Title
Review for Tank Girl (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Christopher Null
     Lori Petty, America's number one Madonna wannabe, is back in action
as TANK GIRL, a comic book character come to life.  Actually, the whole
movie is a comic book come to life.  Live action is spliced with still
shots of comic strip panels and some full-motion animation, so if you get
bored with the live-action part of this picture (and you probably will),
at least you can look at the cartoons.
     Not that these bits are any more entertaining, but at least they're a
change of pace from the dull storyline.  The filmmakers use them any time
there is the possibility for a neat special effect or some potential for
plot development, so they don't waste any money on actually interesting
footage, instead copping out to some goofball crayon scribbling.
     The thin plot goes like this:  the earth is dried up, Malcolm
McDowell is the bad guy, Lori Petty is Tank Girl, and she wants to kill
him.  McDowell barely saves this picture from being a complete failure,
reprising his classic psycho bad guy role in fine form.  His support is
terrible, from Ice-T as a mutant kangaroo, to Petty herself, who I was
hoping would get killed by the movie's end.
     No such luck.  Petty ruins this movie with her bad acting, inability
to crack jokes, and the ability to look stupid no matter what she is
doing.  I guess that was the point, but I can't understand why it needed
to be made.  Recommended only to fans of Petty:  both of them.

Author
Wayne Throop
     Worse than COOL WORLD.  Most positive comment heard upon leaving
the theater: "Wow, that movie was ... awfully long, wasn't it?"
     Intercuts to the comic book versions of scenes are erratic and
badly edited, and scenes that should be light and whimsical are
simply ... limp and motiveless as portrayed.  There's a long (giving
new meaning to the word "interminable") scene in a brothel with Tank
Girl doing a song and dance number that's just bone-grindingly bad,
and overdone.
     Not to mention several serious problems, such as Tank Girl's
incompetence at guard duty and carelessness in the above mentioned
brothel scene leads directly to the death of her entire circle of
acquaintances (except for a juvie, no doubt protected only by the
we-can't-kill-kids-or-dogs-now-can-we law of film).  I mean, she's so
blatantly at fault, when she gets into trouble later, you start to snap
"yeah, what did you THINK would happen you STUPID BI ..." ahem, uh, I
mean "you stupid Tank Girl you."
     The actors simply can't replicate the rubber-faced exaggerated
expressions that gave the comic it's appeal (perhaps Jim (the mask)
Carrey could have, but not *these* poor excuses for store-front
mannequins).
     And above all, Tank Girl is supposed to be a *GIRL*, that is,
young and wild and energetic and all that.  In her near-Morticia-like
makeup, this Tank Girl avatar comes across like a 35-year-old trying to
mix in with her 15-year-old daughter's friends, and doing an
embarrassingly bad job of it.  Picture something like late-career
Marlene Deitrich trying to play Kelly Bundy.  Not quite that bad,
perhaps.  Perhaps.
     Plus the script-writing, comic timing, direction, and editing were
all ...  well, execrably bad is the kindest thing I can think of to say
about 'em.  The jokes all fell horrifyingly flat.  You remember
watching Hudson Hawk?  If you're like me, you were thinking, hey, this
is moderately clever, but why are all the jokes told with the timing
and delivery so far off?  Sort of "oh, haha, that would have been funny
if delivered with a bit of panache," right?  Well, Tank Girl's comic
timing made HH look like a Marx Brothers movie.  Oh, *man* was it bad.
     I can see the appeal of the comic, even from the poorly-intercut
stuff in the movie.  Sort of.  But the "live" version ain't at all
lively.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 3/31/95
Running Length: 1:44
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language, sexual situations)
Starring: Lori Petty, Malcolm McDowell, Naomi Watts, Ice T, Jeff Kober,
          Don Harvey, Stacy Linn Rawsower
Director: Rachel Talalay
Producers: Richard B. Lewis, Pen Densham, and John Watson
Screenplay: Tedi Sarafian based on the comic book created by
            Jamie Hewlett and Alan Martin
Cinematography: Gale Tattersall
Music: Graeme Revell
Released by United Artists Pictures
     When it comes to embracing camp, there's no halfway point.  To be
successful in this arena, a movie must turn its back on even the
semblance of conventionality, expressing everything from the most
insignificant line of dialogue to a climactic event with an irreverence
that would make the Monty Python troupe members offer winks and nudges of
appreciation.  It is because TANK GIRL takes this approach that it
germinates into a high-spirited, madcap example of film making run amok.
Certainly, this movie isn't art, but it sure is fun.
     Film adaptations of comic books have become nearly as prevalent as
those based on Stephen King stories.  In some cases (THE CROW, THE MASK),
they work reasonably well.  In others (TALES FROM THE CRYPT), the results
are disastrous.  None, however, not even Jim Carrey's special effects
tour de force, have gone to the extremes visited by TANK GIRL.  Nothing
is sacred--this movie pushes the envelope as far as it will go, and the
result is an offbeat and energized juxtaposition of action and comedy.
This is the kind of tone that films like HUDSON HAWK, THE LAST ACTION
HERO, and DEMOLITION MAN tried in vain to capture.
     It's the mixture of seeming spontaneity and a total lack of
seriousness that fuels whatever success TANK GIRL has.  The name of the
game is outrageousness, and the script never attempts anything that might
damage it.  There is no characterization to speak of, and the plot is
simply a nonsensical piece of fluff upon which to drape so much excess.
And just when you think things can't get sillier, something happens to
change your mind, whether it's the insertion of oddly-rendered animated
sequences, a bizarre rendition of Cole Porter's "Let's Do It", or Lori
Petty's title character sporting a brassiere that would make Madonna gasp
with envy.
     TANK GIRL takes place in a post-apocalyptic future.  In this
scenario, the Earth-devastating disaster was a comet strike, and it has
left most of the globe in ruins and water in short supply.  There are
three types of survivors:  members of an organization called Water and
Power, small bands of nomads who won't submit to authority, and the
mysterious and deadly Rippers.  Rebecca (Lori Petty), aka "Tank Girl", is
a member of a renegade faction in the Blue Dunes.  When Water and Power
troops arrive, they kill everybody except Rebecca and a little girl
called Sam (Stacy Linn Rawsower).  While the girl is sent to work in a
strip joint, Rebecca is granted a personal audience with Kesslee (Malcolm
McDowell), the leader of Water and Power.
     Kesslee wants Rebecca to join his forces.  When she refuses, she's
put to work in a labor comp.  While looking for a way to escape, Rebecca
meets another ill-treated woman (Naomi Watts).  Together, the pair search
for a way out of Water and Power's fortress while Kesslee plots how to
use Rebecca to uncover the secret entrance to the lair of the Rippers--the
vicious and hitherto untouchable group of "demons" that routinely
slaughter Water and Power troops.
     Given her bleached blond punk hairdo and ever-perky expression, Lori
Petty is an inspired choice for Tank Girl.  She gets all the right
inflections on the one-liners and doesn't know the meaning of the term
"reserve".  Malcolm McDowell, the consummate over-the-top villain,
displays a far more delectable nastiness here than in STAR TREK
GENERATIONS.  This bad guy is someone to root against.  Naomi Watts is
appealing as Tank Girl's sidekick and Ice T is virtually unrecognizable
as the Ripper T-Saint.
     With a breakneck, don't-bother-to-stop-and-think-about-it pace, TANK
GIRL zips along for over one-hundred moments, only occasionally lapsing
from its zaniness.  The rock-and-rap soundtrack, supervised by Courtney
Love-Cobain, invigorates certain scenes, and blends nicely with the
visuals.  Judging by the finished product, it's pretty clear that
director Rachel Talalay achieved her vision.  TANK GIRL is one of those
chew-the-popcorn, munch-the-candy flicks--the kind you go into
expecting to have a good time, but nothing more.  Given those
expectations, disappointment is as unlikely as boredom.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Bryant Frazer
     How disappointed can we be, really, that TANK GIRL doesn't live up
to the promise of its comic book origins?
     TANK GIRL the comic strip is a true brainstorm, a patchwork of
edgy drawings that combine and create a montage that belies the
scattershot narrative surface.  The British export creates its own
metasatirical planet, all the better to backlight the herky-jerky
antics of Our Hero, a cute, punkish loudmouth genuinely unlike any
other.  If you're a comics reader, imagine the doom-saying of a Frank
Miller opus getting wanked off by the low-level hijinks that give the
X-Men their wacky charm.  Mix in a whole lot of sexual innuendo, SF
style, and you're distilling eau d'Tank Girl.
     TANK GIRL the movie falls short on all those counts except the
wacky charm (Lori Petty exudes great sparkling dollops of wacky charm,
much to her credit).  At the beginning of the movie, we find the earth
has been all but completely dehydrated by a near-miss with a nasty
comet.  The overwhelming majority of the world's water is controlled by
the megacorporate Water & Power, with what's left over coveted by
mutant renegades and bootleggers.  Tank Girl's boyfriend (surrogate
husband) is killed and she and a child (surrogate daughter) are
captured in a raid on one of those bootleg compounds.  She breaks free
of Water & Power's clutches when they try to send her on a suicide
mission into mutant territory, but returns (with the help of fellow
ex-con Jet Girl) to rescue the kid.
     While director Rachel Talalay (previously responsible for the game
but forgettable FREDDY'S DEAD: THE FINAL NIGHTMARE and GHOST IN THE
MACHINE) has a good eye for fun performances, she's not quite up to the
action drill (the stops-out MGM-style production of "Let's Do It" is
more like it).  Meanwhile, there's no sense of the low-tech grit that
permeates the original stories--this one's got lots of gloss and
sheen, even if the budget ain't exactly WATERWORLDesque.  While the
comic book is very good (not great), the movie is only middling.  What
went wrong?  Tank Girl got prettified by Hollywood (can't you just
imagine her disgust at that idea?).
     Gone is any sense of the character as vagabond--by foisting a
family off on the poor girl from the very beginning, the movie gives us
a lame justification for her motherly wanderlust.  By characterizing
the bad-ass "rippers" (kangaroo mutants ably crafted for the screen by
FX master Stan Winston) as a bunch of likable goofs, we're given
obligatory comic relief as well as a sense of injustice at their
plight.  And while Malcolm McDowell's evil tormentor is a perfect foil
for Tank Girl (straight outta central casting!), in the end there are a
few too many formulas and too few surprises.
     But what did you expect?  One reason comic books still enjoy a
reputation as an "underground" art form is that you can still find
books, like TANK GIRL, that fly in the face, surprise, and delight.
Tank Girl's brash immodesty and vulgar predilections couldn't be
translated intact to a studio film and, indeed, the character we see on
screen is but a shadow of the vibrant comic book creation.  Someone, of
course, is to be commended for giving a green light to the project in
the first place.  Certainly nothing else at the multiplex looks or
sounds quite like TANK GIRL.  It's a minor stroke to cast Ice-T as a
ripper, indistinguishable yet unmistakable underneath his makeup.  And
Hollywood isn't usually wise enough to hire someone like Courtney Love
(Cobain) to oversee a rock soundtrack.  This one features jewels like
Devo's "Girl U Want" and Joan Jett and Paul Westerberg duetting on
"Let's Do It."
     Comic book frames are cut into the film while the soundtrack
throbs underneath to give TANK GIRL the rough-and-tumble momentum that
propelled the original stories.  In this way, the film reinforces its
own second-class status.  Artist Jamie Hewlett, after all, didn't have
someone else's work to rely on to fill the gaps in his own readers'
experience.  And while a rock and roll soundtrack may have enhanced
your own reading experience, the comic book proved on its own that it
had music in its soul.

Author
James Brundage
Staring Lori Petty, Naomi Watts, Ice-T, and Malcolm MacDowell.
 I don't know what it is.  Maybe it's just that I'm a New Jersey mallrat.
Maybe it's the fact that I'm a lifeless film geek who can fall in love with
a story about a girl and her tank.  Then again, maybe I'm just insane.
 But, really, with a movie as fun as Tank Girl, who gives a damn?
 Tank Girl could be viewed, if you want to put it intellectually, as a
parody of post-apocolyptical nightmare movies.  Hell, it's a lot more fun
that watching The Postman.  If you want to put it intellectually, Tank Girl
could be taken as an anti-facist document.  It could be taken as a warning
of the evils of greed.  It could be taken as a feminist protest, or as a
showing of lesbian idealism.  It could be the new film for the group that
boldly states "I am woman, hear me roar", whoever they are this day of the
week.
 But, you know what, that's all bullshit.  Tank Girl isn't intellectual, it
isn't literary, it isn't philosophical in any way shape or form that I could
discern.  Then why did I enjoy it?  Because I'm human and it was fun.
 Tank Girl follows (*gasp*) Tank Girl (Lori Petty) and Jet Girl (Naomi
Watts) on their battle against Water and Power, headed by an evil mad
scientist played by Malcolm MacDowell, who revives his unique insanity that
he displayed in Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange.
 The year is 2033 and, ever since a comet struck the Earth 14 years ago,
it's been a little different.  No celebrities, no cable TV, NO WATER.  But,
in the words of Tank Girl herself, "about 20 people have to shower together,
so it ain't all bad".
 Tank Girl is about like any other Gen-X heroine, sarcastic, sexy, able to
kill people using her legs without breaking a nail.  She's beer drinking,
she's boxing, she's going around as a rebel stealing water from the
notorious W&P (Water and Power).  Of course, W&P decides to take them out
and she barely survives.  She's captured, but not before seeing her
boyfriend die and killing eight W&P soldiers.  Oh, well.
 Tank Girl's put to work as a slave in W&P and still keeps her sarcasm.  The
evil scientist in charge wants her to work for him, but, being the hooker
with the heart of gold that she is, she refuses.  And, of course, she
befriends a disgruntled jet technician, Jet Girl.  Jet Girl's just fitting
in, trying not to let her supervisor get in her greasy overalls, but she's
about to fail at that goal when (*all guys cheer*) lesbian kiss!
 Ok.  Since I've laid it out in pure English with more sarcasm than Imus,
I'm only going to ASSUME you're following me.  Basically, Tank Girl steals a
Tank and Jet Girl steals a jet, and they get away from W&P.  But we're not
done yet, gotta kill the bad guy.  So the evil scientist takes a little girl
that's a friend of Tank Girl's, holds her hostage while he waits for Tank
Girl to come and save her.
 Tank and Jet, ever out of their minds and cracking jokes, get the help of
the Rippers, an army of half-kangaroo, half-man soldiers who all believe
their someone reincaranted (one of them believes he was Jack Keorack,
another believes he was a dog).
 I'll be the first to admit that Tank Girl has absolute zero as far as
redeeming value is concerned.  But, you know what, I find that if I expect a
drama each time I go to the theatre, I just get pissed off.  So, you know
what, I'm looking at Tank Girl as a comic book movie, as a sarcastic dark
comedy.  And, as far as those go, Tank Girl's an 88mm.

Author
Sue Roberts
Directed by Rachel Talalay
Starring Lori Petty, Naomi Watts, Ice T, Malcolm McDowell, Don Harvey.
     How can one comment seriously on a movie with origins in a joke?
Well, I loved all the animation.  This is the first movie I can recall
with the guts to put cartoon sequences in the frame to function as an
oddball narration.  It's also a really neat move, as no matter how vulgar
Tank Girl attempts to be; she cannot possibly be as crass as her
creators intended.
     So why else is this one different from all the other "Wham Bam"
movies of the decade?  Gosh, could it be, heaven help us, a woman's
point of view on the genre?  Now there's a novelty!
     And wow, does Rachel Talalay let the cat out of the bag!  All that
stuff in action movies that women find enjoyable, but incomprehensible
(like plots that defy logic, or men who behave like pack animals) is
sent up with wild abandon.  I especially liked the tank that responds
like "man's best friend."
     However, she goes one step further into the realms of true
comedy.  Lori Petty and Naomi Watts are used to set up all manner of
skittles of subconscious female paranoia, ranging from "Oh no, is my
date going to think they're gay?" to "You need to be really Glam to
feature on a calendar."

Author
Scott Renshaw
     TANK GIRL is a movie made for the "you just don't get it"
crowd.  There is a segment of the movie-going audience, mostly young
and mostly male, whhich takes a certain contrarian pride i
championing oddball genre flicks which are generally met with
critical disdain or indifference.  These are the movies which come
to be known as "cult" favorites, and are treated as something of a
barometer of hipness.  This is what TANK GIRL is almost certain to
be, and I'll bet that the filmmakers are quite aware of it.  Part
ROAD WARRIOR, part ADVENTURES OF BUCKAROO BANZAI and part NATURAL
BORN KILLERS, TANK GIRL is sometimes quirky and fun, but just as
often merely loud and sloppy.
     In 2033, water is the most precious of resources after a comet
causes a global drought.  Most of that water is controlled by the
fascistic Water & Power Company, headed by the evil Kesslee (Malcolm
McDowell).  However, scattered bands of rebels try to live without
the W & P's control, one of which includes the feisty Rebecca Buck
(Lori Petty).  When the group's base is raided, Rebecca becomes
slave labor, and befriends a W & P mechanic and pilot called Jet
(Naomi Watts).  They manage to escape in W & P vehicles, but
Rebecca's young friend Sam (Stacy Linn Rawsower) is still a
prisoner.  With the assistance of the mutant Rippers, Rebecca--now
Tank Girl--and Jet attempt to save Sam and shut down the W & P.
     I'll give this to director Rachel Talalay--she seems to know
exactly what it is she wants to do with TANK GIRL.  It is a
hyper-kinetic piece of work that never seems to be taking itself at
all seriously, from the comic book page stills that introduce several
scenes to the goofy and diverse personalities of the supposedly
ferocious Rippers (genetically altered human-kangaroo hybrids,
designed by special effects make-up whiz Stan Winston).  There is
Malcolm McDowell, still resplendent in his spiky Sting-at-50 hairdo
from STAR TREK: GENERATIONS, playing a much livelier version of the
same megalomaniac.  He also gets to play with TANK GIRL's niftiest
gadget, a device which sucks all the water out of a human body.  And
of course, there is the bizarre production number in which Tank Girl
leads a group of futuristic exotic dancers in a production number to
Cole Porter's "Let's Do It."  There is one thing of which you can't
accuse TANK GIRL, and that is being conventional.
     What it can be accused of is not being nearly as clever as it
is self-consciously different.  Tedi Sarafian (sister of TERMINAL
VELOCITY director Deran Serafian) has provided Lori Petty with a lot
of one-liners, but none of them have any kick; in fact, I can't
recall a single piece of dialogue from the entire film.  Petty is a
great cast as the tough and unflappable Tank Girl, but she has to
carry far too much of the film with her cocky demeanor, because her
supporting cast (excluding McDowell, whose part is really fairly
small) is unimpressive.  The film also flounders a bit when it makes
token efforts to flesh out the characters, like giving Rebecca a
boyfriend she watches die at the hands of the W & P or her mother
hen relationship with Sam.  TANK GIRL, both the character and the
film, have attitude to spare, but often little else.
     Perhaps as much as anything, though, I was distracted by James
R. Symons trigger-happy editing which, combined with a soundtrack
compiled by Hole's Courtney Love-Cobain, makes TANK GIRL feel like a
feature length version of MTV's "Alternative Nation."  Entire
sequences are composed of snippets of Petty posing and doing cute
little things, apparently aware of the camera.  The battle sequences
are a real weak link, particularly one in which two separate battles
are cross-cut ineffectively.  Meanwhile, the made-for-playlists
soundtrack blasts out riff after riff from Devo, L7, Paul
Westerberg and other college radio darlings.  It was after about the
tenth song, sometime before the headache started to set in, that I
began to feel that TANK GIRL was one of those movies that had been
marketed, not made.  I wanted to like TANK GIRL, but I kept feeling
that the filmmakers kept daring me not to like it, daring me to be
un-hip.

Author
David Petry
     When I left the theater, I was shaking my head back and forth--and
grinning from ear to ear.  TANK GIRL is the goofiest movie I have ever
seen, and I loved it.
     In the first scene, we see Tank Girl (Lori Petty) riding some kind
of ox out in the desert.  Both the ox and Tank Girl are wearing totally
outlandish outfits, with gas masks and goggles for starters, and we
hear Lori Petty in her cute childish voice introducing us to the
story.
     It's the year 2030, and a comet has struck the earth and thereby
upsetting the weather patterns so that it hasn't rained in many years.
Of course, this makes water extremely valuable, and a ruthless
corporation called the Department of Water and Power is working to
establish a monopoly on what little water is  available.
     Tank Girl is a one of a group of renegades resisting the
Department.  Along the way, she gets kidnapped and enslaved, but then
escapes along with another slave  Jet Girl (Naomi Watts) and teams up
with the Rippers--half man, half kangaroo genetically engineered super
soldiers--to ultimately defeat the Department and its deliciously evil
leader (Malcolm McDowell).
     But what's important in this movie is not where they get to, but
how they get there.  They get there in style.
     To get a feel for the style they go in, Tank Girl wears HEAVY
METAL clothes, has a shaved head, pierced body parts (at least I think
she did) and drives around in a tank that comes complete with lawn
furniture!  You've got to see it to believe it.
     Adding to the general absurdity of this movie is the creative use
of cartoons and special effects, wacky costumes and sets, and Tank
Girl's incessant feminist wise-cracking.  We get to see the kangaroo
men hoping wildly all over the place, and we hear Tank Girl questioning
men's adequacy.
     At times the movie almost seems to have a strong man-hating
message.  The men (except perhaps the men who are half kangaroo) in the
movie are caricatured as evil, power hungry louts who want only one
thing from women.  But the actresses do such a good job of not taking
themselves (or anything else, for that matter) too seriously, that it
can all be taken in stride.
     It'd be easy to criticize this movie as being silly and
senseless.  And it is.  But so what? It's good fun.  I'd recommend that
you take a chance on it.
     Oh, a rating?  I have no idea how to give this movie a rating on a
scale of 1-10.  This movie is from another dimension.

Author
vghoward@delphi.com
You *know* the movie you're about to see sucks when...
1) The theater isn't near full for a *free* preview screening.
3) All the music played throughout the movie sounds like the
        soundtrack from one of those crap-ola movies that Gilbert
        Godfrey runs on the USA Network ... and the songs are from
        well-regarded artists like L7 and Bjork!
     I have to give Lori Petty some credit, she did the best she could
with a role she was never meant to play.  Malcolm MacDowell was once
again playing his generic sci-fi bad guy role.  He looked like he came
right from the Star Trek Generations set and was on his way to do the
Wing Commander III CD.  My God, can't this guy play any other
character??
     And I'm not even going to go into the movie's erratic editing and
bizarre use of animation and art from the comic book (at first, it
would seem this was done for artsy purposes, but it actually feels like
they ran out of money for SFX and spliced in animations).
     Naomi Watts as Jet Girl was cool, and she was the only thing
decent about the movie.  I have to agree with comments on the Net that
if not Emily Lloyd, Drew Barrymore would've been great as Tank Girl, as
well as Claire Danes for the part of Jet.
     At the end of the preview, a guy said loudly, "Well, Honey, that
certainly SUCKED."
     So, gang, save your $$$ this weekend for something more
worthwhile.  Like, say, food.  Catch TANK GIRL at the $1 theater.

Author
Shane Burridge
Most people who'd read the comics by Alan Martin and Jamie Hewlett hated 
this live-action film version, although I think that says more about the 
quality of the comic books than the movie.  The setting is familiar enough: 
a post-apocalyptic future, mostly desert, with rag-tag rebels fighting an 
evil overlord for water.  TANK GIRL doesn't want to commit to being set in 
either America or Australia, so settles for both (or neither) which would 
make more sense if the rest of the story was treated in the same way, i.e. 
an excerpt from a larger scenario rather than a complete arc.  It was 
undoubtedly even more annoying for readers of the comic who saw Tank Girl's 
'history' being rewritten for the screen.
The film-makers may have made some bad decisions in TANK GIRL but they did 
get the casting right for the lead role.  Even though much of the casual 
vulgarity of the original character was removed, Lori Petty still makes a 
spunky, perky Tank Girl.  I don't think we need to see the processes 
responsible for her transformation into the heroine of the title, however, 
nor the introduction to her friend Jet Girl (less convincingly assumed by 
Naomi Watts).  Since Petty's character remains consistent throughout the 
movie, it wouldn't have mattered if Tank and Jet smashed their way on to the 
screen from frame one.  In fact, the whole story is just wrong for these two 
characters - they should have had more desert time, tank time and jet time 
instead of spending most of the movie indoors.  The rebel band of 
genetically modified kangaroo men ('rippers') is also a mistake.  Their 
scenes drag and they fare no better than animated action figures.  And 
lastly, the movie's potential star attraction - namely, the tank -  is badly 
wasted.  This overblown variation of the gun-as-penis metaphor is perfect 
for the sexually aggressive Petty (the theme from SHAFT plays when she 
drapes herself all over the tank's barrel, sighing "I'm in love" ) but 
appears too late into the story.  The tank, an effectively scrappy composite 
of Rube Goldberg punk, is relegated to night sequences which fail to show it 
off to its best advantage; similarly Jet Girl's stolen jet makes only one 
appearance in its newly-liberated form before it gets repainted back into 
its former military colors.
With its lead characters, props and source material, TANK GIRL could have 
been a blast.  Director Rachel Talalay was forced to cut material, but I 
doubt this missing footage would have improved the film.  You may find 
yourself wishing that the film-makers had decided to ditch the live action 
concept and extended TANK GIRL's two brilliantly animated sequences into a 
full feature instead.  Why not?  Petty's already got that cartoon-character 
voice down pat.
