Title
Review for Leapin' Leprechauns (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1995. Director - Ted Nicolaou, Screenplay - Nicolaou & Patrick 
Clifton, Idea - Charles Band, Producers - Oana & Vlad Paunescu, 
Photography - Adolfo Bartoli, Music - Richard Kosinski & William Levine, 
Visual Effects - AlchemyFX (Supervisor - Jim Aupperle), Mechanical 
Effects Supervisor - John `Teenie' Deall, Leprechaun Effects - Mark 
Rappaport, Makeup Effects - Michael S. Deak, Production Design - Radu 
Corciova. Production Company - Moonbeam Entertainment.
Gregory Edward Smith (Mikey Dennehy), Madeleine Potter (Morgan de la 
Fey/Queen Nuala), Godfrey James (King Kevin), Tina Martin (Queen Maeve), 
John Bluthal (Michael Dennehy), Sylvester McCoy (Flynn), James Ellis 
(Patrick)
Plot: Young Mikey Dennehy goes to visit his grandfather in Ireland. 
There they meet their new neighbour, the charming Morgan de la Fey. But 
Morgan is really Nuala, queen of the underworld, and places an 
enchantment on Kevin, king of the leprechauns, that makes him fall 
completely in love with her and addles his wits so that she is able to 
capture all the leprechauns to take as a sacrifice to Finvara, lord of 
the underworld.
Charles Band, either under his Empire Productions banner during the 
1980s or under the Full Moon Entertainment and its' children's films 
subsidiary label Moonbeam Productions during the 1990s, has been one of 
the most prolific producers of B-budget direct-to-video films, having 
produced efforts like the `Ghoulies', the `Puppetmaster', the 
`Trancers', the `Prehysteria!' and the `Subspecies' films to name but a 
handful. One of Band's most regular directors has been Ted Nicolaou, who 
originally began as one of Band's editors. While Nicolaou has been 
responsible for some of the undeniable dross that Band regularly puts 
out - `TerrorVision' (1986) and the disappointing `Subspecies' trilogy - 
Nicolaou has also made several of Band's better films under the Moonbeam 
label. Nicolaou's `Dragonworld' (1994) was one film that had clearly 
been made with a good deal more care and feeling than most of Moonbeam's 
product, and Nicolaou was also responsible for the mind-spinningly 
surreal `Magic in the Mirror' (1996).
Band and Nicolaou's `Leapin' Leprechauns' (1994) was undeniably stolen 
in sizeable part from Disney's minor live-action masterpiece `Darby 
O'Gill and the Little People' (1959). Nevertheless it was a light 
knockabout children's film which derived some entertainment value from 
the comic antics of several invisible, mischievous leprechauns being let 
loose in an average American household. This sequel however is actually 
a better film than its predecessor. The first `Leapin' Leprechauns' 
ended on a surprisingly dark climax (almost stolen direct from `Darby 
O'Gill') with the characters having to battle Finvara, lord of the 
underworld, and racing against the arrival of the dark horse of death. 
That tone has been extended in `Leapin' Leprechauns! 2'. It abandons the 
light and frivolous slapstick tone of the first film and concentrates on 
a much stronger plot involving the witch's attempt to enchant the 
leprechauns and the young kid and his grandfather from the first film. 
It works as a much more vivid story - while it is essentially just a 
children's film, it is conducted with some feeling and depth - and the 
ending on an entrance into the underworld achieves something quite 
mythic and resonant. Madeleine Potter plays with some quite effective 
charms, and is balanced out by a return performance of wry blarney 
likeability from John Bluthal and the endearingly comic blatherings of 
John Godfrey again as Kevin, the leprechaun king. 

