Title
Review for Hong faan kui (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Yamamoto
There I was, about to save this damsel in distress and this wicked
witch shows up and ruined everything.  Actually, there was this cute
woman lost and wanted directions.  I was about to give her her the
correct directions and this woman comes up and start mouthing off
as if she knew it all and gave the woman the wrong information.  Of
course being the conscientious guy that I am, I told the woman that
she just gave wrong directions and gave the woman the correct 
information.  And they all lived happily ever after.
Speaking of stupid things people do, RUMBLE IN THE BRONX came out
and I had to go check it out.  It's not really an action film but
a comedy packed with actions.  Yes, it dubbed.  Yes it does first
come across like one of those late night kung fu movies.  No, it's
a lot funnier than you think.  And no, you won't have to worry about
a plot 'cause it ain't there.  No, it's more entertaining than you
expect.
No nakkid boobs.  4 doz bullets.  5 dead bodies.  32 on the vomit
meter.  2 moon shots.  What we got here are:  airplane-fu, baggage-
fu, Manhattan-fu, grafitti-fu, one way mirror-fu, attack of killer
zit-fu, shop lifting-fu, ultimate jacket-fu, dream car-fu, attack
of killer bikers-fu, wedding of the century-fu, more bikers from
hell-fu, diamond-fu, attack of killer bottles-fu, forgive and for-
get-fu, FBI-fu, whole lotta kung-fu and insatiable action-fu.  Drive
in academy nomination for Jackie Chan for saying stuff like "we 
should be drinking together" and to Anita Mui for saying stuff like
"I should never have trusted you" and to Francois Choi for saying
stuff like "you'll get use to it" and to Kris Lord for saying stuff
like "I don't bargain."  Two and a half stars.  Shaggy Bob says 
wicked!
Alien Alert!  Why are so many people protesting the 3rd execution
in this state this decade?  It cost what, $50k per year per inmate
to keep 'em inside while a bullet cost what $0.10?  You figure the
math.  Do you realize what you can do with that kind of money?  May
be if we save enough money, and put them in education, we won't need
such extensive justice system.  Ok, I can always dream can't I?

Author
Jeff Inman
Okay, this isn't really a review of RUMBLE IN THE BRONX.  I mean, it's
about that, but I'm more interested in reflecting for a moment on what
Jackie Chan has done to the concept of "stunts".
RUMBLE IN THE BRONX is the latest from the world's most popular action
movie star.  And he deserves to be the most popular.  Not only is he a
phenomenal gymnast and athlete, he also seems to be a nice guy, and
his movies (the two I've seen) combine incredible stunts with a
self-deprecating type of ironic humor that gives them depth.
Okay, that was my review.  Go see the movie, you'll be glad you did.
And, while you're watching it, think about this: isn't it so much
better to know that the stunts you're seeing are done by a guy who is
really doing them?  For me, it really changes the meaning of the
action to know that what is shown on film is (in some way) something
that Jackie Chan is actually doing.  That they didn't cut to a guy in
a studio strapped onto the top of a hovercraft as it simulates
careening into a bus.  (I presume they must have used SOME studio
techniques, this being a technological art, after all.  My point is
that this is a revitalizing retake on the meaning of action on film.)
I'm reminded of Buster Keaton, who seems to me to have been a
predecessor of Jackie Chan's.  I think some professional reviewer
proposed this connection.  But I would've thought of it anyway.  I
just saw THE GENERAL a few weeks ago, and it was pointed out that one
particular scene (in which a steam locomotive driven by Keaton rumbles
past a watering tower which is gushing water, and it pours over Keaton
as he zooms past in his beloved engine, catching him by surprise,
drenching him completely ... he does the stone-faced blink of
astonishment ... looks up into the sunny sky ... holds his hand out as
though testing for rain) -- in that scene, Keaton is presumed to have
broken his neck.  Went through years of migraines, etc, etc.  One day
a doctor says to him (and of course this is verging on apocrypha as
far as my retelling of it goes) says: I think the problem is ya got ya
a fractured vertebra there.  And Buster knew that it had been that
scene that had done it.
The point is that there is a rare integrity and courage shown by these
bold physical actors who do their own stunts on film.  (Facade of a
building falls over Keaton, who happens to be standing exactly in the
place where a window in the wall makes a hole for him.)
That scene in GOLDENEYE with the motorcycle and the airplane -- you
know what I'm talking about -- that was way cool.  Way.  But it was
kind of marred by the obvious studio sequence towards the culmination
of the stunt.  Am I saying Pierce Brosnan should really ride a bike
off of a -- that he should really DO that stunt?  Well.  It'd sure
impress the hell out of me.  But, no.  Anyhow, the precursor to that
stunt, which occurs in the movie POINT BREAK (excellent action movie,
btw, I'll review it for ya some time) was a lot more convincing.
The thing is that a Jackie Chan stunt can be less visually dramatic
than something from a studio-intensive James Bond movie, and yet can
end up being more impressive.  It's because you don't have separate
camera angles showing (1) Chan jumping from the top of a building, and
(2) landing on a balcony across the way, making you think of stunt men
leaping into an airbag in the first half, and leaping off a platform
on the second take.  The guy actually does it.
[NOTE: You can't really jump through a window holding onto a firehose,
free fall for 50 feet while the hose comes taught, and swing back in
through another window, three stories down.  You can't even do it for
a window one story down.  Trust me.]
Don't take any of this as a disparagement of stunt men (and women).  I
think they're the real heros of most action movies, and I often try to
pick out the reality that the stuntmen (stuntpersons) are dealing
with, which must certainly be extremely intense, in many cases.  I'm
just saying that it is really refreshing to see someone making movies
in which a single human being shows off his truly amazing athletic
talents.  One real Jackie Chan stunt is worth a hundred guys falling
from heights with perfect rotation so to land unharmed on an
off-camera air bag.
What we're seeing, for the first time in a long time, is what real
physicality looks like.  How bodies actually move.  In a way, they
look kind of awkward, compared with the smooth motions of synthetic
action.  But that makes them MORE believable, strangely enough.  When
you jump from mast to mast, across some sailboats, tipping the last
one down to land on a bridge abutment, you're probably not going to
look too graceful.  Doing it at all is the feat.  Chan brings the
human body back to action movies, where it was supposed to be all
along.
Check out the clips at the end, which show some of the stunts that
went awry, (and sometimes with serious consequences).

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Take this review from whence it comes.  I am absolutely floored by
the mental agility of Thomas More in A MAN FOR ALL SEASONS.  The skill
to fight with agility just has never been one for which I have much
appreciation.  I suppose I am about equally impressed with a good
martial artist and a good juggler.  I can appreciate that each can
perform with what appears to be a high degree of skill.  I will watch
each for the moment they are performing and then move on without
envying or even being impressed too much by either.  So perhaps I am
the wrong person to see a Jackie Chan film, whose plot is little more
than an excuse to string together fighting sequences.
     Keung (Jackie Chan) is a prize-winning martial artist in Hong Kong
who comes to the United States to attend his uncle's wedding.  He
quickly discovers that his uncle intends to sell the Asian grocery the
uncle owns.  Keung find himself attracted to the new owner and decides
to stick around and set up the grocery.  This means defending the woman
from a gang of cartoonish bikers who prey on the grocery.  When one of
the bikers steals some loot from some apparent Mafia types, the fight
becomes a three-way battle.
     One of the problems of the script is that Keung's abilities seem
inconsistent and seem to come and go.  It is unclear why in some scenes
he seems so easily defeated and in others he seems unbeatable.  Nor is
it clear why once the street gang has discovered a winning strategy for
beating Keung, they never again use it against him.  Also, we see early
on that he has only limited ability to dodge flying objects, so
presumably he has even less ability to dodge bullets.  Yet while people
threaten to shoot him, nobody actually tries it, even just to disable
him.  The appearance is that even Jackie Chan does not have moves for
dodging a bullet that look convincing on camera and so the scriptwriter
just does not let the situation arise.
     Beyond the action scenes little attention was paid to production
values.  For just about every other aspect of the film the words that
come to mind are "adequate" or "mediocre."  There is little acting in
the film and what is there is intended only to showcase Jackie Chan.
Far more could be done with Chan, of course.  The man has considerably
more screen presence than either Steven Segal or Jean-Claude Van Damme.
This film does what it can to capitalize off Chan's personality, but a
larger budget, a more polished production, and above all a much better
script are needed to make this a really professional product.
     Ironically, the point of the film that generates the greatest
emotions is the closing credits.  Chan shows outtakes where stunts went
wrong.  It combines some of the best laughs of the film with some of
its most poignant moments.  We see two or three cases of actors
performing stunts that go wrong and ending up being put in the back of
an ambulance.  One wonders if this practice does not frighten away
prospective performers from appearing in so dangerous a film to shoot.
     For those who, like me, have only a limited appreciation for
Chan's athletic moves there is not much that this film offers.  For
people who have similar tastes to mine I rate RUMBLE IN THE BRONX a 0
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        What do you give a movie with four-star action and zero-
star acting? If you're me, you round it up to three stars because 
you laughed under your breath most of the time at how bad the 
acting and dialogue dubbing was and sat in awe the rest of the 
time at the amazing action, "hellacious" in the words of a friend I 
went to see the movie with. He and I seemed to have very different 
viewing experiences with RUMBLE IN THE BRONX. He didn't 
seem to notice anything wrong with the acting and even asked 
me at one point what was so funny.
        This question coming right after a sequence where a giant 
hovercraft is racing down the streets of New York toward a punk 
band playing in the street. The drummer stands up, points at the 
immense thing and yells out, "Hovercraft!" Maybe I just have a 
weird sense of humor. Then again, I had to talk the guy out of two 
other movies -- HAPPY GILMORE with Adam Sandler and BLACK 
SHEEP with Chris Farley and David Spade  -- before we could settle 
on RUMBLE IN THE BRONX, so I'm probably not at fault.
        RUMBLE IN THE BRONX is just one of many Jackie 
Chan action movies, all imported from Hong Kong and having one 
overwhelming gimmick going for them -- Chan and everyone else 
do their own stunts. And what incredible stunts they are too. Chan 
has some amazingly-choreographed one-take fight scenes, jumps 
off buildings and various other potentially maiming or paralyzing 
activities. He pulls them off with such ease that I was actually 
surprised to see outtakes at the end of missed attempts at some 
of the stunts in the movie, one of which earned Chan a broken 
leg.
        As a movie-reviewer (in a loose, interpretive sense of 
the word), I'm obligated to point out that the plot of RUMBLE IN 
THE BRONX is unoriginal, cliched and sometimes unintelligable, 
but in a movie like this the plot only serves to tie the various action 
scenes together. Chan plays a Hong Kong tourist who visits his 
uncle in the Bronx. The uncle has just sold his grocery store and 
is leaving for a honeymoon, but Chan decides to stick around 
anyway and help out the store's new owner, an incredibly whiny 
Asian women who we're fortunate enough to see on the pot later 
on in the movie.
        The week isn't all daisies and roses for Chan, though, 
especially after walking in on the Asian woman using the 
restroom. There's a motorcycle gang terrorizing the neighborhood, 
a motocross gang actually, doing stunts in the street with BMX 
bikes. (What's next, the Go-kart Gangstas?) Chan spends the first 
half of the movie waging war with the street gang before falling in 
love with one member of the gang, who moonlights as a cage 
dancer in the local nightclub when she's not moonlighting as 
the gang leader's girlfriend.
        The second half of the movie shifts abruptly as Chan finds 
a bag of diamonds belonging to some mafiosos. He then has to trade 
off the diamonds for his girlfriend and a few members of the biker 
gang. Why would he want to save the gang members' lives after 
sparring with them for half of the movie? I think as long as there's 
ass for him to kick, he doesn't really care who's ass it is. If it had 
been Barney, Tammy Faye Baker and Tom Arnold held hostage, 
he'd rescue them too. He just likes to smash pinball machines into 
people's heads, a common psychosocial disorder that comes from 
eating nothing but plain rice for thirty years.
        RUMBLE IN THE BRONX is a mixed bag of entertainment 
from the movie critic's perspective. The acting and plot are 
atrocious, some of the character's voices are obviously dubbed, 
others aren't, but the action sequences are indeed "hellacious," 
even though I've never heard that word before or used it myself. 
If you go for that kind of stuff, you'll enjoy the movie. And if you 
like to watch really bad movies and laugh at them, you'll like it too. 
I mean, where else can you see a guy trounce an entire room full of 
gang members, then turn to them and announce, in a dubbed, 
monotone voice, "You people are the scum of the earth"? I mean 
_besides_ a Bob Dole campaign rally.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Asian superstar Jackie Chan is just a-kickin' and a-grinnin' 
through this cheery, cheesy martial-arts comedy about a lone Nice 
Guy (Chan) who must defend his friends against a rude biker gang.  
Add a slinky love interest, some stolen diamonds, and a runaway 
hovercraft (!), and you've got a recipe for some seriously hokey 
fun.  (And I mean *hokey*:  this Bronx is flanked by mountains and 
sports the occasional palm tree!)
     RUMBLE IN THE BRONX is Chan's second attempt to break into the 
American film market and he might just make it this time.  Despite 
the erratic pacing and some hilariously bad dubbing, RUMBLE is so 
relentlessly good-natured that you can do little more than groan 
and laugh.  Also adding to the amusement factor is the foreknow-
ledge that Chan does all of his own stunts, and only after director 
Stanley Tong attempts each one, himself!  (Check the blooper reel, 
at the end, for a run-down of who broke what during filming.)
     Given the overall slap-happy construction, snooty action fans 
may scoff at this stuff.  Sure, directors like James Cameron and Jan 
DuBont are choreographing equally impressive physical feats, but 
not with the raw effort of Mr. Chan.  He's a one-man arsenal of 
fury and fun.  However awful the film around him may seem, he's as 
bright a movie star as the world currently knows.  Recommended. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Steve Rhodes
     RUMBLE IN THE BRONX (HONG FAAN KUI) is WEST SIDE STORY on
steroids.  Actually the story is nothing more than a thin veneer and a
poor one at that over a movie to show off the martial arts talents of
Jackie Chan.  Now, when you have someone as athletically gifted as
Chan, viewing his skills in even a ridiculous film is not such a bad
idea.  He actually does all of his own stunts, and you are likely to
sit there and go "oh my god" through most of the show.  This guy is
physically incredible plus he is handsome and as sweet as can be.  That
he could shine through this miserable show is certainly a tribute to
his considerable skills which are not overrated.  I have been told that
he has been in much better movies which is certainly plausible, but
this is the only movie of his that I have ever seen.
     As soon as I got in the theater, I sensed the movie was going to
be different; certainly the clientele was different.  The audience was
mainly teenagers in the baggy clothes that are popular these days.
They thought talking to the screen in loud voices was cool.  Before the
feature started I saw trailers for movies of the type I did not know
existed.  Very low budget action films that I had never heard of as
well as what used to be called black exploitation movies.  One dad
brought his eight year old son with him which, given the level of
violence plus the late hour, I thought was totally inappropriate.
     Jackie Chan plays Ah Keung who has come to visit his Uncle Bill
(Bill Tung).  Bill is in the process of selling his grocery store in
the Bronx to Elaine (Anita Mui).  Keung agrees to stay and help Elaine
out which is good since some bad guys lead by Tony (Marc Akerstream)
start tearing up her store.  Keung manages to fall in love with Tony's
girlfriend Nancy (Francoise Yip).  Tony's gang steals diamonds from
another set of bad guys who in turn get chased and killed by an even
worse set of characters.  And so on and so forth, ad nauseam.
     The silly script by Edgar Tang and Fibe Ma is full of lines that
make little sense or are extremely trite, but hey, remember you are
here to see Chan's action, nothing more and nothing less, and action
there is aplenty.  Chan gets chased down and run over by a killer
hovercraft, gets so many bottles thrown at him that every inch of his
body is oozing blood, and frequently he just gets beat up and shot at.
Through all of this adversity, he shows one amazing move after another.
He has the grace of a ballet dancer, and he can fight thirty people
single-handedly and come out the winner.  He can jump from one building
to the next in a chase as well as leap off bridges onto speeding boats.
There is nothing this guy can't do.  Steven Seagal is a pussycat next
to him.
     Actually the best part of the film is Chan's demeanor.  He looks
like a friend of mine named Kerman, but Chan smiles more than any two
people.  He looks so sweet and innocent that he might melt if it rains,
and yet he has more resilience than Superman.  Quite a contrast between
his actions and his deceptive looking naivete and little boy smile.
     Okay, granted that this is an action flick, but why does the
dialog have to be so bad, and why couldn't the director (Stanley Tong)
find at least one other interesting actor or actress to work with Chan?
Elaine is supposed to be an entrepreneur, but her negotiating stance in
buying the store is, "Your price is too high.  Can't you come down?"
Tough negotiator huh?  Chan is full of simple wisdom like, "Don't let
the situation change you.  Change it," and "if you got the guts, drop
the gun," but mainly he shuts up, smiles, and fights.
     The sets are imaginative with the bad guys carrying baseball bats
but driving something like a golf cart with flashing neon lights.  They
use off road motorcycles to destroy stores by riding through them.  One
of the best scenes has an entire building pulled down by the "badest"
of the bad guys.  The cinematography (Jingle Ma) uses dramatic colors
with bold uses of bright purples, pinks, reds, and blues.  Blood is in
most scenes, and the gore content is extremely high.  In one scene, we
have a guy completely chopped up by a large wood shredder and then
delivered to his friends in large plastic bags.  The show is full of
pain, and Chan gets more than just about anybody, but he keeps on
smiling.
     RUMBLE IN THE BRONX runs too long at just 1:35.  There is no
nudity or sex, but there is some dope smoking and bad language.  It is
correctly rated R for the massive amount of violence.  Granted the
picture is kind of campy, but it is also very bloody.  This show will
probably be okay for most teenagers, but the idea of taking kids under
13 to it is just plain stupid.  I really liked watching Chan's
abilities, but after the first thirty minutes, his welcome wore out.  I
would have liked the show better as a half hour documentary on stunts.
As it is, I can not recommend it, but I am giving it ** for an amazing
piece of work by Chan.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
