Title
Review for Wo hu cang long (2000)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Robin Clifford
Filmmaker Ang Lee's varied career began with his Taiwan family films ("Eat,
Drink, Man, Woman") and went on to period ("Sense and Sensibilities") and
modern ("The Ice Storm") drama. He returns to his Chinese roots, this time
with a tale of legends and love in "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon."
Slick martial arts and high tech action sequences alone do not make a film.
They may raise the interest bar some for a mediocre film and story, but
they cannot make a move "good" by themselves. Director Ang Lee understands
this and uses these film tools, along with solid story, acting and techs,
to create an above average work in "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon."
Set in the early 19th China, Wudan martial arts master Li Mu Bai (Chow
Yun-Fat) is about to retire to a life of meditation, even though the death
of his master at the hands of the infamous Jade Fox (Cheng Pei-Pei) goes
unavenged. He gives his fabled, 400-year old sword, known as Green Destiny,
to fellow master and unrequited love, Yu Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh), to be
delivered to his master's closest friend in Beijing. En route to the city,
Yu meets the beautiful, willful niece, Jen (Zhang Ziyi), of the local
governor. Later, a masked thief steals Green Destiny and escapes with Yu in
hot pursuit.
The sword undergoes an almost comic disappearing/appearing act while Li
journeys to Beijing. Yu thinks he has come for the remarkable blade, but
soon learns that Li's devotion is to her, not some possession. Li has
learned, through his meditation, that true love is the most important thing
as he opens up his heart to Shu Lien. Meanwhile, he finds out that the
young thief - as suspected, it is Jen - is a secret devotee to the Wudan
discipline and he offers to school the girl in his warrior skills. She
rebukes him and Li soon discovers that Jen has links to his nemesis, Jade
Fox. Revenge is imminent.
"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is a loving creation by Ang Lee that pays
homage on different levels. It permits the helmer to explore the past
legends of China with his depiction of larger than life characters that
have mystical powers beyond the realm of us mere mortals. Ang gives praise
to the valuable contribution of martial arts in the visual world of action
film. He also delves into the realm of unrequited love between his star
characters, a coming of age story with the beautiful Jen, and her romance
with a wild, desert nomad prince, Lo (Chang Cheng). Interspersed with these
dramatic stories are some light, comic moments that temper the overall
serious tone.
These varied stories are interwoven into a rich film tapestry that brings
us into a world where martial discipline and super-human powers are a way
of life. This premise leads to some remarkable, choreographed fight scenes
that are second to none. Yen Woo-Ping, the fights choreographer who made
"The Matrix" such an appealing blockbuster, pushes the envelop with wire
F/X that sometimes dazzle (and sometimes don't). The most affective fight
sequences are the ones where the wire stunts are kept to a minimum. When Yu
and Jen are pitted against each other, it is one of the best action
sequences of the film. In contrast, when the wire stunts are in full gear,
they look artificial - fun, but artificial.
The wire-based special F/X give the players the ability to defy gravity
and, quite literally, climb walls with a single bound and float across
rooftops. When Li and Jen do battle on the top limbs of a bamboo forest,
the look is, at once, exciting and a little funny in the awkwardness the
actors have in performing the state of the art stunts. The traditional
fight sequences do not fall into the quagmire of more of the same, though.
Each battle is unique and exciting in its own way. A fight between Jen and
Lo, on horseback and at top speed, rivals the best of America's western
action.
The love stories that are woven into the tale take two paths  - old and
new. Li and Yu have been longtime allies in arms and have respected each
other for many years. Li, who was never aware of Yu as a woman before his
meditations, comes to realize that she is his one, true love. The
melancholy romance takes on a bittersweet tone as we hope the couple is
together at the finish. On the other end of the spectrum of love is the
confrontational attraction between Jen and Lo. Like Li and Yu, the young
couple is well matched in temper and physical ability and their romance
takes on an urgency as Jen looks to Lo as her escape from a mundane
arranged marriage.
 Chow Yun-Fat was a last minute replacement as Li Mu Bai. Prior to his
signing on, action star Jet Li was slotted to play Li, but other
obligations forced the younger action star to bow out of the production.
Chow brings a maturity and dignity to his role as a Wudan master that
reminds me of John Steed in the old "Avenger" TV series. When Li does
battle with the athletic Jen, his movement is minimal and his physical
control total. The action star, best known for fighting his opponents with
blazing guns, takes to the wire stunts quite well. There is an exception,
though, when Li first flies after the fleeing Jen, he points to the sky
before lifting off. I half expected him to declare, "I'm Superman!"
Otherwise, the performer provides a quiet, strong character that garners
respect from all.
Michelle Yeoh does a wonderful, understated job of portraying the
intelligent, capable Yu Shu Lien. There is real pain in her face as she
explains to the young Jen that independence has its price - a life full of
loneliness. Yeoh is intriguing to watch in her action work, but she also
garners sympathy with her sad acceptance of the cost of her independence.
Zhang Ziyi, as Jen, steals the show with her beauty, grace and physical
ability. I was struck, the first time seeing the young actress appears on
the screen, with her resemblance to the great Chinese actress Gong Li. That
is, until I found out that Zhang is also the discovery of premier Chinese
director Zhang Yimou, just like Gong Li. Zhang has such presence on the
screen that she stands toe-to-toe with her more seasoned costars. She is a
pleasure to watch with her kung fu moves and poise and reps the next
generation of action star. Chang Cheng, as Lo, gives a spirited performance
opposite Zhang and comes across as a likable brigand who is head over heels
in love with Jen.
Other supporting cast members are full-fledged characters, especially Cheng
Pei-Pei with her wicked malevolence as Jade Fox. Ang uses his minor
characters to introduce the necessary comic relief that helps give depth to
the film and flesh out the support into real people.
The multiplicity of stories is handled deftly by helmer Lee and translates
to the screen nicely,   especially due to the film's fine technical
qualities. Set in the Forbidden City, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon"
captures both the look and period feel in its 19th century backdrop.
Costume, too, fits the bill from Li's austere, almost monkish attire to
Jen's beautiful wardrobe and ninja-like rags. Photography by Peter Pau,
particularly for the action scenes, is exemplary.
The artificial look of the more ambitious fighting F/X detracts from the
overall quality of "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon." This is especially
distracting when compared with the more traditional action, which is
brilliantly done at times. But, a good story, attractive and likable stars,
and great action do make this one of the season's best entertainment
values. I give it a B+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The concept of wire-fu, a hyped up style of kung-fu using wires on film, has
been running rampant since THE MATRIX popularized it last year. The two most
prominent movies of this year to utilize the technique in their films were
ROMEO MUST DIE and CHARLIE'S ANGELS, who basically just used it as a
"charge" to distract from their lack of actual story. But with this film,
director Ang Lee wants to take the element of kung-fu fighting to another
level...that's right, fighting interspersed with an actual plot line!
PLOT:
A great warrior preparing for "retirement" decides to pursue one last
battle, as his legendary sword is stolen. Alongside his good friend, for
whom he restrains a secret love, he sets out to get the sword back and take
revenge upon the woman who killed his master.
CRITIQUE:
An epic in every sense of the word, this film combines some of the coolest
fight sequences ever put to the big screen with majestic cinematography and
an all-encompassing tale of love, honor and fantasy. And by fantasy, I mean
people literally flying across rooftops and fighting against one another
while standing on skinny tree branches. That's right, you can pretty much
forget about the concept of gravity in this movie! People fly while running,
walk across water and run up walls in this film. Real cool stuff if you get
"into it", but definitely unbelievable if you're not in on the spell. Which
brings me to the actual story of the film. A hundred times better than most
Hong Kong martial arts flicks, I can't say that I was mesmerized by this
sorted tale. In fact, I thought some of the scenes were a little boring,
especially the middle ones in the desert, which went on a little too long. I
also didn't really get emotionally attached to any of the characters, or
feel much for them by the end of the film. The story wasn't a bad one, it's
just that some of the plot points nagged at me somewhat. Here are these
great warriors searching for the evil Jade Fox, and even though she's the
governess of the girl they're quite familiar with, they don't recognize her?
And what about their relationship to the girl? Every time they see her, they
either fight or embrace her. A little too ambiguous for my taste. But maybe
that's just me.
I did however enjoy the overall story which effectively combined dramatic
elements with humor, action and even a touch of romance. For me, the best
parts of the movie were obviously the battle scenes, which just blew my
friggin' eyes away! In fact, I suspect that most people who see this movie
will find themselves staring at the screen and wondering how the hell they
managed to put together all of those cool moves. But again, if wire-fu
stunts don't do it for you, and fast-motion fight scenes ain't your cup of
tea, don't go into this movie expecting GONE WITH THE WIND. It's a
wonderfully photographed picture, with beautiful details in the settings,
its authenticity and the obvious language spoken (the film is in Mandarin
with English subtitles), but its wonder resonates most with its fight
sequences, and if that sort of thing doesn't impress you, this film likely
isn't for you. And for once, all of the actual fight scenes were filmed
flawlessly. Really believable. For me, those were the elements which worked
best in this film. Awesome, awesome battles, beautifully shot and an okay
story.

Author
Laura Clifford
When legendary Wudan warrior Li Mu Bai (Chow Yun-Fat, "Anna and the King")
entrusts his ancient green sword to Yu Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh, "Tomorrow 
Never Dies") for transport to Sir Te (Sihung Lung, "Eat Drink Man Woman") 
in Peking, she wonders at his decision - is he finally ready to declare
long unspoken emotions and settle down with her?  The sword, however, is
covetted by a mysterious new warrior, apparently the protege of Li Mu Bai's
long time enemy Jade Fox (Pei-pei Cheng), and is stolen on its first night
in Sir Te's study.  Li Mu Bai and Yu Shu Lien are pulled back into the 
life of the swordfighter as their romance is reflected by that of a younger
couple in director Ang Lee's ("Sense and Sensibility") "Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon."
Ang Lee established himself in the filmmaking world with his Chinese trilogy 
of patriarchal films "Pushing Hands," "The Wedding Banquet," and "Eat Drink
Man Woman."  He then further proved himself with three wildly different 
English language speaking films, "Sense and Sensibility," "The Ice Storm"
and "Ride With the Devil."  Now he tries his hand at the Chinese martial arts 
genre he grew up with and delivers an epic entertainment that may very well 
cross over from the art house to American multiplexes.
The story (screenplay by Hui-Ling Wang ("Eat Drink Man Woman), James Schamus, 
Kuo Jung Tsai) contains all the elements of a genre romantic fantasy adventure.
There's a fantastic sword, not unlike a Jedi knight's light saber, whose
owner has developed mixed feelings for after years of bloodshed.  Li Mu Bai
and Yu Shu Lien's love is clear for all to see, yet long denied by themselves
(for noble reasons, of course, as she was once betrothed to his brother who
was killed in action).  A new fighter emerges in a most unexpected guise,
Jen Yu (newcomer Ziyi Zhang), the daughter of an aristrocat promised in an
unwanted arranged marriage.  Jen is caught between a natural inclination
towards good and the evil that is her governess/teacher - the infamous Jade
Fox.  Her lover is Lo (Chen Chang, "Happy Together"), a gypsy bandit who
once had the audacity to attempt to steal her hair comb.  The flashback
which fills in the history of Jen and Lo's romance is one of the highlights
of the film - sexy, funny, touching and of course, full of action.
The screenplay delivers with several story lines intermingled, all
evoking the full spectrum of human emotion.  Of course, the story is
studded with numerous action sequences, featuring the balletic fight
choreography of Yen Woo-Ping ("The Matrix").  While most of his work
is exemplary (particularly the fights between Jen and Yu Shu), I found the 
'flying' sequences a bit too fantastical.  Skipping over water and
fighting atop a bamboo forest work, but the rest of the action would
have been better served a bit more earthbound.  Cinematography by Peter
Pau ("The Bride with White Hair") captures the action while also broadening 
scope to capture breathtaking scenery in both green, misty mountain terrain 
and sun scorched deserts.  Tim Squyres' editting is top notch.  The film is 
gorgeously scored by Tan Dun, featuring the work of celloist Yo Yo Ma.
Michelle Yeoh should be receiving some serious attention for a Best Actress
nomination.  Her subtle work here is heart breaking and the most compelling
in the film.  On the opposite end of the scale, Chen Chang ("Happy Together")
gives a rousingly endearing performance as the sexy, good hearted bandit Lo,
while newcomer Ziyi Zhang demonstrates she's got the moves.  Chow Yun Fat
is a bit hampered by the legendary status of his character, to which he brings
enormous nobility.  Sihung Lung ("Eat Drink Man Woman") is humorously sage
as Sir Te.
"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" has something for everyone.  It's a huge
film by a director who must now be regarded as a world class auteur.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON
(Sony Classics)
Starring: Chow Yun-Fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi, Chen Chang, Sihung
Lung, Cheng Pei-Pei.
Screenplay: Wang Hui-Ling, James Schamus and Tsai Kuo-Jung, based on the
book by Wang Du-Lu.
Producers: Hsu Li-Kong, William Kong and Ang Lee.
Director:  Ang Lee.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, sexual situations)
Running Time:  120 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Before delving into the reasons CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON isn't
the unqualified masterpiece it's been touted as, let's revel in the
reasons it's still a cinematic joy in a year of mostly leaden
entertainments. In one of the film's many inspiring action sequences, a
pair of adversaries square off in battle, employing a mystical fighting
technique that allows its adherents to virtually defy gravity. This
particular battle takes place not in a bar, or in a city street, but above
a forest, with the combatants surfing the leaves and tap-dancing across
branches. It is the moment when it's easiest to appreciate CROUCHING
TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON as a giddy exercise in pure cinema showmanship. Over
and over again, it lifts you out of the mundane world of a theater seat.
     It also drops you back into that seat a bit roughly every once in a
while, but why quibble? As directed by Ang Lee, the story is both
mythologically basic and epic in scope. In an unspecified year in the days
of Imperial China, veteran Wudan warrior Li Mu Bai (Chow Yun-Fat) is
preparing to retire from his fighting ways. His famed sword, Green
Destiny, is to be carried by his long-time friend and unconsummated love
Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh) to Peking as a gift to elder statesman Sir Te
(Sihung Lung). But the sword is soon stolen by a mysterious figure
familiar with the ways of the Wudan, one who is able to match Shu Lien in
battle. Is it the infamous Jade Fox, who once slew Mu Bai's master? Or is
it Jen (Zhang Ziyi), the young daughter of a politician who longs for a
more adventurous life than the one designated for her?
     As solid as the narrative is in many ways, it would be ridiculous to
argue that its critical and commercial success will be rooted in the
story. CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON is first and foremost an adventure,
one that turns choreographed action into pure film art. The action
sequences combine the astonishing talents of fight choreographer Yuen
Wo-Ping (THE MATRIX) with spectacular wire work to create moments that
make you want to stand up and applaud. There's never even a sense of
redundancy as the film progresses; each sequence serves its own purpose,
and offers wonderful variations on the clashing of metal, feet and fists,
and escapes up sheer walls. It's pure INDIANA JONES fun with an unexpected
sense of consequence.
     It's also a martial arts-heavy film in which the thematic elements
actually matter. While CROUCHING TIGER is certainly enjoyable as a distaff
spin on the usually testosterone-soaked chop-socky genre, it's more than a
feminist action flick. It explores the human toll of unthinking tradition,
tradition that wears the kind of deep grooves into the world that, in one
lovely early scene, Shu Lien's wagon must follow to remain upright.
Characters struggle with frustration over conflicts between their desires
and their destinies. The performances are strong, with all three of the
principal players (Chow, Yeoh and Zhang) conveying the burdens of living
expected lives in expected ways. For an action-filled film, there's a lot
going on above the neck.
     That's quite a load for an adventure film to carry, and occasionally
it's not quite up to the task. CROUCHING TIGER is full of sub-plots that
make it denser than it needs to be functionally, dashing from Jen's
encounter with a desert raider (Chen Chang), to the political implications
of the sword's disappearance, to the soon-to-be-irrelevant roles of a
police officer and his daughter. Particularly underdeveloped is the
relationship between Jen and her governess (Cheng Pei-Pei), which
ultimately plays a crucial role in the climax but feels like there's
something missing. Yet as ambitious as it is, CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN
DRAGON never feels self-important. As beautifully crafted as it is
(notably Peter Pau's cinematography and Tan Dun's score), it never turns
into a stagnant parade of lovely images. And as fanciful as its action
sequences are, they never inspire eye-rolling. CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN
DRAGON isn't a masterpiece, but it doesn't have to be. There's pleasure
enough in a film that doesn't make you feel stupid while it sends you
soaring over the treetops.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Author: Faust667@aol.com (Jerry Saravia)
Subject: Review: Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000)
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Organization: None
X-Questions-to: graham@jetcity.com
X-Submissions-to: graham@ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #28088
Keywords: author=saravia
The title of director Ang Lee's latest was a turn-off to me. I suppose 
Chinese titles turn me off in general, but something like "A Chinese Ghost 
Story" made me swoon. Nonetheless, though I can't exactly explain the 
significance of the title, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is one of the 
most exciting martial-arts films ever made - a glorious, magical thrill ride 
that Hollywood can only think of aspiring to. 
Set in ancient imperial China, we are introduced to the magnetic Yu Shu Lien 
(Michelle Yeoh), a skillful, graceful warrior who learns that a legendary, 
powerful sword has been stolen from its owner, Lee Mu Bai (Chow Yun-Fat), 
another highly skilled warrior and good friend of Yu Shu's. They both try to 
track down a masked thief, who is almost as graceful as both of them 
combined. This masterfully trained thief can scale walls and fly with such 
ease that Yu Shu and Lee Mu are determined to uncover his/her identity. It 
turns out that the culprit is Jen (Zhang Ziyi), a guest at the home of the 
respected Sir Te (Lung Sihung). Jen has her emotional problems and pines for 
a warrior who lives out in the desert netheregions. She is also fierce and 
hardly tactful - when she gets angry, she is likely to make Robert De Niro 
shudder with fright. I am not sure anyone would want to be within ten yards 
of this soaring, sweep-of-of-your-feet presence. Looks like an angel but she 
is as fierce as a tiger. 
The difference between "Crouching Tiger" and several other hundred 
martial-arts films is in its emotional truths and romantic subplots. We sense 
that Yu Shu loves Lee Mu and wishes some kind of future for the two of them, 
even if they are flying high among treetops and rooftops. Jen is the more 
complicated character of the bunch, she has her questionable loyalty to her 
mother but also a love for the long-haired warrior of the desert, who makes 
her feel love over pain (and sometimes both). This magical sword she has 
stolen gives her a power that she can barely control...and thus, it seems she 
has little control of her own life. 
Yeoh and the often static Chow Yun-Fat (who brims with magnetism in this 
film) bring heart and soul to "Crouching Tiger" but it is the amazing Zhang 
Ziyi who soars above them all. She is quick, smart, clever, passionate, 
tempermental, confident, and genuinely convincing as a warrior with no qualms 
of fighting her respectful elders - we also sense she could fail but it is 
quietly compelling to watch this woman trying to balance her world. 
Every sequence in "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is sheerly amazing and 
wondrous in detail and magnificence. Every fight scene feels honest and 
truthful, no matter how silly it may seem to some that the characters can fly 
with grace and agility (China is used to this sort of thing since it relates 
to their own past legends and numerous other films). Again, it is because of 
how powerful the characters are - they stand for something and represent 
their own people but they also have values and morals. Jen is the rebel ready 
to break down their fortress - she acts out her own feelings rather than 
repressing them. Essentially, Ang Lee ("Sense and Sensibility") has created 
his own "Star Wars" for the new millenium. Spectacularly exciting, tense, 
romantic, dramatic, idiosyncratic at times, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" 
stuns our eyes and engages our hearts. George Lucas can only hope of 
accomplishing this much with his next "Star Wars" opus. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Chad Polenz@aol.com
Think "Star Wars" but set in ancient China and throw in a lot more drama and 
romance and you might have an idea of the scenario. It's a complex story of 
forbidden and unspoken love and the universal war of good versus evil. Chow 
Yun Fat plays a noble warrior trying to escape the life he has lead. Michelle 
Yeoh co-stars as the warrior's lifelong but unspoken lover who is also an 
accomplished fighter. Zhang Ziyi is the REAL star of the show as Jen, a 
teenage girl who has secretly studied a mystical form of martial arts under 
an infamous criminal known as Jade Fox - the nemesis the two warriors are 
hunting when they all come together. A sub-plot involves Jen's romantic 
affair with a wandering bandit and her inner conflict to give up a life of 
aristocracy and eliteness for the freedom of being a road warrior and with 
the man she truly loves. 
Just about everything that could go right for this picture does. The 
screenplay is full of detail, wonder characters, a rich background of the 
Chinese culture as well as a lot of ambiguity and mysticism towards the 
martials arts aspects. Although the story takes place in the "real" world the 
fighters here have the ability to defy gravity and other laws of nature yet 
they're still weighed down by basic human emotions and flaws. Director Ang 
Lee brings it all together wonderfully, pacing the film with energy and 
fluidity throughout so that the dramatic plotlines never drag on and the 
romantic aspects are very effective and quite moving. He also manages to keep 
things just a bit lighthearted with some comic relief that's well-timed and 
not at all distracting. 
There are absolutely no flaws other than the fact the film is in Chinese and 
not English but that just makes it all that more authentic.
It's difficult to compare "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" with anything 
mainstream because it's so vasty different from the kind of entertainment 
we've come to expect here in the west. This film combines elements from many 
different genres and how it manages to successfully make them work together 
is some kind of cinematic alchemy that only comes along a few times in a 
lifetime. 
I saw this movie three times and upon each viewing it became even more 
enjoyable, more exciting and more romantic. How many Hollywood movies can you 
say that of? This is a story that is so full of authenticy and detail it 
creates its own sort of reality and consciousness. I can only compare it to 
the "Star Wars" movies  or "2001" because it works on that kind of level - 
where it's not a movie that you either enjoy or don't - it's an metaphysical 
experience (and no, it's not just something sci-fi geeks would like, ANYONE 
could enjoy this film). 
I hope this is nominated for and wins many Academy Awards. One of the best 
movies ever made, seriously folks. 


Author
Ross Anthony
What to expect from a Chow Yun Fat kung-fu flick directed by Ang Lee the
director of such emotionally wrenching films as "Ice Storm" and "Sense and
Sensibility"? Add to this already tantalizing mix, the equally invigorating
spices of Michelle Yeoh of Bond fame and "Matrix" choreographer Yuen
Wo-Ping, and you get an artistically crafted, warm red-blooded,
mandarin-speaking masterpiece.
And like most masterpieces it's moody, dark at times, thought provoking
(you'll go home talking about it in the car) and not for everyone.
Though the film ends in a question mark instead of a period, there's hardly
a criticism to make. Paced with the rich flavor and patience of maple syrup,
this tiger/dragon drama takes flight during intermittent scuffles - therein
lies the real magic.
The instant these women masters take up arms, your jaw will open and remain
so, dry tongue and all until the robust bout ends. Your heart will hover as
these two graceful fighters race up walls like lizards or moths, then
scurrying across rooftops like the butterflies they'll set fluttering in
your stomach.
Absolutely A+ ballet beautiful fight sequences.
Perhaps more a film for the opera appreciator than Hong-Kong Kung-fu
aficionado, this is a film that takes you on a bareback horse-ride waltz
through beauty.
"When it comes to emotions, even great hero's can be idiots." Chow plays the
warrior monk; Yeoh his warrior love ... though both are too noble to have
commenced a romantic relationship. Tired of the killing, Chow gives away his
sword, only to find himself smack in the middle of the good fight against an
evil skilled witch and her lovely, yet wavering, young disciple.
The film harnesses the beauty and grace of a Disney animated feature, while
bending, like the supple green bark of bamboo, nearly into the surreal.
Director Ang Lee: "The film is a kind of a dream of China, a China that
probably never existed, except in my boyhood fantasies in Taiwan. Of course
my childhood imagination was mainly fired by the martial arts movies I grew
up with and by the novels of romance and derring-do I read instead of doing
my homework. That these two kinds of dreaming should come together now, in a
film I was able to make in China, is a happy irony for me."
Writer James Schamus: "The Chinese embedded in every word of this movie has
layers and layers of culture and meanings. They simply don't exist to a
Western ear. It is one of the truly delicious ironies of this movie, that
although I co-wrote it, I'll never fully understand all of its meanings."
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Chow Yun Fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi, Change Chen.
Directed by Ang Lee.
Written by James Schamus, Wang Hui Ling, Tsai Kuo Jung. Based on the novel
by Wang Du Lu.
Produced by Bill Kong, Hsu Li Kong, Ang Lee at Sony/Good Machine
Int/Columbia Pics Asia.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000)
Chow Yun-fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi, Chang Chen, Lung Sihung, Cheng
Pei-pei, Li Fazeng, Gao Xian, Hai Yan, Wang Deming, Li Li. Music by Tan
Dun; cello solos by Yo-Yo Ma. Screenplay by James Schamus, Wang Hui
Ling, Tsai Kuo Jung, based on the novel by Wang Du Lu. Directed by Ang
Lee. In Mandarin with English subtitles. 120 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
The biggest hurdle facing a movie like "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon"
is the enthusiasm of its own fans. All the glowing reviews and critics'
awards bestowed on the production since it opened in limited release
last month may lead theatergoers to anticipate more than any film can
possibly deliver. If you go to "Crouching Tiger" expecting the moon and
the stars, you'll likely be disappointed. But if you're in the mood for
a beautifully photographed melodrama punctuated by dazzling martial arts
sequences, then get ready for some big fun.
Director Ang Lee, the man behind "The Wedding Banquet," "Eat Drink Man
Woman," "Sense and Sensibility" and "The Ice Storm," is known for his
meticulous approach to storytelling and "Crouching Tiger" represents his
most ambitious undertaking to date. Along with a series of thrilling
gravity-be-damned fight scenes, Lee presents a sumptuous tale of a
rebellious young woman, two aging warriors and a love-struck outlaw.
While the exposition isn't as buoyant as the action set pieces and
occasionally becomes a bit too stately, Lee adds humor and old fashioned
romance at just the right moments to balance things out.
Set in the early 19th century, the tale begins when revered warrior Li
Mu Bai (Chow Yun-fat) decides to put away his sword, a 400-year-old
blade called Green Destiny. He entrusts the legendary weapon to a friend
and fellow warrior, Yu Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh), asking her to deliver
it to Beijing while he goes to visit the grave of his master.
In Beijing, Shu Lien meets Jen (Zhang Ziyi), a politician's bright young
daughter about to be forced into an arranged marriage. Desperately
unhappy with the direction her life is headed, Jen wishes she could
experience the adventures of a warrior and bonds with Shu Lien almost
immediately.
Under the veil of night, a dark-clothed figure makes off with Green
Dragon. The guards shout the alarm and the chase begins, with Shu Lien
in pursuit of the thief. In an extraordinarily well-choreographed
sequence, they chase each other through the compound until the thief
springs onto a roof. In casual defiance of trivialities like gravity,
Shu Lien skitters up a wall and the two break out their best martial
arts moves, exchanging blows and leaping from rooftop to rooftop like
Superman in the early days. The sequence is breathtaking and just a hint
of things to come.
Each successive battle ups the visual ante, building to a showstopper
with warriors soaring up through a forest, where they duke it out on
impossibly thin treetop branches. I tried to sort out the internal logic
of these magnificent scenes and came up with the following: A warrior
cannot simply levitate at will, but can fly from one point to another as
long as he or she is in battle. To stay airborne, however, they must
come into contact with something physical every few seconds. It all
makes for absolutely spectacular eye candy, accented by a superb score
from Tan Dun, with cello solos by Yo-Yo Ma.
But don't make the mistake of dismissing the rest of the film as
between-battle filler. There's much more going on here than trippy
martial arts aerobatics. Like Jade Fox (Cheng Pei-pei), who murdered
Li's master and has plans for all the principal characters. Or the
long-repressed love between Li and Shu Lien, which threatens to break
into a full-fledged romance. Or Li and Shu Lien's attempts to become
mentors for the masked thief. Not enough? How about a dandy extended
flashback revealing the forbidden affair between Jen and long-haired
outlaw, Lo (Chang Chen), with the pair squabbling and smooching in the
Western China desert?
There's humor as well, particularly in a riotous sequence at a frontier
outpost where Jen dispatches a thug with one hand while eating dinner,
and then takes on a few dozen of his friends. The comic timing in this
sequence is letter perfect, with Ang Lee and company proving to be as
adept at slapstick as they are at everything else.
None of this could work, of course, without a stellar group of actors.
As Li, Chow Yun-fat, one of the most magnetic performers in the
business, gives an appropriately restrained performance, projecting
great inner strength along with an intense sense of regret. Michelle
Yeoh radiates grace and vitality as Shu Lien, and Zhang Ziyi makes Jen
explode with spit and thunder. As Lo, Chang Chen manages to seem at once
dashing and uncertain, while, in the pivotal role of Jade Fox, Cheng
Pei-pei is pure evil on a stick.
A friend of mine maintains that "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is a
simply a contemporary martial arts movie with delusions of grandeur.
Having seen relatively few films in the genre, I have no idea whether or
not he is correct. But I do know that, despite a few slow spots, I love
what Ang Lee has done here. "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is grand
entertainment on virtually every level and easily one of the best films
of 2000. Don't go by me, though. I'd hate for you to enter the theater
with unrealistic expectations.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The much anticipated and highly praised CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON 
is the most overrated film of the year.  Although it has MATRIX-inspired 
moments that are truly magical, these are few and far between.  A talky 
film with remarkably little to say, it features characters that are 
never fleshed out or worth caring about.  Kung fu fans will be probably 
be willing to wait through more long dry spots than Death Valley in 
order to watch the fighting.  Others may find themselves in the unusual 
position of frequently checking their watches in what, one assumes, is 
supposed to be an action picture.  Certainly, if the action sequences 
were removed, the rest of the comatose script would not be worth 
watching.
In CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON, director Ang Lee (SENSE AND 
SENSIBILITY and THE ICE STORM) has come up with the least interesting 
film of his career, one that is, on the whole, not up even to his last 
effort, RIDE WITH THE DEVIL.
Chow Yun Fat, after his disastrous performance in ANNA AND THE KING, 
plays the male lead, Li Mu Bai, who is in the process of giving up his 
famous sword, Green Destiny.  Joining him is the head of the Yuan 
Security Compound, Yu Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh, TOMORROW NEVER DIES).  
Along the way, Jen (Zhang Ziyi), a disciple of the evil Jade Fox (Cheng 
Pei Pei), captures the sword.  Needless to say, the others will want to 
get it back.  
The trailers show almost all of the good scenes from the movie.  As they 
fight with swords and fists, the actors get to walk on water as well as 
treetops and thin bamboo.  Almost all of their movements do not occur 
naturally in nature.  These sequences could have formed the basis for a 
wonderful motion picture, but, as soon as the action stops, the actors 
start to slowly, painfully slowly, drone on with some of the most 
lifeless dialog of the year.
Based on the trailers, I expected a magical motion picture.  Instead, I 
got a tedious one that is interrupted sporadically by interludes of 
brilliance.  According to my watch, with which I become well acquainted 
during the screening, I believe that there are about 10 minutes of a 
great movie interspersed into an exceedingly dull one.  See the 
trailers; skip the movie.
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON runs a long 1:59.  The film is in 
Mandarin with English subtitles.  It is rated PG-13 for martial arts 
violence and some sexuality and would be acceptable for kids around 11 
and up.  I suspect, however, that most kids will be quite bored.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON (2000)
PG-13; running time 120 minutes
Genre: Martial Arts/Drama
Seen at: Lowes Star Southfield (Detroit, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.crouchingtiger.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0190332
Written by: Hui-Ling Wang, James Schamus, Kuo Jung Tsai
  (based on the book by Du Lu Wang)
Directed by: Ang Lee
Cast: Chow Yun-Fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi, Cheng Peipei, Chang Chen,
Sihung Lung, Gao Xi'an, Li Li, Li Fa Feng, Hai Yan, Wang Deming (Tsai)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamscrouchtiger.html
If your idea of A Good Time doesn't include watching a two-hour movie
that scoffs at the laws of gravity, involves warrior chicks kickin' butt
and taking names, and does so without a single line of spoken English,
you might want to skip this review and the movie it speaks fondly of:
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON.  Obviously, high fantasy isn't your
Thing.
I hope you'll forgive me if I snicker at some of you as I recall how
much you liked STAR WARS...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
In 19th century Qing Dynasty China, warrior Li Mu Bai (Chow Yun-Fat),
seeking a more peaceful existence, gives his Green Destiny sword to
fellow warrior - and the object of his desire - Yu Shu Lien (Michelle
Yeoh), asking her to deliver it to Sir Te (Sihung Lung) for safekeeping.
Yu Shu Lien regretfully does so, but soon afterwards, a stealthy thief
steals the sword from Sir Te's camp.
Suspicion falls upon members of the House of Governor Yu (Li Fa Feng),
who, along with Madam Yu (Hai Yan), their willful daughter Jen (Zhang
Ziyi), and Jen's Governess (Cheng Peipei), have come to visit Sir Te in
preparations for Jen's arranged marriage to nobility.  As Li Mu Bai and
Yu Shu Lien set out to find the thief, they discover there's more to Jen
than meets the eye - including her involvement with a desert marauder
named Lo (Chang Chen).
The Upshot:
It amuses me somewhat that the fantasy-like acrobatics, and the English
subtitles, would be an impenetrable barrier to anyone enjoying CROUCHING
TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON (hereafter, "CT/HD"); with some of the tripe thrown
at American audiences during the M2K movie year, an inventive movie like
CT/HD should be like a breath of fresh air.  My amusement aside, CT/HD
did take some getting used to, I must admit.  But the learning curve
wasn't at all steep; after only a few minutes, the audience I was in
fully got into the spirit of the film, heartily applauding the
magnificent combat scenes, laughing during appropriate moments, and
generally following the story from start to moving finish.
CT/HD was worth any needed extra effort to watch it.  I've long
appreciated the vast talents of Michelle Yeoh (who I first saw in, of
all things, a 007 flick) and Chow Yun-Fat (one of the best things about
1999's ANNA AND THE KING).  They continued to please here, all around;
the actors and their characters seemed to effortlessly compliment each
other on, and off, the fighting arena, Yu Shu Lien's strength of
presence being a good match for Li Mu Bai's confident nobility.  Much
more a surprise was the striking Zhang Ziyi as the reluctant
bride-to-be, Jen.  She was, in every sense of the word, stunning; her
character as spirited as she was beautiful, it wasn't hard to see why Li
Mu Bai was enchanted by the willful Jen.  A strong supporting cast -
including Cheng Peipei in a dual role, Chang Chen as Lo, Jen's sensuous
desert lover, Gao Xi'an as the diligent guardsman Bo, and Li Li as his
diligent daughter Mai - helped to elevate the CT/HD storyline far above
the standard "You Killed My Master!" plot of most martial arts flicks.
Much of the credit for the depth of CT/HD goes to its brilliant
director, Ang Lee, and the equally-brilliant camerawork by
cinematographer Peter Pau.  Recognition and appreciation of movie
artists besides the actors, being my reviewing Achilles' Heel, I
definitely had to sit up and take notice of Lee's and  Pau's handiwork
behind-the-camera.  Credit, too, to CT/HD fight choreographer Woo-ping
Yuen, costumer Tim Yip, and to Yo-Yo Ma, whose cello provided CT/HD with
a haunting musical touch.  Thought THE MATRIX had it goin' on?  You
ain't seen nuttin' until you see Chow Yun-Fat walk on water, or Zhang
Ziyi knock big bad brutes back into yesterday.  And the weapons used
throughout this film kept me - a big-time weaponry fan - salivating (and
at one point, laughing; watch for a late scene with Michelle Yeoh and
Zhang Ziyi, to see what tickled my funny bone).
The lasting beauty of CT/HD is that its pageantry, its tender love
stories, and its humor are never eclipsed by its awe-inspiring action;
each element is as integral as the next.  Ironically, given the
aspersions cast upon the martial arts genre as a whole, the same can't
be said of many standard Hollywood movies these days.  This, I think, is
a key factor in why CT/HD has taken so many people by surprise: who'da
thunk a kung-fu flick could be *deep*?
Even at this length, my review can't do justice to CROUCHING TIGER,
HIDDEN DRAGON; any attempts I make to describe this genre-breaking
movie, fall woefully short of the mark.  Trust me; even if you have to
go out of your way to see it (as I did - Lansing "Podunkville Central"
Michigan still not being a Selected City), it's well worth the trip.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
You'll have to forgive me again - I know that gang involvement is not
truly a Black Factor issue, no more so than any stereotypically
monolithic and destructive activity Blacks are unproportionately
involved in - but I couldn't help but be struck by the parallels to
modern-day street gangs when Lo spoke of his affiliation with the desert
gang that he rode with as being "family", and a "noble" part of his
life.   Realities of gang warfare aside, I wonder how American movie
audiences would take to ongoing depictions of gang members as
sympathetic, even admirable, characters.  Not too well, I'd reckon.
GOODFELLAS and GODFATHERs, not inclusive.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Once I accepted the gravity-lawbreaking, CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON
was as moving a work of art as any I've ever witnessed; a majestic
master stroke from Ang Lee that takes martial arts cinema to a whole new
level.   I will be shocked - shocked! - if Oscar doesn't smile warmly
upon this film.
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON (rating: greenlight):
Say what you will about the inherent weirdness in CROUCHING TIGER,
HIDDEN DRAGON; but *one* thing's for sure: this ain't your father's
kung-fu flick.

Author
Bob Bloom

Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000) 4 stars out of 4. Starring Chow
Yun-Fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi, Chang Chen and Cheng Peipei. Written
by James Schamus, Wang Hui Ling and Tsai Kuo Jung. Based on a novel by
Wang Du Lu. Music by Tan Dun. Directed by Ang Lee. Rated PG-13.
 If you see one movie this year, I strongly urge that it be Crouching
Tiger, Hidden Dragon.
 This Ang Lee spectacle combines soaring adventure with a rousing love
story.
 It is epic filmmaking on a grand scale. Oh, and it is in Mandarin.
 Lee, best known for work behind the camera on Sense and Sensibility and
The Ice Storm, has returned to his roots, filming a novel by Wang Du Lu.
 The story dealing with warrior wizards is similar to the stories Lee
grew up with.
 The protagonists of this two-hour epic are Li Mu Bai (Chow Yun-Fat),
Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh) and Jen Yu (Zhang Ziyi).
 Chowís Li is a world-weary warrior ready to give up his ways. To prove
so he asks Shu Lien to present his legendary sword, The Green Destiny,
to Sir Te as a gift and token of his respect and devotion.
 However, shortly after carrying out her mission, the sword is stolen by
a mysterious warrior.
 Li and Shu Lien then begin a series of adventures in which they seek
the sword and this new warrior.
 Meanwhile, Shu Lien grows close to Jen, a young woman betrothed in
marriage who seeks an alternative life. She, of course, is the
mysterious thief and is as skilled in the ways of the warrior as Li and
Shu Lien.
 Any description of this movie does it an injustice. It is one that must
be seen to be appreciated. Itís grandeur and craftsmanship must be
viewed first-hand..
 Especially spectacular are the martial arts sequences, choreographed by
Woo-ping Yuen, who also staged the fights in The Matrix. Here, the
combatants fly over rooftops, confront each other on slim tree limbs
hundreds of feet of the ground and glide over water.
 But what really makes Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon so appealing is
the human element. Screenwriters James Schamus, Wang Hui Ling and Tsai
Kuo Jung present us with characters who have a history, who have weight.
 The unrequited love between Li and Shu Lien, their warrior code, their
sacrifices, are all the more poignant because we come to care for them.
 Jen, too, is presented as a complex, headstrong individual who wrestles
with herself before finally deciding on a path to follow.
 What is also interesting is that for a movie of this stripe, the
bloodshed is at a minimum. Itís the beauty of the combat that Lee
emphasizes, not the outcome.
 Lee is ably assisted by cinematographer Peter Pau, who has captured
some exquisite landscapes and vistas, as well as the music of Tan Dun ó
aided by cello solos by Yo-Yo Ma ó which sets a kind of mythic tone for
the movie.
 Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon is an exuberant movie exercise. It
neatly captures the potential of the cinema to take you into a foreign
culture and get you caught up in its mythology.
 Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon is a sure bet to win the best foreign
language film at the Academy Awards. I also think Lee should be
recognized in the directorís category for this splendid achievement.
 This is a must-see experience for anyone who loves movies. It will
leave you gasping, awed and overwhelmed. Don't deny yourselves the
pleasure of Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon. It is monumental.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Jerry Bosch
As I walked out of CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON I thought to myself that I
had had just seen a great film. With the passage of a few hours I tempered
my enthusiasm and started pondering the question of whether a masterpiece
must implicitly be a "great" piece of work and viceversa. Attempting to make
a distinction may be a matter of splitting hairs. I avoided a commitment by
appealing to etymology. As the word implies, a masterpiece is any work which
embodies the skills of a master. As such it should suffice to say that it is
a product of exceptional quality. CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON fits
comfortably in that category.
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON immerses the viewer in an idealized world of
oriental folklore, with the requisite blend of legend, fantasy, magic and
mythology. It is reminiscent of a Wagnerian epic with characters which might
as well be half-gods - greater than life, purer than life, stronger than
life, physically invincible and able to accomplish superhuman feats, but
with a human soul that makes them ultimately vulnerable. All the classic
elements of the oriental mystique are thrown into the mix, including the art
of contemplation and the concept of martial dexterity as the physical
equivalent of spiritual advancement. The classic struggle between good and
evil is the inevitable backdrop, with advanced masters of each and a golden
pupil, which must choose between the two. It is the gifted pupil who, under
the influence of the evil master steals the Holy Grail in the form of a
magic sword which is the focus of the conflict at the heart of the legend.
The elements of romance at two different levels of enlightenment (a pair of
masters and a pair of  youngsters) are poignantly represented.  The paradox
of oriental restraint existing side by side with all consuming passion in
the same breast is projected effectively.
The fight scenes are stunning balletic tours-de-force, not to be taken
literally but clearly to be enjoyed as superb cinematic art, as are the
prodigious leaps and flights to, from and between rooftops, the martial
combat at the top of swaying bamboo branches and the combatants skipping
like pebbles along the surface of a lake. There need be no question of
suspended disbelief when one is in the presence of poetry.
As in a Wagnerian opera there is a substantial story line, which takes place
at an ordinary human level, yet the entire project is to be accepted as a
work of art rooted in fantasy. Do not assume, however, that the art is
limp-wristed. For those who are put off by the "art" label this film can be
confidently recommended as engrossing entertainment at the levels of
adventure, action and romance.
There are no weak performances in this movie. Michelle Yeoh imbues her
character with depth, humanity and wisdom. Chow Yon Fat projects dignity and
purity of heart. Zhang Ziyi is a budding superstar. She is radiantly
beautiful and totally persuasive in a multifaceted role. Cheng Pei Pei as
the evil master and Chang Cheng as the bandit prince acquit themselves
admirably. Kudos to screenwriters James Schamus, Wang Hui Ling and Tsai Kuo
Jing, choreographer Yuen Wo-Ping, photography director Peter Pau and music
director Tan Dun, each of which contribute quality components to this
extraordinary film. Ang Lee as the director, co-producer and mastermind of
the project gets the lion share of the credit.
This is destined to be one of those films that everybody likes, including
those who hate martial arts movies. Don't miss it.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Move over Jackie Chan.  Step aside Batman and Robin. 
Shift gears, Superman.  Ang Lee's "Crouching Tiger, Hidden
Dragon" splashes across the big screen like no other martial
arts movie you've ever seen, utilizing that filmmaker's
feminist vision to portray three women as fighters so
formidable that Rambo would have considerable difficulty
indeed should he ever incur their enmity.  "Crouching Tiger,"
selected as the closing pic by the New York Film Festival,
has the kind of comic-book melodramatic action that could
draw the youngsters into its PG-13 life if only they could
overcome their suspicion of foreign-language fare.  The
subtitles are clear, however, and the story serves as a pretext
for the most dramatic action sequences filmed this year--
surpassing the progression of mayhem in "The Matrix."
   The story, which is adapted from Wang Du Lu's novel by
James Schamus, Wang Hui Ling and Tsai Kuo Jung, takes
us not so far back (the early 1800's) but we might be looking
at the world of the medieval Chinese dynasties where
warlords ruled over their fiefs and skirmishes were so
common that if you said "nee how ma" the wrong way you
were likely to lose your head.  Two couples are in love.  Li
Mu Bai (Chow Yun-fat) and Yu Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh)
have powerful feelings for each other (why not? They're both
masters of the martial arts who could give the neighbors
something to talk about if they ever got into a heated
argument. Li is retiring to devote his life to contemplation. 
(Don't worry: he comes out of withdrawal soon enough.) To
signify his sincerity he hands over his sword, Green Destiny,
to the physically adept, acrobatic Yu, willing to stop seeking
vengeance against Jade Fox (Cheng Pei-pei) who had killed
his master.  In Peking, Yu runs into the youthful Jen (Zhang
Ziyi), about to suffer a forced marriage while envying the
freedom enjoyed Yu.  When the priceless sword is stolen, the
acrobatics commence.
   Tarzan has nothing on the martial artists in Ang Lee's
picture, and what's more the most daring and successful
fighters are of the so-called weaker sex, their prowess even
more remarkable when you consider that Yu and Jade Fox
are meant to be well over the age of 35.  In the most
elaborate and even hilarious aerial ballet, young Jen takes on
a band of uncouth men who might have come out of the
Teutonic beasts who fought the Romans in "The Gladiator." 
She calmly drinks tea on the upper level of a ramshackle
restaurant and, when approached by one "Iron Hand," she
tosses him over the rail with one arm while still concentrating
on her cup.  In short order the entire establishment is gutted.
Kick, pow, sock, bam.
   Ang Lee takes us out of the big city of Peking for long
stretches of Chinese desert in which (as Jen's flashback
reveals) a 19th century Lawrence of Arabia, the bold
equestrian bandit Lo (Chang Chen), alternately fights with
Jen and makes love to her.  A chase on horseback across
the sands of Western China easily put the old American
cowboy sequences into the dust.
  The flights through the air are nothing short of spectacular,
making us wonder whether the characters in this tale are
more the stuff of legend than breathing, fighting and loving
human beings.  While Chow Yun-fat allows himself a
relatively small role in the movie that features his name in the
star's box, Zhang Ziyi's portrayal of the petite but
superhuman fierce Jen is the show-stealer.  Yo Yo Ma's cello
punctuates the action along with a steady percussion in a
movie which ups the ante and might just Jackie Chan green
with envy.
PG-13.  Running time: 119 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon     ***1/2
 Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester City Centre)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on January 5, 2001; certificate 
PG; 120 minutes; countries of origin China/Hong Kong/Taiwan/USA; aspect 
ratio 2.35:120
Directed by Ang Lee; produced by Li-Kong Hsu, William Kong, Ang Lee.
Written by James Schamus, Kuo Jung Tsai, Hui-Ling Wang; based on the 
book by Du Lu Wang.
Photographed by Peter Pau; edited by Tim Squyres.
"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is a movie made with such grace, beauty 
and passion that the effect is somewhat disorientating. The filmmaker, 
Ang Lee, has made serious comedies ("Wedding Banquet", "Sense and 
Sensibility"), thoughtful dramas ("The Ice Storm") and even a Civil War 
epic ("Ride With the Devil"). Now he gives us a martial arts picture.
There are familiar elements throughout. The male hero, played by 
Oriental action star Chow Yun-Fat, is a legendary warrior on a 
passionate quest, attempting to recover his stolen sword and avenge the 
death of his master. He and the female hero (Michaelle Yeoh) are both 
experts at fighting, and there is much respectful talk about their 
hallowed craft. There are old scores brought up, new double-crossings 
perpetrated, instances of witchcraft and malevolence, displays of 
nobility and bravery -- and there is fighting.
We're used to seeing this kind of thing depicted with strained faces, 
accompanied by ridiculously melodramatic drum sounds, while both heroes 
and villains let out shrieks, and speak through bad dubbing tracks. 
That's not the sort of thing we'd expect from Lee, nor do we get it. 
"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is directed with a tender, dramatic 
touch; when the characters talk about their beliefs, the words come out 
with the same sincerity and intensity as they do in the films of Akira 
Kurosawa. This is chop-socky material elevated to art.
Because the movie feels so much like a drama, I felt at arms length for 
a great percentage of its running time -- what I was getting at in my 
opening comment is that the distinguished nature of the style leads us 
to expect that the story is going to coil and spring in some grand, 
unexpected way. It is not until late on in the piece, when the structure 
has become clear, that we realise Lee's aim is simply to approach 
familiar material in an unfamiliar way, and we can relax and let the 
story reach us. A second viewing might help me appreciate the picture 
more, as might have a little less pre-release hype.
What strikes us instantly and unmistakably are the scenes of action, 
beautifully choreographed by the same guy who trained the actors in "The 
Matrix", and none of them created through CGI. There is, for example, a 
breathtaking early moment in which the actors chase each other along 
rooftops, gliding over ceilings and skipping down walls in almost 
musical rhythm. And a hypnotic battle in which two opponents drift past 
each other while gripping onto tree branches as they sway in the breeze. 
Spectacular.
COPYRIGHT 2001 Ian Waldron-Mantgani

Author
Jon Popick
Hollywood marketing departments are always declaring that their
particular film has something to offer to every type of moviegoer, but,
until now, they've all been blowing smoke up your ass.  Crouching Tiger,
Hidden Dragon defines the term `something for everyone,' and, what's
more, it accomplishes this rare feat in a way that will leave you
breathless.
Allow me to use an anonymous family to illustrate Dragon's appeal to a
wide array of potential viewers. Mom likes sweeping romances, and Dragon
offers one of the year's best. It's also one of the finest martial arts
films ever made, which thrills little Bobby to no end.  Big sister
Claire is a big fan of Yo-Yo Ma, who provides the film with a number of
haunting cello solos.  Aunt Sally is an aging militant feminist, but
even she's impressed by Dragon's strong portrayal of women.  Grandma
enjoys the picture's subtitles, on account of not being able to hear a
goddamn thing, and Dad has a little thing for Asian chicks.  Despite the
vast differences in this family's cinematic taste, each of these six
people is going to ride home from the theater with a smile plastered on
their face.
Dragon is set in and around Beijing in the early 19th century.  Giang Hu
warrior Li Mu Bai (Chow Yun-Fat, Anna & the King) has just quit the
martial arts business, choosing literally to hang up his blade in favor
of a life of meditation and reflection.  His sword, a 400-year-old
weapon named Green Destiny, is temporarily presented to an old friend,
Yu Shu Lien (Michelle Yeoh, Tomorrow Never Dies).  But the sword is
stolen one night, leading Li to momentarily interrupt his new lifestyle
to face the evil force that took the life of his Giang Hu master.
Meanwhile, Yu befriends young Jen (Ziyi Zhang), the Governor's wispy
daughter who is being forced to marry a guy she doesn't like.  She is
jealous of Yu's adventurous past, but Jen doesn't realize her dedication
to an honorable life cost her a shot at trying to land Li.  When the
sword is stolen, Yu suspects Jen may be involved.  And then the fighting
starts.
Maybe `fighting' isn't the right word.  This is more like air ballet.
When Dragon's first hand-to-hand clash hits the screen, you'll think
your eyes are playing tricks on you.  In fact, some people even
snickered and guffawed at the pre-festival press screening at the
Toronto Film Festival (where Dragon was the audience's pick for the best
picture).  Choreographer Yuen Wo Ping (The Matrix), who directed the
original Drunken Master film, outdoes himself here, and the result is
likely to knock the socks off kids weaned on Buffy the Vampire Slayer.
Don't get the idea that Dragon is just an action flick  martial arts
films have never been able to boast acting this strong before.  Though
Chow Yun-Fat is the best-known actor of the bunch, his role is really
just a supporting effort.  Yeoh's part is a lot juicier, and she handles
it remarkably well.  The two Hong Kong legends do an incredible job of
acting uncomfortable and stumbling around, like actual people trying to
hide their feelings for each other.  As good as they are, Dragon's real
star is Ziyi Zhang, who is both breathtakingly beautiful and
astonishingly believable as a pint-sized punch Princess.
Dragon's biggest problem is that its story is a bit muddled.  The film
is based on a five-volume novel by Wang Du Lu, so there's a good chance
that a lot of the original continuity was abandoned to keep the running
time from exceeding the two-hour mark.  Dragon also features a goofy `be
true to yourself' message, and there are probably a couple of times when
you may think, `Geez, this is just Mortal Kombat with an international
cast and a love story.'  There's probably a very fine line between the
two, but Dragon is definitely superior in every aspect.
Dragon is the first Chinese-language feature that Taiwanese filmmaker
Ang Lee (Ride With the Devil) has directed since 1994's Eat Drink Man
Woman.  Like most of Lee's films, Dragon is beautifully shot and
surprisingly funny.  The gorgeous cinematography comes courtesy of Peter
Pau, who has shot big Hong Kong features like The Bride With White Hair
and John Woo's classic The Killer.  Wang Du Lu's novel was co-adapted by
first-timer Kuo Jung Tsai, Eat Drink Man Woman's Wang Hui-Ling and
longtime Lee collaborator James Schamus.  With this feature, Lee proves
he is one of the industry's most versatile directors.
2:00  PG-13 for martial arts violence and some sexuality

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON (2000) / *** 1/2
   aka WO HU ZANG LONG [Mandarin; English subtitles]
Directed by Ang Lee. Screenplay by Hui-Ling Wang, James Schamus and Kuo
Jung Tsai, based on the novel by Du Lu Wang. Starring Chun-Yow Fat,
Michelle Yeoh, Ziyi Zhang. Running time: 120 minutes. Rated PG for mature
theme by the MFCB. Reviewed on January 28th, 2001.
Some movies exist to make an important statement, or to shed light on a 
matter of great urgency. Some movies exist just to provoke a basic 
reaction -- to make us laugh, or cry, or scared silly. And then there are 
the movies which exist simply to be watched, that are so visually 
exhilarating that all other matters fall by the wayside. "Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon" is such a movie.
Director Ang Lee has made a film which is not, in principle, very 
demanding. It is a legend, taking place in the China of two hundred years 
ago, when more modern sensibilities had yet to take hold in the country. 
Being a legend, it weaves a simple, classical tale of love, honour and 
revenge, although it is been populated with characters of unusual 
perception. Even those who misguidedly loathe subtitled films ("Crouching 
Tiger" is in Mandarin) should have little to complain about here; although 
the dialogue certainly adds to the proceedings, they are not difficult to 
follow even without it.
The main attraction of "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon", though, is quite 
simply the amazing sights Lee arrays before us. He is aided in this 
endeavour by cinematographer Peter Pau, designer Tim Yip, and fight 
choreographer Woo-ping Yuen (who has already dazzled audiences with his 
work on "The Matrix"). It is rare to encounter a movie which is such a 
feast for the eyes. The vistas of the Chinese landscape -- from lush 
valley to desert steppes -- are gloriously filmed, and the unique feel of 
early nineteenth century Beijing is captured impressively.
And then there are the fight scenes. It would be inaccurate to suggest 
that the only reason to see "Crouching Tiger" is because of the material 
arts sequences, but they are undoubtedly the pinnacle of its success. Lee 
and Yuen have managed to elevate fighting to the level of the finest 
ballet, a poetry of fist and foot. Whereas combat has become almost 
perfunctory in most action movies these days, here an evident combination 
of planning and inventiveness pays off wonderfully.
All of the fight sequences are great, but one in particular stands out in 
my mind. In it, the great Wudan warrior Li Mu Bai (Chun-Yow Fat) and his 
young opponent, Jen Yu (the "hidden dragon" of the title, played by Zhang 
Ziyi), stand on branches atop tall trees, which sway as they parley with 
their weapons. (The martial artists in "Crouching Tiger" possess a number 
of superhuman abilities, the most striking of which is the ability to leap 
astonishing distances. It may sound far-fetched, but given the 
mythological trappings of the picture, it works nicely.) Despite their
precarious circumstances, Li and Jen battle on, not just ignoring their 
unusual circumstances but in fact using the unlikely environment to their 
advantage.
This is the sort of scene, like the mindboggling opening shot of the Star 
Destroyer in "Star Wars" or Marlon Brando in "A Streetcar Named Desire" 
crying out Stella's name like a wounded animal, which sears itself 
instantly into the mind. So exquisite and fascinating is it to behold that 
it will not quickly be forgotten. Even more impressive, in this era of 
increasingly sophisticated technology, is the fact that Fat and Ziyi were 
really up there in the trees; computers were used only to erase the wires 
and harnesses from around them in post-production. This lends an 
authenticity to the scene which modern computer animation cannot yet 
reproduce.
The events which lead Li Mu Bai and Jen Yu to those treetops are not 
complicated. Li wishes to retire from active duty, despite the fact that 
he has never gained vengeance against Jade Fox, a duplicitous woman who 
slew his master years earlier. Li gives his ancient, powerful sword, Green 
Destiny, to his longtime friend and fellow mercenary Shu Lien (Michelle 
Yeoh from "Tomorrow Never Dies"; she's the eponymous "crouching tiger") to 
deliver to a politician in Beijing who has been an ally to them. Not long 
after Shu Lien arrives in the city, however, the Green Destiny is stolen.
The culprit turns out to be Jen, the daughter of a minister who is 
destined to soon enter into an arranged marriage. Jen chafes at the 
restrictions placed on her future and longs for the life of the warrior. 
(She is a perfect counterpart to Shu Lien, who shares an unspoken love for 
Li Mu Bai which they can never consummate, and who wishes to settle down 
and lead a quieter life.) Jen is secretly the promising apprentice of Jade 
Fox (Pei-pei Cheng), and when Li Mu Bai arrives in Beijing and learns of 
the theft of his blade, history may be doomed to repeat itself.
The visual majesty of "Crouching Tiger" is supported by several fine 
performances, with Yeoh a particular standout. Like any good legend, there 
is a pleasing variety in approach: despite all the melodrama and melee, 
Lee leaves room for humour, such as when Jen takes on an entire bar full 
of hostile warriors. And there is also an unmistakable vein of 
spirituality running throughout the film, as Lee seeks to examine the 
notion of identity -- one of the meanings of the title is a reference to 
aspects of one's own personality which can lie buried until finally coming 
to the fore.
If "Crouching Tiger" has its flaws, it is in terms of the storytelling, 
which is occasionally awkward. For example, in the middle of the movie is 
an extended flashback, revealing the origins of Jen's rebellion. As a 
self-contained entity, it's well-conceived, but it is an unwieldy fit at 
this point in the film, basically forcing the main action to come to a 
lengthy halt.
Regardless, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" is a real treat. And it is a 
film which absolutely has to be seen to be appreciated. Much as one 
picture is worth a thousand words, no amount of text could possibly come 
close to describing the majesty and beauty of its images.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/CrouchingTiger.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Michael Dequina
_Crouching_Tiger,_Hidden_Dragon_ (PG-13) **** (out of ****)
The martial arts film has always generally been written off as being the
cinematic equivalent of junk food.  The term often used for the genre,
"chopsocky," perfectly expresses this perception; the word sounds fun,
but it also sounds rather silly and inconsequential.  There's no denying
the amusement to be had with, say, an average Jackie Chan film, but is
there any real nourishment that comes with the enjoyment?  Not
especially.
With credits ranging from the Taiwanese family dramas
_The_Wedding_Banquet_ and _Eat_Drink_Man_Woman_ to the slice of '70s
Americana _The_Ice_Storm_ and the Jane Austen adaptation
_Sense_and_Sensibility_, director Ang Lee would appear an unlikely person
to helm what would be typically classified as a kung fu flick; in fact,
given his award-winning oeuvre, such a film seems beneath him.  As it
turns out, however, Lee is not only a lifelong fan of the genre, his
greatest filmmaking goal was to make a lavish martial arts epic. 
Watching _Crouching_Tiger,_Hidden_Dragon_, the fruition of that dream,
it's clear that all of Lee's previous (and largely terrific) work has
been a mere warm-up to this staggering accomplishment.  _Crouching_Tiger_
is even more than an exhilarating reinvigoration of the martial arts
movie--it's a thrilling testament to the transporting power of film.
Note the term "reinvigoration" as opposed to "reinvention," for in
keeping with being a reverential fan, Lee doesn't tamper with time-worn
convention in adapting Wang Du Lu's 18th Century-set novel (the fourth in
a series of five).  Basic plot strands bear the air of the familiar. 
After many years of legend-building combat, famous and feared warrior Li
Mu Bai (Chow Yun-Fat) is ready to give up his violent ways--that is,
after completing one last mission: avenging the murder of his master at
the hands of the notorious criminal known as Jade Fox.  But Li is ready
to make one major gesture toward a different life, and that is giving up
his fabled sword, the Green Destiny to a friend.  Soon after it is placed
in the trophy case of respected leader Sir Te (Lung Sihung), the Green
Destiny is stolen, and Li and his longtime friend and former combat
partner Yu Shu Lien's (Michelle Yeoh) quest to recover it is the mere
jumping-off point for a sweeping tale of action, intrigue, and romance.
One of _Crouching_Tiger_'s most noteworthy elements is the first-ever
screen pairing of two of Hong Kong cinema's biggest stars, Yeoh and Chow.
 Surprisingly, these iconic figures actually take secondary positions to
beautiful young newcomer Zhang Ziyi.  As Jen, the seemingly innocent and
innocuous daughter of prominent political figure Governor Yu (Li Fa
Zeng), Zhang is a real find, holding her own in all aspects and carrying
the picture with ease once the focus settles squarely on her.  The
conflicting forces battling for influence over Jen's soul is
_Crouching_Tiger_'s main concern, and without an actress as gifted and
captivating as Zhang in the pivotal role, it's difficult to imagine the
story being quite as engrossing involving as it is.
That said, there's no discounting the invaluable contribution Yeoh and
Chow make to the film.  They prove to be a most dynamic duo in every way,
even displaying sides of their ability that they've never had an
opportunity to reveal before.  The ever-charismatic and commanding Chow,
making his bow in this type of action film, proves to be as natural with
a sword as he is with a gun (his usual cinematic weapon of choice); but
granted, his stunts aren't as heavy duty as those of Yeoh, who is given
ample opportunity to show off and even elevate her well-established
athleticism and grace in the spectacular fights staged by the renowned
martial arts choreographer Yuen Wo-Ping.  But the two are even more
impressive in the dramatic scenes.  They have a nicely understated
chemistry that lends heartrending pathos to their characters'
relationship.  Li and Shu Lien have long been in love, but they've denied
their passion in honor of the memory of Shu Lien's late fiancé, a brother
by oath to Li.  Their tortured longing is subtly, wrenchingly conveyed in
Yeoh and Chow's vividly expressive eyes.
Scripters Wang Hui-ling, Tsai Kuo-jung, and James Schamus (Lee's regular
writing collaborator) ultimately address a number of weighty themes in
_Crouching_Tiger_, but they and Lee don't make their points without
having fun along the way.  A lot of fun.  The story is essentially
serious, but the film has a healthy, self-aware sense of humor about
itself, best exemplified by the parallel romance between Jen and Lo
(Chang Chen), a desert-dwelling bandit.  The circumstances behind their
meeting are wholly comical; she chases after him for an insane distance
after he steals... her comb.  Ridiculous, yes; but the light touch is
beguiling and completely convincing, befitting the playfulness of a
young, impetuous love.
Of course, most of the fun comes from the electrifying and boundlessly
imaginative action sequences, which further maintain the film's fidelity
to genre tradition by paying no heed to the laws of gravity.  The film's
first showpiece, an extended chase/fight across many Peking rooftops, is
a jaw-dropper guaranteed to get every audience around the world to burst
into awestruck applause.  Even more unbelievable than this sequence is
the fact that this is only the starting point.  To say more is to rob a
bit of the wonder of the thrills Lee and Yuen conjure up; suffice it to
say, they regularly defy and surpass expectations.  In terms of
bread-and-butter fighting, Yuen outdoes himself, and Lee shoots the
action in such a way that every balletic, meticulously choreographed move
is made clear and thus lent maximum impact.
That impact stays with you long after _Crouching_Tiger,_Hidden_Dragon_
is over, but what leaves an impression even more enduring than the
spectacular action, breathtaking images (captured by cinematographer
Peter Pau), and lovely melodies (composed by Tan Dun) are the
people--their personalities, their emotions, their struggles, the hard
lessons that they learn.  Exciting, funny, uplifting, heartbreaking--the
list of descriptions can go on and on, yet all that is the magnificent
_Crouching_Tiger,_Hidden_Dragon_ is easily encapsulated in one word:
masterpiece.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

