Title
Review for Man Who Wasn't There, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
I was warned in advance about The Man Who Wasn't There, having been told
it was "definitely a Coen brothers movie."  Indeed, there's no better
description for this film aside from that vague insult.
Shot in black and white as an homage to film noir, The Man Who Wasn't
There (no relation to the Steve Guttenberg movie of the same name) tells
the tale of Ed Crane (Billy Bob Thornton, sporting a veritable work of
art on his head as a toupee), a mild mannered, chain-smoking barber in
sleepy 1940s Santa Rosa, California.  As Ed's life consists of cutting
the same heads of hair day in and day out, he can be forgiven for a
little dissatisfaction with his life.
So, when a stranger (Jon Polito) passes through looking for an investor
in a nutty "dry cleaning" operation, Ed decides to blackmail his
neighbor and local department store magnate Big Dave (James Gandolfini)
for the seed capital -- because he also happens to think Dave is having
an affair with Ed's wife Doris (Frances McDormand).  This of course is
only the beginning, as a body count starts to rise and nothing turns out
to be as it seems.
Or actually, as everything turns out exactly as it seems.  If it weren't
for the usual populace of Coen brothers "wacky characters," The Man Who
Wasn't There would be little more than Z-grade noir unfit for the
bargain pulp rack at the drugstore.  As it stands, it's merely Z-grade
noir full of weird non-sequiturs like some utter nonsense about alien
abductions and a bit with a would-be piano prodigy (Ghost World's
Scarlett Johansson, utterly wasted here).
Shot with that typical Coen brothers flair in stark and shadowy black
and white, the evocation of noir is impressive -- but in the end this is
completely and utterly ruined beyond any hope by the fact that the boom
is visible in almost every scene.  Readers will think I'm exaggerating,
but I'm serious.  At least 30 times a honking black microphone -- and
often the pole to which it is attached -- can be seen bobbing over the
heads of the actors, even moving around in the scene to pick up the
voices of different players.  It's distracting to the point where you
wonder if it's something the Coens put in the movie as a nutty gag.  If
that's the case, knock another star off my rating.
But the noir hopes for The Man Who Wasn't There are limited even with
its pathetic technical work.  Thornton's narration comes nonstop,
initially a charming throwback to the real days of noir but inevitably
overdoing it to the point where you never want to hear his voice again. 
The entire second act revolves around Doris's wrongful arrest and trial
for murder, but the legal case is so absurd it's wholly impossible to
believe.  That's too bad, because the appearance of Tony Shalhoub as
Doris's lawyer is one of the few highlights in the movie.
While it's pretty to look at and occasionally clever, the movie rambles
incessantly and just ends up as unsatisfying on a number of different
levels.  I hate to say it, because I'm a fan of much of the Coen oeuvre,
but The Man Who Wasn't There is barely there itself.
Director: Joel Coen
Producer: Tim Bevan, Ethan Coen, Eric Fellner
Writer: Joel Coen, Ethan Coen
Starring: Billy Bob Thornton, Frances McDormand, Michael Badalucco, Adam
Alexi-Malle, James Gandolfini, Katherine Borowitz, Jon Polito, Scarlett
Johansson
http://www.themanwhowasntthere.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 USA Films/ Working Title 
 Director: Joel Coen
 Writer:  Joel Coen, Ethan Coen    
 Cast: Bill Bob Thornton, Frances McDormand, Michael
Badalucco, James Gandolfini, Jon Polito, Scarlett Johansson,
Richard Jenkins, Tony Shalhoub, 
   I don't know whether the Coens got their inspiration for this title
from Hughes Mearns' ditty, "As I was going up the stair/ I met a
man who wasn't there./ He wasn't there again today./ I wish, I
wish he'd stay away," but their central figure, an anti-hero (read:
schlub), is the sort who is regularly ignored and who is himself
barely aware that he exists.  The Coens' noir film is inspired in
part from the detective novels of James Cain ("Double
Indemnity," "The Postman Always Rings Twice") but crime is only
a takeoff point for an examination of Big Themes like innocence,
evil and hypocrisy.  Situated in a small town in Northern
California during the summer of 1949, "The Man Who Wasn't
There" was photographed by Roger Deakins with color film, then
transcribed to black-and-white as though the celluloid ran through
a technological time machine.  The result is a piece whose visual
style glistens, with bold distinctions between the two colors rather
than the sort of graying over which was common in films taken
during the forties.
  A long work of almost two hours--which could have used more
of editors Roderick Jaynes and Tricia Cook's toil to speed up the
languid pace--the Coen's latest effort looks like the work which
they have called their favorite, Alfred Hitchcock's "Shadow of a
Doubt"--a pulp-story work about a young girl who realizes that
her uncle is a murderer.   Thematically, however, the picture
brings to mind Kafka and Dostoevski even more than Cain and
Hitchcock in its existential probing of the sad life of a middle-aged
man who rarely talks (except when he is narrating his story to the
theater audience), seldom changes his facial expression, and
smokes so much that we can't be blamed for thinking that he'll
die before he suffers from any state-imposed punishment for
murder.  This time the Coens save the surrealism for the
concluding moments: don't expect the flamboyance of "Barton
Fink," which goes off-the-wall bizarre, the playfully high spirits of
"O Brother, Where Art Thou?", or the big-city corporate ambiance
of "The Hudsucker Proxy."  What you do get, nonetheless, is a
captivating examination of melancholia, duplicity, and an
astounding performance by man-of-many-faces Billy Bob
Thornton--his best achievement to date.
    When the story opens, narrator Billy Bob Thornton in the
eponymous role of Ed makes sure to let us know that he is not
only "just" a barber but "only" the guy manning the second chair--
signalling us in the audience that he considers himself of no
particular import in this life.  He works for his brother-in-law,
Frank (Michael Badalucco), getting the job because he is married
to Doris (Frances McDormand).  Were he born later, he would
probably be one of those barbers who never learned to be a
stylist--he just can't cut it, he knows it, and he is too Beckettian to
do anything about his plight.  Nonetheless he becomes
fascinated with rug-wearing con man Creighton Tolliver (Jon
Polito), who offers him a silent partnership in a dry cleaning
business, as long as he can come up with $10,000 to finance a
store.  When he blackmails his best friend, successful retailer Big
Dave (James Gandolfini), he gets caught up in a crime caper that
spirals out of control, bringing to mind (to mine, at least), the
expressionist theatrical work "Machinal"--about an anonymous
clerk in a dismal office who murders his boss.
   The movie won for Joel Coen the Best Director's award at
Cannes, understandably so, as he elicits startling performances
not only from the remarkable Billy Bob Thornton but from Coen-
regular Tony Shalhoub in the role of hotshot lawyer Freddy
Riedenschneider.  Shalhoub eats up the scenery as he points out
what we all know--that the finding of a person's innocence or guilt
depends in no small part on the quality of his defense. 
Riedenschneider, a larger-than-life guy who serves as a striking
contrast to Ed, stays in the best hotels and orders the most
exotic dishes he can find on the menu of a coffee shop in a
Sacramento suburb of 1940s.  He orders oysters (no such luck)
while Ed can think of nothing more to ask for but coffee. 
Riedenschneider also serves as an contrast to the lethargic real
estate attorney, Walter Abundas (Richard Jenkins), who virtually
falls asleep to the sound of his own voice.  
   As a portrait of America during an allegedly more innocent time
than our own, "The Man Who Wasn't There" succeeds in digging
under the Norman Rockwell portraits to show the venality,
chicanery, and cupidity of a typical Babbitt-like area of our
country, entertaining us subtly, deliberately, and on an elevated
plane.
Not Rated.  Running time: 116 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE MAN WHO WASN'T THERE, by the acclaimed Coen brothers, director and co-writer
Joel and co-writer Ethan, is an exquisite film noir shot on fine grain color
stock and printed in gorgeous and expressive black and white.  The movie
premiered at this year's Cannes film festival, where it tied for the Best
Director Award.  If it can be argued that the Coen brothers' pictures are an
acquired taste, I guess that most people are still acquiring it.  I've liked
films of theirs that most others didn't (THE BIG LEBOWSKI), hated some that got
mixed reviews (O BROTHER WHERE ART THOU) and loved some that just about
everybody loved (FARGO).
In THE MAN WHO WASN'T THERE, Billy Bob Thornton is the movie.  He is not only
the lead character, Ed Crane, but also the story's constant narrator, which is
handy since Ed's a taciturn kind of guy.  If a building were in flames, he'd
probably stay silent, figuring that, if he waits, someone else will yell,
"Fire!"  Thornton's minimalist performance is perhaps the best piece of acting
that he's ever done.  Every time he appears on the screen, it is as if time
freezes.  He's mesmerizing in the part.
Ed's the second chair barber in a small Northern California town.  Set in the
late 1940s, when land yachts still had some class, the movie takes place mainly
in interior settings, although the few cruises down the country roads form the
film's most impressive visuals.
Ed doesn't have much ambition, and his only desire in life would probably be for
people to stop gabbing so much.  This all changes one day when a seedy stranger,
Creighton Tolliver (Jon Polito), comes into town with a "business proposition." 
With his bad toupee, poorly fitting suit and pudgy body, Creighton is not
exactly the sort to inspire confidence, but he describes to Ed a revolutionary
new process called "dry cleaning."  All Creighton needs is a silent partner to
put up $10,000 to get the business started.
With no money but a cheating wife, Doris (Frances McDormand), Ed figures the way
to get the money is to blackmail her lover, Big Dave Brewster (James Gandolfini,
"The Sopranos").  
In one of his many reflective scenes, Ed tells us how Doris, an alcoholic,
suggested to Ed that they get married after dating for only three weeks.  Ed's
story of the proposal is typical of the script's wonderfully dry sense of humor.
 "Don't you want to get to know me better?" he asked her.  "Why?" she asked in
reply, "Does it get better?"  
Needless to say, there are a few complications along the way which lead to a
trial.  Freddy Riedenschneider (Tony Shalhoub) is the high priced lawyer hired
by the defense.  An attorney with a big ego -- "I litigate. I don't capitulate."
-- he is a firm believer in such esoteric defense strategies as employing the
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, even if he can't ever seem to get the name
right.
A couple of small subplots add a little variety.  One concerns a promising high
school pianist, Birdy Abundas (Scarlett Johansson), whom Ed wants to help. 
Another concerns Ed's interest in the growth and styling of hair.  Both add
delicate spice to the plot without ever spoiling it.
A very quiet movie with little ambient sound, with occasional staccato piano
pieces and with the aforementioned stunning cinematography, it allows one to
concentrate on the picture's best aspect, Billy Bob Thornton's pensive yet
subtly nuanced facial expressions, which alone are worth the price of
admission.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T THERE runs 1:55.  It is rated R for a scene of violence and
would be acceptable for teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, found that this wasn't his cup of tea, giving it just
1/2 of a star.  He said that his favorite part was when it was over.  He found
the lead character uninteresting and the movie boring.  His only positive
comment was that some of the comedy was "okay."
The film opens nationwide in the United States on November 2, 2001.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
