Title
Review for White Raven, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE WHITE RAVEN (1998)  No *  Directed by Andrew Stevens. Written by 
Michael Blodgett . Photography, Michel Slovis.Editing. Ben Hedlund. 
Production design, Michael Borthwick. Cast: Ron Silver (Tully 
Windsor), Joanna Pacula (Julia Konneman), Roy Scheider (Tom Heath), 
Hannes Jaenicke (Dockmonish), Elizabeth Shepherd (Hannah Rothschild), 
Jan Rubes  ( Markus Strand) Jack Recknitz (Inspector Zielinski), Doug 
Lennox (General Dodd), Larry Poindexter(Lieutenant Kreister) 
Agnieszka Wagner ( Zofia), et al. 92 minutes. R (violence).
I am positive that this incredibly bad item went directly to video. 
It appears to have been shown on Pay-per-view cable, then rapidly 
went to regular cable. Even watched for nothing (not counting the 
cost of cable service), it is a disaster.
The story,  which swims in a sea of incoherences, impossibilities and 
idiocies,  utilizes actor Ron Silver as the hero. Silver, in a good 
role, can be quite effective, but here he is ludicrous.
Note that summary credits in film guides list only the names of Roy 
Scheider - who has a minuscule role, and Joan Severance, whoever she 
is --who's not even in the film. Talk of sloppiness. Except for 
Silver, no one has much more than a walk-on appearance.
He plays Tully,  a Pulitzer-winning journalist who had done some work 
on a Nazi death camp survivor. In ways that make no sense, he gets 
involved by his editor (Scheider) in the case of The White Raven. 
This was the biggest or next biggest (some 270-plus carats?) diamond 
ever found.
I can't guarantee that my summary is truly correct since the movie 
acts like a sleeping pill. Even so, it would appear that when young, 
a female member of the Rothschild family (French branch) had been 
deported to a Nazi camp, but not before taking with her the diamond, 
which could become her salvation. (The SS of death camps never 
searched their victims, of course!)
Somehow she survived, presumably by bribing the camp's kommandant 
--which is even harder to believe than Star Wars. We meet her at the 
Rothschild Bank in Paris, which is populated by Israelis of all 
types. The lady, who should be by now at least in her seventies, 
looks at most 50. She declares that the stone is worth one hundred 
million dollars, and, if I am not mistaken (which I could well be), 
she wants her stone back in order to give those zillions to a worthy 
cause (Israel?).
Now the camp Kommandant, who presumably knows where the diamond is, 
has been forever a prisoner in a dank Warsaw jail. He is very old, 
very ill, quite crazy and wants to speak to Ron Silver. But before 
Silver gets to Warsaw he flies to Norway where he visits some 
unidentified friends --or rather relatives, and his (?) antique 
grandfather who has been like a vegetable (silent, etc.) since World 
War II. To top it all, it would appear that the very old man had been 
a brutal guard at the aforementioned Nazi camp.
Next, Tully flies to Warsaw. He has been stalked all along, and still 
is, by a young Lieutenant of the US Armed Forces. That fellow is 
secretly following our hero on the express orders of his General, who 
never told him why he had him play private eye. There's also some 
undefined man, a youngish American who plays host and guide to Tully. 
He packs a gun, and so does the journalist.
(There is quite a lot of firing revolvers. And even a bigger lot of 
Tully chain-smoking even during most impossible moments.)
The host takes Tully to a dance club which is full of sexy, 
provocative girls that make eyes and passes at Silver right away. 
Soon gunshots are exchanged with resulting corpses,  and, and, and... 
The nonsense involves women, the young Lieutenant who'll never become 
a Captain, as well as corrupt Polish plainclothes detectives. Unless 
these are gangsters. Or gansgter-cops. Who knows?
Next Tully has a brief interview with the imprisoned Kommandant, whom 
he records on a cassette. I forget what was said exactly but somehow 
there is a hint that Tully, unbeknownst to himself, was also a Jew. 
This does not help the film's stupidity in any fashion I can discern.
Then the American general and his goons appear, want the cassette, 
rough-up Tully. This is followed by the Polish chief of Police (or 
something) arresting Tully (the cop is also after the diamond). Tully 
escapes in the most laughable way, outrunning and hiding from the 
pursuing cops (in their own territory!), finding asylum as well as 
aid from a beauteous female artist. The latter also smuggles him to 
the American Embassy in the trunk (front) of her VW Beetle. Things 
get so dumb and messy that I wonder whether or not the US  Ambassador 
was also after the diamond.
With a few minutes to go, I fell asleep.
The only, microscopic plusses in the movie are: the lobby of the 
Rothschild Bank in Paris which I imagine was imagined by the set 
designers, and looks worthy of the Alhambra in Spain; a few views of 
Warsaw (the real thing) which are new to many of us who have only 
seen the city in ruins after the 1939 Nazi Blitz or the Ghetto and 
other uprisings; and a beautiful model posing "au naturel" for the 
lady artist.
Can't think of anything else. This has to be as bad, dumb and dumber, 
incoherent and incoherenter movie as was ever made on this planet.
The director, Andrew Stevens, has many credits (TV and film) on his 
resume, as producer, actor and director. They are all unknown, hardly 
familiar, or B works. Mr. Stevens is the son of actress Stella 
Stevens, a Southern beauty (allegedly born in Hot Coffee, 
Mississippi), a Playboy centerfold, and for several years  a familiar 
fixture of B-movies, TV series and sometimes more important films. 
My dim memory of her tells me that given a chance she could act 
pretty well. I don't think that even with her modest past she could 
be proud of her boy.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/
