Title
Review for Agnes Browne (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
Anjelica Huston's directorial debut, Bastard Out of Carolina, was a
devastating portrayal of child abuse in a poor Southern family.  The
film was so powerful that it either turned your stomach or pissed you
off, and in some cases both.  In contrast, Huston's second film, Agnes
Browne, is devastatingly mediocre.  It didn't quite turn my stomach, but
it did piss me off a little.
Unlike Carolina, Huston (Buffalo '66) tackles duties both in front of
and behind the camera, casting herself in the titular role.  Here she
plays the dirt-poor widow of a late hotel kitchen employee with seven
children in 1967 Dublin.  She can't afford to bury her recently deceased
husband and borrows forty pounds from a loan shark named Mr. Billy (Ray
Winstone, The War Zone), agreeing to pay two pounds a week in interest.
With her only viable source of income coming from the operation of a
fruit and vegetable stand, Agnes can barely afford to feed her flock,
let alone cough up Mr. Billy's interest.
The oldest Browne child is Mark (Niall O'Shea), who wants to drop out of
school to help his mom put food on the table.  Brother Frankie (Ciaran
Owens) develops a taste for gambling, while Agnes' best friend Marion
Monks (Marion O'Dwyer) develops a lump in her chest.  Agnes also gets an
admirer in the form of Pierre (Arno Chevrier – think of a cross between
Gerard Depardieu and `Stuttering John' Melendez), a French entrepreneur
opening a bakery near her produce cart.  Throw a Tom Jones concert in
the mix and, well, you get a pretty jumbled story.
That's the main problem with Browne.  The film is based on the Brendan
O'Carroll novel `The Mammy,' which was, in turn, based on an old serial
radio program.  Browne is simply five or six scripts from the radio show
scrambled together, which makes the ending seem particularly silly,
since all of the plots are neatly tied up with (mostly) positive
resolutions across the board.  It shouldn't – they're still impoverished
and have no solid income.  Try not to giggle when Agnes proudly states
to her children, `We're the Brownes; we stick together.'
Browne certainly isn't a total waste of time.  There are highlights –
Mr. Browne's funeral procession is comical, while Marion's conclusion
that the lump in her breast is the result of having her first `organism'
is downright hysterical.  The acting is decent all-around, with Huston's
effective Irish brogue a high point (she grew up in Ireland).  Browne is
a colorful picture, but the slight film just doesn't seem to be able to
get off of the ground.
1:35 – R for adult language and mild violence

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
 http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/156eb1f4c41ebb79882568920011aee9?OpenDocument
Agnes Browne
A film review by Athan Bezaitis  Copyright filmcritic.com 2000
I'm always skeptical when I see a Hollywood diva trying to look haggard,
poor, and malnourished in a film.  Everybody knows that in real life
they all have personal trainers and special diets along with the best
technology has to offer in keeping themselves looking young and
beautiful.  So in the first five minutes of Anjelica Huston's latest
production, AGNES BROWNE, when her husband has died and left behind
seven young children in a poor area of Dublin, Ireland, the first thing
I said to myself was, "There's no way that a woman going through this
kind of hardship can look that good."
Set in the year 1967, the film follows the struggles of Agnes Brown,
(Anjelica Huston) a recent widow battling to keep her irregularly large
family intact (six boys and a girl, ranging in age from 2 to 14).  In
order to give her husband the funeral he deserves, Agnes must borrow
money from the menacing loan shark Mr. Billy (Ray Winstone).  As she
attempts to pay him back in weekly installments, he terrorizes her and
her small children at every street corner.  To make ends meet, Agnes
sells fruit and vegetables on the street along with her best friend
Marion Monks (Marion O'Dwyer). The two are inseparable and Marion is,
ironically enough, Anjelica's guardian angel, as she brightens Agnes
life and helps her in times of desperate need.  When Pierre (Arno
Chevrier, a Gerard Depardieu look-alike) comes along in the form of a
neighborhood French baker and takes an interest in Agnes, sparks fly as
she tries to forge a personal life of her own with the possibility of
newfound love, all while dealing with the nuisance of seven hellion
children.
Despite the fact that Agnes looks way too spry and luminous despite
struggling for money and food, Huston puts together a credible product
as both director and star.  While the story is slow in developing and
easily predictable, the humor and characters overshadow these flaws and
make the film enjoyable.  Huston adds a strange blend of humor into the
dramatic mix that adds a pleasant overtone to a dire and often tear
jerking situation.  Especially noteworthy is O'Dwyer, who not only looks
the part of a poor Irish gal, but also emotes the meaning of true
friendship in a wonderful supporting performance.
The film get three stars because by the time it was over, I had
forgotten what time of day it was.  Translation: I had become so
engrossed that I was emotionally attached to the characters by the
film's conclusion.  This is a good sign, so if you're in the mood for
something poignant, this film is for you.
*** three stars
Starring: Anjelica Huston, Marion O'Dwyer, Miall O'Shea, Ciaran Owens,
Roxanna Williams, Carl Power, Ray Winstone, Arno Chevrier, and Tom Jones
Director: Anjelica Huston
Producers: Jim Sheridan, Arthur Lappin, Anjelica Huston, and Greg Smith
Screenplay: John Goldmith, Brendan O'Carroll
Year of Release: 2000
MPAA rating: R
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
