Title
Review for Chocolate War, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CHOCOLATE WAR, THE (director/writer: Keith Gordon; screenwriter:from a
novel by Robert Cormier; cinematographer: cast: Brother Leon (John
Glover), Jerry Renault (Ilan Mitchell-Smith), Archie (Wally Ward),
Goober (Corey Gunnestad), Obie (Doug Hutchison), Carter (Adam Baldwin),
Frank Bolo (Landon Wine), 1988)
Robert Cormier's young adult novel is about Trinity, a boys' preparatory
school for low-to-middle-class Catholics. In the film version the hero
succumbs to all the violence around him and gets his revenge, as by the
film's end he happily wins a fist fight from his nemesis.
This directorial debut by the former actor Gordon (he was a psycho in
John Carpenter's Christine), is really a tale about fascism. It is
viewed from two sides of school life, one is from the side of the
malevolent new head of the school, Brother Leon (John Glover), who is
insanely mad, as he wraps his success in the school around how he can
get the students to sell more boxes of chocolate in its annual sale for
charity than the other head master did in his tenure. This, he thinks,
will surely impress the school's trustees. The other story is about how
the Vigils, a secret student organization meeting in the school
basement, also tries to control the student body of non-Vigils by making
them follow given assignments. The assignments might be in the nature of
a prank, like unscrewing the seats in a classroom, or they might be more
politically motivated, like making students sell chocolates for the
school so that their organization can attain more power in the school.
Their snake-like leader is a clever bully, Archie (Ward), whose sense of
control is challenged by a shy, entering freshman, Jerry Renault
(Smith), who refuses to sell the chocolates even after his 10-day
assignment by the Vigils to not sell the chocolates is over. They view
his rebellious action as a threat to their power and do everything they
can to make his life miserable, including a cowardly physical attack
upon him.
Everything that could be wrong about this school is wrong with it, as
the classroom teachers, the brothers, all have crosses dangling from
their robes, as if to remind the viewer that religion was something no
one in this school believed in anymore, it was just something to be worn
for show. It is so perverse a place, that there seems to be no way to
function in it without selling your soul. The non-conformist act by
Jerry leaves a sour taste in his mouth, as the Vigils, linking
themselves to the new head in an oral agreement that benefits both
parties, psychologically challenge Jerry's sanity as they act as gestapo
storm troopers trying to make him an example so that there will be no
more dissension on campus.
The acting is superb. The story is gloomy and perceptive. The problem I
had with the film lies in the sense that the only two decent students in
the film, Renault and his friend Goober (Corey), have no recourse but to
conform. There seems to be no real voice of reason. The heroes are too
dull and without any real conviction to fight these fascists they are up
against. All the other peripheral Vigil characters are weak-minded and
willing to do anything to advance their own cause in the world. Carter
(Adam) is a physical bully, and an all-to-willing strong-arm for the
group dictator. Frank Bolo (Landon) is a rotten and stupid thug, who
can't even look good in his school blazer like the other student
fascists he wants to impress with his brashness. Archie, as student
dictator, is a despicable worm and treacherous soul, who already has the
misguided demeanor of an elderly tyrant. Obie (Doug) is the creepy guy
who is a behind the scenes player, currying favor with anyone in power.
All-in-all, a pretty disgusting lot, which makes this film a tough
watch, with not enough elasticity to its story than to be more than a
coming-of-age film that ultimately brings up the wrong lesson in life to
learn: that it is sometimes better to conform than to rebel. The film
itself lacked any sustaining energy to show that it really cared about
the enemy it was fighting. It looked like it was too in love with the
evil elite being depicted and invested too much in their presence to
properly distance themselves from them and tell the story of the
resistance fighter, like it needed to be told.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Bill Chambers
THE CHOCOLATE WAR ***1/2 (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers; wchamber@netcom.ca
(Now with TRIVIA; film, DVD, LD reviews; a section where YOU can
recommend movies;
fabric softener; and much more!
FILM FREAK CENTRAL
http://www.geocities.com/~billchambers
New address. New attitude. Same crappy writing.)
starring Ilan-Mitchell Smith, Wally Ward, John Glover, Adam Baldwin
based on the novel by Robert Cormier
written and directed by Keith Gordon
The Chocolate War was my favourite book in high school-an expansion of
Catcher in the Rye's first chapters, or Dead Poet's Society with sharper
teeth, take your pick-so for years I feared the film version. Last week,
I hunkered down before the set to bite the bullet at last; no matter how
deviant the movie was, I could forever cling to the memory of that first
read in tenth grade. The opening moments of Gordon's movie (he played
the psycho-nerd in John Carpenter's weak Christine) put me at ease. This
1988 adaptation is not letter-faithful, but it does preserve the tone of
its source material.
Smith stars as Jerry Renault, the new kid at Trinity, an all-boys
Catholic school; he is fresh food for the Vigils, an underground student
organization whose sole purpose is to drive teachers and students batty
with complex practical jokes. Publicly represented by the snake-charming
Archie (Ward, née Langham, who played Phil the head writer on "The Larry
Sanders Show" and is barely recognizable here), the Vigils convince
Jerry to refuse participation in the school's annual fundraiser-a
chocolate sale-for ten days. At the end of his "mission," however, Jerry
continues to say "no," causing much consternation for terrible Brother
Leon (Glover), who reluctantly enlists the Vigils to help change Jerry's
mind. Jerry, you see, has become a rebellious symbol at the school;
overall sales have declined at a time when Trinity desperately needs the
extra funds.
THE CHOCOLATE WAR is extremely low budget, perhaps to Gordon's
advantage; often several chapters of the book are compressed into
spontaneous, poetic montages. At times, his camerawork and direction of
actors recalls the unpredictability of Cassavettes. Glover is pure
malevolence, and Ward is outstanding--Gordon's revision of the novel
wisely plants Archie at the forefront: Archie becomes a tragic figure
all his own, an insecure weasel as powerless as Jerry, really. Just as
we can't stop the inevitable death of our loved ones, we can't puppeteer
those around us, either. THE CHOCOLATE WAR's religious setting is
appropriate: by learning about God, perhaps the students and teachers
can learn to be God. (The boxes of the chocolates
even resemble bibles.) With this concept in mind, the movie's ending,
which is quite a departure from the book, is more dramatically
appropriate, logical, and truthful. And pitiful. Only Jerry is
problematic: his introversion on paper was somewhat painful to behold,
and his anti-conformity cathartic, but cinematically the character walks
a fine line between shy and dull.
With a new-wave soundtrack featuring the likes of Yaz and Peter Gabriel,
The Chocolate War is a hipper, meaner take on separate school life than
most like pictures. It's also a multi-layered film this short review
cannot do justice. I needn't have put off seeing it this long.
