Title
Review for Eddie (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Whoopi Goldberg, Frank Langella, Dennis Farina, Richard Jenkins,
      John Salley, Malik Sealy, Rick Fox, Dwayne Schintzius
Director: Steve Rash
Producers: David Permut and Mark Burg
Screenplay: Jon Connolly, David Loucka, Eric Champnella, Keith Mitchell, 
      Steve Zacharias, and Jeff Buhai
Cinematography: Victor Kemper
Music: Stanley Clarke
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     New York Knicks fans, still smarting from a lackluster season and 
second-round playoff ejection, may find some solace in EDDIE, a fantasy 
for Big Apple NBA fans.  Just about everyone else is likely to find this 
smug, self-congratulatory, moronic comedy unbearable.  Whoopi Goldberg 
doesn't exactly have a sterling track record, but this particular 
travesty resembles a pile left by the runaway elephant in MADE IN 
AMERICA.  
     Whoopi plays Eddie Franklin, a rabid Knicks fan (very much in the 
mold of the Celtics fans from the infinitely better CELTIC PRIDE).  She 
sits high in the cheap seats at Madison Square Garden, yelling epithets 
at the beleaguered coach (Dennis Farina, doing a Pat Riley imitation).  
By day, Eddie is a limo driver, and, when one of her pickups turns out 
to be Wild Bill Burgess (Frank Langella), the Knicks' new owner, she 
deluges him with unsolicited advice.  Bill is so impressed by her that, 
when he sees her at a game one night, he rigs an "honorary coach" 
contest so that she wins.  When the fans react with unbridled enthusiasm 
to her antics, Bill goads the current coach into resigning, then hires 
Eddie as the replacement.  And, of course, the sorry Knicks start to get 
better just as the season winds down.
     Eddie has inherited a team of talented problem players, so, 
according to formula, she sets out winning their trust and turning them 
around.  She reunites one with his wife, learns Russian to communicate 
with another, and brings in a third one's mom for an inspirational pep-
talk.  The results?  Well, when it comes to the big game, the oaf who 
can't plant his feet suddenly grows roots and the superstar who never 
passes treats the ball like a hot potato.  There's a bit of contrived 
melodrama at the end that tries to fake the audience into thinking that 
the result of the game might be in doubt, but we know better.
     EDDIE tries to be a little different by introducing a sub-theme 
involving the arrogant self-absorption of today's athletes.  One player 
haughtily ignores a kid's request for an autograph; another won't 
practice because he's involved in a photo shoot for a rap album cover.  
This topic is a good launching pad for satire, but EDDIE does nothing 
with it.  It's just a plot device cooked up by one of the six credited 
screenwriters.  (When has a script written by so many been any good?)
     The character of Eddie is one of the film's worst miscalculations.  
We're supposed to like her, but, with Goldberg exhibiting all the loud, 
loutish arrogance of the stereotypical Knicks fan, we end up wishing for 
her downfall.  Quite a few past and current NBA players (Walt Frazier, 
John Salley, Dwayne Schintzius, and Dennis Rodman) make appearances, but 
their (thankfully) limited exposure does little more than prove that 
they're considerably more effective on court than on screen.
     Those offended by the rampant commercialism of motion pictures 
(Disney and its subsidiaries are particularly guilty of this) will find 
much in EDDIE to raise their ire.  Huge chunks of the film function as 
glorified commercials for ESPN (including a completely unnecessary cameo 
by Chris Berman) and New York's clear-channel WFAN radio.  
     There are a couple of clever moments in EDDIE, such as a scene 
where a player offers a scientifically accurate definition of a black 
hole (this echoes the "civilized" Right Guard commercials), but this 
film offers very few laughs.  It's a dull, stale affair with 
suspenseless game sequences, humorless jokes, and pathetic drama.  In 
short, unless you're craving a Knicks fantasy triumph, EDDIE is one 
summer movie to stay far away from.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Hollywood)  
Starring:  Whoopi Goldberg, Frank Langella, Dennis Farina, Richard
Jenkins, John Salley, Malik Sealy, Rick Fox, Dwayne Schintzius.  
Screenplay:  Jon Connolly, David Loucka, Eric Champnella, Keith Mitchell,
Steve Zacharias, Jeff Buhai.  
Producers:  David Permut, Mark Burg.  
Director:  Steve Rash.  
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw. 
     I have a great idea for a movie, one that can't miss.  See, I've got
Coolio to do a song for the soundtrack, and about fifty athletes and
celebrities to do cameo appearances.  It's about professional basketball,
so I'll release it right around the NBA finals to guarantee added
publicity.  As for what the movie is actually about...well, that will all
sort itself out eventually.  I figure it will be a comedy, so I'll throw a
half-dozen writers at it and take the best of whatever they come up with. 
Maybe we'll put a gender spin on it, see if we can get some women out to
see it, too. 
     EDDIE is one of those phenomenally lazy films that infuriates me more
than any other kind.  TWISTER, as inane as the script might have been, at
least required some creative technicians; MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, overwrought
plot and all, at least involved genuine effort.  EDDIE just sits there,
hawking up a formula story without any laughs, and makes every possible
bad decision when a decision is required.
     Whoopi Goldberg plays Eddie Franklin, a New York limo driver and
die-hard Knicks fan who is suffering through a dismal season for her
beloved team.  Coach John Bailey (Dennis Farina) has lost control of his
overpaid prima donnas, and the losses are beginning to mount.  The
dwindling attendance inspires new team owner Wild Bill Burgess (Frank
Langella) to try a publicity stunt in which a lucky fan will get to be an
honorary coach of the team.  The winner (surprise, surprise) is Eddie, who
becomes a fan favorite, and eventually the actual coach.  The Knicks
continue to lose, but Eddie has some sassy tricks up her sleeve to inspire
her troops.
     Incidentally, the Knicks eventually start winning.  Please raise your
hand if that comes as a shock, and I will invite you to my all-night
marathon of THE BAD NEWS BEARS, MAJOR LEAGUE, ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD, THE
MIGHTY DUCKS, THE BIG GREEN, COOL RUNNINGS and LITTLE GIANTS.  Awful teams
in sports comedies make miraculous turnarounds; it's what they do.  Those
teams usually involve kids, for a very sound comedic reason:  it's funnier
when they screw up, and they're more sympathetic.  Those which _don't_
involve kids usually have actual actors in the lead roles, for another
very sound comedic reason:  they generally have developed some sort of
comic timing.  EDDIE was cast under the misguided premise that it's easier
to make basketball players look like actors than it is to make actors look
like basketball players.  This finds NBA players like Greg Ostertag,
Dwayne Schintzius, Rick Fox and Malik Sealy delivering punch lines as
though they were reading them for the first time off a Bazooka wrapper
(though Sacramento Kings center Olden Polynice has a nice moment
describing a black hole to fellow players).
     Perhaps that all didn't matter to anyone because there are so few
punch lines, and because the whole film is one big casting gimmick.  Steve
Rash directs the spiritless script as though waving a flag of surrender
and screaming, "Don't blame me, I just work here."  Perhaps it was
patently obvious to him that EDDIE isn't a movie -- it's a cameo
appearance that trips over a plot every once in a while.  Among the
notables who lend their faces to this travesty are Donald Trump, New York
mayor Rudolph Giulianni, former New York mayor Ed Koch, David Letterman,
Letterman regulars Mujibur Rahman and Sirajul Islam, ESPN broadcaster
Chris Berman and Knicks announcer Marv Albert, as well as dozens of NBA
players and several NBA arenas.  And those are the real jokes in EDDIE.
Nothing these individuals say or do is funny; you are supposed to be
laughing simply because you notice, "Hey, it's Donald Trump!" or "Hey,
it's Mujibur and Sirajul!"
     It's difficult to decide whether EDDIE is so bad because it was so
shamelessly lacking in imagination or because it can't even get the
cliches in a cliche-ridden genre script right.  The Knicks coach who is
Eddie's antagonist early in the film reappears at the end, but he isn't
given a chance to be the villain EDDIE desperately needs.  Neither is
Frank Langella, and none of the athlete-actors have the ability to give
Whoopi Goldberg anything to play off of.  That leaves her to do her
street-wise Miss Thang routine, but with no character, no sharp lines and
no help.
     EDDIE isn't just a bad movie with a formulaic premise.  It's a movie
that makes you feel cheated and offended, because someone came up with a
poster and a marketing plan to which they had to attach an actual movie,
and you had the nerve to believe it was going to be a comedy.

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Whoopi stars as Eddie, a die hard knicks fan and limousine driver, who
does play by play for the other limo drivers.  Then one day, the Knicks
are sold to a millionare cowboy (Frank Langella, who seems to be
spoofing Jerry Jones). The Knicks coach (Farina) is unhappy with this
new arrangement and quits, but not until after Langella has rigged a
contest so Eddie can be the honorary coach for a game. The crowd loves
her, and Langella names her the new head coach.
Sports movies like this are a dime a dozen. You can pretty much tell
whats gonna happen throughout each part of the movie. Will the Knicks
lose many games until Eddie learns some motivational technique that
inspires them to break the losing streak? Will the ex-coach be named
replacement at another team who will just happen to be the opposing
team in the deciding game at the end? Will the tall foreign center's
weakness of not being able to take a charge come into play at the end?
If you don;t know the answers to these questions you have not seen many
movies.
All of this would be forgiveable, of course, had Eddie been funny.
Well, it is funny at times, but not nearly funny enough to overcome the
obvious route this film is taken.  Director Rash takes this film too
seriously, trying to actually direct this movie. You don't direct a
movie like Eddie. You turn on the cameras and let Whoopi work. Rash is
a ballhog, and save for some moments where Whoopi gets the rebound and
goes the length of the court, she isn't given nearly the opportunity
she should have been given.Eddie has a great premise, a genuinely funny
star, and some good basketball action, but the movie ultimately falls
flat because the director tried to make too much of it.
