Title
Review for Newton Boys, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Steve Rhodes
     To the sounds of a rinky-tink piano playing music like you might
find in a turn of the century saloon, our heroes blow the safe one dark
night, waking the locals.  As the Newton Boys fire in the townspeople's
direction, no harm is meant.  The boys are a good-spirited bunch, who
load birdshot into their shotguns lest someone get hurt.  Just a bunch
of lovable robbers.  ("We don't kill nobody, and we don't steal from
women and children," one of the brothers explains.)
     In a true story, THE NEWTON BOYS brings us back to the times of
those lovable rascals and our country's most successful bank robbers,
the Newtons.  The movie goes down as easy as a shot of whiskey, or
sarsaparilla for you teetotalers.  Director Richard Linklater of BEFORE
SUNRISE fame even includes several slow sections so you can catch up on
your sleep before its rousing and quite surprising ending.  This
cinematic version of easy listening music doesn't have many flaws, or
many strengths, but it certainly does entertain.
     The opening credits introduce the players in silent movie fashion,
even using a square aspect ratio and sepia photography to set the mood.
Peter James films the picture itself without any particular flair.  And
the script by Claude Stanush, Clark Walker and Richard Linklater, based
on Stanush's book isn't particularly imaginative either.  "We're going
to get the big banks because that's where the money's at," the lead
brother, Willis, tells us in a typically prosaic bit of dialog and an
awkward paraphrase of the classic Willie Sutton line.
     The picture's salvation is the story itself, which is fascinating.
The actors, who give perfectly acceptable performances, have a blast
doing this period piece.  They have such a great time that the audience
may become envious.
     Starting in 1919, the boys, Willis (Matthew McConaughey), Joe
(Skeet Ulrich), Jesse (Ethan Hawke), and Doc (Vincent D'Onofrio), and
their munitions expert Brentwood Glasscock (Dwight Yoakam) rob 80 banks
over a 4-year period.  And speaking of periods, the sets by Catherine
Hardwicke are another of the movie's delights.  Taking us back to that
transition time in American history when the cowboys were starting to
trade in their horses for cars and when the country was on its way to
ragtime, she creates a intriguing landscape both dusty and modern.
     If you've grown tired of seeing McConaughey playing cocky lawyers,
you'll be happy to know that this time he gets a completely different
part, a cocky robber.  And, as always, he takes time to remind us of
the nobility of his cause.  This time he's not stealing the money from
the poor farmers whose savings are in the banks.  Oh no, the banks have
recently gotten insured, which means that he's swiping money from big,
greedy, insurance companies.  McConaughey also steals the picture,
getting most of the screen time.  If you want to see more than a
trivial amount of the other excellent actors, Ethan Hawke from BEFORE
SUNRISE being a one of my favorites, you'll have to catch a different
film.
     The boys are so sweet that you'll find yourself rooting for them
in every job they pull.  Ironically, it is when they finally get caught
that the movie is at its best.  And, whatever you do, don't miss all of
the ending credits with Johnny Carson.
     THE NEWTON BOYS runs too long at 2:02.  It is rated PG-13 for some
violence, profanity, and nudity and would be fine for teenagers.
     The film opens nationwide in the United States today, Friday,
March 27.  In the San Jose area, it is playing at the AMC and Century
theaters.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE NEWTON BOYS
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Matthew McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, Skeet Ulrich, Vincent
D'Onofrio, Dwight Yoakam, Julianna Margulies.
Screenplay:  Richard Linklater, Claude Stanush and Clark Lee Walker, based
on the book by Stanush.
Producer:  Anne Walker McBay.
Director:  Richard Linklater.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (frequent profanity, violence)
Running Time: 122 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I've got to be honest with you:  if I were producing a "true crime"
bio-pic, Richard Linklater would not be my first choice as director.  In
fact, I'm not sure he'd make the top fifty.  This is, after all, the man
who chronicled the meandering SLACKER culture, the man who followed DAZED
AND CONFUSED 1970s youth in their hazy misadventures, the man who let two
young lovers talk the night away BEFORE SUNRISE.  Not exactly the stuff of
which blazing shootouts and narrow getaways are made, is it?
     As one might expect, there is an amiable, unhurried pace to Richard
Linklater's THE NEWTON BOYS.  The surprise is that it turns out to be one
of the film's most appealing qualities.  Based on Claude Stanush's
non-fiction book, THE NEWTON BOYS tells the story of the most successful
gang of bank robbers in American history:  Texas siblings Willis (Matthew
McConaughey), Jess (Ethan Hawke), Joe (Skeet Ulrich) and Dock Newton
(Vincent D'Onfrio), along with their explosives expert Brentwood Glasscock
(Dwight Yoakam).  In the early 1920s, the five men went on an unparalleled
spree throughout the West and Midwest, working at night and reaping the
rewards of the last remaining easily-accessed safes in left in the
country.
     From the opening credits, it is clear that Linklater is aiming for an
old-fashioned whimsy in his telling of the tale.  The title cards are
styled after silent films, with "The Players" introduced in sienna-tinted
head shots, tipping their hats to the camera.  THE NEWTON BOYS generally
paints its protagonists as light-hearted, almost casual outlaws, polite
young men who happened to be very good at robbing banks and milked one
effective modus operandi for all it was worth.  The script (by Linklater,
Stanush and Clark Lee Walker) shows little interest in digging deep into
the characters' psyches or exposing the gritty violence of the Old West's
final days.  Though the climactic train robbery features a bit of
bloodshed, far more typical is a scene where a bungled daylight heist
turns into a comedy of errors resulting in nothing worse than a couple of
flesh wounds.  Even the obligatory montage sequence, spinning newspaper
headlines and all, is edited with a less frantic sense of urgency than you
might expect.
     THE NEWTON BOYS is such a lightweight bit of history that it
sometimes threatens to float away entirely whenever there's not a robbery
going on.  The characters are energetically portrayed by the top-notch
cast, but they're little more than a token trait a piece -- Joe is the
Religious One, Brentwood is the Cautious One, Jess is the Cocky Drunken
One, Dock is...well, the _other_ Cocky Drunken One.  Only McConaughey is
given a bit more to work with, playing Willis as a wronged man
rationalizing his lawlessness as payback to the world.  Even then, the
attempts to flesh out his life -- a romance with a single mother (Julianna
Margulies), ill-fated attempts to funnel his ill-gotten gains into
legitimate businesses -- feel half-hearted and only sporadically
effective.
     Still, there's something undeniably charming about THE NEWTON BOYS,
some intangible alchemy between the actors' obvious enjoyment of their
roles and a story with no greater agenda than spotlighting a previously
unknown bit of Americana.  Two hours may be a bit too much time to support
the substance of THE NEWTON BOYS, but if you've indulged Linklater's
episodic films in the past, you probably won't be disappointed by his
willingness to wander down the side roads of a story.  Not a bad choice at
all, as it turns out, for a story about some nice young fellas who just
happen to rob banks.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Matthew McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, Vincent D'Onofrio, Skeet Ulrich, 
      Dwight Yoakam, Julianna Margulies, Chloe Webb, Charles Gunning
Director: Richard Linklater
Producer: Anne Walker-McBay 
Screenplay: Claude Stanush, Clark McBay, Richard Linklater 
Music: Danny Barnes
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     THE NEWTON BOYS illustrates that it's possible to make a film about 
gangsters and gunplay without an abundance of bloodshed, violence, and 
death.  In fact, for this account, which depicts "the true story of the 
most successful bank robbers in the history of the United States," 
director Richard Linklater has consciously kept the tone playful.  
That's not to say that THE NEWTON BOYS doesn't have its grim moments, 
but Linklater limits the shadows.  The result is a fast-paced, 
entertaining motion picture that replaces gritty tension with a lightly-
dramatic character interaction that occasionally borders on straight 
comedy.
     The real Newton Boys started their crime spree in 1919, and 
finished it five years later, in 1924.  During that time, the four 
brothers -- Joe (Skeet Ulrich), Jesse (Ethan Hawke), Willis (Matthew 
McConaughey), and Dock (Vincent D'Onofrio) -- and explosives expert 
Glasscock (Dwight Yoakam) broke into more than 80 banks and committed 
the largest train robbery in U.S. history -- the famous June 12, 1924 
Rondout Robbery.  Their illegal activities took them from their native 
Texas, through dozens of small towns and major cities all across the 
country, and into Canada.  Linklater's film recounts the Newton gang's 
exploits with all of the fondness of a grandfather relating a favorite 
story to a child.
     One thing that differentiates the Newton Boys from America's 
numerous, other well-known bandits is that they never killed anyone.  
They used guns, but rarely fired them, and almost never at a living 
target.  All they wanted was the money, and they were often kind to the 
men they held at gunpoint.  Moreover, they viewed themselves as 
champions of the undertrodden -- little thieves stealing from big 
thieves (the companies insuring the banks).  Linklater presents all four 
brothers as happy, good-natured fellows -- the kind of guys no one would 
mind hanging out with.  
     The violence in the film is kept to a minimum, and, while THE 
NEWTON BOYS depicts a few of the robberies from start-to-finish, most 
transpire as part of a montage that shows images of money, exploding 
safes, and newspaper headlines.  The film's narrative spotlight shines 
brightest on Willis, but finds time to illuminate the other three 
brothers, as well.  Since it spans a five-year period, THE NEWTON BOYS 
is understandably episodic.  Several key events from the characters' 
lives are highlighted.  There's even time for a love story -- that of 
Willis and an attractive single mother (Julianna Margulies) he falls for 
in Omaha.  
     To emphasize THE NEWTON BOYS' cheerful nature, Danny Barnes' score 
remains upbeat.  Linklater opens the film to this music with credits 
designed to evoke memories of the silent era.  The end credits are no 
less interesting, since they feature a series of video clips of 
interviews with the real Willis and Joe (the former from a 1975 
documentary; the latter from an appearance on an episode of THE TONIGHT 
SHOW with Johnny Carson).  In addition to assuring that no one will 
leave the movie early, these excerpts deepen the sense of closure 
offered by the series of captions that finish the narrative.  
     None of the actors in THE NEWTON BOYS gives a standout performance, 
but no one seems miscast, either.  Linklater has gone with a group of 
hot, young stars.  Matthew McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, and Skeet Ulrich 
are all desirable names to have on a marquee.  The lower-profile Vincent 
D'Onofrio (last seen as the hulking villain in MEN IN BLACK) gives the 
strongest performance of the lead quartet, and Dwight Yoakam proves that 
his work in SLING BLADE wasn't a fluke.  Julianna Margulies, the E.R. 
actress who is beginning to forge a big-screen name for herself, 
provides solid support for the mostly-male cast.
     The film is something of a departure for Linklater, whose previous 
efforts (including SLACKER, BEFORE SUNRISE, and SUBURBIA) have been 
dialogue-and-character-centered pieces, whereas THE NEWTON BOYS' 
greatest strengths are tone and narrative.  Going into the film, I knew 
little about the Newtons (except that they were pre-Depression era bank 
robbers), and, while I'm always wary of being "educated" by fact-based 
motion pictures (no matter how scrupulously they have been researched), 
I left the theater with a better idea of who these men were.  More 
importantly, I was entertained, and, for that pleasure, I can forgive 
any dramatic license that Linklater may have taken.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Michael Redman
Newtons movin' kinda slow at historical junction
There are twilight times in history: years where something that was gives way
to what will be. It's rare that individuals living during such a shift
perceive the transformation. Most are too preoccupied with putting food on the
table and a roof over their heads to see the big picture. It takes living on
the fringes of society to visualize the forest.
We seem to be living in one of those times of change now. Fifteen years from
now may be radically different from what we've experienced previously. In the
early years of this century the western United States was undergoing such an
alteration and it took a gang of bank robbers to see it coming.
The Newton brothers began their life of crime in 1919. They successfully
robbed over 80 banks without getting caught and pulled off the largest train
robbery ever at the end of their career in 1924. And they did it all with a
minimum of violence -- no deaths and few injuries.
Based on the exploits of the historical family (during the credits there are
interviews with the boys themselves including an appearance with Johnny
Carson), the film is an interesting study of the developing west. After a
failed daylight holdup that ends with crooks on horseback being chased by the
law in a motorized vehicle, Texan Willis (Matthew McConaughey) Newton realizes
that the days of Jesse James style plundering are over.
Convincing his brothers Joe (Skeet Ulrich), Jesse (Ethan Hawke), Dock
(Vincent D'Onofrio) and explosives expert Brentwood Glasscock (singer Dwight
Yoakam) that the dirt-poor life of sharecroppers is not for them, Willis sets
about modernizing bank robbery. He obtains a list of banks that still have the
older square door safes and, in a stroke of genius, realizes that the best
time to rob them is in the middle of the night when no one is around.
After years of successful crimes, the boys get greedy and go for a mail train
out of Chicago loaded with down with cash. Although they get away with $3
million, this is their fatal mistake. The Feds and Chicago cops are after them
and they're not about to give up.
The movie is too reminiscent of "Butch Cassidy And The Sundance Kid". without
as many entertainment values. There's even a scene with Willis with a glass of
champagne soaking in a bathtub in middle of a fancy hotel room. Later his
girlfriend shoots photos of the guys. Sound familiar? Good buddies doing
crimes politely in the modernizing west with a light-hearted flavor worked
well for the earlier film and those aspects are the highlights in this one.
The film's main audience attraction is its downfall: the boys themselves. As
much appeal as the young men here have for the female gender, they just don't
have the acting chops of Paul Newman or Robert Redford. These actors in "The
Newton Boys" are interchangeable enough that at times it's difficult to
remember which brother is which.
Director Richard Linklater ("Slackers", "Before Sunrise") begins with a
slow-moving delightful western that rambles for too long and eventually grinds
to a halt. By the time that the two hours are up, you'll be wondering if most
of it was filmed in slow motion.
The supporting cast, especially "ER"'s Julianna Margulies as Willis' babe,
are interesting enough to provide some bright spots. Journeying through the
days of 70 years ago is fun but not enough to hold the film together by itself.
The clips at the end from the "Tonight Show" are the highlight of the movie.
That's unfortunate.
[This appeared in the 4/2/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 27, 1998
Starring: Matthew McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, Skeet Ulrich, Vincent
D'Onofrio, Julianna Margulies, Dwight Yoakam, Chloe Webb
Directed by: Richard Linklater
Distributed by: Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (violence including bloody aftermath of a shooting,
language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/newtonboys.htm
The first three months of 1998 have been a textbook exercise in the
effect of star power on major American motion pictures: DESPERATE
MEASURES (Andy Garcia, Michael Keaton), SPHERE (Dustin Hoffman, Sharon
Stone, Samuel Jackson), and PRIMARY COLORS (John Travolta, Emma
Thompson, Billy Bob Thornton) are all good examples of otherwise weak
movies turned into average or better fare. There is no denying the fact
that audiences will see a movie simply for the principals in it. While
THE NEWTON BOYS follows this trend to a certain level, its four
headliners - some of today's best up-and-coming actors - do not account
for the entirety of its liveliness. 
Rather, the script is peppered with fun-loving, aw-shucks humor that
grows on the audience. The story is set in a day that no movie-goer
today is old enough to have lived in, and hence derives a sort of
romanticism that works towards its advantage. The story is also highly
unused. It's been a good while since a down-home, all-American bank
robbers story has been told. The most recent film of similar value is
the Laurence Fishburne starrer HOODLUM, but the racial, social, and
political overtones of that 1930s film seem drab in comparison. There is
little that this 1920s recreation lacks, and every bit of it plays to
the public's image of the Old West. 
The characters, too, are bright and colorful, although not all of them
are used to the film's fullest advantage. Matthew McConaughey and Ethan
Hawke are the top names here, starring as Willis and Jess Newton. They,
along with their brothers Doc and Joe (Vincent D'Onofrio and Skeet
Ulrich), are America's most successful bank robbers. Their heists are
meticulously planned and skillfully executed, resulting in their take of
several hundred thousand dollars. However, when technological advances
in the construction of safes and lockboxes make their conventional
methods impossible, they turn towards a more daring - and more lucrative
- mail train robbery. If completed, the resulting payoff of several
million dollars will set them up for life. 
Even by today's standards, the Newton boys' ambitions are quite high.
This, of course, drags the audience in, for who doesn't like to see a
perfectly planned robbery go off without a hitch? Unfortunately, the
scenes after the train robbery take too long to play out. The movie has
reached such a full head of steam that when the movie doesn't wind down
quickly the audience becomes bored and loses interest. Other than that,
THE NEWTON BOYS is a movie that's full of color and ambition, most of
which pays off. This is a worthwhile film, especially compared to other
movies now playing. 
FINAL AWARD FOR "THE NEWTON BOYS": 3.0 stars - a good movie.

Author
Homer Yen
The Newton Boys is the true story of the most successful gang of bank
robbers in American history.  Their stream of robberies lasted for
over two years in the early 1920s, and an intelligent leader helped to
keep them from being caught by the law.   Matthew McConaughey stars as
Willis Newton, who eventually enlists the services of his brothers to
help him pull off the robberies.  Waxing philosophic, he reasons that
the banks are crooks themselves, so they are just smaller thieves
stealing from bigger thieves.  He also wants the money to help pay for
an oil rig which, he hopes, will hold the key to his future once he
taps into the oil reserves that lie below.
His brothers include Jess (Ethan Hawke), who likes to live life on the
edge; Joe (Skeet Ulrich) whose innocence forces him to question
Willis' moral stance; and Doc, a lumbering loser of a sort who just
wants to be a part of anything that is criminal in activity.  Living
on a Texas ranch and in virtual poverty, the glitzy city life and the
potential riches convince the brothers to tag along with Willis.  The
final member is lovingly referred to as 'Glass' (Dwight Yoakum), a
long-time associate of Willis' who also has experience in setting off
explosives.  These men are all friendly, down-home folk who are
good-natured, not at all indicative of bank robbers.  But they are
good at what they do.  Willis leads the way and makes the plans, Glass
uses the explosives to break into bank safes, and the brothers are
assigned as lookouts.  No one ever gets hurt, and the money pours in.
They are not shy about spending their ill-gained loot, and even Willis
uses his new found wealth and innate charm to woo his future love,
Louise Brown (Julianna Margulies).
Eventually, two events begin to signal the demise of the Newton boys.
One is that new safes are being invented which are sturdier than ever.
The new safes make it virtually impossible for them to break in.
Robberies are now a lot riskier too since security has been
heightened.  Second, the oil rig goes bust.  All that has been
invested is lost, and now, they have to start over again.  But the
fabric of their familiar world is unraveling.  So, it's one last
heist, and the target is a federal mail train.  The risk is great, but
if they succeed, their reward will be an incredible $3 million. 
But if you thought a movie about bank robbing would be characterized
by fun and guns, you'd better think again.  As an entertainment
vehicle, The Newton Boys moves as slowly as the mail train.  Playing
more like a pseudo-documentary, it slowly chugs along, and the movie
seems to meander from scene to scene, letting us hang out with the
boys, but never really pulling us into their family.  Even with guns
a-blazing, this movie is a dramatic lull.  One big problem is that the
characters are all pretty dull.  But a more inherent problem was that
the real life Newtons boys were very successful, whose skills
outmatched anything they faced.  They were smart enough to get away
with anything, and for the most part, they did.  Thus, there lacks the
element of adversity, energy, and excitement.  But if you do watch
this film, stay for the most interesting part which happens during the
end credits when we see an old interview with the real Willis Newton
on the Johnny Carson show and some home video footage of Joe Newton.
The Newton boys remained relatively obscure among the pantheon of
famous criminals.  Obscurity will befall this movie as well.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Richard Linklater, Clark Lee Walker, and Claude Stanush
based on a book by Claude Stanush
Starring: Matthew McConaughey, Julianna Margulies, Ethan Hawke, Dwight
Yoakam, Skeet Ulrich, Vincent D'Onofrio
Ingredients: Four bank robber brothers in the Roaring 1920s farm belt
Synopsis: 
In the Roaring '20s - - the era of prohibition, gangsters, and bank
robberies - - four country brothers (called the Newton boys) and their
partner Mr. Glasscock rob over 80 banks in the American farm belt
between 1919 and 1924. Meanwhile leader of the brothers Willis Newton
(Matthew McConaughey) romances a store clerk named Louise (Julianna
Margulies). Finally, when a business deal goes sour, the NEWTON BOYS rob
a postal train instead of a bank, and the Feds soon come nosing around.
What will happen?
THE NEWTON BOYS is based on the true story of the Newton family, four
young guns who were real life bank robbers in the 1920s. In fact, the
credits of THE NEWTON BOYS contains a Johnny Carson interview with
80-something former bank robber Joe Newton - - the youngest brother - -
who describes his younger days as 'crazy.' In real life the Newton boys
blew up safes at night when nobody was around, and they also refused to
shoot anybody throughout their entire criminal careers. But they were
successful as thieves, and they lived to tell about it.
Opinion:
THE NEWTON BOYS is not an action movie, but perhaps that's just as well,
given the material: the real life Newtons never shot anybody and did
their work when nobody was around. The film takes us from heist to heist
in a wandering, traveling fashion, with nothing really driving the plot,
and not much development of character, almost like a light dramatic
chronicle. 
In the 'screen hunk' department, this film has plenty: Matthew
McConaughey plays older brother Will; Ethan Hawke is Jess; Skeet Ulrich
is youngest brother Joe, and Vincent D'Onofrio is brawny Dock. They get
to wear a lot of classy suits, vests, and hats. And they drive
great-looking vintage wheels. 
As far as the script is concerned, McConaughey gets the lion's share of
lines, and does a good job with them. Unfortunately the other brothers
are not much more than interchangeable scenery. Ethan Hawke hams it up a
little bit by strumming the ukulele and swilling whiskey, but these are
mere gestures. Similarly Julianna Margulies does the best she can
possibly do given her small role. THE NEWTON BOYS is slow-paced light
fare focusing mostly on older brother Willis. It's like a meandering
documentary without a narrator, where the silent narrator is main star
McConaughey.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Richard Linklater
Cast:  Matthew McConaughey, Skeet Ulrich, Ethan Hawke, Vincent
D'Onofrio, Julianna Margulies, Dwight Yokam, Gail Gronauer 
Screenplay:  Richard Linklater, Claude Stanush, Clark Lee Walker
Producers:  Anne Walker-McBay
Runtime:  122 min.
US Distribution:  Twentieth Century Fox
Rated PG-13:  violence, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
It must have been nice to live around 1920, when one could stumble into
a bank and belligerently order the clerks to hand over all the money,
and then stumble back out on to the street and mosey back to the horse,
and then get away, having "not been seen."  The Newton brothers were
smarter than this, but their tactics are frequently as conspicuous. 
Apparently it didn't matter, because they are the most successful bank
robbers in American history.  
And their story makes a darn good movie.  The Newton Boys is a pleasant
surprise:  I expected something far less than this entertaining,
well-acted, and thoughtful film.  
Matthew McConaughey has the largest role as Willis Newton, the brother
who engineers most of the bank robberies.  At first, his accomplices are
his two younger brothers, Joe (Skeet Ulrich) and Jess (Ethan Hawke), and
Brentwood Glasscock (Dwight Yokam), the bomb expert.  Later, their
brother Dock (Vincent D'Onofrio) gets out of jail and catches up with
them.
Willis masterminds each robbery, and is responsible for upping the
stakes as time goes on.  They start off small, blowing up  safes in the
middle of the night and taking the money.  Soon, they move up to
breaking into two banks simultaneously.  Not long after this, they are
going to the bigger cities and taking a lot more money.  Willis
justifies his actions by saying, "It's just one thief stealing from
another," and the good thing is we believe him (at least a little bit). 
Bank robbery is a serious thing, but I liked the light tone that
director Richard Linklater has taken with this film.  The bank robberies
are simultaneously suspenseful and funny; they are also well-filmed, and
enhanced by an appropriate musical score.  The sets are authentic, and
certainly not inexpensive:  huge blocks of city streets from this time
period have been constructed for the film, and the result is a picture
that is visually flawless.
But what makes this such an enjoyable film are the characters, and the
actors who portray them.  McConaughey adds one more bit of proof that he
can hold his own as a leading man; he manages to make Willis the crazed,
eccentric man that he is, while still demanding our like and sympathy. 
And later, when he meets his love, Louise Brown (Julianna Margulies), we
truly believe that he cares for her.  Surprisingly, this is one of the
best-written romances I've seen in a while, for the female character is
fleshed-out, and Margulies plays her part well.
The rest of the cast is made up of a group of talented young actors who
are all making names for themselves.  Hawke, who plays the most jovial
(and most volatile) of the brothers, is perhaps the most entertaining to
watch.  Ulrich is quiet and reserved as Joe, and he does a good job
adding dimension to his character.  D'Onofrio, who has been playing
small parts for a while, is good here, though not given a lot of screen
time.  
Don't leave when the credits begin:  interviews with the real Willis
and Joe Newton role through the credits.  After seeing the film, it's
vastly entertaining to watch these old men talk about what they did so
many years ago (and Willis is still justifying the robberies).  And it
also serves to show how well McConaughey and Ulrich play their roles.
The Newton Boys is a charming, entertaining film.  Its success lies in
its simplicity, and I don't understand why all film makers can't go by
this easy set of guidelines:  make the characters round and interesting,
use talented actors, treat the material with respect, and everything
else will usually fall into place.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Neither Sifakis's ENCYCLOPEDIA OF AMERICAN CRIME nor Nash's
BLOODLETTERS AND BAD MEN seems to know the Newtons existed.  What
research I tried to do before seeing the film turned up nothing.  But
the film turns up some corroborating evidence that the story must have
at the very minimum some truth.  Apparently the Newton Gang were the
most successful bank robbers in American history. From 1919 to 1925
this Texas-based gang robbed banks all over the country, eighty in all,
though their biggest job was the three-million-dollar train robbery in
Rondout, Illinois.
     With Andy Warhol being dead, it is hard to imagine a director less
likely to make an atmosphere-heavy period film than Richard Linklater,
director of Generation X films like SLACKER.  Nevertheless, Linklater
breaks from his mold and does a fair job of recreating America of the
early 1920s.  And ironically his Generation X serves him well when
showing members of the gang in their casual moments relaxing in
postures you would never see in a Bogart or Cagney gangster film.
     Willis Newton (played by Matthew McConaughey) is newly out of
prison where he was railroaded for a crime he did not commit.  What
particularly galls him is that friends and neighbors willingly perjured
themselves to abet the railroading.  He decides really to turn to
crime, stealing from the banks and implicitly from the insurance
companies who, he rationalizes, are all crooks anyway.  After helping
someone else with a daylight robbery he decides it is safer to plan his
own crimes and to rob banks only at night.
     Soon Willis is bringing his brothers in to assist him in his
robberies.  Realizing that he knows how to open a square-door safe but
not a round-door one, he has a bank manager list for him all the banks
he knows of that have square-door safes, a list that contains banks all
over the country.  The film takes a very whimsical look at their
crimes.  These are very clearly lucky amateurs who do not know what
they are doing, as we see in several comic scenes.  They seem to have
an incredible run of luck, neither killing anybody nor being killed
themselves.  Willis is the serious planner, brothers Jess (Ethan Hawke)
and Dock (Vincent D'Onofrio) are in it just for the wild times.  Joe
(Skeet Ulrich) is the youngest and most thoughtful of the boys.
Rounding out the gang is Glasscock (Dwight Yoakam).
     McConaughey clearly provides what acting interest there is in the
film and he gives the only performance that is above being just
adequate.  He is a little too handsome and polished for the role.  The
viewer knows this because of the very intelligent device of having
interviews with the real-life Joe and Willis play with the credits--in
the 1970s Willis was interviewed in a documentary and Joe appeared on
the "Tonight Show" in 1980.  The big surprise is how under-utilized
Vincent D'Onofrio is.  He is a fine actor and should have gotten a
meatier role.
     The story of the Newton Boys is apparently a neglected chapter of
American crime.  I cannot verify the accuracy of the film but I can say
it was entertaining.  I would rat it 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     In the film there is considerable mention square-door safes and
round-door safes.  The Newtons say they can open square-door safes but
not the round-door ones.  In order to decide what banks they will rob,
they need a list of banks with square-door safes.  What is this all
about?  Well, a square-door safe has a (rectangular) door.  It is like
the door to your home, only it is made of steel so it is a lot
stronger.  But it is still held in place by bolts and it is possible to
get behind the door and sheer the bolt, possibly by blowing the whole
door off its hinges.  A round-door safe does not have hinges.  The door
is a disk with threads around the edge.  The door is a separate piece
which screws out of the safe.  (In the 1953 WAR OF THE WORLDS the ports
on the Martian spacecraft use the same principle.  Remember Paul
Birch's line "It's the damnedest thing the way that's unscrewin'.")  In
place a round screw-in door is just as secure as any other wall of the
safe.  There is no way you can get explosive behind it.  At the time of
THE NEWTON BOYS round-door safes (usually in spherical safes called
"cannonballs") were absolutely secure.  Cannonball safes were
eventually defeated, but only by ignoring the opening mechanism and
cutting right through the wall.

Author
Matt Williams
Richard Linklater, notorious for his modern day Generation X films,
strikes off in new territory in The Newton Boys, a period drama
detailing the true-life exploits of the most successful gang of bank
robbers in United States history.
The mastermind behind the robberies is Willis Newton (Matthew
McConaughey) who, after being wrongly imprisoned, decides to take a
little back from the system.  He teams up with an explosives expert,
Brentwood Glasscock (Dwight Yoakam), and together they plan to rob
square-door bank safes up and down the country.
To help them out, Willis enlists his brothers.  There's Jess (Ethan
Hawke), the cowboy of the bunch who lives for the moment.  Joe (Skeet
Ulrich) is the youngest Newton, and the one with the largest moral
dilemma.  Finally, there's Dock (Vincent D'Onofrio), the eldest, and
most stubborn of the family Newton.
Together, they blaze a trail throughout the Midwest in the early 1920s
(and even to Canada at one point).  They never aim to hurt anyone...they
just want the money.  Along the way, Willis discovers one more thing he
wants:  Louise Brown (Julianna Margulies), whom he woos by pretending
he's a wildcatting oilman.
The Newton Boys takes a cavalier attitude toward its subject, painting
the bank robbers as modern day Robin Hoods, who, since they were poor,
robbed the rich and gave to themselves.  The film is more about their
attitude than about their crimes, or even their personalities.  Aside
from the well-done period detail, there's not much we learn from The
Newton Boys.
The lead characters are all genial in their roles.  They're likable, but
not outstanding.  They're not bad here, but they've all done better
work.
Perhaps the problems that fail to give the movie any lasting weight are
the same that have allowed the exploits of the Newton boys to fade from
popular knowledge.  Sure, they set a record, but other than that,
there's very little there: no lurid tabloid details that stick in the
mind, or lasting personalities to haunt us.
The best I can claim about The Newton Boys movie is that it is
diverting. It is an anecdote of a movie that will pass the time, but
won't linger on your mind.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) This is the first Linklater movie that didn't look like one
(no angst-ridden gen-Xers in this one). It's also the first Linklater movie
that I haven't been pleasantly surprised with. I suspect there's a
correlation.  
THE NEWTON BOYS is Linklater's most mainstream and conventional effort so
far. It is the self-proclaimed "true story of the most successful bank
robbers in the history of the United States." Starring Matthew McConaughey,
Skeet Ulrich, and Ethan Hawke, this movie also has a pretty high hunk
quotient (about a .675, almost as high as "Young Guns"). 
Willis Newton (McConaughey) hooks up with a couple of bank robbers who pull
a small job in the middle of nowhere. They ride into town in broad daylight
and make off with very little money before the local sheriff, in a
newfangled horseless carriage, shoots two of the three robbers. After Willis
escapes with his friend Glasscock (Dwight Yoakam, who is proving to be a
capable actor after his impressive debut in SLING BLADE), they talk about
what went wrong. 
They agree that the idea of a daylight robbery is just plain stupid. A night
robbery would have been much easier and more successful. They decide to
prove their hypothesis by robbing a bank at night. Willis enlists the aid of
his brothers (Ulrich, Hawke, and Vincent D'Onofrio) and before long, they
are robbing banks left and right. 
They are very successful. They rob at night, and they only attack banks they
know have square safes, which are susceptible to nitroglycerine explosives.
They are in and out before anybody can organize a posse. 
Their luck runs out in Canada, when a bank that was supposed to have a
square safe has gone to the uncrackable round-fronted kind. Willis,
desperate to make SOMETHING from his trip to Canada, organizes an ambitious
attempt at a daylight robbery. The Newtons prove to be as good at daylight
robberies as Linklater is at mainstream movies. Out of their element, the
robbery goes bad and the boys are lucky to escape unharmed. 
Glasscock and the Newtons realize that their bank robbing days are done
because everyone has gone to round safes (largely because of their success).
They are rich enough to retire, but they want one last big score. They
almost pull off a difficult train robbery, but can't quite make it work.
They mistakenly shoot one of their own men, payoffs to the Chicago mob
aren't made in time... before long they are all arrested. The movie ends
with the Newton boys getting light sentences because of their lovable
good-ole-boy demeanors. 
Linklater seems very taken with the "real story" of the Newton Boys. At the
end of the film he reveals what really happened to each character after
getting out of prison. Even over the credits he includes documentary footage
of Willis Newton recounting his youth and of Johnny Carson interviewing Joe
Newton on "The Tonight Show." There is so much information on the real
Newton boys that it is distracting. 
My first thought was that Linklater should have spent his energy making a
documentary. My second thought was that a more interesting movie might have
been made by someone who wasn't so taken with the real story. An adaptation
farther from the truth might have made a better movie. Here's why: 
As interesting as their story is, it doesn't necessarily lend itself to film
- it doesn't have much of an ending. They go to jail, get out, and live to
old age. Not exactly an exciting denouement. It's an interesting fact but it
doesn't really cap the conflict of the rest of the film. 
Also, there are too many characters that are too similar. Sure, each Newton
boy has a distinct personality, but their bank robbing careers are so
defining that their differences seem small by comparison. There is a slight
emphasis on Willis' character, but there is no single point of focus for the
film and the result is a movie that seems a little too even, a little too
flat. A bit more contrast might have been farther from the truth, but it
would have made a better movie. 
I have no other complaints about THE NEWTON BOYS. There are even a few areas
that I'd praise. Linklater's fabricated and computer-generated prairie town
was surprising in it's realism and insignificance in the landscape. The
music consists of modern recordings of period jazz, an  interesting
approach, well-suited to this film. But overall, the movie failed to capture
my imagination. 
Linklater is great at recording the pulse of his generation. He's a natural
with dialogue, self-discovery and angst.THE NEWTON BOYS gives him little
opportunity to do what he's good at. It's the kind of movie most anyone
could have directed, and it's too bad someone else didn't beat him to it.
Still, It looks like THE NEWTON BOYS was a labor of love for him, so perhaps
it's doesn't signal a permanent change in his style. We can only hope that
the director of SLACKER hasn't sold out.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Ben Hoffman
 Despite the interesting, true stories of the exploits of the four
Newton Brothers with their career of robbing banks, the film never
gets any real excitement.  It comes across as a poor imitation of
Bonnie and Clyde.
 The Newton brothers, Willis, (Matthew McConaughey),  Jess (Ethan
Hawke), Dock (Vincent D'Onofrio), and Joe (Skeet Ulrich), whose
robberies spanned a period mostly from 1919 to 1924, during which
they robbed over 80 banks from Texas to Canada, never killed anyone.
That is unique, especially when it includes America's biggest train
robbery.
  The "Boys" considered themselves businessmen, not killers. Most
outlaws became notorious because of the number of killings in which
they took part . . . but not the Newton Boys.   Oddly, too, they all
lived to a ripe old age with one of them  appearing on the Johnny
Carson show to tell about some of the brothers' exploits.
 This should have made for an exciting thriller but unfortunately it
appears to be little more than a recounting of the facts, omitting
that certain something needed to get it off the ground.

Author
Christopher Null
     Soon after we walked into the theater on opening night of "The Newton
Boys," I feared we had made a mistake. It seemed that the Leonardo's fan
club had gotten lost, and instead of marching like lemmings into another
screening of "Titanic," these pre-ten girls had packed themselves into our
cozy theater. The cries of "Oh baby" as soon as Matthew McConaughey appeared
on screen, however, made me realize that they were simply looking for
another cute young guy (or four) to gawk at.
     The four young guys that our lovable preteens came to gawk at are
McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, Skeet Ulrich, and Vincent D'Onofrio as Willis,
Jess, Joe, and Dock Newton respectively. The Newton boys are you're
stereotypical cowboys turned bank robbers who have decided that a home on
the range isn't enough for them.
     Willis leads his brothers into the outlaw business when he can't seem
to find enough respect or success in society after he gets out of a
penitentiary serving time for a crime he apparently did not commit. This
thin excuse for turning to a life of crime also convinces Willis's brothers
to follow him into the business.
     If this setup sounds like you have seen it before, that is probably
because you have. From the opening credits, modeled after title cards from
early silent films and antique portraits, the film smells distinctly of
"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid." In fact, at times Linklater seems to
be shamelessly ripping off "Butch Cassidy" right down to the fiddle and
banjo ridden score.
     Although the movie sets itself up as just another 90's remake, with the
Hollywood philosophy that every generation needs to remake classic films
almost as good as the originals, it ultimately turns into something more.
Unlike its prototype that ends with a freeze-frame on the impending early
demise of Butch and Sundance, the last half of "The Newton Boys" dwells on
the almost unheard of troubles of outlaws trying to get out of the game
(although we have seen it in many Mafia films.)
     It is at this point that we realize this film is a true story.  (This
is reaffirmed during the credits where we see interview footage of Willis
and Joe Newton describing much of the movie we just saw.)  
     The fact that this story contains very little that we haven't already
seen on the screen is of little consequence when we realize that this
biographical picture imitating a similar biography from 30 years past is
infinitely more interesting than the average cookbook action picture
imitating whatever made money the year before. Come to think of it, I don't
mind the banjos as long as they're not ripping off the soundtrack from
"Titanic", or should I say "Braveheart"?
     "The Newton Boys" is the latest from Richard Linklater, acclaimed
independent director of "Slacker" and "Dazed and Confused."  This outing is
a big step up for Linklater though, with a $27 million budget which exceeds
total expenditures on his first four films combined.  But don't sweat for
Linklater, Leonardo's fan club seems willing to fork over the price of a
ticket for any movie with the word "boys" in the title.
Director: Richard Linklater
Producer: Anne Walker-McBay
Writer: Richard Linklater, Claude Stanush, Clark Walker
Starring: Matthew McConaughey, Skeet Ulrich, Ethan Hawke, Vincent D'Onofrio,
Julianna Margulies, Dwight Yoakam
http://www.filmzone.com/foxmovies/thenewtonboys/
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Matthew McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, Vincent D'Onofrio, Skeet
Ulrich,  Dwight Yoakam, Julianna Margulies, Chloe Webb, Charles Gunning
Director: RichardLinklater
Producer: Anne Walker-McBay
Screenplay: Claude Stanush, Clark McBay, Richard Linklater
What could possibly go wrong if your simplest philosophies in life were
- don't kill anyone and its okay to rob banks because they steal from
farmers? If you're wandering who I am referring to, its none other than
the infamous Newton brothers, those Yankee thieves who got away with
emptying the vaults of more than 60 banks across the nation, plus
pocketing more than 3 million big ones in their finale of a mail train
heist.
But to be honest, I had never heard of the NEWTON BOYS until today.
However, this does not pose as a problem, because when you realise that
this unique story is based on fact and not merely fictional, it makes it
all the more amazing. These boys on first appearances are genuine,
regular decent looking lads, who you would probably trust with looking
after your house if on holiday.
The cast is impressive. Matthew McConaughey heads this cast of young
popular Hollywood actors to hit the screen. He is Willis Newton, the
mastermind and motivator of the brothers. Ethan Hawke plays Jess Newton,
the carefree, less responsible brother with a sense of humour who
carries the same vein of womanising, heavy drunkeness of older,
irresponsible brother Doc Newton, played by Vincent D'Onofrio. Finally,
there is the sweet, good-natured Joe Newton played by Skeet Ulrich, who
is more even tempered here than when last seen in SCREAM.
Overall, an interesting historical dramatisation, for anyone interested
in a piece of American Hill Billy pop culture.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Matthew McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, Vincent D'Onofrio, Skeet
Ulrich,  Dwight Yoakam, Julianna Margulies, Chloe Webb, Charles Gunning
Director: RichardLinklater
Producer: Anne Walker-McBay
Screenplay: Claude Stanush, Clark McBay, Richard Linklater
What could possibly go wrong if your simplest philosophies in life were
- don't kill anyone and its okay to rob banks because they steal from
farmers? If you're wandering who I am referring to, its none other than
the infamous Newton brothers, those Yankee thieves who got away with
emptying the vaults of more than 60 banks across the nation, plus
pocketing more than 3 million big ones in their finale of a mail train
heist.
But to be honest, I had never heard of the NEWTON BOYS until today.
However, this does not pose as a problem, because when you realise that
this unique story is based on fact and not merely fictional, it makes it
all the more amazing. These boys on first appearances are genuine,
regular decent looking lads, who you would probably trust with looking
after your house if on holiday.
The cast is impressive. Matthew McConaughey heads this cast of young
popular Hollywood actors to hit the screen. He is Willis Newton, the
mastermind and motivator of the brothers. Ethan Hawke plays Jess Newton,
the carefree, less responsible brother with a sense of humour who
carries the same vein of womanising, heavy drunkeness of older,
irresponsible brother Doc Newton, played by Vincent D'Onofrio. Finally,
there is the sweet, good-natured Joe Newton played by Skeet Ulrich, who
is more even tempered here than when last seen in SCREAM.
Overall, an interesting historical dramatisation, for anyone interested
in a piece of American Hill Billy pop culture.

Author
Eric Lurio
Okay, it's a minor gripe and it wouldn't hurt the potential enjoyment of the
film by anyone. But it would have been nice if the character of Dock Newton
was played by Woody Harrelson.
Now I'm not knocking Vincent D'Onofrio by any means. He's wonderful here, one
of his best performances since that great one he gave in in `The Whole Wide
World.' In fact everybody's great in this flick.
I just think that Harrleson looks like Matthew McConaughey is all.
Now that that teensy rant is over, we come to what's the best movie to open
since the beginning of the year.
McConaughey plays Willis Newton, who when the movie opens is just out of
prison for a crime he didn't commit. He arrives home to the rural Texas of
1919, which for all intents and purpouses is still the old west. 
His possibly widowed mom(Gail Cronauer) owns a small ranch where her younger
sons Jess(Ethan Hawke) and Joe(Skeet Ulrich) break horses and live happy-go-
lucky lives.
Which is nice and all, but Willis is thinking bigger than that. He's getting
together with Brentwood Glasscock(Dwight Yoakam) and  a guy named Slim(Charles
Gunning) go start a career as a bank robber.
Slim's plan backfires, and with him out of the picture for a while, Willis and
Brentwood decide to bring Jess and Joe into the enterprise.
...And thus begins a hybrid western/gangster film that would be welcome in
either genre.
Rounding out the mob is Brentwood's wife Avis(Chloe Webb) and later the
aforementioned brother Dock.
There's also a romance between Willis and Louise(Julianna Margulies), who
works at a magazine stand in a hotel our heroes are staying at.
The characterizations are all wonderful. The acting is fine, the story
compelling, and there is action from beginning to end.
Had this come out three months ago, it would be up for an Oscar for something.
It's well worth the bucks.

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critic's Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
'The Newton Boys' does something clever.  It draws you in slowly after a
more than mediocre beginning and eventually has you rooting for a group
of wild west American outlaws who never killed anyone in their rampage
of robbing somewhere in the neighbourhood of 200 banks between 1919 and
1924.  Using a Robin Hood mentality of robbing from the rich to pay the
poor (in this case, however, they pay themselves), Matthew McConaughey
(Willis Newton) Ethan Hawke (Jess Newton) Skeet Ulrich (Joe Newton), and
Vincent D'Onofrio (Dock Newton) are featured as the four brothers who
are loyal to each other and to their profession.  Dwight Yoakam is an
explosives expert who hooks up with the brothers and his specialty is
using a nitro mix in blowing safes.  Rounding out the leading players is
Julianna Margulies who plays Louise, a cigar store clerk who becomes
Willis' girlfriend.
As the brothers plot each robbery, there is a hint of detail reminiscent
of a documentary style approach by director Richard Linklater ('Dazed
and Confused', 'Before Sunrise') and the visual style the film projects
is very impressive and candidly entertaining.  Matthew McConaughey is a
charismatic leading man and he is truly one of this generation's most
under rated actors and has a power capable of carrying an entire film on
his back.  His portrayal of Willis Newton, a man raised dirt poor who
had a tough life and claims to have went to prison as an innocent man,
is someone many people can generate sympathy for and these factors fuel
his desire to rob banks as we see him at the start of the film as an
ex-con as someone asks him: "How was prison?", to which he replies: "How
was the war?"
Despite the unusual place in history the Newton brothers have found,
they remain virtually unknown compared to the likes of John Dillinger,
Bonnie and Clyde and "Baby Face" Nelson.  Perhaps because the Newton
brothers weren't as cold blooded as their criminal peers and not just
the American but the human fascination with violence is something that
propels the most violent criminals to the top of the list in terms of
historical documentation.  It's a constant pleasure to watch the
creators of film pick up on a part of history that is relatively unknown
because the research proves to be more difficult and when you succeed,
it is a greater testament to your endeavour as a creative artist.
Everything is meticulously crafted in 'The Newton' Boys'.  From the
clothes, to the sets, to the music, even the dialogue and wild west
attitude are nailed down as impressively as any I've ever seen.  The
most interesting footage of the film comes in two places.  First is a
trip to Canada where they try and rob banks in Ottawa and Toronto and
find Canadian safes better built and harder to crack so they decide to
rob banks in broad daylight on the street as they witness bank
employees, in a more civilized and less dangerous society, openly carry
large bags of cash on the streets for transfer and delivery and as the
boys hold them up, they do what they can to get away without killing
anyone in the process.  Secondly is the film's closing credits which are
accompanied by footage of the Johnny Carson show where the real Willis
Newton is interviewed by Carson and we see the real Joe Newton in clips
of home movies and they tell how the brothers always viewed banks and
insurance companies as cheats themselves and that his gang was just one
thief robbing from another.
Not a great justification of their profession, and while some may
criticize the film as a glorification of bank robberies, it's
captivating simplicity and depth of academic focus make it entertaining
as an alternative form of social commentary and the film does something
rare.  It only uses violence when necessary to make its intended points.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE NEWTON BOYS (1998) ** 3/4  Directed by Richard Linklater.Written by
Linklater, Claude Stanush, and Clark Lee Walker, based on the book by
Stanush.Photography, Peter James.Editing, Sandra Adair. Production design,
Catherine Hardwicke.Musical score, Edward D. Barnes with music by Bad
Livers. Cast: Matthew McConaughey (Willis Newton), Skeet Ulrich (Joe
Newton), Ethan Hawke (Jess Newton), Dwight Yoakam (Brentwood Glasscock),
Chloe Webb (Avis Glasscock), Julianna Margulies (Louise Brown), Vincent
D'Onofrio (Dock Newton), et al. A 20th Century Fox release. 121
minutes.PG-13
The Online Encyclopedia Britannica contains 533 articles that include
"Newton" (including a lot of Isaac and a bit of Huey) but nothing about the
Newton bank robbers. Even Boolean searches turned up nothing.
In my amateur poll, no one had ever heard of the Newton Boys. I suspect
that today very few Americans have, most likely people over 80. So, score
one for movies that  add to our knowledge of  pop culture.  I suspect too
that back in 1967, when "Bonnie and Clyde" came out, its characters were
far less familiar to a broad public than names such as Capone or Dillinger.
Ditto, in 1969, for Butch Cassidy and the Wild Bunch -- except for people
in Wyoming and neighboring states.
Yet, for the period 1919-1924, the four Newton brothers (plus the
oddly-named Brent Glasscock, the nitroglycerin expert) were responsible for
a record number of successful bank robberies and for the biggest train
robbery in American history, arguably in the world, after the British coups
of 1855 and 1963.
Why the Newton gang has not, until now, entered history in a big way is
probably explained by a statement presumably made by Willis Newton, the
leader: " We don't kill anybody, we don't steal from women and children, we
don't  rat." Apocryphal or not, this sets the quintet apart from the
violence and lack of thieves' honor that prevailed in the Chicago (and
Midwest) school of gangsterism.
The Newtons are poor Texas farmers from Uvalde, which happens to be also
the hometown of Matthew McConaughey (Willis Newton). Willis is out of jail,
to which he was railroaded for something he had not done. Or so he claims.
(The film is frustratingly sparse on details and information). He opts for
something more fruitful than farming as a career: robbing banks.
With not-so-odd rationalization, he figures that to take money that way is
no big crime. After all, banks are insured, the insurers are crooks, the
banks inflate their losses, everybody is a thief, so why not rob robbers?
One step farther and we could get into the Robin Hood logic, except that
the Newtons keep their loot. While watching the film it is worth
remembering that it takes place during the affluent Roaring Twenties and
not during the future Great Depression when suffering was generalized and
banks (those that did not fail) were not only a target but the enemy.
The action starts with a wonderfully quiet and matter-of-fact heist made
colorful by a microscopic bank in the middle of a flat nowhere landscape,
and doubling the color as an old flivver chases after three hold-up men on
horseback.
Then comes the formation of the five-member gang.Willis decrees they must
stick to night robberies and use nitroglycerine to blow up safes. It works
beautifully, with more piscturesquenes and some quite funny episodes. The
protracted spree (five years is a very long time for this sort of thing)
takes the Newtons from Texas to Nebraska to Canada, and back to northern
Illinois for the train robbery. The train hold-up comes after the gang goes
from riches to rags because --ironically-- Willis had made a legitimate
investment that turned sour; and after banks started using more
nitro-resistant safes.
The Newtons are, by and large, likable fellows, often well-mannered, not a
bit nasty or bloodthirsty. But their saga doesn't really work dramatically.
The robbers seem to be doing this for a lark, a lark which results in
fashionable clothing, new cars, ritzy hotels, and, moderately, in wine,
women and song.
Director and co-writer Richard Linklater is a triple-A "new" filmmaker:
"Slacker" (1991),"Dazed and Confused" (1993), "Before Sunrise" (1995),
"SubUrbia" (1997). An exceptional, original filmmaker, he has, in many
ways, adapted to American mores and modified in style and substance, the
old French New Wave (notably Godard and Rohmer) in films that are different
from one another yet retain a superb sense of humor and of life-
with-absurdisms. Throughout his works, Linklater maintains a laid-back
attitude (but never twice the same,) sharp eyes and ears, and un-gooey
sympathy for his creatures.
Those qualities are in The Newton Boys, but backfire somewhat in what one
expects to be a genre action movie. The film has a tendency to meander,
pack down too much in sketchy episodes, and occasionally confuse.It even
features a standard montage for the passage of time. Willis, as the leader,
is the key personage; the others,oo much of a supporting cast, receive
scant character development. They are somewhat differentiated but not
sharply, and lack fleshing-out. An unintentional red-herring is Brent's
wife Avis whose initial appearance suggests sexual possibilities, but
nothing comes of that.
The maker of "Slacker," slackens his pace before mid-film. He picks up with
his characters' misguided, Keystone-cops-in-reverse fracas with several
bank messengers in Toronto and later with the oddball train robbery.
Linklater's laid-backness purposely omits other possible tensions while
making of the gang nice ole boys whom we perceive as robbers yet not as
criminals.
There are, however, several very good touches. A love-affair between Willis
and Louise (a single mother who works at the cigar stand of an hotel) may
add a diversion that is so-so, yet there is an excellent, early, throwaway,
subtle scene of reactions when Louise's date comes to get her as she sits
flirting with Willis.
Where "TNB" is admirable is in its production values. Sets, music,
costumes, artifacts and paraphernalia combine into a beautiful,
authentic-feeling ensemble of period recreation, with much attention to
details --down to wristwatches that are right for the time.
The photography is just as good. Cinematographer Peter James has spoken of
the visual progression, from the beginning's "prairie feel," to the
pastel-using robbery scenes, to the brighter look of the gang's affluent
period and the darker look of their downfall days.
Beyond the basic facts, to what extent the movie embroiders on the Newtons'
deeds is hard to tell. I feel skeptical about the early scene of a bank
director (sic) offering the Newtons an improbable 85 cents on the stolen
dollar and giving them a list of 41 banks that still use old-style safes.
And, for reasons which you will understand if you see this movie, the
brothers have been prettified from the hicks they really were into
semi-gentlemanly cowboy-thieves.
Judged by the breathless standards of the genre, "TNB" falls short of
expectations. But as a departure from that category, weaknesses and all,
the film, while only occasionally gripping, does remain interesting.
Some of the best sections are at the beginning and at the end. The opening
credits are like silent movie film cards. I wish the rest of the film had
stuck to black and white and I would guess that so did Linklater,but
economic imperatives are against this notion. What comes with the end
credits is very funny. Do not leave your seat prematurely.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Why do you rob banks?" asked a journalist to Willie
Sutton.  "Because that's where the money is," he answered, a
one-liner which insured Mr. Sutton's place as one of the best
known of his profession.  Now, Richard Linklater, who
directed "The Newton Boys" in a script he co-wrote with
Claude Stanush and Clark Lee Walker (based on a book by
Stanush), aims to make a group of four men as famous as
Sutton. In fact, when its principal character, Willis Newton
(Matthew McConaughey), rallies his brothers, he uses a
similar expression, "We're gonna get the big banks because
that's where the money is."  
   "The Newton Boys" is the story of four bank robbers who,
according to production notes, pulled off the most lucrative
train robbery in U.S. history when they ended their career by
ripping off a huge stash from a mail train outside of Chicago
in the early 1920s.  The movie is based on a book written by
former Life magazine reporter Claude Stanush, who had
gained the confidence of Willis and Joe Newton in 1973 and
got their story in a series of interviews which grew into a full
volume.
 In translating the story from page to screen, director Richard
Linklater--heretofore known for his sophomoric albeit involving
movies "Slacker" and "Dazed and Confused"--goes for the
light touch.  The story is conceivably inspired by one of the
great caper movies, George Roy Hill's 1969 "Butch Cassidy
and the Sundance Kid" (about outlaws Paul Newman and
Robert Redford who are pursued by a relentless but remote
sheriff's posse), but Linklater's creation lacks the sharp
dialogue, originality, and the score of that masterwork. 
Though the picture is sporadically dramatic and involving, for
the most part its attempts at levity are leaden, the chemistry
between Matthew McConaughey and Julianne Margulies
unconvincing, and given the lackadaisical planning and
generally drunken condition of the brothers, their overall
success not credible.  The story is bogged down from time to
time by the whining of the perps, particularly Mr.
McConaughey in the role of the gang leader, Willis Newton,
who insists that the banks abused him, and he was only one
thief robbing from another.  His whimpering begins early on
when he gripes about the rejection of his courtship by the
girl's father, who continued to employ him in the fields: "An
ex-con is not good enough for his daughter, but he's good
enough to pick cotton."
   Edited briskly by Sandra Adair, the film shifts smoothly from
a collage of small banks blown sky-high to scenes of the
robbers playing at being gentlemen; from close-ups of the
safecrackers carefully pouring nitroglycerin into the crevices of
the locks to their feeble attempts at humor.  The last category
highlights some cornball sallies, as when a strikingly clean-cut
Willis Newton asks the lovely hotel shopkeeper Louise Brown
Julianna Margulies) what's fun to do in Omaha, receiving the
reply, "You can chew gum," or when one of the gang
anticipates investing his money in stock and bonds: "Silk
stocks and bonded whiskey."
   While Matthew McConaughey's character is reasonably well
developed, his partners in crime are for the most part ciphers
who fail to win our sympathy or interest because of their
odious ways.  Ethan Hawke in particular plays Jess Newton
as an infantile drunk, an unlikely partner in the burglaries of
eighty banks and a mail train, while the usually superb
Vincent D'Onofrio makes embarrassing attempts to engage in
horseplay with his brothers.  Skeet Ulrich's character, Joe
Newton, is merely a wide-eyed cipher, and other criminals,
notably Charles Gunning as Slim, are stereotypes, smirking in
the obvious ways in which brigands have been depicted for
decades in the old-fashioned Westerns.
   Linklater seems determined to portray these robbers in the
style of the cowboy films that shrouded the TV sets of the
sixties, substituting hotel clerk Louise for the cliched, tough
but vulnerable saloon-keeper of the "Gunsmoke" era and
slipping in implausible scenes as when Slim shows up
unannounced where the Newton boys are holed up and tells
Willis with a smirk, "You can look me up in Chicago" before
disappearing into the horizon.  Perhaps truth is stranger than
fiction, though.  Though the boys pulled over eighty burglaries
including several armed robberies (without killing anyone),
they ultimately received sentences as light as nine months. 
As the credits roll, an epilogue depicts two of the actual, aging
Newton boys in interviews, one with Johnny Carson, neither
exchange particularly insightful. Rated PG-13.  Running Time:
124 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Newton Boys (1998)
Matthew McConaughey, Ethan Hawke, Vincent D'Onofrio, Skeet Ulrich, Dwight 
Yoakum, Julianna Margulies, Chloe Webb, Charles Gunning. Directed by 
Richard Linklater. 122 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/films/
Archive reviews at http:// us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
The most surprising thing about "The Newton Boys" is that it took this 
long for somebody to make a movie about them. America loves turning 
bandits into folk heroes and these guys are naturals. During their five 
year crime spree, from 1919 through 1924, the Texas-born Newton brothers 
worked their way across the States and into Canada, holding up over 80 
banks and committing the largest train robbery in U.S. history. Along the 
way, they never stole from women or children, never killed anyone, and 
generally established themselves as well-mannered young rogues with 
charisma and a flair for the dramatic.
At least that's how director Richard Linklater tells it in "the true 
story of the most successful bank robbers in the history of the United 
States." While the accuracy of the story is debatable, there's no denying 
that Linklater has crafted an amiable, extremely smooth film and a great 
showcase for his cast of hot young actors. Matthew McConaughey, Ethan 
Hawke, Skeet Ulrich and Vincent D'Onofrio play the Newtons, with able 
assists from Dwight Yoakum as their explosives expert and Chloe Webb and 
"ER's" Julianna Margulies as the resident love interests. Although 
D'Onofrio, last seen as the dim-witted farmer-turned-alien villain of 
"Men In Black," is wasted here, McConaughey, Hawke and, to a lesser 
extent, Ulrich are given a welcome chance to strut their stuff. 
Following wince-inducing turns in "Contact" and "Amistad," Matthew 
McConaughey returns to form here, using his natural drawl in a relaxed, 
disarming performance as Willis, the leader of the boys. With an 
easygoing manner and a twinkle in his eyes, Willis is a born salesman. 
It's easy to understand why the brothers go along with his poorly thought 
out schemes and accept his strained rationalizations. 
Ethan Hawke, who wanders through most of his films appearing dazed, 
painfully earnest and a bit constipated, is a delight here as Jess, the 
wildest of the Newton boys. As a struggling farmer, Jess was just another 
lost Texas kid, but as a robber he comes into his own, virtually 
intoxicated playing out his new-found role as a larger-than-life folk 
hero. Hawke's best moments come in a courtroom scene where Jess charms 
the pants off of everyone in the room, grinning broadly while tossing 
fanciful one-liners to the judge, spectators and reporters. 
As Joe, the youngest of the brothers, Skeet Ulrich initially operates as 
the conscience of the group, skeptical of Willis' claims that bank 
robbery is justifiable because the boys are just little Robin Hoods, 
taking money from the real thieves, those companies insuring the banks. 
Joe eventually falls in line, but remains the grimmest of the boys, 
portrayed with appropriate intensity by Ulrich, who looks for all the 
world like a low-rent, heroin-chic version of Johnny Depp.
Films in this genre rarely give women much to do and "The Newton Boys" is 
no exception, although Margulies and Webb make the most of their small 
roles. In addition to being a fine actor, Julianna Margulies has a 
classically-beautiful face that was made for the movies. Sooner or later, 
she'll find the right vehicle for her talents and make the jump from TV 
to film stardom in a big way.
Director Linklater, whose previous films ("Slacker," "Before Sunrise," 
"subUrbia") focused on youthful angst, does good work in this pleasant 
change of pace, maintaining a breezy, playful tone and a strong sense of 
period authenticity. As the boys make their way across the country, 
Linklater paints a crisp portrait of the small, isolated towns in pre-
Depression America. A swing into Canada provides a appreciated twist on 
typical genre locales, with a nice look at Toronto in the '20s.  Adding 
to the atmosphere is a terrific soundtrack, featuring wonderful tunes 
from the period reworked by the Austin bluegrass trio "Bad Livers," with 
guest vocals from Patty Griffin, Abra Moore and others.
Be sure to stay for the movie's closing credits, which features actual 
interview clips from two of the Newton boys as old men. The real Willis 
appears in a 1975 documentary, while Joe turns up on an episode of "The 
Tonight Show" with Johnny Carson. Hearing the real characters discuss the 
very incidents depicted in the film adds a pleasant sense of closure to 
the piece.
Particularly in its early scenes, "The Newton Boys" is structurally 
reminiscent of "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid." While the film 
certainly isn't in the same league as "Butch," it does satisfy in its own 
low-key fashion. Linklater has created a lively, charming slice of 
Americana which delivers an abundance of minor pleasures. Streamlined and 
fast-paced, "The Newton Boys" is the most cheerful film to hit the 
screens in quite a while and, after three months of post-holiday 
cinematic dreck, one of the most welcome.
