Title
Review for Body of Evidence (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Chuck Dowling
Body of Evidence (1993) NO STARS out of ***** - Cast: Madonna, Willem Dafoe,
Joe Mantegna, Anne Archer, Frank Langella. Directed by: Uli Edel. Running
Time: 99 minutes.
First of all, let me explain again that I do not care for films which rely
heavily on sexual scenes. It's not that I'm a prude or anything, far from it
actually. Sex in movies is boring. It has nothing to do with the film
itself. The plot's moving along, then sex happens. You wait for them to
finish up, and then the story can continue.
Even putting that bias aside, erotic thrillers are always poorly written,
with unsympathetic characters. It's difficult to like a film when even the
"good" characters are just as sleazy as the bad guys. "Body of Evidence" is
a perfect example of this type of retarded filmmaking, and easily joins the
list of the worst movies I've ever seen.
"Body of Evidence" stars Madonna, who has just about perfected the art of
making bad films. She plays Rebecca Carlson, a severely disturbed dominatrix
who will sleep with anyone to ensure she gets what she wants (she added some
singing and remade this film as "Evita", you might recall). She is accused
of murdering her elderly, extremely wealthy lover. The plot twist here is
that she's on trial for killing him with sex. You see, the old man had a
heart condition and their sex session were quite intense.
Enter the worst lawyer on the planet, Frank Dulaney (Willem Dafoe). Frank is
a good family man with an attractive wife and a young son. After Frank has
gathered up what he considers enough evidence to defend Rebecca, the trial
begins. After the first day of testimony, Frank and Rebecca have dinner
together and then he drives her home. Instantly the two are having sex (he
must really love that family of his). And this isn't your average sex
encounter either. It involves scolding hot candle wax dripping onto his
flesh, and he's actually aroused by it. A few days later after court, Frank
and Rebecca have sex in the parking garage of the courthouse (!) on a pile
of broken glass (!!).
Eventually, Frank's wife gets word of what is happening between Frank and
Rebecca and throws him out of the house. Frank reacts to this by immediately
going over to Rebecca's house, handcuffing her to a tree, and raping her.
This is our hero ladies and gentlemen!
All that's left after the ridiculous sex scenes are the courtroom scenes,
and they are equally ridiculous. First, Madonna must have had a clause in
her contract which states that if she acts poorly, everyone else must be
worse in order to attempt to make her look good. Everyone gives bad
performances. Then you've got a judge who finishes unknown euphemisms which
are begun by the lawyers in their arguments. Also, you've got the dumbest
courtroom audience ever assembled. Every word of testimony shocks them and
they must discuss everything amongst themselves. After so many outbursts,
the judge clears the court. The next day, the crowd is allowed to return.
They didn't learn their lesson though, as they keep causing a ruckus until
they get thrown out AGAIN.
The final scenes (if you can even make it to the final scenes) are SO inane
that I can't even begin to describe them. But the very last shot is the most
disturbing, when Frank's wife welcomes him back WITH OPEN ARMS! Come on! I'm
just thankful that there was no "Love Theme from Body of Evidence" by
Madonna, or any songs by Madonna for that matter. [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
For better or worse, the appearance of BASIC INSTINCT in the movie
marketplace gave the greenlight to a whole slew of overheated, oversexed,
underwritten thrillers. Apparently not having Joe Eszterhas as the writer
doesn't change a thing, since BODY OF EVIDENCE wasn't written by him, but
has a puzzling Eszterhas-ish presence all over it. In other words, it's a)
really dirty and b) really, really stupid.
Madonna (first warning sign) stars in BODY OF EVIDENCE as a woman who has
piles of money and no apparent job; she lives on a houseboat and likes to
parade around semi-naked, presumably for the edification of the shrimp.
She's been accused of having murdered an older man who was her lover.
Already two classic examples of Hollywood sexism are in effect -- the first
being that any woman in a movie cannot be sexual unless she's under thirty
(or at least looks it), and that they usually only exist for the sake of
studs or filthy rich older men. What's worse is that the movie confirms all
the above, and wallows in them as well. Madonna's character is accused of
forcing sex on the old goat when she knew darned well he had a heart
condition. (And yes, there are the obligatory cracks from the cops about
how at least he died happy. This movie leave no scummy stone unturned.)
Anyway. Willem Dafoe (very good but completely wasted) also stars as the
lawyer who is doomed to run afoul of Madonna's sexuality. How do we know
this? Because his character is set up with the Token Wife And Kids. How
obvious is it that he's gonna cheat on her and have to fess everything up?
And get kicked out of the house? And get welcomed back anyway? Don't skip
to the end yet; we're just getting warmed up.
Dafoe and Madonna have a lot of sex in this movie. Most of it is about as
erotic as open-heart surgery, since it involves such goodies as hot
candlewax (always the kink of choice among screenwriters who don't know the
first thing about *really* kinky sex) and smashed light bulbs. Don't ask. 
Another thing that people are starting to realize about explicit sex in
movies is that unless it is critically important to the story, it's
insanely dull. What's worse is that BODY OF EVIDENCE is dull *everywhere*,
not just in the sex scenes. The stuff in the courtroom is recycled
ninth-hand from other bad courtroom drama scenes. The thriller business
itself is ridiculous -- it involves nasal spray bottles and drugs, and
Juergen Prochnow as a surly doctor. And the ending -- another homage to
Eszterhas, maybe? -- is one of those endings where you can almost see the
exact *frame* where one of the five or six various endings to this mess was
spliced in.
The director is Uli Edel, all the more disappointing since he also directed
the elegiac and powerful LAST EXIT TO BROOKLYN and CHRISTIANE F. Everyone
has to eat, I guess, but this isn't a meal ticket, it's leftovers.

Author
The Phantom
     In his last review, the Phantom wrote of the importance of heeding
the warnings of impending cinematic doom that we may find on the way to
the opening credits of yet another quality-challenged horror or
exploitation film.  Occasionally the filmmakers or the studio will give
us tantalizing hints of the extreme violence about to be done to our
high expectations; but oftentimes we must rely on a combination of some
of our less discerning film critics and the studio's publicity
department to provide us with suitably frightening theatrical portents
-- the cinematic equivalents of "Bridge Out" signs that we overlook at
our own peril.
     As is the case with BODY OF EVIDENCE, the subject of this review
and the latest in a peculiarly Hollywood combination of sex, violence
and litigation that reached its apex with Paul Verhoeven's now infamous
BASIC INSTINCT.  Even before it opened, the print ads for Dino De
Laurentiis' latest attempt to recapture the box-office glory of his
not-particularly-good masterpiece, the 1977 remake of KING KONG, gave us
an inkling of what was to come.  "BE WARNED: It's not for the prudish or
faint-hearted" screamed Susan Granger's quote, used by Metro Goldwyn
Mayer's publicity department perhaps in an attempt to mislead us into
thinking that we would be seeing Bram Stoker's BODY OF EVIDENCE instead
of good old Dino's.  Since then, MGM has reconsidered the value of
displaying prominently a reviewer's quote that warns people away from a
film, rather than recommends it to them.  On the brighter side, since no
one has ever heard of Susan Granger (credited as a reviewer for
WICC/American Movie Classics), her dire warnings seem to have had little
effect on the all-important first weekend gross.  "A slick thriller that
embodies elements of WITNESS FOR THE PROSECUTION, THE STORY OF O, and
BASIC INSTINCT," reads David Ansen's quote, excerpted from his Newsweek
review.  This is better, at least from MGM's point of view, since it
only serves to confuse people rather than warn them away from the film.
But what must it do to those few people who had any respect for Mr.
Ansen's critical sensibilities?  After all, such shameless flaking for
what is universally understood to be an extremely bad film can't be
earning him any brownie points with the editors of his august
publication.  Ansen, after all, has never exactly been King of the
Critics, but still: WITNESS FOR THE PROSECUTION, THE STORY OF O, and
BASIC INSTINCT!?  After reading that quote (and enduring BODY OF
EVIDENCE), the Phantom spent quite a while trying to determine just what
these four films had in common.  At last it occurred to him: they were
all filmed in color!  But no, not even that: Marlene Dietrich wasn't
making color films in the fifties (though in WITNESS FOR THE PROSECUTION
she was sexier fully dressed and filmed in black and white than Madonna
will ever be nude and pouring hot candle wax all over Willem Dafoe in
glorious Technicolor).
     We may never know what "elements" Ansen was referring to.  Phans
who have seen all four films are encouraged to send their best guesses
to the Phantom; he, in turn, will reply with his heartfelt sympathies
for having endured Madonna's latest cinematic fiasco (perhaps on Mr.
Ansen's ever-reliable recommendation) and a recommendation of his own:
that they race to their nearest Blockbusters and rent Billy Wilder's
classic adaptation of Agatha Christie's suspenseful, well-written, and
thoroughly enjoyable play.  WITNESS FOR THE PROSECUTION is every bit as
good as BODY OF EVIDENCE is bad; it is also worth seeing for the second
or third time just as much as BODY OF EVIDENCE is worth avoiding for the
first.
     Having gotten his fellow critics' ill-considered reviews out of the
way, the Phantom will now make some attempt to describe just how bad,
how incompetent, how completely hilarious Madonna's latest film really
is.  Nothing you have seen or read can prepare you for the unceasing
onslaught of just plain lousiness that Madonna, Willem Dafoe, Joe
Mantegna, writer Brad Mirman, and director Uli Edel unleash upon their
audience; truly, it is awe-inspiring to leave a theater thinking to
oneself, "You know, BASIC INSTINCT wasn't that bad after all.  A little
goofy, maybe, and we sure could have done without seeing Michael
Douglas' naked rear-end a half-dozen times, but at least Verhoeven had
some idea what he was doing."  (Phans, cinematic revisionism through
Madonna-tinted glasses is the most dangerous kind, but even the Phantom
found himself engaging in it before the candle wax had finished dripping
all over Dafoe.)
     The story revolves around Madonna's character, Rebecca Carlson, who
is put on trial for the murder of the wealthy older man she had been
rather friendly with right up until the moment he had a fatal heart
attack.  Was Rebecca simply too much for the old man?  Was she herself
the "lethal weapon" that caused his untimely (and rather embarrassing)
death?  As the crackerjack prosecutor Robert Garrett, Joe Mantegna sets
out to prove just this.  Naturally, Rebecca needs an equally crackerjack
defense, and that she gets from Willem Dafoe as Frank Dulaney, a man who
we know is doomed to buzz around the incandescent beauty of his client
like a moth around an outdoor patio light.
     But one immediate problem with the film is that even a dim and
faltering patio light gives off more heat than either Madonna or Dafoe,
both of whom are grievously miscast here.  (Joe Mantegna is never
miscast, but he does manage to sleepwalk though his role as Portland's
least competent prosecutor.  After having seen the film, the Phantom can
hardly blame him, but oh how he must be kicking himself for turning down
the chance to reprise his starring role in GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS for the
opportunity to be the best supporting actor in yet another Madonna
turkey.)  Dafoe, as the equally incompetent Frank Dulaney, does better
with intellectual roles than those that require that he respond with
unbridled enthusiasm when someone unzips his fly in an elevator; he is
simply all wrong for Dulaney, who is first and foremost a character with
very little common sense and not much more intelligence.  (And $7.50
later, the Phantom considered the possibility that he himself might be
perfect for the role; nothing like wasting one's money on a film like
BODY OF EVIDENCE to make one doubt one's own common sense, intelligence,
and at times, sanity.)
     Madonna may have seen something in Rebecca that was just right for
her, but a role in which Madonna does little more than act like Madonna
is not what any of us need.  Her role as Rebecca invites comparisons to
Sharon Stone's similar role in BASIC INSTINCT, but Madonna does not, at
this point, have Sharon Stone's looks; in fact, she doesn't really have
Sharon Stone's talent, though she's probably a better singer, and she's
certainly better at self-promotion.  Madonna plays much better when she
puts herself at the center of a fantasy -- her videos all have her
play-acting in worlds where every element reflects back favorably on
her, and in which she controls the words, the music, and the images we
see -- not when she has to try to play a real person who interacts with
other real people in the real world (or as real as the world ever gets
in a film as loopy as BODY OF EVIDENCE).  In this film, however, she
doesn't even look particularly good: she's given an unflattering hair
style, frumpy-looking clothes, terrible lighting, and bad direction.  As
a result, she seems more like a mannequin come to life than a sex siren
who lures Frank to the rocks of professional ruin and personal danger.
Though even this is a bad comparison, as most mannequins are better
dressed and almost never say anything as inane as "They've taken
something good between two people in love and made it dirty."
     To make matters worse, half the film is set in a courtroom, always
a dangerous thing for a writer to do if he cannot, in fact, write
intelligent dialogue.  The dialogue in BODY OF EVIDENCE is about on the
level of Matlock, and frequently it's much worse.  As the trial gets
under way, we quickly find that the judge (ably played by Lillian
Lehman) appears to be in the same position we are: she's fed up with the
way things are going, she most adamantly does not want to tolerate any
more bad dialogue from either lawyer, and she's going to do everything
in her power to see that her portion of the film ends as quickly as
possible.  Alas, it is only the audience who can hold the filmmakers in
contempt, and even we cannot sentence them to repeated viewings of the
hundreds of more intelligent, better acted, and better directed
courtroom dramas that have been made over the years.  (Including WITNESS
FOR THE PROSECUTION, as Mr.  Ansen may know, a film with sparkling
dialogue by Billy Wilder and crackling courtroom scenes that are reason
enough for Brad Mirman to hide his head in shame.)  Apparently the best
the judge can do is look positively dyspeptic at frequent intervals and
wonder how director Uli Edel could have fallen so far from his very
solid 1989 adaptation of LAST EXIT TO BROOKLYN, and how we all could
have fallen so far from Jennifer Jason Leigh's stunning performance in
that film to Madonna's stunted one in this.
  Of course, there are the obligatory sex scenes, this time sans
ice-pick.  But also, alas, sans emotion and sans interest on our part.
Though there is a lot of fumbling around in the film, there are two main
scenes responsible for the film's notoriety: one in which Rebecca ties
up Frank with his own belt and pours hot candle wax on him; and one in
which she makes love to him in a parking garage, on top of a car, fully
clothed, and while Dulaney is lying on top of broken glass.  Dafoe is
way outside his element in each scene, and Madonna approaches them as if
she were following a particularly complicated chapter in the Time-Life
Guide to Offbeat Sexual Practices.  (Order now and we'll send you "How
to Turn Off the Lights By Breaking the Bulb With Your Shoe Instead of
Using the Switch Like People In a More Plausible Film Would" as our free
gift to you.)  The Phantom had hoped that Madonna might accidentally
open the guide to home repairs and show us all how to replace bathroom
tile or install a new dishwasher but, sadly, he was repeatedly
disappointed.  At least she looked like she was enjoying herself; Dafoe
tended to look like someone who got talked onto a rollercoaster against
his better judgment, just as the safety bars come down and the car
begins its ascent.  He knows he's in for something; he knows it won't be
pleasant; and it's only the thought of the wholesale retribution to come
that keeps him in the scene -- after all, tossing your agent out the
window isn't even a felony in California.
     We have all traveled a long and hard road from the heights of
WITNESS FOR THE PROSECUTION to the depths of BODY OF EVIDENCE, from
Marlene Dietrich to Madonna.  It is conceivable that BODY OF EVIDENCE
could be even worse than it is, but only if it weren't so
unintentionally funny so very often; how it got to be in the sorry shape
in which it is presented to us will likely never be known.  For the
Phantom's part, he still finds it hard to believe that so many
reasonably talented people could together produce a film as
mind-numbingly bad as BODY OF EVIDENCE, though Dino De Laurentiis' Midas
touch should always be kept in mind.  In the meantime, Billy Wilder's
classic film awaits you at your local Blockbusters.  No handcuffs; no
hot candle wax; no contempt for the audience -- just top-flight acting,
unparalleled writing, and Marlene Dietrich with all her clothes on.  A
film that looked good then looks even better now that we are able to see
it through our Madonna-tinted glasses.

Author
Andrew Hall
    I never would have thought it possible:  Madonna has made Sharon
Stone look like Meryl Streep.
    Not to put down Stone by comparison, but Madonna is just awful Uli
Edel's new film BODY OF EVIDENCE, which looks - even from the previews -
like a cheap copy of BASIC INSTINCT.  The new film also stars Willem
Dafoe, Joe Mantegna, and Anne Archer.
     An rich old man with heart trouble has been murdered, and his
blonde bimbo girlfriend Rebecca (Madonna) is quickly arrested and tried
for his murder.  Frank (Dafoe) steps in as defense attorney; Bob
(Mantegna) is the prosecutor.  
     The prosecution thinks Rebecca is the murderer because she was
suddenly written into her lover's will just before he died and also
because they had kinky sex - yes, handcuffs were involved, so naturally,
she's guilty.  To complicate things, Dafoe gets - well, more involved
with his client than he should.
     Was Rebecca a golddigger who killed her lover for his money?  Or
was it his secretary (Archer)?  By the end of the movie, I hardly cared.
     The beginning of the film is extremely rushed.  We are introduced
to Rebecca and Frank, but we don't learn much about them.  Perhaps we're
supposed to have seen the previews and have seen BASIC INSTINCT to guess
what they're all about?  Once we get to trial, things slow down, but
it's too late.  We never seem to find out what motivates these
characters.
     Now, BASIC INSTINCT wasn't the thriller of the decade, but the
characters seemed somewhat convincing and at least interesting.  Rebecca
and Frank are just dull and lifeless.  Archer and Mantegna are decent,
but they don't have much to do.
     Dafoe sleepwalks his way through this one.  Perhaps he shouldn't be
blamed since the story is so bad.  Why in the hell would Frank get
involved with Rebecca?  Now, had we seen that he was unhappy in his
marriage or something, we might understand, but he seems perfectly happy
to me.  Then he just suddenly goes after Rebecca.  Why?  She's not
*that* great looking, Frank!
     Ah, though, there is plenty of steamy sex in BODY OF EVIDENCE, just
as there was in BASIC INSTINCT.  If that's the reason you'd want to see
this film, well, maybe you won't be as disappointed as I was.
     Otherwise, I wouldn't recommend this film to anyone.  Still, the
ending was unpredictable and pleasing, especially if you're not crazy
about Madonna.  Oh, well, it could have been worse.  At least she didn't
sing.  

Author
Brian L. Johnson
104 min., R, Drama/Mystery, 1993
Director: Uli Edel
Cast: Willem Dafoe, Madonna, Joe Mantegna, Anne Archer, Julianne Moore,
      Jurgen Prochnow, Frank Langella, (and Ernie Hudson uncredited?)
     Madonna's older lover dies of a heart attack while tied up.  The
D.A., Joe Mantegna, has Madonna arrested and brings her to court
claiming that Madonna, knowing of her lover's heart problem, secretly
gave her lover cocaine and then she made it with him until he died.
Madonna gets Willem Dafoe to represent her.  As the trial goes on,
Willem Dafoe gets drawn into Madonna's S&M games.
     BODY OF EVIDENCE is 1993's BASIC INSTINCT.  I had read in a
newspaper, about a month before this film was released, that said BODY
OF EVIDENCE had received an NC-17 rating.  The version that is in the
theaters, I assume, is cut.  After seeing it, I am surprised that it was
able to get an R rating.  On a scale of zero to five, I give BODY OF
EVIDENCE a five.  BODY OF EVIDENCE is rated R for female nudity, strong
sexual content, explicit language, adult situations, and violence.  A
word of warning, this film is not for children.
     I enjoyed this film very much.  The only major complaint that I
have about the film is that it is too short.  Two of the reasons that I
went out immediately to see this film is that I like the director Uli
Edel (LAST EXIT TO BROOKLYN) and I have enjoyed Willem Dafoe (WILD AT
HEART, WHITE SANDS) in past films.  I am pleased to say that Willem
Dafoe gives an excellent performance and that Uli Edel has crafted
another great film.
     Madonna (A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN, DESPERATELY SEEKING SUSAN) is
definitely the most overexposed (in more ways than one) person of 1992,
and it seems that she plans to stay there in 1993.  Riding off the
publicity from her recent album "Erotica" and her book SEX, she is now
about to stir up more waters with this film.  Madonna is definitely not
the best part of this film.  Willem Dafoe and Joe Mantegna's
performances are much better.  However she doesn't hurt the film.
     One of the best actresses in this film is the judge (I didn't
notice who played her).  She helped make this film, and I hope that she
gets the credit that she deserves.  Joe Mantegna (THE GODFATHER - PART
3, BUGSY) is also great.  He alone is worth going to see this film for.
     This film is very well written, and at some points reminds me of
the show "Civil Wars."  The ending to the film is not a typical
Hollywood type ending, I was pleased to see.  I won't say any more about
it though, so I won't spoil the film.
     People who got upset because of the sex scenes in BASIC INSTINCT
should definitely stay away from this film and watch A FEW GOOD MEN
instead, because I think they are worse in this film.  This film is
definitely worth a matinee price.

Author
James Berardinelli
Running Length:  1:39
Rated:  R (Nudity, sexual situations, language, mature themes)
     The central question of BODY OF EVIDENCE is whether Rebecca Carlson
(Madonna) used her body as a deadly weapon.  Her latest paramour, a
millionaire who has willed 8 million dollars to her, dies of a heart
attack.  District Attorney Robert Garrett (Joe Mantegna) believes that
Rebecca killed him with sex, knowing that he had a weak heart and
intentionally driving him over the brink so that she could get the
money.  It's the job of lawyer Frank Dulaney (Willem Dafoe) to prove
that she is innocent.  Even though he has doubts about his client's
innocence, he nevertheless becomes involved with her in a
sadomasochistic relationship.
     For those who have a desire to see Madonna in the altogether, the
$6.00 spent on a ticket for BODY OF EVIDENCE is far less than the cost
of her book SEX.  Other than that, however, there is no reason why a
thinking, rational human being would subject him/herself to this
embarrassing excuse for a motion picture.
     The first clue that this is a bad movie comes with the initial
lines of dialogue, which are as stilted as they are dumb.  Things
don't get better as the movie progresses.  There is one especially
painful exchange between Carlson and Dulaney where Rebecca defends sex,
saying things like, "They've taken something good between two people in
love and made it dirty."  She goes on to condemn society's puritanical,
hypocritical values in a scene custom-designed to allow Madonna to make
a speech in her own real-life self-defense.
     It goes without saying that there's a lot of gratuitous nudity and
sex in this film.  That is, after all, the kind of movie it's billed as.
Madonna's isn't the only naked body that parades across the screen.
Dafoe has his moments, as do Julianne Moore (who plays Sharon Dulaney,
Frank's wife), and a body double for Anne Archer (Joanne Braslow, the
dead man's secretary).  Oddly enough, however, the sex scenes generate
more boredom than heat.  There is no chemistry between Madonna and Dafoe
and the direction by Uli Edel is pedestrian.
     Buried beneath the exploitation is an inane thriller that delivers
more yawns than thrills.  Putting aside the fact that it's completely
implausible, there's no suspense.  Whether Rebecca did it or not
becomes irrelevant.  The courtroom scenes that probe the "burning
issues" of the film are plodding, replete with BODY OF EVIDENCE's
characteristically silly dialogue.
     The less said about Madonna's acting, the better.  As a sex symbol,
she leaves something to be desired as well.  Her character is constantly
referred to as "beautiful," the kind of woman a man would alter his will
for, yet the lighting and makeup people behind the scenes at BODY OF
EVIDENCE have gone out of their way to show her as a plain, rather
unappealing person.
     Most of the other actors seem to have taken their cues from
Madonna.  It's been a long time since Joe Mantegna and Willem Dafoe have
turned in such limp performances.  Anne Archer, who has never shown
great range, isn't any better.  The only one who acts like he wasn't
completely bored by the proceedings is Frank Langella.
     Comparisons to BASIC INSTINCT are inevitable.  However uninspired
the Paul Verhoeven sex-and-blood-fest may have been, it's superior to
this effort.  There were a few genuine performances turned in for the
1992 thriller, coupled with a plot that, hard as it was to believe, is
more credible than that of BODY OF EVIDENCE.
     Speaking of BASIC INSTINCT, this film shares another trait with
it--the lack of a likable protagonist.  Willem Dafoe's character is
sleazy and despicable--a lawyer who, by his own admission, defends the
mostly-guilty and who, with little provocation, becomes involved in a
highly-unethical extra-marital relationship with a client.
     In general, thrillers are one of the easiest classes of movies to
do poorly and one of the hardest to do well.  BODY OF EVIDENCE takes the
easy road, and ends up being a shambles from the start.  It's not just a
poor effort, it's unforgivable.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
