Title
Review for Dr. Black, Mr. Hyde (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1975. Director - William Crain, Screenplay - Larry LeBron, Idea - 
Lawrence Woolner, Producer - Charles Walker, Photography - Tak Fujimoto, 
Music - Johnny Pate, Special Effects - Harry Wollman, Hyde Makeup - Stan 
Winston, Makeup - Zoltan Elek, Art Direction - Tommy Estridge. 
Production Company - Hyde Productions.
Bernie Casey (Dr Henry Pride), Marie O'Henry (Linda Monte), Rosalind 
Cash (Dr Billie Worth), Ji-Tu Cumbuka (Lieutenant Jackson), Milt Kogan 
(Lieutenant Harry O'Connor), Stu Gilliam (Silky)
Plot: Eminent Black doctor Henry Pride is trying to find a cure for 
liver disease. He injects himself with the serum he creates but this 
transforms him into a psychopathic white-skinned monster that goes on a 
spree killing prostitutes.
Following the popularity of `Shaft' (1971) which was the first action 
film to feature a Black hero, there was, in what has been nicknamed the 
Blaxploitation fad, a swarm of film-makers who raced to exploit the new 
market, offering up traditional action films but featuring principally 
Black protagonists and characters. Amongst these came the 
entrepreneurial `Blacula' (1972) and `Blackenstein' (1973), jumping on 
the trend to adapt classic horror stories with Black twists. And after 
that, one supposed that `Dr Black and Mr Hyde' was fairly inevitable.
Like `Blacula' and `Blackenstein', `Dr Black and Mr Hyde' is a 
B-exploitation film, passably well made. But while neither `Blacula' and 
`Blackenstein' are any more than that, `Dr Black' has an undeniable 
metaphoric anger to it. Of all the Blaxploitation reworkings of classic 
horror themes, `Dr Black' is the only one to revamp the metaphors of the 
original story rather than simply recast the story in Black face. Where 
Robert Louis Stevenson wrote `Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' as a pre-Freudian 
psychological study in the rift between man's baser drives and the 
veneer of civilization he is forced to adopt, `Dr Black' rewrites it 
into a metaphor for the Black and White racial divide. On the Dr Jekyll 
side it sets up Bernie Casey as the kind-hearted Black doctor Pride who, 
in having won success and acclaim, is accused of "really being white" 
and having forgotten his ghetto ethnicity. And when he takes the potion 
and literally transforms into a white man, the result is an hysterically 
paranoid and exaggerated demonization of a white man that might have 
emerged from someone's deepest darkest racial nightmares. (It is 
probably the most brutish and animalistic of all the Mr Hyde 
characterizations that have ever been conducted). Beneath the film looms 
this deeply afraid (and undeniably racist) racial animosity born out of 
the ghetto - the fear for Black identity; the belief that to sell out 
one's ghetto roots is to become White; that to be White is truly 
monstrous - that manages to play with considerably more potency than a 
good many serious liberal films about racism. And the result is a 
metaphor of the racial divide that is conducted with a striking and 
unremitting ferocity that quite belies the exploitation film it is 
embedded in.
Screening at the Christchurch 1998 Incredibly Strange Film Festival
Reviewed by Richard Scheib

