Title
Review for Roozi khe zan shodam (2000)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Laura Clifford
THE DAY I BECAME A WOMAN (Roozi khe zan shodam)
As a thesis project for her husband's Makhmalbaf Film House, Marzieh Meshkini
has chosen a triptych written by her husband Mohsen Makhmalbaf ("Gabbeh")
which presents the repression of women in Iranian society in "The Day I
Became a Woman."
In the first episode, Havva (Eve, played by non-actor Ftemeh Cheragh Akhtar)
learns that her ninth birthday means that she's become a woman who must
cover her head with the chador and no longer play with her male friend (Hassan
Nabehan).  Her mother relents and gives her one hour (until the time of her
birth) of freedom.  Havva finds Hassan and the two share a lollipop and
tamarind (an act which the Iranian censors found too erotic).   When Havva's 
stick no longer shows a shadow, it's noon and she returns to her home.
Ahoo (Gazelle, Shabnam Toloui) is in a bicycle race, yet is constantly
beseeched by the males of her town to come to her senses and return.   Her
husband and his lawyer chase after her on horseback and threaten on the spot 
divorce.  Her extended male family next attempts to convince her that her
husband still loves her and will take her back.  Finally the town elders
try evoking the punishment of God himself, yet Ahoo cycles on.
The final story features Houra (Black-eyed Beauty, Azizeh Seddighi), an old
woman in a wheelchair who arrives at the airport and hires a young boy (Badr 
Irouni Nejad) to assist her in buying all the things she's always needed 
(furniture, appliances) which she surrounds herself with on the beach.
It's clear that this is meant to be a representation of one woman's life,
with a raft powered by a sail made from Havva's chador featured in the first
and final episodes.  Each story features more modern ammenities than the 
previous.  The young girl succumbs to tradition after a last blast of freedom.
The young wife tries to flee but is finally caught up by men.  The old woman
attempts to find happiness by ironically embodying the Iranian male concept
of a woman as consumer rather than producer.
Meshkini's film, which features different technical credits for each of its
segments, uses three different styles quite cohesively.  The initial, most
simple segment, recalls all Iranian films which deal with children ("The White
Balloon," etc.)  The second begins to become more stylized, with the black
clad female bicyclers strikingly portrayed against the blue sea and blinding
sunlight of the Island of Kish.  The third is downright surreal, with small
boys vacuuming sand and bedrooms set up on the beach.  The film is visually
stunning although the sound mix is uneven.
"The Day I Became a Woman" is a trio of fables which simply yet evocatively
lay out the problems of being a woman in Iran and the filmmaking Makhmalbaf
clan have seemingly overcome these problems and produced a new voice in
director Meshkini.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Marzieh Meshkini, the wife and protege of legendary Iranian filmmaker
Mohsen Makmalbaf, makes her entry into the world film market with three
short stories about being a woman in Iran in "The Day I Became a Woman."
Makmalbaf had formed a film school of sorts in his native Iran, attracting
family and friends interested in learning the art and craft of filmmaking.
His daughter, Samira, made a striking international with "Blackboards." His
young wife, Meshkini, provides us with her graduate effort that effects
some near brilliant moments coupled with film student intensity.
Part one, "Hava," reps the simplest, most amateur feeling, of the three
short tales. This is the story of a little girl who enters, at ripe old age
of nine, womanhood. Little Hava is not prepared for this event, which will
stop her from playing with her best friend, Hassan, ever more. When she
learns that she has one hour before officially becoming a woman, she runs
off to steal back the last vestiges of childhood with her boy friend.
Before she leaves to find Hassan, Hava's grandma shows her how to use a
stick as a sundial to tell her when her time as a child is up. It's a swwet
little tale, but the non-actors are called upon to deliver lengthy,
meaningful lines and it works only as an academic exercise.
Better is the second tale, "Ha," about a young woman who takes part in a
bicycle race - forbidden everywhere in Iran except for the island of Kish.
We learn quickly that Ha is racing against her husband's wishes as he
pursues her on horseback. The focus is constantly on Ha and the other
women, swathed head to toe in black, as her husband and a succession of
family, mullahs and village elders ride their horses beside Ha and the
racers and shout at her to stop this madness. The visuals are striking and
this tale about escape.
The last tale, "Hoora," is about an old women who comes into the big city,
hires a boy and entourage of carriers and goes on a shopping spree, buying
everything from a refrigerator and washer/dryer to a bedroom set and, even,
a tea kettle. She then has the whole kit and caboodle delivered to the
beach to be hauled onto a ship. This odd little yarn starts of with light,
comic whimsy, but turns to Fellini-esque surreality, as her booty is set
out on the beach, in room-like arrangement, to await transport to a ship.
Hoora finally has everything she ever needed as her story draws to a close.
I am a strong proponent for Iranian films these past couple of years and I
am always interested to see the crafted film work emerging from that
struggling nation. To date, I have not been disappointed. True, every film
can't be of the caliber and intensity of such works as "The Color of
Paradise" or "A Time for Drunken Horses," but the obvious talents involved
in the creation of "The Day I became a Woman" cannot be dispelled. The
intense imagery and sometimes-silent story telling are very different from
American films and are an interesting challenge for a film buff. I give it
a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        The Iranian film "The Day I Became a Woman" ("Roozi Khe Zan Shodam") is a
promising trifle.  It's comprised of three vignettes that highlight the
plight of women during various stages of life.  It starts out with a story
about a nine-year-old girl, follows it up with a story about a married,
middle-aged woman, and closes with a story about an elderly grandmother.
        The final chapter is the most intriguing of the three--it has a creativity
and levity that's missing from the first two chapters.  But even it
contains some of the same distracting elements which plague its
predecessors: a naďveté of viewpoint, a sledgehammer approach to metaphor,
and a pacing that tests both physical and mental limits.
        For all of its shortsightedness, however, "The Day I Became a Woman" often
hints at a future fine filmmaker at work.
        In the opening vignette, Hava is about to turn nine.  In Iran, this
signifies entry into womanhood, a time Hava will no longer be allowed to
associate with boys.  This is particularly hard on Hava, who wishes to hang
out with her best friend, Hassan.  As it turns out, Hava doesn't become a
woman until noon, so she has one more hour to play with Hassan--her
grandmother gives her a stick and tells her that when its shadow
disappears, her time is up.  Hassan, unfortunately, isn't allowed to play
with Hava because he has homework to do.  Hava buys some candy and they
share a lollipop through the bars of a window which, given how long
first-time director Marzieh Meshkini lingers on this scene, no doubt breaks
all sorts of taboos in her homeland.
        The second story focuses on a bicycle race.  It's not obvious it's a race
at first, just two dozen women, all dressed in black, billowing chador, out
for a ride on their flashy, ergonomically-designed racing bikes.  It's a
nice image.  Then two men on horseback ride up and begin insisting that one
of the women, Ahoo, dismount.  She refuses, adamantly.  As the race
continues, the situation escalates to the point where the tribe's elders
become involved and the woman's husband threatens to divorce her if she
doesn't concede to his tyrannical demands.
        The third and final segment features an old woman who returns from a trip
and begins to spend her large inheritance on "everything she never had
growing up."  With the help of some willing boys, she turns a beach into a
veritable IKEA--tables, chairs, and a four-poster bed litter the sandy
stretch, as do home appliances of every size and kind.  As the grandma buys
something new, she removes a knotted reminder from one of her fingers yet
by the time she's done, there's still one red ribbon left.  Even though she
asks a number of the boys if they would like to be her son, she cannot
remember what the final ribbon represents.
        In this way, all three stories are rather unsubtle in their presentation
of the underlying themes of the restrictions placed on women in Iranian
society.  While Hava's tale is slow and uninvolving, the second story is,
perhaps, the most interesting culturally but its significance is hampered
by the repetitive nature of the race itself and the conflicts it generates.
 In the film's closing segment, Meshkini mostly gets it right with a nice
balance between poignancy and humor.  The film is short--a mere 74
minutes--but the bicycle race sequence in particular drags it out for much
longer (or so it seems).
        Although certainly pretty to look at--all three stories take place
alongside the mint green Persian Gulf--"The Day I Became a Woman" is not
wholly successful, but it does have enough intriguing elements to warrant a
viewing.  Hang in there and stay until the end, though.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Steve Rhodes
Marzieh Meshkini's THE DAY I BECAME A WOMAN (ROOZI KHE ZAN SHODAM) tells 
three short stories, the first touching, the second tragic and the third 
comedic, after which they are briefly brought together.  These simple 
episodes are all admirable but rarely engaging.  And, although the movie 
comes in at a mere 78 minutes, 10 would have sufficed.  After about 3 
minutes, each of the stories has made its rather straightforward point 
quite gracefully.  The next 20 minutes of each adds little other than 
needless reinforcement.
The first story concerns a 9-year-old girl named Hava (Fatemeh Cherag 
Akhar) who is about to lose her freedom and her childhood.  At that age, 
she is required to always be covered in a chador and not play with male 
friends anymore.  Using a stick as a crude sundial to tell when the 
dreaded hour of noon arrives, which will signal the end of her youth, 
she tries her best to enjoy the time she has left.  
The second story, which might be called "Pedal Ahoo Pedal," has Ahoo 
(Shabnam Toloui) in a bicycle race.  As she burns up the road, her 
husband rides alongside her on horseback, divorcing her on the spot with 
the help of a mullah who rides along on another horse.  The mullah, in 
the story's only memorable line, calls her bicycle, "the devil's mount."  
Toloui's acting is exquisite, showing her pain and determination with 
eye expressions alone.
The last story is about a senile grandmother (Azizeh Sedighi) who takes 
a large inheritance and goes on a big shopping spree.  Everything from a 
refrigerator to a bed, all in crates, follows her wheelchair like a 
Werner Herzog designed caravan.  
It's always hard understanding someone else's religion, but the images 
shown of Islam in this picture give one a feeling of sad repression.  
And it is the images alone that stay with you after this film is over.
THE DAY I BECAME A WOMAN runs a surprisingly long feeling 1:17.  The 
film is in Farsi with English subtitles.  It is not rated but would 
probably be a G since there isn't anything offensive.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Marzieh Meshkini's THE DAY I BECAME A WOMAN (ROOZI KHE ZAN SHODAM) tells 
three short stories, the first touching, the second tragic and the third 
comedic, after which they are briefly brought together.  These simple 
episodes are all admirable but rarely engaging.  And, although the movie 
comes in at a mere 78 minutes, 10 would have sufficed.  After about 3 
minutes, each of the stories has made its rather straightforward point 
quite gracefully.  The next 20 minutes of each adds little other than 
needless reinforcement.
The first story concerns a 9-year-old girl named Hava (Fatemeh Cherag 
Akhar) who is about to lose her freedom and her childhood.  At that age, 
she is required to always be covered in a chador and not play with male 
friends anymore.  Using a stick as a crude sundial to tell when the 
dreaded hour of noon arrives, which will signal the end of her youth, 
she tries her best to enjoy the time she has left.  
The second story, which might be called "Pedal Ahoo Pedal," has Ahoo 
(Shabnam Toloui) in a bicycle race.  As she burns up the road, her 
husband rides alongside her on horseback, divorcing her on the spot with 
the help of a mullah who rides along on another horse.  The mullah, in 
the story's only memorable line, calls her bicycle, "the devil's mount."  
Toloui's acting is exquisite, showing her pain and determination with 
eye expressions alone.
The last story is about a senile grandmother (Azizeh Sedighi) who takes 
a large inheritance and goes on a big shopping spree.  Everything from a 
refrigerator to a bed, all in crates, follows her wheelchair like a 
Werner Herzog designed caravan.  
It's always hard understanding someone else's religion, but the images 
shown of Islam in this picture give one a feeling of sad repression.  
And it is the images alone that stay with you after this film is over.
THE DAY I BECAME A WOMAN runs a surprisingly long feeling 1:17.  The 
film is in Farsi with English subtitles.  It is not rated but would 
probably be a G since there isn't anything offensive.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Christopher Null
A movie called The Day I Became a Woman can only be about one of two
things.  Either it's going to star a young girl who is coming of age or
a guy who's getting a sex change operation.
Surprise, on this Day we get three (genuine) women all going through
various life experiences.  They can be nearly meaningless -- a nine year
old girl is given one hour to play on the morning of her birthday.  They
can mean the end of life as you know it -- a married woman is verbally
divorced by her husband when she refuses to stop riding her beloved
bicycle.  And they can be perplexingly final -- a very old lady spends
her life savings on all new appliances, sets them up on a beach, and
then puts them all on rafts as she sets sail for a boat that doesn't
exist.
Needless to say, we don't normally see stuff like this coming out of
Hollywood; The Day I Became a Woman is an Iranian film directed by
Marzieh Meshkini, 74 slight minutes told in three miniscule vignettes.
Now, most of us (myself included) typically stow the phrases "Iranian
cinema" and "rollicking good time" in totally different parts of our
brains.  Personally, the plodding pace and overblown self-importance of
Middle Eastern films (see also A Time for Drunken Horses) typically numb
me into a depressed coma.  But The Day I Became a Woman stands out as a
reasonably intriguing film -- enlightening us about the life of the
modern Iranian while not pretending to be so significant that the very
earth will shake thanks to its creation.  Along with A Taste of Cherry,
another recent Iranian import, there appears to be some filmic promise
coming out of this war-torn country after all.  Not that Michael Bay has
anything to worry about.
Director: Marzieh Meshkini
Producer: Mohsen Makhmalbaf
Writer: Mohsen Makhmalbaf, Marzieh Meshkini
Starring: Fatemeh Cherag Akhar, Shabnam Toloui, Azizeh Sedighi, Hassan
Nebhan, Sirous Kahvarinegad, Badr Iravani
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 DAY I BECAME A WOMAN, THE (ROOZI KHE ZAN SHODAM) (director/writer:
 Marzieh Meshkini; screenwriter: Mohsen Makhmalbaf; cinematographers:
 Ebrahim Ghafoori/Mohammad Ahmadi; editors: Shahrzad Poya/Maysam
 Makhmalbaf; cast: Fatemeh Cheragh Akhtar (Girl, Hava), Hassan Nabehan
 (Boy, Hassan), Shahrbanou Sisizadeh (Mother), Ameneh Pasand
 (Grandmother), Shabnam Toloui (Woman, Ahoo), Cyrus Kahouri Nejad
 (Husband), Mahram Zeinal Zadeh (Osman), Nourieh Mahiguirian (Rival
 Cyclist), Azizeh Seddighi (Old Woman, Houra), Badr Irouni Nejad (Young
 Boy); Runtime: 78; Shooting Gallery; 2000)
In Marzieh Meshkini's beautiful Iranian film set on Kish Island, in
southern Iran, "The Day I Became a Woman," there are three interlinking
stories (allegories) about the three different stages of a woman's life
(childhood, young womanhood, an old age). In the first story entitled
Hava (Akhtar-Hava is Persian for Eve), a girl of nine reluctantly
becomes a woman and must from now on wear a chador (shawl) in public and
can't play alone with boys anymore. The first part of the film is
grounded in reality, telling about the child's hardship of so suddenly
losing her innocence. In the second story entitled Ahoo (Toloui-Ahoo is
Persian for deer), a wife in her twenties would rather be divorced than
stay married to her domineering husband. This story is very colorfully
photographed and has very little dialogue. The final story is surreal
and is very comical. It is entitled Houra (Seddighi-Houra is Persian for
nymph), and she's a widow, probably, in her eighties, who has just
inherited a lot of money and can buy whatever she wants for the first
time in her life. The beach and the seaside is an integral setting for
each of the stories. It should also be noted that all the heroines are
determined to get what they want but the first two are not in a position
to win their fight; but, it is only Ahoo who is forced physically to
accept her fate by men.
Marzieh Meshkini is the wife of noted Iranian film director Mohsen
Makhmalbaf. He served as the film's screenwriter. The three stories
reflect how women suffer from repression because of the strict
observance of Muslim law. In the third story when a woman finally has
gained her freedom, she doesn't know what to intelligently do with her
newly found freedom as she becomes overwhelmed with consumerism. Her
freedom comes too late for her. Even though they are different women
depicted, it might as well be the same woman because the film is a
metaphor for all Iranian women.
The first episode opens with the cute little girl Hava wanting to go
outside and play with her friend Hassan (Nabehan). Her mother
(Sisizadeh) and granny (Pasand) decide that since she was born at noon
and it is now 11 a.m., she could play for one more hour before putting
on her chador. To know the exact time they give the girl a stick and
tell her to put it in the sand, and when she can't see the stick's
shadow it is time to come home. Just before her time is up, she shares a
lollipop with Hassan. Strangely enough, the Iranian censors wanted the
director to cut this part because they found it too erotic. They had no
other objections to the film.
In the second episode Ahoo, with a number of other women, is in a bike
race on a bicycle path (the only one in Iran where women are allowed to
ride) -- with the Persian Gulf to their side; all the women are wearing
their black chadors and full black dresses. Her frantic husband comes by
on a horse and insists she quit the race. He says if she doesn't, he
will divorce her. When she continues racing the Mullah who introduced
her to her husband and married her, rides by her on his horse to urge
her to obey her husband. He tells her she is riding on "the devil's
mount." When this also fails to stop her from pedaling furiously on,
members of her tribe on horseback yell out to tell her how she has
disgraced their family. She is finally stopped by her two brothers, who
are also on horseback. They take her bike; but, we do not know if she
takes another rider's bike and continues on or if she was forced to
stop. We know exactly how she feels and how determined she is not to be
bullied by them, as we clearly see her animated facial expressions. In
any case, it is evident from this episode that a divorce can be attained
quite easily by a man.
In the last episode the elderly widow Houra gets off the airplane and is
placed in a wheelchair, where a young black boy wheels her to the
bazaar. On her fingers she has tied on different colored strings so she
can remember all the items she wants. She goes on a shopping spree and
purchases everything she always wanted to have in her house: a modern
stove, a refrigerator, a kitchen table, a sofa, a new bed, and so. Her
main problem is that she has forgotten what the red string is for, and
hesitates to leave without trying to figure out what she has forgotten
to purchase. A group of boys wheel the stuff to the beach in a parade
from the bazaar and deposit it on the beach. When she returns to the
store to return a tea kettle, the boys fool around with her goods. On
her return from the bazaar she has the boys load it onto rafts to take
it to a boat out at sea, where she will return home to feed her rooster
(that was her other main concern). Because of her age she doesn't have
to wear the chador anymore. But this freedom has come too late, she has
lost her beauty and offers no more temptations to the men. Hava can be
seen in the last shot of the film wearing her chador, as she has
returned to the beach to watch the old lady departing Kish. Perhaps
there can be detected a knowing look in her eyes of what the future
holds for her.
This is an irresistible film. I ate it up as quickly as I used to lick
an ice cream cone when I was a kid. You can learn more about Iran from
watching a movie like this one than you can by following the news
stories reported by the media.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE DAY I BECAME A WOMAN (Roozi khe zn shodam)
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Shooting Gallery
 Director: Marzieh Meshkini
 Writer:  Mohsen Makmalbaf
 Cast: Fatemeh Cherag Akhar, Shabnam Toloui, Azizeh
Sedighi, Hassan Nebhan, Sirous Kahvarinegad, Badr Iravani
   As I stated in a recent review, Joan Baez--hardly a woman
to stay at home--used to love to sing Marty Tipton's lyrics to
an Appalachian folk song during the seventies: "Hard is the
fortune of all womankind,/ She's always controlled, she's
always confined,/ Controlled by her parents until she's a
wife,/ A slave to her husband for the rest of her life." 
Evidently she had not see the movie "Heartbreakers,"
definitive proof that women are the stronger gender.  But if
Ms. Baez wants confirmation of her theory, she need only go
today to Iran where she would find the fair sex treated only
slightly better than its counterparts in Afghanistan.
  In the vision of director Marzieh Meshkini--whose husband,
Mohsen Makmalbaf wrote the strikingly realized script--
women in Iran have every right to be appalled by their
treatment.  While the film does not bring out the Iranian
tradition that holds if your firstborn is a girl, you are consoled
with the thought, "May your next be a boy," "The Day I
Became a Woman" makes one thing clear through Ebraheem
Gahfouri and Shahrzad Pouya's photography on the touristic
island of Kish.  Hard is the fortune of all (Iranian) womankind. 
"The Day" is a trilogy, its loose connection becoming clear
only in the final moments, featuring the same person as a
nine-year-old girl, as a married twenty-something, and finally
as a very old woman.  While their names are different, they
are metaphorically the same person: Havva, or Eve
dominates the first segment as the woman who, like her Old
Testament counterpart, loses her freedom; Ahoo (Gazelle),
like the fleet-footed quadraped, attempts to regain her
independence; and Houra (Black-Eyed Beauty), now in her
eighties, looks back forlornly on her unemancipated life and
tries without much hope to make up for seven futile decades.
   In Episode One, Havva (Fatemeh Cheragh Akhtar--who is
like almost all of Ms. Meshkini's characters a non-
professional performer)--has awakened on her ninth birthday,
which is not the happy affair enjoyed by most American girls
her age.  She has just become a woman, according to her
grandmother (Ameneh Passand) and mother (Shahr Banou
Sisizadeh) and is therefore no longer allowed to play with her
boy friend (Hassan Nabehan).  In fact she must now cover
her head with a chador, the traditional Iranian garb (in much
the way that an Orthodox Jewish boy after his Bar Mitzvah
must now drape himself with a tallis).  But it's 11 a.m. and
her mom allows one final hour of childhood since she was
born at noon, so Eve takes a stick to measure the sun's
shadow on the beach and goes off to share a lollipop with the
boy.
  In Episode Two, Ahoo (Shabnam Toloui) is engaged in a
bike race across the only area that women are allowed to ride
what some men call The Devil's Mount--a bike path along the
Kish oceanfront.  She is chased first by her husband (Cyrus
Kahouri Nejad), then by the local religious leader, and finally
by a bunch of guys who belong to her clan.  The men advise
her to get off the bike and go home--that she is disgracing
the family name.  Should she refuse, the husband will divorce
her on the spot--and believe it or not, it is much much easier
for a man to get a divorce in Iran than it is for an American in
any state of the union.
  In the final episode--which features the most surreal,
Felliniesque scene I've seen in any modern Iranian picture--
an old woman (Azizeh Seddighi) has come into some money
and is off on a shopping spree, having hired a kid (Badr
Irouni Nejad) to push her wheelchair around an amazingly
slick and modern bazaar on the island.  She assembles a
refrigerator, washing machine, and some furniture on the
beach for transport into the sea.  In this metaphoric finale,
the nine-year-old Eve, now transformed into a crone, sees
her life as one of quiet desperation.  She is looked upon as
men look upon all women in Iran--as fit consumers but not as
producers.  (In fact in a splendid case of life's reflecting art
and vice versa, filmmaker Meshkini has stated in interviews
that the life of a female director is not easy--that a woman
must work overtime to gain the respect and confidence of the
male crew).
   The movie faced a strange irony in its creation.  The nine-
man censorship board seems to have had no problem
approving the movie's motif, which is the desperation of
women, arguing only about the sucking of the lollipop by two
nine-year-olds in the opening segment.  Too erotic!  While
many viewers consider the second episode the best, the most
heartbreaking, I'd vote for the third with its remarkable sense
of whimsy.  The scene of Black-Eyed Beauty loaded with
consumer goods on the beach while the boys "plug in" the
washing machine and refrigerator to clean their clothes and
drink the sodas--a knockout!  But then, so is this entire work. 
Seems that the best films nowadays are coming out of that
beguiling Near Eastern country, paradoxically labeled a rogue
nation by the U.S. yet giving rise to artists who are so
talented, so subtle, so deeply explorative of the human
condition.
   As I was leaving the screening room I overheard a woman
say to her male friend, "Isn't it weird that the women's
liberation movement [I think she meant the most recent
example that began during the 1970s] began in the U.S. and
France, where women were already the most liberated in the
world?"  "Not at all," I would have told her if I felt like
intruding.  Revolutions begins when people see possibilities. 
When a group are completely repressed, you don't have a
liberation movement.  I believe Iran today, given the election
four years ago of a so-called moderate president (reasonable,
that is, in comparison with the fanatical mullahs, or religious
leaders), offers real hope for women.  The mere existence of
"The Day I Became a Woman" is evidence.
Rated R.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
