Title
Review for Water and Power (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A fusion of nature and city images, interwoven with special effects created by
optical printing, animation, and time-lapse photography.  Sort of a special
effects KOYAANISQATSI, but different in tone and style.
     This non-narrative film evolved over a period of approximately ten years;
it was not planned.  The creator of this unique film, Pat O'Neill, is a Los
Angeles based filmmaker specializing in special effects, especially optical
printing [used extensively in this film].
     The film consists of sequences of images: nature, city, and people.  Most
of the nature scenes were filmed in Mono County, California, where there is a
large lake that was drained by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power
(source of the title of the film).  The city scenes are from Los Angeles, and
include time-lapse scenes as used in KOYAANISQATSI.  Many of the people scenes
were staged for the film.
     Interspersed among the images are stories, some of which you read, others
you hear, and some are acted out.  Optical printing is used to overlay one
image on another, one story on another.  Animation and computer graphics are
also used, and are interfaced with optically printed images for some
interesting and striking effects.
     Much of the filming was done with a computer-controlled camera, "animation
style" (in the words of the Director).  This has a number of side effects.
Some scenes are really striking; others are so fast as to nearly overwhelm the
viewer!
     Some of the stories, and some of the animation, reflect a subtle sense of
humor.  The film also includes (in optical printing overlays) sections of old
silent films.  It's strange, but somehow they don't seem out of place amidst
all the special effects.
     Despite the lack of a narrative, the film holds your interest well.  It's
all a bit weird, and non-commercial, but worth seeing if you have any interest
in special effects.  Also, if you liked KOYAANISQATSI or CHRONOS (two non-
narrative films), you will probably find this to be interesting.
Distribution:  This film is currently in its world theatrical premiere.  Next
theatrical showing is 9/21 at the Roxie Cinema in San Francisco.  It has been
selected for the New York Film Festival (next month), and the Berlin Film
Festival (Feb. 1990).
Reviewer:  Thomas E. Billings, Department of Statistics
           University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
