Title
Review for Untamed Heart (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
     Caroline (Marisa Tomei) is a waitress at a diner who lives with her
parents and constantly gets dumped by her boyfriends.  Adam (Christian 
Slater) is a loner who works as a busboy at the same place.  As a child,
he was an orphan with a bad heart, a condition which has not improved 
with time.  The two are brought together when Adam saves Caroline from 
a pair of rapists.  Together, they form a bond and must fight to keep
their love alive despite overwhelming pressure from almost every
direction.
     Get out the Kleenexes and violins.  If there's a method of audience
manipulation that UNTAMED HEART misses, it would surprise me.  This is 
melodrama of the worst kind.  It goes straight for the heart without
bothering to consider that the people watching it might actually have
brains.  The best single word to describe this movie is schmaltz.
     It wouldn't be so bad if the manipulation was skillful.  After all,
that's what most tear-jerkers are - films that play upon the emotions.
Unfortunately, UNTAMED HEART is saddled with heavy-handed direction and
a script that should have been thrown into the garbage.  Its moments of
"great emotional power" are more likely to have audience members
grimacing than getting misty-eyed.
     The dialogue is embarrassing too.  The people in this movie say
some of the dumbest things.  If I met someone who was spewing this kind
of nonsense, it would be difficult for me to keep from breaking into
fits of uncontrolled laughter.  Sometimes, I think screenwriters should
sit back and think about lines before they commit them to paper.  If
the intent had been to parody bad melodramas, the dialogue in UNTAMED
HEART would have been brilliant.  However, this is supposed to be a
serious film.
     The casting is curious.  Christian Slater may be one of the more
versatile actors in his age bracket, but he is horribly miscast here.
For whatever reason, he never gets a handle on Adam.  Most of the time,
his performance is rigid - there are moments when it seems that rigor
mortis has set in.  On those rare occasions when he relaxes and does a
little bit of acting, it becomes jarringly apparent how poor he is in
the rest of the movie.  For someone who has made his reputation playing
cocky, somewhat obnoxious characters, a role requiring subtlety is
clearly beyond his grasp.
     Discussing Marisa Tomei's performance is more difficult.  She's an
actress with an abundance of energy and spunk, and it shines through
even in this dreary little film.  She possesses a tremendous ability to
use facial expressions to convey emotions - a pout, a smile, a widening
of the eyes.  Despite those physical tools, however, she's not
particularly good here.  The reason is simple: she can't do dialogue,
at least not in a serious or believable manner.  Admittedly, most of
her lines are trite or silly, but that's not a valid excuse.  Her whiny
voice is only occasionally capable of saying things that sound
heartfelt.  After viewing Ms. Tomei's standout performance in MY
COUSIN VINNY, I had high hopes for her in this movie.  Now I think she
would do better to stick to comedy, where she seems better suited.
     Then there's the issue of chemistry.  In romances, this is a
critical element, and it's completely absent here.  Of course, it
doesn't help that both of the main characters are flat, but the actors
don't connect either.  This is another example of where more
appropriate casting might have produced a marginally better film,
although the performances of Slater and Tomei are clearly not the 
fundamental problem with UNTAMED HEART.
     At the outset, I thought this film was going to be a FRANKIE AND
JOHNNY for a younger crowd.  While the Pacino/Pfeiffer outing isn't my
favorite film, it has a few things to recommend it.  Too bad the same
can't be said for UNTAMED HEART.  Unless you're a fan of Slater or
Tomei, or hopelessly addicted to sappy, ineptly-handled love stories, I
would be hard pressed to come up with any reason to see this movie.  
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Hollywood filmmakers in 1990s missed plenty of opportunities
for truly great films when they decided to stick to the
formula and simplify plots and characters as much as
possible. However, there are some occasions when simplicity
can be a virtue, and when attempts to spice up films for the
sake of originality can be counterproductive. One of
examples of simplicity that works could be found in UNTAMED
HEART, 1993 melodrama directed by Tony Bill.
The protagonist of the film is Caroline (played by Marisa
Tomei), waitress in Minneapolis diner. She is beautiful
young woman, but her search for "Mr. Right" is fruitless -
each of her romantic relationships ends with disappointment.
One night, on her way home, she gets attacked by rapists,
but Adam (played by Christian Slater), her introverted
colleague, comes to the rescue. This incident marks the
beginning of the romantic liaison between Caroline and her
rescuer. Two of them are very happy, but one thing casts a
shadow on their bliss - Adam was born with a heart disease
and his condition can be fatal unless he gets another heart.
Adam nevertheless refuses to go to surgery, convinced that
his heart is part of his identity.
At first glance, Tom Sierchio's melodramatic script looks
terribly old-fashioned and almost ridiculous in its attempts
to manipulate viewers' feelings. However, two things rescue
UNTAMED HEART from turning into disaster. One of them is
blue collar setting of Minneapolis - it represents something
of a refreshment compared to the majority of similar films
that usually take place in New York or Los Angeles; and it
also brings realism necessary for us to forget that we are
being manipulated. The other great asset of this film is in
the cast. Marisa Tomei excels in the role so different from
the one that brought her "Oscar" in MY COUSIN VINNY, while
Christian Slater obviously works very hard in order to show
people that he can play shy, introvert and almost retarded
people - so different from the characters that brought him
fame. Because of that and Tony Bill's professional
direction, UNTAMED HEART is a nice example of Hollywood
craftsmanship that could be recommended to audience hungry
for good old tearjerkers in these cynical times.
Review written on September 29th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Steve Rhodes
     UNTAMED HEART (1993) is a wonderful and truly magical film.  It
has two extremely strong and compelling performances by the leads, and
is a film that makes you realize the joy of the human existence and
especially the rapture of love.  Unless your taste run to believing the
Scrooge's of life, I find it hard to believe that you will not be as
charmed by this show as was I.
     Christian Slater plays Adam in the best piece of acting is his
career.  It is so imaginative and risk taking that I wish he had at
least gotten an Academy Award nomination for it.  It is a brilliant
piece of acting.  Adam is someone who is either very shy, has a low IQ,
or both.  Then again, perhaps it all stems from his weak heart which he
believes he got in the jungle from a baboon king.  He relates his story
in such a slow and serious way that you begin to think, well maybe.
     Adam works as a busboy in a diner with waitresses Caroline (Marisa
Tomei) and Cindy (Rosie Perez).  At first they think he is nuts and
stay away from him.  Eventually Caroline becomes attracted to him, and
they have a beautiful romance.  Their love making ranks among the
slowest, sweetest, and most natural I have ever seen on the screen.
The romance is more than just sex.  It includes many magical gifts like
making Christmas trees that appear overnight in the Caroline's bedroom.
     The direction by Tony Bill and the script by Tom Sierchio floats
on a cloud.  The movie works in all dimensions, but the scenes between
Adam and Caroline are pure bliss.  The cinematography by Jost Vacano
and the sets by Steven Jordan do a wonderful job of providing reverence
to lower class housing, jobs, and existence.
     Other than watching the great and natural charisma between the two
leads, the delight in the show is the little surprises in the plot, and
there are many.  The plot has several tragedies in it, and some may
object that it is too manipulative, but, I thought every moment of it
worked, right down to the ending.
     UNTAMED HEART breezes through at only 1:38 thanks to beautiful and
seamless editing by Mia Goldman.  The film is rated PG-13 for violence,
preliminary sex, and brief nudity.  Since the little violence the film
has is realistic and a bit frightening, I would say the film would be
fine for any kid over say 10.  I loved this movie and think you will
too so I give it a strong recommendation and award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jon Ridge
     To begin this review, I must say that I did not want to see this
film.  The romantic-love-heart-ache genre in cinema has grown a bit
outdated in recent years, and basically I've become quite disillusioned
with the whole concept.  But, a funny thing happened while I sat down
to watch UNTAMED HEART--I found myself completely drawn into its world,
and the private lives of its characters.  I was pulled in, held--and as
soon as the lights in the theater were turned on again I felt as if a
part of me had been torn away from me.
     The story is simple:  Two lonely people fall in love.  Sounds just
like every other love story you've ever seen on film.  Where this one
differs, however, is that you really care about these people.  His name
is Adam.  Adam is an odd, reclusive young man who doesn't like to talk
a lot and isn't very good with people.  It seems as though he has
embodied a rather unhealthy heart since birth, and believes the story
about it that a nun told him at the orphanage where he was raised.
Adam has just one wish:  To love and be loved by a pretty young
waitress, with whom he works at an all-night diner in Minneapolis,
named Caroline.  Caroline is on a constant lookout for love, but she's
been dumped more times than she or anyone else can count.  Nobody wants
to be with her... except for Adam.  The only problem is that Caroline
hasn't given Adam much thought.  She thinks he's just plain weird.
Then, one night as she is walking home alone through the park, Caroline
is attacked by two men.  At her rescue is, of course, Adam.  He fights
both men off, and then carries an unconscious Caroline home.  He lays
her down in the swing on her front porch, covers her with his overcoat
and sits on the steps, keeping a constant watch on Caroline while she
sleeps.  She awakens ready to fight, but there's no need; no words are
spoken between her and Adam, and he runs away.
     They later meet at passing in a shopping mall.  He touches her
hand, and that's all.  You see, Caroline doesn't know what to say to
Adam or how to approach him.  She's always thought of him as a strange
part of life that she'd rather not get to know.  Nonetheless, Caroline
gets up the courage one night at work to finally thank Adam ... with a
kiss.  So begins their relationship.
     As I have said, this is a cut above other romance movies--a huge
cut above.  The characters are real people, not cookie-cutter, factory
outlet, assembly line characters.  These characters live on the screen,
and you feel all the time you spend watching this film that you are
intruding on their lives, or listening in.  That is the type realism
most film- makers strive for and fail miserably at capturing.  The per-
formances are absolutely indelible.  Christian Slater has never been
any better than he is here.  In the majority of his prior work, Slater
has pretty much hidden behind some sort of mask-- whether it be Jack
Nicholson, or whatever.  Here, he has nothing to hide behind.  As a
result, his work in this film is touching, endearing, subtly eloquent
and very moving.  This is not just a pretty face anymore; this is the
most competent actor working in film today.
     I'm afraid, however, that all credit for the success of this film
must go to Marisa Tomei.  She makes up the heart and soul of this film
with a performance that is as sweet and sensitive, as it is altogether
sexy.  Tomei is the most vibrant young face to grace the screen in
years, and she brings a great deal of freshness to the role of the
"love interest."  These two actors have wonderful chemistry on-screen--
they really do look great together.  All their scenes together can be
class- ified as love scenes, and each of them is a small gem.  Director
Tony Bill does a good job of erasing most of the grit of Tom Sierchio's
poignant script, and Cliff Eidelman skillfully captures the light,
exuberantly sweet tone of the film.  Put all these elements together,
and you have a truly involving and engaging movie.  UNTAMED HEART is
the best film of this, or any other, year.  See it, cry, and feel good
about life.
1993 -- 1:42m -- Rated PG-13, for mild Violence
