Title
Review for Spawn (1997)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Jesse Kaplan
SPAWN        A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan
Cast:  Michael Jai White, John Leguizamo, Martin Sheen, Theresa Randle,
Mindy Clarke
Directed By mark A.Z. Dippe
So many movies are coming out now from former comic books and change
much so they can appeal to the general public who are not as familiar
with the stories.  SPAWN is no exception to this, the problem here is
that the plot, the directing, the effects, and the acting are so poor
that anyone even remotely interested in the movie will lose that slight
bit of interest 25 minutes into it.
        The plot deals with an assassinated hitman Al Simmons, (White)
who dies, makes a deal with the devil to lead his armies to taking over
the world in exchange for seeing his fiancee Wanda (Randle).  Violator
(Leguizamo), who looks like a cross between a constipated Danny Devito
and Chris Farley on a bad hair day, is there to make sure Simmons, now
called Spawn, lives up to his end of the deal, which includes killing
global kingpin Jason Wynn (Sheen) who is going to blow up the world if
he dies by a deal made with the Violator.
Yawn!! Who cares.  Leguizamo gives a horrendous and annoying
performance here, Sheen looks bored even though he couldn't be in a
better picture, and White doesn't have much to do as Spawn, as the
costume and effects on him steal the spotlight.
        Most of the effects in this movie, which were so anticipated and
talked up, look like you're playing Doom II on a 3DO system, its
completely computer and looks it, so the scenes of hell are ridiculous
and unrealistic.  This is another movie, such as TWISTER and
INDEPENDENCE DAY, where the plot and storyline are simply there to back
up the Special Effects, which can not and will not make a movie.
        The only positives I enjoyed from SPAWN are Mindy Clarke, not
for her acting but for some other features (nice rubber) and the special
effects on Spawn himself.
        I give this movie a single star * and do not recommend it to
anyone, there are much better movies out worth seeing.  AIR FORCE ONE,
anyone?
Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net    Jesse A. Kaplan

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
        I like comic books, and occasionally that causes problems.  The prob-
lem these days is that the affection leads me to see movies that most people can
see coming for miles.  They hide in concrete bunkers until the danger has pass-
ed, and see films that are more worthwhile.  How can you say that, you say.
There's plenty of movies out there, and there's probably plenty that are an
equivalent theft of two hours.
        "Spawn" starts out as a low-grade blend of "Darkman" and "The Crow",
and goes downhill rapidly from that modest goal.  I've rarely seen a movie 
with as much exposition as "Spawn" has, and yet almost NOTHING makes any sense.
"Spawn" seems to be the story of Al Simmonds, some sort of hired gun working 
for some sort of CIA variant.  The group assassinates political enemies of the 
U.S. in elaborate, supposedly covert ways that require a lot of special ef-
fects.  Well, Al being the Caring Family Guy that he is, can't take his job any
more, and wants out.  No way, says group leader Jason (Martin Sheen, sadly),
well, all right -- as long as you do this One Last Job for us.  Well, all
right, says Al, and being the Good Team Member that he is, goes out to blow up
a chemical weapons plant with agent Priest (Mindy Clarke, who is costumed dif-
ferently than everyone else in the film) smirking portenteously in the back-
ground.
        Of course, it's a double cross, and Jason blows up the plant with Al
still in it (though he and Priest are there too, so I don't know how they es-
caped meeting the same fate).  Al dies, and is sent to some place that I still
don't understand -- a set that's clearly been lifted from "Blade Runner" -- 
that isn't Hell, or Earth, either.  Here he meets Count Cogliostro (Nicol Will-
iamson, even more sadly) and The Violator (John Leguizamo), his Hellmates who
attempt to fill us in on why all this is happening.  Seems that the Violator is
playing both Al/now Spawn and Jason for suckers -- he's trying to wipe out ev-
eryone on Earth using greedy Jason's plans for power through his chemical 
weapon devices, and enlist Al/Spawn (using Al's devotion to his wife as lev-
erage) to lead his army of the newly-dead to storm the pearly gates once the
Earth is destroyed.  Of course, the Violator is the right hand man for ol'
Scratch himself, so this is a Conflict of Epic Proportions Between Good and 
Evil.  Spawn is given a CG glop suit that can do lots of cool things, but it's
never clear what the limits of it are, and the Count doesn't even get around to
telling him (or us) about it 'til well past the halfway mark.
        Most of the first half is flashbacks, and that gets redundant fast.
The middle is Spawn coming to terms with his angst, and learning a little about
what's going on -- he has a run-in with Jason and Priest, who despite being set
up a some sort of awesome assassin, is dispatched by Spawn in his first appear-
ance almost immediately.  She doesn't come back as an undead superhero, like 
Al.  She's just dead.  Of course, to say that "Spawn" is target marketed as a
"guy thing" is something of an understatement.  The rest of the film deals with
him rebelling against his manipulators.  If there is a message to "Spawn", it
might be that we all are in control of our destinies, which isn't bad, but the
amount of violence required to present it renders it somewhat ineffective.
The Violator can turn into some sort of monster that intially seems pretty
threatening, but winds up getting dispatched (after much frenetic editing) by
getting its head chopped off.  Well, not really -- it's just sort of killed in
that sequel-promising way.  The Devil is not only incapable of stopping Spawn
from doing anything, it can't even move its mouth to its own dialogue.  Most
of the effects here aren't all that good, but the Devil (ostensibly a potential
effects higlight) is particularly lackluster.  There are a few decent shots in-
volving Spawn's prehensile chains and cape, and some effective wallcrawling 
shots, but the editing weakens even these.  Heck, half the time Spawn isn't ev-
en masked.  The Violator has a few passable lines out of hundreds.  The pro-
duction design is derivative, and Graeme Revell's score goes for moody goth --
some Danny Elfman energy would have been welcome here.  Even the credit sequence
is reminiscent of "Seven".  It's difficult to imagine anyone, even fans of the
comic, enjoying this.  But then, "Heavy Metal" has been inflated to cult sta-
tus, so who knows?  Aggressive aversion recommended.

Author
Justin K. Siegel
Hey, I'm a hip guy; I like comics. How come I didn't like this movie? It could have 
something to do with the fact that I don't like Todd McFarlane's comic of the same name, 
on which the movie is based. SPAWN is a gorgeous-looking, but intellectually numb 
science-fiction soon-to-be-cult film that, like all dark, dank, depressing action-films, 
contains balsa-wood acting, a script thay would earn the writer a C- on any 10th Grade 
creative writing assignment, and about a gazillion dollars worth of special-effects.
What do I _really_ think og this movie? That's a mystery, even to me. While I enjoying 
looking at it, I was bored with the storyline.
Michael Jai White plays Al Simmons, a trained assassin who, after being set up in North 
Korea and burnt to a crisp by bad guy Martin Sheen, goes to hell. Then he comes back (?) 
as Spawn, a superhero. Albeit an ugly, badly scarred superhero with a bad additude. He is 
befriended by a sadistic little demon named Clown (John Leguizamo), who wants him to lead 
the Army of Darkness in a war against Heaven. The movie portrays Satan as an "overgrown 
Gecko," and he, uh, it, is the most interesting character in the movie (not to mention 
the best looking, although Theresa Randle, as Simmons' estranged wife, comes close).
As the plot plods along, Spawn's old wife (Randle), her new husband, and their daughter 
are all put in danger, and Spawn has to save them. Of course, Spawn doesn't die or turn 
back into Simmons or anything crazy like that, since there has to be a sequel, according 
to Law no. 442 in the Superhero Movie Code.
SPAWN runs long at only an hour and 34 minutes. I enjoyed looking at some of the 
eye-popping special effects the film has to offer, but, as far as plot, story, or 
character development goes, look elsewhere.

Author
Bill Chambers
starring John Leguizamo, Michael Jai White, Martin Sheen, D.B. Sweeney
screenplay by Alan McElroy, based on Todd McFarlane's comic books
directed by Mark A.Z. Dippe
The makers of Spawn have created something almost as vacuous as this
summer's other comic book adaptation, Batman and
Robin. Both films make the mistake of adapting for the screen not only
the
look of their graphic counterparts, but also their monosyllabic
dialogue and empty-headed
character motivations. In panel-sized morsels, implausible plots and
"Rambo"-esque
dialogue are often overshadowed by the artwork, but on thirty foot
silver screens, it's
much more difficult to dismiss the shallowness behind the pretty
pictures.
Spawn is ostensibly about an assassin named Simmons (White) who is
framed
by a corporate baddie (played without irony by Sheen), then set on
fire and left for dead.
Though the movie skimps on the next few plot points, here's what I
could determine: said
assassin then becomes the leader of Satan's army, under the tutelage
of a flatulating midget
named Clown (Leguizamo, grating as always). He is renamed, for reasons
unbeknownst,
Spawn, and granted a really cool costume that enables him to become
something of a
human chameleon. But when Spawn spies on a birthday party for his
child, he realizes that
he can't be the evil superdemon he's expected to be, and he sets about
avenging his
untimely death.
Typical of summer blockbusters, Spawn is an effects-laden ninety
minute rock
video. While the visions of hell are laughably crude (think the
virtual reality sequences of
The Lawnmower Man), Spawn's prehensile outfit and the action sequences
are truly something to behold. But the storytelling is completely
lacking in emotion
(Spawn longs for his wife, but they don't have a single scene together
before Simmons'
death!), conflict (who will triumph is not anybody's guess), and
believability (not that I
expected it). So many questions are left unanswered, and I'm sure they
won't be addressed
in the inevitable sequel.
While last year's The Crow: City of Angels
suffered similar problems with its narrative (which was lazy and
somewhat incoherent), it
had atmosphere to spare and genuine moments of hypnotic power. Spawn
is
an in-your-face, screaming banshee of a film; these guys know how to
graft a comic book
onto celluloid, but they haven't the faintest idea how to make a
movie.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Michael Jai White, John Leguizamo, Martin Sheen, Nicol Williamson,
D. B. Sweeney, Theresa Randle, Melinda Clarke Director: Mark A.Z. Dippe
Screenplay: Alan McElroy based on the comic book by Todd McFarlane
Satan's first choice to be the General of Hell's armies is a good guy
assassin who gets murdered. He sells his soul to Satan to see his wife
again and gets resurrected as "Spawn" the ultimate fighting machine
from Hell. All of a sudden, Spawn (Michael Jai White) decides he doesn't
want to be a bad guy after all and starts beating the crap out of all
the other bad guys. Wait a minute - didn't he just sell his soul to
Satan a moment ago? Fickle, fickle, fickle.
Satan's plans are entrusted to an old fart known as 'Clown' (John
Leguizzamo). The general whiff of things is to nuke the world with
biological weapons before Hell's armies invade. Clown's elaborate scheme
is to get an evil entrepreneur 'Wynn' (Martin Sheen) to murder Spawn;
put a pace maker in the heart of Wynn that will trigger the biological
bombs if he dies; then resurrect Spawn to murder Wynn thus ending the
world. A simple analogy to this is - buy a cat to murder a rat; then
resurrect the rat and make it bionic. Encourage the rat to murder the
cat with a specially implanted time bomb that will destroy the entire
cat population so the dogs from hell can take over. Now all we need is a
hat and we've got Dr Seuss.
The final battle in hell - Satan does nothing but holler and scream -
even I can do that. Clown is bigger and badder than Spawn, yet is
overlooked for the position of General of Hell's armies. Why bother with
silly little piffy bombs, just invade earth and get it over with - from
the look of things there are a lot of baddies down there. What does God
have to say about all of this? Why is Spawn called Spawn? Is there any
relevance to breeding? If so shouldn't there be a good guy of equivalent
power representing the good side, someone perhaps called 'Sperm'? Sperm
and Spawn the Heroes from Heaven and Hell carries a ring to it.
I hope the comic makes better sense that this movie - cause Spawn sure
smells like a carton of rotten eggs. The only thing that fascinated me
about the entire movie was my fixation with Spawn's crimson red, flowing
cloak. Now if someone can tell me where I can my hands on one of these,
and don't tell me Hell cause I have no intention of going there.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Jai White, John Leguizamo, Martin Sheen, Nicol Williamson, 
      D. B. Sweeney, Theresa Randle, Melinda Clarke
Director: Mark A.Z. Dippe
Producer: Clint Goldman
Screenplay: Alan McElroy based on the comic book by Todd McFarlane
Cinematography: Guillermo Navarro
Music: Graeme Revell
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     Anyone going to SPAWN who is unaware of the film's origins will 
quickly determine that this is the descendent of a comic book.  In 
addition to focusing on the exploits of a superhero (albeit an atypical 
one), SPAWN possesses the distinctive style and visual flair of a comic 
book-turned-motion picture (see THE CROW, BATMAN, and DARKMAN for other 
recent examples).  Unfortunately, where the movie falls apart is in the 
storyline.  While SPAWN fans may be delighted by this effort, the 
uninitiated may have a hard time getting beyond the fancy special 
effects and often-incoherent plot.  
     In a very palpable way, SPAWN is much like another of this summer's 
big budget releases, THE FIFTH ELEMENT.  Both movies belong in the 
"style over substance" category, both present interesting visual 
packages, and both are less than satisfying.  To succeed as a major 
motion picture, SPAWN has to appeal to those who do not regularly plunk 
down $2 for the comic book; this motion picture is a poor step in that 
direction.
     SPAWN's underlying premise is, at its most basic, a twist on Faust.  
Heaven and Hell are at war, and Satan is about to launch his latest 
campaign against the Pearly Gates.  To accomplish this, he intends to 
let loose his army of warriors on Earth to destroy the human race.  
While God and the Devil remain in their respective headquarters to watch 
the battle unfold, each sends a general to the front lines.  For the 
forces of darkness, it's a twisted gnome named Clown (John Leguizamo), 
and, for the other side, it's the distinguished knight Cogliostro (Nicol 
Williamson).  
     As outlandish as this background may sound, it wouldn't be that 
hard to accept if it fueled a strong story.  Unfortunately, SPAWN's plot 
isn't especially interesting or engrossing.  The film, helmed by first-
time director and former ILM veteran Mark Dippe, gets bogged down by 
digital effects, many of which appear a little too artificial.  These 
are the kinds of shots that look great on a computer screen, but aren't 
nearly as impressive in a movie theater (compare them to the fine work 
at the beginning of CONTACT).  In the end, a great deal more effort 
seems to have been put into the look of the film than into the story.
     Al Simmons (Michael Jai White) is a paid assassin, but when he 
begins to question his role in the corrupt business run by mogul Jason 
Wynn (Martin Sheen), his boss orders him killed.  Five years later, Al 
returns to Earth, literally a changed man, having made a deal with the 
Devil.  In exchange for an opportunity to once again gaze upon his 
beloved wife, Wanda (Theresa Randle), Al has agreed to become a creature 
named Spawn, and lead Hell's Army in the upcoming war.  But, before 
Spawn can begin his appointed task, Cogliostro finds him and stirs up 
the good that lies locked within his armor-encased body.  From that 
point on, SPAWN becomes as much about the war for control of Al's soul 
as about the external battle between good and evil.
     As disappointing as SPAWN will be to anyone expecting a strong 
story, there are a few things to like about the film.  First and 
foremost, the kinetic style disallows the possibility of boredom.  Then 
there's John Leguizamo's delightfully off the wall rendering of the 
wisecracking Clown, who looks and acts like a cross between Jim Carrey's 
Riddler and Jabba the Hut.  On the acting front, however, Leguizamo is 
the only standout.  Michael Jai White's performance as the lead 
character is hampered by his mask, makeup, and costume.  Martin Sheen, 
Theresa Randle, and D.B. Sweeney (as Al's best friend) are merely 
adequate in stock roles.  
     SPAWN's chief attraction is the moral ambiguity of the main 
character (the spawn of Hell fighting for humanity against the minions 
of his former master), which, according to New Line Cinema, lends 
Shakespearean overtones to the film (yeah, right).  What the studio 
fails to recognize, however, is that this sort of "dark hero" approach 
is nothing new.  DARKMAN and THE CROW have already explored it in some 
detail, while movies like BATMAN and THE SHADOW have embraced certain 
aspects of it .  In fact, an analysis of SPAWN reveals that this 
production is basically an amalgamation of scenes, setups, characters, 
and situations from other, often better motion pictures.  Essentially, 
SPAWN does for comic books what STARGATE did for science fiction:  it 
borrows liberally (or steals, depending on your perspective).  What 
works on the printed page does not necessarily translate well to the 
screen.  As a comic book, SPAWN may be first rate, but, as a movie, it's 
a retread.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Justin Felix
Screen Story by Alan McElroy and Mark A. Z. Dippe.  
Screenplay by Alan McElroy.  
Based on the comic book by Todd McFarlane.  
Directed by Mark A. Z. Dippe.  
Starring Michael Jai White, John Leguizamo, Martin Sheen.  
Rated PG-13 (contains violence and profanity)  93 mins.
Synopsis:  Al Simmons, top-notch assasin with a guilty conscience, dies in
a fiery explosion and goes to hell.  Making a pact with Malebolgia, a chief
demon there, Simmons returns to Earth 5 years later reborn as Spawn, a
general in Hell's army donning a necroplasmic costume replete with knives,
chains, and a morphing cape.  Sullen, wise Cogliostro and flatulating,
wisecracking Violator vy for Spawn's attention.  
Comments:  When Todd McFarlane left Marvel Comics (where he had made a name
for himself as a first-rate comic book penciller on the "Spider-Man"
titles) to join the newly-formed, creator-owned Image Comics, a new comic
book legend was born: Spawn.  McFarlane's "Spawn" immediately became a
commercial and critical success and a defining comic book series of the
1990s.  McFarlane created a hero who was not only original but visually
intricate, allowing McFarlane to utilize his knack for artistic detail to
the max.  The early "Spawn" issues brilliantly capture McFarlane's genius
at illustration and show his early attempts at writing.
With the popularity of "Spawn" and the success of the current Warner
Bros.'s BATMAN film franchise, a movie version of some sort seemed
inevitable for Spawn.  In the summer of 1997, hence, New Line Cinema
released SPAWN, a live-action film based on the groundbreaking series.
This topheavy exercise in violence and special effects unfortunately
topples quickly and leaves fans of the comic book, like me, numbed by how
much SPAWN misses the mark.
What happened?  Why is SPAWN so bad?  Todd McFarlane himself executive
produced this disappointing misfire and even appears in a cameo.  I don't
think, however, that his presence necessarily hurt (or helped) the film.  I
place the blame, in part, on the recent Hollywood trend, fueled by public
demand apparently, for special effects blow-out movies utilizing the latest
computer technology.  These films focus upon the effects at the expense of
everything else: character, plot, dialogue, etc.  SPAWN, reflecting this
trend, shows the audience one gratuitous scene after another populated with
morphing characters and filled with unnecessary pyrotechnics.  Hardly a
minute goes by in this film without fires, explosions, knives and chains
appearing out of nowhere, glowing eyes, or constantly transforming demons.
A lot of it is visually interesting and technically solid, don't get me
wrong, but, because the script and cast aren't engaging, SPAWN ultimately
comes across like overwrought wallpaper (the surface may capture the eye,
but nothing exists underneath).  
SPAWN's translation of the comic book suffers the most at the storyline
level.  McFarlane's Spawn was a tortured hero.  A mercenary by trade, Al
Simmons was nonetheless a warm man in love with the beautiful Wanda.
Having died and journeyed to Hell, he made a pact to return to Earth to be
with Wanda.  Simmons, however, discovers that his memories are fragmented,
his body a creepy mess, and his wife married.  Despite his sometimes
violent nature, readers couldn't help but feel sympathetic toward his
plight as the spawn of the underworld.  SPAWN attempts to show all of this
but does not spend nearly the time it should to do so.  When the characters
are developed, they seem absurd rather than touching.  The cartoonish
dialogue and implausible subplot (a general possesses the antidote to a
supervirus called Heat-16 which he wishes to unleash to enslave the world)
do not help matters.  
SPAWN, in an apparent attempt to duplicate the success of BATMAN, also
unwisely spends too much time on a villain, the Violator (BATMAN favored
the Joker over Batman).  John Leguizamo, like Jack Nicholson in BATMAN,
receives top billing in the cast as the Violator; Michael Jai White (Al
Simmons / Spawn) is second.  I ordinarily find Leguizamo an intensely
annoying presence in films which seems to make him a perfect candidate for
the Violator.  The film, however, spends so much time on the Violator's
offensive antics that they grate on the nerves.  Apparently meant to be the
comic relief in the film (as Nicholson was in BATMAN), especially when
contrasted with the sullen Spawn, the Violator's lines are oftentimes
grotesque and unfunny, leaving the audience wishing he would leave.
Leguizamo does a satisfactory job in the role, but he is seen far too often
in the film.  Michael Jai White, a relative newcomer to theatrical
releases, seems to be an appealing actor, and he handles his role
adequately, but we see little of him without various masks on.  More time
needed to be spent on White's character before he became Spawn for the
movie to pull at the heartstrings.
A special note should be made about Martin Sheen as the over-the-top,
obnoxious, evil General Wynn.  Easily the hammiest performance in the
movie, it's hard to imagine how Sheen mucked up his role so much; after
all, he played a Vietnam assasin brilliantly in the great APOCALYPSE NOW.
Sheen's excessive demeanor do not help the audience accept him as a
mastermind villain and comes as a surprise considering his extensive career
in film.  
Many other elements conspire with the disappointing script and abundant
special effects to drag SPAWN down.  MTV-style, jerky, in-your-face editing
is one of them.  Flames, for example, roll across the screen sometimes to
announce a shift in setting.  Cogliostro, unlikely wannabe guide for Spawn,
serves as a poor narrator for the film.  He goofily tells the audience, at
one point, that "how much of [Spawn's] humanity is left remains to be
seen," as if the audience really cares as one violent sequence leads to
another.  The music, finally, assaults the audience as much as the manic
violence and offensive dialogue.  Loud and obnoxious hard rock fused with
drum loops dominate some scenes.  To be fair, however, Marilyn Manson's
"Long Hard Road Out of Hell" effectively compliments Spawn's return to
Earth, while Filter and the Crystal Method's "(Can't You) Trip Like I Do"
proves a surprisingly fitting theme song.
For as good a comic book as it is, "Spawn" did not spawn a good movie.
SPAWN, instead, suffers from too much pomp and circumstance, and too little
plot and character development.  It receives two stars for its technically
well-done special effects.  Many other films, though, have equal, if not
superior, special effects and are much better.  Rated PG-13, SPAWN seems
more violent than many R-rated movies and probably wouldn't be appropriate
for the very young.

Author
Jamie Peck
New Line / 1997 / 1:37 / PG-13 (language, violence, disturbing
religious overtones, crude sex humor)
Cast: John Leguizamo; Michael Jai White; Martin Sheen; Theresa Randle;
Melinda Clarke; Miko Hughes; Sydni Beaudoin; Nicol Williamson;
D.B. Sweeney
Director: Mark A.Z. Dippe 
Screenplay: Alan McElroy 
"Spawn" features good guys, bad guys, lots of fighting, bloody
violence, a leather-clad machine gun chick, gooey, self-healing bullet
holes, scatological humor and a man-eating monster. It not only
appears to have been tailor made for a swarm of 12- and 13-year-old
boys, it appears to have been made by them.
In a classic example of telling and not showing, "Spawn" opens with a
truckload of mumbo jumbo about forces of darkness, forces of light and
how "men are the ones who create evil on earth." So much for a
message. The movie then lurches forward into the plight of Al Simmons
(Michael Jai White), a government assassin/operative who is murdered
by diabolical boss Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen, who plays all of his
scenes like an Oscar clip) while on a top secret mission in a North
Korean biological weapons plant. Simmons goes to hell and back, after
making a deal with Satan himself -- if he agrees to command the
Devil's army to overtake the world, he'll be allowed to return to
Earth to see his wife Wanda (underused Theresa Randle) and little girl
Cyan (Sydni Beaudoin).
Of course, seeing as how five years has passed, Wanda has fallen for
-- and married -- Simmons' partner (D.B. Sweeney). His, uh, shoulder
to cry on comes in the form of Clown (John Leguizamo), a disgustingly
disproportioned minion of Satan's. Clown manipulates Simmons, now in
superhuman Spawn form, into a stand off with Wynn. Wynn, who thinks he
is in league with the double-dealing Clown, recognizes Spawn as a
threat and undergoes an operation where a bomb is placed on his heart
-- when it stops beating, major cities around the world will detonate,
causing the leak of a disease that "makes the ebola virus look like a
skin rash."
It would be easy to dismiss "Spawn" as just another one of those
heavy-on-FX, short-on-substance action pics, but it doesn't even work
on that level. The computer-generated sequences are often and plenty,
and the problem is that they look too computer-generated. The several
scenes set in hell present a Devil that looks and acts like a video
game graphic -- with the movie's healthy budget you'd think they could
have afforded to make his mouth move when he talks. Other elements of
the movie are so-so; Spawn's enormous red, flowing cape is a wonderful
sight, but it's too obvious when he's being played by a costumed actor
or an image. In movies like "Contact," the special effects serve the
story. In "Spawn," they are the story.
And Spawn himself isn't even an interesting character. The film's
reliance on razzle-dazzle would be acceptable if we were given
somebody to root for, but both Simmons and his funky alter-ego are
completely underdeveloped. What we need is a Batman, a Luke
Skywalker. Even watching the adventures of Kleenex Man would be more
interesting than Spawn.
Poor Leguizamo. He starred in February's "The Pest," a movie that I
still think is the year's worst so far, although this one does give it
a run for its money. As Clown, he overacts to the extreme, never
missing an opportunity for a poor-taste punchline.  Leguizamo farts
green mist, munches a pizza slice covered with maggots and even dons a
mini-skirt and performs a cheerleader routine, all before turning into
a giant grey demon. The guy was brilliant in "To Wong Foo, Thanks for
Everything! Julie Newmar."  What is he doing wasting his talent in
this and "The Pest"?
I'm one of the few people that liked "Batman & Robin," this summer's
other big-budget comic book film. Yet after catching this movie and
making the inevitable comparison, I can only hope people will change
their minds and think of "Batman" as the superior adaptation. There's
a compelling story somewhere in "Spawn" -- including strong religious
overtones and the debut of the first African-American superhero ever
-- but it's just not found anywhere near here. As it is, "Spawn" is
just awful -- it stinks worse than a dead trout.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Michael J. Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     SPAWN is worth skipping, unless you're a comic-book fan, in which
case you'll probably enjoy the special effects.  Viz wiz and first-time
director Mark A.Z. Dippe proves, once again, that a caped crusader can
at least be *visualized* on film.  The soulless, joyless story is *less*
enjoyable, but it certainly goes a long way to easing to pain of that
other hotly anticipated four-color failure, BATMAN AND ROBIN.  (At least 
Mr. Schumacher's film had entire *sequences* worth watching.)  Really, 
there's barely anything here to hook the viewer.  The tone is black, but 
not black enough.  The costumed villain (a squat and obscenely padded 
John Leguizamo) is a grotesque delight, but doesn't get enough screen 
time.  Even a literal rendition of Hell-- complete with a CGI rendition 
of the Big Guy himself-- gets boring after the first look-see.  Sigh.   
With Michael Jai White, Martin Sheen, Nicol Williamson, D. B. Sweeney,
and Theresa Randle.

Author
Vallejo
  While the summer movie season approached its long awaited cessation,  we had
yet another shoddy, subordinate disposable celluloid superhero movie brought
on by the inexorable hasten from the major studios to please kids with
everything they think kids will go for to disburse their seven bucks. And,
once again, we have one of the worst films of the year.
 The trend of the moment-- and bear in mind it's a trend not a movie - is
SPAWN, and if you've seen the animated series on HBO you'll recall it embodies
the lost life of a disfigured man, an individual who has transpired the
ultimate punishment: He's been sent to hell. Todd McFarlane, the creator of
the SPAWN comic book, must have had a tough time sitting through SPAWN, for
his creativity and themes about resurrection and loss of identity were all
being jettisoned in favor of reliable special effects, style over substance,
ambience over anything else. 
 Not only does SPAWN rely entirely on special effects, the story, about a
bewildered individual who must take on a group of *bad guys* and *find
himself* in the process is realized in such a sordid, incapable manner, it
becomes indigestible after a while. Every character in this film is lifeless,
vacuous and seemingly written by a depressed college student. 
 The story begins, like in every superhero movie in this age, with a man
living an idyllic life. Al Simmons (Michael Jai White), a government
agent/assassin shares the love of his wife, Wanda (Theresa Russell ) and
daughter, has a tongue-in-cheek, wiseass partner, Terry (D.B Sweeney) and is
content with the job his boss, Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen), provides him.
The next element in the film is the part when things go awry. And as expected,
everyone turns the tables on poor Al. 
 As the two are investigating their latest mission at some sort of biological
weapons plant, Al is befriended by Jason, and dies in a gory and truly
sickening scene. Inevitably, it leads everyone to the conclusion that he has
passed away. Hence, Jason's mischievous master-mind plan, to ` conquer the
world" is just commencing its initial stages, when Al makes a pact with Satan
himself, agreeing to command the Devil's army to take over the world and he
gets to see his family again.
 So, our pal Al has been uplifted to hell, and while his transformation from
normal guy to Spawn takes place, his ol' partner Terry forms a relationship
with his wife. Time passes. And now Spawn is present in the grotesque inner
city, the ghetto where Cog (Nicol Williamson ) teaches Spawn how to utilize
his neat artifacts, his motorbike, armor, etc... This character is merely a
poor man's Obi Wan Kenobi without all the mythological hoopla. 
 Now the stage is set Spawn, the new `enemy of evil' Vs Evil. And evil takes
the cake, doubtlessly. John Leguizamo's deliciously heinous performance as the
injurious clown working for Wynn is the film's relief point. All this anguish,
pain, half-baked themes and putrid action scenes are invisible to Leguizamo,
who steals the show and derives joy from his character, which is basically a
compilation of so-so one liners. 
 And then there's Martin Sheen. Whichever way you look you will find carving
boards near his pitying and downright appalling last two years. His selections
calls for an immediate firing of his agent. As the megalomaniac boss, his
caricature plays like a bad dream out of a B-movie, scrambled, and left in the
shelf to rot. This is the man that starred in films such as APOCALYPSE NOW and
WALL STREET. I'd never thought I'd be saying this, but at this juncture,
Charlie Sheen's career is in better shape.
 SPAWN is a movie in which realism, or even an attempt to draw a parallel
between the problems of the hero and real life is identifiable. For most of
the film the vapid Michael Jai White consumes his time ogling, jumping through
roofs, and performing all kinds of acrobatic exercises which even BATMAN AND
ROBIN accomplished better. It constantly reminded us we were watching a
superhero movie-- a very bad superhero movie. Continually the film kept on
depending on special effects, and sadly, this is how pictures are being made.
Perhaps no other movie better than SPAWN illustrates the deterioration of
cinema through computer wizardry. The filmmakers seem to have forgotten every
human element possible. The quality of this film is abysmal and insulting.
 It is perceptible that director Mark Dippe, attempted to touch the
psychological chord that Tim Burton's BATMAN DID touch, the desperation of a
man whose life has all but evaporated in one spontaneous act. But Bruce Wayne
had human elements to him. He was pensive, resourceful and had relationships,
which made our perspective on him equally human. The character of Al Simmons
seems to be LONGING for a drastic change, as if he's fatigued about being
normal. And as all superheroes, Batman, Superman, The Phantom, they must
possess an element of normal civilians to make us think they are
extraordinary. None of this is present
in  SPAWN.
 The fighting sequences are weakly executed, the dialogue is penny-dreadful
and the art direction an odious duplicate of BLADE RUNNER'S. As an example of
this film's vastly creative imagination the writers of SPAWN decided to
include a poor orphan boy who is abandoned and beaten, and then rescued by
Spawn, so our emotions tend to be a little more sympathetic. Admittedly, I did
laugh once in the film ,and that's when Todd McFarlane showed up in an
unexpected cameo as a bum. 
 It is no wonder why so American children grow up with no engrossment for art
or literature. Besides blaming a large portion of it on the laughable school
system, I condemn the other part to garbage like SPAWN. Movies that present no
admiration, no captivation, no richness and vague interest in what children
are being subjected to. And kids will continue to see films like SPAWN, simply
because they are unable to differentiate what makes an imaginative, wondrous
film from an insipid and wasteful one. Children are not muppets. And SPAWN
unapologetically targets children. 

Author
Michael Dequina
Spawn (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
        Todd McFarlane's comic book sensation Spawn is prime fodder for a
big-budget Hollywood movie treatment--there's a extravagantly costumed,
supernaturally powered, sometimes homicidal hero, resurrected from the dead,
whose primary enemy is none other than the devil himself.  After years of
topping comic sales charts, Spawn has indeed arrived to conquer the movie
arena, but something is seriously lacking; for all its visual razzle dazzle,
Mark Dippe's film is a mess--a misguided attempt to sanitize a concept whose
most distinctive trait is its darkness.
        To Dippe and scripter Alan McElroy's credit, McFarlane's basic
conceit remains intact: Spawn (Michael Jai White) was originally murdered
government agent Al Simmons (Michael Jai White) who makes a pact with the
devil to see beloved wife Wanda (Theresa Randle) one more time.  In return,
however, he must use his newfound supernatural powers to lead Hell's Army in
its quest to destroy Heaven and Earth.  Prodding Spawn into serving holding
up his end of the bargain is the Clown (John Leguizamo, having a ball in a
fat suit and heavy makeup), whose short, rotund exterior hides his true,
horrific self as the demonic Violator; urging him to rebel against the dark
side is Cogliostro (Nicol Williamson), a mysterious figure from the distant
past.
        The above is a fairly accurate distillation of comic's basics, but
the Spawn faithful know there is something deeper and richer behind the plot
fundamentals--an overwhelming sense of despair and anguish.  Spawn has a
great costume, some nifty powers, and a killer instinct, but the key to the
character is his emotional torment.  Al's passionate love for Wanda is what
drives him and also what cripples him.  Merely seeing her is not enough, and
being with her is an impossibility--not only because he's a severely burned
undead hellspawn but because she has gone on with her life.  Adding to his
angst is the fact that in the five years that have passed between his death
and rebirth, Wanda is remarried with a daughter, Cyan (Sydni Beaudoin), and
her new husband is none other than Al's best friend, Terry Fitzgerald (D.B.
Sweeney, putting a Caucasian face on a what is originally an
African-American character).
        For reasons only known to him, the intense emotional content that
McElroy successfully incorporated into the Spawn HBO animated series (which,
I may add, is a much more satisfying translation) is all but completely
absent in his script for the film.  The only hints at Spawn's torment are a
couple of anguished cries of "Wanda," and the rest of the time--which is
nearly all of the time--he's merely angry and vengeful, no different from
some heroes in any number of generic action films.  The dilution of the
emotion--and, in McElroy's most offensive move, having the normally brooding
Spawn utter a couple of lame _one-liners_--are obvious attempts to make the
character fit a more traditional mold and hence win an audience-friendly
PG-13 rating.  But this decision makes no sense, since it's Spawn's
untraditional, dark, R-rated nature that made him so interesting to begin with.
        Dippe, making his feature directorial debut, is a seasoned special
effects creator, so it should come as no surprise that Spawn is most
impressive and imaginative--and most faithful--in the visual arena.  The
jarring opening credits, complete with shaky, distorted lettering and nearly
subliminal glimpses of images, is highly reminiscent of Se7en's unsettling
main titles (which is a good thing).  The creative transitions between
scenes, such as having flames and capes wipe across the frame, effectively
recall the visual style of the comic, as do the characters' appearances.
The Clown and his demonic alter ego, the Violator, are every bit as
repellent in three-dimensions as they are on the page (even if, as part of
the PG-13 compromise, he does not perform any of his trademark heart
extractions), and Spawn is blessed with a wonderfully fluid,
computer-generated cape, which, unfortunately, only materializes from time
to time.  McFarlane has said that the cape's sporadic appearance in the film
(Spawn has his cape at all times in the comic and animated series) was a
conscious decision, so Spawn would look less "superhero-y."  Ironically,
though, he looks more conventional without it.  The true marvel is Dippe and
visual effects supervisor Steve "Spaz" Williams's vision of hell, a
stunningly organic blend of flame and rock--a true technical achievement.
        But that's the problem with Dippe's direction as a whole--it's _too_
technical.  Attention was paid to the visuals and little else.  The story,
involving a biological weapon developed by Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen, all
clenched teeth), the shady government agent responsible for Al's death, is
weak and doesn't make complete sense; even the action scenes are clumsily
handled, especially the climactic battle in hell, where the heavy editing
makes the action hard to follow.  But worst of all, there's no passion--no
real connection to the characters (no fault to White or the other actors,
who aren't really given much to work with in the script), no sense of
urgency to the tale.  The film is a feast for the eyes, yes, but there's
none of the soul that gives the comic its power.
        In its comic and animated form, Spawn pushes the creative envelope;
in this live-action, big-screen incarnation, Spawn plays it safe--much too
safe; so safe that I'm certain people being introduced to Spawn with this
movie will wonder just what all the fuss is about.  At a recent comic book
convention, producer Clint Goldman said with much confidence and certainty,
"There _will_ be a sequel."  Here's hoping that next time around the
filmmakers will take a lesson from its hero in the comic and go for the kill.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/

Author
Steve Kong
Spawn aims to be a dark, broad, and moody comic book to silver screen
translation, much like the first two Batman films and the first Crow film.
It almost reaches this difficult goal, but falls short when a specific
character is introduced and the story starts to lag.
Spawn is about Al Simmons (Michael Jai White), an agent for some
super-secret government operation, A-6.  A-6 is a group that conducts
operations that most of us Americans don't know about.  Simmons, though, is
through with running these black-ops.  He has grown a conscience and wants
out of A-6.  Which is fine with his superior, Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen).
Simmons, as it seems, is the best killer around, and the forces of evil,
lead by the Devil himself, want Simmons to lead the army of evil.  The
middleman between the Devil and these mortals on Earth is an evil clown
(the unrecognizable John Leguizamo).  Simmons is killed in "one last
operation" and his soul is sent to Hell.  In Hell, Simmons makes a deal
with the Devil.  In order to see his wife, Wanda, again, Simmons agrees to
lead the army of evil.  But, as Simmons returns to Earth as Spawn, a hero
with a suit that morphs (complete with chains and a cool cape), his
conscience returns also.  With the devil's helper, the clown, sitting on
one shoulder and a new godly helper, Coglistro (Nicol Williamson), sitting
on the other, Spawn fights himself to see if he is evil or good.  There is
a subplot about a genocidal chemical that Wynn wants to unleash onto the
world, but that subplot falls to the wayside of the special effects.
What ruins the film is Leguizamo as the clown.  First time director Mark
Dippe (known mainly for his special effects work at ILM) does a great job
with visuals and setting the mood of the film, that is until the arrival of
Leguizamo.  Leguizamo fills his time on screen with bad one liners and
flatulence jokes.  You can see how this instantly toasts the dark mood.
As with most comic book to silver screen translations the story in Spawn is
pretty thin and the characters two-dimensional.  At the time that the Spawn
comic books were released, I was still a comic book reader.  In the comic
book Spawn, Simmons/Spawn are haunted by memories of his wife and past
life, and this causes serious inner pain.  And it is this inner pain that
motivates the comic book Spawn to do what he does.  In the movie the only
sign of inner pain is the two or three times that Spawn looks to the sky
and yells "Wanda."  Most of the other time, his acts are just of pure
revenge towards Wynn.
The special effects are the opposite of the story and plot.  They are
spectacular, and this is what is expected from a director who was once a
special effects person.  The most impressive special effect, and least
used, is Spawns cape.  The cape is wonderfully fluid, and if you haven't
seen it in the comic books, the cape stretches for what seems to be miles.
Spawns armor is also pretty impressive, but not as much as the cape.
The ending hints, most definitely, at a sequel.  I hope they do not produce
a sequel if it is going to be another mediocre film as this one.  The movie
moves particularly slow, and I found myself yawning and looking at my watch
constantly throughout the film.  This is a film that I would recommend only
for people to see on video, and only to see for the special effects.  Other
than that, go rent Batman and see a good comic book to silver screen
translation.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) The day SPAWN opened, I saw two very different reviews.
Roger Ebert gave it 3˝ stars because it was a good-looking exposition of
the state of the art in special effects; a melding of costumes, acting,
models, and computer effects in a hellish landscape worthy of
Hieronymous Bosch. Steven Rosen of the Denver Post called it an
incoherent waste of time that suffers from an overdose of special
effects.  
I suppose they were both right, but Roger Ebert had much more fun. 
If I had to guess, I would say that Ebert also liked WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO & JULIET (1996), and that Rosen hated it. Like ROMEO
& JULIET, SPAWN is a movie where style and pacing are given center
stage. The style is comic book and the pacing is fast, fast, fast. 
SPAWN is based on comic books by Todd McFarlane. The story opens with
hired killer Al Simmons being betrayed by his superiors. He ends up
badly burned before he dies and goes to Hell. Hell sends him back to
Earth with a new suit of "necroplasmic" armor and a mission. His mission
is to ensure that a certain chemical weapon will wipe out Earth's human
population. (The sudden influx of billions of souls will allow Hell's
army to wage war on Heaven's fortress, you see.) But Simmons has his own
noble motives for wanting to return to Earth: he wants to see his wife
again. That, and to murder the bastards who did this to him. 
Because much of the motivation in Spawn comes from Hell's plan to attack
Heaven, the gates for religious interpretation are wide open. When a
character exclaims "Jesus!" or says that the place is going to "hell in
a handbasket," there is a certain resonance that is usually absent from
such words. Whether or not it is intentional, the extra emphasis is not
lost. 
Perhaps because of the extra emphasis on these words, I wondered why the
demons did not rear back from their utterance. Vampires fear crosses and
holy water. Why do these demons from Hell not fear the muttered
"Christ!" The message seems to be that while Hell is going strong,
Heaven is weak, tottering on the brink of oblivion. If this movie has a
big box office, it'll be a telling sign of the adolescent worldview in
1997. 
It is interesting how closely Spawn parallels the traditional "hero's
journey." The hero hears the call to adventure, refuses at first, then
finally sees that the journey is inevitable. Along the way he is helped
by a spiritual guide who will show him the way. Luke Skywalker had his
Obi-wan. Disney's Hercules had his Philoctetes, even King Arthur had his
Merlin. 
What sets Spawn apart from other heroes is that his spiritual advisor,
Clown (John Leguizamo), is Evil's representative, not Good's. Clown is a
teacher, but Spawn doesn't get his lessons for free. He must distinguish
between the lesson and the propaganda. It is a simple twist on a
storytelling tradition that works very well for this movie. (One could
argue that this is a parallel for the influx of information we get in
this day and age. We have to learn to glean good information from those
messengers who have ulterior motives, be they government, media
monopolies, or Internet wackos.) 
When he's on the screen, Clown steals the show. Leguizamo, who is almost
unrecognizable as the stunted pear-shaped demon, looks like he had a
great time with the part. He is rude and crass, which is only
appropriate for a guardian demon. He teaches and guides the hero, but
unlike a guardian ANGEL, he gets to mock the hero's shortcomings. Clown
has a lot of good lines, and many of them draw attention to the fact
that this hero's teacher is hell-sent, not heaven-sent. 
But what really makes SPAWN stand out is its look. SPAWN looks like a
heavy metal fantasy. It is a black and orange Halloween explosion. It
looks like the latest series of Batman movies, only set in the most
horrible Hell Christianity can come up with. It looks like the Hell of
BILL & TED'S BOGUS JOURNEY ("our album covers lied to us, dude") without
the levity. 
Rosen said the movie was incoherent, but the style was very coherent.
There isn't one special effect that stands out above the rest (i.e., is
out of place). The look and tone of the movie is consistent from scene
to scene, presenting the audience with a single, integrated visual
"message." Even the opening and closing credits are designed with the
same edgy feel and look. (Maybe credit design should be the next
category for the Academy AwardsŠŽ.) 
For the record, the production designer (the person in charge of the
overall look of a film) was Philip Harrison, a veteran from THE RELIC,
TIMECOP, and other films going back as far as OUTLAND (1981). The rookie
director is a former special effects wizard. The cinematographer,
Guillermo Navarro, has worked with Quentin Tarantino and Robert
Rodriguez. 
Add up all that experience and you can please a lot of 13-year old boys.
But SPAWN can have a broader appeal, if you let it. Expectations are
everything, so do see this movie, but make sure you know what you're
getting into.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Laurence Mixson
Starring: Michael Jai White, John Leguizamo, Martin Sheen, D.B. Sweeney,
Nicol Williamson, and Theresa Randle.
Reviw by Laurence Mixson(venom8@hotmail.com)
        Finally, after years and years of waiting, the moviegoing public gets a
good film based on a comic book. You do, of course, recall the
awe-inspiring stupidity of Punisher, the wretched horribleness of
Captain America, and you will cringe in mortal terror by
remembering another recent summer release, Batman and Robin. But since
this is a GOOD movie, I won't dwell on those embarassments of cinema.
        If you're a comic book reader, you probably already know the story of
how Spawn came to be. But for those who don't, I'll give a quick
synopsis of the first 15 minutes or so of the movie. Basically, Al
Simmons(Michael Jai White) is an assassin at some secret government
base, kind of like the CIA. He is happily married to Wanda(Theresa
Randle), who he loves dearly. His partner is Terry Fitzgerald(D.B.
Sweeney) a computer geek.
        After completing a successful assassination of a US enemy and killing
lots of civilians in the process, Simmons grows a conscious and decides
to quit. But not before he completes one last mission, his boss, Jason
Wynn(Martin Sheen) tells him. Al agrees. Little does he know that the
mission is a set-up, and that Wynn has cut a deal with the devil,
Malebolgia, who is represented by the fould-mouthed Clown(John
Leguizamo). Malebolgia has given Wynn power in exchange for a deadly
chemical weapon. Now he wants something else: a person to lead his dark
forces in the apocalypse between heaven and hell. He orders Wynn to kill
Al Simmons so that Al will go to hell(assassins don't go to heaven),
thus giving Malebolgia a leader. Wynn agrees, and it's goodbye Al.
        When Simmons is killed, he wake up in the dark pit of hell and hears a
voice asking him if he'll lead the dark armies on earth in exchange for
being able to see Wanda. Al agrees, and is returned to earth. But a few
things have changed...
        1)His body is badly burned, although he now has a special
costume and cool chains that come out of his body.
        2)Malebolgia has returned him to earth 5 years later.
        3)He now has Clown and Count Cogliostro(Nicol Williamson)
following him around. Clowin is trying to persuade him to hell's side,
while Cogliostro is wooing him to heaven's side.
        Of course, now Simmons is unpresentable to Wanda, who has married
Terry, and had a child together, Cyan. Plus Clown is trying to get him
to kill Jason Wynn, because Wynn has a device in his heart so that if
his heart stops, the chemical weapon he developed for Malebolgia will go
off, killing a lot of the earth's population and giving a chance for the
dark armies of hell to cross onto earth. Now you're confused, right?
Don't worry, the movie lays it out in a way so that you always know
what's going on.
        Of course, for a movie like this to work, it has to have 2 things: good
characters and good FX. On the first note, everyone is excellent in
their acting, but John Leguizamo stands out as being the hilariously
evil Clown. On the second note, the FX are terrific. Wait till you see
the battle in hell between the Violator(the hideous
and bigger half of Clown)and Spawn.
        If you have any reservations about seeing this movie, then throw them
away. It's the best film playing right now out there, and the 3rd best
movie this summer(it falls short of Con Air and Face/Off). Go see this
movie.

Author
Michael Redman
The entry into the world of feature length films by the hero of the
best-seller comic book and highly acclaimed HBO half hour animated series
clearly demonstrates the old adage that length doesn't necessarily equal quality.
Spawn's daddy Todd McFarlane, the renegade comic book artist that quit Marvel
comics at the height of his popularity to form an independent company has
marketed his creation masterfully. There are several comic series, trading
cards, the cartoons, t-shirts and wonderful toys: all produced with care and
an artistic vision.
And now comes Spawn The Movie, a different kettle of fish.
Al Simmons (Michael Jai White) is a top assassin for a shadowy US government
agency who decides to hang up his big guns in exchange for a nice quiet family
life. His boss Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen in a wasted role), in league with the
devil, gives Simmons the usual retirement for people who know too much.
Waking up in Hell, he agrees to lead the armies of darkness against the forces
of light in exchange for seeing his beloved wife Wanda again. The Hellspawn
returns to Earth five years later confused and bewildered. His new supervisor,
Clown (John Leguizamo in a fat suit) is a wise-cracking motor-mouth from the
netherworld. On his other shoulder is Cogliostro (Nicol Williamson) who
attempts to convince him that Good is the true path.
The film is filled with good intentions gone bad and not just in the
motivations of the characters. Many of the movie elements don't work as they
are intended.
Spawn carries huge guns and rides a motorcycle. Presumably this is to show
that he is not familiar with his enormous abilities and at first relies on his
old techniques. What actually happens is that the all-powerful agent of Satan
looks goofy riding a bike through the city streets.
The devil himself is visually exceptional but for some reason is unable to
move his mouth when talking. Giving the filmmakers the benefit of the doubt,
perhaps he is communicating telepathically and has no need of a mobile jaw,
but it comes across as bad animation.
The effects are often exceptional, but just as often look like clumsy student
projects. The images of Hell are stunning, but fall apart the longer they are
on screen.
The film doesn't live up to its promise of a stunning look at the morally
ambiguous lead character torn between good and evil. What we get instead is
another tepid walk though flash with little substance.
[This appeared in the 8/7/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Once upon a time, many years ago when the earth was still young, I
read comic books.  In fact, I read them quite avidly.  I attended comic
book conventions, kept my collection in acid-free boxes and bought the
Overstreet Price Guide every year.  I remember the fervor with which comic
book fans defend their favorite characters, and the excitement generated
by the first film appearance of a character.
     My first encounter with this phenomenon from the other side of the
philosophical fence came when I dared to give only fleeting praise to
1994's THE CROW.  From the reactions of the film's fans, you would think
not only that I had challenged the film's artistic merit, but also that I
had performed an excretory act on Brandon Lee's grave.  The idea for the
story, I felt, was intriguing, the execution merely competent.  And the
wrath it raineth down.
     Now I steel myself once again, because folks, SPAWN ain't even _that_
good.
     Anyone familiar with THE CROW is going to experience a bit of
conceptual deja vu with SPAWN.  The hero, in this case a government agent
named Al Simmons (Michael Jai White), is murdered, in this case by his
megalomaniacal boss Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen).  The hero returns to earth,
compelled by a desire to reunite with his beloved (Theresa Randle), and
finds himself endowed with supernatural powers to assist in the wreaking
of his vengeance, powers in this case provided by the devil in exchange
for Simmons -- now Spawn -- leading the Army of Darkness to the
Apocalypse.  A goading little demon called Clown (John Leguizamo) is
around to make sure Spawn keeps his end of the bargain; a benevolent
eternal warrior named Cagliostro (Nicol Williamson) acts as the little
angel on the other shoulder.
     At its best, SPAWN does provide some genuinely eye-catching visual
effects for its titular character.  Spawn's body armor is perfectly
rendered, sprouting all manner of computer-generated weaponry and a
billowing red cape as necessity demands.  Leguizamo also provides
entertainment value by tossing off crude gags between bouts of flatulence.
At its worst, SPAWN provides the kind of horrid acting often excused in
genre films with the description "campy," with half the cast (White,
Sheen, Leguizamo) doing gutteral line readings (because the Forces of Evil
always talk like Mercedes McCambridge in "The Exorcist") and the other
half (Randle, Williamson, D. B. Sweeney) standing around looking
befuddled.  It also offers a decidedly Sony Play Station vision of hell,
and a script which doesn't bother to give the main character a life before
it gives him an afterlife.
     Most of the time, however, SPAWN is neither at its best nor at its
worst.  It is merely redundant, a now-familiar plot of gloom-soaked
heroism decked out with the expected trappings of perpetually rainy
alleys, Gothic spires and a couple of explosions.  I'm not familiar enough
with the time line of recent comics to know whether "The Crow" pre-dated
"Spawn" in comic book form, but it doesn't really matter.  Viewers of 
SPAWN may find a few new and improved special effects, but everything else
is re-used and recycled; even Leguizamo's performance as Clown seems like
a slightly more scatalogical spin on Nicholson's Joker.
     Comic books may have picked up a certain improbable cachet when they
started referring to themselves as "graphic novels," but that attitude has
merely resulted in a different kind of creative rut.  It's like graphic
grunge rock, where an energetic and invigorating first wave has given way
to endless imitators who can't seem to lighten up and stop whining.  Even
when screenwriter Alan McElroy tries to temper the angst with glib quips,
the result is something strictly for fans of the new and improved special
effects.  Or, perhaps, for die-hard SPAWN fans who may be preparing an
effigy of yours truly even as we speak.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Comic books are often the origins to some very entertaining films.  Which, when 
you think about it, makes a lot of sense.  After all, who wouldn't appreciate 
seeing Batman battle some bad dudes or an agency of Men in Black protecting the 
Earth from intergalactic warfare?  For me, comics are a source of entertainment 
and fun.  But the creation of a film based on Todd McFarlane's popular hero 
"Spawn" is unfortunately never much fun at all.
Bearing a definite resemblance to the sets from the Batman series; the dark and 
gothic surroundings of Spawn help prepare us for the depressing time that lies 
ahead, where the question "Why did I come and see this again?" will be asked 
one too many times.  
The film (and the comic series) is based around the peculiar experiences of Al 
Simmons (Michael Jai White).  Being one of the finest professional assassins in 
the world, Simmons is more than aware of his talents yet underestimates those 
of the people around him.  So after a stylish assassination at the beginning of 
the film (which incidentally was one of my favorite parts), he makes it 
perfectly clear that he "cares" about innocent people losing their lives.  This 
alone is an unforgivable mistake.  Michael Jai White wants us to believe that 
this soon-to-be hero can be as emotional and sensitive as anybody else.  He has 
no problem in firing missiles or using impressive artillery, but later on 
complains that people's lives were in danger.  Even if we push aside the fact 
that no one really wants to see an 
emotional-at-times-and-ruthless-at-other-times hero, White gives Spawn about as 
much emotion as a prison meatloaf - which you could imagine is not terribly 
impressive.
Anyway, after a sudden outburst of emotion and ethics, Simmons soon finds 
himself burned to death with a face that looks like a toasted Pop Tart.  He 
then goes on his merry old way to the fiery realms of hell (which, by the way, 
is fabulously animated) and makes a pact with the devil: he is able to return 
to Earth to see his beloved wife Wanda (Theresa Randle) if he agrees to lead 
Hell's Army in a battle to destroy mankind.  As you may have guessed, Simmons 
heartily agrees and finds himself back on Earth - 5 years after his apparent 
death.
However a few things have changed.  Wanda is now married to Simmons' former 
colleague Jason Wynn (Martin Sheen) and are producing sons and daughters whilst 
living a happy family life.  And if this wasn't enough to get used to, he is 
rapidly introduced to the devil's number one assistant Clown (John Leguizamo) 
and Cogliostro (Nicol Williamson), who helps Simmons harness some new fighting 
abilities and works along side him in many fiendish battles.  So as Simmons 
discovers that he is no longer human and always dressed in a mysterious black 
suit and red cape, he struggles to decide whether he should let the forces of 
evil prevail or to defend the Earth at any cost.  Born into darkness and sworn 
to justice, Spawn is a hero to be reckoned with.
It doesn't take many brains to guess that Spawn is not going to get much more 
complicated than the old good versus evil skit; and although it wants us to 
feel for the character of Al Simmons, most audiences will be looking forward to 
the fighting scenes but not much else.  To save the film from total failure, 
Spawn's dazzling eye candy is state of the art computer generated effects. The 
team from Industrial Light and Magic has once again distracted us from a fairly 
weak film by placing us in the middle of a special effects bonanza of the 
highest degree.
Fans of the comic books will get a thrill to find their hero right in front of 
their eyes, and the impressive sets of Spawn give a perfect conversion from the 
dark, gloomy comic artwork.  But director Mark Dippe went no further than this, 
and Spawn fails to achieve many interesting aspects that would create fans 
rather than reward them.  
It's interesting to note that the film spends all of its time explaining how 
the hero emerged, so in the grand scheme of things the end of the film is 
really right at the start of the comic series.  Which is actually something 
pleasing considering that Spawn is a fairly modern character and unknown to 
many - so the possibility of a sequel or a series of films is not unlikely.
Spawn seems to me to be a movie you can like a lot better when you look back on 
it, where you remember how good the special effects were but not really care 
when you're watching them.  The film is solid and consistent with average 
action, a below average plot, dismal acting and great special effects.  Is it 
worth seeing?  Well the cinema, when I got out of my chair and began to walk 
out, I asked myself "What kind of people would really love that film?"  Of 
course, the answer hit me almost suddenly when one of my friends blurted out 
"Wasn't that awesome!"  You got it - teenagers.
2 out of 5 stars
Spawn's dazzling screen mayhem will appeal to some teens, but most people 
should wait for this one to hit the video shelves so they can fast forward to 
the semi entertaining battle scenes and a creative depiction of the undead.


Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
"Spawn" may be somewhat of an older film. In fact it will probably be on
video before anyone who hasn't seen it will finally get to see it (that is,
IF they see it). But i managed to catch it before it made it's way out of
theaters and into the world of rentals and, God forbid, video cassette
purchasing.
It wasn't the worst film of year by any means. It isn't even on the top 5 of
the worst films of the year. But it did manage to top the bottom five of the
bottom ten, which, in simpler terms, means it comes in at number 6 on my
"Worst of 1997" list. The only reason it doesn't come in lower is thanks to
the special effects, which might actually have been some of the best of the
year.
Performances, however, were either wooden or, for the most part,
unforgivingly campy. In fact, this film shows no signs of attempting to avoid
campiness! Even the editing seemed to boast a campy quality. I don't know how
to explain that one; it wasn't exactly choppy, but something about it seemed
. . . well, annoyingly unprofessional. John Leguizamo almost makes it as
Clown, but not quite. He is the only character who provides the audience with
any laughs that can honestly be called intentional.
But the main problem i found with "Spawn", as with most films that wind up on
my "worst of" lists, is that it was just plain boring. I wouldn't even say
there was a climax to the film. Sure, it had the big battle scene at the end,
but the only excitement felt was that the movie might be nearing a
conclusion. Never too soon, the movie did conclude in a very simple,
disappointing way. Even though it's one of the shorter movies i've seen this
year, it's one that I would definitely not want to subject myself to sitting
thru again.
Like I said, the special effects are the only reason that this film should
have any sense of pride, no matter how small. I was impressed with the
opening sequence, so long as I didn't allow the melodramatic voice-over and
lobotomizing editing to get to me. And Batman has nothing on the spectacular
visuals Spawn's outfit created. But even the effects got tiresome during the
final scenes, which looked quite a bit like a modern video game. Who knows if
"Spawn: The Video Game" wasn't part of the plan from the beginning?
Keeping in mind that the film was based on a comic book makes it somewhat
more approachable, and in a very small amount, makes up for the cheeziness of
it all. But none of this movie's saving graces can it make it something I'd
recommend seeing, no matter what the price of admission. This movie is
definitely not for young children, which shouldn't really be a problem seeing
as how only teenagers, if anyone, would likely find it appealing. If you
really want to catch a movie, there are many better ones out there, no matter
what your tastes might be! Trust me! "Spawn" has very little to offer even
the most avid moviegoers!

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
SPAWN is the kind of movie they used to pass out scratch 'n sniff
cards for -- "to enhance the sensory experience". It's not the
greatest film ever made -- not by a mile -- but it's ambitious as all
hell, pardon the pun, and is so over the top that it actually
works. It's about a man who's been chosen to lead the Devil's armies
on earth (and eventually, in heaven), and it slams this comic-book
story home with gobbets of gory special effects and eye-searing
computer graphics. If this isn't your cup of Diet Pepsi, I say pick
another review. If it is, read on.
The man who we come to know as Spawn (Michael Jai White) starts off in
life as an assassin for a secret government bureau. He's sick of it
and wants out, but his boss (Martin Sheen, looking weirdly like
Stephen King with that beard and hair) double-crosses him. Instead of
dying, however, our hero is whisked down to hell and drafted into the
service of Satan (named Malebolgia in this movie): if he leads Satan's
armies, he will get to see his wife and children once more. He's also
given a controller, of sorts, a vile bucket of suet and four-letter
words with a clown's face (played, incredibly, by John Leguizamo), who
turns out to be another stab in the back.
The movie quickly turns into a high-tech special effects ride, with
the usual obligatory nods towads a plot and theme. Movies like this
succeed or fail largely based on the level of energy and inventiveness
they possess, not the originality of their plots, and SPAWN is if
nothing else energetic. Spawn's suit (done with CGI) sprouts horns,
fangs, claws, chains, and a giant undulating cape that reminded me of
a sentient glob of bubble gum. The soundtrack's a loud, unending roar
of industrial-strength drumbeats and guitars; the acting rapid-fire
and goofy. There's always something weird to look at or listen to.
The movie's sole ambition is to be brassily entertaining, and it does
that well.  The worst thing you can say about SPAWN, I guess -- beyond
it being very silly frat-boy level fun -- is that it sets itself up
for a sequel.

Author
Walter Frith
Some would accuse the makers of 'Spawn' of being creatively empty but that
would be unfair because this movie set out to be exactly what the final
product has become and that is a live action comic book.  Based on the
creation by Todd McFarlane, 'Spawn' is the story of a government assassin
(Michael Jai White) who dies and goes to the thresholds of Hell and makes a
deal with Satan concerning his return to Earth to participate in creating
Armageddon where the conflict between Heaven and Hell will ultimately be
decided.  White makes the deal because he is promised re-united companionship
with the wife he left behind at the time of his death on Earth.
John Leguizamo portrays Clown, a Devil's disciple sent by Satan to make sure
Spawn carries out his duty for the unspeakable forces of evil.  Clown
maintains an Earthly liaison with a government agent (Martin Sheen) who is
bent on bringing biological warfare to anyone on Earth who will not follow in
his quest for power.  What the forces of evil don't realize is that Spawn
receives visits from an English knight who died 500 years ago on Earth and
works to save Spawn's soul for redemption.
There are a lot of ingredients that went into this production and perhaps the
most distinguished compliment that anyone can pay this movie is to call it
technically efficient and a movie with extraordinary vision.  It shows us
things that will undoubtedly haunt us and has perhaps the darkest look I've
ever seen in a motion picture.  As far as the writing is concerned, the
characters are good but the story is a shallow one at best.  Its story is
overwhelmed by special effects and a thundering music score but unlike
'Batman and Robin', 'Spawn' is a story about a crime fighting hero that
certainly has many more colourful characters that audiences will remember
long after they leave the theatre.  
John Leguizamo puts a frightfully silly style of improvisation on his
character which doesn't always work but it is genuine to a certain degree in
keeping with Clown's personality and Michael Jai White is perfect as the
film's title character.
This movie is for adults and young people about 14 and over and may cause
nightmares for young children.  Would I want to see 'Spawn' again?  No, but I
was impressed at the technical aspects of the film which for me were
experimentation rather than genuine filmmaking.  It's fast food rather than a
home cooked meal.
