Title
Review for Farinelli: il castrato (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release beginning 3/17/95 
Running Length: 1:36 
MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, nudity) 
Starring: Stefano Dionisi, Enrico LoVerso, Jeroen Krabbe, 
          Elsa Zylberstein, Caroline Cellier, Omero Antonutti 
Director: Gerard Corbiau 
Producers: Vera Belmont, Linda Gutenberg, Dominique Janne, 
           and Stephane Thenoz 
Screenplay: Marcel Beaulieu, Andree Corbiau, and Gerard Corbiau 
Cinematography: Walther Van den Ende 
Music director: Christophe Rousette 
Released by Sony Picture Classics 
In French and Italian with subtitles 
"A castrato was a male soprano or contralto singer whose unbroken voice 
had been preserved by castration performed before puberty so that the 
larynx would not develop.  As a result his voice retained its high 
range, but because his lungs and chest matured they were able to produce 
sounds of great power.  Although the range of the castrato was similar 
to that of the female soprano or contralto, the voice was stronger, 
often more voluptuous in tone, and capable of the utmost delicacy and 
technical brilliance.  Castrati were in great demand as leading singers 
during the 17th and 18th centuries in opera houses throughout Europe..." 
     -- Robert M. Cammarota, ACADEMIC AMERICAN ENCYCLOPEDIA 
     FARINELLI brings to the screen a segment in the life story of one 
of the greatest singers of the 18th century.  Born in 1704 with the name 
of Carlo Broschi, Farinelli (Stefano Dionisi, who resembles Daniel Day-
Lewis) became the most celebrated singer of his day in Italy, England, 
and Spain.  It is the London period (from 1734 to 1737) that this film 
concentrates upon, using Farinelli's relationship with his brother 
Riccardo (Enrico LoVerso) and his rivalry with composer G. F. Handel 
(Jeroen Krabbe) as the cornerstones upon which to build a narrative. 
     Despite its historical inaccuracy, the most interesting facet of 
FARINELLI is the complex interaction between the title character and 
Handel.  Fine performances by Stefano Dionisi and Jeroen Krabbe deepen 
the intensity of these scenes, but it doesn't take long to recognize 
that the composer is perhaps the more interesting figure.  There is such 
potent rage, scorn, and passion in Krabbe's portrayal that it makes one 
wonder what Handel might be like when not locked in combat with the 
castrato.  The glimpses offered here are tantalizing, but their prime 
function is to provide a suitable foil for the protagonist and, as such, 
they fail to sate the appetite. 
     Farinelli is not a likable man and, regardless of attempts by the 
script to show a more human, misunderstood side to his personality, the 
character comes across as a narcissistic egotist.  His duels with Handel 
are concerned with power, not music.  Neither is willing to give in to 
the other.  Handel will not concede that the voice of a castrato is 
necessary for his compositions to attain their full impact; Farinelli 
initially refuses to admit that he needs Handel's music for fulfillment. 
     Of equal, if not greater, importance to the film's structure is 
Farinelli's relationship with his brother Riccardo.  Although marred by 
betrayal and jealousy, this interplay lacks much of the raw energy of 
the Handel/Farinelli scenes.  Often, whether the brothers are sharing a 
woman in bed or arguing over Riccardo's unfinished opera, little is 
revealed of the real ties binding them.  There is much background we're 
not privy to, and when the secret between them is eventually uncovered, 
the disclosure is anticlimactic. 
     On the technical side, FARINELLI is imperfect.  Since no castratos 
exist today, reproducing the resonant, three-and-one-half octave voice 
presented difficulties.  Director Gerard Corbiau overcame the obstacle 
by recording the voices of Derek Lee Ragin and Ewa Mallas Godlewska, 
then electronically combining them.  This effect is marginally 
successful, but the poor synching of the audio track with Dionisi's lip 
movements destroys the magic.  Often, Farinelli's performances, which 
are meant to be among the film's centerpieces, come across as awkward.  
Considering all the expense and trouble devoted to costumes and 
settings, the overall result is disappointing. 
     FARINELLI represents a fascinating, if occasionally overly 
melodramatic, recreation of a period when Baroque music ruled Europe.  
The story is perhaps not as cohesive or coherent as it could be, but 
there is enough narrative momentum to retain the viewer's interest.  The 
result is an intriguing, if flawed, film about the power of the voice 
and the effects of fame and ego upon interpersonal communication.   
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FARINELLI is about a part of musical history that I knew nothing
of until a couple of months ago when the publicity for this movie hit
public radio and the trailers started to appear at the local art house
cinemas.  It seems that in the 18th and 19th centuries there were
singers called castrati.  These were men who were castrated when they
were boys so that they could have increased vocal ranges when they
matured.  The advertisements say something like they stole his manhood
to make him a God.
     Farinelli was the stage name for Carlo Broschi (Stefano Dionisi).
He and his brother Richardo (Enrico LoVerso) toured all over Europe in
the early 1700s.  Richardo would compose music designed to show off his
brother's amazing vocal range of three and a half octaves.  He would
also procure women for Farinelli which was trivially easy to do.
Farinelli was the rock star of his day.  The women fainted when he sang
the high notes, and they queued up to be with him.  Remember tag team
wrestling from the 50s?  Well, the brothers actually performed tag team
love making.  The movie was quite explicit in demonstrating their
techniques.  The women of the 1700s appeared to be big fans of this
sport.
     Director Gerard Corbiau's FARINELLI is a troubled, confused, and
unhappy fellow.  Success gives him little pleasure.  Richardo, on the
other hand, has a great time.  He loves his brother, takes great
pleasure in conducting him, and is full of happy smiles.  Quite a
contrast.  As the movie evolves, the script by Andree and Gerard
Corbiau shows us that actually both brothers are troubled and
tormented.  To fill out the cast we have a dejected and broke George
Frideric Handel (Jeroen Krabbe).
     Although FARINELLI was nominated for an Oscar for Best Foreign
Film, I found the quality of this movie to be all over the map.  The
good parts are brilliant, but poor ones will put you to sleep.  The
story is so unique and fascinating, and the technical aspects of the
film so well done, that I could not think about missing seeing this
show.  Sort of a must see, poorly executed picture.
     Okay, what is good about it?  First, the way they electronically
blended a male and a female voice to create a castrato's voice was
amazing.  Totally believable.  Second, the art decoration and the
cinematography (Walther Van den Ende) of the baroque opera houses of
the period as well as the costumes were unsurpassed.  The clothes that
Farinelli wore were so imaginative that I wished the costume designer
and the set decorator had both won Oscars for their work.  The acting
by Enrico LoVerso is consistently excellent.  That by Stefano Dionisi
is uneven except when he sings, and then his expressions steal the
scene.
     On the poor side is the script and the directing.  The movie
starts off with plenty of energy, but after an hour, I was spending a
lot of time looking at my watch.  The show wore out its welcome.  They
said little new in the last hour, and they said it increasingly slowly.
I wish I had left after the first hour.  One final negative point, I
found Krabbe's performance to be pedestrian and unimaginative.
     Although FARINELLI did not have the material to run the 1:50 that
it did, I was fond of some of the editing (Joelle Hache) techniques
where he would cut from very quiet scenes to loud noisy ones like the
hoof beats of large running white horses.  The movie is rated R for
nudity, sex, drug use, and some realistically bloody scenes.  It is
basically pretty mild given its subject and would be fine for most
teenagers.  It is in Italian and French with easy to follow English
subtitles.  For the brilliance of the good parts and for the not to be
missed story, I recommend the movie and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
This is a film about Carlo & Ricardo Broschi, a famous pair in their heyday,
when castrati were famous because they could carry a tune beyond the talents
of many singers of the time.  Farinelli, ( Carlo ) was at the time the best
known of them, and he is given much credit for having made a lot of Handel's
music famous, and to turn the
famous musician's style from pretentious into something valuable and good.
It is the story of two brothers, one a composer and the other one a singer.
The singer had been castrated in his younger days, to preserve the wonderful
voice he had.  And though most life around him was not very pleasant, he did
make the best of it, until he
achieved a certain amount of success, and from then on, the rest was
history, as they say.  The film, spends much time endorsing the voice part
of its main character, but it also shows the underside, the unhappiness and
the frustration which Farinelli lives under.  In many ways, he can not
satisfy a woman, and for many years, this job is left to his brother, until
he marries. The film ends with his wife pregnant, but with his brother's
child.  Presumably the start of surrogate fatherhood.!!!
But that's degrading the film a little.  This is a really well thought out
film, which tries, in many ways to show that the other brother, the composer
also had as much to do with his brother's rise, as he did in his brother's
demise inside.  It is never suggested, but there are hints that it wasn't
the  father that had his child castrated, but the older brother
 that had it done, after the father died, and the brother  figured out how
he could earn a living.  It was the older  brother that kept the two of them
alive for a long time, by  finding some work here and there, and later by
entering competitions   in fairs and the like, where they could show off in
front of  people.  They are inevitably heard by people befitting a better
social ranking, and that's when the story really starts.
The film has some very funny moments, given to the fainting of heart, and
the various people who do not pay attention to the virtuoso singing.  It is
a moment that many of us, yes us, can easily feel threatened, but it is so
true, and so well done.  The such and such countess is eating and reading a
book, not listening to him, and other some such events.
The exceptional mix of the music and the acting is what makes this film so
nice, not to mention the outstanding costume party that the whole thing is.
It's rare these days one gets to see a good period drama in full regalia,
and this film fits the bill, and then some.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Based on a true story about two brothers, Ricardo and Carlo
Broschi.  It was quite the custom in Italy to castrate young boys with
good voices so that their voices would not change.  This took place
mostly in the 17th and 18th Centuries with many becoming very famous
even to the point of having groupies and insignia worn by the fans.
With all the crazy customs of people over the centuries it is a wonder
the human race has survived this long.  Not everyone became famous;
many had their lives ruined by the mutilation.
     When the film opens there is a handsome boy of about 9 years old
who is singing in the chorus.  He has a beautiful voice.  His friend,
standing next to him, cautions him not to sing because "you know what
they do to young boys who have good voices."
     In the film, the singer is called Farinelli (Stephano (Dionisi).
His father induces him to help his older brother, Ricardo, (Enrico Lo
Verso) who is a composer.  "He will compose and you will sing and
together you two will be famous.  Please do not let us down; do it for
your brother and me."  And so he submits.
     Farinelli grows up and becomes famous, singing before kings and
queens.  His brother's compositions are of very poor quality but he is
carried along by the younger one's beautiful voice and popularity.
     Despite his being one of the castrati, women are taken in by his
beauty and his voice.  When asked, he tells one beautiful woman
Alexandra (Elsa Zylberstein), that he was left enough to satisfy a
hundred women.   That is not quite true.  He starts and then his
brother finishes.
     Touching, beautifully mounted and directed, filled with drama. the
film is not to be missed.  It was nominated for the Best Foreign Film.
Derek Lee Ragin and Eva Mallas Godlewska did the actual singing, their
voices digitally fused.   You cannot tell the singing was dubbed.
     For something different and excellent, try FARINELLI.  You will
love it.
