Title
Review for Smoke Signals (1998)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Scott Hunt
Review by Scott Hunt
Movie Hunt:   http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Cast: Adam Beach, Gary Farmer, Irene Bedard, Evan Adams, Tantoo
Cardinal, Cody Lightning and Tom Skerritt
Director: Chris Eyre
Writer: Sherman Alexie
A lyrical, at times magical, look at the familial bond, "Smoke Signals"
is the first film written, directed,co-produced, and acted by American
Indians. Director Chris Eyre and screenwriter Sherman Alexie have
adapted Alexie's critically acclaimed collection of short stories, The
Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven, into a funny, bittersweet
road picture that avoids melodrama and the often romanticized images
presented of American Indians in modern cinema.
Thomas Builds-the-Fire (Evan Adams) and Victor Joseph (Adam Beach) are
Coeur D'Alene Indians who share a common bond. As an infant, Thomas was
thrown from the upper story window of his house as it burned, his
parents trapped inside. Moments before hitting the ground, he was saved
by Victor's alcoholic,physically abusive father, Arnold (Gary Farmer).
As the boys grew, Thomas came to view Victor as a brother and Arnold as
a surrogate father. Twenty years later, word comes to the reservation
that Arnold, who had left Victor and his mother Arlene (Tantoo Cardinal
in a subtle, knowing performance) years earlier, has died and Victor
must go retrieve his ashes. Short of funds, Victor is forced to accept
money from Thomas, despite his annoyance and apparent dislike of him,
on the condition that Thomas can go along.
Evan Adams is a delight as Thomas, Victor's cousin. Thomas has a
fondness for sports coats with matching vests, black framed glasses and
pigtails, along with an ever present goofy grin, something which
irritates the brooding Victor. At one point Victor tells
Thomas, "Indians ain't supposed to smile. Get stoic. If you don't look
mean, white people won't respect you." Victor holds a special
resentment for Thomas, who has leaned what it's like to be an Indian
from watching television. As Victor puts it, "The only thing worse than
Indians on TV is an Indian watching Indians on TV."
Victor is a walking knot of anguish, conflicted about his feelings and
memories of his father, a man he can neither hate nor love. Throughout
the film, more is revealed about Arnold in expertly done, non-intrusive
flashbacks. This is one of the movie's strengths as Thomas narrates
many of the flashbacks in an annoying, yet mesmerizing, sing-song voice.
The movie settles into the familiar trappings of a road picture as the
two young men gain fresh insight into themselves and Arnold. What makes
the film special is the self-deprecating dialogue, often centering on
stereotypes of American Indians. Ayres and Alexie don't preach at the
audience, but rather give them a comedic nudge as they tear down many
preconcieved notions about Indians.
As both Thomas and Victor struggle to interpret the smoke signals of
Arnold's death, they ultimately begin to learn the power of fathers,
sons, and forgiveness.

Author
Mark O'Hara
"Do you want lies, or do you want the truth?" Suzy Song asks Thomas 
Builds-the-Fire.
"I want both," Thomas (Evan Adams) replies.
This is one of the layers of meaning in Chris Eyre's film SMOKE SIGNALS.  
As much as anything, it's about the thrill of a good story, the 
importance of stories in our lives and especially in our individual 
pasts.  As Thomas tells his stories he holds very still, eyes closed, 
head tilted toward the heavens.  For him it's a religion of narrative, 
telling tales about his life and friends, not bothering to separate out 
the threads of falsehood from the fabric of his accounts.  Evan Adams 
delivers probably the strongest performance in the work, his voice full 
of inflection and poetry, his tone the perfect mix of seer and nerd.
His friend Victor Joseph is the only one who complains about Thomas' 
stories.  Victor (Adam Beach) has lived on the Idaho reservation all his 
life, growing up with Thomas, hearing the same stories endlessly.  What 
bothers Victor the most is that Thomas idolizes Victor's father Arnold, 
who deserted the family when the boys were ten.  It was Arnold (Gary 
Farmer) who saved the infant Thomas from the fire that killed Thomas' 
parents; Arnold who took the orphan to Denny's and bought him the Grand 
Slam breakfast.  But it was Victor who had to live through his father's 
alcoholic flights of fancy and through the dark days of abuse.
The main premise turns the film into a travelogue in which the adult 
Victor and Thomas ride a bus to Arizona to retrieve the ashes of Arnold.  
On the journey there and back they meet people and situations that 
change them, and show the viewer much about contemporary attitudes 
toward Native Americans.
When William Faulkner said, "The past isn't dead.  It's not even past," 
he was talking about the kind of suffering Victor and his mother, Arlene 
Joseph, have been undergoing.  Using flashbacks that melt instantly into 
scenes of the present, the film takes the type of risks that ensure the 
success of stories.  Victor displays an appropriate anger toward his 
now-dead father, and we even excuse his unfair treatment of the lovable, 
eccentric Thomas.  A straight-talker, Victor is aware of the prejudices 
that still stalk Native Americans, especially two long-haired young men    
venturing off the reservation and into the "foreign" country of the 
United States.  In a scene in which unshaven white men take Victor's and 
Thomas' seats on the bus, we are shown traces of hate in even the most 
common experience.  Perhaps Victor learned a modicum of hate himself 
from his father, who wished to make the white man disappear.  In a 
fascinating motif involving magic, it is Arnold who makes himself 
vanish, accomplishing yet another feat that he "didn't mean to."
SMOKE SIGNALS is weak in its overuse of things Indian.  Although Thomas' 
voice-over at the start and finish is well-written, it sets a tone that 
touches upon countless cliches.  We hear allusions to the oral tradition 
(Thomas's storytelling), to George Armstrong Custer, John Wayne and Tom 
Mix, to the stoic face a Native American must turn to his troubles.  
Yes, these elements are part of the culture, and some very humorous use 
is made of them.  But the film's greatness does not hinge upon their 
repetition.  Rather, the human elements cause the success:  Victor's 
long journey and change of heart, Thomas' unfailing friendship and goofy 
smile, Suzy Song (Irene Bedard's) decency and determination to help.
Touted as the first major film written, produced and directed by Native 
Americans, SMOKE SIGNALS came away a favorite at the Sundance Film 
Festival.  With a screenplay by Sherman Alexie (based on his book of 
stories THE LONE RANGER AND TONTO FISTFIGHT IN HEAVEN), the film acts 
ultimately as an ode to the relationships between fathers and sons, as 
well as to the love visible in acts of kindness.  
I was grateful to have the chance to see SMOKE SIGNALS in the only 
cinema in our small midwestern city.  It seems the university is 
requiring all incoming freshman to read Alexie's book, and is sponsoring 
a visit by Alexie in just a few days.  Now I do not have to worry about 
finding a video store that carries independent art films.  Now my son 
and I have been enriched by witnessing a part of the world different 
than ours.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films/ Shadow Catcher Entertainment
 Director:  Chris Eyre
 Writer:  Sherman Alexie
 Cast: Adam Beach, Evan Adams, Irene Bedard, Gary Farmer
   Father-son relationships have been the stuff of drama at
least since Oedipus killed his father Laius, and as such,
stories focusing on fathers and sons should be universal.  It
would be a shame, then, if a film like "He Got Game," honing
in on the affiliation between a young black man who needs to
forgive his dad's accidental killing of the boy mother, were
seen primarily by African-Americans.  It would likewise be
regretful if "Smoke Signals," also about a young man's need
to forgive his father--in this case for abandoning the family--is
ignored by white moviegoers simply because the principal
characters are American Indians.  "Smoke Signals" deals with
serious themes in a lighthearted, self-depracatory manner. But
its principal repute comes from its subtext: it is the first-ever
fictional movie written, directed, acted and co-produced by
American Indians.
   Having enjoyed a run at the 1997 Sundance Film Festival
where it garnered the prestigious Audience Award and
Filmmakers' Trophy, "Smoke Signals" is really four stories
adapted into a single, unified comedy-drama based on
Sherman Alexie's "The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in
Heaven."  Director Chris Eyre films it with a variety of angles,
filters, and techniques including the clever blending of
flashbacks into the present. It opens on the Coeur d'Alene
reservation in Idaho on a terrible fire which took place in 1976
killing the parents of little Thomas Builds-the-fire (Evan
Adams).  When Brian Capener's camera returns to the
present we see Thomas as a young man with oversized
glasses and a 3-piece suit, conveying the image of
a nerd, one whose penchant for endless storytelling could
almost be a metaphor for the entire oral tradition of the Native
American people.  Unlike Jim Carrey's character Fletcher
Reade in "Liar, Liar," Thomas tells falsehoods, but he mixes
them so cleverly into his narratives that one can scarcely tell
where the prevarications fade away and verity makes an
appearance.  
   Thomas's idol, Victor (Adam Beach), is his polar opposite.
Victor, a strapping, handsome, athletic young man, can hardly
avoid Thomas since his father Arnold (Gary Farmer)
saved the bespectacled boy's life by catching the infant as he
was thrown from a window.  But the dauntless Arnold is not a
hero to Victor, as he walked out on the family in a drunken
rage ten years previous.  Victor, who has never forgiven his
dad for the desertion, gets the opportunity to absolve Arnold
posthumously when he travels with Thomas to a desolate
Phoenix, Arizona location to pick up the ashes of the
newly-deceased man.
   Much of "Smoke Signals" is a road movie which has its
serious moments, but never fails to come across as solid, fun
entertainment, as Thomas regales his idol with fanciful tales
of Victor's dad.  Half annoyed and half relishing the
narratives, Victor tries to shape up the storyteller's image by
telling him to wipe the smile off his face, lose the suit in favor
of a power T-shirt, and most of all "get stoic."  Though their
tribe has always been fishermen, he urges his protege to act
like a buffalo hunter, the extended counsel providing the high
comic point of the movie.  Through their meeting with a
woman who has nurtured Victor's dad in Phoenix, Suzy
Song (Irene Bedard), Victor learns not to expect perfection in
a parent and finally comes to terms with his rage.
   Adam Beach and Evan Adams provide a comical study in
contrasts in much the way urbane New Yorker Robin Monroe
clashes with laid-back charter pilot Quinn Harris in the much
less substantial and more slickly commercial "Six Days,
Seven Nights."  Were "Smoke Signals" to go on for another
quarter hour, the novelty could well have worn off but at an
economical 89 minutes, director Eyre supplies just the right
balance of humor, intuition, and balance in a movie that
provides a gossamer story wholly from the Indian point of
view.  It's not that the Indians, like Victor, are a forgiving
people.  The opening scenes are peppered with commentary
such as the wish that all whites would go back whence they
came--London and Paris, for example--and no one considers
General Custer a hero.  "Smoke Signals" touches on subjects
as diverse as frybread, Phoenix, and forgiveness--a
distinguished Indian entry into mainstream filmography.
PG-13.  Running time: 89 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten
1998

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SMOKE SIGNALS (director: Chris Eyrie; cast: Adam Beach (Victor Joseph),
Evan Adams (Thomas Builds-the-Fire), Irene Bedard (Suzy Song), Gary
Farmer (Arnold Joseph), Tantoo Cardinal (Arlene Joseph), 1998)
SMOKE SIGNALS won the 1998 Sundance Festival film of the year. It is a
story of fatherly abuse, and a reluctant friendship between children
united by tragic circumstances. It is told in flashback, mostly from the
point of view of Victor (Adam), who feels that he is the wronged son of
a father who deserted the family. He has an unpleasant disposition,
which the filmmaker seems to indicate, is because of the failed
father-son relationship. All the main characters are Coeur d' Alene's of
Idaho. They offer a look into what the current indigenous people are
thinking and saying to each other, and how life is on the reservation.
There are many odd characters that add to our awareness of the Native
American experiences on the reservation, who are both amusing and
talkative.
But life on the reservation seems stale and confining; yet, everyone, at
least, has some material comforts, as they all seem to live in a house
and enjoy their fried bread.
The plot takes on its central theme of transformation when Victor learns
that his father died in Arizona, and he goes there with his most ardent
admirer, Thomas (Evan), who volunteers to pay the expenses just so he
can be with Victor, to retrieve the body. Thomas is the gentle
storyteller trying to grasp his Indian roots after being raised by his
kindly grandmother; while, Victor is the handsome, athletic but asocial,
abused child, who has never come to terms with his father's drinking or
rejection of him and his mother.
Victor's father, Arnold (Gary), rescued Thomas from the house Thomas's
parents died in, in a July 4th fire.Victor subsequently learns the fire
was caused accidently by his drunken father. Arnold could not reconcile
this, so he continued to drink and abuse his family, and finally took
off for Arizona, where he lived with Suzy Song (Irene), this wonderfully
gracious soul.
Forgiveness for his father and renewed friendship with Thomas takes
place when they bring his father's ashes back home.The film takes on the
look of a road film.
This is a film written, directed, and acted by Native Americans. It does
not suffer from the usual clich=E9s of Indian films, as it artfully weaves
a story wavering between despair and comic acceptance of the Native
American plight. It is only through the optimistic ending, that the
forgiveness of the son for his father and his altered relationship with
Thomas, from scorn to healthy respect, can the film reassure us that
this story has served as a metaphor for the hopes of the Native American
people, as they try to handle the injustices of their situation in a
peaceful  manner.
I recommend this film for its verve and very real passion it has for
Native Americans, despite the triteness of its story and the fact that
it offered no new insights into child abuse, resolving the father-son
relationship only posthumously. I mainly point this out, since one of
the major underlying themes of the film, was just that problem.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Brundage
Written by Sherman Alexie (based on stories from his book The Lone Ranger
and Tanto Fistfight in Heaven)
Starring Adam Beach, Evan Adams, Irene Bedard, Gary Farmer, Cody Lightning,
and Simon Baker
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 To those who think the world of watching movies as a job all fun and games,
remember that it is a chore as well.  You are forced to sit through numerous
bad movies, forced to lose faith slowly and surely in the film industry
until it is almost gone.  The cynicism you harbor eats you up inside until
you have nothing left but your own cruel intentions towards an industry that
you have no affinity left for.
 Then, as hope has dwindled to an almost non-existent point, you sit back
and watch a film like Smoke Signals.  Smoke Signals is one of those rare
movies that you never hear a bad word about.  It is one of those films that
comes out of nowhere, has no big names or bad lines, and is a completely
original story in short, the main things most movies lack.
 Rarely does a film touch you so much as Smoke Signals can, nor does it make
you smile or cry like this immensely powerful film can do.
 Set on the C'Ordelene Indiana Reservation in Idaho, Smoke Signals concerns
Victor Joseph (Adam Beach as an adult, Cody Lightning as a child) and Thomas
Builds-the-Fire (Evan Adams as an adult, Simon Baker as a child), both,
according to Sherman Alexie, "children born of fire."  By this it is meant
that the two of them were both almost killed in the same fire that took
Thomas' parents 22 years ago on the Fourth of July.  Arnold Joseph (Gary
Farmer) saved Thomas by catching him in his arms when he was thrown out of
the window by his parents in order to save him from the holocaust.
 Arnold Joseph, haunted by his own guilt for his abusive treatment of his
family and a secret that tears him apart inside, left for Phoenix when
Thomas and Victor were only 12, and, ten years later, the two of them must
go retrieve his ashes from his next door neighbor Suzy Song (Irene Bedard).
 The story sounds highly simplistic, and it is.  It also serves to be a
perfect method in which to examine the troubled relationships between
fathers and sons, and seeks to find a definition of a good man.
 As much as I talk of myself in my reviews, writing this it strikes me how
very little I tell you in them.  I opt not to speak of my own relationships
with others, nor my own personal demons and hauntings.  Faced with Smoke
Signals, I would love to recommend the film more to you but cannot do so
without entering into how the film is made personal for me.
 That feeling that the film is personal is universal with Smoke Signals,
which means different things to different people but is always a powerful
and personal story to everyone.  The film is strictly word-of-mouth,
recommended by one friend to another, and there is a reason for that.  Smoke
Signals is so intensely personal that it is difficult to get into why it is
such a perfect movie without drifting into one's own past something which
most people will only do with people they trust.
 What can be told without getting too personal is that, whatever walls you
may have built up over the course of your life, Smoke Signals contains with
it the raw power to break them with a thought.  It is a film that you will
enjoy, whether or not you set out to enjoy it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: An odyssey of two Indians in their early 20s going to
pick up the pickup truck of one's deceased father.  This is a film with
good characters that makes some profound points.  The dialog is very
good.  Rating: 9 (0 to 10), +3 (-4 to +4 scale)
   - Coeur d'Alene Indians of Idaho.
   - Victor Joseph is slightly stereotypical, a tall handsome Indian,
     but bitter about his alcoholic father not being around.
   - Thomas Builds-a-Fire is an original.  He is a sort of nerdy boy
     with braids and glasses.  Rather than playing basketball like his
     friend Victor he watches.  He tells stories, many of which are
     lies.  Victor looks down on him and derides him.  Yet where Victor
     is empty he is full.  His stories are what will sustain his
     people.  They are something that is lasting.
   - The conversations are worth hearing.  (But they are totally wrong
     about John Wayne's teeth.  The claim that you never see John
     Wayne's teeth in a film is totally misinformation.)
   - In 1976 Victor's father Arnold saved Thomas's life when a fire
     burned down his parents' house.
   - Victor's father was an alcoholic.  He left home a few years ago to
     live near Phoenix.  Took up with Suzy Song.
   - As with CHAMBERMAID ON THE TITANIC, a good lie from Thomas seems
     to do more to heal and to build people up than a harsh truth.
   - Local reservation traffic report is more a gossip column.  But
     there is no traffic anyway.
   - Lots of nice little surprises understated.  Many are humorous.
   - Only images of bad Indians on TV.
   - Suzy Song is everything Victor is not.  She embraces life and is
     not bitter.
   - Tom Skerritt has a small role as a threatening policeman.
   - Based on LONE RANGER AND TONTO HAVE A FISTFIGHT IN HEAVEN, a short
     story collection.  This was one of the stories.
   - Really about all fathers and sons.

Author
Murali Krishnan
Vincent and Thomas are not really friends, but they have a connection in
that Vincent's father Arnold (who left the family years ago) saved Thomas'
life in an accident that left him an orphan as an infant. When Vincent finds
out that his father has died in Arizona, miles away from the reservation in
Idaho, Thomas offers to give Vincent the money he needs to make the trip to
recover Arnold's possessions on the condition that he accompany Vincent. The
nerdy Thomas and the tough Vincent
This is a film that I wanted to like more than I did. The overall theme is
rather moving, and it is expressed quite well in the voice-over narration in
the final scene. However, in many places the film seems forced. When a film
chooses to present extreme situations to make a point, rather than using
subtlety, it is not making the audience feel for the characters, but rather
it is telling the audience what to feel for the characters. It is easier to
write melodrama than drama. Also adding to the forced feeling is the rather
stiff acting. I was often left feeling that I was watching actors rather
than associating with characters.
Despite its weaknesses, this is still an enjoyable film. It does showcase
many aspects of the modern American Indian experience. One example is the
presentation of oral storytelling tradition. The stories that several
characters tell play pivotal roles, and what is interesting about them is
that what is considered "truth" in the narrative. Instead of being a
accurate portrayal of events as they actually happened, they often have a
more symbolic meaning. Since this is billed as the first film to be written,
directed, and co-produced by a Native American, one feels comfortable that
one is learning about that subculture rather than being presented with the
usual, often distorted, image.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Louis Proyect
Written by Coeur D'Alene Sherman Alexie, directed by Cheyenne/Arapaho
Chris Eyre and starring American Indians, "Smoke Signals" is a
deceptively "small" movie. While lacking the big budget elements of
the plastic commercial blockbusters featuring Arnold or Tom or Julia,
it is from another perspective much grander than those types of films.
It evokes William Blake's lines in "Auguries of Innocence":
Structured as a picaresque "road movie", "Smoke Signals" (based on
Alexie's short story collection "The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight
in Heaven") depicts a journey from the Coeur D'Alene reservation in
Idaho to Phoenix by two teen-aged Indians, Victor Joseph (Adam Beach)
and Thomas Builds-the-Fire (Evan Adams). Victor's father Arnold (Gary
Farmer) has just died and Victor is sent to return his ashes to the
reservation. Thomas, whom Victor regards as something of a pest,
pleads to be taken along.
Their relation to each other and to Victor's dead father supplies the
central dramatic impulse for the film. While guests are asleep
following a drunken party at the house of Thomas's parents on the
fourth of July in 1976, Arnold accidentally starts a fire with a
sparkler he is waving drunkenly. The infants Thomas and Victor are
saved from the fire but Thomas's parents die in the flames. Thomas is
rescued by Arnold, who catches him from a second story window. This
act lends a certain grandeur to Arnold in Thomas's eyes, but for
Victor his father is just a wife-beating drunk. Structured around a
series of flashbacks, we see Arnold trying to impress the young Victor
with magic tricks while in the next moment slapping his face for
accidentally spilling some beer.
During a long bus ride, Victor and Thomas discuss what it means to be
an Indian as well as what it means to be a human being in the larger
sense. Victor is a suspicious and angry young man who excels in
sports, while Thomas is warm, accepting and physically
unprepossessing. Thomas is also a visionary and a story-teller, who
occasionally drives Victor to distraction with his spontaneous
Shaman-like tales. Victor is also on a reclamation project to make
Thomas look "more Indian". This means getting him to get rid of the
nerdy looking business suit he wears and his braids. While Victor's
idea of being Indian has a lot to do with image, we (and Victor)
discover that Thomas is in touch with older and more genuine
indigenous roots as the film takes shape. Thomas's nonstop musings
serve as the central "voice" of the movie as he constantly babbles
about family, traditions, ancestors and values. While Victor glares at
him during these rhapsodies, he is eventually seduced, as are we.
Much of the film's power has to do with its honesty, both in the way
the characters are depicted and also in its use of on-location filming
at the Coeur D'Alene reservation which, like most reservations, is
literally in the middle of nowhere. It reminded me much of what I have
heard from Jim Craven about the Blackfoot Reservation in Montana. It
is a mixture of rugged mountainous landscape with meager ramshackle
housing and tacky general stores run by whites. Director Chris Eyre
has found a way to capture both aspects of the reservation, so the
audience understands both the lingering attraction of the reservation
and what drives its inhabitants to desperation. One of the nicest
touches is Thomas and Victor getting a hitch to the bus stop by two
teenaged girls in a jalopy stuck in reverse. Before they allow the two
boys in, they demand a payment for the ride. Thomas suggests a story
as barter and proceeds to spin out a wry tale of Arnold Joseph as a
militant Indian antiwar hippie in 1967, to Victor's customary chagrin.
To Victor's complaint that this never happened, Thomas responds with a
smile and a shrug of the shoulders.
Interviews with Sherman Alexie during the publicity campaign
surrounding the film's debut last year depict a man who appears to be
a combination of Thomas, and both Victor and Arnold Joseph. Alexie is
6'2" and played basketball during his student days. Physical prowess
did not come easy to him, however. He was born hydrocephalic and
underwent brain surgery at the age of 6 months. He wasn't expected to
survive and, if he did, the doctors expected him to be left mentally
retarded.
Like many sickly children, Alexie took comfort in books. This
eventually led him into a writing program at Washington State
University and early successes in poetry and prose. Success has not
come easy to him, however, and he has had to battle alcoholism. He has
also had a troubled relation with his own father, who worked as a
truck driver and logger on and off the reservation. He says, "We've
had difficulty, mostly when were younger. We're at the point where I
love him, but I'm pissed off at him. And I can tell him both things."
(Minneapolis Star Tribune, July 8, 1998)
Alexie describes "Smoke Signals" as a challenge to the cinematic
history of Indians. "In most films, Indians have been stoic. That's
the stereotype of what Indians are supposed to be--stoic and
alcoholic, depressed poor people. But in fact, Indians are the most
joyous people in the world. The two funniest groups I've been around
have been Indians and Jews. So I guess there's something to be said
about the inherent humor of genocide."
Another challenge to preconceived expectations is what has been
happening to the Coeur D'Alene people economically.
Since opening a modest bingo hall and casino in 1992, the reservation
has become an "economic powerhouse" in the northern Idaho Panhandle,
according to an August 14, 1998 Washington Post article. More than
$100 million in land and facilities is held and another $60 million is
slated for construction.
The Post article points out that the Coeur D'Alene view casinos as a
means to an end, that being a diversified economic structure including
industrial parks to golf courses, which they believe will be more
dependable and long-lasting than casinos. David J. Matheson, their
chief executive officer for gaming, says, "Ultimately, we'd like
gaming to be a footnote in our history, to be able to say that it was
here and we used it for a purpose because we chose to. But my ultimate
hope is that someday we can phase out gaming entirely."
For the average reservation resident, the income has made a
difference. Charlotte Nilson got a degree at Lewis and Clark College
in Lewiston, 75 miles south of the rez. "There are no limits to what
we can do. We can do just about anything we want to do."
Leaving aside the question of whether other economic resources might
have entailed less loss of cultural autonomy, a backlash is growing in
Washington against the system which allowed casinos to be built.
Lawmakers seek to remove tribal autonomy and exemption from local and
state taxes. The Coeur D'Alene are also under attack for launching
U.S. Lottery, the first American Indian gambling site on the Internet.
While the Coeur D'Alene are determined to protect their right to use
gaming for the collective benefit of the people, their real priorities
are on projects like a Wellness Center that is meant to fight
unhealthy habits in Indian country, including obesity, alcoholism and
drug abuse.
Another important project is the eventual purchase of world-famous
Coeur D'Alene Resort, 40 miles north of the reservation. The state
court has ruled that the lake the resort sits on is Indian property,
ceded by the federal government before Idaho statehood.
In 1991 the tribe filed a massive lawsuit against the local silver,
lead and zinc mining industries for dumping millions of tons of heavy
metals into the Coeur D'Alene watershed, which also fouled the lake.
Today, the site is the nation's second largest Superfund cleanup
project, expected to cost $120 million.
The current owner of the resort said that he'd be surprised if the
entire lake came under Indian control. But if it did, he said, "I
think the tribe would be good stewards. They have a long history of
deep concern for the lake, and I think however it turns out, its
beauty will be retained."
I want to thank long time cyberfriend Ya-ZZZ, a Cherokee wisewoman,
for recommending "Smoke Signal" and also the way she recommended it. 
Marxist discussion is at: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

"Smoke Signals" is one of those small movies I may not have seen on
my own.  There was the potential dopiness factor ("the first film made
by Native Americans" or something like that).  The expectation of a
more mediocre "Boyz in the Hood" would have been high: overblown praise
for a film about an ethnic group, made by someone from that ethnic
group, simply for those facts and not because it's a remarkable movie.
White liberal guilt as a marketing tactic.
[Speaking of Native Americans and spin aimed right at white liberal
guilt, I recall the fur industry taking up the tactic of using Eskimos
to go and hunt seals for fur.  Traditional lifestyle, it was called,
even though seals had not been hunted in such numbers and solely for
fur.  In white liberal guilt terms, this caused a short circuit kind of
like the ones you see in bad science fiction, where the all-knowing
computer is defeated by the hero posing an unanswerable question.
"Does not compute" and all that because of "fur or traditional
lifestyles".  It was supposed to have been one of the reasons for fur's
revival in the past few years.  But I think I saw the article in the
New Republic.  For all I know, Stephen Glass wrote it.]
Anyway, "Smoke Signals" is based on the collection of short stories,
"The Long Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven," by Sherman Alexie, who
also did the screenplay for the movie.  The book was recommended to me
a number of times, but I never got around to reading it.  I'll pick it
up in the near future after seeing the film.
It's a good film, funny and humane.  The basic story is of the main
characters traveling from Idaho to Arizona to retrieve the body of
one their fathers.  He had left home a decade before, leaving behind
his wife and 12-year old son.  The son, of course, had not been
reconciled his father's departure.  The movie is a road movie and a
father-son-relationship movie (one that, refreshingly, doesn't involve
being lost in space or dinosaurs to work out the conflict).  It uses
universal themes, textured with Indian reservation culture to give it
context and place.
Reservation culture, despite the film's advanced billing, is not shoved in
your face.  Yes, the film shows the culture's quirks and peculiarities,
its humor and tragedy, but it does not call attention to itself.
It's simply there.
There are nice scenes illustrating the characters reactions to America's
perception of Native Americans in general.  They are conscious of it,
but look at it with unforced humor.  The film itself is an attempt to
recast this image, but it does it without straying into the New Age goo
you see strewn all over "Dances With Wolves" like buffalo droppings.
It is conscious of the image, but realizes that it has to deal with the
living in the present.
Most of the film proceeds nicely, feeling much like, say, a Jarmusch
film, but it breaks down somewhat about fifteen minutes before the end.
There is a crisis in which one of the characters has to run 20 miles
for help.  The run is very abrupt, and, apparently during his marathon,
he is magically reconciled with his father.  How this happens is clouded
in mystery: we see him running in the desert night, intercut with scenes
of fire.  There's a voice over, replaying things said earlier in the film.
At the end of the run, all is happy.  Perhaps he went on a Spirit Quest.
Arguably, if engaging in a lot of cardiovascular activity results in a
mystical voyage of inner discovery, I may someday discover the meaning of
life while on the exercise bike (in the meantime, I have wacky ideas like,
hey, hook me up to a Gilligan's Island-style bike-powered generator,
and I can power my halogen lamp for ten minutes).  Beyond this glich,
this is a good movie, and should be appearing at the local art house in
the near future.
"The court determined that Fox TV does not impede free and fair
competition in the teen-angst soap-com genre, therefore Party of Five
need not be broken into five 'Parties of One,' one being distributed to
each of the other networks."
-- 
"The court determined that Fox TV does not impede free and fair
competition in the teen-angst soap-com genre, therefore Party of Five
need not be broken into five 'Parties of One,' one being distributed to
each of the other networks."

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Adam Beach, Evan Adams, Irene Bedard, Gary Farmer, Tantoo
Cardinal
Ingredients: Two young guys on a road trip who can't get along, Native
Americans, fatherhood
Synopsis: 
Flashback: Years ago a tragic fire occurs in a home on an American
Indian Reservation in Idaho. During the fire an alcohol-prone man named
Arnold Joseph (Gary Farmer) bravely saves an infant named Thomas, about
the same age as his own baby boy Victor. "I didn't mean to," Arnold
says. Tragically, Arnold becomes an alcoholic as the lads grow taller,
and finally he abandons his son Victor and the family.
When an unexpected phone call brings the news of Arnold's death in a
trailer park in Phoenix to the Idaho reservation, Victor (Adam Beach)
and Thomas (Evan Adams) are about 20 years old. Victor is somewhat of a
stoic, cynical person, while Thomas is an irritating, talkative, geeky
person. Although they don't have much money, the misfit friends set off
together on a quest to reach the Phoenix trailer park to recover
Arnold's ashes. 
In the meantime, they ponder who exactly Arnold was, why he left, and
the general bond between fathers and sons.
Opinion:
SMOKE SIGNALS is a tasteful and well-acted movie about a universal
theme: trying to understand why your father did the things he did, as
you were growing up. Aside from being a movie about two guys on the road
and the universal theme of men trying to understand their fathers, there
is also a pleasant and unique cultural background that pervades the
movie. SMOKE SIGNALS is written, directed, and acted by Native
Americans.
For example, when the son asks, "I promised you I would. You want me to
sign a written contract, Mom?" the mother replies, "Nah, we Indians have
a thing about signed documents."
The soundtrack is also very unique, especially for those like myself who
are unfamiliar with rock done in American Indian style. (Actually rock
music is ethnic by nature, since it is the blending of African rhythms
with the European chord schemes). Conventional rock music is on a 4/4
beat, but the timing of the notes in Native American Indian chants is
highly advanced; much more sophisticated than folk or rock. The blending
of Native American timing with the rock beat is fascinating. A good
example of this is the humorous song, "John Wayne's Teeth" which is
heard during the bus trip in the movie.
All in all, it's obvious that SMOKE SIGNALS was lovingly created by
people who wanted to bring homespun wisdom to life. If you've seen one
too many megastar schlock formulas this summer and are burnt out on
them, take a break and check out SMOKE SIGNALS.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Smoke Signals (1998)
Adam Beach, Evan Adams, Irene Bedard, Gary Farmer, Tantoo Cardinal, Cody 
Lightning, Joseph Simon Baker, Michelle St. John, Robert Miano, Penny 
Monique Mojica, Elaine Miles, Michael Greyeyes, Chief Leonard George, 
John Trudell, Darwin Haine, Tom Skerritt, Cynthia Geary, Perrey Reeves. 
Screenplay by Sherman Alexie (based on his book "The Lone Ranger and 
Tonto Fistfight in Heaven"). Directed by Chris Eyre. 88 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Oh, what a debt the cinema owes to lousy father and son relationships. 
Between the films about sons trying to reconcile with Dad, dads trying to 
reconcile with sons, and young men seeking father figures because Dad is 
either dead or just too damn mean, this angst-filled genre has produced a 
number of fine movies, providing welcome vicarious catharsis for tortured 
males the world over.
"Smoke Signals" is the latest addition to the bad Dad genre, enlivened 
with a healthy dose of good humor. Written by Sherman Alexie, from his 
caustic short-story collection "The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in 
Heaven," the film centers on Victor Joseph (Adam Beach) and Thomas Builds-
the-Fire (Evan Adams), two Coeur d'Alene Indians living on an Idaho 
reservation. When word arrives that Victor's father, who deserted his 
wife and son years earlier, has died, the young men head for Phoenix to 
collect his remains.
Though far from friends, Victor and Thomas have shared a connection since 
childhood, when Victor's father Arnold (Gary Farmer) saved the baby 
Thomas from a fire that killed his parents. Victor grew up sullen and 
stoic, while Thomas became the Native American Urkel. Wearing pigtails, 
black-framed glasses and a constant goofy grin, Thomas tells mythic tales 
of his heritage over and over in a peculiar sing-song voice. He irritates 
the hell out of Victor, who grudgingly allows him to come on the journey 
only because Thomas has the travel funds Victor lacks.
With its mismatched-pair-on-a-road-trip structure and estranged father 
and son subtext, "Smoke Signals" covers very familiar turf, but does so 
with style, punctuating the men's trip with illuminating flashbacks to 
their childhoods. The easygoing film has real charm, thanks to winning 
performances and Alexie's eye for character detail.
In the early scenes at the reservation, he establishes an agreeably 
quirky feel, reminiscent of the "Northern Exposure" TV series. The KREZ 
morning deejay greets listeners with "It's a good day to be indigenous" 
before cutting to a man perched on his broken-down truck at a dusty 
intersection, who offers amusing deadpan bulletins like "Big truck just 
went by. Now it's gone" over his cell-phone. Victor and Thomas exchange 
pleasantries with two young women who cruise the reservation driving in 
reverse, apparently the only gear that works on their car. Elaine Miles, 
the enigmatic Marilyn from "Northern Exposure," is one of the women. 
Cynthia Geary, who played Shelly on the show, also pops in later, further 
underscoring the stylistic connection to the series.
Colorful townfolks aside, the heart of the film is the relationship 
between Victor and Thomas, thankfully two very well-rounded and 
intriguing characters. Adam Beach does fine work adding shadings to 
Victor's tortured soul, and Evan Adams is a revelation as the peculiar, 
but extremely engaging Thomas. Just when you're about to write off the 
young man as a hapless loon, he says something quite insightful. And just 
as you begin to respect his off-the-wall wisdom, he blurts out some 
wildly clueless statement. Such a beguiling odd duck.
As the details about Victor's father slowly emerge, things change for 
both men. The revelations and life-lessons in "Smoke Signals" are nothing 
new, but they resonate anyway, because the dialogue rings true and the 
characters are so credible. 
Presented with both the Audience Award and the Filmmakers Trophy at the 
1998 Sundance Film Festival, "Smoke Signals" is a ragged, but disarming 
little film. In a cinematic climate overflowing with character-deficient 
event movies, it's nice to see an unassuming work about actual human 
beings come up a winner for a change.

Author
W. Waffle
I review independent flicks and movies that deserve a second chance every week
at WWW.WAFFLEMOVIES.COM. Here is a sample:
In Smoke Signals, director Chris Erye and writer Sherman Alexie give us a
realistic and moving view of Native Americans. They drop the stereotypes and
truthfully portray Native Americans as regular people full of hopes and dreams,
facing tough decisions and coping with loss. Erye and Alexie also examine the
stereotypes and racism they face, as well as the inner struggle each faces
dealing with the world. 
The movie opens with an incident that connects our two main characters for
life. In Coeur d'Alene, Idaho on Independence Day 1976, Arnold Joseph (Gary
Farmer) saved the life of Thomas (Evan Adams) as both of his parents perished
in a horrible fire. Now orphaned, Thomas is raised by his grandmother and tries
to connect with those around him through storytelling. Also rescued from the
fire is Arnold Joseph's son, Victor (Adam Beach). 
Erye skillfully uses a series of flashbacks mixed with modern day action to
explain the relationship between Thomas and Victor. He shows us the friendship
shared by the two until a guilt-ridden Arnold Joseph leaves his family for
Arizona. On that day, young Thomas (Simon Baker) suggests it is young Victor's
(Cody Lightning) fault that his father has left. Victor never forgives Thomas
until his mother (Tantoo Cardinal) receives a call from Arnold Joseph's
neighbor (Irene Bedard) informing her that his father has died. 
Victor wants to travel to Arizona to claim his father's remains, but cannot
afford a bus ticket. Although they have grown apart, Thomas agrees to lend him
the money, but with the condition that they go together. Thomas always had a
strong relationship with the man who saved his life, and wishes to say good-bye
with his old friend. 
The resulting movie becomes one of the best buddy movies I have seen in a long
time. Unlike the classic Dean Martin/Jerry Lewis buddy pictures, this one is
driven by Alexie's sharp Tarrantino-like dialogue instead of zany situation
comedy. During the trip, we learn about the racism Victor and Thomas face as
they encounter others filled with hate. 
Not only do Victor and Thomas face hate as they leave the reservation for the
first time in their lives, but they are burdened by conflicting ideas of how
they should act and portray themselves. One of the best scenes of the movie
results when Victor instructs Thomas how he should act or else, "the white man
will run all over you." Victor tells Thomas he must abandon his trademark suit
and braids for long flowing locks and a stoic appearance. Thomas transforms
himself into a warrior, but retains his nerdy demeanor, realizing that he
doesn't want to be a stereotype. 
In Arizona, Thomas and Victor learn about the rehabilitated Arnold Joseph. He
gave up drinking and loved his son from afar. Arnold's neighbor, Suzy Song,
explains why he left Victor and his mother and the truth behind the most
important incident in Victor and Thomas' lives. 
The picture is full of excellent performances. Gary Farmer shines as the
alcoholic and remorseful Arnold Joseph. Farmer is excellent as we slowly watch
him deteriorate and become consumed with guilt. Adam Beach is fabulous as the
emotionally withdrawn and heartbroken Victor. He fills the character full of
rage and hurt. Evan Adams should have been nominated for an Oscar for his
performance as the "Dances with Wolves"-loving, mystical, nerdy Thomas. He
creates an appealing and enduring character that you hope will reappear in
other work by Eyre and Alexie. 
Why was this movie released in June of 1998?!?!?!? Unfortunately, this
excellent movie would have been better served if it were released in the fall
or winter like most Oscar contenders. That competition would have been more
appropriate than facing Saving Private Ryan, Armageddon and Something About
Mary. The movie was awarded the Audience Award and the Filmmaker's Trophy at
the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, and could have made a strong Oscar showing if
released at a better time. 
Chris Eyre does an excellent job helming the first movie by Native Americans
about Native Americans. Unfortunately, the movie has some fantastic
cinematography that is lost on the small screen. Although this movie never
registered on the national radar screen, Eyre has great potential and will be
heard from as he makes more movies. Fortunately for us, this movie is available
on video, allowing us the opportunity to enjoy this hidden gem. 

Author
Joy Wyse
        Throughout history the American Indians have communicated through smoke
signals, but do they always understand the message that is sent?  This
movie concentrates on the lives of members of the Coeur d'Alene Indians of
Idaho, particularly on two friends, Victor and Thomas.
        As the film begins a frame house is engulfed in flames with  smoke
billowing into the sky.   A voice narration is describing the incident. 
It is Thomas.  He is recalling  when he was flying, as you see a baby
thrown from the upstairs window.  An Indian man rushes forward with
outstretched arms catching the infant as they both fall to the ground. 
The rescuer is Victor's father.   Sadly, Thomas' parents are both killed
in the blaze.  Thomas, raised by his grandmother, becomes quite a
storyteller and somewhat of a nerd.  Victor, on the other hand, is the
epitome of the Indian brave, with the added ability to play basketball.
        When Victor is twelve years old, his father leaves.   Much of the movie
is done using flashbacks, with very artistic editing.  The twelve year old
actors and their adult counterparts are remarkably alike, and all handle
their roles with total believability.
        Watching the film you   understand a little more about what life must be
like on an Indian reservation.  There is a lot of drinking, mostly beer,
but the thought of "firewater" and its effect on the American Indian is
obvious.  There are many subtle remarks about the "white man", some of
which are very funny, some all too true.  One charming scene involves two
Indian girls out for a joy ride in their car, driving in reverse.  No
reason is ever given, but you know that it is probably the only gear that
works.
        The main story involves the trip that Victor and Thomas make to Arizona
when word is received that Victor's father has died and Victor needs to go
there to finalize things. He doesn't want to go, but he does.  What he
learns is told in a most fascinating way.  It is truly a heartwarming
story and I highly recommend it.  I will definitely watch is again,
probably when it comes on television.  
        This film was produced in association with the Sundance Studios.  I give
it a B+.

Author
Kristian Lin
"How do we forgive our fathers?"  That line, spoken by a voiceover
narrator, comes toward the end of SMOKE SIGNALS, an accomplished and at
times remarkable film.  It's meant to be the movie's epigraph, but it
could serve the same purpose for several other recent movies.
The movie starts when Victor Joseph (Adam Beach), a Coeur d'Alene Indian
who lives on the reservation in Idaho, receives the news that his
father, Arnold, has died in Phoenix.  His nerdy friend Thomas
Builds-the-Fire (Evan Adams) offers him the money for the trip from
Idaho on the condition that he let Thomas go along with him.  Victor
doesn't like Thomas all that much, but he needs the money, so he
reluctantly accepts.  Arnold once saved the infant Thomas's life, and
Thomas now idolizes him as a brash, colorful, bigger-than-life
character.  Victor, on the other hand, remembers him as an abusive,
unpredictable drunk who abandoned his family.
SMOKE SIGNALS began as a book of short stories by Sherman Alexie.  When
Hollywood expressed interest in filming his screenplay adaptation, he
held out for a Native American film director.  With Chris Eyre, he made
the right choice.  The pacing is deliberate, providing the properly
relaxed, open-road atmosphere that lends itself to Alexie's tiny, sharp
insights.  He isn't afraid to take stylistic chances, but he finds a
nice balance between fantasy scenes and the movie's smaller-scaled
moments.
Hollywood often uses Native Americans as symbols, or occasionally as
slyly comic figures who play on white people's ignorance of them.  It's
sad, though, that we needed Native American filmmakers to portray 
Native Americans who don't behave as if they're from another planet. 
These characters are firmly placed in American pop culture, even as
they're given a bemused, detached attitude towards it.  Victor and
Thomas's worm's-eye point of view makes their references to Michael
Jordan and the DEATH WISH movies so breezily amusing.
SMOKE SIGNALS is like GOOD WILL HUNTING in that both movies are best at
depicting the banter of guys hanging out.  Critics have already given
their dues to the chant of "John Wayne's teeth" and Thomas's praise of
Victor's mother's frybread, but there's also stuff like the story of
Arnold getting his picture in the paper, or Thomas's shirt that reads
"Frybread Power."  Evan Adams, in particular, deserves some credit - he 
seems carried away by his own narrative sense when he gives voice to the
stories.
But it isn't just the tone that these movies share.  Like Will Hunting,
Victor's a strong, silent type who's crying on the inside because of his
father's abuse.  SMOKE SIGNALS, though, tops GOOD WILL HUNTING in that
the father isn't just a shadowy, fairy-tale monster.  He's a complex
character who's carrying around his own pain.  Seen in flashback (and
played brilliantly by Gary Farmer), Arnold is a troubled shell of his
former fun-loving self.  He's still capable of real warmth and inspires
the love of his neighbor Suzy (an incandescent Irene Bedard).  His
telling a story of Victor's performance in a basketball game results in
a bravura scene that's worthy of the inspired heights of Spike Lee's HE
GOT GAME.  Arnold's pride in his son infuses the whole screen with an
electricity that results in a great, thrilling moment.
Eyre's film also dares to suggest that exorcising one's demons is a
somewhat complicated process.  Will Hunting achieves catharsis because
his therapist keeps telling him, "It's not your fault." (Hell, if that's
all it took to cure him, "Saturday Night Live's" Stuart Smalley could
have done the job.)  Eyre and Alexie leave Victor's healing incomplete
at the movie's end.  Neither film reaches the level of HE GOT GAME -
Spike Lee takes things a step further by daring to make Jesus
Shuttlesworth emotionally functional in spite of his father's neglect -
but Eyre's movie is mostly and refreshingly free of the self-pity that
pervades GOOD WILL HUNTING.
SMOKE SIGNALS boasts a veritable all-star lineup of Indian actors.  As
Victor's mother, Tantoo Cardinal has the soft radiance and authority of
a Susan Sarandon.  Michelle St. John and Elaine Miles (from TV's 
"Northern Exposure") are a daffy pair of girls who cruise the
reservation in a car that's apparently stuck in reverse.  It goes to
show that there is a talent pool of Native Americans that has been
scandalously underused by Hollywood casting directors.  Anglo actor Tom
Skerritt also gets a spicy cameo as a local sheriff.
In the end, SMOKE SIGNALS is a film that reinforces what we should
already know - everyone has a story to tell.  I was planning on ending
this piece by expressing the hope that this movie would spur Native 
Americans and people from other minorities to film their experiences.  I
still have that hope, but a movie this good doesn't need that kind of
hook.  It's a highly enjoyable road picture told from a different point
of view, and that's reason enough to make it out to your art-house
theater to see it.

Author
Joe Barlow
        On the Coeur d'Alene indian reservation in Idaho, life floats by
like a slow breeze.  K-REZ, the low-watt radio station which serves the
indian community, broadcasts the same basic traffic report every morning:
"A big truck is passing by."  A pause.  "Now it's gone."  Another pause.
"Ain't no traffic, really."  The meteorological report is just as laconic:
"One of those clouds looks kinda like a horse."  It's the sort of place
where people still prefer to barter for their goods, and if you can't
afford to have the "forward" gear of your car fixed, then hey, you simply
drive around in reverse.  But life here only looks slow and dreamy if you
happen to live somewhere else.  The residents of this community have
their own fair share of joy, desire, catastrophe and discontent, all
carefully buried behind the idyllic facade they put up for the benefit of
the tourists.
        It's a rare film indeed which is able to bring together
sentimentality, wistfulness, and absolution in such a way that it feels
fresh and new, rather than old and reheated.  "Smoke Signals" is such a
film.  Not only does it allow us a peek into the highly personal lives of
its characters, but it paints them with such a deft touch that we are
completely drawn into their world, experiencing all the pain and triumph
of these fascinating people.  This is a film where, when the end credits
begin to roll, you simply stay in your seat and think about what you've
just seen while simultaneously wishing the experience wasn't over.
        The story opens on July 4, 1976, the American bi-centennial.  On
the reservation, indians celebrate "the white man's day of freedom" by
shooting off fireworks and drinking beer.  The festivities are quickly
disrupted, however, when a fire breaks out in a nearby house.  The young
couple inside finds themselves trapped in the burning building, and fling
their newborn baby from a third-story window in a desperate attempt to
save it from the inferno.  A quick-thinking neighbor, Arnold Joseph (Gary
Farmer), manages to catch the child, but all he and the other onlookers
can do is watch and listen as the parents burn.
        The infant that Arnold saves is Thomas Builds-the-Fire (Evan
Adams).  Raised by his grandmother after being saved from the flames,
Thomas grows into an intelligent, amiable young man, full of stories and
laughter.  Sadly, Thomas is also a bit of a nerd, and is therefore shunned
by the other indians.  Cruelest of all is Arnold's son Victor (Adam Evans),
who later accuses Thomas of having learned everything he knows about their
heritage by watching "Dances with Wolves" over and over.
        Victor has demons of his own, however.  His father, despite the
brief moment of heroism in which he saved Thomas, is an alcoholic who's
just as likely to communicate with his fists as with words.  In his
young life, Victor has seen his mother physically abused by Arnold many
times.  Under the tutelage of his father, Victor is also taught to hate all
white people.  When Arnold storms out after a fight with his wife and
moves to Arizona, never to return, Victor learns an important lesson:
one must never love, for love leads to pain.  The lesson is heeded, though
Victor never forgives his father for deserting him.
        Flash forward to present day, as word of Arnold's death filters
back to the reservation.  As his only son, Victor knows what he must do:
travel to Arizona, pick up his father's ashes, and bring them back to the
reservation as indian tradition demands.  There's a problem, however:
Victor has no money, no car, and precious little experience dealing with
the great big world outside the reservation's boundaries.  Thomas, hearing
of Victor's plight, offers to buy Victor a bus ticket on one condition:
he, Thomas, must be allowed to come along and pay his respects to the man
who saved his life so long ago.  Victor grudgingly agrees, and the two men
head off on a journey which will change both of them forever.
        The film borders on heavy at times, but the witty script from
Sherman Alexie knows when to lighten the mood with humor.  The interplay
between Thomas and Victor, an indian "Odd Couple," is priceless.  Thomas,
who has even less experience being off the reservation than Victor, is
constantly fascinated by the smallest details.  "I went to Denny's once,"
he tells Victor wonderingly.  "Even though it was after twelve, they still
let me order the Grand Slam Breakfast!"  In another scene, Victor tries to
get Thomas to act more like an indian.  "You smile too much.  Indians don't
smile, Thomas.  Get stoic!"  This is a wonderful moment, as is another
in which Thomas and Victor sing a lengthy song about John Wayne's false
teeth... to the great annoyance of the other passengers.
        Along the way, we watch Victor come to terms with the death of
his father, who he has always considered a loser and a deserter.  Thomas,
who knows Arnold only as the man who saved his life, disagrees with this
assessment.  As more of Arnold's personality is revealed to us via
flashbacks, we learn that neither Victor or Thomas have the complete
picture.  Mercifully, the film does not try to make Arnold into a "good"
man, only a real one.  Victor will learn that his father was not quite
the monster he'd always believed, just as Thomas will discover that no
man, including the late Arnold Joseph, is a saint.  It's a revelation
that makes both men rethink their philosophies.
        As one would expect of any mismatched pair, there is an incredible
amount of friction between our two main characters.  When the friendly
Thomas befriends a white woman on the bus, Victor insults her and drives
her away.  Thomas's chatterbox dialogue grates on Victor's ears, and they
have differing opinions on just about everything.  But through it all, a
special bond forms between them.  Due to the skillful way in which the
film depicts their growing fondness, we never doubt either man's sincerity.
        By the end of the movie, Victor and Thomas have each inherited
a smattering of the other's personality, and both are better people for it.
Their final parting scene, in which Thomas receives a special gift from
his new friend, is so unselfish and "real" that I was honestly touched by
it.  The fact that such a powerful response could be generated by such a
short scene says a great deal about the skill of the actors, director,
and screenwriter.  These characters stay with us long after the film is
over, as does the haunting climatic voice-over, solemnly delivered by
Thomas.
        "Smoke Signals" isn't perfect, but it comes awfully close.  Only
once does it stumble, and even this is not neccessarily a flaw, depending
on your point-of-view:
        I understand that the film is interested in conveying the Native
American viewpoint.  That's fine-- it does so extremely well, and it's
a big part of the movie's charm.  However, the film does seem to go out
of its way to make a GREAT STATEMENT about racism, which quite honestly
feels forced.  Case in point: there are four white men with speaking parts
in this movie, and ALL OF THEM are racist scumbags.  Indeed, one scene
with a redneck sheriff could be dispensed with altogether, since it seems
to be included for no other reason than to introduce yet another white
antagonist.
        But this relatively minor criticism in no way detracts from the
story's power.  This is an incredible debut from first-time director
Chris Eyre, full of warmth, humor, and most of all, life.  Be sure to
catch it.  Without a doubt, it's one of the year's best.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm

Author
Kevin Patterson
The buzz surrounding SMOKE SIGNALS has largely focused on the fact that it
is the first film to have been written, produced, directed, and acted
entirely by Native Americans. While it is notable for its avoidance of
pop-culture stereotypes of all Native Americans as either shamans or
drunkards, the roots of its success are the same as those of most
successful films: realistic, three-dimensional characters who have an
interesting story.
Victor Joseph (Adam Beach), the lead character, is a young man living on a
reservation in Idaho whose alcoholic father Arnold (Gary Farmer) abandoned
his family years ago. It's a small, isolated community, which means that he
sometimes sees more than he would like of Thomas Builds-The-Fire (Evan
Adams), whom Arnold rescued from a fire when he was only an infant. Thomas
is the kind of guy who's settled into a routine, which in his case is his
enthusiasm for just about everything and his tendency to tell odd little
stories all the time, and is completely oblivious to the fact that he can
get on people's nerves once in a while. Victor's father, who's been in
Arizona since he left his family, has now died, and Victor doesn't have
enough money to go collect his ashes by himself. Along comes Thomas, who
agrees to supply the rest of the cash if he can go along for the ride.
>From there, SMOKE SIGNALS follows the basic formula for a buddy/road movie,
in which the characters discover certain things about themselves and about
each other along the way. Victor discovers that his father wasn't just a
simple drunk who ran out on the family and that he has harbored a lot more
anger and bitterness over his family's breakup than he would like to admit.
Thomas, who sometimes unintentionally mimics the stereotype of Native
Americans as mystics and who "has seen DANCES WITH WOLVES a hundred times"
according to Victor, turns out to be a little wiser than one might
initially think.
While there are some traces of resentment over their social
marginalization, the Native Americans in SMOKE SIGNALS seem just as likely
to joke about their situation as they are to complain about it. "The only
thing worse than Indians on TV is Indians watching Indians on TV," Thomas
comments when he, Victor, and Arnold's friend Suzie (Irene Bedard) find
themselves watching a cowboys-and-Indians movie. Some of the funniest
moments belong to a radio broadcaster on the reservation who makes daily
traffic and weather reports such as, "A car went by about ten minutes ago,
and there's a cloud up in the sky that looks kind of like a horse." The
humorous touches serve to undermine the stereotypes through the characters'
mockery of them.
The acting in SMOKE SIGNALS and the evocation of the rural West by director
Chris Eyre are probably a little more polished than Sherman Alexie's
screenplay, which includes a few long, drawn-out scenes of only minimal
importance and comes dangerously close to making a caricature of Thomas as
storyteller wannabe. Still, the mix of character study and humor is
engaging enough to keep Victor's and Thomas's road trip moving past any
bumps along the way.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
