Title
Review for Ma vie en rose (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Seth Bookey
(a/k/a  Ma vie en rose; French with English subtitles)
"Sometimes you just have to be yourself," claims the tagline on the movie
poster. Of course, being oneself is usually easiest for children, before
they learn what is expected of them from society or their families.
So what happens to those children who at an early age know they are
different, especially in a suburb where you know what to expect every day,
where every morning the wives walk their husbands to their cars, all
simultaneously, and where the same reckless neighbor in the yellow
hatchback almost hits you every day? What happens when you are a
seven-year-old boy who deep down knows he wants to be a girl, and marry
that little boy, Jerome (Julien Riviere), across the street?
This is the moment of discovery for Ludovic (George Du Fresne); but it's
not a good discovery. It is perfectly natural for Ludo to want to have
long hair and wear lipstick and earrings and some pretty dresses. It even
seemed perfectly natural to Jerome to allow Ludo to engage him in a play
wedding. So what went wrong? The adults freaked out and the classmates
instinctively move to hit the nail that stands out among the others.
While all the performances are very good--the angry neighbors, the
bewildered parents, the understanding psychologist, and the vicious
classmates--it is Du Fresne's portrayal of Ludovic that is absolutely
amazing. It's hard to know how this child actor is able to portray this
character whose innocence is shattered at this moment, when he learns to
that to say what you feel is to dig your own grave (apologies to Sinnead
O'Connor). Whether he is weathering the pain of disapproving parents,
dressing up, or fantasizing about escaping into the World of Pam
(Belguim's answer to Barbie), Du Fresne is a natural. Frankly, I don't
know how he does it. Perhaps he has not had his innocence completely
shattered by the real world yet.
Michele Laroque and Jean-Philippe Coffey as Ludo's trying-to-understand
parents are also excellent.
This is possibly one of the best movies of the year. If you have every
felt different or outside, you will find this movie hitting you in the
heart; and if you are inside, you get a glimpse of what it's like for
those who are outside, or rather, pushed out. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Georges Du Fresne, Michele Laroque, Jean-Philippe Ecoffey, 
      Helene Vincent, Daniel Hanssens, Laurence Bibot, Jean-Francois 
      Gallotte, Caroline Baehr, Julien Riviere, Marie Bunel
Director: Alain Berliner
Producer: Carole Scotta
Screenplay: Chris Vander Stappen, Alain Berliner
Cinematography: Yves Cape
Music: Dominique Dalcan
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
In French with subtitles
     Equal parts fantasy, satire, and pathos, MA VIE EN ROSE 
investigates the role of sexual stereotypes in today's culture, and 
shows how the more conservative elements of society encourage conformity 
and stifle diversity.  In terms of both its style and story, this is one 
of 1997's few unique motion pictures; it's understandable why it has 
captured a landslide of film festival awards.
     Tomboys are a common phenomenon.  There is no social stigma 
attached to a young girl who dresses like a boy, plays rough, wears 
Band-Aids on her skinned knees like badges of honor, and prefers trading 
baseball cards to jumping rope.  It's regarded as "just part of growing 
up."  Reverse the situation, however.  The result -- a boy who adopts 
the traits of a girl -- is unacceptable.  Such a child, who plays with 
dolls, puts on makeup, and wears dresses, is likely to become a pariah.  
And that is the situation explored by Alain Berliner's debut feature, MA 
VIE EN ROSE.
     Pierre (Jean-Philippe Ecoffey) and Hanna (Michele Laroque), along 
with their four children, have just moved into a nice house in a 
suburban Paris neighborhood.  Three of the kids are normal and well-
adjusted, but the fourth, Ludovic (Georges Du Fresne), a seven year old 
boy, is showing "alarming" tendencies.  His favorite toys are Barbie-
like dolls, he expresses a desire to marry a male classmate when he 
"grows up and becomes a girl," and he shows up at a party dressed like a 
pink princess.  His mother, convinced that this is a harmless phase, 
tries to be as supportive as possible, but, when pressure from 
unsympathetic and close-minded neighbors mounts, she begins to turn on 
Ludovic.  Meanwhile, Pierre doesn't know how best to cope with his son's 
tendencies, and Ludovic's sometimes-embarrassing displays of femininity 
threaten to derail his career.
     Ludovic can't understand what the fuss is about.  After all, 
everything seems clear to him.  When God was giving out chromosomes, his 
second "X" (of the "XX" pair that signifies a female) was lost in the 
trash and he somehow got stuck with a "Y" instead (for the male "XY" 
pair).  As a result, he's a "girlboy," but, when he grows up, he's 
convinced that he'll be a woman.  So why shouldn't he wear makeup and 
dresses, and play with dolls?  And why is it wrong if he arranges a mock 
marriage with a boy in his class?  When his parents and his schoolmates 
react angrily, he doesn't understand their surprise, discomfort, and 
rage.  He just wants to do what feels right, yet everyone hates him for 
it.  Those who assume that he's gay have missed the point entirely -- 
sexuality isn't even an issue, at least not at this young age.  MA VIE 
EN ROSE isn't concerned with Ludovic's eventual sexual orientation.
     One of Berliner's successes is his ability to effectively realize 
multiple viewpoints.  While MA VIE EN ROSE gets into Ludovic's head and 
convincingly presents his confusion regarding the adults' negative 
reactions to his behavior, it also conveys the sense of near-panic that 
grips his parents.  They love their son, but don't know how to (or 
whether they should) break him of his feminine obsession.  The resulting 
stress tears at the fabric of their marriage, and their disapproval 
threatens to destroy Ludovic.
     Another standout aspect of the movie is its strong, vivid use of 
colors.  Nearly every hue of the spectrum is represented in pastels and 
fluorescents.  There are red outfits, yellow cars, green bushes and 
grass, pink garage doors, red shutters, purple shirts, orange dresses, 
and so on  Color is an important element of MA VIE EN ROSE, and its use 
in both the strange reality of Ludovic's world and the surreal 
fantasyland to which he occasionally escapes is a testimony to Tim 
Burton's influence on Berliner.  In the end, it's apparent that the 
intense colors of Ludovic's neighborhood do little to lighten the 
darkness that lurks in the hearts of many of the residents.  To further 
emphasize their lack of human compassion, Berliner paints many of 
Ludovic's neighbors as caricatures, and occasionally has some fun at 
their expense.
     Although the most memorable element of MA VIE EN ROSE is the 
forceful visual style, the director proves himself to be an apt student 
of human nature.  The film works because we understand the central 
characters and their tribulations.  When Ludovic is teased and 
tormented, it's easy to remember how much unthinking cruelty there is in 
this world, whether the setting is Paris or next door.  But, when all is 
said and done, MA VIE EN ROSE is more of a fantasy than a straight 
drama, and Berliner's lighthearted touch keeps the film buoyant when it 
could easily turn grim.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Sony Pictures classics
 Director:  Alain Berliner
 Writer:  Chris Vander Stappen, Alain Berliner
 Cast: Georges DuFresne, Jean-Philippe Ecoffey, Daniel
Hanssens, Michele Laroque, Cristina Barget, Julien Riviere.
   The suburbs are stereotyped as places which do not
tolerate differences the way urban residents do, and writers
Chris Vander Stappen and Alain Berliner do nothing to
subvert that notion.  In "Ma Vie En Rose" ("My Life in Pink")--
which played at the New York Film Festival and at Cannes
and was winner in the Best Picture category at the Karlovy-
Vary Film Festival--first-time director Berliner scores big using
a remarkable first-time actor in the title role.
   Told from the point of view of a seven-year-old boy, Ludovic
(George DuFresne), "Ma Vie En Rose" focuses in on a
middle-class Brussels suburb in which everyone seems to act
cheerfully alike and old age appears to have been banished. 
Elisabeth (Helene Vincent), a grandma and the oldest person
in the movie, looks as though she had gone through
liposuction and a few tucks.  The liveliest one in the crowd,
this fifty-something woman switches off a slow dance number
at a party and substitutes music with a disco beat--obviously a
woman who has come to maturity during the peak of the
feminist revolution.  The teachers are all young, attractive and
lithe, and even the psychologist who is hired to treat Ludovic
looks as though she has just received her doctorate.  This
emphasis on youth--and on startlingly bright colors as well--
signals us that "Ma Vie En Rose" is in many ways a fairy tale,
one which never tries overtly to make statements or suggest
psychological theories; in fact, director Berliner could not care
less about where his characters are headed.  This is all to the
good.
   Ludo acts differently from all others in the community
though it becomes clear that he is not doing so to draw
attention to himself.  At the age of seven, he is at the point n
life that psychologists say people carve out an identity.  Ludo
knows his: he is a girl in a boy's body who has little regard for
hiding his transvestism, even though his behavior will lead to
his father's losing his job, his own expulsion from his school,
his parents going ballistic, and the neighbors staring at his
antics in downright shock and deadly silence.  If this kid lived
in New York or Paris, nobody would pay heed, but in a
suburb which values fitting in above all other traits, he is an
outcast.
   For the most part, Berliner treats the situation with good
humor, though he does have his director of photography,
Yves Cape, mute the vivid colors for most of the second half
of the movie, turning the bright reds and blues into pale
shadows of their former selves.  Ludovic's antics lead to one
disaster after another.  In a school play he locks Snow White
in the bathroom and takes over the role himself, if only to be
kissed by Jerome (Julien Riviere), the lad he has fallen in love
with.  He attends a party in a skirt, his parents telling their
neighbors that they are allowing the boy to fulfill his fantasies
and thereby banalize them, which is to say, will allow him to
outgrow his illusions.  Though the neighbors smile in apparent
understanding, they unanimously sign a petition causing him
to be thrown out of school.  
   The most amusing scene occurs just after Ludovic is told by
his older sister Zoe (Cristina Barget) that God creates boys by
giving them XY chromosomes, while XX genes are distributed
to the females.  Ludo dreams that he was set to get his
double-x, but one letter bounced off the chimney and landed
in the trash can: ergo, the girl in a boy's body.
   Ludo may or may not outgrow his cross-dressing proclivity. 
But "Ma Vie En Rose" has no intention to make us care. 
What this charming little story does care about is relating
incidents as a child sees them, a boy at the age in which
everything is possible (including his turning into a girl when he
grows up), who wants everyone to love him without
demanding that he conform to their narrow expectations.  The
ensemble, which at times seem like characters from a Disney
sketch, play their parts impeccably: Jean-Philippe Ecoffey as
Pierre, the father who learns to accept his son's tendencies;
Michele Laroque as Hanna, the mom who tries to understand
but rages within; Daniel Hanssens as Albert, Pierre's boss, a
creep who assures Pierre that his job is safe but betrays him;
and especially Georges DuFresne in his first acting job, a
solemn kid who rarely smiles but always insists on being
himself.  Rated R.  Running Time: 88 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Alain Berliner
Cast:  Michele Laroque, Jean-Philippe Ecoffey, Helene Vincent, Georges
Du Fresne, Daniel Hanssens, Laurence Bibot
Screenplay:  Alain Berliner, Chris van der Stappen
Producers:  Carole Scotta
Runtime:  88 min
US Distribution:  Sony Pictures Classics
Rated R:  brief strong language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Ma vie en rose (My Life in Pink) is a quaint, direct film that tells
the story of a nine year-old boy named Ludo (Georges Du Fresne) who
finds pleasure dressing up like a girl.  His parents, Pierre
(Jean-Philippe Ecoffey) and Hanna (Michele Laroque), discover this one
uncomfortable day when he emerges during a party dressed in his sister's
pink dress.  At first, they think it's just a phase.  But Ludo keeps
talking about it, and soon they have him seeing a child psychiatrist.  
Ludo, in his young age, doesn't understand the implications of the
things he does and says.  A neighborhood friend of his is also the son
of Pierre's boss; when Ludo tells his friend that he wants to marry him
someday, the neighborhood finds out and goes into social upheaval,
immediately assuming that Ludo's parents have raised him in some foul
manner.  The final straw occurs when Ludo--unbeknownst to
everyone--takes the part of Sleeping Beauty in the school play so he can
be kissed by Prince Charming.
Ma vie en rose was written and directed by Belgian filmmaker Alain
Berliner.  He has created a good film here:  it is successful because it
shows clearly the perspectives of both the children and the parents in
the story.  Berliner presents the material in such a way that it is
completely inoffensive from the beginning--even those who agree with the
ethics challenged in this film are not likely to be offended.  It's
positive, actually, that the subject matter is not off-putting, because
it makes the film more accessible, and allows us to focus on the
characters rather than a contrived plot (which, unfortunately, is what
most American films dealing with cross dressing offer).
A film like this relies heavily on the acting, and the central
performance from the young Georges Du Fresne is an excellent one; Ludo,
at the same time, is a fascinating character.  He knows so certainly
what is natural to him, what he wants, and yet, he's still willing to
try and be "manly" for the sake of his parents.  He attempts soccer, but
is ultimately beat up by the other boys on the team.  Ludo, at times
like these, fantasizes about living in a dream world with the his
favorite toys, flying through the blue sky over the pink houses he would
love to live in.
The acting by Ecoffey and Laroque is incredibly good, as are the
dialogue and interactions from Berliner's screenplay.  The fights and
arguments they have over Ludo's problem, and they way they go about
dealing with the situation, is intense and realistic; at the same time,
the characters are given full development.  Berliner's direction is
straightforward--there isn't a lot of intricate camera work, and much of
it appears to have been shot with a handheld to give many of the scenes
a visceral quality unusual to films of this kind.
Ma vie en rose is, perhaps, a little to light.  There are funny moments
here, and there should be; often, though, Berliner seems to avoid a
certain amount heaviness that might have been appropriate for such a
sobering subject matter.  But I can also see how this avoidance might
have a definite point--the film is not really about cross dressing, or
even what becomes of Ludo in the long run.  This is a film about
accepting diversity, and realizing the innate and different qualities
that some people have.  I hold that Berliner didn't quite tap into this
story's full potential, but the final product is still a film that
presents its themes in a way that even skeptics might embrace.
