Title
Review for Du rififi chez les hommes (1955)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Gordon Bass
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Gordon Bass.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/285a5ac036f67fec8825694100152765?OpenDocument
When a movie begins with a con being freed from jail, you know one of
two things will happen: Either he'll be called in to help the hapless
police solve an impossible crime that's had them baffled for months, or
he'll be tempted by one final heist, a perfect job that will let him
retire a wealthy man.
Rififi, a French film originally released in 1955 as Du rififi chez les
hommes, is a film noir. Which means, of course, we're going to get the
heist.
Sad-eyed Jean Servais plays Tony le Stephanois, fresh from a stint in
the slammer. Free for the first time in five years, Tony wants to stay
on the straight and narrow, but can't maintain his cool when he
discovers that his girl has taken up with another man during his
imprisonment. A man of few words, Tony orders her to strip, whips her
and kicks her out of his apartment before meeting up with his old
associates Jo (Carl Möhner) and Mario (Robert Manuel, from whom Billy
Zane was apparently cloned). Jo and Mario have a high-risk crime in
mind, breaking into a ritzy but well-protected jewelry store and its
basement safe, and Tony agrees to mastermind the job. Cesar le Milanais,
an Italian safecracker played to dapper, womanizing perfection by
director Jules Dassin, is recruited to round out the gang.
The heart of the film is the subsequent robbery sequence, which
stretches for 30 minutes without dialogue. Cool, tense, and suspenseful,
the scenes of the heist play out like a primer for would-be jewel
thieves, which led to the film being banned in several countries after
its original release in 1955. (That it was allowed in the United States
was an indication that the Production Code Administration had lost much
of its authority by the mid 1950s; the Code stated that "theft, robbery,
safe-cracking... etc., should not be detailed in method.") 
The heist goes off perfectly, giving us valuable lessons in how to break
through a concrete ceiling without a sound and how to silence an alarm.
The film anticipates every audience question -- How do you hammer
through concrete without waking the neighbors? How do you crack a safe
without explosives? -- and answers them with surprising technical
accuracy. That the break-in is accomplished with nothing more than rope,
a suitcase of simple tools, and an umbrella makes it vastly more
impressive than anything in current films, where burglars rely on latex
face masks, magic voice-changing throat stickers and plastic surgery to
get their business done. No, back in the smoky, jazz-filled Paris of the
1950s, men were men, and they used hard steel implements to do the job.
The crime nets the gang jewels worth a staggering 240 million francs.
But despite an agreement to lay low for a while, suave safecracker Cesar
can't help giving an enormous diamond ring to a nightclub chanteuse,
setting a final chain of violence in motion. The singer promptly shows
it to her boss, club owner Pierre Grutter, who makes an immediate
connection between the ring, Cesar, and the recent heist. And decides he
should have the stash himself.
>From here events spiral rapidly southward. Grutter beats a confession
out of Cesar, Tony pops Cesar for talking, and Grutter kidnaps Jo's
young son and demands the jewels as ransom. There's an accelerating rush
to a violent and hallucinatory ending.
Yet despite the inevitable bloodshed, the underworld romance of Rififi's
Paris has an undeniable and timeless appeal. As captured in moody
black-and-white, it makes you want to lounge in a jazz-joint, chain
smoke and knock back whiskey, and bitch-slap any two-bit punk who dares
look at your girl. Sure, there's a price to pay in the end, but that's
the life of the professional criminal. And the code of film noir, even
in France.
Director: Jules Dassin
Producers: Henri Bérard, Pierre Cabaud, René Bézard
Writers: Jules Dassin, René Wheeler, Auguste Le Breton
Starring: Jean Servais, Carl Möhner, Robert Manuel, Jules Dassin, Marie
Sabouret
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Jon Popick
Thank you, Rialto Pictures, for cleaning up and re-releasing Jules
Dassin's Rififi, an incredible French masterpiece in black and white
about a high-stakes jewel heist.  The film, which won Dassin the Best
Director award at the 1955 Cannes Film Festival, is said to have
inspired the likes of Quentin Tarantino and François Truffaut, the
latter of whom called Rififi the best Film Noir he'd ever seen.
Rififi is set in Paris, where gristly Tony (Jean Servais) has just been
popped from the pokey after serving five years for a jewel robbery.  We
later learn that Tony took the fall for his young protégé named Jo (Carl
Möhner) because of his student's young wife and son.  After filling his
lungs with the sweet air of freedom, Tony quickly finds out that Jo is
still involved in the burglary racket and that his girlfriend Mado
(Marie Sabouret) has taken up with a gangster named Grutter (Marcel
Lupovici).
In fact, Jo and his cousin Mario (Robert Manuel) ask Tony if he wants in
on their latest endeavor – stealing diamonds from the window display of
a prominent jeweler.  At first, Tony balks at the idea, declaring that
the store has `more alarms than a firehouse,' but eventually agrees to
participate if Jo and Mario agree to two conditions – they can't use
guns, and they have to go after the jeweler's well-protected vault
instead of the merchandise in the window.  Their pilfering plan is
rounded out by the addition of a safecracker from Milan named Cesar
(played by Dassin under the pseudonym Perlo Vita).
The four men meticulously case the joint, detailing everything from the
hours of operation of each surrounding business to the lap time around
the block.  There's a great scene where they acquire a duplicate of the
jeweler's state-of-the-art alarm system, causing one of the men to
observe that `It's getting harder to make a living' before methodically
testing the alarm like a Consumer Reports scientist.
All of the preparation is merely a set-up for what is probably the best
on-screen robbery ever filmed.  Using rope, an umbrella and some simple
tools, the burglary takes nearly 30 maddening, nail-biting minutes to
unfold, accentuated by a complete lack of dialogue and score.  The
half-hour heist is so detailed, it was actually banned in several
countries when Rififi was first released.
Rififi is pretty violent for a 45-year-old film, but most of the brutal
stuff takes place just off-camera (like the ear-severing scene in
Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs).  Dassin (Never on Sunday), who wrote the
screenplay in six days, does a fantastic job of directing, and the
film's newly restored black-and-white photography looks as lush as
ever.  Rififi is based on Auguste Le Breton's novel and features a
performance by La Dolce Vita's Magali Noël, who sings `Rififi,' a song
about physical confrontation in Grutter's nightclub.
2:00 – Not Rated, but contains violence and some mild sexual content
