Title
Review for Johnny Stecchino (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
I had not seen roberto Benigni, when I was told that I should see this film.
I had been debating seeing the latest Pink Panther film, specially when I
happen to be a Peter Sellers fanatic.  Well, who cares about the panther
film, anyway..... this is more like it, and better.
Johnny Stecchino is one of those films that one gets sucked into without
knowing why, and eventually, it is because of the double role which the lead
actor plays, and even though the acting could be considered a bit campy, it
is nice, and a good shift of space.
A lonely guy, happens upon a woman, and falls in love with her, and he
thinks she is in love with him.  And he finds her ( or she keeps track of
him, which is more likely ) a few times, until he is invited to her place in
Malta.  Lo and behold, as it turns out, he is a carbon copy of the girl's
husband who happens to be a Mafia guy who has fallen on
hard times and is being chased around.  And the plot is to try and get the
double shot so the other two can run off.
And the rest is an array of misadventures, that are funny and off the wall,
with very subtle gags, and unusual situations.  And a tour de force for
Roberto Benigni, who also directed the film.
While it isn't the world's best comedy, it does have some very odd comedy
bits, that directly say something about both the church and the state, and
of course the Mafia.... it seems that if you are in the right side you are
government, and if you are in the wrong side you are Mafia..... Ohh
well.....

Author
Ben Hoffman
        This Italian belly-laugher stars Roberto Benigni in the
dual roles of Dante, an inept, unhandsome, nice guy, who drives a
school bus for Down Syndrome children, and that of a Palermo
Mafioso, Johnny Stecchino, who made the mistake of ratting on his
fellow gangsters.
        As Dante, nothing good ever happens to him.  No one ever
notices him.  At parties he may as well be invisible.  One day,
quite by accident, he meets the beautiful Maria (Nicoletta
Braschi) who takes him in hand because unknown to the naive Dante,
Maria has recognized that he is a dead ringer for her boyfriend,
Johnny, a squealer who is in hiding from the Mafia who would like
to rub him out.
       Johnny is nicknamed Stecchino (toothpick) because he always has
one in his mouth.  When Dante, while dining in a restaurant with Maria,
puts a toothpick in his mouth, Maria tells him she wants to call him
"Johnny Stecchino," the plot being that Dante will be passed off as the
gangster, killed by the Mafia, and Maria and the real Johnny will fly off
to another country to live happily ever after.
      Running along with the above are several other very funny
plots. Dante has a penchant for stealing bananas. He also is being
investigated by an insurance detective who suspects that Dante's
uncontrollable right hand is a scam on which he is collecting
disability compensation.  (It is and he is.)  There is also heroin
that Dante is told is a medicinal powder that controls diabetes.
All of the above are cleverly interwoven into the main story to
make this one of the funniest comedies of the year.
      Roberto Benigni combines all the talent of the slapstick
comedians who have made us laugh all these years.
      Screenplay by Vincenzo Cerami and Roberto Benigni. .
