Title
Review for Blue Chips (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Tak
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A coach fights corruption within himself and the system as he
tries to assemble a winning basketball team.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Coach Pete Bell (NICK NOLTE) is facing his first losing season and
doesn't like it, but can't compete for the best high school talent (the
Blue Chips) unless he breaks the rules and offers "enticements."
Ex-wife Jenny (MARY McDONNELL) knows Pete plays by the rules, but
wealthy alumni Happy (J.T. Walsh) is more than eager to tempt him, with
reporter Ed (ED O'NEILL) waiting if Pete should slip.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     This sports movie focuses on one coach's love for the game of
basketball.  He is passionate about the game and would do almost
anything to have the best team. He can't stand the corruption almost
inherent in the game--"You've taken the one thing really pure in your
life ... and you've corrupted it."  But he can't have the best team
without that corruption, which provides the focus for the movie.
     There are lots and lots of real basketball stars and legends in
BLUE CHIPS.  You can't watch 5 minutes without tripping over a
real-life basketball player, coach, or sports caster.  Oddly enough, it
works, and you don't have to be a huge basketball fan. (I'm not)
     The basketball action is exciting and energetic, both players and
crowd were real and it shows.  Since all the games were played with
real players, the film makers had no problem filling the bleachers--the
action was filmed in four standing-room-only games in Indiana.  Nick
Nolte: "We had ten cameras working but nobody was aware of where the
cameras were and the filming never interfered with the game. It wasn't
like filming at all."
     The few basketball figures who can't seem to act well come off a
bit flat, but none of them have more than cameo appearances, with the
possible exception of legend Bob Cousy, who my friend commented on
with--"You can tell which ones are basketball people--they can't act."
While this may be true for Bob Cousy (arguably) and Shaquille O'Neal,
Anfernee "Penny" Hardaway did a great job as Butch, the clean-cut
talent from Chicago.
     It would seem Nick Nolte's been really busy--I'LL DO ANYTHING and
BLUE CHIPS both released within a week of each other.  It's a testimony
to his acting ability that he performs excellently in both movies, with
a completely different character in each.  As coach Bell, Nolte is the
complete coach: hot-headed, intelligent, and dedicated to the game he
loves.  He looks more like a coach than the real coaches in the
film--Bobby Knight, Rick Pitino, and George Raveling.
     Mary McDonnell put in a strong supporting performance as Jenny.
You'll also see Ed O'Neill, who always surprises me with his acting
ability--initially it's so hard to see past his Al Bundy ("Married with
Children") character.  Louis Gossett, Jr., a college scholarship player
himself, appears as a high school coach.
     Despite the subtitles at the end ("Blah went on to play in the
NBA") this is *not* a true story.  The screenplay was first written
twelve years ago and was intended to deal with themes of corruption,
morality and ambition.  The events depicted are extremely realistic and
more timely than ever--a bunch of last year's University of Washington
Husky football squad got in trouble for just such antics.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     I was surprised by this movie.  I thought it would be a showcase
movie for the numerous NBA characters.  Instead, we get an inspiring
story about a man who loves basketball and how that love affects every
aspect of his life. It's always a treat to watch people who love what
they're doing, and BLUE CHIPS provides us that opportunity.  Check it
out one evening, I think you'll like it.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by William Friedkin 
Written by Ron Shelton  
Starring Nick Nolte, Mary McDonnell, J. T. Walsh, Alfre Woodard, Shaquille
O'Neal, and Ed O'Neill
MPAA Rating     PG-13  (though boasting the highest "god****" count in
                        recent memory. :)
Running Time    108 minutes
     Hurrah!  Hurrah!  Once-upon-a-time wunderkind Bill Friedkin is
back and with a subject that hits, at here in North Carolian, *very*
close to home.  With an assist from basketballsy writer Ron Shelton,
Friedkin's first film in four is a exciting but easy examination of
illegal recruiting practices in college basketball.
     BLUE CHIPS introduces Pete Bell (Nolte), the dedicated coach of
the Western University Dolphins.  The team has just wrapped its first
losing season and Bell is upset, to the say the least.  He knows that
his team is doing their best, but he needs better players--boys they
can't recruit because *he* won't play "dirty pool." Pressured by
everyone from the alumni to his athletic director, Bell confronts this
issue to build a strong "starting line" for the upcoming season.
     BLUE CHIPS is a frantically charged film.  True to Friedkin form,
*everything* stays in motion.  Bill films basketball like he was born
for it and even his off-court scenes have an infectious energy.  He
also pulls a powerhouse performance from Nolte, who spends the entire
film wrestling with his conscious more than with his players.  Nolte's
best scene comes early, when he punts a basketball into the stands
after losing a fight with a ref.
     Less successful is Shelton's script and how it oversimplifies
illegal recruiting.  The characters have depth, but not the story.  The
ending is unusually good for a sports film, though.  BLUE CHIPS favors
fair-play instead of feel-good and it's a welcome change.  Even *with*
a soapbox speech at the end.
     McDonnell gives a mediocre performance as Bell's basketball-smart
ex-wife.  And there's barely any chemistry between her and Nolte.  The
ever-leering J. T. Walsh hangs out the ham, again, as an boorish
booster.  And seven-foot, four-inch "Shaq" O'Neal makes an appealing
freshman recruit.
     (Six-foot, one-inch "Ed" O'Neill is wasted as an investigative
reporter, though.  But his inclusion may be nothing more than a simple
joke--if memory serves, O'Neill once played a TV version of "Popeye"
Doyle!)
     For basketball fans, BLUE CHIPS is a fountain of familiar faces.
Larry Bird, Bob Cousy, Jerry Tarkanian, and, yes, Dick Vitale, are just
some of the good sports who appear in the film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BLUE CHIPS is the classic morality tale of the basically good
character selling his soul to the devil when he gets down on his luck.
In this case, the good guy is the college basketball coach played by
Nick Nolte and the devil is the head of the alumni association played
by J.  T.  Walsh.  There is a throwaway roll of the coach's ex-wife
played by Mary McDonnell who was once so wonderful in DANCES WITH
WOLVES and GRAND CANYON.  There are lots of basketball players in it,
all about the size of small skyscrapers, who are either corrupt or
stupid with the exception of the Shaquille O'Neal character.
     Easily the best part of this movie is the ending.  Wrapping up a
morality play is tricky - this one does a really nice job of it.  It
also has a neat epilog that makes you think, incorrectly, for a few
minutes, that maybe this was all a true story after all.
     The movie was directed by William Friedkin.  Friedkin did the
highly imaginative and innovative FRENCH CONNECTION as well as TO LIVE
AND DIE IN LA.  I loved both of these shows.  They are both full of
energy and intelligence.  There is little visible intelligence in any
of the actors or characters in BLUE CHIPS however.
     The story runs 1:47 and the time passes quickly.  The problem with
BLUE CHIPS is that watching it is like eating a pastry that has been
whipped so that it is all air.  You ate it, but there was nothing
there.  It is a very homogenized movie that never offends, yet never
seems to be for real either.  It gets a PG-13 rating for the typical
bad language you hear in any locker room.  Well, it does insult
religion, but most Hollywood movies feel that is mandatory these days,
so no surprise.  There are a lot of good sports movies that have been
made.  For basketball, go rent HOOSIERS rather than see this one.  I
give the movie **, and do not recommend it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Nick Nolte, Mary McDonnell, J. T. Walsh, Anfernee "Penny" Hardaway,
           Shaquille O'Neal, Matt Nover.
Screenplay:  Ron Shelton.
Director:  William Friedkin.
     There may be only one thing in this world that I know better than
movies, and that would be college basketball.  For every two hours that
I spend in a theater, I probably spend four in a gym or watching hoops
on television.  I spent a lot of time in BLUE CHIPS picking on the
details, but that wasn't only because I felt I knew the details; it was
also because there isn't all that much detail to be found.  BLUE CHIPS
is a morality play drawn in big broad strokes, with a message that can
be summarized in two words:  "Cheating *bad*."
     Set at a fictional California institution called Western
University, BLUE CHIPS stars Nick Nolte as Pete Bell, head basketball
coach at Western.  Two championship banners hang in the rafters from
Bell's tenure, but a point shaving scandal three years back has
tarnished the program's reputation and resulted in fewer prime
recruits.  In an effort to turn around a losing team, Bell tries to
bring in three potential stars:  Chicago guard Butch McRae Anfernee
"Penny" Hardaway); Indiana farm kid Ricky Roe (Matt Nover); and
untrained physical specimen Neon Bodeaux (Shaquille O'Neal).  Standing
in the way is Bell's sense of ethics, since it appears that he'll need
to break recruiting rules and pay off the athletes to get them to
Western, a dilemma which doesn't seem to trouble a wealthy alum (J. T.
Walsh).
     The problem facing BLUE CHIPS from the outset is a tone bordering
on the terminally naive.  Screenwriter Ron Shelton (BULL DURHAM, WHITE
MEN CAN'T JUMP) approaches the subject of big money in collegiate
athletics as though he were the one blowing the whistle on it.  "Can
you believe this?" he seems to be saying.  "It's not just a game any
more!"  The film revels in self-congratulatory outrage, leaving its
characters to founder undeveloped.  Nolte's Bell is a purist who just
loves the game, but he's too shiny a knight, and his final, pedantic
speech to a group of sportswriters is just sloppy.  J. T. Walsh plays
Happy, the fat-cat athletic booster, as an absurd stereotype, and Mary
McDonnell plays Bell's ex-wife as a recycled version of her spirited ex
from SNEAKERS.  There is the potential for an interesting conflict when
O'Neal's Bodeaux exhibits a reluctance to buy in to the same ethic as
his teammates, but Shelton and director William Friedkin seem reluctant
to give any of the novice actor-athletes too much to say.  They also
seem unwilling to ask any of the hard questions about collegiate
athletes, such as whether or not they actually deserve some sort of
compensation.  Every choice is the obvious one and the wrong one, right
down to an awful "conscience" voiceover during the climactic game.
     BLUE CHIPS could have saved itself by getting its basketball
right, but there are a basket full of problems there as well.  The
on-court action is fairly bland, and photographed from all the wrong
angles.  Friedkin makes no particular effort to make the setting seem
collegiate, with crowd shots focusing on politely cheering alumni.
However, two gaffes particularly irked me.  In the first game, with the
margin twenty points in the last minute, every seat in the stand was
still filled; I suppose it would have been tricky telling half the
crowd to leave when rumor has it that tickets for the filming were
being scalped for $100.  Then, in the final game, the crowd reaction
comes far too slowly given the result, and doesn't seem remotely
authentic.  It's too bad Shelton couldn't have brought the same feel to
the hardwood that he brought to BULL DURHAM's dugout.
     There are a few things to like about BLUE CHIPS.  Nolte is
perfectly cast as a coach, and O'Neal and Hardaway are pleasant
surprises.  I was also amused by the inclusion of ousted coaches Lou
Campanelli and Jerry Tarkanian among the gaggle of competitors pursuing
Bell's prized recruits.  They are, however, small consolation.  BLUE
CHIPS' puffed-up indignance wears thin quickly.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Nick Nolte, Mary McDowell, J.T. Walsh, Alfre Woodard, 
           Shaquille O'Neal, Anfernee Hardaway, Matt Nover
Director:  William Friedkin
Producer:  Michael Rappaport
Screenplay:  Ron Shelton
Music:  Nile Rogers, Jeff Beck, and Jed Leiber
Released by Paramount Pictures
     An underdog team gets an infusion of outside talent (either a
player or a coach) and goes from the bottom to the top, winning the
championship in a game whose result is never in doubt for those sitting
in the audience.  This is the plot of dozens of sports-related motion
pictures, including HOOSIERS, one of the best basketball-related
films.  It is *not*, however, the plot of BLUE CHIPS, a rare example of
an entry into this genre which attempts to be honest and unique.
     Coach Pete Bell of Western University (Nick Nolte) is going
through a nightmare season.  After a decade of winning, his team is
about to finish with a sub-.500 record for the first time in his
tenure.  It's not that his players don't have heart, but the Western
University Dolphins are thin on talent, so getting several blue chip
prospects becomes the driving motivation for the off-season.  Coach
Bell singles out three (Shaquille O'Neal, Anfernee Hardaway, and Matt
Nover) to pursue.  They all like Western U, but two are demanding a
little something "under the table," which goes against Coach Bell's
principles.  Nevertheless, facing another losing season, he is forced
to consider that cars and cash might not be the worst price to pay.
     Perhaps the best decision made by writer Ron Shelton and director
William Friedkin was to focus on the off-court politics of recruiting
rather than on the team's wins and losses.  In the end, that's what
makes BLUE CHIPS different from so many other, similarly-marketed
movies.  There is a big showdown at the end, but the basketball game
becomes peripheral to a more important crisis.  It is a catalyst, not a
conclusion.
     Those who expect Shaquille O'Neal to dominate the film will be
disappointed.  While the NBA star has his share of scenes, the acting
required is limited (and mercifully within his capabilities--this is
nothing like Dan Marino's movie debut in ACE VENTURA).  From start to
finish, this is Nick Nolte's picture, and his performance is energetic
to the point of frenzy.  It doesn't take long to discern that Coach
Bell is modeled after Indiana's Bobby Knight (who, along with numerous
other basketball luminaries, makes an appearance).
     The central moral dilemma facing Coach Bell is whether or not to
agree to pay off players with alumni money.  While this goes against
everything he believes in, it becomes apparent that it may not be
possible to field a winning team without breaking the rules.  There's a
good dose of reality in this story, even if the script occasionally
becomes too preachy.  The end sequences especially could have been
toned down.
     BLUE CHIPS is peppered with subtle humor and in jokes.  One prime
example is former UNLV coach Jerry Tarkanian (who was constantly
accused of recruiting violations by the NCAA) expressing genuine
concern about whether a prospective college player has the grades to
stay academically eligible.  The film's conclusion also features a
droll parody of the "what happened to our characters after this movie
ends..." messages that reality-based dramas often scroll across the
screen.
     As for the actual basketball sequences, they're exceptionally well
done, as accurately capturing as possible the feel of a college game.
The presence of several real-life stars elevates the level of on-court
intensity.  Shaquille O'Neal and Anfernee Hardaway may be merely
adequate delivering their lines, but they're electric with the ball in
their hands.
     BLUE CHIPS will obviously appeal more to basketball aficionados
than to those who are indifferent to the sport.  Despite an advertising
blitz of slam-dunks and crisp passes, this film has a story to tell
which does not demand a recognition of Dick Vitale.  The theme, which
deals with facing the consequences of one's actions, is universal, even
if the attraction of "the Shaq" isn't.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
