Title
Review for What's Up, Tiger Lily? (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Early experiment by Woody Allen laid the groundwork for MYSTERY SCIENCE 
THEATER 3000 and the improvised soundtrack dubbings on the UK TV series 
WHOSE LINE IS IT ANYWAY? -  consequently it doesn't appear nearly so unique 
nowadays.  We've probably all talked over the top of a movie on TV and added 
our own soundtrack or commentary (a group of friends and I managed to invent 
a most amusing pornographic narrative for BATTLESTAR GALACTICA one time), 
but Allen realizes the idea wholly.  By taking a serious Japanese thriller, 
KAGI NO KAG, and re-editing it with new, irrelevant comic dialogue, Allen 
invented a new way of getting a product into cinemas with relatively little 
expense.  If WHAT'S UP, TIGER LILY? (titled to cash in on the previous 
year's WHAT'S NEW, PUSSYCAT?) helped get his future projects off the ground, 
then its addition to the Allen oeuvre is more than justified.  Fortunately, 
it has the distinction of also being very funny.
Consider the way Allen was to approach his task:  he obviously had to keep a 
cohesive narrative throughout his film without sacrificing humor to 
exposition.  To this end, he employs a motif - a recipe for egg salad - that 
becomes the justification of all that happens in the film.  Having set up a 
running gag, the jokes in TIGER LILY then take on two forms - they either 
bear some relevance to the events happening onscreen, or they are totally 
off-the-wall (e.g. one early exchange has a young half-dressed beauty 
approach the film's hero, only to deliver the line "Name three presidents" 
).  It's the latter humor that is most characteristic of the Woody Allen we 
know from magazine articles, where his wild, offbeat lines are truly 
hilarious.  Perhaps TIGER LILY is most reflective of this writing style 
because, like a magazine piece, it allows Allen distance from the project - 
he appears not as an actor (or even voice) but as an observer.  It's a 
curious attitude, because after this project Allen's films were to become 
more and more intertwined with his life and persona.  Watching TIGER LILY 
today, one can't help think of his self-critiquing STARDUST MEMORIES, in 
which characters complain that he is no longer interested in making the 
"early funny stuff".  I hope Allen does not disown this film, as so many 
maturing artists do of their fledging work - it may lack the sophistication 
of his later films, but there is still "funny stuff" at hand here (I find 
the 'Hollywood impressions' sequence hysterical).  It's surprising how well 
the absurd dialogue actually synchs up with the actors in the original film! 
  Some filler is provided with Inserts of 60s group The Lovin' Spoonful - 
they don't add anything to the story.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com
