Title
Review for BASEketball (1998)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  David Zucker
Cast:  Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Yasmine Bleeth, Jenny McCarthy, Robert
Vaughn, Ernest Borgnine
Screenplay:  David Zucker, Robert LoCash, Lewis Friedman, Jeff Wright
Producers:  Robert LoCash, Gil Netter, David Zucker
Runtime:  90 min
US Distribution:  Universal
Rated R:  vulgar humor, language 
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
BASEketball is a fantastic assembly of failed jokes.  I sat
straight-faced through much of the film, enduring the agonizing
experience of a make-fun-of-sports film that is rarely imaginative,
funny, or smart.  Oh, I know, a film like this isn't supposed to be
"smart," right?  Well, the funniest films have underlying intelligence
-- a feeling you get knowing that the makers had some kind of thought or
vision while creating their picture.  BASEketball gave me no such
feelings.  I just sat and watched actors romp around a script that
relies almost entirely on toilet humor.
It is a bad film.  I would have preferred to dislike it more, but the
presence of Trey Parker and Matt Stone keeps me from despising
BASEketball.  I've never seen these guys before (and I've never watched
an episode of "South Park," which is their creation), but they have a
strange kind of presence that had me entertained throughout
BASEketball.  I wasn't always laughing, but I was amused.  On the basis
of this, I begrudgingly award the film my lowest-possible rating in the
"mediocre" category.
Parker and Stone play a couple of loser buddies, Coop and Doug.  One
day, in their driveway, they create a game, which turns out to be a
strange and frightening amalgamation of baseball and basketball.  It
becomes a neighborhood hit, when finally a rich guy (Ernest Borgnine)
comes to buy the game and make it a professional sport.  Cut ahead five
years, and our heroes are playing in the national BASEketball league
(their team name is the Beers, which is supposed to be a joke).  
One of the rules of the game is that players can't trade teams, and
teams can't move to different cities.  This is where the story comes
in!  See, when the rich guy dies, another rich guy (Robert Vaughn) wants
to break the previously mentioned rules.  It's up to our heroes to stop
this other rich guy.  In the meantime, the two of them are fighting over
the nice-looking director (Yasmine Bleeth) of the Dreams Come True
Foundation.
Unlike Mafia!, BASEketball takes itself seriously from time to time.  A
film this silly should never, ever take itself seriously.  There should
be absolutely zero "tender" moments between our hero and the love
interest.  There shouldn't even *be* a love interest:  the mere presence
of a love interest is an immediate removal of points on my scorecard,
because it requires scenes in which the two characters kiss, or almost
kiss.  I despise scenes like these.  They aren't funny, and every scene
in a film like this should aspire to new comic heights.
It doesn't help that director David Zucker has no focus on his humor. 
Sometimes BASEketball spoofs films.  Sometimes it spoofs the sports
industry.  Sometimes it's nothing more than a big fart joke, no more
complex than Doctor Dolittle or There's Something About Mary.  I like
films that spoof specific things like films and sports, and even big
fart jokes have their place in certain movies, but Zucker never follows
through with any of his attacks, and the result is a slew of jokes that
seem like they all belong in different films.  Some of them are funny
(the locker room scene is great), but too many fall flat.  Not laughing
during a comedy is like an uncomfortable silence on a first date.
But there's something interesting about Parker and Stone.  They're both
endearing -- it seems they knew that much of this material wasn't very
funny; the interesting thing about BASEketball is that, despite it's
failure as a comedy, it's never boring.  In fact, is usually amusing,
thanks to Parker and Stone.  These guys have personality, and they
certainly know how to kiss (the scene in which they make up is rather
unexpected).  This isn't a good film, but it's a good introduction to a
couple of funny guys who may have found a place for themselves in the
industry.

Author
Michael Dequina
The freshness date for the joke-a-second comedy style pioneered by the
writing-directing team of David Zucker, Jim Abrahams, and Jerry Zucker in
1980's _Airplane!_ has just about expired--look no further than Abrahams's
latest ZAZ-flavored solo effort, _Jane_Austen's_Mafia!_ (which is being
promoted as just plain _Mafia!_ in spite of the onscreen title prefix).
While Abrahams had been able to keep the style, which crams ridiculous
sight and verbal gags within single scenes and shots, fresh, and funny in
his _Hot_Shots!_ films, most of the gags in the film (which he co-wrote
with Greg Norberg and Michael McManus) are simply uninspired.  A spoof of
_The_Godfather_, _The_Godfather_Part_II_, and _Casino_ (including riffs on
_The_English_Patient_, _Forrest_Gump_, _Child's_Play_, and even
_Showgirls_), _Mafia!_ packs no big laughs, only a handful of
smile-inducing jokes.  Not helping matters is the lackluster efforts of the
cast, led by a bland Jay Mohr as the Al Pacino stand-in and the late Lloyd
Bridges, noticeably frail, as the Marlon Brando-esque don.
While Abrahams tries to milk the old ZAZ formula for more riches (and
coming up mostly dry), one of his former cohorts, David Zucker, tries to
modernize it by incorporating the background-gag style into a '90s lowbrow,
gross-out comedy.  The result, however, is simply disastrous.
_BASEketball_, about two losers (Trey Parker and Matt Stone, creators of
the cult hit TV series _South_Park_) who create a baseball/basketball
hybrid that becomes the national pastime, is a painfully unfunny would-be
satire of the commercialization of professional sports--or, rather, it
_initially_ sets out to be a satire, with its sharply written prologue
about how money became the center of all things athletic.  But once that
passage is done, Zucker, Robert LoCash, Lewis Friedman, and Jeff Wright's
script degenerates into a tedious series of unamusing and rather forced
gross-out gags, such as milk squirting from male nipples and the licking of
a vibrator.  There was only one funny gag, and that was when a familiar
buddy-buddy reconciliation scene culminated not in a warm hug, but in a
long, wet, tongue-heavy kiss (now that I've given that joke away, there's
no reason for you to see the movie).  As actors, Parker and Stone are...
well, creators of a cult cartoon show.  One has to wonder about Universal's
marketing campaign that boasts "starring the creators of _South_Park_."
I'm a big fan of _The_Simpsons_, but that doesn't mean I'll watch a film
starring creator Matt Groening.
As low as Zucker or the modern masters of lowbrow comedy,
_There's_Something_About_Mary_'s Farrelly Brothers, go, no one can tap into
the uniquely warped wavelength of writer-director John Waters.  His latest,
_Pecker_, features more of his singular brand of cinematic dementia.  Among
the hilariously eccentric pieces of Baltimore white trash featured: a
sweets-obsessed young girl named Little Chrissy (Lauren Hulsey), who
guzzles Jolt cola and eats sugar straight from the sack; her mother Joyce
(Mary Kay Place), a thrift-shop owner who enjoys offering her fashion
"expertise" to the homeless; Chrissy's older sister Tina (Martha Plimpton),
who works at a gay male strip bar known for "teabagging" (don't ask); and
Chrissy's grandmother Memama (Jean Schertler), whose sacred statue of the
Virgin Mary not-so-miraculously "speaks" (she makes the voice herself).
Toss in running gags about the pubic hair on lesbian strippers, and what
could possibly be wrong?  In short, the film doesn't have much of a pecker.
 The title character (a truly dazed Edward Furlong) is Little Chrissy's
perky older brother, who snaps photos of everyone and everything he sees
around him.  Pecker's photos of his "culturally challenged" family and
community come to arouse great interest in the New York art world, building
to a rise to fame that causes the inevitable friction with his family; his
girlfriend Shelley (Christina Ricci, wonderfully acid as always), who runs
her laundromat with an iron fist; and his gleeful shoplifter of a best
friend, Matt (Brendan Sexton III).  This main thrust of the film, however,
is downright flaccid compared to the comic potency of the fascinating and
wildly amusing weirdness of all else.  There's quite a bit to laugh at in
_Pecker_, but the sturdy jokes stand up at the periphery of a very limp
center.  (_Pecker_ opens September 25)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
BASEKETBALL
(Universal)
Starring:  Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Yasmine Bleeth, Robert Vaughn, Dian
Bachar, Jenny McCarthy.
Screenplay:  David Zucker, Robert LoCash, Lewis Friedman and Jeff Wright.
Producers:  David Zucker, Robert LoCash and Gil Netter.
Director:  David Zucker.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, slapstick violence)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     If your comic tastes run to the urbane, this is most definitely the
summer of your discontent.  THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY brought you
mangled genitalia and dangling bodily fluids; MAFIA! featured flaming
flatulence and a boy being smuggled in a donkey's rectum.  And now comes
BASEKETBALL, co-written and directed by David Zucker (THE NAKED GUN) and
starring Trey Parker and Matt Stone, the creators of "South Park" who gave
the world a talking piece of excrement named Mr. Hankey.  Anyone want to
place bets on whether it's going to be an Oscar Wilde-ian romp spilling
over with tres bon mots?
     Fact is, BASEKETBALL tosses off the kind of groin-level humor that
makes THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY look like a particularly droll "New
Yorker" cartoon.  This tale of two losers (Parker and Stone) who create a
sports sensation combining elements of baseball and basketball scurries
about in search of every imaginable source of vulgar, offensive and/or
just plain immature comedy.  Stone lactates like a Parisian fountain;
Parker slurps liposuctioned fat from a plastic bag; both stars sport
prosthetic male members which make it look like they're auditioning for
the sequel to BOOGIE NIGHTS.  No subject is too sensitive for some sort of
peurile gag:  not gays, not foreign accents, not raving bigots, not
necrophilia.
     Damn them all for making it funny too often to dismiss.  Yes,
BASEKETBALL certainly crosses the line at times from daring to
mean-spirited.  It also includes some wicked shots at professional sports,
from corporate stadium sponsorship to peripatetic franchises to bizarre
promotional giveaways (including "Dozen Egg Night," "Free Range Chicken
Night" and "Anal Probe Night").  The best running gag comes from the
baseketball rule which allows opponent to taunt the player with the ball
in an effort to psych him out.  Stone and Parker take the opportunity to
run with every possible distracting comment, gesture and visual image.
There's nowhere too low for them to sink, and they get enough laughs to
justify going just a bit lower the next time.
     It's hard to tell whether Parker and Stone have the stuff to be
legitimate big screen comic stars.  BASEKETBALL is an ideal showcase for
their malicious, "dude"-spewing wastrel characters; they're like Bill and
Ted with more acid in their veins.  Still, there's a sense that they're
just the slightest bit desperate to impress, too eager to reach for a
four-letter punch line before coming up with a more clever alternative.
When Parker finally goes for a laugh by trotting out the voice of "South
Park's" Eric Cartman, you can bet the audience will go wild with 
recognition.  It just feels lazy, one overgrown adolescent playing to
other overgrown adolescents, congratulating himself for being the id boy
of the moment.
     Strange as it may seem, David Zucker ends up being the steadying
influence which reins in Parker and Stone.  Zucker knows how to play a
near-subliminal visual joke with the best of them, and he works in plenty
of knee-slappers in BASEKETBALL.  He also calls on AIRPLANE! alums Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar and Robert Stack to help out, with Stack doing a particularly
hilarious parody of his own gig hosting "Unsolved Mysteries."  Even when
he steals from himself in the character of a sick boy at the mercy of
idiots (a la Jill Whelan in AIRPLANE!), he gives it a fresh twist; there's
nothing quite like watching an 8-year-old in need of a liver transplant
doing rounds of tequila shots.  That's one of the tamer bits in
BASEKETBALL, a film that sometimes doesn't know when to quit.  There will
be viewers who revel in that sort of "look at me, Ma, I'm being
irreverent" irreverence.  Others will shake their heads at the
continuation of their comedic summer of discontent, even through their own
embarrassed giggles.

Author
Jason Wallis
BASEketball * * * (out of four)
Starring Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Yasmine Bleeth, Jenny McCarthy, Robert
Vaughn, Ernest Borgnine, Dian Bacher, Robert Stack and Kareen Abdul-Jabbar 
Directed by David Zucker 
Rated R for profanity and crude, sex related humor 
Theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1 
Released in 1998 
Running 98 minutes 
Exactly how far is too far? Lately, we've been seeing alot of movies that
pose this question. Most recently, there was There's Something About Mary,
the newest attack on the senses by the Farrely Brothers (Dumb and Dumber,
Kingpin). I'm not expecting anyone else to agree with me, but I'm convinced
I will not see a better film all year than Mary. Unlike their first outing,
Dumb and Dumber (which supplied dick and fart jokes without even a hint of
an actual story), their latest venture gives us plenty of dick and fart
humor, only this time also give us the truest, sweetest romantic comedy
since When Harry Met Sally... It was, quite simply, a masterpiece of comic
timing and truths about the nature of love and it's effects. Now, in the
wake of Mary's success, the same idiots who brought us The Naked Gun and
it's sequels bring us BASEketball... not very good timing on the Zuckers'
part if you ask me. 
Unfortunately, this film falls into the same trap that the Farrely's first
film did. It takes what could have been a wildly satiric and delightfully
gross send-up of modern sports and turned it into...that's right; an attack
on the senses without a good story or characters. But despite it's flaws,
the movie is funny and I'd be lying if I said I didn't laugh. Hell, some
parts had me in tears. I defy anyone to describe some of BASEketball's key
sight gags and still keep a straight face. However, it's also one of the
most uneven comedies I've seen in years. 
The plot is pretty much self explanatory. Trey Parker and Matt Stone
(creators of "South Park" - the best television show of last year) play Joe
Cooper and Doug Remer, two hopelessly inept best buddies who inadvertently
invent baseketball, an obviously idiotic fusing of baseball and basketball.
The main catch is that while an opponent is preparing to take a shot, you
can do anything in your power (short of physically attacking him) to stop
him from making it. 
Let me take a time out here and explain why these so-called psyche-outs are
pivotal to the marginal success of BASEketball. These are the times that
had me in tears, trying desperately to catch my breath. During the normal
comedy routines in this film, most of the jokes are either not funny or
just plain too cruel and sick to laugh at. Even I, the sick-humor hound,
felt uncomfortable during the section of jokes focusing on dying children.
Sometimes I like to tell myself that there isn't a line, that anything
that'll get a chuckle is fair game. But watching these scenes, I came to
realize that there are just some things not to be made fun of. Thankfully,
the movie only takes about ten minutes in executing these jokes. Trust me -
go get popcorn when the time rolls around. 
Where was I? Oh yeah; the psyche-outs. These are actually what make the
film somewhat recommendable. You wouldn't believe the kinds of things these
guys do to make a distraction. Pornographic t-shirts, discussions of
necrophilia, gay bashing, mutilation, eating fat from Marlon Brando's ass;
you name it. They are, essentially, the highlights of the movie. 
Like I said, the plot is pretty standard. When the owner of the Beers
(Ernest Borgnine - yeah!!!) chokes on a hotdog and dies, he leaves the team
to Cooper...if and only if he leads the team to victory in the next season.
A-ha. This is the perfect opportunity for the late owner's Anna Nicole
Smith-esque wife (Jenny McCarthy) to swipe the team from the rightful
owners. Al she has to do is keep them from winning. 
Again, as far as plot and characters go, BASEketball leaves much to be
desired. But the numerous psyche-outs, most of them done with a stroke of
brilliance, are alone enough for me to marginally recommend this irreverent
comedy. 
E-mail: rwallis@inreach.com
Homepage: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Dude, why on Earth do you think Premiere magazine picked us to be one of the
films that would gross over $100 million in the summer of 1998? Dude, I have
no idea, but another politically-incorrect comedy, THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT
MARY (7.5/10), made over $150 million! Dude, are you for real? Dude, our
film kicked that film's ass all over the place!! Dude, ours didn't feature a
couple of bra-shots of Cameron Diaz, or a shot of cum in her hair. Dude,
where can I rent that video, dude !?!?
PLOT:
Two losers with little hope or ambition, create an amalgam-sport which falls
somewhere between baseball and basketball, called baseketball. The sport
rises to popular new heights, and tests its original non-commerciality
promise, and the friendship of a couple of air-headed dude buddies.
CRITIQUE:
Sophomoric comedy barely curves a few laughs over home plate, pops up a lot
of corny and repetitive jokes, but hits a homerun for originality and strong
performances by the new kids on the block, Matt Stone and Trey Parker. This
movie starts off with an original premise, a healthy cast of campy actors,
but slowly deteriorates into a "one-joke" movie, with a weak plot line and
flat sight gags. Don't get me wrong, I chuckled at quite a few of the jokes
in this film, but unfortunately for its makers (The Zucker Brothers of
AIRPLANE and the NAKED GUN series fame), there weren't enough to carry the
weak story in which they were stirred. I mean, how many times can you show
the audience cheering, the "sexy" cheerleaders leading, and the players
trying to "psyche each other out", before you look for a little more? I
would recommend it to anyone who's looking for a cute basis for a comedy,
with a little zing, but not much zang.
Also, if you're a fan of TV's "South Park", I'm sure you'll want to see it
for the big-screen debut of the creators of that show, Stone and Parker, who
actually work perfectly in this film, and really seem at ease and very
natural before the camera. So if you don't think the premise of this movie
is cute, and you don't care for either one of these two individuals, I
suggest you skip this hit-and-miss comedy, and check out the funnier THERE'S
SOMETHING ABOUT MARY. Also, keep in mind that most of the humor in this film
is based in the pool of "stupid humor", which I personally enjoy, but others
might not. All in all, a so-so time at the videostore. By the way, if you do
get to see this film on video, there are about 15 minutes worth of outtakes
at the end of the film, which you could definitely skip out on. They are
absolutely NOT FUNNY, and actually carved away from the little smile that I
had at the end of the movie. Dude, why would you even put those unfunny
outtakes there to begin with? Dude? Duuuuuuuuude ????
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Kato Kaelin, of OJ Simpson Murder Case fame, has a small cameo as a
driveway-game announcer.


Author
James Sanford
        If Universal Pictures really wanted viewers to properly
appreciate ``BASEketball'' the studio should have furnished each
ticket-buyer with a free six-pack. This proud-to-be-stupid comedy,
which unites the creators of ``South Park'' and one of the men behind
the ``Naked Gun'' series, is is the type of movie designed to be
watched in a bar, at a frat house, or after a party.  Putting it in an
alcohol-free theatrical setting makes about as much sense as packing a
suitcase for your trip to Nudestock.
  With its consistently raunchy tone ``BASEketball'' can't
help but invite comparisons to ``There's Something About Mary,'' the
hit that's taken low-brow humor to new heights. Though ``BASEketball''
cheerfully pours on one gross-out after another - a guy drinks from a
bidet, clueless heroes Coop (Trey Parker) and Remer (Matt Stone) knock
back tequila with an 8-year-old boy, a character discovers a woman's
hair stuck between his teeth - nothing here approaches the sick genius
of the ``hair gel'' scene in ``Mary.''
  But two points for trying. Stone and Parker may not be
actors, but they'll do anything to get a reaction or to spice up the
movie's so-called plot. The story involves Coop and Remer's attempts
to save their newly created sport from the clutches of villains Cain
(Robert Vaughn) and curvy black-widow Yvette (Jenny McCarthy, who has
very little screen time and almost nothing to do).
  Unsurprisingly, the best laughs in ``BASEketball'' have
nothing to do with the central story, such as when earnest Yasmine
Bleeth asks that the kids she cares for be referred to as
``health-challenged or life-impaired'' rather than terminally ill.
  Writer-director David Zucker crams as much verbal and visual
humor in each shot as possible - watch the background action carefully
- in an effort to amuse or offend as frequently as possible. The
biggest joke of all, however, may be Zucker's claim in the press
information that the film is based on a true story. Now that is funny.

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
The only thing that's worse than viewing a really bad movie is seeing a
really bad movie that actually HAD potential.  I love movies that take
cynical and sarcastic jabs at all the things that make most of us
angry.  Recent high school graduates signing NBA contracts in the 100
million dollar range which they don't deserve because they haven't
proven themselves in the big leagues.  Teams switching cities,
disregarding fan loyalty even though their profits are substantial.
Sports stadiums and arenas given corporate names and plastering their
marketing strategy in people's faces until their exhausted and the way
some sports, like hockey, disregard rules in favour of dirty play.
'Baseketball' makes fun of all these things but loses sight of the fact
that gross-out gags can only carry a movie so far.
Trey Parker and Matt Stone, the creators of television's 'South Park',
star as two social misfits who, while at a party one night in the
suburbs, invent a game in the driveway of their hostess and later call
in baseketball.  A cross of course between baseball and basketball that
in reality looks pretty boring.  Like strikeout in baseball, the idea to
retire you opponent in baseketball is the 'psyche' out where you
mentally tease members of the other team to distract them from doing
their job.  I was sick of the game of baseketball after the second or
third scene involving it.  The game grows in popularity slowly until a
billionaire (Ernest Borgnine) wants to take the game professional.  Five
years pass and the game is so popular that it ranks up there with the
other major sports and arenas are packed with fans and Bob Costas and Al
Michaels, two of America's best sports broadcasters, are the chief
announcers for the Milwaukee Beers, the name of the team that Parker and
Stone play for.
One tasteless scene makes fun of the fact that Borgnine, the owner of
the Beers, chokes on a hot dog at the championship game and dies and the
Beers lose.  At the reading of the will, Parker is given majority
control of the team but if the team loses the championship next year,
controlling interest reverts to Borgnine's widow (Jenny McCarthy).  Gee,
like that doesn't give away the ending.  Don't blame me.  I'm saving you
money by telling you that the movie makes this obvious, predictable, and
you've seen it all before.  McCarthy is pursued by the villainous owner
(Robert Vaughn) of the Dallas Felons (can you guess what team they're
making fun of here?) who tries to get close to her and take over the
team himself.  Parker and Stone both fall for a beautiful humanitarian
(Yasmine Bleeth) who runs one of those programs for underprivileged
children.
The creators of 'The Naked Gun' and 'Airplane!' series are responsible
for this mess of a movie that doesn't have the first clue where to draw
the line, keep its ideas fresh or be entertaining and convincing without
using crude humour. I found Parker and Stone completely untalented in
this film.  How can two guys who make such a sharp and funny show like
'South Park' miss the mark by so much here?  Director David Zucker lets
every joke fall flat and 'Baseketball' will only appeal to the dirty
minded adult and the care free mind of pre teens.  How about something
for the rest of us?
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Matt Williams
The first film to take advantage of the South Park craze has hit the big
screens.  Starring the creators of Comedy Central's crudely funny
animated show, BASEketball is a hamhanded attempt to merge their brand
of offbeat insult humor with the zany gags that have been a trademark of
director David Zucker.  Surprisingly, the alliance actually works,
creating a movie that, while not for all tastes, has moments of genuine
hilarity.
The new sport baseketball gets its start as the brainchild of two
friends, Coop (Trey Parker), and Remer (Matt Stone). Making up rules on
the spot, the two merge baseball and basketball, removing all sense of
athleticism while adding a heaping dose of trash talking.  The end
result is enjoyed by Coop and Remer and several of their neighbors,
including Kenny "Squeak" Scolari (Dian Bachar).
However, things take off when the wealthy Theodore Denslow (Ernest
Borgnine), enjoying the freshness and innocence of the new sport,
creates a national league.  Within five years, the new sport has become
a national craze, but can it live up to its idealism?
One man, owner Baxter Cain (Robert Vaughn), seeks to spoil the sport.
Will his desire for higher profits lead to the corruption and downfall
of baseketball? And can Theodore Denslow's trophy wife, Yvette (Jenny
McCarthy), be up to any good? At least Coop & Remer's love interest,
Jenna (Yasmine Bleeth), seems to be on the side of goodwill...or is she?
Fans of South Park are obviously the film's intended primary audience,
and said fans are likely to have a blast here.  (Though, the film only
resorts to using South Park voices twice.)  However, if the South Park
brand humor doesn't particularly strike your fancy, BASEketball isn't
likely to convert you.
The film expends most of its gags on its insult humor, applied when the
teams attempt to "psych out" their opponents.  The result is a mixed
bag, with some of the psych-outs being genuinely funny, others landing
with a dull thud.  The film is actually better when it aims its comical
eye elsewhere:  such as at the excesses of pro sports.
The film's plot is a letdown, constructed merely as a loose framework
for gags and jokes.  There's hardly an unanticipated step in the film.
Even in the sporting scenes, you never are made to care who wins or
loses... it's all done for the gags.
Vulgar and gross, the film never rises above low comedy.  But at times,
the low comedy really shines.  It's never as consistent as There's
Something About Mary, and its laughs are rarely as intense, but it does
have its fair share of them.
BASEketball should please it's target audience.  If simply hearing about
this film makes you want to go see it, then this is likely for you.  For
those with second thoughts, this one can easily wait until video.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: David Zucker
Writers: David Zucker, Robert LoCash, Lewis Friedman, and Jeff Wright
Starring: Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Yasmeen Bleeth, Dian Bachar, Robert
Vaughn, Jenny McCarthy, Ernest Borgnine, Al Michaels, Bob Costas, Robert
Stack, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar
Last week, many reviewers made the mistake of comparing "Mafia!," the spoof
on "The Godfather" movies from Jim Abrahams, to the recent Farelly
Brothers' comedy, "There's Something About Mary," possibly the funniest
movie in a couple years.  If you're going to compare any recent comedy to
"Mary," it should be "Baseketball" because when looking at them, you can
see where the former is wildly sucessful while the latter is moderately so.
 These are both films that at least try and take toilet humor to a level of
sheer high comedy, but only one actually gets there.
"Baseketball" actually begins more promisingly than "Mary," a film that,
admittingly, took a couple minutes to really get going.  Here, we start
very high: a sorta-documentary on why modern-day sports are dying: because
of too much media control.  This is where I laughed the hardest - how can't
you laugh when you see a mock arena titled "Preperation-H Stadium?"  And
from this, "Baseketball" promised to be the best of both worlds: high
satire and lots of giddy toilet humor, since the film comes from two groups
of popular giants: David Zucker, one of the three guys who created a whole
new brand of movie comedy with "Airplane!"; and Trey Parker and Matt Stone,
the creators, writers, and voices of the hit show "South Park."
In a lot of ways, "Baseketball" is like "South Park" (strange, because it
was written by other people): it uses lots of shockingly crude humor, a
touch of wild satire, and an attitude that seems to say "hey, we're getting
away with this, aren't we?"  They mock minorities and majorities (they seem
to love making fun of dying children, short people, and Texans).  They
ridicule the way sports has become such a sell-out.  They make sex jokes,
bodily function jokes, and all sorts of jokes many comedies are afraid to
make fun of.  And it all comes across more like a live-action, really long
episode of "South Park" than another film in the spirit of "Airplane!" and
"The Naked Gun."
"Baseketball," as you would have guessed, is about a fusion of Baseball and
Basketball made by two complete losers: Joseph "Coop" Cooper and Doug Remer
(Parker and Stone, respectively).  Over the course of a couple years, the
sport becomes increasingly popular, thanks to help from a selfless
billionaire (an oxymoron?), Theodore Denslow (Ernest Borgnine - remember
when we used to talk this guy seriously?  Neither do I.), who dies as a
result of choking on a hot dog, which catapults the film into its big plot:
Denslow leaves the team to Cooper, instigating another billionaire, Baxter
Cain (Robert Vaughn - see the footnote beside Borgnine), who wants to try
and cash in on it like they used to do for baseball and all.  Will they
sell out? Will Cain get the team anyway?  Will Cooper and Remer break up?
It's all handled in a joking fashion, of course, and there's a joke every
couple seconds of varying degrees, everything from the laugh-inducing sight
of the afro-d Stone making out with a Playboy bunnyin a jacuzzi to calling
the short friend/teamate of Cooper and Remer's a "little bitch" constantly.
 And so Parker and Stone can really goof off, there's a rule in the game
where the defending team can prevent the shooting team by psyching them out
anyway which way they can, so there's lots of hilarious taunts and
disgusitng jokes (my favorite was Parker drinking fat from a liposuction of
Marlon Brando's ass, which, incidentally, doesn't prevent the shooter from
shooting).
The big discovery is that Parker and Stone are, for the most part, talented
and likable comic actors, a shock because many actors who do voices for a
living aren't ever very comfortable on screen.  Parker, with his bleached
blond hair, gets the least wacky of the jobs, settling with a lame romance
subplot involving him and a sexy runner of a sick children's clinic
(Yasmeen Bleeth), but nevertheless milks all the comedy out of it.  Stone,
the ugly guy of the bunch, gets to be more wacky, and actually does it
well.  Ironically, the one time a joke really falls flat is when Parker
does the voice of Eric Cartman from "South Park" as a psyche out - it just
looses so much in the transfer from cartoon to reel life.
The film's cameos and supporitng roles are rather funny as well, especially
real-life sports announcers Al Michaels and Bob Coastas playing, well,
sports announcers, who, like all the news anchors in this film, have to say
wildly profane lines with a straight face.  Robert Stack even shows up
towards the end on a pseudo-episode of "Unsolved Mystery."  I know it's
immature to laugh at something like this, but hearing Stack swearing
dead-pan is just too funny to not laugh at, no matter what the principle
is.
However funny as this film is, the whole falls just short of its many
parts.  There's a lot of funny stuff here, but it never works as smoothly
as it should.  Many many jokes fall dead, as well as subplots (Jenny
McCarthy literally laying carpet...over and over again), and the film's
satirical edge just gradually dies as the film becomes more and more
obsessed with topping itself.  The reason it's not as satisfying as it
should be may be because everyone puts more in the attitude they tell the
jokes than they do the actual quality of the jokes.  Take, for example, the
dozens of psyche-outs we see in this film.  Some are funny, but so many of
them are just mediocre or not funny at all.  Saying at the last second "I
fucked your sister" is hilarious, as is the breast milk squirint bit (at
least the first time).  But putting on a mask and speaking like a hick? 
Puh-lease.
The chief problem is this film is too much in love with itself, too much in
awe at what they can get away with.  Sure, hearing a sports announcer use
the word "cocksucker" like it was just part of his daily job is funny at
first, but a whole bunch of these kinds of jokes, each handled as they're
the greatest, most obscene jokes in the history of comedy...well, that
makes the film a little bland.  It's funny, but if you're want to see
toilet humor done right, without all the glitz and glamor that this film
has, do yourself a big favor and go see "There's Something About Mary."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal Pictures
 Director: David Zucker 
 Writers:  David Zucker, Robert LoCash, Lewis Friedman
 Cast: Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Yasmine Bleeth, Jenny
McCarthy, Robert Vaughn, Ernest Borgnine, Dian Bachar
   One basketball player gets $20 million a year for promoting
a company that makes sneakers.  In some countries, you're
as likely as not to be killed in the stands over plays on the
soccer field.  Baseball players vie with one another for
lucrative movie contracts, and many a marriage has dissolved
over absentee husbands who sit glued to the tube every
Sunday watching pigskin spectacles.  Yet at one time, so they
say, people enjoyed just going out into the field and lobbing
the horsehide around and frolicking about wearing a pair of
Keds.  Today most of us prefer to go to Wrigley Field or
Giants Stadium and, if we're into jogging, it's as much to show
off our $200 footwear as to trim down and stay in shape. 
"BASEketball," which bills itself as a sendup of organized
sports--particularly its gross commercialization--fights fire with
fire in out-vulgarizing its target.  A laugh-out-loud movie with
more hits than misses, "BASEketball" is obviously the work of
David Zucker, whose popular "South Park" TV show keeps
people glued to their sets whenever there's no sign of a game
to watch.
   The nonstop action begins when when Joe Cooper (Trey
Parker) and Doug Remer (Matt Stone) invent a new game,
one which can be played even by people with bad backs and
shoddy knees, putting them on an equal plane with the most
tanned and fit athlete.  Dubbing the action "BASEketball," the
sport uses a white horsehide about the size of a basketball,
but you don't have to run back and forth down the court like a
nut. You simply take a shot and, depending on where you
discharge the orb, you get a single, double, triple or home
run.  Nor do you have to "cover" your opponent on guard
duty.  Your task in defense is more challenging: you must
psych the guy out by doing something so offensive or saying
something so distasteful that the shooter is too distracted to
get off a good throw.  The opportunities for both verbal and
physical humor are obvious and David Zucker, who wrote and
directed this ribald film, keeps the action going without letup,
parading frenetic activity in both foreground and horizon.
   The three stooges, "Coop," Reemer, and a diminutive guy
named Squeak Scolari (Dian Bachar), evoke laughter even if
they do nothing but stand and look at the audience as if
singing a chorus of "duh."  As Joe Cooper, Trey Parker sports
an obvious blond rug over his dark hair, Matt Stone a pair of
disgustingly fashionable spectacles under his Afro, while Dian
Bachar gets the chuckles just by being himself.  The crowning
event of the picture is the world series-like competition for the
Denslow Cup. Though the sport had begun innocently in an
impromptu backyard basketketball court, it had grown by
leaps and bounds after its initial commercialization by
financier Ted Denslow (Ernest Borgnine)--so much that
promoter Baxter Cain (Robert Vaughn) stands to gain big
bucks if the hero's team loses.  
   The romantic interest is sparked by a clean-cut beauty,
Jenna Reed (Yasmine Bleeth), who runs a charitable
foundation for kids with incurable diseases.  Trey Parker's
interest in the striking young woman sets the scene for some
productive, politically incorrect verbal humor.  When Joey
(Trevor Einhron), a lad about to undergo a crucial liver
transplant which he is not expected to weather, is asked for a
Big Wish, he fancies himself as a game hunter targeting
endangered species like pandas.  That dream rejected, he
asks for a go at Chelsea Clinton.  "That's a tall order,"
responds Coop dryly. "You'd have a better chance at Bill." 
When Coop asks whether the kids are "sick and dying,"
Jenna corrects him: "They're health-challenged and survival-
impaired."  After Coop and Remer take the kid out on the
town for a night of heavy drinking before the operation, Joey
lies on the hospital gurney, prompting the nurse to complain,
"He's eight years old and he smells like Robert Downey Jr."
   The jokes do not depend exclusively on sports and, in fact,
some of the funniest scenes occur early on.  In one situation,
Coop and Remer crash a party given by the ice-cold Brittany
(Cory Oliver) and, taking a drink from the house bidet,
smelling the undies in an upstairs room and testing a vibrator,
they find out that they're in Brittany's mother's room.
   The sports personality most bitingly satirized albeit without
mentioning his name is Michael Jordan, whose promotion of
Nike sneakers earns him an annual income greater than that
of the entire 30,000-strong force of largely underage
assemblers in Indonesia.  Flying to Calcutta, Coop discovers
a factory filled with eight-year-olds making the product and
wins Jenna's heart by effecting drastic reforms in the
workplace.
   Despite what you may have heard, "BASEketball" is not as
crude as such paradigms of coarseness as "Mall Rats,"
"Trainspotting," and even "Mafia!"  It's filled with solid comic
performances, equally effective as both physical and verbal
buffoonery.  
