Title
Review for Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Christopher Null
     The way I see it, any film starring Christopher Walken as a
quadriplegic gangster has to have something going for it.  And while
THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD has *something,* I'm not quite
sure what that is.
     Just you're typical gangster/melodrama/black comedy/romance flick,
THINGS TO DO... is a stylish story about a few days in the life of Jimmy
the Saint (Andy Garcia).  Jimmy plays a mobster-gone-good whose attempt at
legitimacy is a business known as "Afterlife Advice," where terminally ill
clients can videotape future advice for their loved ones.
     The Man With The Plan (Walken), Jimmy's old boss, soon calls him back
for a special job:  rough up the new boyfriend of The Man's son's
ex-girlfriend (got that?)--no big deal.  Jimmy then reassembles his old
team of hit men, including the leper "Pieces" (Christopher Lloyd),
Franchise (William Forsythe), Easy Wind (Bill Nunn), and the
beyond-hyperactive Critical Bill (Treat Williams in his fabled "comeback"
role).  In case you haven't figured it out yet, THINGS TO DO... is not
exactly long on tastefulness.
     To make the overly long story short:  the gang manages to completely
screw up the job, Jimmy finds himself falling in love with a girl named
Dagney (Gabrielle Anwar), and a whole lot of folks get whacked.  When you
sort all this out, you get a plot that's mildly interesting and sometimes
funny but is mainly a tedious exercise in attempted hipness. 
Incidentally, Scott Rosenberg's script was written in two weeks...and you
can tell.
     The film has its fun moments and first-timer Gary Fleder's direction
isn't too tough on the viewer (it's about as aesthetically pleasing as any
film made in Denver can get).  Williams's performance is further
over-the-top than I've seen since Jack Nicholson in BATMAN (not that
that's a bad thing), and Fairuza Balk also turns in a startling
performance as Jimmy's favorite hooker.
     Other than these elements, THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD is
merely average--a nice place to visit, but I wouldn't want to die there.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     If Albert Einstein watched this movie while traveling at the speed
of light, would he still think that three hours had passed instead of
two?  No, THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD is not about time-
travel, but it *is* one of those unfortunate movies that makes you
feel like you've lived sixty more minutes than you actually have.  And
that's too bad, given the many interesting ingredients in this film that
never quite come together.
     Director Gary Fleder makes a mash of Scott Rosenberg's script about
a gang of usual suspects who botch a reunion job with disastrous
results.  Both his pacing and his framing of the story are way off.  The
cast is a pleasant distraction, sure, but only Treat Williams-- as the
resident psycho-- registers completely.  (He delivers a great monologue
while pissing into a milk jug!)  To be fair, Fleder does a good job of
keeping everything reeking of death.  The reaper is everywhere in DENVER
and it makes for a great, grim subtext.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
PMILAN@FSC.EDU
     The new wave of gangster films, spearheaded by Quentin Tarantino,
keeps on growing.  Once, young filmmakers wrote and directed these kind
of films in homage to Martin Scorsese; now things have grown more and
more outlandish in tribute to Tarantino's warped sensibilities.
     Gary Fleder's THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD walks a line
between the two.  The film stars Andy Garcia as Jimmy the Saint, a
kindly gangster-turned-legitimate businessman who runs Afterlife
Advice, in which the dying record their last thought so that their
children can refer to them in years to come.  The business is failing,
so to raise money, Jimmy's forced to come out of retirement and work
for The Man With The Plan.
     As played by Christopher Walken, the Man is a paraplegic don, who
conducts his business from a wheelchair. (Walken must be the only actor
who can project menace while moving only his head.) The Man sends Jimmy
on an "action"; capture the new boyfriend of his son's former fiance,
and convince him that marriage would be a very bad idea.
     Jimmy assembles a crew of like-minded individuals; Franchise
(William Forsythe), who now runs a trailer park; Pieces (Christopher
Lloyd), a leprous criminal; Easy Wind (Bill Nunn), an out-of-town
player; and Critical Bill (Treat Williams), a certified psychotic.
     As must be obvious, nothing goes as planned; by the end of the
"action," the boyfriend *and* the fiance lie dead, and the Man With The
Plan has hits out for all five members of the crew.  Jimmy's forced to
scramble around, trying to save his boys, protect the woman he loves
(Gabrielle Anwar), rescue a prostitute friend from the streets (Fairuza
Balk), and in general, keep from getting killed.
     All this plays out with a mix of absurdity and profundity.  For
every over-the-top touch (Critical Bill is first sighted in the
basement of a funeral parlor, using a corpse as a punching bag),
there's a moment of quietude and clarity.  Christopher Lloyd's final
speech is one of the best of these moments.
     THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD is certainly dark-
humored, especially in respect to Critical Bill and a hitman named
Mister Shhh (played by a fairly menacing Steve Buscemi), but it also
has a genuinely affecting love story between Garcia and Anwar.  The
performances are first-rate across the board, especially Garcia,
Walken, and Williams, who deserves a John Travolta-style resurrection
for his work here.
     My one big problem?  Just this; I'm a Warren Zevon fan.  How in the
hell do you write a movie called THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE
DEAD and *not* put in the Zevon song of the same name?  Ah, well.

Author
Vince Deehan
Directed by Gary Fleder
Screenplay by Scott Rosenberg
Cast:  Andy Garcia, Christopher Walken, William Forsythe, Treat Williams, 
Christopher Lloyd, Bill Nunn, Jack Warden, Steve Buscemi, Gabrielle Anwar, 
Fairuza Balk, Michael Nicolosi and Josh Charles.
Just take a look at the amazing cast list for this film- pretty impressive 
isn't it?  This is almost a dream time of actors and it says so much for 
this film's calibre that such a heavyweight team of actors was drawn to this 
project.  So it is very sad to note that this film didn't do at all well in 
the US, and it really is a crying shame since this film has everything going 
for it : a great script with cracking dialogue, great characters, excellent 
performances and a good story. So why did this film fail ?  I think I may know 
why, and I will come back to this later.
When we first meet Jimmy "The Saint" Tosnia (Andy Garcia) he is seen trying to 
drum up some business for his video service.  He runs a company which films 
dying people giving advice to their relatives in their absence.  His business 
isn't doing well and this is noted by Jimmy's former boss, The Man With The 
Plan (Christopher Walken).  Jimmy used to lead a life of crime but has long 
since gone straight, although his former boss still feels that Jimmy will be 
just the right man to do a "piece of work" for him.  The Man With The Plan is 
a quadriplegic and lives in a huge mansion with his nurse, his two brutish 
bodyguards and his slow-minded son Bernard. 
We learn that Bernard has been having a very hard time getting over a 
long-term relationship with his childhood sweetheart who is now about to get 
married.  It turns out that her husband-to-be is about to arrive in Denver in 
a few days time and The Man With The Plan wants him to receive a bit of a 
scare from Jimmy and his old associates.  Jimmy is not at all keen at first, 
but The Man With The Plan doesn't seem the sort of guy you say "No" to, so
Jimmy accepts.  Jimmy gathers up all his old mates from his former days of 
crime: Franchise (William Forsythe), Critical Bill Dooley (Treat Williams), 
Pieces (Christopher Lloyd), and Easy Wind (Bill Nunn).  Jimmy plans the whole
procedure and allows Critical Bill to be one of the two men who stop the 
groom Bruce (Josh Charles) on the road into Denver.  Jimmy isn't keen to let 
Critical Bill take such an important role, since he has a bad reputation
for being a bit explosive and prone to unnecessary acts of violence.  Against 
his better judgement Jimmy is swayed when Critical Bill assures him that
those days are behind him.  When the night arrives to scare Bruce, things do 
not go to plan and Bruce ends up dead.  The Man With The Plan never intended 
this to happen and is not pleased. He orders that Jimmy's associates be killed 
and warns Jimmy to get out of Denver or face the same fate.
The rest of the film shows how Jimmy tries hard to save his friends' lives as 
well as that of his young girlfriend, Dagney (Gabrielle Anwar) who is now in 
danger too.  We also meet a young prostitute, Lucinda (Fairuza Balk) who 
clearly dotes on Jimmy and talks of how she wishes she could have a love-child
with Jimmy.  Jimmy is shown, throughout the film, looking out for Lucinda's 
interests and this is vividly shown when he barges into an office and punishes 
a businessman who has assaulted Lucinda.
I can't speak highly enough of this film, it is simply wonderful.  I have seen 
it twice now and I am looking forward to seeing it again later this week (it 
is still showing in London).  It has everything that I like to find in films : 
a great story that keeps you interested, great characters who you come to 
care about, excellent dialogue that sticks in the mind, marvellous acting from
the entire cast and it looks good too ! I have no criticisms to make.  I 
think that the reason this film was so unsuccessful in the US is due to the 
misapprehension that this is somehow a Tarantino rip-off or a self-consciously 
hip movie.  Both these assumptions are not true and I feel that people who 
may have heard these comments are really missing out on a great film.  I 
believe the film was written before RESERVOIR DOGS came out so the Tarantino 
jibes are unfounded.  The idea that it is a trendy "hip" movie is perhaps due 
to the title of the movie, which unfortunately does give this impression. I 
think that when I heard this title for the first time I got the feeling that 
perhaps this movie was wanting to sound cool and trendy, which is not a good 
impression to get.  So perhaps the title is unwise.  
I have also seen people write about some of the stylised dialogue in the 
film . There are a lot of words and phrases used in the movie that are 
clearly made up and unique to the film and its characters.  Some of these,
including : "Give it a name", "Boatdrinks" and "Buckwheats" and indeed many of 
the characters' names may seem a little forced and a tad pretentious.  Many 
of the phrases are, at first, hard to translate but they get used so often 
that their meaning is very quickly picked up.  The meaning of "Boatdrinks" is 
explained early in the film and vividly and, frankly, beautifully demonstrated
later in the film ( I want to expand on this further but I wouldn't want to 
spoil it for anyone).  My personal feeling is that the creative use of new 
phrases throughout the film lends the film a lot of charm and gives the film 
a very unique feel.  The phrases are never used to distance the viewer, far 
from it.  I felt that it made me like the characters even more, because they 
had such a wonderful way of expressing themselves.
The acting from the entire cast is impeccable.  It's the kind of film that If 
I were an actor I would be so proud to have been a part of it. Indeed, in a 
TV interview I saw with the writer and director they said that once the script 
started doing the rounds in Hollywood, actors all over town were *very* keen 
to get involved. This is a great film for actors because the parts are all so 
well written and the dialogue really gives the actors some wonderful lines to 
play with.  To pick out actors for particular praise is hard, because everyone 
deserves praise.
Christopher Lloyd has one of the most powerful scenes in the
film, where he explain to Jimmy that he knows that he has lived life to the 
full and is prepared to face his impending death with dignity.  Christopher 
Lloyd's acting here is just sublime and had me very close to tears.  Andy 
Garcia is also excellent in this scene as he struggles to come to terms with
what Christopher Lloyd's character is saying. Indeed Andy Garcia
is solid as a rock throughout and gives a hugely charismatic performance that 
just shines off the screen.  Gabrielle Anwar as the beautiful Dagney gives a 
captivating performance, especially in her first scene when she playfully 
makes fun of Jimmy when he attempts to use what she feels are practised
lines in showing how enchanted he is with her.  Her character is essentially 
similar to her part in SCENT OF A WOMAN, but she plays it well and lights up 
the screen when she appears.  Jack Warden has a small role in the film, but he 
is very memorable.  He is seen mostly in a diner, talking to anyone one who 
comes in about Jimmy and his friends.  He is such a master actor that with 
what little he had to do, he creates such a big impression.  Fairuza Balk 
gives a luminous performance as a teenage prostitute and is clearly a very 
talented actress.  She is surrounded by vastly more experienced actors yet she
still gives an excellent performance which has a lot of depth and makes you 
feel very protective for her character.  Her character is so brash on the 
outside yet Fairuza Balk shows her vulnerability very well.
I could go on forever praising all the other actors (Treat Williams and 
Steve Buscemi are superb- there, I got in two more! ), but I think you get 
the point.  Gary Fleder and Scott Rosenberg have made a fantastic film and if 
just one person checks this film out after reading my review, I will be a 
very happy man.
Review written by Vince Deehan on Monday 23 September 1996
e-mail : vince@deehan.demon.co.uk

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Andy Garcia, Treat Williams, William Forsythe, Christopher Lloyd,  
      Bill Nunn, Christopher Walken, Gabrielle Anwar, Steve Buscemi,  
      Jack Warden 
Director: Gary Fleder 
Producer: Cary Woods 
Screenplay: Scott Rosenberg 
Cinematography: Elliot Davis 
Music: Michael Convertino 
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     Owing more than just a nod to Quentin Tarantino's RESERVOIR DOGS, 
Gary Fleder's THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD tries to tell the 
same sort of hip tale about sympathetic gangsters whose crime goes 
horribly wrong.  A lot is missing however -- the snappy, polished 
dialogue; the tense, gritty atmosphere; and the nearly-perfect pacing.  
THINGS TO DO is a wannabe that never quite makes it.  That's not to say 
it's all bad, however. 
     The film introduces us to Jimmy the Saint (Andy Garcia), a slick 
ex-gangster with style, class, and some great pickup lines.  For a 
while, Jimmy has been on the right side of the law, running a business 
called Afterlife Advice, in which dying men and women record words of 
wisdom for their heirs.  The debts are mounting, however, and Jimmy is 
in desperate need of cash.  So, when a shady, quadriplegic crime boss, 
The Man With the Plan (Christopher Walken), comes to him with an offer 
he can't refuse, Jimmy listens. 
     The Man With the Plan has a son, Bernard, who desperately needs to 
get back together with his ex-girlfriend.  To facilitate this, Jimmy is 
commissioned to put a scare into the girl's intended fiancee.  The fee 
is $50,000 and Jimmy can bring in as many men as he wants.  So, armed 
with the promise of easy money, he rounds up his old crew -- guys with 
absurd names like Franchise (William Forsythe), Pieces (Christopher 
Walken), Critical Bill (Treat Williams), and Easy Win (Bill Nunn).  
Things don't proceed smoothly, however.  A couple of well-placed insults 
from the intended victim cause Critical Bill to go ballistic, and Jimmy 
is soon faced with the unpleasant prospect of disposing of two bodies, 
then explaining his failure to The Man With the Plan. 
     The first half of THINGS TO DO is an unoriginal-but-entertaining 
tale of gangster-types botching a crime.  Many of the settings will be 
familiar to followers of film noir, and much of the self-consciously 
cool dialogue is derivative of, albeit inferior to, Tarantino's.  After 
the movie's midpoint, however, things go in the wrong direction.  The 
poorly-paced second hour features a lot of aimless running around and 
talking punctuated by bursts of bloody action that don't signify much.  
Most of the characters who get axed haven't been fleshed out enough to 
capture our sympathy, so it's easy to shrug off their deaths as a waste 
of screen time.  The only one we care about is Jimmy, and his motives 
and intentions become increasingly murky as THINGS TO DO moves towards 
its predictable conclusion. 
     Andy Garcia turns in one of his best performances in years, 
infusing Jimmy with an unexpected dose of humanity.  Garcia has a number 
of deftly-acted scenes, the best of which center on his evolving romance 
with Gabrielle Anwar's Dagney, an innocent girl caught up in Jimmy's 
mess.  Treat Williams is wildly energetic as Bill, a nutcase with an 
itchy trigger finger.  Williams chews on the scenery a little, 
delivering lines like "I'm Godzilla and you're Japan!" with suitable 
gusto.  Bill Nunn, William Forsythe, and Chistopher Lloyd do adequate 
jobs playing the misfits who round out Jimmy's crew.  Christopher Walken 
is his usual creepy self as The Man With the Plan. 
     As is true of his BEAUTIFUL GIRLS script, Scott Rosenberg's 
screenplay is largely a pastiche of themes and ideas from other, better 
pictures.  This movie has been assembled with enough aptitude to offer 
two hours' tepid entertainment, but it's not nearly as clever as the 
title suggests.  A few too many characters and scenes in THINGS TO DO IN 
DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD lack life and luster, making Fleder's film more 
of a pretender than a contender in a field that includes superior 
entries like RESERVOIR DOGS and THE USUAL SUSPECTS. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin
