Title
Review for Roxanne (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Funny, intelligent updating of CYRANO
     DE BERGERAC has something to say about the nature of beauty
     without ever failing to entertain.  Unfortunately, Martin's
     script cops out at the end, denying the audience the power of
     the end of CYRANO.
     Steve Martin's new film has the best plot of anything he has done to
date.  But the credit, of course, does not go entirely to Martin's
screenplay.  In fact, ROXANNE is an updating of one of the great plays of
French theater, CYRANO DE BERGERAC.  It is a good enough play that Martin
could have coasted through his version and still have had a marvelous film.
Instead, he broadens the humor and makes Cyrano de Bergerac--renamed
C. D. Bales--perfectly at home as the ever-perfect chief of the world's most
incompetent fire department.
     Bales has an old problem and a new problem.  His old problem is that he
has an absurd-looking four-inch-long nose.  That problem he pretty much
under control.  That is because he is unmatched as both a wit and a fighter.
Nobody makes fun of that nose for very long.  His other problem is that he
loves the new-in-town astronomer Roxanne (played by Daryl Hannah).
Unfortunately, Roxanne wants Bales only for a friend.  She really has eyes
only for Christopher, a handsome but vapid new recruit to the fire
department.
     Christopher is low-brow and crude, but is physically attracted to
Roxanne.  Knowing he is too clumsy to woo her by himself, he asks for help
from Bales.  Bales coaches Christopher to say the things that Bales wishes
he could tell her himself.  To be able to say to Roxanne everything that he
feels, Bales is willing to let Christopher reap the advantages.
     ROXANNE represents one more step for Martin away from his off-the-wall
origins and into making comedy of some lasting value.  Updating CYRANO DE
BERGERAC was a clever idea and is one that works.  One complaint, however--
when ROMEO AND JULIET was updated for WEST SIDE STORY it was the *whole
story* that was updated.  They did not soften the ending.  Martin insults his
audience by denying them the powerful and tragic end to the story.  Probably
at the beginning he was planning to include it because he made Bales a
firefighter rather than, say, a stockbroker.  But at some point he changed
his mind, apparently to make the film more commercial.  The film remains a
light throwaway summer comedy instead of a powerful adaptation of Rostand
that the final scene of CYRANO could have made it.  Rate it a +1 on the -4
to +4 scale.  Good, but watch the Jose Ferrer version of the original if it
comes up on PBS.
POST SCRIPT:  It may be of some interest that Cyrano de Bergerac really
existed.  He was at once one of the greatest swordsmen and one of the
greatest wits in France.  He did have a nose of prodigious size, about which
he was extremely sensitive.  He is also credited as being the first major
science fiction novelist.  His VOYAGE TO THE MOON was the first real science
fiction novel to use its concepts not for allegory, but for sense of wonder.
He thought of, on his own, several means of getting humans to the moon, most
of which were absurd by modern standards, but the one he invented for his
book (and which nobody is recorded as having thought of before) was to use
rockets.  Science fiction historian Sam Moskowitz devotes the first chapter
of his EXPLORERS OF THE INFINITE to Cyrano de Bergerac.

Author
Steve Miller
          Summary:  Steve Martin plays Cyrano to Daryl Hannah's Roxanne
     in a modernized version of Rostand's play.  This is mostly a
     vehicle for Martin, who plays a fire chief, rather than a swordsman.
     His physical acting ability is combined with some truly witty
     dialog, making for a very funny performance.
     Seeing this movie was a bit frightening to me, I have to admit.  I'm not
very fond of Daryl Hannah, and only grudgingly so of Steve Martin.  More
important was my affection for Edmond Rostand's "Cyrano," which has always been
a favorite of mine.  So-called "modernized" versions of classic stories often
need to be watched from between the fingers, in something of the manner of a
horror show.  But ROXANNE owes more to Rostand than I expected, with many lines
being taken directly from Brian Hooker's translation.
     Martin plays C. D. Bales, the chief of a volunteer fire department in a
modest British Columbia village.  Despite his preposterously large nose ("Here
we have a man who can please two women at the same time"), his wit and charm
have made him the town's favorite son.  Bales's sense of humor is admired by
all, and his extemporaneous gibes can be awesome.  However, just as with his
beplumed forebear, C. D. never jokes, nor allows others to joke, about his
nose.  In an early scene, when two athletic malcontents decide to taunt him,
C. D.'s wit is released simultaneously with his skill at unarmed combat, to
leave both jocks face down in the dust.  Personally, I found this bit deeply
gratifying.
     Hannah's role as Roxanne is perhaps the least faithful to the orignal.
She plays an astronomer, spending the summer in B. C., for no real reason.
C. D. takes an instant liking to her, but is too insecure about his looks to
let her know.  Along comes a strapping hulk of a fireman, Chris, to join Bales's
fumbling department.  He too is drawn to Roxanne, but is so awfully insecure
around women that he can't bring himself to speak to her.  His insecurities, to
the point of losing his lunch in anxiety, are the film's weakest point.
Seeking help from his chief, Chris talks C. D. into writing letters over
Chris's name.  Various other means are used to coach him when he actually meets
Roxanne face-to-face, and, as they say, "hilarity results."
     In addition to the jokes based upon Chris's ineptitude and C. D.'s nose,
the screenwriters have added a subplot not in the original.  This background
story is really a set of running jokes about the training of the volunteer
fireman, none of whom who should even be allowed a book of matches.  These are
mostly sight gags, and very funny ones.  It adds a great deal to the film, and
meshes nicely with the main story.
     It should be mentioned that the nose makeup, which is subjected to several
extreme close-ups, is superb.  A simple thing like a seam or poor skin tone
might have ruined some very funny scenes, and I'm glad the producers made sure
that this received the attention it was due.
     This was a terrifically funny movie, due almost entirely to Steve Martin's
talents.  His physical skills get their chance as well, though not to the
extent they did in ALL OF ME.  If I only grudgingly admired him before, I'm a
genuine Martin fan now.  Hannah's performance is about as dead-pan as all her
performances, but she has a small role, really, and one can ignore her.
     Certainly the funniest movie I've seen in years, and good family stuff, I
think.  +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
