Title
Review for Diamonds (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Call it a pity film.  Call it a last hurrah for a Hollywood legend.
Call it what you want – it's still crap.  Diamonds stars
eighty-three-year-old Kirk Douglas, and the film opens with clips of his
Oscar-nominated turn in the 1959 film Champion.  Old clips of old glory
– for both Douglas and his character.
Douglas was never better in Champion, which, prior to Raging Bull, was
probably the finest boxing flick around.  He was nominated for Oscars
two other times but never won. Which brings us to the perplexing
Diamonds – a film that seems specifically made to give Douglas one last
shot at winning an Oscar.  Having suffered a serious stroke in 1995,
he'd certainly have the sympathy vote.  And with the film backed by the
Miramax Oscar juggernaut – well, we know what they're capable of.  But
then the film was released.  There is still a twinkle in his eye, but
Douglas has the acting range of…well, of a guy that just had a serious
stroke.
Douglas plays Harry `The Polish Prince' Agensky, a former welterweight
fighter that raised himself from the depths of poverty to become the
champion of the world.  In 1994, Harry's beloved wife Ellie died, and
shortly after that he had a stroke that left him unable to speak.
Living in British Columbia with his son Moses (Kurt Fuller, Pushing
Tin), Harry is visited by his other son Lance (Dan Aykroyd, Blues
Brothers 2000) and teenage grandson Michael (Corbin Allred, Anywhere But
Here), who are en route to a vacation from San Francisco.  Thanks to
practicing daily with a videotaped speech coach, Harry is now able to
speak somewhat intelligibly.
Lance, an ornery, divorced newspaper columnist, is still upset over his
relationship with his dad, who was never around during his childhood.
Michael, however, instantly bonds with Harry, who explains that `a
stroke is God's way of making you shut up.'  Of course, if Harry were to
actually shut up, we would never find out about his crazy story of a
thrown fight and magic diamonds.  But no, there isn't a beanstalk – that
would have made the film entertaining.  Entertainment was obviously the
furthest thing from the minds of the filmmakers.
Long story short, Michael persuades Lance to let Harry come with them on
vacation.  They head for Reno, which makes no sense if you've gone to
British Columbia on the way from San Francisco.  Harry acts up, Lance
get embarrassed, and Michael shouts `Right on, Grandpa!' and `Grandpa,
you da man!' as his grandfather gets drunk, trashes hotel rooms and
punches people out.
There is a significant portion of the film that takes place in a
whorehouse, where characters played by Lauren Bacall (The Mirror Has Two
Faces) and Jenny McCarthy (Scream 3) are introduced.  Bacall, if you
remember, was the last victim of the whole
give-the-Oscar-to-the-faded-star-because-he/she-is-a-legend-that-has-never-won-before
syndrome (she was nominated but lost to The English Patient's Juliette
Binoche and looked extremely pissed off).  And how bad off is a film
when former Playmate McCarthy shows more range than the rest of your
actors?  But, then again, she's playing a hooker, so I'm not sure you
can even call what she's doing `acting.'
When Michael asks his grandpa if he is still in pain from the stroke,
Harry mumbles `frustrating,' which is just how you'll feel if you decide
to plunk down money to watch this film.  Diamonds was penned by
first-time screenwriter Allan Aaron Katz and directed by John Mallory
Asher (Kounterfeit).  The acting in the film is so bad that I actually
believe everyone was purposely horrible to make Douglas look better.
1:31 - PG-13 on appeal for sexual content, drug use and language

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/diamonds.htm ---
---Those of you in the Portland, Maine area can hear Mac VerStandig's 
film reviews every Friday morning on the 98.9 The Point morning show.---
Diamonds is a thoroughly enjoyable piece which owes its success to a 
remarkable ensemble cast and beautiful script that wisely shies away 
from devilish cliches and over-the-top poignancy for which many 
similar relationship films sell their souls. Those seeking a masculine 
version of movies like Anywhere But Here and fans of stars Kirk Douglas, 
Dan Akroyd and Lauren Bacall as well as teens seeking a peak of Jenny 
McCarthy (who keeps her clothes on- well, sort of anyway) should find 
this movie to be a true treat.
Harry (Kirk Douglas), Lance (Dan Akroyd) and Michael (Corbin Allred) 
represent three generations of the same family. Harry, once a boxer 
known as the Polish Prince, fondly remembers his days as the 
welterweight champion of the world. He hasn't had sex in 8 years. Lance 
is somewhere in his midlife crisis as he fights for his son's attention 
and respect despite a recent divorce. He hasn't had sex since his wife 
and he split up. Michael is battling high school and coping with the 
aforementioned divorce. He has only been to second base once.
The three generations set out on a road trip to Reno, Nevada in search 
of precious diamonds that lend the film its title. With Reno comes one 
of the most enjoyable casino scenes since Dustin Hoffman counted cards 
in Rain Man (Lance cheats at poker in a most amusing fashion), an 
unforgettable trip to a bordello that occupies nearly 1/3 of the film 
and mended relationships among the three once angry relatives.
Kirk Douglas plays a stroke victim who insists that his condition is 
merely "G-d's way of trying to make me shut up." Douglas is truly 
inspiring and it would not be unjust for him to receive a best actor 
nomination accordingly. Dan Akroyd reprises his 
confused-but-well-meaning-father role previously seen in both My Girl 
movies. In doing so, he shows that, despite enormous name recognition, 
he is one of Hollywood's most underused assets. The biggest surprise 
comes from a rather small role tackled by former Playmate Jenny McCarthy 
as, surprisingly enough, a call-girl. She shows the expected sexual 
character that her role calls for as well as a very sweet, 
girl-next-door persona that give her scenes an added oomph and her 
character more depth than any whore since Julia Roberts' lead role in 
Pretty Woman. Lauren Bacall rounds out the grade-A cast playing a madam.
Harry, the former boxer, was never a heavyweight. Rather, he was a 
welterweight at the top of his division. Similarly, Diamonds isn't a 
heavyweight film. There are no massive effects or even $20 million 
stars. But don't be mistaken, the film is at the top of its league and 
can still deliver a knock-out punch.

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/0c8aee0c7c3597e088256888001cef9f?OpenDocument
DIAMONDS
A film review by Athan Bezaitis.  Copyright filmcritic.com 2000
Kirk Douglas is a real trooper.  He still looks darn good for eighty,
and his resilience after suffering a debilitating stroke in 1996 is
quite admirable.  Unfortunately, he's the only thing really worth
cheering about in DIAMONDS.  In his first big-time Hollywood production,
director John Asher has three major stars with Dan Aykroyd, Douglas, and
the beautiful Lauren Bacall, but the newcomer fails to add anything
truly novel to the hackneyed formula of an implausible treasure hunt
that brings together an estranged family.
The story follows the life of Harry Agensky (Kirk Douglas), a former
welterweight champion who is devastated by the one-two punch of the loss
of his beloved wife and the after-effects of a stroke.  Once known as
the "Polish Prince," Harry is now faced with spending the rest of his
life in a retirement home.  But there is hope as, supposedly, fifty
years ago he made a deal with a Reno mobster to throw a fight so that he
could retrieve hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of diamonds... but
he can't remember where they are hidden.  Nobody will help Harry, and
his visiting son Lance (Aykroyd) doesn't buy his father's fable about
the fight and the diamonds, either.  Lance is his dad's opposite, a
super-sensitive San Jose Mercury News sports writer still trying to win
over his old man.  Ironically, Lance seems to have the same problems
with his own son Michael (Corbin Allred - ANYWHERE BUT HERE).  When the
three decide to go for broke and head to Reno, they clash hard and seem
to fail every step of the way.  However, what they lose in wealth they
gain in insight, and finally discover they can't live apart.
The story, despite being sappy and clichéd, is somewhat fun, and the
physical antics of Douglas, of all people, steal the show.  He's
surprisingly nimble and quick-witted, and he proves that the "Polish
Prince," after all those years, can still kick some butt.
Unfortunately, Aykroyd, who I was hoping would show stuff from the
hilarious days of THE BLUES BROTHERS and TRADING PLACES, was somewhat
limited in his role.  So much was made of him as a big wimp, constantly
sucking up to his father, that he didn't have the freedom to get really
wacky.  On the other hand, Lauren Bacall, playing a Reno madam, is
excellent as the love interest of Harry.  The two have great chemistry
and their tryst is strangely romantic and satisfying.
This one gets three stars simply because Kirk Douglas carries it on his
still powerful shoulders.  While it's not quite as good as GRUMPY OLD
MEN, it's light years ahead of THE ODD COUPLE II.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Michael Dequina
A grandfather, his son, and grandson take a road trip from Canada to
Reno, Nevada in search of some lost diamonds, along the way taking an
extended side trip at a brothel.  It sounds like a junky comedy ripe for
release in the January/February dumping ground, and John Asher's film
would have received that undistinguished--and, to a certain extent,
deserved--treatment if not for one person: Kirk Douglas, who headlines as
the cantankerous former championship boxer searching for riches and
renewed happiness in his twilight years.
His touching, effortless performance--his first screen role since
suffering a stroke--is the reason why Miramax is giving the film a
one-week awards qualifying engagement, and indeed it is great to see the
former Spartacus back where he belongs; his acting skills are in tip-top
shape even if his body isn't.  Yet I wouldn't call his performance
particularly award-worthy other than for sentimental reasons, which is
more than I can say for this rather silly and sappy film, which also
stars Dan Aykroyd as Douglas' son, who only wants his daddy's love and
approval; and Corbin Allred as Aykroyd's rebellious son, perhaps the
whitest of white boys to ever utter such terms such as "yo" and "phat." 
The normally overwrought Jenny McCarthy, late of MTV's _Singled_Out_ and
_Playboy_ magazine, is nicely held in check as a prostitute (insert your
own joke here); and as her madam, Lauren Bacall strikes luminous sparks
with Douglas, with whom she had previously teamed nearly 50 years ago on
_Young_Man_with_a_Horn_.  However, not even the reunion of these two
screen legends makes the film evaporate from the memory any less quickly.
 (reopens January 21)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

