Title
Review for City of Hope (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CITY OF HOPE (director/writer/editor: John Sayles; cinematographer: Robert
Richardson; cast: Vincent Spano (Nick Rinaldi), David Strathairn (Asteroid),
Tony Lo Bianco (Joe Rinaldi), Joe Morton (Wynn), Barbara Williams (Angela), Bill
Raymond (Les), Angela Bassett (Reesha), Stephen Mendillo (Yoyo), John Sayles
(Carl), Louis Zorich (Mayor Baci), Kevin Tighe (O'Brien), Josh Mostel (Anthony),
Jace Alexander (Bobby), Todd Graff (Zip), Frankie Faison (Levonne), Gina Gershon
(Laurie), Jojo Smollett (Desmond), Ray Aranha (Retired Black Mayor), Anthony
John Denison (Mike Rizzo), Gloria Foster (Jeanette), Bob North (D.A.), Chris
Cooper (Riggs); Runtime: 129; Samuel Goldwyn Co.; 1991) 
John Sayles and his ensemble cast present an intensely dramatic political story
of a corrupt and decaying fictional city in New Jersey, ironically called "City
of Hope." The film is crowded with at least thirty characters trying to tell
their urban horror story. They range from a crazy man (Strathairn) raving in the
street as a sort of Greek chorus to both white and black street kids to
policemen to a jogger to a builder to politicians. The film also handles a love
story, as this bleak look at inner-city life puts everyone's feet to the hot
coals. 
There are interconnecting stories, with the main one involving a confused
twentysomething, Nick Rinaldi (Vincent Spano), who quits his soft job his father
secured for him because he is rebelling against how his father, Joe (Lo Bianco),
a builder, uses his political connections to make deals. When Nick pulls a
foolish electronics warehouse robbery, to pay off his gambling debts, along with
his buddies Zip (Graff) and Bobby (Jace), organized by someone he hates, a
sleazebag small-time crook and owner of a crooked auto repair shop, Carl
(Sayles), the robbery is botched but Nick escapes. He is later fingered by the
crippled Carl to a politically ambitious cop, O'Brien (Tighe), who is only
looking to advance his own position with the district attorney. This charge
against his son puts his builder father, who is also a slum landlord, in an
awkward position. As a political favor to the mayor to get the charges dropped
against Nick, he must have his slum buildings torched. New developers want that
site to put up some Japanese backed luxury buildings and a shopping center to
revitalize the decaying city. 
On the night of the robbery, an ominous day in the life of Nick, he falls in
love with Angela (Barbara Williams), a single mom, who is divorced from her
abusive husband, Mike (Denison). He is a beat cop who has it in for Nick because
of his involvement with his ex-wife, and he will go gunning for Nick even after
his dad got the charges against him cleared. 
The bleak also story deals with a former professor, black city councilman, Wynn
(Joe Morton), who is a reformer trying to change things in an honorable way but
is being attacked by the militants in the black community for being too white
and by the establishment for being too clean. He is trapped in all the political
payoffs that come with his office, as he must bargain and compromise himself
with the city administration to get things for his community. 
When two black kids are hassled by the police they decide to beat up the first
white person they see, a professor (Raymond) at the local university out
jogging. The kids are arrested, but they claim the professor made homosexual
advances to them. This puts Wynn in a difficult spot, as he knows the kids are
lying but he must take advantage of this situation politically to get what he
wants for his constituents. 
Everyone must compromise or totally risk losing what they want. They not only
compromise their values, souls, or beliefs, but they must also compromise their
happiness. This ambitious painting of a desperate city and its fragile people,
often makes salient points and just as often leaves us overhearing conversations
without going further with the story. It varies from being like a soap opera to
at times offering some very touching dramatic moments. It's a big, messy, angry
film, that is both powerful and sad. And like everything in America, it's
ultimately about black and white relationships. The film offers observations and
not answers. 
As for its dramatics, I found the romance between Spano and Williams to be very
believable and moving. Also, the relationship between Spano and Lo Bianco seemed
to sum up the film. Their love for each other was real, but they just didn't
know what to do for each other. The Spano character had drifted for too long
without trying to become somebody and had become dependent on drugs and gambling
to fill a void in his life, and when he fell for the right girl and made contact
with his dad, at last, it was too late for him to be saved. Is that what Sayles
is saying about the future for those old American cities, where the immigrants
lived out their American Dream? Or, is he holding out some hope that the next
generation will change for the better? It's difficult to say what Sayles thinks,
as he seems to want to leave that up to the viewer. But the most pertinent film
quote comes from the mugger's mother, who tells her son: "You must stand up for
what is right!" 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Shane Burridge
Mosaic by John Sayles is reflective of his versatility by virtue of
its multifarious nature.  Sayles, a writer-director-actor-editor,
makes pains to experiment with as wide a genre and mood available to
him in the landscape of commercial cinema.  At first glance, CITY OF
HOPE might seem his most 'ordinary': a story of the effect of corrupt
politics and business on different socio-economic levels. 
Straightforward enough, but Sayles wants to provide as broad a
spectrum as possible into his two-hour running time, so his constantly
mobile camera drifts in and out of the lives of a huge cast of
characters.  Some provide subplots that rhizomically link together;
some nudge each other in passing; yet others function only as
incidental bystanders.  It's a great dance that Sayles choreographs -
he obviously finds enjoyment in the immeasurable ways in which people
affect each others' lives.  CITY OF HOPE has obvious parallels with
Robert Altman efforts like NASHVILLE and SHORT CUTS, but Sayles'
approach touches base on a more human level.  His characters are for
the most part plain speaking and down to earth, and get an equal
amount of screen time (Vincent Spano has a little more than the rest
of the thirty-plus cast, giving him the film's nominal lead role).
It seems an obvious idea to tell the story of a city by using a
plenitude of voices instead of a sole representative one, but there
aren't many films like this one around.  Sayles shows us that it is
this chorus that unites to provide the one voice of the city itself . 
In CITY OF HOPE the people take center stage: the city has no name;
its streets are simply named after letters of the alphabet; we never
see an establishing shot of the city; much of the story is filmed at
street level (when we do see a view out of a high-rise, it's only of
the building opposite); the characters all work in service of the city
to keep its various mechanisms in running order.  When Spano quits his
construction job in the film's opening scene, he is setting himself up
for a fall: without any useful function for the city he automatically
becomes expendable - he fails to emulate the example of several other
characters who want to be recognized as separate identities in their
community (Sayles has everyone use each other's first name
repeatedly).  It's hard to tell if this is a city of hope or a city of
hopelessness - because of its unfixity it best serves as allegory. 
Like the building left unfinished halfway through the story, the
separate storylines remain largely unresolved.  Sayles gets away with
this by treating them in such a fragmentary manner that we don't
really expect all the loose ends to tie up anyhow.  Film's last shot
is inspired - it may linger in your memory for days afterwards.
