Title
Review for Personal Services (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is tough to say exactly where this film went wrong.  This is a sad
parable of a boy with rat-like features.  For years he has lived in a junkyard,
thought by everyone to be just one more legend.  Then he is kidnapped and falls
into the hands of Sondra Locke, who wants to exploit him to make a fortune.  In
retrospect, a lot of the film was probably intended to be funny but just
wasn't.  The film's view of humanity as being entirely selfish and callous just
is too familiar.  Like HAROLD AND MAUDE, this film was probably not intended to
be a first-run hit but to become a cult film.  Unfortunately, it never has the
right touch.  RATBOY is a production of Clint Eastwood's company Malpaso.
These days usually Eastwood directs Malpaso films; this time he has allowed his
frequent co-star to direct.  Rating: 0.  (All films will be rated on the -4 to
+4 scale.)
     This film came as something of a surprise, not because it was unusual but
because after a few good reviews it turned out to be remarkably and
unexpectedly usual.  In spite of pretensions to be something more, PERSONAL
SERVICES is little different from a lot of English sex comedies that get picked
up to run on cable after midnight.  Julie Waters (who was so good in EDUCATING
RITA) plays a character the film claims was inspired by but not based on
Cynthia Payne, a notorious London madam.  Due to unfortunate financial
pressures, Cynthia is forced to become first a prostitute and then a madam.
For a hard-hitting, realistic view of the world of prostitution, PERSONAL
SERVICES is right up there with THE BEST LITTLE WHOREHOUSE IN TEXAS.  There is
no attempt at impartiality, and eventually the film degenerates to pure sex
farce.  Rating: 0.
     Spend a couple of hours safety-pinned to a punk rocker.  See Sid Vicious
slam his head against a brick wall to get a reaction from his girl friend.
Watch him for two hours doing the same thing figuratively to get a recation
from anyone who will give it.  This is an uncompromising film that never asks
you to care for punk rocker Sid or his girlfriend Nancy, just as they never
seem to first we see Sid among the London punk culture.  They do likeable
things like spray paint graffiti on borrowed apartments or kick in windshields
of Rolls Royces.  In the second part of the film we see them among bewildered
non-punkers.  They go to the United States as part of a tour and, among other
activities, visit Nancy's grandparents who quickly tire of the little
parasites.  The title characters lead pointless, useless lives that are cut
mercifully short by early deaths.  Rating: +1.

Author
Jeff Meyer
Seen at the Seattle Film Festival:
PERSONAL SERVICES (Great Britain, 1986)
Director: Terry Jones
Screenwriter: David Leland
Cast: Julie Walters, Alec McCowen, Shirley Stelfox, Danny Schiller
     This is, unless you are rather prudish about sexual matters, a pretty
funny film, but it really doesn't get rolling until after the first half-hour,
so have a little patience.  Maybe I was expecting too much; but with a director
like Terry Jones (of MONTY PYTHON fame and thus a god to me :-) ), a writer
like David Leland (who did MONA LISA last year), and Julie Walters (the actress
who brought EDUCATING RITA to life), I was expecting some type of comedic
Blitzkrieg.  It isn't that, but it isn't bad, either.
     We open with Walters, as a fairly rough woman who is losing her shirt
sub-letting apartments to hookers in the city.  Faced with financial ruin, she
and her friends (a high-class hooker and her transsexual "maid") talk her into
teaming up into a service specializing in elderly, kinky men...harmless in
themselves, but liking to be chained to walls and pissed upon, to dress up in
womens' clothes, or to get into old school uniforms and be spanked by the
"headmistress."  Soon their business begins burgeoning to the point that they
must find a larger place to practice business, and they move to the suburbs...
and this is where the film really takes off.  While there are some funny
sequences in the first half, much of it seems to be trying to make a dramatic
point about the dreams Walters has of a married life, and the realities she
must face in the real world.
     The main theme of the film seems to be that tolerance of sexual
eccentricity would make the world a better place.  I must admit, I'd rather
hang around the people in this movie than Jerry Falwell and his righteous
legion any day.  C+ for those who like bawdy laughs and can get by the English
accents (B for the second half).
