Title
Review for Reckless (1995/I)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Even a fairy tale about Christmas has to have some continuity,
some explanation of the whats and whys of the story.  RECKLESS does not
seem to have any of that.
     The film opens Christmas Eve with Rachel (Mia Farrow) lying in bed
with her husband Tom (Tony Goldwyn), snuggling up to him and chattering
happily away.  Not being able to understand one word of what she was
saying I assumed it was the fault of the screening room's sound or I
had gone deaf. Luckily the explanation came soon when Tom tells Rachel
that he can no longer stand her giggling babbling and had put out a
contract on her to have her killed.  After the confession, he also
tells her that he took out a $100,000 insurance policy on her life.
That is the end of the understandable part of the film; the rest is a
hodgepodge that is the fault of the director, the screen writer and/or
the editor.  (Norman Ren, Craig Lucas, and Michael Berenbaum,
respectively.)
     Outside the house, the snow is piled high but when she opens the
window and climbs onto the sill, her husband gently but firmly shuts
the window on her so that she goes sliding down the snow-covered roof
and onto the ground ... unhurt, of course.  This is, after all, a
fairy tale.
     Later she is in a phone booth when she is approached by a Lloyd,
(Scott Glenn) who takes her to his home where she meets his wife, Pooty
(Mary-Louise Parker) who is in a wheel chair as she is a paraplegic
who, for good measure, is also a deaf mute.  That she talks and hears,
a bit later in the film, was not explained ... at least, not to me.
     One weird incident follows another without any rhyme or reason
that I could ascertain.  The press kit mentions Candide but Voltaire
would have a lot to say about that.
     The supporting cast includes Eileen Brennan, Giancarlo Esposito
and Stephen Dorf.
1 byte (because I am feeling generous.)

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mia Farrow, Scott Glenn, Mary-Louise Parker, Tony Goldwyn,
      Stephen Dorff, Eileen Brennan, Giancarlo Esposito
Director: Norman Rene
Producer: Amy J. Kaufman
Screenplay: Craig Lucas based on his play
Cinematography: Frederick Elmes
Music: Stephen Endelman
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     RECKLESS is a Christmas story for all of us who like our holiday
fare spiced with bizarre characters and strange plot twists.  This black
comedy, directed by Norman Rene (LONGTIME COMPANION, PRELUDE TO A KISS)
and written by his frequent collaborator, Craig Lucas, takes good cheer
and Seasons' Greetings and turns them upside down.  Insightful and very
funny, this film sails through a wonderful seventy minutes before
slipping slightly off-track as it slides into its denouement.
     RECKLESS opens to the warm strains of "I'll Be Home for Christmas"
as the camera sweeps over a snowscape to a small house decorated with
colored lights.  Inside, it's Christmas Eve, and Rachel (Mia Farrow) is
reminiscing about holidays past--how she wanted so much to believe in
Santa Claus and would try to stay awake at night to hear the reindeers'
hooves on the roof.  Outside, snow continues to fall, and Rachel
confides to her husband (Tony Goldwyn) that she's on the verge of a
"euphoria attack."  His unexpected response begins an unreal odyssey for
Rachel that ends in Springfield, Massachusetts at the home of a rugged,
saintly good Samaritan named Lloyd (Scott Glenn) and his paraplegic,
deaf/mute wife, Pooty (Mary-Louise Parker).
     To reveal more about RECKLESS' seemingly-endless twists and turns
would be unfair, but the movie almost never goes along exactly the
expected path.  Rene and Lucas have consciously incorporated a number of
standard Hollywood subplots into their film, then spun them off in
unanticipated directions.  Coincidence plays a big part in much of what
transpires, but this is less a plot device than a statement by the film
makers of how real life is often impelled by the vagaries of an ironic,
fickle fate.
     The first two-thirds of the movie successfully accomplish a
delicate balancing act between an absurd comic tone and occasional
moments of drama.  Unhappily, during the final thirty minutes, these two
opposing moods begin to grate and clash, which results in an uneven
conclusion.  The film perhaps tries to do too much and, while it gets
most of its points across, the style towards the end isn't as appealing
as it is near the beginning.
     RECKLESS toys with the differences between dreams and reality.
>From the opening moments, there's always a flicker of doubt about
whether what we're seeing is "really" happening, or whether it's a part
of Rachel's conscious (or subconscious) imagination.  The cinematography
by BLUE VELVET's Frederick Elmes highlights the surreality of certain
scenes, and each individual is left to ponder which parts of RECKLESS,
if any, are fantasy.
     A fair amount of RECKLESS' screen time is spent examining the issue
of identity:  how our appearance to others may have nothing to do with
who we really are.  No matter how completely anyone thinks they know us,
there's always something concealed.  Friends, lovers, spouses--none
see us with exactly the same perspective as we view ourselves.  In
RECKLESS, not only do each of the characters have hidden sides, but the
essential nature of their personality is mutable over time.  Rachel
believes that the past is something we "wake up from."  Lloyd, on the
other hand, sees it as something we "wake up to."
     The cast includes some well-known names.  Mia Farrow plays off her
Woody Allen-groomed reputation to good effect.  She's bright and
sparkling, and what she accomplishes here is easily her best work in
years.  Mary-Louise Parker adds another exceptional performance to her
growing resume, and Scott Glenn is wonderfully laid-back.  Actors like
Stephen Dorff and Eileen Brennan ably fill smaller roles.
     Rene and Lucas explored the issue of identity in a slightly
different fashion in their previous film, PRELUDE TO A KISS.  In that
story, an old man and a young, newly-married woman switch bodies.  In
RECKLESS, the theme is examined a little more subtlety and with a great
deal more laughter.  Despite its failings, this motion picture is a rare
thought-provoking comedy, and a wonderful example of something that, at
least on the surface, looks like a Hollywood film, but definitely
doesn't behave like one.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
John Paul Powell
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Nov. 13, 1995) 
Starring:    Mia Farrow, Scott Glenn, Mary-Louise Parker, Tony Goldwyn, 
             Eileen Brennan and Stephen Dorff. 
Directed by: Norman Rene.
Written by:  Craig Lucas.
Produced by: Amy Kaufman. 
             A Malofilm Distribution release.  
(Sung to the tune of "God Rest Ye Merry Gentleman".)
God rest ye merry Mia, let nothing you dismay.
You're the mother of twelve children, how do you make it through the day?  
You took Woody to court. 
Now the lawyers he must pay.  
In the movie RECKLESS, Mia plays a naive spouse.  
She as dim as Polyanna.  
You'd think Rachel roomed at the Brady house.  
Rachel loves her husband Tom, but he's a scheming louse. 
Christmas is coming and Tom bought a gift for his wife.  
He phoned the local hitman and put a contract on her life.  
His plan is better than O.J.'s.  
No Kato or a knife.  
Christmas Eve finds Rachel and Tom lying in their bed.  
Remorseful, he confesses the plot to shoot her dead. 
She escaped out a window.  
"This is so mean," is all she said.  
Standing at a phone booth, her world in disarray. 
Rachel thumbs a ride from a driver on his way.  
Lloyd, a good samaritan, gives her a place to stay.  
Lloyd has a wife, she is confined to a wheelchair. 
They adopt Rachel into their family and she joins the devout pair.  
Year-long escapades do cease as Tom turns up there.  
RECKLESS is a dark comedy, on that we should be clear. 
If you're anal retentive, another direction you should veer.  
It's surreal zaniness that David Lynch would cheer.  
The handiwork of Rene is unmistakeably first-class.  
The fantasy landscape mirrors a Christmas ornament made of glass.  
Mia's so engaging, Woody can pucker up and kiss her...  
RECKLESS is rated Q for quirky. A Tim Burton ambience x Mia Farrow
- a wandering second half + one depraved regurgitation scene x
surprising twists - one Let's Make A Deal skit + the absence of a
Rudolph, Frosty and Santa = an unstable Christmas fable.
