Title
Review for City Slickers (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     CITY SLICKERS is a movie by Ron Underwood, written by Lowell Ganz
and Babaloo Mandel, and starring Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, and Bruno
Kirby, with Jack Palance, Patricia Wettig, and Helen Slater.
     CITY SLICKERS is a very funny, very touching film that compares
favorably with Billy Crystal's WHEN HARRY MET SALLY.  Indeed, both films
concentrate at their hearts on pretty much the same concern, a
redefinition of manhood and manliness, within the context of sustained
hilarity.  CITY SLICKERS is an amiable, well-intentioned, feel-good,
irresistible, and heartfelt comedy.
     Indeed, the cattle drive hadn't even begun and the muscles in my
face were already sore from non-stop grinning.  Which may be a
reflection how little smiling I do these days.
     Billy Crystal has been a favorite of mine since the Seventies when
he played the token gay man on TV's SOAP.  Over the years, he's gotten
funnier and no less attractive for being older.  He mugs the camera, he
throws away priceless one-liners like a maharajah scattering coins, he 
keeps us gasping as we struggle with his wise-guy, city-boy energy and
wit; he's pretty much limited to playing Billy  Crystal but for me
that's enough.  In CITY SLICKERS he's as good as he's ever gotten; his
angst over aging, over being stuck in a meaningless job, is real
without being pushed to new histrionic heights.  Crystal emotes by 
cracking wise and here he cracks very wise indeed.
     His two buddies are a supermarket manager (Daniel Stern) bullied by
his wife and father-in-law/boss and a gravel-voiced macho-man (Bruno
Kirby) who drives his friends to take vacations from common
sense--running the bulls at Pamplona and driving cattle from Colorado to
New Mexico.  Both actors are effective and appealing.  Stern is an
owl-eyed, life-shocked victim, a man who everyone agrees has no life.
Kirby, a veteran supporting actor, may find his role a break-away part
for his career; he is self-protecting, vulnerable, a tough guy whose
afraid, and immensely appealing.
     (The three of them are first seen in an opening sequence that is
part of the credits and may well be one of the funniest credits
sequences I've ever seen.  Funny and altogether appropriate to the
story to come.)
     Even more appealing is the camaraderie between the three men.  They
compete, they criticize, they occasionally dislike each other, but
always they love each other.  And it is the real strength of CITY
SLICKERS.
     Of the supporting parts, only that of Palance is really memorable.
The women are largely irrelevant in this "men's movie"; Wettig and
Slater are perfectly fine, but their parts are small.  However, it is
wonderful to see Jack Palance again, even though he looks and sounds
very sick.  He sounds like he has emphysema, gasping for every breath,
and his skin looks waxy and translucent.  Palance has been making
Westerns since SHANE, and his mere silhouette encapsulates the entire
mythos of the West for this viewer.  There is a very special scene
between Palance and Crystal that is going to be on several posters'
lists of special movie moments.
     The story idea is said to have been Crystal's.  It was worked up by
a veteran writing team, Mandel and Ganz (SPLASH, PARENTHOOD, NIGHT
SHIFT), and the script is definitely a strength here.  They create comic
situations that are more than funny, they also inform us about the
characters.  Underwood's (TREMORS) direction also helps the film capture
the agony of characters who find that their lives don't offer anything
other than loss and dissolution.  There is also some wonderful Western
locale photography.
     CITY SLICKERS isn't going to challenge you; it isn't an
intellectual heavyweight.  Instead, it's life-affirming, meaningful,
funny, skillful, heart-warming, and ingratiating.  I got my money's worth
and more and I recommend CITY SLICKERS, even at full price.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     With DANCES WITH WOLVES making the great Hollywood western
respectable again, it stands to reason that an attempt to rejuvenate the
great Hollywood western parody wouldn't be too far behind.
     The first of this breed is CITY SLICKERS, an amiable but
surprisingly unfunny fish-out-of-water comedy starring Billy Crystal.
In one of the flattest cowboy spoofs to mosey on down the trail in a
long time, CITY SLICKERS simply leaves the viewer tired and saddle-sore.
     One of the problems with the film is its laughs, or lack thereof.
At almost two hours, there aren't enough of them to sustain a film of
this length.  Screenwriters Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel (SPLASH)
have taken what is, after all, a pretty easy target and come up with a
seemingly endless stream of banal and largely uninspired one-liners, the
cow pat kind of humor that only appeals to little kids.
     Comedic everyman Crystal plays Mitch, who sells radio air time for
a living.  Mitch has gotten to the point in his life where he's the best
he's going to be, look or feel ... and it's not that great.  He's on
the verge of his 39th birthday and a mid-life crisis both at the same
time.
     Mitch's best friends are Ed (Bruno Kirby, who co-starred with
Crystal in WHEN HARRY MET SALLY)  and Phil (played by a bespectacled
Daniel Stern).  Ed, a sporting goods salesman with an eye for adventure,
co-habits with a 24 year old underwear model who adores him, yet he's
afraid to make any kind of long-term commitment.  Phil is a hen-pecked
grocery store manager whose tyrannical wife has made his life a living
hell.  These three amigos could sure use some serious counseling.
     They settle instead for a couple of weeks of soul-searching out
west, driving two hundred head of cattle from New Mexico to Colorado.
It's a perfect opportunity to come to terms with their identities whilst
fulfilling some of their adolescent fantasies - machismo, male bonding
and merriment under the stars.
     Mitch, Ed and Phil are joined on this trek by a motley crew of
stereotypically offbeat characters, including the mandatory
blonde-haired, tight-jeaned temptress who comes along for the ride,
keeping our saddle- pals' hormones percolating along with the coffee.
     Western veteran Jack Palance has a colorful role as the prickly
trail boss who laughs at the ineptness of it all.  "Two weeks out here
is supposed to change your life?" he scoffs, astutely.  Yet by the time
these "city folk" finish horsing around, we are supposed to buy just
that.
     Dwarfing everything in the picture -- especially the laughs -- are
the sprawling deserts of New Mexico, with their magnificent buttes and
mesas.   Too bad we don't get to see more of them, and less of Crystal,
Stern and Kirby.  These are two-dimensional characters in a
three-dimensional landscape -- and a very spectacular one at that.
     Another of the film's drawbacks is that it spends too much time
dabbling in the seriousness of the male menopause.  When the three
aspiring cowpokes ruminate over sex, baseball and the other-worldly
pleasures of their lost youth, this introspection comes across as
sounding trite and awkward.  If there is a balance between humor and
sincerity, then the film never quite finds it.
     The film momentarily comes to life in a scene in which Mitch,
having first delivered a calf with his own hands (a sweetly sentimental
if sticky moment), later risks his life to save it.  It's a rare
dramatic sequence in a film crying out for some genuine emotion.
     Early in the film, Mitch's wife realizes that her husband needs a
break from the rigors of everyday life.  "Find your smile," she
earnestly implores him.  But by the movie's end, this viewer was still
trying to find his.
