Title
Review for Timecode (2000)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Screen Gems
 Director: Mike Figgis
 Writer: Mike Figgis
 Cast: Xander Berkeley, Golden Brooks, Saffron Burrows,
Viveka Davis, Richard Edson, Aimee Graham, Salma Hayek,
Glenne Headley, Andrew Heckler, Holly Hunter, Danny
Huston, Patrick Kearney, Elizabeth Low, Daphna Kastner,
Kyle MacLachlan, Mia Maestro, Leslie Mann, Laurie Metcalf,
Suzi Nakamura, Alessandro Nivola, Zuleikha Robinson, Julian
Sands, Stellan Skarsgard, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Steven Weber
   Being able to walk and chew gum at the same time is all
very nice, but multitasking is getting out of hand.  People
can't walk in the street any more without drinking their
morning coffee while simultaneously talking on their cell
phones, and carrying backpacks loaded with survival
equipment (bottled water and the like) more suited to
camping trips than subway rides to the office.  People read
magazines in restaurants while chomping on food they have
not looked at, they cruise the web and they watch pictures
within pictures on TV.  The decade from 2000 to 2009 could
be called the time of "The Unfocused Generation."
   Mike Figgis now makes matters worse.  Apparently
believing that we in the movie audience cannot sit still to
watch a story, he divides his screen into four quadrants, with
each telling a part of the story during four 93-minute takes
filmed digitally in real time without editing.  He splashes the
sections across the screen, each showing characters involved
in actions in separate areas from the others, but all taking
place in and around an L.A. movie studio building.  The
performers move from cell to cell, each improvising the lines,
because Figgis gives the talent only a broad outline and lets
everyone loose to ham up a paltry story.  We might wonder
whether the experimental photography, involving digital tech
that is supposed to be the wave of the near future, is
designed simply to distract the audience from a banal non-
script, just as Emperor Commodus gave his Romans bread
and circuses to divert them from his tyranny and his designs
on a popular general.
   The story takes place in the area of Sunset Boulevard. In
opening scene which thankfully takes place in only one
quadrant, Emma (Saffron Burrows) talks to a psychotherapist,
moaning about her life while her husband Alex (Stellan
Skarsgard), the director of a small movie company, enjoys 
sexual affairs.  His current mistress is an actress, Rose
(Salma Hayek), whose purse has been bugged by her liaison,
Lauren (Jeanne Tripplehorn) as Lauren drops Rose off for an
audition.  Allegedly a satire of Hollywood production, directing
and acting procedures done with darkly comic overtones,
"Time Code" unfolds an unimposing story of auditions,
attractions and conundrums.
   We are invited democratically to look inside any quadrant
that strikes our fancy, but generally action that is at all
dramatic or comic occurs in only one.  The unifying element
is a series of earthquakes that sets all four cameras a-
shaking when Figgis anticipates enough audience ennui.  For
better or worse, he mutes or shuts off the sound in three
quadrants at any given time to allow us to hear the ad-libbed
conversations in the fourth box.
   Mike Figgis's greatest coup also involves a hand held
camera, but there is no way to compare the quality of his
stunning "Leaving Las Vegas" with the useless anarchy he
perpetrates this time around.  "Time Code" helps prove the
theory that to tell effective truths, you must distill everyday
reality.  Given the minimalist camera technique, the lack of
editing, the want of a script, not even the energetic
performance of Salma Hayek can save this probing of novelty
that appears to exist for its own sake.  There might have
been material for a decent tale in "Time Code," but this film
looks as though it were sent to an execution to have it drawn
and quartered.
Rated R.  Running Time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
I believe it's unfair to call Time Code an actual movie. The word experience 
is a better fit. The Time Code experience involves the screen being split 
into four different images, each with a different character focus, as they 
all play at the same time. The sound gets turned up on the one Figgis wants 
you to watch. One could describe it as watching four different shows on MTV 
all at once. The story relies heavily on this split screen factor and this is 
a very visual film with little complicated dialog. It has to be. Even with a 
slightly complicated plot, this movie would have been even more of a frenzy 
of annoying pointless images than it was. Essentially, a frenzy of annoying 
images describes the film well. This film is a foray into the different and 
the unusual, but carries little meaning. While Figgis has created a 
groundbreaking filmmaking approach, he seems concentrated on making sure the 
audience can handle it, rather than keep an interesting storyline going. It 
has been a long time since a movie has challenged you in such a way as this 
one does, but I felt it could have been even more challening if trust was put 
in the audience. Time Code dares to go freeform, and encourages the viewer to 
look at these characters and their surroundings with lightning fast 
comprehension before moving onto the next frame. Like any new method to come 
onto the film scene, it will take time to master, but consider Time Code the 
beginning of a new era in film.
The movie was shot entirely in one afternoon last November using hand-held 
cameras. There are no edits. Everything is real time. There is no set plot 
structure either. While Figgis gave his actors basic character outlines, he 
decided it would be much more interesting if the film was almost entirely 
improvisational. This is both an attraction and a detraction.  There are 
times when you sense the actors come up with things right off the top of 
their heads, and those parts of the film are exciting and fun. Character 
reactions are a key part of this movie that centers around Red Mullet 
Productions (both the producers and setting for this film) during auditions 
for a new movie. In the upper left corner Rose (Wild Wild West recovering 
Salma Hayek) is going to the audition with Lauren (Jeanne Tripplehorn). Rose 
and Lauren are lovers, and the latter suspects infidelity. In the upper 
right, Emma (Saffron Burrows, Figgis's wife) consults her psychiatrist about 
her husband Alex (Stellan Skarsgard) whom she suspects is cheating on her. 
Alex is indeed cheating on her, and he occupies the lower right frame. 
Finally, in the bottom left is an aspiring actress that comes to audition for 
the lead role at Red Mullet.
After this basic setup, the camera roams free. Characters pop up in two 
different frames at once, or switch frames entirely. It's interesting to see 
how this effect gets used. One scene that I found bizarre involved Alex and 
an anonymous female having sex behind a movie screen. The screen was being 
used to show actresses moaning loudly from sexual pleasure during an audition 
for a group of executives. Another common element that unites the characters 
is the frequent bothersome earthquakes. Much care must have been taken into 
the timing to make the illusion of an earthquake appear in all four parts at 
the same time. These tremors that connect the characters continuously 
reminded me of the character connecting amphibians from the end of Magnolia. 
The ensemble cast that includes Steven Weber, Holly Hunter, Julian Sands, 
Leslie Mann, and Laurie Metcalf, as well as the actors mentioned above, have 
fun with their roles. It's no surprise though that the movie is inconsistent, 
but by the hour mark, I found myself comfortably able to grasp all that was 
going on. Time Code is almost interactive. It allows people to get a 
different experience of the movie each time they see it. The themes are the 
same though. Woe, jealousy, and betrayal all occupy different parts of the 
screen often. Everyone is cheating on everyone, and all the women are 
lesbians. Late in the film a young female independent filmmaker comes forward 
with an idea of new age filmmaking. "The end of editing is upon us!" she 
preaches. "Imagine a movie with four different images all running at the same 
time." Alex blows this idea off, and cannot control his laughter at the 
proposal. He tells her what a load of crap he thinks it is. She takes the 
criticism surprisingly well, and replies with a thank you stating he's the 
only honest person she has ever met in Los Angeles. By the time it reaches 
the conclusion, the facade of quality and honesty in Time Code is gone. It 
was then I realized the emptiness that ran through this movie. While Time 
Code is definitely worth seeing for the very original concept it presents, 
there's no hiding that little actual material lies under its surface.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TIMECODE (director/writer: Mike Figgis; cinematographer: Patrick
Alexander Stewart; cast: Xander Berkeley (Evan Watz), Golden Brooks
(Onyx Richardson), Saffron Burrows (Emma), Viveka Davis (Victoria
Cohen), Richard Edson (Lester Moore), Aimee Graham (Sikh nurse), Salma
Hayek (Rose), Glenne Headly (therapist), Holly Hunter (executive), Danny
Huston (Randy), Patrick Kearney (drug house owner), Elizabeth Low
(Penny), Kyle MacLachlan (Bunny Drysdale), Mia Maestro (Ana Pauls),
Leslie Mann (Cherine), Suzy Nakamura (Connie Ling), Alessandro Nivola
(Joey Z), Zuleikha Robinson (Lester Moore's assistant), Julian Sands
(Quentin), Stellan Skarsgard (Alex Green), Jeanne Tripplehorn (Lauren
Hathaway), Steven Weber (Darren Fetzer),  Andrew Heckler & Daphna
Kastner (auditioning actors); Runtime: 93; Screen Gems; 2000)
This gimmicky experimental film from Mike Figgis ("Leaving Las Vegas")
isn't worth the film its on...even if one were to applaud the effort.
Will pretentious crap do for a succinct review of the film! It is more
of a joke than a serious film, as all it tries to do is push the
boundaries of technical innovation, while it neglects the basics of
movie making: character development and the telling of a good story.
Shot on digital video in real time, with four hand-held cameras filming
four different split screens, allowing the viewer to pick his poison as
to which screen to watch, the narrative is told without any cuts,
therefore no editor is needed. One of the screens has a louder volume,
indicating that is the one the director thinks we might be more
interested in watching.
This soap opera story is about the lives and loves of sundry people
connected to a Hollywood production company, as they cast for their
latest film project, which it turns out, is similar to the film just
seen.
Ana Pauls (Mia Maestro), a heavily, foreign accented avant-garde
filmmaker, pitches her project at the office of Red Mullet Productions
to a roomful of uptight executives. Her preachy lecture is accompanied
by the hip-hop music of her boyfriend (Alessandro Nivola), while at her
side is her wormy agent (Kyle MacLachlan), as she drops names -- from
Sergei Eisenstein to Walter Gropius -- using embellishments to overstate
her case, as freely as Al Gore does. Ana expounds on the virtue of art
and technology "to go beyond the paradigm of collage." This is greeted
by a burst of laughter from the studio producer Alex (Stellan
Skarsgard), as he can't imagine this as a serious work. Well, at least,
there should be something said about honesty in recognizing the worth of
the product produced. The filmmaker's attempt here, is to make a
stinging satire on Hollywood and himself.
Timecode, under the pretense of being innovative, gets a big studio to
take a chance on producing it, which doesn't mean it's worthwhile. The
film was most like one of those stationary camcorder sites that they
have on the Internet, of say, some street corner, where the viewer hopes
the time he spends is not wasted and something spontaneous will unfold
to make it worth his while.
The prosaic story opens with a therapy session involving Emma (Saffron
Burrows),
describing her marital crisis to her unfaithful husband Alex, who is
burnt-out from being a drug addict and an alcoholic. The haggard
producer keeps busy by having several affairs, but an affair with an
aspiring, voluptuous actress Rose (Salma Hayek), is the key one to the
story. Rose's jealous lesbian lover Lauren (Jeanne Tripplehorn) suspects
this affair, and plants a microphone on Rose while they ride to her
audition in Lauren's limo. Lauren wishes to confirm what she already
knows and when confirmed will commit a bloody deed in this very ragtag
presentation of romantic problems, with the lesbian, naturally, being
made the ultimate villain.
At various times, the obvious symbolism of an earthquake is used as an
artificial means to shake up all the characters in the quadrant. It was
awkwardly done, seemingly ruining whatever natural effect was aimed for
in telling this story in real time.
I just couldn't get interested in this experimental film, finding it
dizzying to watch and I was also hampered by its lack of wit and lack of
spontaneous outrageousness. These are the type of films the Warhol
factory used to knock out with clockwork, able to easily get the right
freaks to pull off their bizarre free-flowing sordid tales, as they did
in " The Chelsea Girls." "Timecode" just couldn't translate its sense of
fun to the viewer, at least it couldn't to me. As for the technical
feats attempted, maybe a more innovative filmmaker could make something
of this format that wasn't done right here. Other than that, this plays
mostly as a novelty film, one to see because it's part of movie history.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Xander Berkely, Julian Sands, Salma Hayek,
Golden Brooks, Steven Weber, Holly Hunter, Stellan
Skarsgard, Alessandro Nivola, Jeanne Tripplehorn,
Saffron Burrows, Kyle MacLachlan, Aimee Graham, Leslie
Mann, and Viveka Davis.        
Before I review Mike Figgis' extremely unique new film
Time Code, it is necessary to list the reasons for why
this is one of the most original films ever created. 
1)Time Code is one of the first films to be entirely
filmed using a digital video camera.
2)Time Code is shot in real time. It is filmed under
one take lasting 93 minutes.
3)Time Code is filmed using four different cameras.
Each camera follows certain characters around Los
Angeles. To show all of the cameras, the screen is
divided into four segments. 
4)Time Code has no script. The actors improvised based
on an outline written by Figgis.
5)Time Code was shot fifteen different times. Figgis
then chose the take he was most pleased with (the
fifteenth).
6)Time Code is synchronized to the second. Since the
four cameras interact with each other (sometimes a
character in the third quadrant calls another via cell
phone in the first quadrant), the timing must be
perfect for the film to make any sense. 
7) Time Code's outline was written on a sheet of music
paper, with four different lines, each line telling
each camera where to go at every moment.
8)Time Code, in order to avoid confusing the audience
contains a soundtrack in which three of the four
segments are muted or at a low volume, while the
fourth is at normal volume. 
Despite the small errors in the film's plot, Time
Code, receives a perfect score for its fabulous acting
and overall creativity. Figgis' picture is certain to
inspire future works and for this reason alone, it is
recommended. It is always great to see big time
directors and actors trying something complete
different from the mainstream, and in the case of Time
Code, it is even better to see them create a memorable
film at the same time. Time Code is a different
experience at the movie theater than most films. It
took a while for me to adjust to its format almost
like it is uncomfortable to sleep in a brand new bed
or live in a new house. However, once I grew more
accustomed to its layout, what seemed impossible to
enjoy (four cameras on one screen; how would I
understand what is going on? How would I be able to
follow everything?) turned out to be a mesmerizing
display. Time Code glued my eyes to the screen in
fascination from the dazzling opening credits to the
equally dazzling closing credits. 
The film is an examination of Los Angeles at its most
chaotic (every once in a while there is a brief
earthquake that simultaneously shakes the four cameras
and the myriad characters). More specifically, Time
Code revolves around a small movie production company
called Red Mullet. At Red Mullet, executives ponder
upcoming movie ideas, beautiful women audition for
film roles, and people gossip among many other things
including sex and murder. With all of this occurring
during a mere hour and a half, one can hardly imagine
how crazy a day in this place must be or even a week.
There are some flaws in the film including
underdeveloped roles or cliched characters, but the
outstanding acting covers the mistakes up very
efficiently. It is important to realize that these
actors were not given complete scripts but just
outlines of who they are supposed to be. Figgis
depended on the actors' charismatic qualities in real
life to fill the roles in the film. All of the actors
bring their talents into the ensemble cast including
Salma Hayek and Jeanne Tripplehorn as a lesbian
couple, Stellan Skarsgard as a sex and drug obsessed
executive, and Saffron Burrows as his troubled wife.
Other supporting actors bring a needed comedic aspect
to the movie including Julian Sands, Allesandro
Nivola, and Steven Weber. 
Time Code's release in the year 2000 is a harbinger
for new technological age in filmmaking.  The use of
digital video is expected to increase dramatically in
future years in households and in movie studios. I
really hope Time Code becomes the next Blair Witch
Project and not just another limited release doomed
for a short life in the movie theaters. This is a film
you have to see on the big screen. 

Author
Brian Herring
In the 60s Andy Warhol was responsible for producing a number of experiments 
in cinema.  It wasn't so much the films themselves than the audiences that 
Warhol found interesting - by showing static, lengthy opuses he was actually 
encouraging his viewers to get bored and talk to their neighbors.  His 
experiments with simultaneous projection were pretty much cut of the same 
cloth: cinematic narrative is arbitrary and you watch what you want when it 
suits.  Bring on WOODSTOCK.   Bring on Brian De Palma.  Split-screen 
perspective was less about narrative deconstruction than it was of gimmickry 
- even Able Gance knew that when he made NAPOLEON in 1927.  End of story, 
you might think, but not quite.  Developments in digital technology have 
once again allowed us to throw a fresh coat of paint on the old split-screen 
wagon.  In TIMECODE, director Mike Figgis uses the new lightweight Sony 
DSR-I to synchronize not two, but four narrative divisions on the cinema 
screen.  You want more?  The separate narratives have all been filmed 
simultaneously on one Friday afternoon.  Improvised.  In unbroken 93-minute 
takes.
Let's put aside the storyline - or storylines - for a moment and address a 
more obvious issue: how do you watch something like this?  More pertinently, 
how do you watch four screens when one of them always focuses on Salma Hayek 
in a snug-fitting top?    Figgis knows ahead of time which screen his 
viewers are going to be drawn to, and this is the most impressive aspect of 
his film.  The fast-tracking digital countdowns in the title credits point 
the way to the logistical feat that he has accomplished.  Although his 
actors and camera operators improvise around a preset framework of 
circumstances, they are each given a 'timecode' to follow - a sort of time 
clock which must be punched at intervals throughout the film.  This most 
noticeably occurs during periodic earth tremors, but also effectively in 
moments where all frames are simultaneously filled with close-ups of faces, 
telephone conversations, characters in restrooms, or contemplative scenes 
that allow the musical soundtrack to engage with the action.
You would think the theme underlying Figgis' work would be one of 
unification, but he takes the opposite tack, and it works just as well.  
TIMECODE is set in and around a small-time film studio, where we see actors, 
producers, writers, and directors sifting through the bric-a-brac that 
passes for their daily management.  It seems an amusingly perfect setting 
for TIMECODE's sensibilities: the studio execs' juggling act is in symmetry 
with Figgis' own deployment of images on screen, but there the similarity 
ends.  Instead of harmony we find duplicity.  The multiple screens become 
testament to untruths, causing us to debunk one character's assertion that 
the tyranny of montage (as per Eisenstein) has resulted in 75 years of 
manipulation and lies.  If the implication is that the opposite must be 
true, then TIMECODE rejects that also: unedited footage does not prescribe 
integrity, as evidenced by the continual deceptions perpetrated in real-time 
before our eyes.  But that's okay.  Figgis has undertaken his project with 
humor, and tips us a self-referential wink every now and then without coming 
across as smug.  His orchestrated synchronicities are not designed to dazzle 
us into an oh-gosh appreciation of his technical skill, they are there to 
elicit grins.  You smile because it's cute, because it all seems made up 
even though you know it isn't.   TIMECODE is a confidence that we have been 
taken into, and we enjoy participating in the director's game.
It takes a confident film-maker to place his work so heavily in the hands of 
his actors and camera operators (essentially second and third unit 
directors), and it's heartening to see another contemporary talent trying to 
mess around in the mainstream.  See this in a theater if you can, otherwise 
make sure you've got a big screen TV if video is your only option (those 
four divisions could get mighty small).  And don't touch that pause button.  
You know Mike wouldn't want you to.


Author
Michael Dequina
Without question, Mike Figgis has to be one of the most boldly
experimental filmmakers working today.  So it would only follow that his
track record in recent years is among the most inconsistent; gambles
wouldn't be labeled as such if they paid off every time.  While he hit
the jackpot with a little no-budget, 16mm effort called _Leaving
_Las_Vegas_, the risks he's taken since haven't been so successful.  Last
year's non-linear, non-narrative _The_Loss_of_Sexual_Innocence_ was
indeed, as he described, his most "personal" film--that incoherent,
indulgent jumble could only make sense to him.  Immediately prior to
that, he tried to do the impossible--turn Joe Eszterhas-originated sleaze
cheese into gold--with _One_Night_Stand_.  It goes without saying that he
couldn't make that work.
It's hard to imagine a more daunting task than that one, but leave it to
Figgis to come up with the ultimate sink-or-swim cinematic proposition,
which now hits the screen as _Timecode_.  The story (or, rather, stories)
being told does not qualify as being revolutionary by any stretch.  What
does, however, is the storytelling--which, to use an overused bit of
hyperbole, is unlike anything anyone has seen before.  And this time
around, the perpetual gambler clearly comes out on top.
Based on the plot alone, the title _Timecode_ would not appear to fit. 
The film follows a number of characters over as they wander in and around
the Ticketmaster building on Sunset Boulevard over a single, continuous
stretch of 93 minutes.  The primary players: Rose (Salma Hayek), a
vivacious aspiring actress; her jealous lover, Lauren (Jeanne
Tripplehorn); boozed-up and drugged-out Alex (Stellan Skarsgĺrd), head of
the motion picture production company Red Mullet (which also happens to
be the name of Figgis' real life production company); and Emma (Saffron
Burrows), his unhappy wife.
These and many other characters crisscross during this 93-minute span,
not unlike the multicharacter epics made familiar by Robert Altman.  This
being a Figgis film, though, there is a radically different spin, which
is threefold: (1) the film unfolds on a screen split into four quadrants,
with each portion following a different character and/or storyline all at
once; (2) each of the four "sub-movies" were shot continuously for those
93 minutes, without any cuts, on digital video cameras; and (3) there was
no set script, only a basic story outline from which the actors entirely
improvised their dialogue and a few storyline turns.  The project being
entirely dependent on the precise timing of the cast and crew, the title
_Timecode_ is only too apt.
A label that perhaps isn't so apt is that of "director" for Figgis. 
This is not meant as a slight on his work; far from it.  His meticulous
direction and arrangement of the individual pieces is more befitting of
the label of "conductor"--very appropriate, considering that Figgis wrote
_Timecode_'s score (as he does with most of his films) and mapped out the
entire work on sheet music paper.  It's nothing short of astounding how
he was able to perfectly sync the four individual pieces, which all
seamlessly interlock at various moments in time and tone.  But even more
impressive is how he makes the four-POV approach feel necessary and not
merely as a shameless gimmick (which it is to some degree).  If
_Timecode_ were edited like a normal film, there's no doubt that some
valuable moments of story and especially performance would be lost.
The latter loss would be most unfortunate, for its the actors that makes
_Timecode_ more than a cold exercise in the possibilities of digital
video technology.  The entire cast--which also includes Holly Hunter,
Leslie Mann, Kyle MacLachlan, Steven Weber, Alessandro Nivola, and a
hilarious Julian Sands (playing a masseur) in smaller roles--appear to be
energized by their high wire task, and their immersion into character
shines through; none of the improvised dialogue sounds awkward, but
rather quite convincing and real.  For example, when Rose tells her
secret lover to not place a piece of food on a surface because "we just
had sex there," it is a natural wisecrack and completely in line with her
character.
As well as the improvisation works as a whole, it does contribute to
_Timecode_'s biggest shortcoming, which is in the story department. 
While what goes on is fairly eventful for a 93-minute stretch of life, as
a self-contained movie, the plot threads are all fairly thin and "made up
as they went along" approach makes for a certain lack of urgency. 
Despite the fresh visual technique, _Timecode_ still suffers from the
same problem of these multicharacter pieces, which is that some plot
threads don't work well as others.  While most characters jump from
quadrant to quadrant as the film progresses and stories overlap, Burrows'
Emma remains fixed in the upper right hand corner, and, not surprisingly,
her storyline is by far the weakest; she has the least amount of
interaction with others, which is the primary catalyst for story
developments and interesting moments of improv.
As much as I enjoyed _Timecode_, I am not eager to see every movie
employ its revolutionary splitscreen storytelling technique; it does take
some getting used to, even when the shifting emphasis of the sound mix
helps direct one to the most pertinent action.  But if Figgis were able
to make something this strange, funny, and exciting to watch without a
script, imagine the possibilities of its use at the service of a more
concrete story.  Unfortunately, that likely won't happen for a long while
(if ever), and in the meantime one can only admire Figgis' audacity, for
going through with such a crazy idea--and his talent, for making it work.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
R.L. Strong
Rated R: for adult language, sexual situations, homosexuality, and
violence. 93 minutes. Release: 2000
There are those experiences in our lives that impact on all of those
around us. Mike Figgis, who created the cinematic benchmark "Leaving
Las Vegas" has crafted a revolutionary form of cinema. Unfortunately,
the story being told is not as daring as the technique being used.
The film opens in the office of a Psychiatrist (Glenne Headly) as Emma
Green (Saffron Burrows) relates a dream in which her husband has a
small wound in his side. He is bleeding badly but is not upset by the
wound, he is almost comforted by it. Emma is concerned that her
husband is having an affair, as their marriage is deteriorating.
We are next introduced to Lauren Hathaway (Jeanne Tripplehorn) as she
leaves her home, stopping in her driveway to tamper with the tire on
her girlfriend's car. As Rose (Selma Hayek) gets to her can and
notices the flat, Lauren offers to give her a ride to her audition.
Again the suspicion of infidelity is brought up. Lauren questions Rose
with her suspicions. Rose is adamant in her innocents. Lauren relaxes
and the relationship seems to be back on track. But Lauren's
suspicions are still potent. It is when she manages to place a small
radio transmitter into Rose's purse that the truth starts to unfold.
Finally we meet Alex Green (Stellan Skarsgĺrd) a Motion Picture
Producer who is having a nervous breakdown while his partner Evan
Wantz (Xander Berkeley) tries to negotiate a deal with up and coming
Director Lester Moore (Richard Edson). As the plot develops we learn
of the inter-relationships between all of these characters, and how
these relationships affect others on the periphery of the tale.
The revolutionary style used to tell this rather simple tale of moral
breakdown is what makes the film so compelling. Shot entirely in one
continuous take with four digital video cameras, the film is projected
in four equal panels. The screen takes on the appearance of a window
pane, with each major character (or their immediate environment) being
the subject of each panel. Each of these four panels conveys a single
story from four distinct views all set in real time. And there are
many moments where the action (s) cross over into other panels,
creating a montage of time and drama that is invigorating.
The screen is set up as such: Emma Green's (Saffron Burrows) story
takes place on the upper right hand of the screen. Lauren Hathaway's
(Jeanne Tripplehorn) tale is on the upper left. Alex Green's (Stellan
Skarsgĺrd) drama is played out on the lower right corner, while Rose's
(Selma Hayek) comprises the lower left. What may seem to be a
difficult method of carrying out a narrative, is surprisingly simple.
Director Figgis uses sound to direct the audience to the pertinent
story panel. Not once during the course of the film does the story
become muddled or convoluted. The only moment of theatricality in the
film is a plot device of a series of earthquakes (there are four in
all, one for each major character). While superficially, this seems to
be simply a devise to show off the timing between the four cameras, it
actually reflects an emotional tide that each individual character is
experiencing. But the effect is more intrusive than it needs to be.
Now the technique of "split-screen" is not new. Several Directors have
used the technique to embellish their films for short sequences, most
notably Brian DePalma ("Sisters", "Phantom of the Paradise" and "Blow
Out"). Only one other film has used the 'split-screen' for a complete
movie and that was Richard L. Bare's disastrous "Wicked, Wicked"
(1973). Also being shot in one continues take (with no edits), the
film calls to mind Alfred Hitchcock's "Rope" (which actually did have
edits but were cleverly hidden by either furniture or the actors
themselves crossing in front of the camera).
The performances in the film are remarkable in that all of the actors
had to improvise their scenes. Director Figgis only gave his actors an
outline and plot points for his story, letting the actors natural
creativity and intuition carry their performances. The standout
performances in the film are by Jeanne Tripplehorn, Selma Hayek,
Stellan Skarsgĺrd, Holly Hunter and Julian Sands (as a Hollywood
Massage Guru).
The problem here is that with so much going on, it is hard to focus on
any one character. Not to say that the story is muddled. But it is
simplistic for a mystery, and too technically complex for a comedy.
While the film is invigorating and compelling in its execution, its
story is not. Mike Figgis is a unique filmmaker, his aforementioned
"Leaving Las Vegas" was a revelation of style and characterization.
"Time Code" is a fascinating film in and of itself. I'll be interested
to see what Mr. Figgis does next.
Owned & Copyright Š 2000 R. L. Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the
expressed written permission of the author.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Two major novelties with this film: 1) The movie presented on the screen is
divided into four equal smaller screens, each showing a different story at
the same time as the others 2) The entire movie was shot in one straight
take of ninety-three minutes, and features general improvisation by the
actors. Certainly the concept of this film is unique, but then again,
director James Toback tried another such cinematic experiment earlier this
year with BLACK AND WHITE, and it sucked the big one. Fortunately for us,
this film is actually able to combine its technological novelty, with solid
acting and quite the interesting, sorted tale of a day in the life
of...Hollywood.
PLOT:
Follow the lives of various Hollywood types during a hectic audition day
with a handful of behind-the-scene situations padded by various relationship
dramas.
CRITIQUE:
This is a film which begins on a visually confusing note, eventually settles
into its own and manages to seduce with its voyeuristic appeal, its talented
cast and its sheer creative spirit. Oh yeah, and if none of that appeals to
you, how about the fact that the film features two different sets of
actresses swapping spit during a couple of the film's groovier scenes (Hayek
and Tripplehorn go at it early, and later on, Burrows and Mann take a shot
at the gold). But lesbianism aside, the movie is cool on various different
levels, all of which transcend the initial shock of the visual, including
some surprising comedy by the way of Julian Sands' overly competent massage
therapist and Richard Edson, playing the neurotic director. Of course, the
basis of the film is soaked in various intertwining relationship dramas, but
it's nice to know that director Figgis doesn't take himself too seriously.
He even features a pitch scene in which a woman presents an idea for a movie
not unlike Figgis' own creation, only to be laughed off by a producer as
"the most pretentious crap I've ever heard".
And despite it taking me a while to get used to the idea of four stories on
the screen at the same time, it wasn't long before the volume controls began
to work wonders, and I gelled right into the movie. Finally, a cinematic
experiment that succeeds! Mind you, I wouldn't want to see movies like this
all the time, honestly you have to pay about four times more attention than
you usually do, but kudos to Figgis for pulling this one out of the hat. Of
course, the film wouldn't have been such a success were it not for the
extremely solid performances of its actors. Improvising most of their lines
from a pre-established structure, all of the actors involved in the
production seemed to take full advantage of their respective carte blanches,
smacking many a ball out of the park. By golly, even Salma Hayek was really
good in this (besides being a Goddess of beauty, of course). Give an award
to Stellan Skarsgard for his amazing portrayal of Alex, the alcoholic
producer, who slowly disintegrates before our very eyes, as well as Jeanne
Tripplehorn, who surprised me with her strong showing. A great cast, a
captivating story about pretentious Hollywood folk dishing their dirty
laundry, a novel idea that works and lesbian make-out scenes. How could you
go wrong? :)
Honestly though, if you think that an experiment as such is in your
interest, you should definitely see this film on the big screen, since it
will more than likely lose many of its subtleties on video. A few moments
drag on here and there, but overall the movie works on all cylinders, and
its running time of ninety-three minutes is ideal, considering its novel
concept. So if you're not one to allow your mind to stray during a movie
outing, this film is ideally created for you. Visually unique with an
interesting narrative and a solid cast, this film has turned into one of the
year's nicest surprises for me.

Author
Jon Popick
You've probably seen films with overlapping storylines, but you've never
seen anything quite like Time Code.  Like Robert Altman's Short Cuts or
P.T. Anderson's Magnolia, where the lives of seemingly unrelated
characters cross paths almost by chance, Code one-ups its predecessors
(technically, at least) by allowing viewers to watch each story uniquely
unfold by splitting the screen into quarters and showing four different
plots developing at the same time.
Gimmicky?  You bet.  Potentially annoying?  Perhaps.  But the Brady
Bunch-esque split-screen isn't the only unique element of Code.  It's
one of the first pictures to be shot entirely in digital format instead
of using film, which allows Code to be filmed in one long, ninety-three
minute shot (standard cameras only hold enough film for about ten
minutes).  There is no editing.  And no script, either - director Mike
Figgis (Miss Julie) gave his actors a general idea of what he wanted in
terms of Code's plot, but most of what unfurls onscreen is improvised.
But wait, there's more.  The four hand-held digital cameras all began
filming at the same time, so the film progresses in real time.  So
basically Figgis sent a group of about thirty actors with no script to
improvise to four cameramen and - ninety-three minutes later - had a
completed picture.  Figgis' premise is audacious and groundbreaking, and
it really makes you realize how awful and unoriginal films like Here on
Earth and Where the Heart Is really are.
Code's story (there isn't much of one  remember, it's improvised)
focuses on Red Mullet, a film production company in Los Angeles.
Mullet's employees are your typically jaded Hollywood types and are
portrayed by (among others) Holly Hunter (Living Out Loud), Steven
Weber  (Wings) and Suzy Nakamura (The West Wing).  Stellan Skarsgĺrd
(Deep Blue Sea) plays Alex Green, one of Mullet's founders and the
thread that holds Code together.  Alex is a drunk, which affects his
relationship with his co-workers and his wife (Deep Blue Sea co-star
Saffron Burrows), and he's having a fling with a struggling bisexual
actress  (Salma Hayek, Dogma), who has a dangerously suspicious lover
(Jeanne Tripplehorn, Mickey Blue Eyes).
While I'm not sure how much of the film is improvised, Code's acting is
pretty well done (a surprising portion of the acting talent in this film
will also appear in Wim Wenders' upcoming film The Million Dollar
Hotel).  Like any decent film about southern California, Code also
prominently features earthquakes, drug use, booze, sex and lesbians
(there are two girl-on-girl make-out scenes - Hayek vs. Tripplehorn and
Burrows vs. Leslie Mann).  There's even a bit of self-mockery thrown in
for good measure, which makes Figgis' slightly pretentious concept seem
a bit easier to swallow.
1:33 - R for drug use, sexual content, adult language and violence

Author
Jerry Saravia
As a sheer experiment in filmmaking, "Timecode" is audacious but as human 
drama, it fails to evoke much of an emotional response, though it has 
selective moments of humanism and it is often compelling. 
"Timecode" takes place during a hazy afternoon in Los Angeles near Sunset 
Boulevard where a "creative meeting" is taking place among ad executives in 
an office building, and other events occur with different characters outside 
the building and beyond, including a psychiatrist's office and a limo that 
travels from some mansion to the aforementioned building. I don't want to 
sound too general with such a description, but that is about it. The 
characters merely float by us, making little introductions and soundbites. If 
this sounds like a documentary, in many ways, it is. Let me explain further. 
As directed by Mike Figgis ("Leaving Las Vegas"), "Timecode" was shot in real 
time using four digital cameras that each recorded up to 93 minutes of 
footage in one single continuous take. Not only is this the longest long take 
ever devised on film (shot of course on video and then transferred to film), 
but it is also the first film to ever have four 93 minute takes in four 
quadrants of the screen projected at the same time. The idea of breaking up 
the screen in four quadrants is not a new visual trick but an entire film 
viewed in this manner is new and something to behold. Often, Figgis will 
drown out sound from one or more quadrants to focus on something significant 
in another. This aural technique makes me wonder why Figgis did not cut the 
film to focus on what he wanted us to be attentive to. Perhaps this is my own 
problem of trying to discover what the director intended but I much rather 
see such an experiment used as part of the underlying story, as opposed to 
just for the sake of style. 
Some of the basic characters include a coke-sniffing security guard (Danny 
Huston), a jealous lesbian (Jeanne Tripplehorn, who spends most of the film 
in a limo), another lesbian with hopes of movie stardom (Salma Hayek), an 
attentive psychiatrist (Glenn Headley), and the founder of a film studio 
(Stellan Skarsgard) who is coming apart at the seams over a failed 
relationship. Skarsgard makes the biggest impression, creating a full-bodied 
character portrait of a lost soul, whereas the other characters sort of drift 
by, including a barely audible Holly Hunter as an ad exec. I did enjoy the 
frenetic Richard Edson, an unsung actor to be sure, as a low-budget film 
director with drug problems.  
Despite what is a literally mind-boggling visual experience to endure, the 
film is still quietly fascinating, and there are moments that break up the 
quiet, stately style such as a series of earthquakes, some screaming fits and 
a chilling finale. The use of music by Gustav Mahler gives the film some 
punch. All in all, a semi-successful experiment that will hopefully lead to 
more exciting uses for such an innovative technique. Although it is draining 
and sometimes repetitive, "Timecode" is certainly brave and risky fare. Just 
what we would expect from Mike Figgis.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com 
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        "Timecode" is a brilliantly conceived and executed piece of
experimental filmmaking that questions the notions of traditional narrative
cinema by challenging the very way in which we view movies.
        The bad news is that it's written and directed (and produced and
scored and photographed!) by Mike Figgis, the man who made the overrated
drunk drama "Leaving Las Vegas," and the worst thing about it is that it
continues his sophomoric preoccupation with sex.
        But "Timecode," easily his finest work to date, is so different, so
creative a motion picture that even I could put away my anti-Figgis
sentiments for an hour and a half and enjoy the film purely on its own
considerable merits.
        Watching "Timecode" is like no other cinematic experience and you'd
be well advised to sit further back than usual, since your eyes will be
wandering--sometimes racing--all over the screen.  The film is actually
four separate yet (as time will tell) linked films presented in four
panels, so in the top right-hand corner of the screen, for example, we have
a woman talking to her psychiatrist while in the bottom left-hand corner of
the screen someone else is auditioning for a part in a Z-grade exploitation
flick.
        Each sequence is shot in one continuous take with no edits.  One
uninterrupted 93-minute take, to be precise, since that's exactly how long
a digital videocassette runs.  But it *feels* like there are edits, because
by the time your eye returns to one of the segments the action is closer
in, or further out, or in a completely different place.
        The actors, among them Salma Hayek, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Stellan
Skarsgĺrd, Holly Hunter, Saffron Burrows, Kyle MacLachlan, Julian Sands,
Richard Edson, Glenne Headly, Leslie Mann, and Steven Weber, improvise
around a loosely-structured narrative that requires them to do certain
things and be certain places at specific times--synchronized right down to
the millisecond.  What we see on the screen, therefore, are four distinct
storylines that, over time, come together--overlapping and interacting.
It's truly invigorating watching how characters that were once "down there"
are now "up here."
        Figgis, I hate to admit it, orchestrates the whole thing
beautifully, so that from time to time all four sequences "match," or run
parallel, while at other times they're completely out of sync.  And the
experience of watching the film is sensational, since it requires a
different *method* of viewing depending upon what's happening on screen at
any one time.  For example, at points in the film you can leisurely move
your head in a slow continuous circle, absorbing each of the disparate
stories, yet at other times you have to move your eyes quickly, scanning
each different area for clues.
        In-jokes abound, and Figgis is not afraid to make fun of himself or
his trade (note the surreal scene towards the end in which a diaphanous
beauty pitches her own familiar-sounding experimental treatment accompanied
by a rapper-keyboardist named Joey Z).  Every now and again there's an
earthquake, a minor tremor that rumbles through each of the four quadrants
sending our actors tumbling and reminding us, as if we needed reminding,
that these four stories are not only linked, but happening in real time.
But in the end the near-irrelevant "plot" takes second place to the film's
structure (and it's just as well, because I'd swear that Figgis came up
with the idea of having Hayek and Tripplehorn making out in the back of a
limo before he came up with his revolutionary four-camera technique!).
        If you're not into film, the medium, and the concept of a highly
structural film experience, then the novelty of "Timecode" might grow
tiresome very quickly.  But if you can allow yourself to put aside all
traditional expectations--just as I was able to put aside my tiny problem
of this being a Mike Figgis film--then you might just find it absolutely
fascinating.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christopher Null
     Sorry, Mr. Lynch, your place at the head of the avant-garde
experimental filmmaker table has been given away.  Messrs. Jarmusch,
Toback, Korine, and Cronenberg, you'll all be eating outside.  Mike
Figgis will be taking over for all of you, and don't come back.
     Figgis, who earned a Best Director Oscar nomination for Leaving Las
Vegas in 1996, appears to have gone a little funny in the head last year
with his inexplicable and nearly dialogue-free The Loss of Sexual
Innocence.  Now he's fully gone off the deep end with what may be the
most ambitious experiment ever: Time Code.
     Now pay attention: Shooting on digital media (and thus avoiding the
limitations of holding 10 minutes of film in a cartridge - the problem
that haunted Hitchcock's Rope), Figgis took four digital cameras,
started them rolling at 3:00 in the afternoon on a November day in 1999,
scripted out a few basic plot points, and let a cast of 20 or 30 actors
do their thing for 90 minutes.  The four cameras follow around various
characters as they improvise their way through an earthquake-torn day in
Hollywood's snooty and provincial movie studio scene, often crossing
paths, and invariably creating heartbreak.  Usually lesbian heartbreak.
     The catch is that the footage from all four cameras is all
displayed at the same time: in four panes on the screen in front of
you.  Watching one Time Code is challenging enough.  Watching four is
serious work.  The reprieve from this catch is that the sound is
typically limited to one pane at a time -- and it's usually the one
where Figgis wants you to look.  As the story unfolds all around town,
the drama shifts from pane to pane so that it's relatively easy to
follow the intersecting tales.
     If Time Code weren't so unique it would be awfully easy to dismiss
the movie for its pretentiousness alone.  At one point near the end of
the film, a Euro filmmaker pitches an assembled cast of movie producers
and executives the very premise of the movie we're watching -- which is
then dismissed as being a pretentious joke!  As if acknowledging the
silliness up front somehow makes it less silly.  Figgis even plans to
attend select screenings and mix the soundtrack -- live -- for the
audience like a DJ.  Oh-kaayyyyyy....
     Despite its quirks, Time Code is actually mostly enjoyable, and you
quickly get used to the gimmick of the four panes.  The acting is good,
especially for improv work under duress, and the story is about what
you'd expect.  While I'm quite sure I'll soon be ready for good-old
single-pane films, I'm certain Time Code is something that will stick
with me for awhile.
Director: Mike Figgis
Producer: Annie Stewart
Writer: Mike Figgis
Starring: Saffron Burrows, Salma Hayek, Stellan Skarsgĺrd, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, Xander Berkeley, Golden Brooks, Viveka Davis, Richard
Edson, Aimee Graham, Andrew Heckler, Holly Houston, Holly Hunter, Danny
Huston, Juji Johnson, Daphna Kastner, Patrick Kearney, Elizabeth Low,
Kyle MacLachlan, Mía Maestro, Leslie Mann, Laurie Metcalf, Suzy
Nakamura, Alessandro Nivola, Zuleikha Robinson, Julian Sands, Steven
Weber
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/jump/f_timecode.html
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
TIMECODE
(Screen Gems)
Starring:  Jeanne Tripplehorn, Salma Hayek, Stellan Skarsgaard, Saffron
Burrows, Leslie Mann, Kyle MacLachlan, Richard Edson, Holly Hunter.
Story:  Mike Figgis.
Producers:  Mike Figgis and Annie Stewart.
Director:  Mike Figgis.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, drug use, adult themes,
violence)
Running Time:  97 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Late in Mike Figgis' experimental drama TIMECODE, a young would-be
film-maker pitches an idea to a Hollywood production company for a film
shot on digital video, following four characters in real time in one
uninterrupted take ... at which suggestion one of the production
executives bursts into laughter and calls the idea "pretentious." It seems
like Figgis is trying to have a little fun at his own expense, since that
pitched idea is exactly the idea behind TIMECODE: four characters followed
in real time, the screen divided into four quadrants to follow their
individual stories. And it would be easier to buy Figgis' self-deprecation
as genuine if he didn't then begin his closing credits with a caption
describing exactly how the film had been made. "Look what an interesting
and original film you've just watched," Figgis says to us out of one
corner of his mouth, while the other mutters, "And it was all just a big
pretentious joke."
     Figgis has been on a kick in the last couple of years of trying to
stretch cinematic boundaries, but it's too often too difficult to get past
his art-for-art's-sake bluster. In TIMECODE, he takes a fairly mundane
90-minutes-in-the-life story and tries to spice it up with his four-play. 
One segment of his screen opens with a therapy session involving a woman
named Emma (Saffron Burrows), describing her marital dissatisfaction. 
Eventually we learn that her husband is Alex Green (Stellan Skarsgaard),
the aforementioned chuckling production executive. Alex is an addict and
an alcoholic barely hanging on to awareness of his business, though he has
enough time for an affair with aspiring actress Rose (Salma Hayek). 
Unfortunately, Rose's lover and sugar mama Lauren (Jeanne Tripplehorn) 
suspects that something is up, and spends the afternoon checking up on
Rose after planting a microphone on her.
     TIMECODE was essentially improvised around a loose plot structure,
leading to a predictably ragged feel to the film. And while Figgis would
probably emphasize that raggedness as a function of the film's realism and
immediacy, it simply doesn't make for particularly engrossing viewing a
lot of the time. At times TIMECODE is a satire of film industry poseurs,
and occasionally a very funny one. Steven Weber does a great
straight-faced description of a potential Matt Stone-Trey Parker project
called TIME TOILET -- a comedy about a janitor who discovers a portal
through time in a commode -- as having "educational value," all while a
masseur (Julian Sands) caresses his earlobes. Then Figgis will turn up the
volume on Burrows pining over her unhappy life, and we'll take a quick
right turn into melodrama. Most intrusive of all is the use of a series of
earthquakes as a device to shake up the lives of the characters. In a more
conventional film, it might have been easier to forgive the obvious and
repetitive symbolism. In a film like TIMECODE, you begin wondering when
Figgis will ever take off his avant-garde hat and just let a story be a
story.
     I might have considered TIMECODE a thoroughly failed experiment if
not for a development that briefly justifies the entire structure. During
one stretch of the film, Tripplehorn listens in on a tryst between Rose
and Alex that takes place behind the screen of a screening room while
other executives watch audition clips of actresses playing a sex scene. In
a conventionally edited film, the director might cut back and forth
between the encounter and the jealous lover in her headphones, giving us
only the moment of realization as a payoff. In TIMECODE, I was able to
watch Tripplehorn throughout the scene, from her puzzled but intent face
as the background noise from the screening room prevents her from hearing
Rose, to the anguish that overwhelms her once it's impossible to deny the
truth. Film too rarely allows us to watch actors do purely physical
acting. I was so fascinated by Tripplehorn's wordless performance that I
rarely took my eyes off of her quadrant of the screen, even when there was
dialogue coming from elsewhere.
     I'd gladly accept a structure like that in TIMECODE if it meant I
could spend time following interesting supporting characters instead of
blank-faced bores like Burrows' depressed Hollywood wife. Of course, I'd
prefer it if a film-maker acknowledged the importance of developing
character and story, rather than assuming falsely that improvisation is
always the best way to get at the "truth" of a situation. No moment makes
that fallacy more evident than a scene at a production meeting when a
musician responds with a snicker to an Asian woman's introduction of
herself as "Connie Ling." The snicker itself was a completely believable
reaction; the woman's puzzled expression, as though she had never before
in her life heard a joke about her name, strains all credulity. A director
doing the job of directing might have taken that opportunity to coach the
actress that anyone who grew up on Planet Earth would have been taunted
mercilessly throughout her adolescence for having the name "Connie Ling," 
and therefore might not respond as thought the character had just been
dropped from the sky that afternoon. Figgis, however, never intrudes on
his experiment in realism, not even so it might make more real-world
sense. All that remains is his self-congratulation at doing something
entirely new, even if it ultimately feels mostly like a big pretentious
joke.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Time Code ***1/2
rated R
97 minutes
Screen Gems
starring Xander Berkeley, Golden Brooks, Saffron
Burrows, Viveka Davis, Richard Edson, Aimee Graham,
Salma Hayek, Glenne Headly, Andrew Heckler, Holly
Hunter, Danny Huston, Daphna Kastner, Patrick Kearney,
Elizabeth Low, Kyle MacLachlan, Mia Maestro, Leslie
Mann, Suzy Nakamura, Alessandro Nivola, Zuleikha
Robinson, Julian Sands, Stellan Skarsgard, Jeanne
Tripplehorn, Steven Weber
written and directed by Mike Figgis
The tagline for `Time Code' asks the viewer: `Who will
you want to watch?' Considering my expectations going
in to the film, a better question would be `Why will
you want to watch?' After he triumphed with the jazzy,
low-budget hit `Leaving Las Vegas', filmmaker Mike
Figgis directed three dreadful films: `One Night
Stand', `Miss Julie', and of course, `The Loss Of
Sexual Innocence', one of the most pretentious art
films I have ever seen. To add salt to an oozing flesh
wound, his latest film, `Time Code', is shot on
digital video and features a screen split into
quadrants for the duration of its running time. In
other words, I was expecting a `Blair Witch' headache
to the fourth power, as directed by an elitist
egomaniac. But the cinema often defies our
expectations. 
Films are rarely as provocative as `Time Code' is.
Figgis gives us four pairs of eyes to witness a story
told in real-time, on digital video, without edits and
quick cuts. The plotline isn't half as fascinating as
the project itself, and the best thing is that it's
hard to care. `Time Code' tells a generic L.A. tale of
sex, drugs, murder, greed and excess, but it's a tale
that the viewer puts together in his own head, which
makes the film a transcendent experience for some, a
vomit-inducing mind-trip for others.
I chose to watch `Time Code' as a glimpse into the
future of experimental cinema. This is the film that
the Danish `purist' movement Dogma 95 has wanted for
years. Figgis' film is structured in such a way that
it's impossible for the viewer not to become engrossed
in the storyline, no matter how phony the improvised
dialogue and rehashed storyline may seem.
He is also blessed with a cast that feels up to the
challenge. Few roles are as tough as the ones Figgis
provides his actors with in this landmark production.
In this film, the performances must be spot-on. No
cuts, no editing, no bullsh*t. Stellan Skarsgard plays
a movie mogul, Saffron Burrows (Figgis' wife) is his
wife and Salma Hayek is his mistress who is engaged in
a relationship with a woman played by Jeanne
Tripplehorn.
The film revolves around one day in the office of Red
Mullet Productions; the site of auditions for a new
Hollywood film. It is a day shaken more by jealousy
and revenge than by the earthquakes that occur every
half-hour. The four-camera structure brings voyeurism
to new heights, giving us a surveillance camera view
into the personal crises of a group of wealthy,
disconnected adults.
Is the quadruple screen tactic annoying? At times,
yes. But it also makes `Time Code' an endlessly
engrossing picture, because if one part of the screen
is boring you, chances are that in another quadrant,
something interesting is occurring. Figgis allows his
viewers to pick and choose, making the film as close
to interactive as possible.
I thought it would be hard for Mike Figgis to regain
my respect, but he does so with one simple line,
spoken in the film by Stellan Skarsgard. A young
Russian filmmaker has come into the Red Mullet office
to explain her next feature film, which sounds a lot
like the basis of `Time Code'. Four cameras will
follow different people and tell the same story.
Skarsgard laughs out loud, proclaiming: `That's the
most pretentious crap I've ever heard!' It's a bravura
moment of self-loathing that single-handedly
apologizes for most of Figgis' career.
The most contrived plot element of `Time Code' is the
earthquake, which was also used in Robert Altman's
similar `Short Cuts' to tie the characters together.
But in `Time Code', the earthquake seems like a
metaphor. With `Time Code', Mike Figgis breaks new
cinematic ground, and hopefully the aftershocks will
be just as powerful.

Author
Steve Rhodes
For those who think that what movies need today are more elaborate
gimmicks, TIME CODE is the answer, since it is nothing but one long,
insufferable gimmick.  Simultaneously using 4 digital cameras shooting
without stopping until their 90 minute tapes ran out, director Mike
Figgis (LEAVING LAS VEGAS and THE LOSS OF SEXUAL INNOCENCE) made 4
movies which he displays in static quadrants on the theater screen.
Collectively these 4 movies form one story with the characters moving
freely between the sections of the screen.  The most exciting parts are
when the characters place cell phone calls across quadrants for a little
chitchat.
The result is the artistic type of experiment that seems designed to put
film critics in ecstasy over the movie's showy, avant-garde techniques.
The film would seem destined to be played and discussed ad nauseam at
college film courses.
It should be pointed out that one can achieve almost the same effect any
afternoon at your local Sears store by turning 4 adjoining television
sets on 4 different soap operas.  Yes, this approach will not permit the
interaction between frames, but soap operas are so alike that you can
easily imagine that the characters in the various shows are conversing.
Most viewers, however, will be more likely to point out TIME CODE's two
fatal flaws.  First, none of the stories in TIME CODE are worth
including in a normal movie.  Most of the stories will have viewers
alternating between wondering what they are about and not caring what
the answer is.  Second, although having multiple screens is undeniably
cute, it is just a distraction.  Sony's new marketing campaign suggests
that viewers see the movie four times, watching a different quadrant at
each session.  Since it's only the interaction between the quadrants
that make the story the least bit compelling, concentrating on one would
be painful.
The large, stellar cast improvise their parts based on a written
outline.  In one segment Jeanne Tripplehorn is a rich, jealous lover who
suspects that Salma Hayek is unfaithful.  Figgis raises the audio level
in the quadrant on which he would like us to focus, but even when he
tries to get our eyes elsewhere, it's hard to look away as these two
actresses in the back of a limo play kissy-face like a pair of
love-struck teens.
The only completely satisfying part of the production is the music,
especially a long, dreamy section of a Gustav Mahler symphony.  Closing
your eyes enhances the pleasure, but you run the risk of falling asleep.
This is also a problem with your eyes open.
One of the stories involves the casting of a new movie called BITCH FROM
LOUISIANA.  The producer for that film pitches another idea of his.  He
wants to make a film called TIME TOILET, a sci-fi comedy in which human
waste will travel across time once it is flushed away.  I would rather
have seen that movie than TIME CODE.
TIME CODE runs a slow 1:30.  It is rated R for drug use, sexuality,
language and a scene of violence and would be acceptable for older
teens.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Shane Burridge
In the 60s Andy Warhol was responsible for producing a number of experiments 
in cinema.  It wasn't so much the films themselves than the audiences that 
Warhol found interesting - by showing static, lengthy opuses he was actually 
encouraging his viewers to get bored and talk to their neighbors.  His 
experiments with simultaneous projection were pretty much cut of the same 
cloth: cinematic narrative is arbitrary and you watch what you want when it 
suits.  Bring on WOODSTOCK.   Bring on Brian De Palma.  Split-screen 
perspective was less about narrative deconstruction than it was of gimmickry 
- even Abel Gance knew that when he made NAPOLEON in 1927.  End of story, 
you might think, but not quite.  Developments in digital technology have 
once again allowed us to throw a fresh coat of paint on the old split-screen 
wagon.  In TIMECODE, director Mike Figgis uses the new lightweight Sony 
DSR-I to synchronize not two, but four narrative divisions on the cinema 
screen.  You want more?  The separate narratives have all been filmed 
simultaneously on one Friday afternoon.  Improvised.  In unbroken 93-minute 
takes.
Let's put aside the storyline - or storylines - for a moment and address a 
more obvious issue: how do you watch something like this?  More pertinently, 
how do you watch four screens when one of them always focuses on Salma Hayek 
in a snug-fitting top?    Figgis knows ahead of time which screen his 
viewers are going to be drawn to, and this is the most impressive aspect of 
his film.  The fast-tracking digital countdowns in the title credits are 
there to advertise the logistical feat that he has accomplished.  Although 
his actors and camera operators improvise around a preset framework of 
circumstances, they are each given a 'timecode' to follow - a sort of time 
clock which must be punched at intervals throughout the film.  This most 
noticeably occurs during periodic earth tremors, but also effectively in 
moments where all frames are simultaneously filled with close-ups of faces, 
telephone conversations, characters in restrooms, or contemplative scenes 
that allow the musical soundtrack to engage with the action.
You would think the theme underlying Figgis' work would be one of 
unification, but he takes the opposite tack, and it works just as well.  
TIMECODE is set in and around a small-time film studio, where we see actors, 
producers, writers, and directors sifting through the bric-a-brac that 
passes for their daily management.  It seems an amusingly perfect setting 
for TIMECODE's sensibilities: the studio execs' juggling act is in symmetry 
with Figgis' own deployment of images on screen, but there the similarity 
ends.  Instead of harmony we find duplicity.  The multiple screens become 
testament to untruths, causing us to debunk one character's assertion that 
the tyranny of montage (as per Eisenstein) has resulted in 75 years of 
manipulation and lies.  If the implication is that the opposite must be 
true, then TIMECODE rejects that also: unedited footage does not prescribe 
integrity, as evidenced by the continual deceptions perpetrated in real-time 
before our eyes.  But that's okay.  Figgis has undertaken his project with 
humor, and tips us a self-referential wink every now and then without coming 
across as smug.  His orchestrated synchronicities are not designed to dazzle 
us into an oh-gosh appreciation of his technical skill, they are there to 
elicit grins.  You smile because it's cute, because it all seems made up 
even though you know it isn't.   TIMECODE is a confidence that we have been 
taken into, and we enjoy participating in the director's game.
It takes a confident film-maker to place his work so heavily in the hands of 
his actors and camera operators (essentially second and third unit 
directors), and it's heartening to see another contemporary talent trying to 
mess around in the mainstream.  See this in a theater if you can, otherwise 
make sure you've got a big screen TV if video is your only option (those 
four divisions could get mighty small).  And don't touch that pause button.  
You know Mike wouldn't want you to.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
