Title
Review for Sand Pebbles, The (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Sand Pebbles" was a lengthy, expensive,
highly dramatic epic.  A risky proposition
for 20th Century Fox, their confidence in
Producer/Director Robert Wise was redeemed
when the film proved commercially successful
and received eight Academy Award nominations.
Set in China of 1926, Steve McQueen played the
lead role, sailor and engineer Jake Holman.
Holman transfers to the small warship San Pablo,
which is nicknamed 'Sand Pebbles' by its crew.
Holman wants to be left alone to maintain
the ship's engine, only to learn that Chinese
'coolies' perform all actual on-board work.
Humorless, dramatic Captain Collins (Richard Crenna)
prefers it this way, to free up the sailors for
an on-deck show of force, designed to intimidate
China.
Holman's campaign against the 'coolies' (he
also refers to them as 'slope-heads') makes
him unpopular with the crew.  Later, Holman
changes his racist ways, befriending his
engine room trainee Po-han (Mako).  Holman even
trains him to fight loudmouthed bully Stawski
(Oakland).  Holman also befriends Frenchy
(Richard Attenborough, who has to hide his
British accent) who is in love with well-
educated, mixed blood Maily (Marayat Andriane).
These actions make Holman even more unpopular
with the crew, who consider Po-han to be a grunt
and Maily to be a prostitute.
Civil War rages across China, threatening the
lives of American missionaries.  Collins
violates orders to send the San Pablo on a
rescue mission, one of whom (Candice Bergen,
in an early role) has a big crush on Holman.
"The Sand Pebbles" is nearly three hours long,
but has few unnecessary scenes.  The sets are
impressive, especially the old steam engine and
the fleet of Chinese junks.  The cast is excellent
as well, with only Crenna's curious angst
marring the performances.  The film's biggest
problem is that that the non-officer sailors all
seem to be stupid savages, except for Frenchy and
Holman.  The crew is also frequently insubordinate
to Collins, apparently for dramatic purposes.
The Oscar nominations included Best Picture,
Best Actor (McQueen), Best Supporting Actor
(Mako) and Best Color Cinematography (Joseph
MacDonald).  The film failed to take any trophies,
most instead going to the costume drama "A Man For
All Seasons".
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
