Title
Review for Producers, The (1968)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Andrew Hicks
        THE PRODUCERS is the movie that reminds us that one 
time, long ago, Mel Brooks used to make good movies. With this 
and his 70's hits like BLAZING SADDLES and YOUNG FRANKEN-
STEIN, it must have seemed like he would be a formidable comedic 
force to be reckoned with. But as time wore on and his output 
extended to movies like DRACULA... DEAD AND LOVING IT and 
LIFE STINKS, it was obvious Brooks burned out. The message 
here is to stick with 60's and 70's Brooks and stay away from 
everything from the past two decades.
        To be sure, even his good movies had plenty of strained 
moments where the comedy just wasn't working, especially in THE 
PRODUCERS, which has annoying scenes of loud silliness that 
make you want to throw the TV out the window. From the early 
scenes, it seems like a bad, plotless movie, especially the scene 
where Gene Wilder gets hysterical (translation: ultra-whiny) for a 
minute and a half because Zero Mostel has taken his "blue blanket" 
away.
        Even a normally likeable performer like Wilder can get on 
one's nerves with bad comedic material (Remember his Man-
Smitten-With-Sheep scene from Everything You Always 
Wanted to Know About Sex?), and Lord knows there are 
places here where you wish someone would shove an Everlasting 
Gobstopper in his mouth to shut him up.
        Wilder is an accountant who has come to balance 
Broadway producer Mostel's books and soon becomes partners 
with him in a scheme to produce a play that will be a surefire flop 
and pocket the investors' money. First he needs some investors, 
whom he culls from his usual bevy of blue-haired old ladies who 
invest in exchange for sex with Mostel, the oldest and fattest gigolo 
alive. His sex appeal is less than his first name, but to an arthritic 
old lady, I guess it doesn't matter.
        The rest of THE PRODUCERS continues on an episodic 
scale, with scenes where Mostel and Wilder have to find the worst 
play ever written ("Springtime For Hitler: A Gay Romp With Adolph 
and Eva"), track down the author (a crazed Nazi), find a director 
("the worst director to ever live," who also wears a dress... I thought 
Ed Wood was dead.), audition some actors (including a hyperactive 
hippie Hitler who acts like Robin Williams) and finally put on the 
play itself.
        Most of the best moments in THE PRODUCERS come 
from the performance of "Springtime For Hitler" and its opening 
song-and-dance number, complete with a chorus line of German 
babes who form a moving swastika with their bodies. Tasteless 
(but not as tasteless as the man-smitten-with-sheep scene -- 
remember that?) but incredibly funny, unlike the rest of the movie, 
which is brainless and marginally funny. As a whole, though, 
THE PRODUCERS is a classic of 60's comedy and one of the 
few Mel Brooks successes.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
James Brundage
Starring Zero Mostel, Gene Wilder, Dick Shawn, Kenneth Mars, Christopher
Hewett
 Mel Brooks' directorial debut occurred in 1968.  It was his gift to the
world.  And, you might ask, what was his gift originally titled?  Springtime
for Hitler.  Springtime for Hitler, re-titled The Producers (probably for
reasons of political correctness, which the film appears not to give a damn
about), was a movie about two theatre producers who take it upon themselves
to make a fortune off of a flop.
 This unlikely scam features the seduction of old ladies for financing, the
purchasing of a script titled: `Springtime for Hitler: A Musical Romp with
Adolf and Eva', the hiring of the worst director and actor possible, and, of
course, setting it all to music.
 The best way to characterize this film is as a charicature of Hilter as a
cheaply-drawn cartoon with his pants down around his ankles singing at the
top of his lungs.  It is both that striking, that immature, and that funny.
Zero Mostel, although not giving a great performance, does his best with the
role offerred to him and excels in it, as does Gene Wilder, who plays and
accountant-turned-producer with as much neuroses as Woody Allen.
 The film doesn't have speed to it: it lumbers along, taking it's time to
get to punchlines which strike the viewer as perfectly delivered.  Instead
of speed it has a brilliant script, filled with jokes and quips and
wittiness and turned out by Mel Brooks himself, allowing us all to view his
genius at an early stage.
 I don't normally watch films from the sixties: I don't make an effort not
to watch them, but I don't go out of my way for them, either.  This film,
however, was recommended to me by a friend and I, in turn, recommend it to
you.  It's childlike in its silliness, adult in its message of how utterly
idiotic starting WWII was, and downright brilliant besides.  This film, like
Casablanca, Citizen Kane, Touch of Evil, and Gone with the Wind is worth
going out of your way for.
 It won the 1968 Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay, and wins my
respect for the way the lines are deliever.  Gene Wilder's most memorable
moment is when he goes into hysterics, holding his blankie (literally), and
delivers the line `I'm hysterical!  I'm hysterical, I'm hysterical, I'm
hysterical!'  when water is put in his face he pauses for a moment and
screams and says, `I'm wet and I'm still hysterical!  I'm hysterical and I'm
wet!'  When he is then slapped he screams again and says, `I'm wet, I'm
hysterical, and I'm in pain!'
 Mel Brooks has always delivered a strange mix of message and humor (with
the exception of Robin Hood: Men in Tights and Dracula: Dead and Loving it,
which simply delivered humor), and it is prevalent  in this film.  He uses
this opportunity to make fun of Hitler and Nazism in general, as well as,
without once mentioning Hollywood, the strange system that exists in the
City of Lights.
Sure, you see films like Get Shorty and The Player and The End of Violence,
set in Hollywood and dealing with producers, and you know it's a satire of
the system, but, when you watch The Producers, it's not the first thing that
occurs to you.  It is, like message should be in all good films, hidden just
beneath the surface.  Having the director being sure that he's funny and
having the producers butter him up for directing a flop picking an actor
who does good by mistake.  It has gumption to be this subversive, and is all
the more lovable for that.
 As I've said: it came recommended, I'm sending it off recommended.
