Title
Review for Antonia and Jane (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Jane frumps her way through life.  She never knows how to act or how to
dress.  Jane thinks that everyone else has read the book HOW TO FUNCTION IN
THE WORLD and nobody ever offered it to her.  To make matters worse her best
friend, whom she envies and hates, has just about everything.  Antonia lives
the good life.  Married to the lover she stole from Jane, she has a
responsible job high in the publishing business and a beautiful home.  She
also goes to the same psychiatrist that Jane does.  From her point of view
her life just goes from bad to worse.  From her point of view her life
stagnates while Jane has the courage to reinvent herself constantly and to
explore new aspects of her personality.
     Jane Hartman (played by Imelda Staunton) finds herself constitutionally
unable to complain or assert herself.  She floats like a cork on the
currents of life, letting the tides of others' wills push her one way and
then another.  And like the cork, she never floats half in the currents and
half out.  She has a series of freaky relationships, like one with a
boyfriend unable to have sex until he has been read to from the works of
Iris Murdoch.  Meanwhile her lifelong friend and rival Antonia McGill
(played by Saskia Reeves) faces a different set of problems, mostly bred of
her fast-track lifestyle.  Her husband has an unfortunate taste for variety
in bedmates.  Her own extra-curricular activities do not satisfy her and
only serve to complicate her life in bizarre ways.
     Beeban Kidron, who previously directed ORANGES ARE NOT THE ONLY FRUIT
presumably made ANTONIA AND JANE from BBC television.  Kidron gives some
Woody Allen twists to the old saw of the grass growing greener on the other
side of the fence.  The writer seasons her story with plenty of clever wit,
but in an end that comes much too soon in this 79-minute film, the story
amounts to no more than a humorous platitude.  I rate ANTONIA AND JANE a +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     ANTONIA AND JANE is a film directed by Beeban Kidron, produced by
George Faber, and written by Marcy Kahan.  The cast includes Imelda
Staunton and Saskia Reeves.  It is unrated, but includes some profanity
and nudity.
     ANTONIA AND JANE is probably more like MY DINNER WITH ANDRE than
just about any other film I've ever seen, yet even that comparison would
have to be qualified at length.  Critics have suggested some kinship
with THELMA & LOUISE, but that also conceals as much as it reveals about
the excellences of this fine film, which was originally shown on the BBC
in 1990 and is currently enjoying its U.S.  premiere in Seattle at the
Metro Cinemas.  Seattle first discovered this film at the International
Festival of Films by Women Directors in 1990.  It is a funny, meaningful
film about women's friendships.
     The two women are a pair 30-year-old Britishers, one, Antonia
(Saskia Reeves), upper-crusty and beautiful, the other, Jane (Imelda
Staunton), frumpish, bookish, Jewish, and no clothes sense whatsoever.
She's also given to attracting some very odd boyfriends.  Antonia and
Jane go back a long way, share some interesting details, and make each
other very insecure.  They meet once a year for dinner, apparently to
torture themselves.
     The movie's positive qualities include a tart and sardonic sense of
humor, a gift for slight exaggerations that strain but never quite
rupture our credulity.  The men in the two women's lives are pretty
pathetic creatures--I mean I don't mind a movie that says men are
dickheads, but these turkeys are bare human.  Perhaps this is merely a
facet of the film's very British sense of the absurd.  Certainly,
something is bound to be lost on purely American audiences--the class
undertones, for example.
     I have to say that I don't take ANTONIA AND JANE as seriously as I
took ANDRE, which seemed to be real people talking about real, if
fantastic and wonderful, things and ideas, or THELMA AND LOUISE, which
was ultimately more challenging and upsetting in what it concludes about
the choices facing women in our society.  By contrast ANTONIA AND JANE
appears to a bit on the fluffy side, rather like Henry Jaglom's essays
on women.  (I know, I praised EATING in this forum a few months and I
still stand by that praise, but that film is flawed by its own class
prejudices, too.)
     The main fault of the movie is its brief 75-minute running time.
It was made to fit into a TV schedule.  Pity there wasn't some
additional shot for the theatrical version to flesh out some of the
transitions and changes.  Or to extend the story.
     We do learn to care for these people, who at first seem somewhat
off-putting.  Just as they become real people, not merely unexplored
neuroses on the hoof, poof!  the film's over.  We'd like to see more of
them, basically.  What we do is a successful, but modest, relationship,
coming-of-postponed-age comedy, a witty film that says interesting about
friendship, things that can apply to any friendships regardless of
gender.  Certainly, my first thought on leaving the theater was a desire
to call an old friend from whom I have been estranged for the last
twelvemonth.
     I am delighted to recommend ANTONIA AND JANE, but matinee prices
will probably suffice.
