Title
Review for Titicut Follies (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
TITICUT FOLLIES (1967) - A Film Review by Jerry Saravia
How does one react to a documentary so honest and heartbreaking that one is 
compelled to turn away from its tragic outlook? Well, it is tough to watch 
Frederick Wiseman's cinema verite documentary, "Titicut Follies," a 
disturbing look at a mental institution fraught with impracticalities, but it 
must be seen. 
Wiseman frames the opening and closing moments of this film with a 
song-and-dance routine performed annually by the institution's residents - 
the name of the show is "Titicut Follies." Gradually, in almost bleached-out 
black-and-white, we see the conditions at the Bridgewater Correctional 
Institution where the patients are awakened each morning, strip-searched, 
shaven, and then interviewed by the doctors about their personal histories. 
They are then escorted back to their empty cells naked, and locked in with an 
unerring sense of closure and solidity. 
The patients are a mixed bag, some crazier than others. There are a few who 
babble on a variety of topics without interruption, a former teacher who 
incoherently screams at the guards, and one patient who feels that he is sane 
and wants to go to prison after a nearly one-year stay. This particular 
patient insists that the doctors are wrong, and tries to prove his case. 
This Massachusetts institute is like a journey through hell - one patient is 
forced fed with a tube through his nose while the doctor performs the 
procedure and smokes! Another patient is carried out in a coffin - the only 
one to get out of this hellhole. There is an effective scene where a group of 
doctors decide that increasing the dosage for one patient, who complains of 
sickness from the medicine, is the best solution. There is a lot more taking 
place, most of it disquieting in its immediacy and the atmosphere of such an 
environment. It is no wonder that a Massachusetts judge banned the film from 
being shown for many years because it invaded the privacy of the patients, 
housed in what looks like a prison facility. What the film really does is to 
show how the patients are treated - like slabs of meat, not people. 
"Titicut Follies" is virtually unwatchable and all too realistic - a document 
of sad times when mental illness was synonymous with animal behavior. With 
Wiseman's hand-held camera, we feel we are there witnessing one grueling 
event after another, unable to help except to bear witness to the patients' 
behavior. And it is to the director's credit that we see the glint of 
humanity within these patients - they are people like anyone else. 
Misunderstood, and possibly quite insane, but still human. "Titicut Follies" 
is a tough film to put out of your mind, and it will linger longer in your 
mind than any fictional film dealing with similar subject matter would. It is 
a haunting masterpiece that heralded the cinema verite standard for all 
documentaries to come. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at 
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com
