Title
Review for Aliens (1986)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Laurence Mixson
Review by Laurence Mixson(venom8@hotmail.com)
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Paul Reiser, Michael Beihn, and Bill Paxton.
        Every once in a while a movie comes along that completely redefines the
genre: with dramas, it was Citizen Kane, with arthouse it was Pulp
Fiction, and with comedy it was, well, that Jim Carrey guy(okay, so he's
not a movie, but he DID have a huge influence on the genre. Not to
mention an expensive one.) Sometimes a movie even combines them all into
a big, sprawling motion picture event, as did Forrest Gump four years
ago.
        With action films, it was Aliens, whic was released to much hype seven
years after it's equally-innovative parent, Alien(1979). Directed and
written by James Cameron(T2: Judgement Day, The Abyss, True Lies), THE
authority on action films, it was a masterful encore to his sci-fi
thriller The Terminator(1984). 
        While the original Alien film was a dark, enclosed horror film that
featured one alien slowly massacering a horrified crew, James Cameron
took the big-budget action film with Aliens, which featured multiple
aliens doing basically the same thing, although on a much-larger scale.
And boy, did he take that route! I'd say at about 165 mph or so...
        The film opens 57 years after the original, with Lt. Ripley(Weaver)
being found in her ship in a  cryogenic state by a salvage vessel. If
you'll recall, at the end of Alien Ripley, the only surviving member,
cryogenically "hibernated" herself after expelling the rogue alien from
her ship. Unfortunately, she thought she'd only be out for a couple of
weeks...
        Once she's returned to earth, Ripley is quickly interrogated by "the
company", who quickly dismiss her and her stories as lunacy. In truth,
they believe her, as they soon approach Ripley with an offer to travel
with some Marines to a new colony planet as an "alien advisor". It seems
that the colony planet was a once-breeding ground for the nasty aliens,
and now all communication with the planet has been lost...
        It doesn't exactly take a genius to guess what happens next: Ripley
agrees, and before you can say "big mistake", she and the half dozen
marines, plus the slimy corporate guy(Reiser), who has more than it
looks like up under his sleeve, are off to the colony.
        When they arrive, they find the planet in ruins. Only one survivor is
found, a little girl, Newt, who confirms that, yes, the aliens were here
and that she only managed to survive by hidding in the ventilation
system. And soon enough, the marines come under attack from the
aliens...
        What happens for the next hour and a half or so is what completely sets
this movie apart from any other standard alien sci-fi movie: the action
scenes.  Cameron directs them so skillfully, and so suspensefully, that
you're literally ringing your hands by the time the finale rolls around.
Which features, in my opinion, the best fight scene ever recorded on
film, as Ripley straps herself into a huge robot and battles the nasty
Queen alien to the death.
        Many people will tell you that this film, while being a great action
film, has no real drama and is all cliches. Well, they would be wrong,
my friends. If this film had no "drama", then why was Sigourney Weaver
nominated for Best Actress at the 1987 Academy Awards? That's right,
best actress. You know that ANY action film that has an oscar nomination
attached to it for something other than technical stuff like editing and
F/X has GOT to be good.
        In short, Aliens combines all the right elements(great action and F/X,
drama, a good plot, good dialogue, and great villains)into what could
arguably be called the best action film of all time. Then again, maybe
not. Movies rise and fall from glory and, sad to say, Aliens was
wrestled from it's throne of Best Action Movie by another Cameron film,
T2: Judgement Day, in 1991. So who will be the next king? Well, let's
wait until December 19th and see yet another James Cameron film-the
highest budgeted film of all time-Titanic to make that decision. I can't
wait.

Author
Chad Polenz
1986, R, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
starring: Sigourney Weaver (Ripley), Michael Biehn (Corporal Hicks), Bill
Paxton (Private Hudson), Paul Reiser (Carter Burke); written by James
Cameron, David Giler, Walter Hill; produced by Gale Anne Hurd; directed by
James Cameron; based on characters created by Dan O'Bannon, Ronald Shusett.
Seen Friday, November 7, 1997 on home video.
I'm not sure what the appeal to "Alien" was, and I'm even more perplexed
that someone thought it was worthy of a sequel. The "us-versus-aliens"
formula has been used many times before, but never as moronic as "Aliens"
uses it. It's just a disguised horror flick and an excuse for special
effects, not the exciting thriller it tries to be.
This film picks up where its predecessor left off as Ripley (Weaver), the
sole survivor from the first movie, is awoken from her "hibernation" 57 years
later (funny, but she didn't seem to age a day!). We know somehow Ripley will
end up going back to the alien planet, but the film doesn't provide much of,
if any, rationale as to why this will happen. The only attempts at
justification are provided through elements so generic they're pathetic.
First there's Ripley's constant nightmares, then the  executives who think
she's insane. But the same execs have a sudden change of heart when they
realize a team of investigators sent to the alien planet have not returned
and they want Ripley to "advise" a military rescue team.
Now, it's not that these reasons alone are silly, it's the way the film
presents them: with complete logic when they're no different than cliches
most horror movies use.  The fact that within a five-minute period, Ripley
goes from being adamantly opposed to going back, to being more than willing
to go says it all.
And so, after 20 minutes of ridiculous sci-fi and military jargon, Ripley,
along with a troupe of Marine Special Forces, head out to the alien planet to
save some humans and kick alien butt. That's not the most intelligent plot in
the world, but it can yield great camaraderie and pride when done right.
Cameron knows this, but he goes about establishing these sensations in the
wrong way by over-doing it. The Marines do have a sense of unity to them, but
they're so one-dimensional it's corny. All they do is crack on each other and
act like idiots - where's the unity in that? Their dialogue is also laughable
because they seem more like characters from the cartoon "G.I. Joe."
Finally, after an hour or so we get our first encounter with the aliens but
many of the marines are wiped out. It's not surprising the survivors all turn
into cowards after this point, which is probably intended as satire, but
turns out to be annoying (especially Bill Paxton's character, Private Hudson,
whose constant whining drove me nuts after 10 minutes). The battle scenes are
reason these films were made, but they're shot so poorly it's impossible to
tell what's going on. Tension is worthless if it's confusing.
>From here on the film just starts repeating itself: the Marines try to get
off the planet but are always prevented from doing so, in one way or another,
by the aliens. There's many scenes of the aliens closing in on the humans,
and then carnage ensues. Most of this is set up through cliches, such as the
Marines not being able to use their weapons in certain places, the aliens
suddenly jumping out of the walls, floors and ceilings, or the fact the
Marines always seem to corner themselves. There's also a sub-plot involving
the backstabbing exec Carter Burke, who should be an even slimier character
than the aliens, but isn't, due to the miscasting of Paul Reiser (!?) for the
part.
The ending not only clinches the predictable story, it symbolizes the entire
film. It's just one exhausting battle after another for no real reason. This
also demonstrates how the basic premise is the worst flaw: it's us invading
an alien planet and trying to exterminate them when they're not really a
threat to begin with. This would be like aliens coming to Earth millions of
years ago and fighting the dinosaurs.
There isn't much going for "Aliens" other than its special effects and
production design (which are excellent, I'll have to admit it), but that
doesn't make up for the mediocre story. Maybe if it had been scripted with
more wit, it would be worth getting excited over.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 170
new and old movies reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Paul McElligott
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Michael Biehn, Bill Paxton, Paul Reiser
Written, Produced and Directed by James Cameron.
Aliens represents a true rarity among movies, a sequel that not only
equals or even surpasses the original, but also one that stands alone as
work unto itself.  You could see this movie without knowing the first
ever existed.  Knowing the original allows you to enjoy the sequel on
other layers of course.
Weaver plays Ripley, the sole survivor of a mining ship whose crew was
wiped out by a previous unknown creature.  After killing the creature,
she climbed into a lifeboat and put herself into suspended animation. 
She stayed that way, drifting through space, for 57 years until she was
found.  Her story is discredited, however, and she is forced into menial
jobs.  However, a colony has been established on the planet where
Ripley's ship found the original alien and now contact has been lost
with that colony.  Ripley is invited to accompany a platoon of Marines
to the planet to investigate.  At first, Ripley resists, but the need to
purge herself of the nightmares that have been plaguing her sleep impels
her to confront her fears.
The gung-ho Marines arrive to find the colony deserted, with signs of
desperate fighting all around.  They also find carcasses of alien
"face-huggers," which plant the seed of the adult alien into human
hosts, and one lone survivor, a little girl named Newt.  An attempt to
locate and rescue the other colonists, however, leads most of the
Marines into an alien ambush and most of the platoon is wiped out.  The
few remaining survivors have to desperately fight off hundreds of aliens
while searching for a way off the planet.
Aliens is less of horror story, like the original, than a
straight-forward action story, and on that level it succeeds as well, if
not better than Alien did as a horror movie.  It represents the peak of
James Cameron's career so far, creatively speaking.  Those who only know
Cameron through Titanic might be surprised to note that yes, he really
can write, and he can also bring in a film for only $17 million, on time
and under budget.
For a film released in 1986, it was certainly not the norm to have a
female lead anchoring a science-fiction action film.  It's not even
common enough today.  That's what makes Sigourney Weaver's performance
so striking.  She can bring off a female action role without ever
calling undo attention to the fact that she is a woman.  Lesser
filmmakers would have felt it necessary to pepper the film with
self-conscious feminist rhetoric and lesser actress might have played it
self-consciously butch.
That wouldn't have worked in this film.  Aliens is, among all the macho
posturing of the marines, the high-tech weapons and furious gunplay,
ultimately a film about motherhood.  For those of you who have only seen
the theatrical release, I point you to the Special Edition, now
available on VHS and DVD.  It contains several scenes deleted from the
original release to shorten the running time.  The most critical of
these is early in the film, before the inquest, when Ripley finds out
that her daughter died of old age two years earlier.  This loss and
sense of failure drives the maternal interest that Ripley takes in the
newly orphaned Newt, and this sense of responsibility leads, I think, to
Ripley going from a shell-shocked basket-case at the beginning of the
film to the rock on which all the other characters wind up leaning.
The motherhood arc extends to the aliens too, when Ripley winds up face
to face with the alien queen, another mother who is now super-pissed at
Ripley for torching her nest.  This film reminds us that, although women
might be referred to as "the weaker sex," in much of nature, the female
is the more dangerous and ferocious gender because she is charged with
the protection of the young.
If you've never watched any of the Alien films, I recommend this one. 
It's far less gory than the first and far superior to the third and
fourth.

Author
Brian Koller
Director James Cameron does well with action films
starring tough, strong-willed female leads.  "Aliens",
the long-delayed sequel to 1979's "Alien", was worth the
wait since it was an ideal project for Cameron's strengths,
and likely would have been a lesser film if directed by
anyone else.
"Aliens" picks up 57 years after the first film left off.
Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) has been in living in suspended
animation in a spaceship sleeping chamber, until rescued by
a salvage team.  No one really believes her story about the
murderous alien with acid for blood, until contact is
lost with a colony on the same planet that Ripley had
battled the alien.
Ripley is sent as an advisor on a rescue mission to the
planet, along with android Bishop (Lance Henriksen), creepy
'company man' Paul Reiser, and a crew of wisecracking,
gung-ho Marines.  They soon encounter the colony's only
survivor, a little girl nicknamed Newt (Carrie Henn).
Of course, they find the aliens as well, which are
disgusting, frightening and ubiquitous.
As in the first film, Weaver is most impressive as
Ripley, whose character should be out of her element,
but always proves to be tougher (and smarter) than those
around her.  Even when Ripley's actions are wildly risk-taking
(especially when rescuing Newt at film's end) her actions
seems credible.  Credit is due first to Weaver, then to
Cameron, and then to the special effects department for
making those nasty aliens look so convincing.
In addition to the tense and frequent action scenes,
"Aliens" is interesting for its psychological aspects.
Ripley, who is a loner by nature, not only conquers the
aliens, but builds for herself a substitute family.
Newt becomes her daughter, Michael Biehn her husband, and
Bishop her father.  As in "Alien", there is a sabotaging
character (Reiser).  My favorite supporting character,
though, is the whiner (Bill Paxton), who provides the sole
comic relief.  Henn acts very well for a little kid.
"Aliens" was nominated for seven Academy Awards, including
Best Actress (Weaver).  Its only Oscar was for Best
Visual Effects, but perhaps it should have won for the
great sets (Peter Lamont, Crispian Sallis) as well.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: James Cameron
Writer: James Cameron (story by James Cameron, David Giler, and Walter
Hill)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Carrie Henn, Paul Reiser, Michael Biehn,
Lance Henriksen, Bill Paxton, William Hope, Jenette Goldstein, Al
Matthews, Mark Rolston, Ricco Ross, Colette Hiller
After re-watching "Aliens" after a couple years, I silently sat there on
my bed throughout the end credits without making any sudden moves.  This
is what this film does to you: it leaves you completely drained, just
like the characters in this movie.  Some say that the fact that this is
exhausting is a major flaw; I say it's ingenius filmmaking, not a shock
from James Cameron.
"Aliens" is the sequel to the 1979 classic, "Alien" (duh), where a group
of seven were stalked by an acid-burning, shaft-crawling, belligerent
alien, and where only one survived: Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver). 
The film takes place 57 years after the first one, but Ripley has been
in the same hibernation she entered into at the end of the previous
film, but is luckily woken up by some deep space workers or something.
After a nice little introduction, where Ripley is introduced to the
deceptfully slimy Burke (Paul Reiser), a government worker who seems to
be Ripley's friend, but asks her to go back to the planet where they
found the alien in the first film, since the stupid government has sent
about 70 families over there to live, and have lost contact.  After some
soul-searching (spanning a whole day, and a bad dream), she agrees to go
as an "advisor" in what is a military operation.
So off to the freaky planet where the obvious has occured: the face
huggers from the eggs they found in the first film have killed off the
inhabiants, spawning a ton of giant aliens.  Most of the cocky soldiers
are quickly and ironically killed off, leaving about eight people left
to fend off the aliens by themself.  After the only way back to the
mother ship is destroyed, and with the threat of alien invasion at any
moment, the film from this point becomes a non-stop gradual ascent of
pure adrenalized tension.
First off, "Alien" and "Aliens" seem completely different.  Some may
bitch, but I ask you: do you like seeing the same thing over and over
and over and over again (i.e. the "Home Alone" series, which just
released a third installment - yeasnorebitchwail).  The first one, as
directed by Ridley Scott, is a wonderful film, filled with great
tension, and directed with great creepy control.  James Cameron, not one
for slow films with Kubrickian minutes (or hours) of human silence and
inhuman noises, has taken a compeltely different approach.
He, instead, takes us right into the field of combat, making us feel
like we're right there beside Ripley and the surviving soldiers, waiting
until the aliens invade the confines of their space, and probably kill
them mercilessly.  From the hour point on, "Aliens" holds us in its
grasp, and doesn't let us go until the remaining characters (or
character...) are finally sleeping after a long period of
cringe-inducing, coffee-spilling, nail-biting, finger-tapping tension.
Cameron, who has directed such big films as the two Terminator films,
"The Abyss," "True Lies," and the upcoming "Titanic" (to which I'm
counting down the days), is a genius director with a big budget. 
Instead of giving us drivel, like "Independence Day" and "Stargate"
(wow!  both directed by Roland Emmeurich!  who woulda guessed?), Cameron
wows us with special effects, bowls us over with an interesting story,
and amazes us with interesting characters.  Ripley continues to grow as
interesting character, having lost her daughter due to the fact that she
was hibernation for 57 years and she had died before she got back (a
great scene which is deleted in the video copy), she finds solace in the
young Newt (Carrie Henn), a little girl who's family was killed by the
aliens, but has, herself, survived for a long time by staying away from
them.  They share a touching, though never melodramatic and/or corny,
relationship which gives the film additional depth.
The marines in the film are really not as well drawn as these two, but
still carry some great satirical wit along with them.  For one thing,
they're mostly cocky, and bitch constantly about the conditions.  When
Ripley briefs them before they go down about the aliens, one of them -
the butch chick Vasquz (Jenette Goldstein) - says "I just need to know
one thing: where they are."  They're cockiness pays a sorry price, as
they are confronted with acid-burning,
more-belliegerent-than-Saddam-Hussein-on-percodan aliens who wipe most
of them out in a harrowingly creepy scene, to which we only see brief
shots.
Another satirical part of the film deals with the usual "Alien"
government, which is, of course, trying to bring the aliens back for
scientific research and all.  The government is wonderfully represented
in the form of Burke (the brilliantly cast Paul Reiser), a charmingly
witty and innocent-feeling member of government, who turns out wants to
have the aliens planted in the soldiers' bodies.  Reiser gives the film
a comic air (even if he doesn't have a lot of zingy one-liners, a good
thing in my book), and also does a great job with manipulating us into
thinking that he's not such a bad guy.
The film appears to have some minor flaws, like not much
characterization, a lack of respect for the other alien (what is the
alien feeling), and a seemingly cheap ending tacked on for some more
shocks.  But.  This all adds to the overall fun of the film.  If it was
too philosophical, and overly cerebral, the film would probably lose its
touch.  Let "2001" do the cerebral, which is why that is brilliant. 
"Aliens" is brilliant because of the way its directed.  And who says
that big budget action pics can't be brilliant?
Other additional notes should be made to whoever did the efx, which are
absolutely brilliant, to some of the actors (most notably Weaver,
Reiser, Biehn, Paxton - who's annoying but good - Goldstein, and,
strangely enough, Henriksen, who gives his most lively performance -
save that bizarro episode of "Millenium" where he had blond hair...not
that I watch that show - as an android), and to James Horner, who has
scored an absolutely brilliant score from start to finish.  However, a
note should be made that the opening and closing music is a piece from
"2001."
But writer/director James Cameron gets the best note.  In what is
probably his best film so far (along with "T2"), "Aliens" is a
filmmaking tour de force.  He holds a state of tension throughout, so
much that people can come out of it emotionally ravaged.  As I said, I
was shaking afterwards, and in his review, Roger Ebert said it left him
depressed.  But even if it may leave a negative reaction, that was what
Cameron was going for, and it is nothing less than a brilliant example
of sheer film craftsmanship.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dragan Antulov
Almost any film reviewer sooner and later gets nostalgic and
thinks fondly about certain period in film history, when
unmatched multitude of masterpieces emerged in a relatively
short time. For the author of this review, such Golden Age
happened in late 1970s and early 1980s, when he enjoyed most
of the movies he considers the best. Almost exclusively
those movies belong to the genre of science fiction; genre
that later became the domain of blockbuster infantilism,
inspired by Lucas and Spielberg. Most of the directors that
used to shine in that Golden Age, slowly faded away in the
years to come, unable to adapt to the new rules of
Hollywood. However, even in such atmosphere another
masterpiece happened; shining counterexample to the popular
belief that Hollywood sequels always must be inferior to the
original. Such movie was ALIENS, 1986 science fiction horror
by James Cameron, Canadian director who had a difficult task
in matching quality of 1979 classic ALIEN by Ridley Scott.
However, Cameron managed not only to make a good movie, but
he also made a masterpiece of his own, instant cult classic
that enjoys popularity even now, after twelve years and two
disappointing sequels.
Like many sequels do, ALIENS begins more or less exactly
where the old movie ended. Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) is a
sole survivor of the space freighter plagued by a single yet
deadly alien monster that killed the rest of her crew after
being brought from LV-426 planet. Her voyage back to Earth
in a shuttle ends when she is picked up by salvage team,
only to discover that her hybernated sleep had lasted 57
years. Burdened with terrible nightmare and forced to live
in a world with all her friends and family gone, Ripley also
loses her job, because her old Company executives don't
believe her story about alien-infested LV-426; the planet
was in the meantime colonised by terraformers and nobody
reported any problems. However, that is about to change when
LV-426 stops sending signals. Ripley reluctantly agrees to
join Company's senior official Burke (Paul Reiser) on a
rescue mission, led by Liuetenant Gorman (William Hope) and
his small but elite unit of Colonial Marines. Upon landing,
they discover that the entire population was turned into
hosts for alien organism. That means that they should deal
not with a single monster, but entire small army. Marines
quickly learn that in a first serious engagement, when they
despite all their firepower, get slaughtered. The remaining
band of survivors, nominally led by Corporal Hicks (Michael
Biehn), and actually by Ripley, finds itself stranded in a
small, isolated part of colony complex. Their chances of
survival aren't however, totally hopeless, because a little
girl Newt (Carrie Henn), daughter of the colonists, managed
to avoid monsters simply by hiding in ventilation tunnels.
The biggest achievement of ALIENS is a fact that the movie
seems to work both as a standalone action adventure, and as
a sequel in the same time. Script by James Cameron remains
true to the previous movie, even borrowing some crucial
elements of its plot; yet, despite all those similarities,
script manages to add new twists to the story and remains
original. The most notable difference between those movies
is in a genre; the first one was dark, disturbing, and
slow-paced horror which relied on a thick atmosphere of
anxiety and claustrophobia; the second one is an war movie,
that relies on a clever combination of suspense and non-stop
action thrills, that brings ALIENS clearly to the action
genre territory.
However, there is another element that separates ALIENS from
ALIEN; it is the fact that, unlike the previous movie, this
one has more time and opportunity to speculate about the
trends in future society and comment on the present one. The
world of ALIENS seems like a natural extension of the some
current yet disturbing trends of the Reagan era - supremacy
of all-powerful military-industrial complex, rebirth of
ultramilitaristic jingoism and, finally, yuppie philosophy
of material success through any means necessary. Cameron
obviously seems very concerned about the ultimate result if
such trends remained unchecked, because ALIENS could be very
easily (and most of the critics agree with such notion) seen
as a metaphor for another, this time historical disaster -
Vietnam. If ALIEN tried to warn about the fact that the
universe may hide some horrors that humans aren't ready for,
its sequel tries to warn that even in the brightest of
futures superior technology can't save humans from repeating
some costly mistakes from the past.
Because it tries to send a clear message, ALIENS, unlike
ALIEN, tries to be more humanely oriented film, even
uplifting, especially in the end. While the last one barely
had a happy end and left nothing but a bitter taste in
mouth, this one manages to praise courage, sacrifice and
human spirit, and rewards its heroes by giving them a ride
in the sunset in the form of well-deserved sleep. In order
to be achieve that impact, ALIENS collected a small yet
impressive group of well-drawn and three- dimensional
characters the viewer cares for. The only character shared
with ALIEN, Ripley, played by Sigourney Weaver in an
"Oscar"-worthy performance, was well- developed; already
proven to be capable of handling dangerous situations,
Ripley was hardened by previous traumatic experience and now
is ready to tackle with her worst demons. For some
contemporary critics, character of Ripley from ALIENS was
some kind of feminist response to the RAMBO-inspired
renaissance of action moviee machismo. But, unlike
Stallone's icon, Ripley was, through her interaction with
Nwet, also portrayed as a mother figure, capable of
emotions. Thus, character of Ripley can serve as an ideal
for strong and capable women who don't want to lose her
sensitivity and femininity.
Other characters are also well-drawn, although the
breath-taking tempo of non-stop action and their constantly
dwindling numbers wouldn't indicate so. Corporal Hicks,
played by one of Cameron's most reliable actors, Michael
Biehn, is brilliant as an indecisive, yet capable soldier,
whose single yet subtle scene with Ripley gives few precious
elements of sexual tension in this picture. Bill Paxton is,
on the other hand, gave much stronger impression as his
wisecracking yet panicky comrade who redeems his cowardice
in the end. He managed to shadow even Jeanette Goldstein and
her great effort to transform herself into tough female
Marine. Most subtle performance was one by veteran character
actor Lance Henriksen who played android Bishop; his simple
gestures helped to turn his android character Bishop into
the most human personality of all the cast. All of those
characters were also equipped with a series of sharp
one-liners that would become one of this movie's trademarks.
Even the slimy Burke, played by Paul Reiser, had one of
them.
Although ALIENS, unlike its predecessor, puts more emphasis
on action than on atmosphere, James Cameron had worked very
hard on visual details, trying to make it as faithful to
ALIEN as possible. Yet in the same time, he made ALIENS
quite unique with its new, futuristic weaponry, clothes,
vehicles and spaceships. Together with Stan Winston's superb
special effects those visuals made ALIENS one of the most
recognisable and visually stunning movies. While the
original was literally dark, Cameron's photographer Adrien
Biddle used a lot of light, but its combination with grey
tones made an atmosphere of ALIENS equally depressing.
However, the most noticeable element of the movie is a
superb musical score by James Horner, who had a very
difficult task in matching Jerry Goldsmith's haunting
soundtrack in the ALIEN. However, Horner made it by using
effective themes that perfectly match numerous action scenes
in the film. The proof of its quality lies in the fact that
the ALIENS soundtrack is often used outside this movie.
For a lot of people ALIENS is considered to be "the best" in
many categories. It is considered to be the best in Alien
cycle. It is also the best movie in already impressive
career of James Cameron. And, finally, it is also considered
to be the best science fiction film ever made. Some people
might disagree with anything from above, yet one thing
remains obvious -ALIENS is an excellent movie, not just for
the fans who built a whole cult around it, but also for the
regular viewers, who haven't been able to see something
matching its quality for a long time.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Aliens (1986)
Rated R for strong violence and gore, language, and terror.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Paul Reiser, Lance Henriksen, Jenette Goldstein, Michael Biehn, Carrie Henn
With the success of the surprise hit ALIEN, directed by Ridley Scott,
a sequel was inevitable. In fact, after watching the first film, a
sequel was wanted, particularly by this reviewer. Handing over the
director's chair to recent box office gem James Cameron, who had only
made two films previous to this one (PIRAHNA II, a surprisingly dull
film, and TERMINATOR, making Cameron a household name), the ALIEN
series got a face-lift of immense proportions. Instead of being a
suspense/science fiction film, Cameron alters the series and changing
it into an action picture. What results is one of the most terrifying
films ever created.
A film like ALIENS comes along only once in a while, and when it does,
audiences are usually unprepared for it. I never saw this movie in
theaters, but I wish I could have. The terror and fright must have
been unimaginable, most likely with audiences members literally
shrieking in fear. ALIENS is an action film unlike any I have ever
seen. With a science fiction plot, Cameron gives ALIENS added
testosterone, pumping up the action and fire power from the original
film. In fact, ALIENS is one of those few sequels which tops the
original. Perhaps what makes the ALIEN series so impressive is the
hero--or heroine, as the case may be. Never have we had a more
sympathetic hero in an action film, and never have I seen such an
impressive acting job done by the main character. Sigourney Weaver is
possibly the only actress who could play this character and make her
realistic enough for us to care about. Placing a woman in these
situations would sometimes seem unusual, but because of Weaver's
presence, a woman is the only suitable hero.
ALIENS begins 57 years after ALIEN ended. Lieutenant Ellen Ripley
(Weaver) is discovered in hypersleep on the Nostromo and is
awakened. She explains how she is the only survivor of her past
encounter with the aliens, but "the company" is doubtful. They explain
that a colony of families is flourishing on the same planet from which
she just left. Despite stern warnings from Ripley, the company remains
rigid and won't call the families back.  However, when the company
loses contact with the colony, Ripley's story seems much more
feasible. One of the company's directors, Carter Burke (Paul Reiser),
wants to gather a team to travel to the planet. This team includes a
buff Private Vasquez (Jenette Goldstein), a questionable Corporal
Hicks (Michael Biehn), and a loyal android Bishop (Lance
Henriksen). Burke tags along with Ripley as they fly to the planet in
order to locate the members of the colony.
Arriving on the planet, the team finds most of the human life
extinguished in a cocoon-type environment. The only survivor is 12
year old Rebecca "Newt" Jorden (Carrie Henn). Ripley finds this a
chance to be the mother she never had the opportunity to become, and
she becomes Newt's surrogate mother. Ripley and Newt are the only ones
who knows what has happened, and soon, all hell breaks loose. ALIENS
not only multiplies the thrills and suspense from Scott's version, it
also multiplies the number of aliens in general. ALIEN focused on one
alien in particular which systematically killed each crew member,
except Ripley, who managed to jettison the alien out of the
Nostromo. ALIENS focuses on an entire race of these aliens, and as a
result, the chills are incredibly heightened. Then again, this is
James Cameron, the guy who has given us TRUE LIES and TERMINATOR 2:
JUDGMENT DAY. He is the best action director out there (topping Renny
Harlin, who directed CLIFFHANGER), and only he could create something
as terrifying as this film.
It seems that every ALIEN film seems to have some memorable scene or
scenes, and ALIENS has the motherload.  With perhaps one of the most
astonishing endings ever created for an action film, ALIENS climax
never seems to hit until the viewer is nearly pushed to extreme
exhaustion. I can't recall another film ever to sustain this level of
intensity throughout, never dropping for a moment. Just when you think
the movie is over, something else will occur, and it starts right back
up again. With a seemingly endless conclusion, ALIENS ends with one of
the greatest moments in film history. This scene is usually the one
remembered most from the film, as Lieutenant Ripley steps into one of
the lifting machines to fight the alien queen. Using flawless special
effects, the climax is exhausting, leaving any audience member drained
from extreme anxiety.
Of course, for a film of this genre to work properly, the technical
aspects must be realistic enough for us to believe what we see. ALIENS
is completely realistic, even a decade after its initial release. The
special effects are wonderfully seamless, with a terrifying alien to
go with them. One of the most overlooked aspects of this film is the
music, composed by Cameron-regular James Horner. Horner has created a
terrific score, receiving an Oscar nomination for his work. Not only
that, Horner has also created one of the best scores for any action
film, or science fiction film ever (and that includes 2001: A SPACE
ODYSSEY, which was mainly a compilation of well-known composers). In
fact, the climax music is also some of the most recognized of film
music. The production design is incredible, which also happened to
snag a nomination from the Academy. Dark corridors lit by red lights
are very impressive, but more impressive is the amount of terror which
arises from well-lit locations. Normally a film will be very dark in
order to scare a viewer; ALIENS uses lights to scare the viewer. Then,
of course, is the cinematography, which uses point of view shots,
along with video feeds in order to build suspense. Some of the
scariest scenes involve the perspective of Ripley.
Surprisingly, the acting is not only above average for this genre, but
some of the best. Sigourney Weaver received an Oscar nomination for
her portrayal of Ripley, incorporating the right amount of sympathy
into her hard-edged persona. Weaver soars above the rest in this film,
but she is supposed to. Carrie Henn gives an above average performance
for a child, developing a three-dimensional character from her quiet
attitude. Lance Henriksen is terrific as Bishop, showing that androids
don't always have to be flat characters. Jenette Goldstein shows a
fair amount of enthusiasm with her role, and steals several scenes of
her own (though her personality becomes slightly annoying when she
isn't fighting). Michael Biehn gives a very nice performance in the
most obligatory role of the film.  However, Biehn does a good job,
making it seem original again. Paul Reiser may seem like an odd choice
to play the sleazy corporate director, but Reiser manages to pull it
off quite well (however, I still see him as Paul on TV's "Mad About
You"). A very good cast (which also includes Bill Paxton and William
Hope) highlights this action film, making it stand out from others.
ALIENS is rightfully rated R for violence, gore, language, and
terror. ALIENS is sort of the redefining moment of the science fiction
genre, as ALIEN was more of a suspense/horror film. ALIENS pumps up
the stakes, and Cameron directs it with professional quality. Cameron
certainly knows how to make a good action film, but here he proves how
he can create some truly horrific moments on screen. Technically
astonishing, ALIENS' only flaw is small characters who are only there
to get killed. Aside from this, you probably won't experience anything
like ALIENS for quite a while.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html
