Title
Review for Road to Wellville, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Matthew Broderick, Bridget Fonda,
           John Cusack, Michael Lerner, Dana Carvey.
Screenplay/Director:  Alan Parker.
     Sir Anthony Hopkins doing a scene with Dana Carvey.  If you can
capture that image in your mind, you will know everything you really
need to know about why THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE just doesn't quite work.
On the one hand, the sumptuous production is filled with delightful
period detail; on the other hand, there isn't all that much going on
that one couldn't find in your typical bad, overlong "Saturday Night
Live" sketch.  Somewhere in THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE is a satire of health
fads, but it's buried beneath costumes and scatological humor.  The
result is basically a Merchant Ivory production of a "Benny Hill"
episode.
     THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE is set in turn-of-the-century Battle Creek,
Michigan, where corn flake entrepreneur and health guru John Harvey
Kellogg (Anthony Hopkins) has established a high-class sanitarium for
wealthy patrons.  Among those who journey to Battle Creek to avail
themselves of the "san's" regimen of meatless diet and frequent enemas
are Will (Matthew Broderick) and Eleanor Lightbody (Bridget Fonda), a
couple whose problems are more personal than medical.  While separated
due to the strict anti-sex rules, both Will and Eleanor find their
desires piqued elsewhere.  Meanwhile, a young fortune seeker (John
Cusack) and his shady parnter (Michael Lerner) attempt to cash in on
the health craze with their own corn flake.
     THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE opens promisingly enough, with a funny scene
of a group of women undergoing "laugh therapy."  It's delightfully
silly, but it isn't long before it becomes clear that such silliness is
about all there is to THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE.  It's a classic one-joke
film, all based on the outrageous Rube Goldberg health contraptions to
which the guests at the sanitarium are subjected.
     Actually, it may be more accurate to think of THE ROAD TO
WELLVILLE's one joke in broader terms, as the tittering variations on
an R-rated farce.  At one time or another, all of the following are
used as punch lines:  vomit, flatulence, sex, bare breasts,
masturbation, erections, enemas, urine and feces.  I'm hard pressed to
come up with anything they might have missed.  It's not that none of
the gags are amusing; some of them are.  But over two hours of such
material truly tests one's patience.
     That running time seems particularly long because screenwriter and
director Alan Parker lets his narrative wander all over the place.  The
sub-plot featuring Cusack and Lerner as a couple of hucksters
attempting to hitch their wagon to Kellogg's estranged son George
(Carvey) seems intended as a counterpoint to the sanitarium, simply
taking advantage of health obsession on a different scale.  But there
isn't anything interesting going on in that sub-plot, except watching
Cusack take a lot longer than it takes us to figure out that his
partner is a fraud.  Then there is a bizarre series of flashbacks
showing Kellogg dealing with the extremely odd behavior of a
10-year-old George.  While they may be meant to humanize Kellogg,
they're really just one more case of where judicious editing might have
benefited the film.
     As with almost everything in THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE, the acting is
almost universally too broad, probably as an attempt to disguise the
fact that there may not be a single genuinely interesting character in
the bunch.  Hopkins' Kellogg is a buck-toothed cartoon, a health
evangelist selling salvation via the bowels, but he's never a real
person.  Matthew Broderick is good in a rare adult role, but he's stuck
with every actor's bugaboo, the drunk scene, as is Cusack.  And Carvey,
naturally, mugs shamelessly.  Only John Neville and Camryn Manheim, as
a pair of older patrons who befriend Will and Eleanor respectively,
bring any kind of human warmth to their roles.  They are all surrounded
by marvelous sets, and are well-photographed by Peter Biziou, but
Parker hasn't given them any clear sense of exactly why they are making
this movie.  For a story that's supposed to be a satire, THE ROAD TO
WELLVILLE ends up mostly as a parody of itself.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Anthony Hopkins, Matthew Broderick, Bridget Fonda, John Cusack,
Dana Carvey, Colm Meaney, Lara Flynn Boyle.
The Road To Wellville is one big mess of a movie. There are three seperate
story lines throughout the film and none of them come together at the end.
The main story involves Broderick and Fonda who come to the Battle Creek
Sanitarium, a "health" resort run by the inventor of the corn flake, Dr.
John Henry Kellogg (Hopkins). Another plot involves John Cusack trying to
start a rival breakfast food company and still another involves Kellogg's
son (Carvey) who keeps terrorizing his father and the people at the
sanitarium.
Broderick's character is subjected to all sorts of strange "health"
contraptions, which allow him to do what he does best, the normal guy in a
strange situation (see also: The Cable Guy, The Freshman, and Biloxi Blues).
It's his reactions to what's going on around him that make the movie, and
the entire film should have been about him and his experiences.
What we get instead are things that I can't imagine anyone caring about.
These things include: vomiting, endless fart jokes, gratuitous naked fat
people, gratuitous sexual discussions by naked fat people, masterbation,
talk about masterbation, mud, and unfaithful spouses. Also, the ending is
unsatisfying. However, there is good score music and as I said earlier,
Broderick's character is amusing. But overall, steer clear of The Road To
Wellville. D:Alan Parker.
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
Please visit my movie reviews web site at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
You'll be glad you did.

Author
Eric Grossman
     Here is a new topic for a talk show: why good filmmakers make the
wrong movies.  Alan Parker, a very talented director who is responsible
for such films as BUGSY MALONE, ANGEL HEART and THE COMMITMENTS, should
be the headlining guest so we can ask what possessed him to make THE
ROAD TO WELLVILLE.
     I'm sure it looked good on paper.  Based on T. C. Boyle's novel and
adapted by Parker, THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE takes place at the Battle
Creek Sanitarium where Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, inventor of the corn
flake and peanut butter, has developed innumerable, bizarre and mostly
quack methods to improve one's health.  As played by Anthony Hopkins,
Kellogg looks like a buck-toothed Teddy Roosevelt and to say he has an
anal fixation would be a gross understatement. A sample piece of
Kellogg's dialogue. "My own stools, Sir, are gigantic, and have no more
odor than a hot biscuit."  How you feel about that line will probably
give you an idea of whether or not you will like THE ROAD TO
WELLVILLE.  Hopkins is good in his role as Kellogg, but despite the
outrageousness of the part, this will not be one of his most memorable
characters.
     Bridget Fonda and Matthew Broderick also turn in decent but
forgettable performances as Eleanor and Will Lightbody, a couple who go
to the "San" to help save their marriage.  Will, who has a bad stomach,
is the film's guinea pig as he goes from one awful treatment to the
next.  Yogurt enemas, bath's with electric current running through
them, and intestinal surgery are just a few of the treats Kellogg has
in store to cure poor Will.
     John Cusack plays Charles Ossining, a young entrepreneur who has
taken his aunt's money to start his own corn flake company.  Problems
arise, however, when his business partner, Goodloe Bender (Michael
Lerner) turns out to be a con-man.  This subplot is completely
unnecessary to the film and slows it down.
     To round out the cast, Dana Carvey plays the mischievous George
Kellogg, one of Dr. Kellogg's forty-two children.  Some of the
film's best moments are the flashbacks of young George and his father.
For no apparent reason, George continually defies his father, driving
the household crazy.  Finally, Dr. Kellogg begs George to stop, which
he does, by dropping his coat on the floor.
     If it were not for these types of moments, THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE
would have been mostly intolerable.  The other saving grace is the
captivating time period.  Production designer Brian Morris and costumer
Penny Rose re-create turn of the century America with enough detail to
make us feel we are there.  We don't have time machines but this will
do for now.  The lighting by Peter Biziou and Gerry Hambling's editing
are top-notch, making this a film of the highest production value.
Parker's direction is as sharp as ever, however, his screenplay drags
and fails to pay off in a gratifying manner.
     The final redeeming attribute is the cinematic documentation of
the erroneous philosophies for good health in the early part of this
century.  When these absurd treatments are performed before our eyes,
we cringe with the thought of how the people of the time could have
been so foolish.  Then again, just recently, there was a book published
that dealt with the benefits of drinking one's urine.  Perhaps in the
next century, someone will make a movie showing how ludicrous many of
our current techniques for better health actually are.  I hope it is
better than this film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Matthew Broderick, Bridget Fonda,
           John Cusack, Dana Carvey, Camryn Manheim, Lara Flynn Boyle, 
           Traci Lind, Michael Lerner 
Director: Alan Parker 
Producers: Alan Parker, Armyan Bernstein, and Robert F. Colesberry 
Screenplay: Alan Parker based on the novel by T. Coraghessan Boyle 
Cinematography:  Peter Biziou 
Music: Rachael Portman 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE dares to ask the question "When approached
from the perspective of a period piece with a 'name' cast, can
flatulence be funny?"  Unfortunately for those stuck in the audience,
it also provides the answer.  For, while it's entirely possible to get
a laugh or two out of this sort of relentless scatological humor,
there's a point at which the bodily function jokes stop amusing and
start aggravating.  In THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE, this happens about thirty
minutes into the film, which is bad news because there's still an hour
and a half to go.
     Writer/director Alan Parker has designed this story, set in 1907
at the Battle Creek Sanitarium, as a satire on all sorts of health and
wellness issues.  Frequently, however, his more biting statements get
swamped by "toilet humor."  There's only so much about the bowels that
any audience can take - and here we get our fill, and more:  "The
bowels are born again," "The bowels are our passage to health," "Clean
thoughts make for clean bowels," and "Clean bowels make for clean
thoughts."  All that, and enemas too.
     The film follows two parallel, yet rarely convergent plots.  The
first involves the arrival of Will and Eleanor Lightbody (Matthew
Broderick and Bridget Fonda) to the sanitarium run by Dr. John Kellogg
(Anthony Hopkins).  Neither of them is "well", and they've come for
"the cure."  Will's condition is immediately diagnosed as critical, and
he's put into the care of the young and sexy Nurse Graves (Traci
Lind).  His treatment involves frequent enemas, electro-shock baths,
and flagellation.
     Arriving on the same train as Will and Eleanor is a young
entrepreneur named Charles Ossining (John Cusack), who has come to
Battle Creek, the "cereal bowl of the world", to manufacture corn
flakes.  He quickly learns, however, that his partner (Michael Lerner)
is more interested in living high off the hog than getting any real
work done.
     Why this second, generally irrelevant subplot was included at all
in THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE is a question to ponder.  Not only does it
draw out an already-overlong film, but it never dovetails with the
primary storyline.  When Charles eventually shows up at the sanitarium,
we expect some sort of closure, but nothing really happens.
     THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE suffers from a case of reverse momentum.
The first half-hour, which is moderately entertaining, passes
relatively quickly.  After that, however, the story's progression
decelerates as tedium and inertia set in.  By the end, it's hard to
believe that you've only been in the theater for two hours.  It seems
significantly longer.
     The presence of Anthony Hopkins does not guarantee a good movie
(even those with short memories may recall the disastrous FREEJACK, in
which he played the villain), as is illustrated here.  With buck teeth
and wire-rimmed spectacles, Hopkins invests a fair amount of energy in
his portrayal of Dr. Kellogg, but nevertheless ends up seeming much
like that part of the anatomy that THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE is
overly-enamored with.
     Dana Carvey and John Cusack are totally superfluous, and Matthew
Broderick and Bridget Fonda are hopelessly out-of-place (they seem like
modern-day refugees gamely trying to cope with being dropped
unexpectedly into an era ninety years in the past).  Fine actors such
as Colm Meaney and John Neville are wasted in insignificant roles.
     Ultimately, THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE is just too long and pointless.
It's a film without direction, and the script appears less concerned
with coherence than with how to get a cheap laugh from a body noise.
Surprisingly, considering Alan Parker's involvement in the high-voltage
THE COMMITMENTS, this picture is sadly lacking in energy.  A more apt
title might be THE ROAD TO DULLSVILLE.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Shane Burridge
One-of-a-kind comedy by Alan Parker.  It boasts Anthony Hopkins at his 
most eccentric and appears to be an attempt to redefine the screen 
presentation of toilet humor - because nearly every moment of the story 
is devoted to a body function or orifice.  Story is set at the turn of 
the century, when the popularity of Dr John Kellogg's new breakfast 
food, corn flakes, was part of a society fad for health and fitness.  
Two storylines look at both sides of the craze - the main one has 
Matthew Broderick, who has chronic indigestion, checking into Kellogg's 
sanitarium with wife Bridget Fonda.  The second story follows attempts 
of John Cusack and Michael Lerner to break into the lucrative 
health-food market.  We take our morning cereal so much for granted that 
we don't think twice about the impact that the novelty of 'breakfast 
food' might have had on its first appearance.  Although he doesn't state 
it as such, Parker uses this idea to lampoon similar health crazes of 
contemporary times - the Victorian sensibility of going through personal 
suffering for a cleaner mind and body doesn't seem too far removed from 
the high-tech torture equipment of your local gym.  
Delivering one hilarious organic metaphor after another, Hopkins makes 
for a spirited Kellogg.  Every one of his scenes is a delight, 
especially those in which he confronts his rebellious, filthy son Dana 
Carvey - easily the biggest flake he was ever responsible for.  The 
flashback scenes to their early family life are highlights.  Kellogg's 
clinic puts every idea into practice - colonic irrigation, 
vegetarianism, aerobics, dietary restriction, mineral baths, surgery, 
and sexual abstinence.  As if that isn't enough, some of the female 
clients opt to undergo a highly suspect 'therapeutic massage' by a 
neighboring German physician.  Film is consistently entertaining, but 
nevertheless overlong.  It wouldn't have made much difference if the 
Cusack sub-plot had been cut entirely.  As with most comedies, this one 
is an acquired taste.  You may have to chew it over 23 times before 
swallowing.


Author
Ben Hoffman
     Everyone has heard of Kellogg's Corn Flakes and almost everyone
has heard of its home, Battle Creek, Michigan.  But how many knew that
John Harvey Kellogg was also a a doctor, a surgeon, inventor, owner of
a spa and a crusader for "biological living?"  Not only did he invent
corn flakes but he also invented peanut butter and the electric
blanket.  Aside from that, he was a flamboyant flake.
     Some of his proclamations are, to say the least, very much out of
the mainstream of medicine.  "The liver is the only thing standing
between the smoker and death.  Sex is the sewer drain of a healthy
body."  As a strict practitioner of vegetarianism he would often tell
his audience at San (Sanitarium) that "My own stools are gigantic and
have no more odor than a hot biscuit.  An erection is a flagpole on
your grave."
     Will Lightbody (Matthew Broderick) who has been feeling sickly (he
is not getting enough sex) is induced by his wife, Eleanor (Bridget
Fonda), to come to the San for a cure.  She, herself, has been there
several times and it had, she says, done wonders for her.  Hardly has
Will been introduced to Dr Kellogg when he is whisked away to be
cleansed with a series of enemas.
     By this time the comedy is beginning to lose its humor, sinking
more and more into childish nonsense.  With a little more taste and
discretion it could have been an interesting tale about Kellogg.  It
does have a fine cast.  Anthony Hopkins as Kellogg, carrying his role
with complete abandon, is aided by John Cusack, Dana Carvey, Michael
Lerner as well as Fonda and Broderick and a host of others but to no
avail.  Director Alan Parker unfortunately did not know when to lay off
the dung and get on with the main story.  Too bad.
