Title
Review for Real Macaw, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Jamie Croft, Jason Robards, Deborra-Lee Furness, Joe Petruzzi,
John Waters
Director: Mario Andreacchio
Screenplay: Bruce Hancock and Matthew Perry
Cinematography: David Foreman
Australian theatrical release date: 17 September (Victoria and
Queensland), 24 September (other states and territories)
Even after the high expectations generated from Babe and Napoleon - two
friendly Australian pet comedies - the production team of The Real Macaw
have a good reason to be congratulated.  The screenplay by Bruce Hancock
and Matthew Perry is intelligently written so that it's accessible to
all ages, Mario Andreacchio's direction is firm but fun, the editing by
Edward McQueen-Mason leaves no room for boredom and David Foreman's
cinematography shows beautiful shots of exotic locations and urban
Australia.  And that's without mentioning the exquisite music
composition and a bunch of finely tuned performances. Indeed, The Real
Macaw is a cinematic eye opener, with enough talent attached to it to
sink the Titanic.
Mac (voice of Daniel Murphy) is a squawking talking smart alec parrot.
A 149 year old one, in fact, who lives with Benjamin Girdis (Jason
Robards), a grandpa who is fascinated by the wonders of life.  When
gramps finds himself in serious debt, his grandson Sam (Jamie Croft) and
Mac come to the rescue, in search of buried treasure in the Coral
Islands.  They are tailed every inch of the way by Dr Lance Hagan (John
Waters), a ruthless academic who will do anything to get his greasy muts
on the loot.
It doesn't take a Will Hunting to figure out where the plot ends up, as
there is only really one way it can give a rewarding pay off.  We know
that the bad guy will eventually be caught out, the parrot
(sorry...macaw) will keep on squawking and the treasure will be found.
What we don't expect is the level of maturity that Andreacchio gives to
his material; and as a consequence, the many family movie cliches are
handled not so much as formalities but simply things that happen along
the way.  This gives a loose and energetic feel to the film as it moves
swiftly, freely and amusingly along its parrot perch of finely tuned
comic capers.
Jason Robards is charming to watch, and he fulfils the requirements of
his role with a wonderful amount of vibrant talent that so obviously
comes from many years' experience.  Jamie Croft also does a good job in
his very demanding role, reacting to his winged buddy's actions with
appropriate comedy mannerisms.  Mac was played by Tango the parrot with
three stunt doubles - Tango, Harpo, Groucho and Chico.  Together, Mac
looks beautiful as a blue and gold macaw parrot, and often kept me
staring at him when I should have been taking more notice of the human
characters.  But compared to Mac, they're a pretty lifeless bunch.
Whilst it is refreshing to see an original and very worthwhile buddy
adventure, it's also refreshing to see a real family flick.  The Real
Macaw shows kids strong family values, but thankfully avoids preaching
about them.  It's a real charmer of a film, a surprising bundle of rich,
lavish cinemaand a whole lot of fun.  Here's to the production team who
gave us it all.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au
