Title
Review for Marius et Jeannette (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Yorker Films
 Director: Robert Guediguian
 Writer: Robert Guediguian & Jean-Louis Milesi
 Cast: Ariane Ascaride, Gerard Meylan, Pascale Roberts,
Jacques Boudet, Frederique Bonnal, Jean-Pierre Darroussin,
Laetitia Pesenti, Miloud Nacer, Pierre Banderet.
   Yuppies have been gloried by recent films as saviors of the
exploited ("Rainmaker") and depicted as brutal and scheming
("In the Company of Men").  Working class folks have been
portrayed as brutal and vulgar ("Nil by Mouth") and as saintly
guides to those with little hope of finding any job
("Twentyfourseven").  Robert Guediguian, who directed
"Marius and Jeannette" calling upon his own background in
Estaque, a poor, working-class district in the northern part of
Marseilles, is irresistibly sympathetic to his own class.  The
forty-five year old filmmaker put his own wife, Ariane
Ascaride, in the principal role to create a film which has
surprisingly garnered great attention in France, where three
million unemployed and a labor force increasingly anxious
about downsizing connect with a romantic fable of two lonely
people who find happiness with each other in a district only
four hours' train ride from Paris but light years away in
ambiance.  In one scene which takes place in a tony
restaurant, Guediguian portrays one professional couple as
an attractive but antiseptic pair whose conversation over wine
consists of comparing notes on debenture bonds.  The one
conspicuously working-class duo may have more anxieties
about the prices of this establishment but seem a lot happier--
just thrilled to be where they are.
   The Jeannette (Ariane Ascaride) and the Marius (Gerard
Meylan) of the story, who have the good fortune to meet each
other under less than favorable circumstances but develop a
solid bond, sometimes seem a mere background, as
Guediguian wants his viewers to capture the soul of a district
which few tourists will ever visit.  The neighborhood he
portrays may be poor, the houses shabby and in need of
paint, and the lodgings so close together that they seem
carved out of a large old home by an ambitious landlord.  But
the society of women who congregate on the stairs would not
have it any other way.  They love to chat about the men, just
as women probably do the world over, easing their jabs with
broad smiles as if to say that no matter what the faults of the
macho set, they're glad the males are around.  
   The folksy charm of the neighborhood, its ever-present hills
so typical of the colorful vicinities of Europe, is contrasted
favorably with the aseptic look of the huge supermarket where
Jeannette works as a low-paid cashier.  She is harassed
repeatedly by her boss for her failure to sit up straight as she
rolls the produce through the automated price machine, but
responds with unconcealed hostility just short of what would
get her fired.  When she has a mini-breakdown, getting on the
store microphone to exhort the customers to "buy everything--
create jobs--get useless things," she forfeits even the minimal
income she uses to support herself and her two lovely kids,
the pretty Magali (Laetitia Pescenti) and the playful Malek
(Miloud Nacer).  Caught by a guard, Marius (Gerard Meylan)
when she tries to steal paint from a cement plant, she returns
to her home, quite surprised to see this sentinel turn up
shortly thereafter with an offer to paint her house for free. 
The romance begins.
   Each time Guediguian gets us involved in the courtship, he
cuts away to illustrate the mood of the surroundings as the
women gather daily to commiserate, to laugh, and to trade
homespun philosophies. The most serious of the gang is a
sixty-ish individual who had spent time in a Nazi concentration
camp because of her communist leanings and, looking at the
economic status of capitalist France today decides that for the
most part her convictions were on the money.  One old guy,
Justin (Jacques Boudet), has been a long time dinner guest of
a woman he adores, who cooks beans for him and shares her
bottles of wine.  At one point Justin gives a couple of boys a
lecture on the evils of extremist thinking, calling
fundamentalists the sorts of people who want everyone to see
the world as a uniformly gray place.  The authenticity of the
actors is furthered by their unprofessional status.  These are
real, salt-of-the-earth people who seem more human than
those who make the political and economic decisions that
determine their fate.  The most humorous part of the film
arrives toward the end as Marius, for reasons made known
only later, suddenly leaves Jeannette, while the community
pitches in to get them together once again.
   "Marius and Jeannette" is one of those films that could be
described as pleasant enough, one without the originality that
critics are so fond of seeking, but Guediguian wears his heart
on his sleeve and has given us a tender, humorous and
sometimes biting commentary on the lives of the people with
whom he feels comfortable.  Not Rated.  Running time: 102
minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
James Sanford
"Marius and Jeannette" is one of those movies that succeeds or falls flat
depending on your response to the quirky characters screenwriters Robert
Guediguian and Jean-Louis Milesi have cooked up. If you're easily charmed by
stories featuring nutty folks playing Cupid for troubled lovers, you may
find this French comedy enchanting. If eccentricity alone doesn't usually
persuade you to buy a ticket, "Marius" is 102 missable minutes.
 The movie's saving grace is the luminous Ariane Ascaride, whose performance
here may remind you of the legendary Anna Magnani. Like Magnani, Ascaride
has an earthiness and warmth that makes her instantly endearing.
 Ascaride plays Jeannette, a mother of two who's had an inordinate amount of
bad luck with men and is barely scraping by in the depressed city of
Marseilles. When she tries to steal some paint from an abandoned cement
factory in the hopes of sprucing up her house, Jeannette runs into guard
Marius (Gerard Meylan) and before you can say "la vie en rose," a
relationship is blooming.
 Not counting on Ascaride's charm to carry the film, director Guediguian
keeps shifting away from the love story to introduce considerably less
beguiling characters, most of whom seem like refugees from some European
sitcom. Particularly disorienting is middle-aged Communist Caroline (Pascale
Roberts): One minute, she's Sophie Zawistowska, dredging up memories of her
imprisonment in a concentration camp, and the next she's Mrs. Roper, trying
to put the make on an elderly beau.
 These lovable kooks, who spend all their considerable spare time hashing
out left-wing politics, finally pool their resources to get Marius and
Jeannette together. Neighbors like these would be a strong incentive for
escaping the low-rent district and Guediguian's heavy-handedness as both
writer and director doesn't make them any easier to stomach.
 Aside from Ascaride, the only flashes of interest in "Marius and Jeannette"
are the film's observations about the French economy, in which a worker can
slip down the ladder of success much more easily than he or she can ascend.
The movie's strongest image is a tracking shot that follows Jeannette as she
makes her way to the back of a seemingly endless line of job interviewees.
That moment has a good deal more truth than anything else in this contrived
tale.
James Sanford

Author
Greg King
MARIUS AND JEANNETTE (M).  
(Gil Scrine Films)
Director: Robert Guediguian
Stars: Ariane Ascaride, Gerard Meylan, Pascale Roberts, Jacques
Boudet, Frederique Bonnal, Jean-Pierre Darroussin, Laetitia Pesenti,
Miloud Nacer
Running time: 101 minutes
(French with English subtitles).
Writer/director Robert Guediguian was born and raised in
Marseilles, and has an affinity for the tough working class area and
its characters.  Guediguian has set his previous films in this same
area, somehow finding beauty and inspiration in the harsh environment.
A contemporary romantic comedy about the relationship between two
middle aged people touched by tragedy, Marius And Jeannette is
Guediguian's seventh film, but the first to be released locally.
This enormously appealing film has no real plot to speak of,
but is driven along by its wonderful cast of characters.
Jeannette (beautifully played by the director's wife Ariane
Ascaride) has been scarred by tragedy all her life.  Her father died
when she was nine, and she has lost two husbands.  One died in an
accident, the other walked out on the family and never returned.
However, she has a feisty, uncompromising attitude and tackles life on
her terms.  She has raised her two children, and worked a succession
of thankless jobs to pay the bills.  Marius (Gerard Meylan) is a shy
gentle giant who works as a security guard at the local cement works,
which are being demolished to make way for new developments.  He also
carries around with him the tragic loss of a wife and two children,
although his grief has been bottled up inside.
This lonely and scarred pair meet after Jeannette scales a
fence at the dilapidated concrete factory to steal a couple of paint
cans.  Marius drives her away, but the next day shows up at her place
with a couple of cans and an apology for his rough attitude.  He helps
Jeannette paint the house, and a strong affection develops between the
pair.  However, they have to overcome their own personal demons before
they can be truly happy.
There is plenty of advice and support for Jeannette from her
eccentric ensemble of neighbours, who share a courtyard.  While this
charming obviously concentrates on the developing romance between
Marius and Jeannette, Guediguian also devotes some screen time to
exploring her colourful neighbours, who are sketched in economical
fashion.  Caroline (Pascale Roberts) is a survivor of the Nazi
concentration camps, but has a healthy appetite for life and a
generous spirit, while Justin (Jacques Boudet) is a retired teacher
who is in love with her.  Monique (Frederique Bonnal) and Dede (Jean-
Pierre Darrousin) are a married couple constantly fighting over his
radical politics.
But, at the heart of the film is an exploration of the healing
power of love, and how people find their own happiness despite the
hardships they encounter.  However, there are a few moments that
misfire - such as Justin's political discourses, which are largely
irrelevant, and an unusual bar room brawl.  There is also a delightful
running joke, in which Jeannette constantly encounters her former boss
forced to undertake a variety of menial jobs.
Guediguian always works with the same ensemble group of
actors, who bring the characters to life with compassion,
understanding and humour.  Their familiarity and easy going affinity
with his laid back style is reflected in the film's realistic and
natural style.  Meylan gives a soulful performance as the haunted
Marius, while Ascaride brings fire and verve to her role.
Marius And Jeannette is suffused with a generous spirit, a
relaxed charm, and a genuine sense of warmth.  Guediguian maintains a
gentle rhythm throughout.  The film's upbeat and optimistic nature
will strike a more responsive chord with audiences who found the
recent Gallic drama Dream Life Of Angels a little too bleak and grim
for their tastes.
