Title
Review for Buena Vista Social Club (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
Never has poverty looked more inviting than in Wim Wenders's BUENA VISTA
SOCIAL CLUB.  A documentary about Cuban music, it's also a homage to the
people of Havana and to Havana itself.  Shot on digital video with
heavily oversaturated colors, the movie shows off the city's radiant
beauty to maximum effect.
Dilapidated buildings with peeling paint are made so appealing that they
look like Paul Gauguin paintings.  The cars, being all pre-Castro
American, make the movie feel like something between a time warp and a
classic auto show.
The real attraction of the movie, however, is its concert footage,
introducing most of us to music that we've heard little of before.  With
haunting rhythms and soulful lyrics, the heartfelt songs strike an
emotional chord deep within our psyche.  From the very first note, the
music grabs the audience with a visceral intensity and never lets go.
In its heyday, all of the best bands played at the "Buena Vista Social
Club" in Havana.  The movie includes music from many of these groups.
The culmination of the picture is their 1998 Carnegie Hall concert.  The
film argues convincingly that this was their last concert together.
Given that most of the musicians are in their 70s, 80s, and 90s, the
picture probably does represent a last opportunity to see them together.
Whenever the energetic music plays, the film is sublime.  Songs of love
are among the most popular, but there are other playful ones as well.
In one, an unfortunate woman named Tula has her bedroom catch fire.
Then, again, perhaps this song was meant to be understood in metaphor.
The movie bogs down only when the music stops.  Some of the stories are
interesting, as the one in which 92-year-old Compay Segundo explains how
he came to start smoking cigars at age 5.  Others, as in the long
window-shopping episode along Broadway, are unnecessary distractions.
These non-musical segments appear with increasing frequency toward the
picture's end and almost kill the documentary's momentum.
One piece of advice to filmgoers.  When you are ready to experience this
good-spirited and infectiously happy musical documentary, choose your
theater carefully.  Only ones with adequate legroom will do.  No matter
how hard you try, your feet will prove uncontrollable from the moment
the music starts.  There is no need to punish them by confining them to
a tight enclosure.
Finally, a suggestion to theater owners.  Have copies of the CD
available for purchase in the lobby.  This will be the easiest sell you
will ever make.
BUENA VISTA SOCIAL CLUB runs 1:41.  The film has Spanish dialog and
songs, both with English subtitles.  It is not rated but would be a G as
there is nothing to offend anyone of any age.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
In "Buena Vista Social Club," Wim Wenders has made another important film.  
This story follows a group of aging Cuban musicians from their neighborhoods 
in Cuba to various concerts across the world, and finally to Carnegie Hall.  
It is a documentation of guitarist Ry Cooder's journey to Cuba to preserve a 
vanishing music, and the culture behind it.  As such, "Buena Vista Social 
Club" serves one of the more noble functions of documentary films.
The most watchable dimension of the film is the music.  Anyone would want to 
own the soundtrack of this film.  Hearing the guitar of 90 year-old Compay 
Segundo, the piano of 80 year-old Ruben Gonzalez, and the voice of 70 
year-old Ibrahim Ferrer, we know the reason behind making the film.  These 
legends of Cuban music should not fade.  And when we have the opportunity to 
watch their movements and expressions as they perform, we know we are 
witnessing history.  Wenders and director of photography Jorg Widmer use 
overlapping music to seamless and astonishing effect:  many times we listen 
to an artist's performance, and then fade into an interview featuring his or 
her views on music, or Cuba, or the world.
Interviews are extensive and crucial to the narrative.  Especially 
interesting are the views of Ibrahim Ferrer, who sports a thin goatee and 
cap, and brings us into his apartment.  He speaks of various inspirations, 
and we sense the hardships he's experienced - enough to make him retire from 
singing so he might shine shoes - before his resurrection through this 
project.  Near the end, Ferrer's observations on New York are touching;  the 
man's consideration of others, his lack of arrogance, his suave singing 
voice - these make him the leading man of the movie.  Others are almost as 
interesting.  Mr. Segundo tells of being five years old and lighting his 
grandmother's cigars.  (He confesses to having smoked for 85 years!)  We are 
also treated to the words of Ruben Gonzalez, who was able to record his 
first solo album at age 77.  There's an irresistible scene in which Mr. 
Gonzalez plays his piano for a group of small girls in a huge Havana dance 
studio.
Through seeing the decaying infrastructure and transportation of Cuba, we 
conceive a better understanding of the conditions of its people.  Hence we 
better comprehend what these musicians have survived, what obstacles they 
have  faced, in order to keep their music alive.  It's worth commenting that 
not once do we hear a bitter comment about the political situations 
responsible for the crumbling buildings surrounding these vibrant people.
Mixing clever storytelling techniques - like a series of nifty "steadicam" 
shots that encircle the musicians - with implicit awe for these special 
styles of music, "Buena Vista Social Club" stands out as a non-fiction film. 
  In short, it makes the viewer want to visit Cuba hoping that maybe, just 
maybe a place like the Buena Vista Social Club still exists.


Author
Dennis Schwartz
BUENA VISTA SOCIAL CLUB (director/writer: Wim Wenders; cinematographer:
Jorg Widmer; cast: Compay Segundo, Eliades Ochoa, Ry Cooder, Joachim
Cooder, Ibrahim Ferrer, Ruben Gonzalez, Barbarito Torres, Omara
Portuondo, Julio Alberto Fernández, Pío Leyva, 1999-Ger.)
Wim Wenders (The End of Violence, Paris, Texas, Lisbon Story) made the
very touching documentary Buena Vista Social Club in collaboration with
guitarist Ry Cooder, who had found the aging musicians in Cuba, in 1996,
musicians neglected after Castro came to power. They range in age from
the 60s to the 90s, as they play the music they recorded in the '40s and
'50s. The Buena Vista Social Club (Nonesuch), an album of the 14 Cuban
musicians became such a hit, that it sold a million copies and also won
a Grammy. The movie is a mixture of their music, lifestyles, and an
apolitical, quick peek at an impoverished Havana. It is done in a
wonderfully nostalgic manner, as Wenders becomes an admiring fan of
theirs, allowing us to see how humble and human these most talented
musical souls are.
We start out at their 2 day concert in Amsterdam, then go back to Havana
and see them free associate and tell something candid about themselves,
including their biography, and then we go to their finale concert in
Carnegie Hall, New York.
Wenders has done a good job highlighting them, though I would have liked
to have seen more of their music as performed in Carnegie Hall, instead
of seeing an overabundance of shots showing how well they were received
there and how appreciative they were of that rousing welcome.
Ibrahim Ferrer is the mellifluous sounding 70-year-old singer, who was
shining shoes all these years before being part of Cooder's tremendous
coup. "If we followed the way of possessions," he says, "we'd have been
gone a long time ago." He has faith in a walking stick his dead mother
left him some 50 years ago, as a source of luck. The 92-year-old cigar
factory roller and cigar smoking guitarist, Compay Segundo, tries
unsuccessfully but with some amusement to find where the Club they once
played in existed. Segundo boasts of being the father of five and
playfully says he still hopes to sire a sixth child.Tearful joy fills
the eyes of the 69-year-old Omara Portuondo, as she sings the bolero
Silencia in a duet with Ferrer, which takes place in a recording studio.
Ruben Gonzalez, the 77-year-old, who some in the group think, might be
one of the very best pianists in the world, as he rises to the challenge
in Carnegie Hall, smiling effusively with a warm glow covering him, as
he basks in the applause he receives. He didn't even own a piano before
the film was made. Barbarito Torres, who is much younger than the
others, plays his unique 12-string lute-like Arabian instrument called
the laud, while the camera records the decaying paint on the seaside
buildings and the sensual music played recalls a grand past that no
longer exists.
Can such music make a dilapidated Cuba bearable? It sure seems that way,
as there is a consuming joy that sweeps across those who come into
contact with these naive but friendly souls. Their genuine camaraderie
for each other and love of country and gentleness, shines through as
much as all the wonderful music they play.
In Carnegie Hall, they sing that lively song entitled "El Cuarto de
Tula", with the words:  "Fire! Fire! I'm burning up. Call the fireman!
Tula's room is all ablaze!" As their performance goes on, Wenders
follows three of the group into Manhattan, as they look up at the tall
buildings in awe and gravitate to a tacky souvenir store, where
celebrities and U.S. presidents as statues, are greatly admired by the
childlike musicians, who are having the time of their life, wandering
down Seventh Avenue and feeling so elated at seeing the Radio City Music
Hall. They tell each other, it doesn't get any better than this.
I wonder how much longer Castro's Communist Revolution will go on! It's
an obvious failure, as even these great musicians were not recognized by
the Cuban government; it took an outsider to do it. Near the film's end,
the camera pans back to Havana and a banner proclaims "We believe in
dreams."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Frankie Paiva
Recently, there have been a couple of films that bring us into a world of music
that we have never heard before. Genghis Blues followed the story of a blind
man who's visit to Tuva, for the throat-singing championships was funny and
heartfelt. The Buena Vista Social Club is a touching look into the world of
aging Cuban musicians, and the poor country that they live in.
The Buena Vista Social Club is a large group of Cuban music makers. Each of
them have very special lives that the film documents. The main singer (Ferrer)
lives in a small rundown apartment and is best friend's with the woman he sings
with. He's hesitant when someone asks him to record an album, but he eventually
does it. The piano player had arthritis and hadn't even owned a piano in over
ten years before he joined the club. The guitar player has always wanted to do
a record on Cuban musicians.
The film documents the different, touching lives that these people live, and
focuses mainly on their talent. A great deal of performances of different songs
are included in the film, whose Grammy winning soundtrack is making a comeback
for Cuban music. But another thing the film shows is how nice of a place Cuba
really could be. The desolate streets and hot climates could easily be made
into a huge tourist vacation. I know that this review is very short, but there
isn't much that I can say about the film, because there really aren't any basic
plotlines. If your looking for an interesting little documentary, I suggest you
go see The Buena Vista Social Club, which gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: The film is rated G, but some younger kids won't understand
what's going on. Good Age 10 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Artisan Entertainment/Road Movies
 Director:  Wim Wenders
 Cast: Ry Cooder, Ibrahim Ferrer, Compay Segundo, Ruben
Gonzalez, Pio Leyva, Manuel "Puntillita" Licea, Eliades
Ochoa, Omara Portuondo
   In the long-running musical "Sunset Boulevard," Norma
Desmond, an aging, has-been actress, misinterprets a call
she receives from Cecil B. DeMille's office.  Thinking that her
long-dormant movie career is about to take off, she heads for
the great man's studio, again full of herself, only to be shot
down.  Nobody wants you when you're old and gray, unless
your name is Gloria Stuart.
   This is true even in Cuba, where a forty-year ethos of so-
called communist equality does not mean celebrity status can
be counted on forever.  Take a marvelous group of singers
and instrumentalists, mainly now in their seventies and
eighties and even beyond.  The group were largely forgotten
until guitarist Ry Cooder--noted for composing the soundtrack
for Win Wenders's unconventional movie "The End of
Violence"--went to Havana to record an album with these
former greats.  The record, entitled "Buena Vista Social
Club,"  sold a million copies and prompted the celebrated
director to travel to Havana to join Cooder next time around.  
As the aging musicians, called by the film crew the Super-
Abuelos," step up to the microphones to record, we get the
feeling that they had not interrupted their calling for a single
day--they are that much at ease with melodious instruments,
both vocal and mechanical.  Wenders follows the crew
around the streets of Havana with side trips to towns like
Santiago, recreating the youths of the musicians now given a
new lease on life.  As we in the United States--for the most
part either discouraged or downright banned from traveling to
that communist-governed island--see the dilapidated but
vibrant streets of that proud nation, we become caught up in
the stories that the performers tell of their greener days while
admiring the joie de vivre of the ordinary people who
enthusiastically mug for the camera.
   Box Office Magazine may have pushed the envelope a bit
when its critic, Wade Major, called this "One of the most
beautiful and poetic documentaries ever made."  (How many
has he seen?) But the film has quite a bit going for it,
principally its structure.  Rather than numb the viewers by a
talking-heads, Q&A with interviewers, Wenders allows each
personality to speak for himself or herself, free-associating
without the intrusive presence of a formal exchange.  Even
better, Wenders allows the music to speak for itself.  This
social club is not made up of now raspy-voice, halting
performers that could remind you of the embarrassing
moments on the Ed Sullivan show when octogenarians
attempted to dance until their breaths ran out.  These people
are so good that they fully justify the standing ovations they
received during their climactic trip to New York at a sold-out
show at Carnegie Hall.  Ibrahim Ferrer, the Santiago-born 70-
year-old singer, knocks out silky renditions of Cuban rhythms.
Close your eyes and you'll think Nat King Cole.  The 90-year-
old, Siboney-born Compay Segundo ("I've been a cigar
smoker for 85 years") endows the film with its opening
humor, as he rides around in the back seat of an aging
convertible asking the local Havana folk facetiously to direct
him to the Buena Vista Social Club.  Compay, who was born
Francisco Repilado, not only continues to strum up a storm
but is credited with inventing his own instrument, the
armonico, a seven-string guitar.  The 80-year-old Ruben
Gonzales does a remarkable job playing piano for the group, 
involving the audience further by reminiscing about his first
piano, essentially the great love of his life.  Omara
Portuondo, the one female of the group, sings a
heartbreaking solo with Ferrer, demonstrating a chemistry
with the man that Hollywood romances would have a tough
time beating.  
   The one song, gratefully repeated by the entire company,
begins with the words "Fire! Fire! I'm burning up.  Call the
fireman!  Tula's room is all ablaze!"  Wenders, who uses
footage from Amsterdam, New York, L.A., and Berlin as well
as Cuba, has us believing this literally, as he conveys the
bliss that each ripened entertainer feels during this musical
feast.
