Title
Review for Lolita (1962)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
Contemporary media are flooded with images of young, often
adolescent, girls (and boys), who are sometimes not so
subtly presented as desirable sexual objects. However, if
someone takes those not so subliminal messages seriously and
tries to act on them, he is usually branded as worst
possible human scum and monster. Even worse things happen to
those who try make books or movies in which they try to
present that problem from the perspective of such monsters.
If such reaction could be expected in our, presumably more
liberal, time we could only imagine the difficulties that
faced the authors of similar books and films few decades
ago. Taking this into account, we must really appreciate the
bravery of Russian emigre author Vladimir Nabokov. In 1955
he risked his reputation with his novel LOLITA, novel that
described obsession of middle-aged intellectual with 12-year
old girl. Seven years later, the literary world was still
recovering from the shock when another great artist showed
the same bravery. Stanley Kubrick took almost impossible
task of adapting this controversial novel for the silver
screen, and the result was one of the landmark events in
history of cinema.
Plot of the film deals with Professor Humbert Humbert
(played by James Mason), European writer who came to America
after WW2. Before he takes teaching position in one of
American colleges, Humbert would like to spend summer in
small resort town of Ramsdale, New Hampshire. He rents the
room in the home of Charlotte Haze (played by Shelley
Winters), widow who is obviously attracted to cultivated
European. Humbert, on the other hand, becomes enchanted with
her 15-year old daughter Dolores alias Lolita (played by Sue
Lyon), who seems to enjoy teasing him. After some time
Humbert decides to marry Charlotte only to remain close to
the object of his affection. This bizarre love triangle is
crushed when Charlotte finds Humbert's secret diary in which
he described his true feelings. Unable to confront mind-
shattering discovery, Charlotte runs on the street and gets
killed by a car. Humbert is now free to have his way with
Lolita and use his role of stepfather in order to become her
lover. But his idyllic life and relationship would be
threatened by group of mysterious people that seem to be
connected to television writer Clare Quilty (played by Peter
Sellers).
Although Nabokov himself wrote the screenplay and although
he praised the film in later interviews, many fans of the
novel accuse Kubrick of unfaithfulness to the film's
literary source. Many of those people forget that the best
novels are often very difficult or almost impossible to be
faithfully adapted for the screen, and that Kubrick, like
any other sensible filmmaker, had to make some serious
changes in the material and re-write Nabokov's original 400
page screenplay in order to make it filmable. During such
re-writes Kubrick also had to take censorship into account;
some changes had to be made in order to accommodate the
producers and conservative segments of the audience. The
most important in all those changes was the decision to
raise the age of Lolita from 12 to 15, thus making her
relationship with Humbert somewhat more acceptable for 1960s
standards. Kubrick thus made the film more acceptable for
censors, and LOLITA today seems rather tame. But the
promotional tagline "How did they ever make a movie of
Lolita?" was quite on the spot in its time, because it was
one of the first Hollywood films that tackled the issue of
erotic obsession and unconventional sexuality.
One of the reasons why the public accepted LOLITA was in
Kubrick's approach to Nabokov's material. Kubrick in all of
his classic films liked to present People As They Are, and
not People As They Should Be. Troubled characters of the
novel and writer's often-sarcastic observations about
post-WW2 America were perfect for Kubrick's trademark
cynicism. So, instead of moralising or presenting the events
of the novel as mind-shattering tragedy, Kubrick simply
turned LOLITA into dark comedy. All major characters in the
novel are deeply tragic, yet in Kubrick's vision they are
also very funny. The script equipped them with lines full of
double entendres, but Kubrick also makes us laugh with his
superb directorial skills. Almost any scene is elaborately
staged, with great care for the details that reveal much
about characters and things that they couldn't do or say on
the 1960s screen. The movie takes place in America, but
Kubrick used exclusively English locations. The audience,
thanks to suggestive black-and-white photography by Oswald
Morris, doesn't notice it, and this is another proof of
Kubrick's talent. Another example of such talent is the way
Kubrick turned producer's meddling of screenplay into
advantage - the producers insisted that the last scene of
the novel had to be shown in the beginning in order to
initially show the protagonist as cold-blooded murderer and
thus prevent any sympathies for him in the rest of the film.
Kubrick, instead, used this opportunity to make characters
more tragic - the audience know that they are doomed and all
their actions have a flavour of Greek tragedy laced with
misanthropy and black humour.
However, the most memorable element of the film is in its
characters and actors playing them. Sue Lyon, who plays
Lolita, was 16 years old during the production and that is
probably movie's only major flaw. Her figure - which is
quite evident in the scenes like her introduction to
Humbert, when she tans herself on the lawn, wearing skimpy
bikini - is somewhat too developed for someone we usually
associate with paedophiles' dark objects of desire. Lyon
tries to compensate that by playing Lolita as immature
annoying brat trapped in the body of grown woman, and,
later, as clever teaser and manipulator. Lyon's talent is
enhanced with infantile, yet somewhat menacing musical theme
by Bob Harris that plays constantly in background. Another
great performance is given by Shelley Winters, whose role
seems somewhat similar to the role she had played in
Laughton's NIGHT OF THE HUNTER. Similarity is mostly in the
terms of sexual frustration; in this film Winters is quite
successful in portraying obnoxious and shallow woman, whose
pathetic attempts to show herself as educated and cultivated
cause many laughs among intellectuals within film's
audience. Although Shelley Winters became somewhat typecast
after this film, her performance is great; her character
might be poster girl for misogyny, but we still pity her.
James Mason as Humbert Humbert has more scenes, since the
story is being told from his POV, but he fares no better in
the end. Mason portrays this cultivated, mild- mannered
gentleman from aristocratic Europe as being equally affected
by dark desires and perversions as the rest of society.
Contrast between his noble outside image (and the fact that
he remains desirable sexual object for females despite being
middle-aged) and his downright pathetic actions bring a lot
of dark humour to this film. However, the man who stole the
film is Peter Sellers as Clare Quilty. Sellers does wonders
with the character reduced to nothing more than dark,
menacing presence in the novel, making him vulgar,
unscrupulous but intelligent and finally superior to
old-school Humbert. Sellers also used this opportunity to
experiment by playing the same character in three different
incarnations, which would, later lead to the great multiple
roles in Kubrick's DOCTOR STRANGELOVE. Many people like to
criticise Sellers' multiple appearances in the film as too
distracting, but his presence actually contributes to film's
ironic tone.
The biggest flaw of LOLITA is perhaps the fact that it
wasn't made ten or fifteen years later, when the attitudes
towards depiction of sex or taboo subjects like paedophilia
and incest were more liberal (when Louis Malle made few
brave excursions into such dark area). However, Kubrick made
excellent film even in such circumstances, and today's
audience may still enjoy it, which is another proof of its
timeless quality. LOLITA also became one of those great
films that have the rare privilege of having been remade in
satisfactory fashion by Adrian Lyne in 1997.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In 1962 the great director Stanley Kubrick (SPARTACUS, DR.
STRANGELOVE, 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY, A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, and BARRY
LYNDON) made a movie of the controversial best seller LOLITA.  Although
this year Adrian Lyne will be releasing his version with Melanie
Griffith as the Charlotte Haze, Jeremy Irons as Humbert Humbert, Frank
Langella as Clare Quilty and Dominique Swain as Lolita Haze, this
review is of Kubrick's 1962 version.
     Censorship was much stronger in 1962.  If you wanted to release
pictures into places other than art houses, you had to have the
Industry's seal on it.  In order to get it, Kubrick toned down a story
of love between an middle-aged man and a young teen so much that the
movie is more about murder and comedy than any sexual deviation.  In
fact the movie as filmed is so tame that it would almost certainly get
a PG-13 rating today.  The raunchiest scene is one of Lolita setting on
the lawn by herself in a not particularly revealing bikini.
     LOLITA is based on the best selling novel by Vladimir Nabokov.
The book was labeled pornography by many at the time, and most movie
studios did not care to have anything to do with it.  Kubrick decided
to make it into a movie, but he wanted the seal so he completely
reworked the story and got the seal.  This was made easier by his
throwing away most of the material in the screenplay attempt, more of a
tome actually, by the author.
     The plot of the book is reasonably straightforward, but Kubrick's
change to start off at the ending makes it feel more complicated than
it is.  Basically the movie is about a 40ish novelist with the strange
double name of Humbert Humbert (James Mason) who comes to live one
summer in a rented room in Charlotte Haze's (Shelley Winters) house.
     Living with single Mrs. Haze is her fourteen year old daughter
Lolita (Sue Lyon).  For poor Sue Lyon this was the only decent film she
ever made.  She would latter appear in such classic roles as Linda in
EVEL KNIEVEL (1971).  In LOLITA she is great as a bored teen who lets
her boredom get her into big trouble.  Both Mason and Lyon demonstrate
the consequences of a lack of morals.  Lyon does it with a who-cares
attitude; Mason with heavy angst.  Both are highly effective.  Combine
this with Kubrick's black comedy rendition of the story as well as his
Hitchcockian touch of suspense and the movie becomes quite compelling.
Notice too how Kubrick has the adults all drinking so heavily you can
see that alcoholism is one source of their problems.
     Also in the film is a strange screenwriter with an equally unusual
name, Clare Quilty (Peter Sellers).  Sellers acting in the role is one
that many critics like, but I found overboard.  He goes too much for
the heavy comedy for my taste, and I found scenes with him in it
grating on my nerves.  Overall, I wish Kubrick had cast someone else.
Speaking of casting, Tuesday Weld was considered for the role of
Lolita, but she reportedly turned it down.  I think she would have been
perfect for it.
     The dialog is excellent.  Typical is a riposte between Humbert and
Charlotte.  She asks him, "Do you believe in God?"  His immediate reply
is, "The question is does God believe in me?"  Later, in a nice little
line, Mason explains how, "The best men all shave twice a day."
     If you judge the movie by today's freer standards and ignore most
of the actions and contrivances that Kubrick had to go through, the
film could seem a bit trite.  If you approach it with an open mind, the
movie can seen to be a deserving member in the body of work of a master
director.  Other than Sellers's acting and Mason's silly vaudevillian
style routine with a folding bed that had no place in the movie, I
liked it all.
     Technically the film is interesting as well.  The black and white
footage by Oswald Morris is quite dramatic.  Many scenes have Humbert's
car moving down a road with dramatic music (Nelson Riddle) playing to
highlight the importance of the journey.
     LOLITA runs a bit long at 2:32.  I think the material would have
been more effect with tighter editing.  The picture is unrated, but
given there is no sex or nudity and the little violence is not very
graphic, I think it would actually get a PG-13 today.  If you did not
know the story, this version of the movie is so ambiguous that one
could easily assume that Lolita's relationship with Humbert is merely
platonic.  The film should be fine for any teenager.  I recommend the
picture to you.  I look forward to the new Lolita by Lyne and hope I
get invited to the press screening.  This 1962 version gets *** in my
book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Stanley Kubrick
Writer: Vladmir Nabokov (adapted from his novel)
Starring: James Mason, Sue Lyon, Shelly Winters, Peter Sellers
"How did they ever make a movie like 'Lolita?'" said the posters for the
1962 Kubrick adaptation of the raunchy novel by Vladmir Nabokov of the same
name.  After reading it, I wondered the same thing.  Here's a novel dealing
with the sexual obsession a middle-aged man has for a 14-year old "nymphet"
with the eponomys name, and in the early 60s, a film is being made from it.
 To readers of the novel, this means an unfaithful adaptation to adhere to
the early 60s censors, which the film does.  Anyone looking for a faithful
adaptation should wait for the new one directed by Adrian Lynne to find an
American distributor.
But as unfaithful as it is the novel, "Lolita" is surprisingly remarkable. 
It has a kind of weird comic feel to it, with small chuckles coming out of
scenes that are funny because of character, not situation.  And it has a
kind of Sophoclean depth to it, mostly due to a structure that was forced
upon the film by the distributors.  The first scene of the film is the last
chapter of the novel: our protagonist, Humbert Humbert (played with
brilliance by James Mason, who you may remember as the head villain in
Hitchcock's "North by Northwest"), goes to kill the object of his hatred,
the man who stole his Lolita from him, Claire Quilty (Peter Sellars).  This
was done because the distributors wanted Humbert Humbert to seem like a
murderer before he's a pedophile.  But it instead gives a brilliant scope
of fate to it.  Like Oedpius, Humbert Humbert is forced to live a tragic
life, his tragic flaw being his obsession with Lolita.
The novel by Vladmir Nabokov is a brilliantly written novel, told from the
perspective of Humbert Humbert himself (maybe revealing a bit about
Nabokov...), and filled with clever word play much like James Joyce.  The
novel is the journals of Humbert upon seeing everything in his life, and
being a writer, Humbert has a sardonic, pretentious wit about everything. 
With a narration by Humbert throughout the film, maybe the point is that
Humbert sees his future because of his lifestyle but can't change who he
is.  He's trapped to be Humbert Humbert, the pedophile.
The plot deals with Humbert who moves to America to write and get a
teaching job, and ends up staying with in a big house owned by the
eccentric, overbearing, sexual-crazed, nightmare mother, Charlotte Haze (a
remarkably thin Shelley Winters), primarily because he sees her daughter,
Lolita (Sue Lyon, actually a little over 16), tanning in a bikini in her
garden.  The film's only flaw is its backup for Humbert, which the novel
supplies as being that he lost a childhood sweetheart to death, and she
reminds him of her.  Although this isn't a big flaw, it does make Humbert
look more like a pedophile than he is in the book.
Soon, Humbert has married Charlotte, solely so he can see Lolita more and
wait for Charlotte to die of a failing kidney she has.  But when Charlotte
discovers his diaries, which he kept for more of thrill with the situation,
she storms out and is thankfully hit by a car, killing her instantly.  He
goes off with Lolita on a road trip, and is constantly running into people
who we know is the same person: Claire Quilty from the beginning, another
pedophile writer (though this time a playwright) obsessed with Lolita.  As
the film goes on, Quilty is constantly disguising himself as various
different people: a police officer, a german psychiatrist, etc (hinting at
the kind of chameleon-like role playing Sellars would do in Kubrick's next
film, "Dr. Strangelove") in an effort to rob Lolita from Humbert, who is
pathetically trying to control her.
What's remarkable about this film is its sense of humor.  The film has a
darkly comic feel mixed with the tragic story.  It's like watching Greek
Tragedy with lots of humor in it.  Although one slapstick moment seems too
disjointed from the film (a scene involving a cot, a sleeping Lolita, and a
loud Hotel Attendant), the film maintains humor from the characters and
their nuances.  This is not a film we laugh hard at, but we do get lots of
chuckles out of just watching the characters shine do their stuff.
Stanley Kubrick has always been an amazing director, and it's easy to
dismiss this film from the other films in his oeuvre.  It lacks the scope
of many of his other films, as well as the hypnotism.  But when grading a
director's work, one must ignore all the others and concentrate on the film
as it stands alone.  It's a simple film, despite its taboo topic, and it
never lets its gimmick of a grown man in love with a teenage girl overcome
its purpose of describing a tragic character, and the situation surrounding
him.
Besides, there are so many brilliant things about it, like the gorgeous
black and white photography, showing the sadness lying within the film. 
And there are several brilliant scenes, like the opening which is among
Kubrick's most intense and funniest sequences, with a hung over and crazed
Quilty playing oblivious to Humbert's mortal threats.  Charlotte's death
scene is also brilliant, with a cruel bit humor dumped in for a better
effect.  And the final scene where Lolita explains what happened to her
after Quilty stole her and Humbert finally gives in is sad without becoming
melodratic.  Kubrick easily lets this be funny and tragic without mixing
the two elements wrong.
The acting from all is brilliant.  Sue Lyon, although looking way too old
to play the character at a young age and too young to play the character at
an older age, nails her acting, showing Lolita as a very nuanced character,
exhibiting all her childish bitchiness.  Shelley Winters is amazing,
showing a well-rounded character, and showing that back in the day, she was
actually...dare I say it, attractive.  And Peter Sellars is ingeniusly
funny in his multiple-yet-singular role, stealing many of the scenes.
But it is James Mason who really amazed me.  Despite being a crazy
pedophile, he shows Humbert Humbert as being a tragic character, and easily
gets our sympathy despite being who and what he is.  Mason is an amazing
actor, and he exhibits lots of great personality in his portrayal of
Humbert Humbert.  Scenes where he's trying to rule Lolita are priceless,
especially one where he's just embarrassed her socially, and tries to coax
her back to him.  Mason's one of the many pleasures of watching this film.
"Lolita" has been wrongly presented in history as being one of Kubrick's
underrated films, a hard-to-find masterpiece that has been wrongly bashed
by some as being unlike the novel.  But who cares if a film is unlike the
novel?  Espeically if it has the good excuse that it was the early 60s,
where a novel as frank as "Lolita" could be written, but a film as frank as
it couldn't be filmed.  Besides that, it is as tragic as any old Greek
play, only more humerous.
NOTE: Note how I didn't make one lame joke about this film's relation to
Woody Allen...oh darn...
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
