Title
Review for 12:01 (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
1993 was the year that lacked thought-provoking Hollywood
films. One of the exceptions was GROUNDHOG DAY, fantasy
comedy by Harold Ramis. Its concept - protagonist caught in
a same day for all eternity - was later used in some popular
TV shows like XENA or THE X-FILES. The concept, however,
wasn't original. It was first used in a short story by
science fiction author Richard A. Lupoff. The same story was
used in 1990 film by Jonathan Heap. Three years later,
television remake was filmed, this time directed by Jack
Sholder and written by Philip Morton.
The movie protagonist is Barry Thomas (Jonathan Silverman),
office worker who meets beautiful scientist Lisa Fredericks
(Helen Slater) and falls in love with her. But, before he
could meet her, she falls victim to uknown assassins.
Depressed, Barry goes to bar and gets drunk. Next morning,
he is surprised to see his colleagues use exactly the same
lines and doing exactly the same movements like yesterday.
When he sees Lisa alive and well, he figures that something
is very wrong. Next morning, exactly the same thing happens,
and Barry realises that he is trapped inside the time loop.
Finally, he discovers the facts that could serve as an
explanation - secret nuclear physics experiments that may
have disrupted the time-space continuum and caused the loop.
Compared with GROUNDHOG DAY, this film is disappointment. On
its own, it is more than passable piece of TV entertainment.
The story has its own internal logic (although the
pseudoscientific explanation is rather lame). Jack Sholder,
director whose best film so far is 1986 SF thriller HIDDEN,
is handling this television production quite well. The
characters and situations are interesting, providing a lot
of humour. The actors are capable in their roles, although
they lack charisma (especially Jonathan Silverman). Martin
Landau, on the other hand, wasted his own in the role of
rather conventional project leader. All in all, good film
for the viewers who watch movies without too much
expectations.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
A well-meaning but bumbling clerk (Silverman) takes a shine to
one of the scientists (Slater) at his workplace but she is gunned
down in front of him.  Mysteriously, that night he is flung back
in time to replay this day endlessly.  He investigates a sinister
experiment at the heart of both the murder and his time travel.
Previously, this Richard Lupoff story was filmed as a terrific
and much blacker short feature, also called "12:01" (1990) and
starring the wonderful Kurtwood "can you fly Bobby?"  Smith.
(Highly recommended, if you can get your hands on it.)  It also
bears a close resemblance to "Groundhog Day", of which it has
been called the flipside (cv Leonard Maltin).  As the two were
released in the same year, it's difficult to see how much
influence there could have been.  But "12:01" (1993) seems to
have snipped out the noir and nihilism of "12:01" (1990) and
substituted the romanticism of "Groundhog Day" without the
morality tale aspects.
"12:01" (1993, that's this one, okay?)  lumbers itself with
enough liabilities it's a wonder it ever recovers.  Jonathan
Silverman (remember?  "Weekend at Bernies"?  1 and 2?)  attempts
to scrap up enough charisma before the bank forecloses on his
acting career.  Helen Slater ("Supergirl") wrestles with
blandness.  Martin Landau as the head of the research laboratory
is left to chew the scenery.  Add one murder plot, some
artificial urgency, a sprinkle of dumb coincidence and allow to
simmer.  Serve lukewarm.
But while "12:01" never quite lives up to its predecessor, it
manages some competence of its own.  There is a consistent logic
behind the time loop and Silverman's slow realisation of what is
going on and his subsequent reaction are scripted with some care.
(Some care.  Some dumbness and also some care.)  A modicum of
pacing and a lack of the saccharine that (for me) ruined
"Groundhog Day" helps make what could have been a disaster into a
minor but diverting story.
Wonderful it ain't, but it passes muster.  [**/ok] and one of
the better episodes of "Space 1999" on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]
