Title
Review for Dancer, Texas Pop. 81 (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Matt Williams
Written and directed by small town native Tim McCanlies, Dancer, Texas
Pop. 81 is a film that shares many of the same qualities of a small
town.  It's small, unassuming, easygoing and has a certain kind of charm
that will resonate well with audiences anxious for a change of pace from
the hustle and bustle of big budgeted Hollywood extravaganzas.
Dancer is a very small town in West Texas, composed mostly of ranchers,
oilmen and their families.  Dancer's largest senior class (5) is about
to graduate, and a moment of truth is coming for four of the boys.  As
children, the four best friends made a solemn vow to leave Dancer for
Los Angeles on the Monday following graduation.  However, now that day
is fast approaching, and the four young adults are now having second
thoughts about leaving behind everything they have known.
The leader of the foursome, Keller (Breckin Meyer), has meticulously
researched and plotted every facet of the trip...but he never counted on
a mutiny.  The first one to voice doubts is Terrell Lee (Peter
Facinelli), whose overbearing parents (Patricia Wettig and Michael
O'Neill) want him to continue the family oil business.  But also
experiencing second thoughts are the rancher John (Eddie Mills), who
wonders about the place of a cowboy in L.A., and the oddball Squirrel
(Ethan Embry), who starts thinking of his alcoholic father (Keith
Szarabajka).
As the four teens deliberate their future and reflect upon their past,
we are treated to a knowing glimpse at the charms and pains of small
town life. The pace of the movie is as slow and relaxed as a warm summer
day, but, since it fits the mood of the movie, it is not distracting in
the slightest.
The four leads are engaging (though Embry overacts a bit as the most
comical of the four).  But the whole of the film works much better on
the ensemble level...there's not anyone who particularly stands out from
the cast, but the combined whole manage to create a realistically
pleasant small town atmosphere.
Though the question of whether or not the four friends will actually
leave has set the town of Dancer abuzz, it's not as much of a mystery to
a knowing audience. If you're familiar with typical movie conventions,
it's not that big of a challenge to accurately predict who will stay and
who will go.  At least, enjoyment of the movie is not contingent on the
suspense.
Those expecting an explosion around every corner might be disappointed
by Dancer, Texas Pop. 81.  But, for those looking for entertainment with
a change of pace, the movie delivers an enjoyable break from the
razzle-dazzle of big budget fare.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Frankie Paiva
Dancer, Texas Pop. 81 is moviemaking gem. Yes, it does belong in the barrel of
teen films with good looking stars, but that's about it. Instead of filling our
heads with stupid romances that we don't care about, and proms we will never
attend, we are treated to a great 97 minute character study. 
Four guys have had a solemn vow since the fifth grade that they would leave
their tiny Texas town of Dancer when they graduated from high school to go to
LA, get jobs, and be together. But soon their plans change.
Terrell Lee's (Peter Facinelli) father in the oil business and he wants him to
run it, even though his son doesn't want to. He forbids him to go to LA and
makes him stay. When Terrell Lee firsts tells the group this, they view it as
betrayal, but then they also stop to think about what they will be leaving
behind. What if they don't get jobs? What if they have everything they've ever
needed right in front of them?
John's (Eddie Mills) dad has that 18 years and out policy, he doesn't want him
to go to college, in fact, it seems as if he doesn't care about him at all.
John is an excellent rancher and is faced with a big decision. Squirrel (Embry)
has a new mother figure around that's trying to help him tame his wild and
drunk dad, and Keller (Meyer) begins to see the flaws in the plans he made.
Another great thing about this movie is the fact the the parents are in
control, aren't shut out of their child's lives, and aren't incredibly naive to
the problems and things that teens are exposed to.
All four actors are wonderful in their roles, especially Embry, as the goofy
Squirrel, he was a charming character that I liked and cared about. Meyer,
Embry, and Facinelli (all of them also appear in Can't Hardly Wait) show fine
promise as young actors in the future. The film could easily have a sequel
showing what happens to the different boys if it have been more popular.
Finding actual people in teen movies is hard. But there is not one stupid or
stereotypical character to be found in this film, that's why I liked it so
much, and that's why I give all of the 81 people that live in Dancer, Texas ***
1/2 stars.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tim McCanlies.
Cast: Breckin Meyer, Peter Facinelli, Ethan Embry, Eddie Mills, Ashley 
Johnson, Patricia Wettig, Michael O'Neill, Alexandra Holden, Eddie 
Jones, Wayne Tippet.
1998 - 97 minutes.
Rated PG (for mild profanity).
Reviewed October 25, 1998. 
"Dancer, Texas Pop. 81," is one of those minor small-town films in which 
not much happens, but it is enjoyable nonetheless just to watch the 
characters.
The title gives way to the setting of the movie, which is a tiny desert 
town that, yes, has a population of only 81. At the start of the film, 
four teenage friends are about to graduate from high school (their class 
only consists of one other person), and promised each other when they 
were 12 that once they graduated, they would set off together for L.A. 
At the head of the group is Keller (Breckin Meyer), the person who is 
the most positive he wants to get out. Terrel Lee (Peter Facinelli) is 
being forced to help out with his father's oil business, and doesn't 
know how to break the news to his friends that he can't go. Squirrel 
(Ethen Embry) is the most eccentric of the group, and has a very bad 
family life, living in a motor home with a father who doesn't really 
care about him, or know what's going on half the time. And John (Eddie 
Mills) is also unsure about going, after his father tells him he has a 
great talent for ranching, which is something he loves.
There are no big, dramatic scenes in "Dancer, Texas Pop. 81," nor are 
there any big plot developments. Instead, it is simply a series of 
scenes and vignettes involving all of the characters, and director 
McCanlies, making his film debut, proves that he is a very assured 
writer. The cinematography, with the open skies and empty landscapes, 
are gorgeous to look at.
There actually are no real problems with the film; it is just that it is 
so laid-back and slight that the picture couldn't possibly be any better 
than merely "good." 
The four main actors are all fine, but it actually is a few supporting 
performances that stand out, particularly Ashley Johnson, as John's 
12-year-old sister, Josie, and Alexandra Holden, as Keller's female 
friend whom he always confides in with his problems.
"Dancer, Texas Pop. 81," is by no means an earth-shattering, important 
film. It is neither complex nor any sort of award-winner. But it is 
quiet and entertaining, and I'm glad I saw it.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Dustin Putman's
Film Haven >
