Title
Review for Crossing Guard, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Freddy Gale (Jack Nicholson) is a jeweler.  Watching the film, my
mind wandered to the many films in which Nicholson starred over the
years, almost all fine films: ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST, A FEW
GOOD MEN, PRIZZI'S HONOR, REDS, CHINATOWN, FIVE EASY PIECES, and EASY
RIDER, to name some of the more outstanding.  And I am watching
Nicholson looking and acting very much as he did in every film he has
been in: the white eyeballs, the devilish look, the way he wipes his
mouth, the way he lowers his voice into a hushed mumble. And I think,
maybe he ought to start looking different in different kinds of
films.  Even at the Lakers' games, with his dark glasses, he is
Nicholson.  His "look" is getting a bit boring.
     The film's story is not much help.  Written and directed by Sean
Penn, it's a simple story and not terribly interesting.  John Booth
(David Morse) accidentally ran over Gale's seven-year-old daughter with
his car.  After spending his time in jail he is about to be released.
While he is ticking off the days on his calendar in the jail cell,
Nicholson is doing the same in his home.  Both know that when Booth is
released, Gale is going to go after him.
     Gale shows up at the home of his ex-wife, Mary, (Anjelica Huston)
and informs her that he is going to kill Booth.  Mary has remarried.
They had gotten divorced, presumably because of Gale's behavior once
his beloved daughter was killed; he has become a changed man who hangs
out at strip joints with other jewelers who look more like sleazy
gangsters.  It now becomes, for the audience to watch and guess how
the film will develop and the development is nothing spectacular.
There is a short look at an elderly crossing guard asleep, or half
asleep, sitting in a chair while the children are in a playground.  If
there were any significance to that, and to the film's title, I missed
it.
     Supporting actors are Robin Wright who befriends and comforts
booth and Piper Laurie (as beautiful as ever) as Booth's mother.
     One of the obviously "silly" incidents (to use a kind word) is the
policewoman who, when Gale is pulled over for possible drunk driving,
takes his gun (he has a license for it as he is a jeweler who carries
valuables) and lays the gun on the trunk of his car within easy reach
of Gale if he chooses to make a grab for it and escape.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE CROSSING GUARD is a movie written, directed, and co-produced
by Sean Penn.  Penn has done this all once before in a movie call THE
INDIAN RUNNER (1991) which I have never seen.  I hope it is not as
flawed as this mess of a movie.
     THE CROSSING GUARD starts with a support group for people who have
had relatives killed by drunk drivers.  In the group is Mary Gale
(Anjelica Huston) since her then seven year old daughter Emile was
killed five years earlier.  Mary is a real estate agent who now lives
with her two young boys about age seven and her new husband.  Her old
husband and the father of Emile and the two boys is Freddy Gale (Jack
Nicholson).
     Freddy is a New York City jeweler and an alcoholic who spends his
time hanging out at cheap strip joints with his male buddies and
spending his nights with prostitutes and bottles of Jack Daniel's.
Freddy has one raison d'etre, he plans on killing his daughter's
killer, John Booth (David Morse) when he get out from prison.  John
Booth, name chosen for obvious reasons, is scheduled to get out the day
the movie starts since he has just finished serving his five years for
manslaughter for killing Emile with his car while drunk.
     What Penn's script attempts to do is to turn the world upside
down.  The actual killer, Booth, is shown as a shy, tender, and
compassionate man full of great guilt who thinks he may deserve to die.
Penn creates him as a totally sympathetic character where as the
victim's father and hence a victim himself as well, is a sleaze bag and
a degenerate who has never even visited his own daughter's grave.
Hence, the bad guy is the good and vice versa.  In short, it doesn't
work.
     The whole movie is about Freddy planning on killing John.  Both
Freddy and John and everyone else in the movie are aware of Freddy's
plans from almost the beginning.  Whether Freddy does or not kill him,
you will find you do not care in the least since none of the characters
are believable.  John was written so sweet he is in danger of having a
diabetic attack, and Freddy is so evil you keep wanting a truck to run
over him.
     Jack Nicholson is a brilliant actor that is wasted in this movie.
The scene of him drunk and crying on the phone in the bathroom is the
low point of a dismal movie.  Penn has Nicholson in the whispering mode
with many of his lines.  What effect this is supposed to create I could
never figure out.
     The dialog is so bad it almost gets funny.  One of the times
Freddy comes to kill John, John asks, "Would you mind closing the door.
I don't want to wake my parents."  Later John muses to his girlfriend
about his impending death, "Freedom is overrated."  In the worse piece
of script we have John asking his girlfriend, "What is guilt? Can you
define it?" She looks very serious and thinks for what seems forever
and then answers, "Want to dance?"
     The movie is full of strong imagery.  In one of the more striking,
we have John Booth with his arms outstretched Christ like chanting
"come on, come on" waiting for Freddy to arrive and do him in.  John's
ridiculous image was enhanced by his wearing dark glasses in a darken
trailer.  From there we cut to the scene of Freddy crying in the
bathroom.  The show is so full of angst, it is like a class film
project in Directing 101.
     The cinematography by Vilmos Zsigmond is quite pedantic.  We have
superfluous slow motion shots to call our attention to obvious points.
We have fast pans with hand held cameras to get us dizzy.  Finally we
have lots of night scenes filmed in a medium shade of black.
     THE CROSSING GUARD runs on and on at 1:57, and I was foolish
enough to have seen every minute of it.  For some reason I was curious
as to the ending.  Don't be; it isn't worth it.  The film is rated R
for lots of sleazy nudity, alcoholism, some violence, bad language, and
sex.  I would just as soon everybody stayed away from it, but it would
be acceptable for mature teenagers if they really wanted to see it.  I
give the movie a big thumbs down and award it a single star for at
least trying hard.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Why did Sean Penn cross the road? I don't know and I don't 
care. My question is more along the lines of why Sean Penn devoted 
so much of his energy to scripting and directing this thriller whose 
only action scenes are at the beginning and end with a whole lot of 
boring melodrama in between. I don't know if you'll take my word 
for it, though, because from the video box it looks like a promising 
movie. Jack Nicholson plays the father of a murder victim who's 
been counting off the days to the killer's release from prison, when 
he'll exact his revenge, most likely in the eye-for-an-eye manner 
by killing the killer.
        But we know from the beginning that Jack ain't such a 
smart guy. He marches into the home of his ex-wife (Anjelica 
Huston), who was his wife at the time of the murder, and announces 
his plans to kill the murderer. Huston and Nicholson have had this 
discussion over and over (and will have many more before the 
fade-to-credits) and it's obvious Nicholson is a disturbed man 
who intends to go through with his plans, but Huston doesn't 
tip off the police, even after Nicholson gets in a fistfight with 
her new husband.
        So the murderer, played by David Morse of "St. Elsewhere" 
and 12 MONKEYS, gets out of prison and returns home to his loving 
parents. By this point we know something's wrong -- Nicholson is 
much more of a menace to society than Morse. That night Nicholson 
sneaks into Morse's bedroom while he's sleeping and points a gun at 
him before realizing there are no bullets. Morse wakes up and 
begins a casual conversation with him ("Oh hi, Jack. Come to kill 
me again?"), fully aware of Nicholson's plan to kill him. Everyone 
in this movie knows what Nicholson is up to but no one tries to 
stop him. All Morse does is ask for three days to live out his life 
before Nicholson claims it.
        Nicholson grants him the three days, beginning a long, 
no-action stretch of movie in which Morse falls in love with Robin 
"Jen-ny" Wright (you almost expect Forrest Gump to start stalking 
him too) and Nicholson spends most of his time at a strip club and 
lays at least ten separate women. This guy gets more action than 
James Bond, but unfortunately THE CROSSING GUARD has none 
of the action of a Bond film. That hour or so in the middle serves 
mostly to show us Morse is human after all, with a lot of remorse 
for what he did, and that Nicholson is nuts after all, which we 
know before the opening credits are even up.
        Even the climax is dull, beginning with Nicholson being 
pulled over by the cops. He runs off into the woods, leading them 
on a chase, before somehow ending up at the home of Morse. Then 
they both run down the street for awhile, take a bus, run some more, 
climb a fence or two -- mostly in slow motion. When even the action 
scenes are boring, there's a problem. And when there's at least thirty 
minutes of painfully-slow, superfluous drama, including Wright's 
interpretive dance of Salt-N-Pepa's "Whatta Man," there are a 
_lot_ of problems.
        Penn's message that the guilty are still able to feel remorse, 
to love and be loved, was later personified by Penn himself in DEAD 
MAN WALKING, which had genuine drama and none of the 
contrived action. The fault for THE CROSSING GUARD rests 
squarely on his shoulders. Lord knows Nicholson and Huston are 
wonderful actors, but when given crap, they can hardly rise above 
it. It may be high-quality crap, but it's still crap, a dead movie barely
crawling.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     I cannot help but think that Sean Penn, for the second film he
directed (after THE INDIAN RUNNER) was inspired by Claude Chabrol's
very good and quite well-known drama, THIS MAN MUST DIE (1970).  In the
French movie, a father sets out to find and kill the hit-and-run driver
who had killed his young son.
     In the Penn film, the seven-year-old daughter of Freddy Gale (Jack
Nicholson) and Mary (Anjelica Huston) was killed by drunk driver John
Booth (David Morse).  When John is released from jail after serving six
years, Freddy sets out to kill him.  When Freddy faces John and
something goes wrong with the gun, John asks for a two-day reprieve
during which Freddy can think if he really wants to shoot him. "I'll
give you three days" is the answer.
     Neatly balancing out vengeful Freddy is guilty John.  Not merely
sorrowful and contrite but carrying a colossal burden of guilt, one
that's spelled out and underlined at every turn, one that is in fact a
kind of death wish.  We get too much of the despair of both men,
especially since John always speaks haltingly in a low-pitched monotone
that's like a big whisper.  Even in the short run, this fatigues us, as
do as too many silences pregnant with meanings that are either
repetitious or unclear.
     The movie is interesting but relies too little on script and too
heavily on the excellent photography of a master, Hungarian-born Vilmos
Szigmond, and the moody production design of Daniel Haller, whose track
record is very good. (I wonder whether Californian Haller is related to
the late, classic cinematographer Ernest Haller who died in a 1970 car
accident).  Together, those two artists create an atmosphere of
somberness and emptiness, stress night scenes, artificial light,
chiaroscuro interiors and, even in daylight, the feel of loneliness.
On the other hand, the artsy editing and acting that go from the
theatrical to the "sub-texted" are less welcome.
     More than anything, the film leans very heavily on Jack
Nicholson.  The premise here is that Freddy, who owns a small jewelry
store, went to pieces after the child's death.  He is a man with an
attitude that includes impatience with the weaknesses of others,
harshness and irascibility.  All that goes with chain-smoking and major
boozing.  Freddy's milieu is one of strip-joints, like "Dreamland"
where his bed mates work.
     Nicholson can play convincingly lonely, alienated, weird,
pugnacious and raging characters.  So convincingly, indeed, that our
familiarity with the many faces of Jack may makes us conscious of
watching acting more than life.  Yet that's not the movie's weakest
point.  The flaw here is that as a writer, Sean Penn gets too fancy,
soulful, "philosophical" and sometimes tackily low-life.  More
seriously, it is never made clear whether Freddy's desire for revenge
is its own entity; whether it came upon him early on or recently;
which came first and caused the other, the drinking or the despair;
whether or not there is history of Freddy having always been unhinged.
     The main clue we get is when well into the film, in a dark cafe,
there's a "friendly" meeting of Freddy and his now remarried ex-wife
Mary (echoes of the real-life Nicholson-Huston relationship).  She
tells him "When Eve died you became small and weak.  I needed someone
big and strong."
     More of Penn's weaknesses.  John is in the car with a pal who's
found him a job and arranged for a party with several girls.  He
suddenly asks John: "In the joint, did you get violated?" (my
euphemism).  John: "It only hurts the first time."  This exchange is
followed by cross-cutting between the party (where a woman improbably
discourses on compassion) and a fancy restaurant where Freddy has
invited three hookers.  There is much that is unnecessary and
unedifying in those sequences.  And when Robin Wright, in the
underwritten part of Jojo, plays an improbably "nice" and "clean"
artist in a society of broads, and falls for John, and speaks of his
puppy-like eyes, writer Penn is combining cliches with an unlikely mix
of societal types.
     There are some good inventions.  The quiet relationship between
John and his parents; the talkative, deranged lady who speaks to John
in a bus; the surreal sight of a stripper dressed in a Shirley Temple
outfit and singing "The Good Ship Lollipop"; a hooker serenading John
at his place via song and electronic keyboard (she must be one of those
fallen girls from better society); the amicable Freddy-Mary meeting
mentioned earlier unexpectedly climaxing with Freddy exploding:" I hope
you die.  I hope you f...g die."
     THE CROSSING GUARD is a mixed picture until the closure which is a
total cop-out, illogical in topography and timing, with too many
coincidences, clich's and sentimentality, all embarrassing to watch.  A
pity, because in spite of several arid, dull stretches, the movie has
enough going for it to set it apart from run-of-the-mill productions.

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by Sean Penn
Cast: Jack Nicholson, David Morse, Robin Wright and Angelica Houston
Release Date: Friday August 16 1996 (UK)
THE CROSSING GUARD tells the story of how two men cope with the death of a 
young girl from a drink-driving accident. One man being the father of the 
young girl, Freddy Gale (Jack Nicholson) , the other being the drunk driver
himself, John Booth (David Morse).
When the film begins we see John Booth being released from the jail where 
he served a six year sentence for killing the young girl.  We see him 
welcomed back with loving arms by his parents Helen and John (played by 
Piper Laurie and Richard Bradford).  John decides to live in a trailer beside 
his parents house and no sooner has he moved in when he is visited by Freddy
Gale seeking revenge for his daughter's death.  Fortunately for John, the gun 
with which Freddy fully intends to shoot him, doesn't appear to have 
been loaded.  Freddy then decides to give John a three day reprieve before 
he returns to visit him once more.  It is this three day period which the 
rest of the film shows, leading up to their next meeting when Freddy fully 
intends to carry out his original plan of killing John.
During the course of the film we get to meet Freddy's ex-wife, Mary (Angelica 
Houston) and her new husband (played by the singer Robbie Robertson).  
Mary has two young sons from her marriage to Freddy (in addition to their 
deceased daughter), who now call Mary's new husband "Daddy" and call their 
estranged father "Freddy".  Freddy is shown to have abandoned his wife and 
sons after his daughter's death and has kept in little contact with them since. 
Whilst Mary is shown to have remained strong for the sake of their young sons,  
we see that Freddy couldn't or wouldn't face up to his responsibilities to 
his family following their tragic loss.  
Freddy runs a jeweller's shop in town and spends a lot of time in local strip 
joints and with the young girls who work there.  His daughter's loss never
seems far from his mind though, as we see him lovingly observing a young girl 
embracing her father in the street.  Freddy is convinced that taking the 
life of the man who took his daughter's life will somehow make things better.  
When he tells his ex-wife of his plans to kill John Booth, she doesn't take 
too kindly to the idea.  Freddy reckons that this means that somehow Mary 
doesn't really care for their lost daughter, so deep is his conviction
that revenge is the answer.
During the three day waiting period, John starts a new job and meets and 
starts a relationship with a woman he meets at a party, Jojo (played by 
Robin Wright).  Jojo is aware of John's past and clearly starts to develop 
strong feelings for John, as does John for her.  But it soon starts to become 
very clear to Jojo that John's guilt is so great that she feels unable to reach
him.  There is a wonderful scene in the film when John visits Jojo and seeks 
solace from the pain he is feeling. Jojo knows how mere words will not do, and
anyway she knows that she will be unable to find the right words, so she 
simply puts on a tape and urges John to dance with her.  Jojo starts to
dance but John just stands still at first, realising that
neither Jojo or anyone will be able to help him get over his pain.  The
acting by David Morse and Robin Wright in this scene is amongst the finest in 
the film.  Very few words are spoken, but you can just feel what is going 
through their minds.
The acting throughout the film is excellent. Sean Penn has drawn fine some 
performances from all the lead actors.  Jack Nicholson is on top form 
and is never anything but totally convincing. His pain and anger is palpable 
throughout the film.  David Morse is always a solid performer and he is great 
as John,  playing a man whose pain and anguish is almost deeper than that 
of Freddy's.  David Morse is a huge man but with the quietest of voices and 
superbly portrays a character who clearly has spent much of the past six years 
examining his conscience and wrestling with the pain and suffering he has 
inflicted on Freddy's family and indeed his own family.  Piper Laurie and
Richard Bradford, as John's loving parents, are excellent in the short 
amount of screen time they get. Especially, their scene in the car on the 
way home from jail when John's father is so ecstatic that he has his son back 
with him that he can't help but laugh out loud and can't keep himself from 
swearing with glee - the first time he has sworn in front of his son.  Piper 
Laurie, as John's mum,  gets in on the act too and lets out a swear word.   
This scene is wonderfully played - and I haven't really done it justice here.
Sean Penn's script is very well written and deals with very delicate 
subjects - mourning, and the feelings of revenge that can overcome 
people who have suffered such a terrible loss as Freddy.  Whilst we are never 
led to believe that Freddy's plans are right, we nevertheless can't help but 
feel for Freddy - a man who seems unable to face up to life without his
beloved daughter.  
Review Written on Sat August 17 1996 by Vince Deehan

Author
Doug Thomas
     Jack Nicholson gives a fantastic performance in an otherwise dull
film.  It's probably his best performance in 10 years, unfortunately,
Sean Penn's second film as a director is just missing ... something.
Have you ever watched a film and thought, "I can't put my finger on
what's wrong with this movie?"  That's exactly what will likely go
through your mind.  THE CROSSING GUARD is the story of Freddy Gale, a
man torn apart by rage and guilt since the death of his daughter by a
drunk driver several years previous.  Anjelica Houston plays his
ex-wife Mary, who fights with her former feelings of love for Freddy,
while finding his current behavior of drinking and slumming in topless
bars quite distasteful.  The film unfolds as John Booth (David Morse),
the man who killed Gale's daughter, is released from prison.  Freddy
vows that he will kill the man but when he is faced with the deed,
Booth pleads for a few more days to grieve and cpome to terms with his
crime.  Booth is not a thoughtless felon--he has grieved over his
prison time.  What probably should have been a poignant film quickly
turns routine as we follow Freddy on a series of drinking binges and
feel-sorry-for-myself tantrums.  Penn's skill as a director is uneven
at best, with far too many slow motion "artsy" scenes, several
unintentional funny moments and a completely un-realistic final.  It's
too bad that Penn didn't give the cast more to work with.  One of my
favorite actresses, Piper Laurie, is completely under-used, as Booth's
mother.  Also, MTV fans will find former "Remote Control" babe Kari
Wuhrer in a hilarious scene where she serenades Nicholson.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 11/95 (limited)
Running Length: 1:57
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence, sexual situations, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     To lose a child is perhaps the greatest tragedy any person can
endure.  When something like that happens because of a drunk driver, it
raises a specter of impotent fury that no dose of reason can ever
dispel.  In Sean Penn's THE CROSSING GUARD, a flawed but thought-
provoking motion picture, Jack Nicholson's Freddy Gale has opened his
arms to the embrace of anguish and hatred.  Nothing--not the pleas of
his ex-wife Mary (Angelica Huston) or the excesses of drink and sex to
which he succumbs--allows him to forget, or, more importantly,
forgive.
     The problem with THE CROSSING GUARD is not the premise or core
theme, but the manner in which director Sean Penn breathes life into the
story.  This film is horribly unfocused.  Significant chunks of screen
time are devoted to unrelated, superfluous, and cryptic sequences.  Many
apparently have been included for the purpose of enhanced
characterization, but, since basic character development is handled
effectively early in the movie, much of this material is redundant.  How
many times do we have to be reminded that Freddy is on the edge?  How
often must John Booth, the drunk driver who killed Freddy's daughter,
wrestle with his guilt?
     THE CROSSING GUARD opens on the day John (David Morse) is released
from prison after serving a five-year sentence for manslaughter.  While
his ordeal behind bars hasn't broken him, the knowledge of his crime
weighs down his conscience like an anchor--so much so that a potential
girlfriend (Robin Wright) tells him she can't compete with his guilt.
As John, Morse gives a powerful, contained performance that is all the
more effective because it is so controlled.  Despite what he did, we
feel for him.
     Nicholson, on the other hand, is uneven playing a father who is
self-destructing under the pressure of his grief.  The death of his
daughter Emily ruined Freddy's life, and, in his opinion, a prison term
was too mild a penalty for John.  Freddy intends to repay the drunk
driver with a calculated, cold-blooded murder.  Much of Nicholson's
portrayal involves over-the-top ranting (the actor's usual shtick),
which becomes tiresome.  Fortunately, there are scenes where he is
restrained, and there's a palpable tension to those moments.
     When Penn hits the right tone, his direction shows undeniable
power.  THE CROSSING GUARD contains several noteworthy scenes.  One,
which illustrates the potency of Freddy's bereavement better than all of
Nicholson's ravings, has Freddy silently watching a loving father and
daughter hug.  Another has John visiting the grave of his victim.  A
third takes place in a coffee shop, where Freddy and Mary perform an
autopsy of their marriage.  Then there's John's description of what it
was like to watch Emily die.  Had all of THE CROSSING GUARD been put
together with such deft skill, this could have been an amazing motion
picture.  Alas, what's on-screen too often devolves into ineffective
melodrama.
     With strippers dressed as little girls, a father's unquenchable
grief, and a climax that brings the situation to an emotional crescendo,
comparisons between THE CROSSING GUARD and Atom Egoyan's EXOTICA are
inevitable.  In any such point-by-point study, however, Sean Penn's
film, with its spotty treatment of powerful emotional topics, does not
fare favorably.  On balance, THE CROSSING GUARD probably succeeds more
often than not, but there are enough serious missteps to raise doubts
about whether this film is worth a trip to a theater.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Billy Bud Vermillion
        Weinstein, Harvey Weinstein, Richard N. Gladstein. Miramax
This is definitely the best movie to be released last year(hey, I 
didn't see Crumb, so sue me). It speaks to the soul, humming softly at 
you, urging you to look inside and see if you'd do  the same thing as the 
figures on screen. Really. A powerful, moving piece of work every one 
who's ever felt the need for vengeance or justice in an unjust world 
should see just to show you how justice can be unjust, too.
The film opens as John Booth, convicted of manslaughter in a 
drunk-driving accident, is released from prison. We meet his parents, who 
love him very much, and obviously miss him. We see him as a tortured 
soul, guilty for what he did, for killing a little girl. We see him in 
flashbacks, beating his head against the bars of his cell, we see the 
scar this makes. He is a horribly depressed man,a  man in a lot of pain. 
Then we meet Freddy Gale, one of the most complex characters 
Nicholson's dealt with in a long time. He is obsessed with fantasies of 
revenge. He's been counting off the days on a little wall calendar, 
waiting for Booth to get out. He's planned to kill him since the trial, 
for his daughter's death. He is man lost to his dreams. All he has is 
revenge, liquor, and the strip bars where he picks women up from time to 
time. His wife(Huston)has long-since divorced him an married another 
man(Robbie Robertson)and thinks Freddy has forgotten her and her other 
kids for what she sees as selfish wish-fulfillment fantasies. Huston 
looks more haggard in this role than I think I've ever seen her. She's 
been worn down by her husband's madness. 
Booth meets a woman(Wright)at a party his friend(David Baerwald, 
nice touch)throws for him, and she falls in love with him, though he 
can't love because of his oppressive feelings of guilt. Gale eventually 
makes his way to Booth's trailer and tries to shoot him, but the gun 
won't fire. He gives Booth three days to live. The movie then follows 
both characters during the three days, with Wright's character trying to 
bring Booth back to some semblance of life and Nicholson's moving farhter 
and farther from life into a kind of dead-eyed obsession. The three days 
pass, and Booth decides he wants to live, so he runs. The best scene in 
the movie comes during this part.Nicholson chases him onto a bus, but, 
polite jewelery store owner and former family man that he is, he decides 
to sit down and wait for the bus to stop before pursuing Booth(he knows 
the consequences of killing Booth will probably be the chair,  but he 
still can't bring himself to go nuts on a bus--brilliant!). The ending is 
one of the most touching I've ever seen(though a little predictable). 
Penn has proven himself a fine director, and Nicholson has reaffirmed his 
status as a damn fine actor, too.
Coincidence, perhaps, that this film deals with the same basic 
idea as dead man walking(starring Penn)? I think not. And this one was 
released first. Hmmm....
This film may not be out in theaters any longer, but wait for it 
on video, because it's definitely worth your time. A fine film.
