Title
Review for 'burbs, The (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        Poor Ray Peterson: all he wanted was to spend his vacation quietly
at homerelaxing, mowing the lawn, fixing the barbecue, and watching ball
games on TV.  But then, he met the Klopeks, his new next-door neighbors, in
THE 'BURBS, the horror spoof starring Tom Hanks.  The Klopeks aren't like
us normal folks, and they certainly don't fit into Suburbia, U.S.A.  For
instance, their house is decrepit, their yard has grown out of control, no
one has ever seen them, and strange noises come from their basement late at
night.  As Ray becomes suspicious of his new "neighbors from Hell," his
restful vacation turns into a nightmare of paranoia.  He suspects the
Klopeks of everything from murder to satanic worship.
        THE 'BURBS, directed by Joe Dante (GREMLINS), is an attempt to
lampoon the horror genre on one hand and the American, suburban lifestyle
on the other.  THE 'BURBS wants to be a parody a la AIRPLANE, but a poor
script, uneven direction, and frequent lapses in momentum sabotage the
film.
        Visually and stylistically, however, the movie is stunning thanks
to Dante's imaginative direction.  He employs extreme close-ups,
melodramatic zooms, and quick-fire editing to great comic effect.  And best
of all, Dante gives Ray's neighborhood a real sense of space and place.  In
fact, the most effective part of THE 'BURBS is the first half hour, during
which the film introduces us to Ray's suburban neighborhood and its
eccentric residents.  Tom Hanks is Ray, the only normal person on the
block; he's your average suburbanite and family man.  Next door lives his
slovenly friend, Art, played by Rick Ducommun.  Across the street is Bruce
Dern as Mr. Rumsfield, a wacko Vietnam vet who still dresses in army
fatigues and plays with his war toys.  He lives with a dizzy blonde
bombshell (Wendy Schaal) who likes to prance around in skimpy, revealing
outfits.  At the end of the block lives Walter, an old man who's quite
attached to his poodle, his perfectly groomed lawn, and his toupee.  And
let's not forget Corey Feldman as a radical teenager who gets his kicks by
watching his neighbors from his porch.  Then, of course, there are the
Klopeks who are strange even by the standards of this neighborhood.  Dante
has created a satirical microcosm of America: a block of suburbia that
would make the Cleavers run for their lives.
        Dante demonstrates once again his knack for horror; he brings a
stylish look and a paranoid atmosphere to the screen.  His comedy skills,
however, are not so well honed.  While the humor in THE 'BURBS is sometimes
clever, more often it is mindless, playing to the lowest common
denominator.
        Some scenes ARE hilarious such as when Ray, Art, and Rumsfield dive
into a garbage truck, much to the bewilderment of the garbage men, in order
to rummage through the Klopeks' trash.  In another amusing scene, the
camera manically zooms in and out and in and out as Art and Ray find a
large thigh bone and come to the horrifying realization that it belongs to
their missing neighbor, Walter.
        Most of the time, however, the gags are either too juvenile, too
cheap, or too predictable to produce honest laughs.  Most of the jokes are
so obvious that you can see them coming from miles away.  You don't have to
be psychic to predict that when Art climbs up a telephone pole to cut a
power line, he's going to nearly electrocute himself and then plummet to
the ground.  And yet despite these problems, THE 'BURBS hits the satirical
mark often enough to keep things rolling; the movie seldom fails to
entertain.
        With the exception of Bruce Dern's outrageous tour de force
performance as Rumsfield (which is almost worth the price of admission
alone), the acting in THE 'BURBS is uninspired.  In fact, after his
tremendous success in BIG and PUNCHLINE, I'm surprised that Tom Hanks took
this role.  Ray is one of the least colorful characters Hanks has ever
played.  The actor doesn't get to do anything interesting with his
character until the very end of the film when Ray goes on a rampage; only
then do we finally get some vintage Tom Hanks humor.  During most of THE
'BURBS, another actor would have sufficed in the role, which is a
condemnation not of Hanks but of the movie.  I think it's a safe bet that
THE 'BURBS will not revive Carrie Fisher's sagging film career.  As Ray's
bland wife, Carol, Fisher seems to be going through the motions; the
actress gives a lifeless performance in a thankless role.  At least Wendy
Schaal and Corey Feldman inject some spirit and humor into their supporting
roles.
        THE 'BURBS has its strong points, but it also contains a fatal
excess of unnecessary baggage.  For every well-earned laugh, there is a
groan.  But if you have the patience and don't mind suffering through the
weaknesses of the film, you just may want to visit this very unusual
neighborhood.  But remember, beware of the Klopeks.

Author
Shane Burridge
     Director Joe Dante has an affection for small-town communities,
even when he's unleashing all manner of havoc upon them.  It's evident
in his films, and is the subject of his 1991 television series EERIE,
INDIANA.  It should come as no surprise, then, to see his involvement
in THE 'BURBS, a film devoted to the subject.  Story takes place in the
suburb of Hinkley Hills, where enigmatic, unseen neighbors have just
moved into the rundown house next door to Tom Hanks and wife Carrie
Fisher.  Egged on by a couple of his neighbors, Hanks' paranoia about
the new arrivals escalates to absurd heights.  Picture runs out of
steam before the end, as the more recognizable idiosyncrasies of
suburbia in the opening sequences give way to situations that become
increasingly outlandish, preventing the film from becoming the
definitive statement on suburban neuroses that many moviegoers were no
doubt hoping for.  But if THE 'BURBS doesn't live up to its premise, it
still works effectively as a kind of goofy homage to suburbanites.
Dante's tendency towards cartoonish fantasy planes all satirical edges
off the story: the neighborhood he gives us is the type of communal
playground we would have liked to remember as children; a place of
eccentric, comical inhabitants (Bruce Dern, Rick Ducommun, and Corey
Feldman, to name a few), a weird gothic house (placed right in the
middle of a cul-de-sac!), friendly feuding, spying, night-time strolls,
and intrigue.  The film ends with the enthusiastic line "I love this
street", and by that time it's easy to share the sentiment.  We realize
that the characters belong in their suburban niche.
     As with other Dante films, THE 'BURBS is rife with references to
films and television - and his entire neighborhood set seems to be a
product of that as much as any other source.  Feldman invites friends
over to watch a scene unfolding on the street as if it were part of a
movie (which it is), and describes the activities of his neighbors to a
date as if they were characters in a story (which they are).  Dante
fans are used to such self-referential treatment -- as usual, he puts
his personal stamp on everything.  One of my favorite sequences is
nothing more than a walk down a path, which Dante shoots in flinty-eyed
Sergio Leone-style closeups.  It would be hard not to think that the
cast must have had a ball making the movie -- even Dern plays it
strictly for laughs, for a change.   I can't help thinking it would
come over better late at night at a drive-in.  A good companion piece
would be the surreal 1981 film NEIGHBORS.  Other faces on the street
include: Henry Gibson, Gale Gordon, and Dante regulars Robert Picardo
and Dick Miller.  Music by Jerry Goldsmith, who, in keeping with the
film's in-joke style, drops in themes from his score for PATTON.
