Title
Review for Amongst Friends (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

AMONGST FRIENDS (director/writer: Rob Weiss; cinematographer: Michael
Bonvillain; editor: Leo Trombetta; cast: Steve Parlavecchio (Andy), Mira
Sorvino (Laura), Patrick Mc Gaw (Trevor), Joseph Lindsey (Billy),
Michael Artura (Michael), Frank Medrano (Vic), Louis Lombardi (Eddie),
David Stepkin (Jack Trattner), Ford Sorvino (Fish); Runtime: 90; 1993)
This Scorsese "Mean Streets" type of film has been done too many times
and often much better than it was done here, for it to have much of an
impact. It was mildly entertaining, setting a wiseguy mood in a wealthy
suburban area instead of using the usual locale of the gritty urban
streets. It was sort of funny hearing the wise philosophy coming out of
such empty heads, pontificated by old mobsters (especially Ford
Sorvino-Mira's grandfather) to young potential mobsters, who already
looked just as stupid as their mentors. There was also a very funny bit,
featuring fast-talking heavyweights in matching designer jog suits named
Vic and Eddie (Frank Medrano and Louis Lombardi). But the film had such
a pat look to it, I just couldn't help feel that it was phony, an annual
staging of a movie about wannabe Mafia youths that seems to be the
dream-baby of almost every new indie director. It seemed to be striving
to get some laughs, release some suburban angst, while trying to find
the missing ingredient in its tale of innocence lost...which it never
found.
Three inseparable childhood friends, sons of the privileged, Andy (Steve
Parlavecchio), Trevor (Patrick McGaw), and Billy (Joseph Lindsey) have
grown up in the Long Island suburbs of Five Towns. They enjoyed doing
petty crimes as youngsters for the respect they got and because they
were bored. After finishing high school, in the late 1980s, Billy asks
Andy to make a drug delivery for him. Andy says yes, then changes his
mind and gets Trevor to do it for him. Trevor thinks Andy is too scared
to do it and decides to help his friend out but gets arrested in a
police sting. After serving two years of hard time and feeling
disillusioned, he fails to return to his home town. But he is anxious to
see his one-time girlfriend Laura (Mira Sorvino), whom he has not seen
or written to while in prison. It is never made clear if Billy set his
friends up, but the implication is, that he did, in order to get rid of
the competition.
Trevor comes back home by motorcycle and with a different attitude after
being away for four years, and plans to see Laura and then leave for
California with his motorcycle friend. Billy, in the meantime, becomes a
big-time hood while Andy, who is now 23-years-old, stagnates and is
disgusted that Billy treats him contemptuously as his gopher. Andy wants
to make one big score, on his own. He comes from wealthy parents and
could always get the money he needs from them -- but he's all about
proving himself, wanting very much to be recognized as a big criminal
operator. He sees his opportunity through a drug deal, where he needs
$25,000 to get in on that deal. He decides to rob a nightclub with the
gang he put together, even though he knows it is run by a Jewish
mobster. He talks the weak-minded Trevor into going along with the
heist.
The old-time Jewish gangster club owner named Jack Trattner (David
Stepkin), asks his vicious enforcer, Michael (Artura), to get the ones
who took his money and diamonds. The 26-year-old first-time director Rob
Weiss, has this low-budget film put all its cards on the action table,
moving it along at a fast clip. The story highlights how different the
three friends turned out to be as young adults and how Billy so easily
betrays his friends. The weakness of this plot, is that the friendship
among the three never seemed to be anything but a superficial one, yet
we are supposed to believe it is packed with a great deal of emotion at
present.
Trevor is the only one of the three who we can be sympathetic to. He is
looking for a different way of life and is searching to find out what
really makes him happy, having learned that it is not money. Andy needs
to come of age, to realize he has to grow up and can't be stuck with the
same twisted mental attitude he had as a kid. Billy is just a bad egg, a
weasel. It is difficult to find one thing about him that is likable. I
also found it hard to believe that he became a big-time criminal, he
just seemed to be too punky.
The problem with this creepy friendship tale, one solely based on
criminal schemes and drug deals, is ultimately the problem with this
film -- because when the friendship breaks up, who cares! And if we
don't care, the film becomes empty, though it's good for a few laughs.
The main joke seems to be that the kids learn to respect their elders,
not their parents who have become wealthy the old-fashioned way through
their talent, but their grandfathers who were crooks like they are and
who see their grandsons as them when they were young.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
     Andy (Steve Parlavecchio), Trevor (Patrick McGaw), and Billy
(Joseph Lindsey) have grown up together in the Long Island community of
Five Towns.  By their own admission, their friendship started almost
from birth.  However, relationships that were once strong begin to
fracture with the onset of adulthood.  A drug bust gone bad sends
Trevor to prison and he emerges a disillusioned man.  Billy becomes a
big-time hood using Andy as his gopher, a role that the somewhat-timid
twenty-three year old is desperate to escape from.
     AMONGST FRIENDS is another story about crime in America, but
instead of telling about the "have nots" of society, the film focuses
on three boys who come from wealthy, respectable families.  Bored and
satisfied with comfortable lives where all their conventional wants are
met, they crave something different and exciting.  Andy's grandfather,
who built his fortune as a bookie, and his gangster friends become
inspirations and role models.
     The three main characters couldn't be more different.  Trevor is a
dreamer and a romantic, a man to whom freedom and love mean more than
all the money in the world.  His feelings for Laura (Mira Sorvino,
daughter of GOODFELLAS actor Paul Sorvino) bring him back to Five Towns
following a lengthy absence, and it's his return that sets in motion
the events of this film.
     Billy is, plain and simple, a thoroughly unlikable bully.  In
fact, if there's an obvious flaw in any of the characters, it's that he
has absolutely no redeeming characteristics.  It's hard to see what
anyone else could possibly see in someone so completely despicable.
     Of the three, Andy is the most unsatisfied with life.  Each of his
friends has something while he's still striving for that one big score
that will fill the gaping void.  It isn't that he needs the money--he
can get that from his parents any time he wants it--but the cash is a
way of proving that he can hit the big time, even if it is gained
through drug deals.
     Solid performances by the lead actors, not to mention strong
support from a cast of equally-unfamiliar names, bring these people to
life.  Through the entire film, there's not a bad acting job to be
found, and a couple of the players excel.  Patrick McGaw is
superlative, as is Mira Sorvino, despite the limitations of the role.
Also worthy of note is Ms.  Sorvino's grandfather, Ford Sorvino, who
has a series of hilarious cameos that provide most of the film's scarce
comic relief.  Apparently, there's a lot of talent in that family.
     AMONGST FRIENDS never lets up.  Scene after scene flashes by,
often moving the plot along at dizzying speeds.  Movies less economic
with dialogue and story development might take an hour longer to tell
the same tale.  The transitions in AMONGST FRIENDS are frequently
abrupt, and writer/director Rob Weiss obviously doesn't believe in
wasting screen time.
     In fact, it could be argued that the film moves too fast,
especially at the beginning when it takes a while to sort out who the
individual characters are and exactly what they're up to.  The
voiceover narrative by Andy doesn't help much since there's too much
information to absorb in such a short time.
     This is one of those low-budget motion pictures (it cost only
$900,000 to make) that succeeds wildly because it takes chances.
Eschewing formulas is dangerous territory for a production team that
wants their product to hit it big; fortunately, there's still a market
for this kind of small, independently-made movie.  Apparently the big
distribution companies know something good when they see it, though,
because Weiss has recently signed a three picture deal with Universal.
     Don't look for easy answers in AMONGST FRIENDS, because you won't
find them.  In fact, the film doesn't really offer any solutions.  The
problems are obvious, as are the tragic consequences of certain
actions, but if Weiss has any answers, he doesn't share them with us.
     In the final analysis, AMONGST FRIENDS works not because it's an
expose of upscale, suburban violence and drug use, but because it takes
the time to develop its characters so that the events which swirl
around them involve us.  Emotional honesty is difficult for many films,
but this one attains it, and when something devastating happens on
screen, the reverberations shake the theater and the people sitting in
it.
     That's the kind of experience that AMONGST FRIENDS offers.  It's
not safe, comfortable, or lighthearted, nor is it completely original,
but it's definitely memorable.  With plenty of movies available
offering fluff, this is among the rare exceptions that don't pull
punches and always hit hard.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
