Title
Review for Endless Summer, The (1966)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) Brown loves to surf. It was his dream to spend one year
surfing, switching hemispheres as the seasons changed, and circling the
globe in the process. This documentary gave him the perfect excuse to
fulfill his dream. The title refers to the year in his life when, for
him, summer would never end. 
Along the way, we learn a little about surfboards and waves. What types
of waves are the best? Little curly ones that don't collapse. What does
great surfing mean? Long rides. 
But more interesting is the human story. 
The tone of the film is a little staged and familiar at first. Brown
seems like a big self-assured lug going for cheap clever laughs. He
realizes he has a movie camera and sets up a couple of visual gags, as
if that's what one is expected to do with a camera. But as he moves
around the globe, the novelty of the camera wears off and his wonder and
enjoyment grow. He stops TRYING so hard, which is for the best, because
the adventure he is living is enough for the camera. 
He arrives on the west coast of Africa with his two "stars" and
companions. Blond, white, well-dressed, and carrying 10-foot surfboards,
they stand out like a couple of sore thumbs. They catch some waves at a
nearby beach and are mobbed by locals (adults and children) who have
never seen a surfboard, much less a person riding one. The surfers let
their "hosts" try the boards, which are such a fascinating novelty that
they fear the locals won't give them back. This first encounter is a
real culture shock and it makes them grow up fast. What little "we're
Americans so respect us" attitude they started with, goes away fast. 
As they travel south along the coast, they gradually become more
streetwise, more confident, and more mature. 
In the most memorable scene of the film, the two surfers find the most
perfect spot on the globe for surfing. It is a little beach in South
Africa, miles away from the nearest civilization, only accessible by
walking 20 minutes from the road across some sand dunes. The spot itself
is pretty, but to the average viewer, it is no more amazing than any
other spot on earth. To these surfers, it is paradise. Their
enthusiastic declaration that it is the best surfing in the world makes
us feel privileged to have seen it and sorry not to have been there in
person (especially in light of what became of the spot . . . but more on
that in the next review). 
The movie is a favorable cross between a home movie and a serious
documentary. Bruce Brown's personality is apparent from the pranks he
pulls at the beginning, and through his more serious evaluations of
friendships and waves. But the movie is also long enough and of a broad
enough scope to be taken seriously. The mix is very effective. The
storyteller's personal enthusiasm for the subject matter is contagious,
and it makes both Brown and surfing much more interesting. In fact, it
will probably make you want to try surfing. 
Not many of us get to fulfill the kind of dream that Brown fulfilled by
making this movie. He knew he was lucky to be making THE ENDLESS SUMMER,
and by the end, he seems genuinely grateful for the chance. The year of
the endless summer was clearly the best year of his life, and we got to
see it all. 
He was a wonderful tour guide for one of the most interesting tours on
film.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Brian Koller
Bruce Brown directed, produced, edited and
narrated "The Endless Summer", a pseudo-documentary
that follows two professional surfers around
the world.  It was filmed as a silent, with
witty narration and a surf music score later
added.  You would think that a documentary on
surfing would eventually reach low tide and
become beached, but the expected repetition
and boredom never quite arrives.  This has
much to do with the skill of Brown's editing,
and his knowledge of and enthusiasm for surfing.
Our surfer protagonists are Mike Hynson and
Robert August.  We don't get to know them
beyong surfing (and some clever comic relief
pantomiming) and it fact it is difficult to
tell which one is which.  Perhaps this is
just as well, since that allows the focus
to be on the sport of surfing, and how the
surf varies worldwide from beach to beach.
Brown and the crew stay behind the camera,
creating the illusion that they aren't there,
and that it is just Mike and Robert who are
surfing around the world.
The best part of the film comes early.  Mike
and Robert begin their travels with the northwest
coast of Africa, becoming the first ever to
surf there.  They encounter local villagers,
fishermen and their kids, who had never seen
a white man, much less a surfer, in their lives.
It is entertaining to see our surfing heroes
trying to communicate with the locals, who of
course speak no English, and attempting to teach
them how to surf.
You don't have to be an expert surfer to
appreciate the film.  Surfing techniques are
explained in amusing slang expressions, and the
cinematography, while on the cheap, is
very good.  Sometimes the waves are awesome,
with the surfers risking their lives for
the thrill of the ride.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
