Title
Review for Under Siege 2: Dark Territory (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by   Geoff Murphy
Written by    Richard Hatem & Matt Reeves
Cast          Steven Seagal, Eric Bogosian, Katherine Heigl, Morris
              Chestnut, Everett McGill
MPAA Rating   "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Reviewed at   General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh (15JUL95)
     This bastard son of DIE HARD--and there are so very *many* of
them!--has a playful awfulness that's missing from the other
summer blockbusters.  Master thespian and martial-arts expert
Steven Seagal returns to the role of Casey Ryback, the former Navy SEAL
turned civilian chef.  This time, he's taking a train ride through the
Rockies.  Why?  Because he doesn't want to fly, or something like
that.  (His parents just died in a plane crash.  Or was it his
brother?  Who can tell?)
     Along for the trip is his pretty niece (Katherine Heigl), who gets
to spar with her uncle for all of fifteen minutes before she and the
rest of the passengers are taken into custody by a band of terrorists.
They chose this train because it's there, and because it's such a great
way to transport a satellite uplink that will let Eric Bogosian (as the
villain, if you can buy *that* one!) control a satellite with truly
devastating power.  Scary.
     Meanwhile, Ryback is hiding in one of the compartments.  He's a
master of guns, knives, and a mysterious form of yoga that can hold all
facial muscles immobile, even during dramatic close-ups.  Like UNDER
SIEGE, PASSENGER 57, DIE HARD 2, and all the rest of those movies, our
hero spends the duration of the film slowly staking the bad guys while
trying not to fall in/out/onto something.  Of course, Bruce Willis
never had to undergo the humiliation of falling off a train ala Gene
Wilder in THE SILVER STREAK.  Luckily, these bad guys are really
not-so-bad guys.  They actually back the train up to get him!
     Director Frank Oz (LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS) and screenwriter
Melissa Mathison (E.T.) adapt the Lynne Reid Banks's children's classic
to pleasant effect.  The story of a young boy who gets to play dice
with the universe doesn't really go anywhere, but the actors are
appealing and the FX are great.  (Anyone else see the resemblance
between Litefoot and Keanu Reeves??) Certainly it's a better family
film than either POCAHONTAS or THE MIGHTY MARVEL MORPHIN' MUTANT
TEENAGE NINJA POWER RANGERS MOVIE.
     Director Chris Columbus continues to experiment with tone, trying
his hardest to juxtapose sentiment and slapstick the way he did so well
in HOME ALONE.  He partially succeeded with his last film, the stuffy
MRS. DOUBTFIRE.  Here, he fails.  The characters in this remake of the
French farce NEUF MOIS need a more intimate approach than what's
attempted here. (In fact, the film's best joke is a throwaway--the
characters race past a marquee that reads HOME ALONE VII.)
     The cast is good, though, and they'll survive to film another
day.  And nobody does reticence quite like Hugh Grant, even if NINE
MONTHS is a really poor showcase for Scandal Boy.  Hugh could do
better.  With Julianne Moore, Jeff Goldblum, Tom Arnold, Joan Cusack,
and a scene-stealing Robin Williams.
     Another funny film about film, this one boasting another smooth
comic performance from Kevin Spacey.  (Remember THE REF?)  He does an
Oscar-worthy turn as a tyrannical studio executive who gets *his* after
a year of abusing his fresh-from-film-school assistant (Frank Whaley).
Boasting torture sequences right out of DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, this
pitch-black comedy may be too much for some.  Hilarious.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: general release 7/14/95 
Running Length: 1:40 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, brief nudity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Steven Segal, Eric Bogosian, Katherine Heigl, Morris Chestnut, 
      Everett McGill, Kurtwood Smith 
Director: Geoff Murphy 
Producers: Steven Segal, Arnon Milchan, and Steve Perry 
Screenplay: Richard Hatem & Matt Reeves 
Cinematography: Robbie Greenberg 
Music: Basil Poledouris 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     Back in 1992, there was a thriller about a cook aboard a Navy 
vessel who got stuck with the job of stopping a bunch of generic 
terrorists.  All-in-all, the film wasn't great, but sizable portions 
were redeemed by the wonderfully over-the-top performance of Tommy Lee 
Jones.  Of course, the good guy was played by Steven Segal, the macho 
man with the frozen expression.  Now, for a reason that has more to do 
with Segal's ego than a creative impulse, the unsuspecting action-loving 
public has just had UNDER SIEGE 2 foisted upon it.  Those that thought 
DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE was a disappointment had better be prepared 
for the worst. 
     Of course, it's a well-known fact that Segal can't act (or direct, 
for that matter; however, I'll leave ON DEADLY GROUND out of this), but 
he's far from the only thing wrong with this sorry excuse for a sequel.  
>From start to finish, the script is stupid, the direction is spotty, the 
editing is choppy, and the special effects make DOCTOR WHO's notoriously 
cheesy visuals look like flawless masterpieces.  This movie is putrid.   
     Back from UNDER SIEGE is ex-SEAL operative Casey Ryback (Segal), 
the man who cooks with one hand while defeating bad guys with the other.  
This time, he's on a train trip with a pretty niece (Katherine Heigl, 
turning in a performance as bland as the one from MY FATHER THE HERO).  
There's been a family tragedy (Casey's brother is dead), but the details 
are glossed over because the introduction has already begun to drag.  
Meanwhile, a nutcase named Travis Dane (Eric Bogosian) has taken over a 
super-secret, invincible weapons satellite and, after devastating China 
with a blast, he turns it on Washington D.C.  Needing a mobile base of 
operations, Travis and his henchmen decide to take over the train 
Casey's on, so that's where the so-called action takes place.  This 
mostly consists of Segal running through lots of empty train cars, 
finding inept bad guys and either stabbing them, blowing their heads 
off, or throwing them from the train. 
     As a villain, Eric Bogosian lacks a certain panache.  To his 
credit, the actor tries to foam at the mouth and do all the other 
requisite things necessary for the audience to hiss at him, but he just 
doesn't manage it.  Everett McGill (TWIN PEAKS) as his sidekick isn't 
much better.  As far as villains go, these guys don't have it.  They're 
boring.  Who cares that they intend to kill 8 million people? 
     During the course of the film, there are three incidents when our 
stalwart hero seems to be in a little bit of trouble, but terrible 
visual effects make these more amusing than tense.  And then there's the 
big, joyous conclusion, complete with applause -- talk about cornball.  
This makes SCENT OF A WOMAN's grand finale look restrained.  The whole 
production might have made a wonderfully campy ride if director Geoff 
Murphy hadn't taken things so seriously. 
     I have come to the conclusion that it's impossible for a Steven 
Segal movie to be anything better than mediocre, and this particular 
travesty may be his worst yet.  The title UNDER SIEGE is supposed to 
represent the situation faced by Segal's character, but it's equally 
appropriate in describing the experience of the poor viewer who sits 
through this film.   
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Kong
It's hard to force myself to watch Steven Seagal movies.  But, since I
enjoyed Under Siege so much, I thought I'd catch Under Siege 2 for fun.
As introduced in the first film, Steve Seagal's character, Casey Ryback is
a Navy cook.  But, are we to believe that's all he is?  Heck no.  Ryback is
really a highly trained Navy SEAL who is able to disable or kill men with a
chop of his hands.  He knows many ways to inflict pain to bad guys, and he
shows us many.
In Under Siege 2 Casey has retreated to a quiet life as a cook in a big
restaurant.  Customers come to visit the restaurant not because of the good
food but because of Seagal's shiny personality.  Like many other
professions, you can take the man out of the Navy, but you can't take the
Navy out of the man.  When needed Ryback still goes active with the Navy on
top secret tasks.  Casey's brother just died and Casey needs to get out
West to pay his respects.  Tagging along is his niece-with-an-attitude
(Katherine Heigl).  Since Casey doesn't like to fly, he and his niece take
a train out West.
Unknowingly to Casey a high-tech group of men want to earn some money and
use this train as their mobile headquarters.  The group of men wants to
earn their money by using a new Navy satellite to strike terror in the
heart of the US.  They are going to destroy the Pentagon with the satellite
which can cause natural-looking earthquakes.
The story is enough to string along the action sequences.  The action
sequences are fun but rather generic.  None of the memorable.  Also, Seagal
isn't allowed to show off much of his martial arts skills.  Some of those
fighting sequences also use some laughable techniques, including one that
sped up the film.
As with most all of Seagal's other films, all the characters are one
dimensional cardboard cutouts. Eric Bogosian as the crazed villain, Dane,
doesn't come close to Tommy Lee Jone's crazed villain in the first film.
And director Geoff Murphy isn't able to create as much excitement as Andrew
Davis did in the first.  Steven Seagal, well, he is Steve Seagal.  His one
scene where he has to show some emotion is quite laughable.
Worth mentioning is Basil Poledouris' score for the film.  This is a very
thematic score and works well with the film.
Under Siege 2 feels different than the first.  The first had a more serious
and believable feel to it.  This sequel has a silly feel to it and some
parts are utterly unbelievable.  This is shown with a version of the
run-faster-than-a-fireball sequence with a twist. (Lets just say the
fireball is replaced with a train).
Though not as good as the first, Under Siege 2:Dark Territory is inevitably
fun.  If you have two hours to spare, catch Under Siege 2:Dark Territory on
video. 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This bastard son of DIE HARD--and there are so very *many* of
them!--has a playful awfulness that's missing from the other summer
blockbusters.  Master thespian and martial-arts expert Steven Seagal
returns to the role of Casey Ryback, the former Navy SEAL turned
civilian chef.  This time, he's taking a train ride through the
Rockies.  Why?  Because he doesn't want to fly, or something like
that.  (His parents just died in a plane crash.  Or was it his
brother?  Who can tell!?)
     Along for the trip is his pretty niece (Katherine Heigl), who gets
to spar with her uncle for all of fifteen minutes before she and the
rest of the passengers are taken into custody by a band of terrorists.
They chose this train because it's there, and because it's such a great
way to transport a satellite uplink that will let Eric Bogosian (as the
villain, if you can buy *that* one!) control a satellite with truly
devastating power.  Scary.
     Meanwhile, Ryback is hiding in one of the compartments.  He's a
master of guns, knives, and a mysterious form of yoga that can hold all
facial muscles immobile, even during dramatic close-ups.  Like UNDER
SIEGE, PASSENGER 57, DIE HARD 2, and all the rest of those movies, our
hero spends the duration of the film slowly staking the bad guys while
trying not to fall in/out/onto something.  Of course, Bruce Willis
never had to undergo the humiliation of falling off a train ala Gene
Wilder in THE SILVER STREAK.  Luckily, these bad guys are really
not-so-bad guys.  They actually back the train up to get him!
     Director Frank Oz (LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS) and screenwriter
Melissa Mathison (E.T.) adapt the Lynne Reid Banks's children's classic
to pleasant effect.  The story of a young boy who gets to play dice
with the universe doesn't really go anywhere, but the actors are
appealing and the FX are great.  (Anyone else see the resemblance
between Litefoot and Keanu Reeves??) Certainly it's a better family
film than either POCAHONTAS or THE MIGHTY MARVEL MORPHIN' MUTANT
TEENAGE NINJA POWER RANGERS MOVIE.
     Director Chris Columbus continues to experiment with tone, trying
his hardest to juxtapose sentiment and slapstick the way he did so well
in HOME ALONE.  He partially succeeded with his last film, the stuffy
MRS.  DOUBTFIRE.  Here, he fails.  The characters in this remake of the
French farce NEUF MOIS need a more intimate approach than what's
attempted here. (In fact, the film's best joke is a throwaway--the
characters race past a marquee that reads HOME ALONE VII.)
     The cast is good, though, and they'll survive to film another
day.  And nobody does reticence quite like Hugh Grant, even if NINE
MONTHS is a really poor showcase for Scandal Boy.  Hugh could do
better.  With Julianne Moore, Jeff Goldblum, Tom Arnold, Joan Cusack,
and a scene-stealing Robin Williams.
     Another funny film about film, this one boasting another smooth
comic performance from Kevin Spacey.  (Remember THE REF?) He does an
Oscar-worthy turn as a tyrannical studio executive who gets *his*
after a year of abusing his fresh-from-film-school assistant (Frank
Whaley). Boasting torture sequences right out of DEATH AND THE MAIDEN,
this pitch-black comedy may be too much for some.  Hilarious.
