Title
Review for Hush (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Hush is a preposterous little film starring Jessica Lange as an evil
mother-in-law who will go to any length to get a grandson.  The only way
that a story this insipid could be any good would be if it was a very
campy black comedy.  Hush, instead, is sold as a thriller but comes off
as more of a Lifetime movie of the week.
Lange (Blue Sky) stars as Martha Baring, the
at-first-nice-but-later-flat-out-crazy mother of Jackson (Jonathon
Schaech, That Thing You Do!).  She's a single Mom (her husband was
killed when Jackson was a boy) who single handedly runs a sprawling
horse farm named Kilronan.  As the picture opens, she is anxiously
awaiting her son's return home from New York City for the holidays.
Helen, (Gwyneth Paltrow, Great Expectations) his big city girlfriend is
in tow.
The two women start off on an awkward foot, with Martha accidentally
walking in on a nude Helen.  Perhaps this is her chance to see if Helen
has the proper hips for child bearing.  Evidently passing the quick peek
test, Martha does what any good mother-in-law would do by tampering with
Helen's diaphragm.  A pregnancy and a wedding quickly ensue.
The rest is your basic uninspired fodder.  Helen slowly learns the deep
dark family secrets, but it's too late.  The only person she has to turn
to is Martha's mother-in-law, Alice (Nina Foch), who has found herself
unceremoniously cast from the family upon her son's death.  Foch, an
Oscar nominee for Executive Suite, is the only redeeming quality among
the so-so performances by the other cast members.
I'm not going to get into the unbelievable parts.  Like how Helen is
knocked up on New Year's Eve but isn't showing at all in a scene that
takes place during the summer.  Or the part where she gets attacked,
sliced and diced in the hallway of her New York City loft apartment but
incredibly has mascara intact after being treated in the emergency
room.  By the way, her attacker has got to be one of the most obvious
`mysteries' of film history.
Martha is a woman so evil and diabolical that she regularly attends
church, but Lange comes off as only slightly mischievous.  While there
was a great vomiting scene and that naked first encounter, this film was
still boring and painful to watch.  Luckily, I was alone in the theater
and could freely laugh out loud at the absurdity of it all.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HUSH, the latest in the tradition of the mad mother movies, feels
like a hundred other films you've seen before.  Only the delightful
acting by Gwyneth Paltrow, as the daughter-in-law, breathes any life
into it.  Jessica Lange, as mother-in-law Martha Baring, plays the same
role of the fidgety woman that she's played so often.  The twist is
that this time her restlessness is the hint that her sweetness isn't
genuine.
     Opening with the hazy close-up of a child's toy merry-go-round as
it plays "Hush little baby, don't you cry," the movie immediately
telegraphs where it is going.  With images of the creepy old Bette
Davis movie HUSH... HUSH, SWEET CHARLOTTE firmly planted in their
minds, the audience meets young lovers Helen (Paltrow) and Jackson
Baring, played as unbelievably naive by an unemotional Johnathon
Schaech.  Helen has all of the intelligence that Jackson lacks, and
Paltrow acts rings around Schaech.
     Helen is the first woman Jackson has ever brought home to visit
his mother -- one in a long series of clues that makes the film so
obvious that every "twist" becomes completely predictable.  When Helen
sees the Mount Vernon-sized mansion and massive grounds of the family
estate, Jackson attempts to argue its commonness.  "It's a farm," he
tells her nonchalantly.  "There's a mortgage.  It's no big deal."
     His constantly smiling and utterly agreeable mother welcomes them
with open arms.  Even when she walks in on them starting to have sexual
intercourse in the hall -- not something most young adults would do in
such a situation -- she smiles and walks away, trying not to disturb
them.
     As is patently obvious, all is not right at the family farm.  Soon
Helen becomes mysteriously pregnant, so she and Jackson decide to
marry.  (The pregnancy may be a mystery to Jackson and Helen, but not
to the audience.)  After they decide to marry, events then encourage
them to move in with Martha.  Martha quickly poisons their relationship
with Helen seeing what is happening but Jackson remaining as blind as
the proverbial bat to every obvious, sinister turn of events.
     The script by Michael Cristofer and the director, Jonathan Darby,
serves up many incredulities.  One of the show's harder to believe
claims is that Martha keeps her huge house immaculate without the aid
of servants.  That she would have trouble keeping help is plausible,
but her doing all of the housework isn't.  Helen falls asleep without
make-up after having her baby but wakes up with fresh lipstick and
makeup.  Finally watch how Helen's very prominent pregnancy waxes and
wanes like the moon, with one scene in particular showing her losing a
half dozen inches off her waist and regaining them in the next.
     The show does have its moments.  The romance between the two young
lovers, she being witty and intelligent, and he being a handsome
airhead, works beautifully.  A nice little romantic comedy could have
easily been fashioned from the show's promising beginning.
     The show's last act is so ludicrous that members in my audience
were laughing out loud at it and engaging in conversation about how
overdrawn and ridiculous it was.  Even with all of story's problems,
the final confrontation scene, in which the people being attacked
attack back, is great fun.
     HUSH runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for some violence, sensuality
and brief strong language and would be fine for teenagers.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Hush (1998)
Rated PG-13 for some violence, sensuality and brief strong language
----------  Out of 4 stars: **1/2 (2 1/2 Stars)
Starring: Jessica Lange, Gwyneth Paltrow, Johnathon Schaech, and Nina
Foch
HUSH is one of those few films that means to entertain, and does to some
degree.  However, it also contains its fair share of problems, namely
its unfortunate title.  Originally titled "Kilronan" and "Bloodline"
(both better titles than HUSH), HUSH is one of those films that will
fail at the box office because of its name.  It's got an appealing cast,
but it seems that even that isn't enough to draw a crowd these days.
Selecting a title that appeals to everyone is a difficult process, but
we take it for granted.  That is, until we hear a title like HUSH, which
makes you want to laugh at it.
However, nitpicking titles is not a critic's job, and so I will move on
to bigger and better things.  HUSH is another entry in the genre that we
thought died with THE GOOD SON (has there been another "evil
_______-in-law" film since that one?).  Despite this, HUSH is
surprisingly effective, boasting good performances from the cast, and
keeping it real enough to be semi-scary.  Many films of this type fall
into the cliched formula of beginning as a light drama, and then
twisting (usually quickly) into a psychologically frightening film.
HUSH begins the same, but I was quite surprised at how smoothly the
transition was.  Instead of having the "evil" character do something
completely evil that establishes them as the antagonist, HUSH gives this
character a background that explains what she does.
That character is Martha (Jessica Lange), and at first glance she seems
normal enough.  She loves her son Jackson (Johnathon Schaech), and her
new daughter-in-law Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow).  The film begins with
Jackson taking Helen down to his mother's home, Kilronan, a large
horse-farm.  Jackson and Helen live in New York City, so the trip to the
country is gladly welcomed.  Helen is especially thankful for the warm
hospitality she receives from Martha.  Unfortunately, this hospitality
begins to break down, as Helen becomes more aware of Martha's motives.
And as is the tradition of all these films, no one believes
Helen--except for one person: Alice (Nina Foch), Martha's
mother-in-law.  Of course, Alice happens to be in a nursing home, and no
one believes her either.  As the countless cliches come into order, the
film begins to take on a life of its own.  We know where it will go, but
we don't know how it's going to get there.  And as the film approaches
its conclusion, we begin to wonder if it will follow in the grand
tradition of this genre--a bloody shootout or fight between good and
evil.  It doesn't.  Instead, it goes for a more psychological and
realistic ending.
The difference between HUSH and the countless other films of this genre
is pretty basic: HUSH maintains a level of believability.  Whenever the
characters do anything, it is usually upon instincts and not as a plot
convention.  These characters think for themselves, and sometimes it
gets almost too real.  There is one moment in HUSH that scared me the
most.  It is a very small and seemingly insignificant moment, but it was
startling nonetheless.  It comes close to the end of the film.  Martha
enters the room of Helen, in order to do some evil deed to her, but she
is startled by her son's presence.  As she tries to convince him to
leave the room and fails, she turns and pauses for a brief second.  This
pause is the moment.  It occurred to me that this woman is not insane at
all.  She is fully rational, thinking everything out and planning her
next move.  It's amazing what a good performance can do for a role.
There are several problems with HUSH, however.  Most of them are rather
apparent, but some lie in the details.  While many critics complain
about the Schaech character being too dumb for his own good, I think he
is actually quite effective (I will explain later).  The problem lies in
the actual presentation of the story.  Director Jonathan Darby isn't
able to hold together a decent pace, making some scenes riveting, while
others boring and dull.  Overall, there are more scenes of the latter.
Some include the preposterous, as when Helen and Jackson begin taking
each other's clothes off in the middle of the hallway.  Martha walks
back in and stares at them.  She smiles, and then walks back into her
room.  During another moment, I tried to remember if those steam
machines had handles on them for cold water.  I can't recall that they
do.  But mostly, HUSH relies on a lot of coincidental plot tricks, as
when Helen decides to check out the room above the barn ("The light was
on...").  I would also like to know if the same medicine that is used
for horses can be used for humans, or if that was just to move the plot
along.  I also noticed that one scene in the trailers of HUSH was cut
out of the film (The part involving the poison in the bathroom).  But
despite all these flaws, the cast does come through as fun and
appealing.
Jessica Lange has proven to be quite a reliable actress.  It seems that
she excels at playing these crazy characters, although sometimes she'll
give a bravura performance as in BLUE SKY.  This is probably one of her
better performances, as she is very fun to watch.  The only problem I
can see is that the producers were trying to make her look more crazy
than the character needed to be.  I began to feel sorry for her
character, even towards the end of the film.  This isn't Lange's fault,
as she gave a very good performance.  Gwyneth Paltrow is also appealing
in the cast, giving the film some emotional depth.  As for Schaech, he
surprisingly gives a decent performance.  Other critics complain that
his character is too slow to catch on, but I disagree.  First, you have
to put yourself in his position.  You lived with your mother for years
and years, but have only lived with your wife for a couple of years.
Whom would you believe in this situation?  Everything Lange does,
Schaech is probably used to, and he doesn't think it is very strange.
Another performance deserves to be noted, and that is by Nina Foch.  Her
wiseacre character is hilarious and adds a lot of humor that could have
been used more throughout the film.  She also provides the best line in
the film ("I am answering, but you can't see my finger!").  A very good
cast which is forced to plod through this uneven plot.
HUSH is rated PG-13 for some violence, sensuality and brief strong
language.  There is a brief glimpse of Paltrow naked, but it's very
quick.  There is a graphic description of how horse-breeders "help" the
horses mate, though it's not as graphic as it could have been.
Surprisingly, the language is nearly non-existent, though a few words
(including on f-word) are rather harsh and unnecessary.  While the
screenplay and plot may not be original or very good, the cast does its
best to make the film enjoyable.  For the most part, they succeed.  But
sometimes, they fall victim to contrivance and coincidence, and that
makes HUSH a mild disappointment.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 6, 1998
Starring: Gwyneth Paltrow, Johnathon Schaech, Jessica Lange, Nina Foch,
Hal Holbrook
Directed by: Jonathan Darby
Distributed by: Sony Pictures Entertainment / TriStar Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (some violence, sensuality, brief strong language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/hush.htm 
On an otherwise crowded movie weekend, with three other releases that
are surely more promising, HUSH has to hope for viewer curiosity to make
good on its terribly awry premise. Those who wander into this one will
do so certainly to see either the beautiful people - Gwyneth Paltrow
(GREAT EXPECTATIONS) for the guys and Johnathon Schaech (THAT THING YOU
DO!) for the girls - or to see the psychotic Jessica Lange (A THOUSAND
ACRES). But after word of mouth filters back to the rest of the American
public, the masses will learn that HUSH is nothing but a good idea that
never gets going. 
Schaech and Paltrow play Jackson and Helen, a couple hopelessly in love
(the two display appropriate amounts of chemistry, but this doesn't work
out too well later on). Within the first thirty minutes of the movie,
Jackson has taken Helen home to meet Mom (Lange), gotten her pregnant,
and proposed marriage to her. Upon her acceptance of his proposal, he
takes her back home to Mom to have the wedding at her place. However,
things don't go exactly as planned because Mom isn't your garden-variety
mother-in-law and her feelings toward Helen are less than accommodating.
The movie builds on the tensions between Mom and Helen, which takes
Helen through a series of increasingly dangerous encounters that climax
in a painful in-home birth of her baby followed up by Mom's malevolent
intents with a syringe full of morphine. 
This plot, which is both familiar ground and originality (with the new
cast), works only if viewers assumes certain things. First, the audience
has to assume that Lange, as the mother-in-law Martha, wants to kill
Helen only because she's possessive of her son. Second, the audience has
to assume that Jackson is dumb enough to be on his mother's side for the
entire movie and suddenly jump to Helen's defense after she spews about
fifteen seconds worth of hopeful arguments. Third, the audience has to
assume that only reason Helen and Jackson repeatedly return to Mom's
home is the fact that spending weeks of quality time on a back country,
multi-acre horse farm is an enticing ordeal. Fourth, and perhaps most
inconsequential, the audience has to assume that Gwyneth Paltrow can
drive a Ford Explorer over a bumpy horse pasture at blazing speeds when
she's at least eight months pregnant. 
Most of the characters have little or no audience likeability. Schaech,
as Jackson, is dumb as a doornail, while his mother, Lange, is the bitch
everyone wants to hate (fortunately, the scriptwriter made sure Mom gets
what's coming to her - HUSH would've been completely disappointing if
she hadn't). Paltrow is likeable as Helen, but that's only because she's
the victim of society in a cast that's filled with badly characterized
roles. But the most likeable is Nina Foch as Alice, Jackson's paternal
grandmother. She's the only one who openly insults the cunning Martha,
and when she befriends Helen, she can do no wrong. Unfortunately, one or
two good performances can't salvage a movie that's already headed in the
wrong direction. The entire thriller premise takes way too long to
develop and the movie ends before it goes anywhere. Wait until HUSH hits
the budget theaters.

Author
Jamie Peck
HUSH
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Paltrow and Johnathon Schaech play Helen and Jackson, a photogenic New York 
couple on their way to spend Christmas vacation at his wealthy, well-to-do 
family's horse farm/estate Kilronan. Jackson's mother Martha (Lange) runs 
Kilronan all by herself, and her genteel Southern hospitality makes Helen feel 
welcome immediately -- even if her first meeting with Martha takes place while 
Helen is in the altogether, caught red-handed after a bedroom romp with her 
husband-to-be. But it seems that Martha's friendly smile masks a much more 
threatening demeanor; she's what you'd call someone who loves too much. Martha 
eagerly, deviously wants a grandchild, and then Helen will be expendable, as far 
as she's concerned. 
If there's one reason to catch "Hush," it's Lange. She treats the pedestrian 
screenplay better than it deserves to be treated, injecting Martha (poorly 
written though she may be) with a little empathy to level out the psycho-playing 
field. When she delves into Martha's dark side, predictable cliches -- 
chain-smoking, staring in mirrors, praying in a confessional to a priest who 
isn't there, poking a hole in Helen's diaphragm so she'll become pregnant (and 
she does) -- abound, but it's moderately entertaining junk because Lange is such 
an interesting actress to watch. Veteran performer Nina Foch is smart and tart 
as Jackson's wheelchair-bound paternal grandmother. The rest of the cast looks 
ill and uncomfortable, especially Paltrow. But can you really blame them? 
The character relationships in "Hush" hold a certain amount of promise, at least 
until their psychological impact is blown out of the water by sheer stupidity. 
Idiotic situations (Martha yells at a nearby horse so it will bolt up and knock 
Helen over) compliment idiotic dialogue ("Why did you yell?" Helen yells back at 
Martha), and the film takes the form of one of the shoddier fill in the 
blank-from-hell flicks ever made. You can see through a great deal of Martha's 
actions and lies from their conception; why do people who have known this woman 
for years longer than we have never figure things out? Does nobody communicate 
or read the newspaper in this town? If any of her potential victims thought, 
acted or behaved like normal people,"Hush" would be a really short movie. 
And then there's the climax and ending, which abruptly come when Helen starts 
having contractions after eating some pound cake spiked with a labor-inducing 
drug normally used on horses. After a really weird chase scene, Martha calmly 
knits in a rocking chair while forcing Helen to give birth in a bed all by 
herself. I won't spoil what happens next except to say that it's contradictory, 
illogical and (probably, since I'm no doctor) medically impossible. The final 
scene offers no closure, no resolution, no confrontation whatsoever. It's just 
there, dangling amidst silent displeasure. No one should like this ending, 
regardless of their feelings on the preceding material. Perhaps "Hush"'s title 
is a plea to silence its audience's likely bitter word of mouth while exiting 
the theater. 

Author
Matt Williams
One of the 90s' most unwelcome thriller trends returns from the grave:
it's the "___ from Hell" movie!  Starting in the early nineties, we were
subjected to nearly every conceivable combination of
relationships-from-Hell!  There were Boyfriends from Hell, Friendly
Neighborhood Cops from Hell, Nannies from Hell, and even Secretaries
from Hell.  But Hush has found an old standby that somehow was forgotten
in the rush:  The Mother-In-Law from Hell!!!!!
The mother-in-law in question is Martha, played by Jessica Lange. She
has been single-handedly running the family horse farm, Kilronan. Her
son, Jackson (Johnathon Schaech) and his girlfriend, Helen (Gwyneth
Paltrow), live in New York, and have no intention to move back down
south to the rural Kilronan.  But those intentions are about to change.
You see, Martha lives by manipulation.  She has used it in years past to
breed many championship horses.  Now, she believes she can use it to
breed herself a grandson.  Though at first, Helen finds Martha charming,
soon she is caught in the domineering Martha's web of deception.
It's hard to understand why nobody ever wises up to Martha' schemes. As
written, most of the characters in the film must be very slow witted.
But then, the film even treats the audience like idiots.  It tries to
get away with things (like leaving a critical piece of evidence in a
rather unlikely place) without even batting an eye.  Then again an
audience which accepts characters as shallow as these isn't one that's
likely to question details.
Jessica Lange's Martha is the only semi-developed character in the film,
and she applies her talents to redeem it as much as she can. A character
that could have been simply awful is merely groan-worthy. Gwyneth
Paltrow doesn't have much to build upon, as Helen's only character trait
seems to be "daughter-in-law".  Still, she fares better than Johnathon
Schaech, whose character is so nonexistent, he's inexplicably missing
for much of the film.
Still, there have been much worse "____ from Hell" films.  Even with its
paper-thin characters and ludicrous setups, Hush manages to create a few
thrills in a color-by-numbers fashion.  You know what's coming, but
occasionally the film will deliver a shock or two.  The old formulas are
around for a reason, but that doesn't mean they taste fresh.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Eric Lurio
A few decades back, every comedian did what's called a `mother-in-law joke.'
You know the thing about the old battle axe who would make the hero's life
hell. 
This is one loooooooonnnng mother-in-law joke.
Helen(Gwyneth Paltrow)  and Jackson (Johnathon Schaech) have been living with
each other for some time, and Jackson decides to take her home to meet mom.
Biiiiiiiiig mistake! 
For Mom in this case is a psycho named Martha(Jessica Lange),  every
misogynist's worst nightmare.
She's a clawing, cloying, sarcastic lying bitch with murder on her mind. Lange
has a great time with her and shows that she can chew the scenery with the
best of them.
To make matters worse, Mother-in-law hates her Mother-in-law(Nina Foch) who is
given the best lines. So, of course, she becomes Helen's soulmate and Martha
tries to kill her. 
The problem here is the script. In the words of Norman, patron saint of Movie
Critics, `It Stinks!' You know what's going to happen a mile away. 
Gwyneth Paltrow seems lost here. She's been in lots of classy films in the
recent past and doesn't seem to know how she managed to wind up in a cheesy
thriller like this one. 

Author
James Berardinelli
     Jessica Lange is one of the most inconsistent actresses working 
today.  From time-to-time, she blows away audiences with powerful, 
intense performances.  On the other hand, this is the same woman who 
made her jaw-droppingly awful feature debut in Dino DeLaurentiis' KING 
KONG.  And, much as Lange would probably prefer movie-goers to develop 
amnesia regarding that particular entry on her resume, every once in a 
while she does work that is reminiscent of it, if only in quality.  HUSH 
is one such example.  Lange is so bad here that she might have been fun 
to watch if the rest of the film wasn't such a prime example of motion 
picture tedium. 
     The film opens, as many so-called "psychological thrillers" do, by 
posing as a light drama.  We are introduced to Jackson (Johnathon 
Schaech, last encounter in Tom Hanks' THAT THING YOU DO!) and Helen 
(Gwyneth Paltrow), a picture perfect young couple who are very much in 
love.  Jackson is taking Helen home for the holidays so she can meet his 
mother, Martha (Lange).  The moment I first saw Martha, I started 
looking for fangs.  Soon, the Wicked Witch of the East is plotting a way 
for her son to get Helen pregnant (this involves poking a hole in a 
diaphragm).  Once that goal is accomplished, she manipulates events so 
that the expecting couple moves out of New York City to the horse farm 
where she lives.  As long as she gets her way, Martha is a perfectly 
amicable person, but when Helen defies her, it's a declaration of war.  
     HUSH has three very simple problems:  it's incredibly dumb, it's 
incredibly boring, and it's incredibly predictable (at least up to the 
stupefying ending).  This film has absolutely nothing to recommend it, 
with the exception of a couple of nice shots of snow-covered fields and 
a quick glimpse of Gwyneth Paltrow's bare buttocks.  Frankly, it's 
embarrassing to watch a respected actress of Lange's stature give a 
performance like this -- it's like a bad Blanche Dubois (the role she 
played in a 1995 TV version of A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE).  Meanwhile, 
Paltrow does her best to get through her dialogue without gaping at the 
stupidity of some of her lines, and Schaech attempts a passable 
imitation of an inanimate object.
     As in all psychological thrillers, the battle lines are clearly 
drawn.  Here, it's Mom and against Wife, with Jackson caught in the 
middle.  Of course, since Schaech's character is poorly-developed and 
badly acted, it's impossible to say how he feels about being in that 
situation.  Maybe someone should ask him if he's familiar with Oedipus.  
Martha is, of course, the evil one.  How do we know she's evil?  She 
smokes cigarettes and drinks hard liquor -- two sure signs that the 
Devil is at work.  On the other hand, Helen is a good girl.  The 
evidence for this is that she's nice to old ladies and treasures a 
locket with a picture of her dead parents.  That's about it for 
character development.  Beyond that point, HUSH is just a series of 
increasingly hard-to-swallow coincidences, contrivances, and moronic 
plot twists.
     However, the first 85 minutes are just a warm-up for the ending, 
which is as anticlimactic as it is profoundly dissatisfying.  I can't 
imagine anyone, no matter what they thought of the movie as a whole, 
liking this conclusion.  Either there was some serious last-minute 
editing or someone left out a few pages of the script.  Before the 
climax, I disliked HUSH; by the time the end credits started, I hated 
it.  Viewers invest something in every movie they watch, no matter how 
good or bad it is.  Cheating them like this is offensive and 
unpardonable.  
     Most entries into this worn-out, worm-eaten genre aren't especially 
good.  Films like CONSENTING ADULTS, THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, and 
SINGLE WHITE FEMALE rely on stock plots and predictable twists to propel 
the narrative along.  In general, however, they're directed with a 
degree of competence that assures a level of sustained tension.  That's 
not the case with really bad thrillers like this, which fail to generate 
even a momentary heart palpitation -- the characters are too bland and 
the plot is too uninvolving for anyone in the audience to care.  Indeed, 
the title of this movie probably refers to what the producers hope 
viewers will do in lieu of telling their friends what they really think 
of this sorry piece of celluloid.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Jonathan Darby
Cast:  Jessica Lange, Gwyneth Paltrow, Johnathon Schaech, Debi Mazar,
Alice Baring, Hal Holbrook
Screenplay:  Michael Cristofer, Jonathan Darby
Producers:  Douglas Wick
Runtime:  95
US Distribution:  Sony Pictures/TriStar
Rated PG-13:  violence, language, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        When I watch films like Hush, I wonder what kind of pitch the film
makers made to the producers to make the project look appealing.  I
think about what the intended target audience is, and what the intended
genre is, and how much money they expected to make with the film.  I
think about these things because the film itself does not answer the
questions.  
        It's a film staring a talented actress who appeals to adults (Jessica
Lange), a beautiful babe who appeals to younger males (Gwyneth Paltrow),
a hot hunk who would probably appeal to most women (Jonathan Schaech),
and stuffs them into an overblown, tedious thriller about a crazy
Southun' mom on a sunny Connecticut horse ranch.  The highest paid
lawyers in the country shouldn't have been able to sell this premise,
but someone did, and the film was produced.
        Of course, lousy test-screenings caused TriStar to change the name from
less interesting titles including Bloodline and Kilronan (one of which
is generic, the other senseless to those who haven't seen the film). 
Apparently, the movie has been sitting on a shelf somewhere for over a
year, just waiting to be released to suspense-thirsty audiences.  And
now, thank heavens, it is here!
        It's about Helen (Paltrow) and Jackson (Schaech).  Jackson takes Helen
out of New York for a weekend to meet his mother, Martha (Lange) in
Connecticut; she lives on a huge horse-breeding ranch called Kilronan
(now you know what that other title means!).  As the all-powerful
audience, we know immediately that Martha is jealous of Helen, but
neither Helen nor Jackson notice this until much, much later in the
film.  The weekend ends, and they return to their home in New York.  
        Helen gets pregnant.  Jackson asks her to marry him.  Someone breaks
into the apartment and attacks Helen.  Helen gets upset and wants to
move to Connecticut so they can fix up the ranch and have a child in the
nice, country atmosphere.  And Martha slowly goes crazy as she begins to
develop delusions about Helen's child being her own.  From there, the
film is unthinkably absurd (up to that point, it is imaginably absurd).
        The movie is just poorly made.  The script is disorganized; as I
watched, I noted that it felt like a first draft of a practice script. 
I would not have structured the film in this clumsy, back-and-forth
manner (from New York to Kilronan to New York to Kilronan, over and over
again).  There isn't even any suspense; Martha is clearly insane from
the get-go, and we all know what's going to happen just from seeing the
preview.
        The story itself is not pleasant.  Writer/director Jonathan Darby
apparently wanted to make a film that observes the complicated bonds
between a mother and her son, and what happens when that bond is in
jeopardy, but there is no depth in this story.  Everything here is for
shock value, and what isn't intended to be shocking is boring.  The
story lends itself to only one kind of conclusion (which we can all
guess because this is a mainstream film), and it just doesn't ring true.
        Gwyneth Paltrow almost holds the film together with her no-nonsense
approach, but one actress typically can't counter an entirely bad script
and execution.  She plays her part well, but Helen is a flat, often
unbelievably mean character, and what concern I manifested for her
spawned only from my liking of the actress.  Schaech, who I last saw in
the loathsome The Doom Generation, is bland an unnoticeable here.
        Lange is the strangest part of the film.  Her performance is
overwrought, but often mildly amusing to watch.  The character she plays
is so deeply psychotic that I just wanted to grab her by the shoulders
and shake her violently, screaming, "Why are you so crazy!?"  When
Martha coolly tells her lies, It seems that she actually believes what
she says.  As an observer of a character whom I've known for
approximately thirty seconds, I would like to think that the characters
in the film--who have supposedly know her for years--would be able to
read her just a little bit.  No, Jackson is not very observant.  In
fact, he's totally in the dark until the very last scene.
        I understand why TriStar procrastinated with the release of Hush.  It
is a bad film.  It has very little to offer anyone, mostly because it's
the wrong kind of story from which to make a thriller.  Unfortunately,
it really doesn't matter when a film this bad gets released, because
almost no one will go see it anyway.  Thrillers should contain serial
killers or deep mental anguish, and they should never, ever take place
on a sunny horse ranch in Connecticut.  
