Title
Review for Notti di Cabiria, Le (1957)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Federico Fellini
Writers: Federico Fellini, Ennio Flaiano, Pier Paolo Pasolini, and Tullio
Pinelli
Starring: Giulietta Masina, François Périer, Franca Marzi, Amedeo Nazzari,
Dorian Gray, Aldo Silvani, Mario Passante, Pina Gualandri, Polidor
I didn't even know "Nights of Cabiria" was a movie until before this summer
when it was announced it would be rereleased in theaters.  I was even more
surprised to discover it's a Fellini film, a director I'm in the process of
discovering as I try to see all the films that have influenced some of my
favorite contemporary directors.  But there's more: it won the Oscar in
1957 for Best Foreign Film, being one of the four Fellini films to do that
(the others: "La Strada," "8 1/2," and "Amarcord"), and it inspired the
semi-popular musical, "Sweet Charity."
There's got to be a reason this is so unknown in modern day society,
especially since the other three films on that list are relatively
well-known, and others that didn't win Oscars are more well-known.  I'm not
sure why, but I will say after seeing it, it's a real shame, not because of
the other reasons why it should be known, but because of the most ironic
reason a film should be cherished by modern-day societies: it's perhaps
Fellini's most accessible film.  I took two people to see this film with
me, both who weren't too aquainted with his work, and they both came out
loving it.
Whether taken as a religious allegory or a satire or whatever else you can
dissect it as, "Nights of Cabiria" is first a touching funny/sad story. 
It's like Chaplin if he were more bleak and used less slapstick.  In fact,
it's public knowledge that Giulietta Masina, the star of the film (and
Fellini's wife), based her Cabiria performance on the Little Tramp. 
Cabiria is an aging prostitute in Rome, and she uses her toughness to ward
off police raids, talk down to some of the other more aggressive
prostitutes, and make sure that her clients don't jerk her around.
But at the same time, Cabiria is weak, and she's not just looking for some
quick cash.  She wants to be loved, and her job leads her to many potential
clients or lovers.  In fact, the film finds her in a month-long
relationship as the film begins, only to lose it all suddenly and have to
go back to her profession.  In this retrospect, Cabiria is sympathetic
because she has perpetual bad luck, but Masina doesn't just make her a
character of pity.  She makes her lovable.  With an umbrella in her hand
almost all the time, and with her Bambi-like face, Cabiria is almost
impossible not to like, and Masina makes her into a unique character: her
bursts of anger at certain parts in the movie come out of a fear of
emotional pain.
Fellini's strong point was capturing reality and making it hypnotic.  In
many of his films, especially his masterpiece, "La Dolce Vita," sequences
go on for long periods of time, giving the film an episodic but
nevertheless capitivating feel.  In Cabiria there are many sequences of
varying ranges, but they never become boring because Fellini always makes
them interesting, and filled with human emotion.  When Cabiria is picked up
by a movie star (Amedeo Nazzari), we see her bragging to all her friends
while in his car, only to see her dumped by him because his girlfriend
returns to apologise for a fight they had earlier.
We see all of this from the point of view of Cabiria, who's a witness to
several of the same things that are shown from a different perspective in
"La Dolce Vita" (which was from the point of view of a gossip collumist). 
She witnesses some of the decadence of Roman society as he always showed,
but the strongest scenes are the ones where Cabiria is shit upon, which
make for the most poignant and emotional moments since Chaplin films.  In
the film's best scene, she's put under a spell by a sadistic hypnotist in
front of a giant audience, where she confesses some of her deepest desires,
only to receive jeers from the audience when she awakens.
A love story occurs late in the film, but the film actually moves in a
giant circle, and the final scenes are filled with tension and sadness. 
Fellini demonstrates that he was one of the best directors in the history
of cinema because he knew how to make his audience feel what his characters
were feeling, and was able to do that without manipulation or cheap stunts.
 In these final scenes, we're right there with Cabiria because we care
about her, and we ultimately want to see her come out okay.  Fellini knew
that the key to making a great film was creating characters who were
likable and could make some connection with his audience.  Cabiria may be
his greatest creation.  She's like all of us.  She has ups and downs
throughout the film.  She wonders about faith and ponders the same
unfaithful questions we often ponder.  And most of all, she shows that we
need to be survivalists if we're going to make it at all in this crazy
world.
But if Cabiria's his greatest creation, it's mostly due to the performance
by Giulietta Masina.  She wasn't just the director's wife, the way that
Lindsay Crouse and Rebecca Pidgeon are the wives of writer/director David
Mamet.  She was an extremely talented actress who appeared in several of
his films, such as "Juliet of the Spirits," and she's shown that she's not
just an adorable creature (and she is), but that she's also a brilliant
actress.  With her Cabiria character, she absolutely eats up the screen. 
She's never boring, she never overacts, and she's always lovable, even when
she's hostile and even pathetic.  And with that final shot with the tears
in her eyes and a smile that can't help but be on her face despite what has
happened to her, we can't help but feel a sad happiness along with her.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Seth Bookey
(a/k/a Nights of Cabiria, Italy 1957 Black and White)
It was a beautiful summer evening, so I figured I would spend it at the
movies. So I figured I should go to the movies. But, with *Bulworth*,
*Clockwatchers*, and even *Wilde* all suddenly gone by mid-July, and *The
Mask of Zorro* not out yet, my only viable choice was a restored classic
of Italian neorealism--*Nights of Cabiria*.
When you don't know a lot about director Federico Fellini, it might be
easy to be scared off. However, *Nights of Cabiria* sends a message so
universal and stirring you would have to be either an idiot or have a
heart of stone not to love this movie, or at least not understand it. 
The title character is a prostitute named Maria "Cabiria" Ceccarelli
(played by Fellini's wife, Giulietta Masina). While we are used to seeing
prostitutes being portrayed as drug addicts or abuse victims, the sense
here is that even 12 years after World War II, prostitution is a matter of
economics. Cabiria is a bit different from the other hookers at the
Passegiata Archeologica. She actually owns her rectangular cinder-block
house on a dirt road on the outskirts of Rome. She assiduously avoids
falling into the clutches of pimps who offer protection. But she is
foolish in one way. She's a fool for love. The film opens with Cabiria
being tossed into a canal and left for drowned by her latest "beau", who
has also run off with a lot of her money.
The sense here is that the nights of Cabiria are not just the nights she
spends on the streets and having dreamlike experiences; she has a lot of
restless nights of the soul, too, as she is endless in her quest for true
love.
Cabiria sees the highs and lows in 1957 Roma. She spends a chaste evening
with a movie star Alberto Lazzari (Amedeo Nazzari) one night, and winds up
wandering the streets, dumped by a john in the countryside, the next. She
gets rambunctious with her hooker friends, and just as quickly accompanies them
to a religious pilgrimage to beg the Virgin's mercy and grace. She also
sees two possibilities for herself--the adored mistress of a film star, or
the aged prostitute living in a hole in the ground, waiting for the
kindness of strangers that helps her survive.
There are also some hits to organized religion. The pilgrimage has a
carnival air to it and the much hoped-for miracle of change does not come
to Cabiria, who gets more out of her chance encounters with a Good
Samaritan and a kooky priest on the street than she does from the Roman
Catholic Church proper.
Finally, Cabiria winds up at a hypnotist's show and her true essence is
revealed on stage. She promptly winds up courted by Oscar D'Onofrio
(Francois Périer), who pursues her relentlessly and asks her few
questions. He seems almost too good to be true; but over time he seems to 
provide an out for Cabiria, saving her with true love. 
Two things stand out here. First is Masina's performance. She is an
endearing Italian Lucille Ball, with a wonderful comic face and a quality
of universal pathos and empathy. It's obvious from the way she is filmed
how much Fellini loved her (and why they died five months apart). Second,
the reaffirmation of the wonders of life and the resilience of the human
spirit are amply shown. *Nights of Cabiria* is told with kindness and
affection, and should not be missed. 
Written by Federico Fellini, Ennio Flaiano, Pier Paolo Pasolini, and
Tullio Pinelli. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
