Title
Review for Where Eagles Dare (1969)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Action movies, like any other genre, tend to change through
time. Today it is impossible to imagine action spectacle
being scripted by renowned novelist and having a theatre
legend in the leading role. But thirty years ago this was
quite normal for Hollywood, and one of the better examples
for this practice can be found in WHERE EAGLES DARE, 1969
World War Two action spectacle directed by Brian G. Hutton.
The screenplay was written by Alistair MacLean, prolific
author of popular action-packed novels (many of them later
into popular films, including GUNS OF NAVARONE), while the
lead was played by Richard Burton, actor who was until this
time associated only with serious dramatic roles.
The plot begins in early months of 1944, when two leaders of
British intelligence - Vice Admiral Rolland (played by
Michael Hordern) and Colonel Turner (played by Patrick
Wymarck) - summon top Allied covert operatives for important
mission deep in the heart of Nazi-controlled Europe. Few
days ago Allied plane was shot down over Southern Bavaria,
and team of commandos under British Major Smith (played by
Richard Burton) must liberate captured U.S. general before
he reveals important information about upcoming D-Day
invasion to German intelligence. Smith's team, wearing
German uniforms, is parachuted into Southern Bavaria, near
the "Castle of the Eagles", mountain fortress where the
General is being held. Actually getting to the fortress is
difficult, because it is accessible only by helicopter and
cable car. But this is the least of Smith's problems,
because some members of his team start getting killed in
suspicious circumstances and Germans seems to be aware of
their presence. Lt. Schaeffer (played by Clint Eastwood),
only American in the team, is also baffled by these events
but he also starts doubting the true purpose of the mission.
WHERE EAGLES DARE is bound to be always compared to GUNS OF
NAVARONE, its better-known predecessor, also based on
MacLean's text. Both films (and novels, since MacLean later
turned his script into novel) feature small band of Allied
commandos deep behind Nazi lines in a covert yet spectacular
mission against all odds - formula which was used in many
popular WW2 films in 1960s. Pure action is combined with
complex plot twists and uncertain allegiances of main
characters. Unlike GUNS OF NAVARONE, viewers actually have
to wait whole hour before the first action scene (and this
is the reason why the viewers accustomed to
Bruckheimmer/Silver type of action movie might find it
overlong and boring), but when the action actually starts,
it never stops until the end and features endless shootouts,
explosions, car chases, general mayhem and bodycounts that
could put even Hong Kong directors to shame. Those viewers
who are patient enough to sit through the first hour are
going to be awarded with very good stuntwork, excellent
pyrotechnics and special effects that look convincing even
after three decades. And even the scenes that aren't that
spectacular - like the fight on the cable car roof - are so
well done that they would be remembered long after the rest
of the film is forgotten.
Unfortunately, WHERE EAGLES DARE, like many other action
films, loses a lot of its value whenever someone takes it
seriously. There should be more suspension of disbelief than
usual to accept easiness in which our protagonists enter and
leave heavily defended Nazi fortresses and airports, dodge
thousands of bullets and, despite overwhelming numerical
inferiority, manage to cause more casualties to Wehrmacht
than those suffered in the course of certain major WW2
campaigns. In the end viewers might even start to feel sorry
for all those multitudes of Germans who constantly get
stabbed, strangled, shot, torched and blown without any
chance to fight back. Obvious invulnerability of
protagonists comes with the complete lack of complex
characterisation - they are presented as stone-cold and
emotionless killing machines we couldn't care less about.
Even the actors show no desire to breathe some air into
their cardboard character, and this is especially evident in
the obligatory romantic coupling of Richard Burton's and
Mary Ure's character. The supporting players, as usual, are
those who steal the show - Patrick Wymarck as half- mad
Colonel Turner and Darren Nesbitt as frustrated Gestapo
officer. However, excellent Alpine locations and equally
impressive musical score by Ron Goodwin are more than enough
to turn these two and half hours of non-stop action into
pleasant viewing experience.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
