Title
Review for Within Our Gates (1920)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Within Our Gates" is the earliest surviving feature
film directed by an African-American (pioneering
black director-producer Oscar Micheaux).  Thought
lost for decades, a single copy was found in Spain
back in 1979.  The original dialogue cards were lost,
as the found copy had the cards replaced with ones
in Spanish.  New title cards were made, translated
back from Spanish into English.  One brief scene
has inexplicably been lost.
The much-ballyhooed top 100 list released by the
American Film Institute was selected from a list of
400 films.  "Within Our Gates" was on that list of 400.
"Within Our Gates" has three major storylines, all
focusing on Evelyn Preer's character.  The first
story has Preer refusing disreputable suitor Jack
Chenault for fiance James D. Ruffin, but her engagement
with him is broken due to intrigues by Flo Clements.
Preer then becomes involved in saving a rural school
for impoverished black children, by securing a large
donation from white philanthropist Mrs. Evelyn.
The third storyline is a flashback. It turns
out that Preer has a white father who secretly
funded her education, while she was raised by a
black family.  This family became victims of a
an angry lynch mob, who wrongly believe that
her adopted father William Stark murdered cruel white
landowner Ralph Johnson.  A happy ending is suddenly
pasted on.
I have seen two Micheaux-directed silents, "Within
Our Gates" and "Body and Soul".  Both films are
good, but have problems with continuity and exaggerated
characterizations.  Both films feature corrupt preachers.
Micheaux can put on a show, though: the viewer may
become perplexed but never bored.
One of the black actors (E. G. Tatum) is an outrageous
stereotype, gossipy, pandering to whites, apparently with
the mind of a child.  The other characters aren't portrayed
in this manner.  Tatum is later lynched by whites.
Micheaux's message may be that while conforming to a
racist's expectation of behavior can result in short-term
gains, sooner or later you will be betrayed (or punished
through divine justice).  Hey, these are just my opinions.
See the film yourself and form your own.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
