Title
Review for Roger & Me (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Chad Polenz
America is a country of opportunity because of its capitalist system where
anyone can make something for his/her self if they aim high and work hard.
The downside to so much freedom is the fact many may have to suffer in order
for others to succeed. "Roger & Me" proves this to be true as an entire city
is made to suffer because of the greed of a few. 
General Motors is the largest and richest auto manufacturer in the world. It
got its start in Flint, Mich., where it employed more than 30,000 workers up
until the mid-1980s. When GM Chairman Roger Smith announced the closing of
the Flint plant, the city was devastated and Moore decided to make this
documentary about his efforts to meet with Smith to voice his concern and
show him how badly Flint was hurt. 
Moore narrates and directs this documentary about his hometown of Flint,
which quickly deteriorates from a booming industrialized city almost to a
modern ghost town. But this is not a grim, depressing story. The film has a
lighthearted and satirical tone: instead of narrating the film through
graphic reality, Moore instead uses "Americana" footage to reflect the
subjects, such as clips from old comedies, movies, television, etc. 
Usually the subjects of documentaries are not the filmmakers, but Moore
becomes another victim of GM's business decisions as he tries to find Smith
and is constantly ejected from restaurants, country clubs, health centers,
and GM headquarters in Detroit. 
Sometimes reality can be more brutal than fiction, but sometimes it can be
funnier too, and both happens here. Throughout the film there are several
instances of people obviously lying to Moore and giving him the run-around
just to get him to leave. It's funny to watch because they are such terrible
liars, but it's also disturbing when we realize how cruel some people can be.
What is so unique about this film is its ability to tell a rather bleak
story through lighthearted methods. A parade is held and the entire city
turns out for it, but as Miss Michigan rides atop a float, in the background
we can see dozens of boarded-up stores and the frowns on the people's faces.
Moore also throws in several celebrity interviews, and they all say the same
thing; "Keep your head up and your spirits high. Work hard, and things will
pick up eventually." Try telling that to the woman who sells rabbits out of
her backyard for $20 a week, or to the guy whose job it is to evict people
from their homes.
After three years of trying to contact the GM execs, Moore is finally given
a chance to speak at a GM stockholder's convention, Roger Smith himself
abruptly ends the meeting and no one seems to notice Moore.... you don't know
whether to laugh or cry.
The last line of the closing credits reads: "This film may not be shown in
Flint..... because all the movie theaters have closed." This line sums up the
entire mood and theme of "Roger & Me" - lighthearted, but shockingly real. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Author
Tom Markson
     After seeing ROGER & ME tonight, I was amazed that such a negative subject
could be presented with such wit.  "Roger" is Roger Smith, chairman of General
Motors.  "Me" is Michael Moore, a writer who is watching his hometown of Flint,
Michigan, dissolve after GM lays off 30,000 workers.  
     The film is a documentary of sorts; where the "plot" consists of Moore's
comical attempts to see Roger Smith.  Much of the film revolves around his 
interviews with Flint residents and "celebrities."  Moore is able to  change
your emotions between sadness and laughter at a moments notice.
     Moore gives a quick history of Flint, Michigan and then presents three
years in which despair turns to hope and finally becomes abandon.  The despair
is when GM lays off the workers.  You see the workers cheering as the last
automobile is finished and a worker comments "Why are they cheering?  They've
just lost their jobs."  
     Despair turns to hope when Flint attempts to appeal to tourism.
Immediately, the viewer knows that this will fail.  The city builds a Hyatt
Regency, a shopping center and "Autoworld," an indoor theme park whose theme is
the Automobile.  Moore compares the theme park to building "ChemicalWorld" in
New Jersey or "ExxonWorld" in Alaska.  All go bankrupt within a year.
     The hope quickly fades and people begin to leave Flint faster than ever.  
Crime spins out of control.   When "Nightline" comes to town to broadcast live,
their broadcast truck is stolen.  Ex-autoworkers are hired as prison guards and
find themselves locking up their former co-workers.  When the jail becomes too
crowded, a new one is built.  Prior to its opening, though, the gala "Jailhouse
Rock" party is held where guests may spend a night in jail for $100.  It is
Moore's ability to expose irony in this way that gives the film an almost
surrealist quality.  You see people celebrating the opening of the new jail,
but blind to fact that having to build a bigger jail is negative.
     This picture is also a character study, of sorts.  It certainly makes a
character study of Roger Smith (who appears in the film for less than 5
minutes).  The woman I attended the film with, who rarely says a harsh word
about anything, commented, "Roger Smith is an evil man and I hope he burns in
Hell."  It is also a character study of Flint, Michigan.  Flint takes on an
almost human presence on the screen -- that of a drowning man.  It is also the
story of one of the few employed people in Flint, the evictor.  He evicts those
who do not pay their rent.  He has a job to do and must do it.  "At least they
have someone to talk to," he comments while evicting his friends.
     During the course of his interviews, Moore seems to catch many people at 
their worst.  Pat Boone, for instance, describes how wonderful a company GM is
for giving him two cars a year when he was their advertising representative.  
Or when Moore asks Miss Michigan what she thinks of Flint's economic woes,  she
replies "I'm for employment."  Or the semi-famous Bob Eubanks joke (for which
he later made a public apology)
     Whether intentional or not, there is a very strong symbol in the film: A
woman who raises rabbits for food.  She says she raises them to about four
months and then kills them.  While she holding a rabbit and caressing it
softly, she notes that it is to be her dinner.  She kills, skins and guts it.
Is that so different from what General Motors has done to Flint?  
     Moore put several unusual conditions in his agreement with Warner
Brothers.  The most obvious being the placard on one of the theatre seats that
reads "Reserved for Roger Smith, Chairman of General Motors."  Another was
that Warner would pay rent for all families evicted in the film.  He has also 
stated that he will create an endowment for independent film makers.
     I found ROGER & ME to be an intelligent and very entertaining film well
worth seeing.  I plan to see it again.  

Author
Charles QUINN
     "You know when they send you flowers?  They send you flowers when you
die."  - An autoworker after being laid off in Flint, Michigan.
     Hold the flowers--Michael Moore is alive and well.  Alive and well due to
the success of his first film, ROGER & ME.
     Roger (Roger Smith, the chairman of General Motors) & Me (Moore) is the
story of a boy and his town, and how the town goes from boom to bust.  It is
also the story of the reaction the town has to going bust, both by the people
affected, and the people responsible.  But above everything else, it is the
story of Michael Moore's attempt to bring Roger Smith to Flint Michigan to see
what his decision to close eleven factories, and lay off 35,000 people has done
to the town in Smith's backyard.
     Under normal circumstances, this would not be the stuff that an
entertaining movie would be based on.  In fact, most people would probably
prefer a root canal to seeing the suffering of families being evicted from
their homes on Christmas Eve, and the skinning of a rabbit.  But, to fall into
that trap would be to underestimate the acid wit of Michael Moore.
     Returning to Flint after a very brief stint as editor of MOTHER JONES in
California, Moore discovers that Flint is going downhill at an alarming rate.
General Motors is starting to close some of its factories in order to move them
to Mexico where the labour is cheaper.  Unfortunately the factories keep on
closing until they are all gone.
     Well, almost all.  Moore takes pains to point out that there still is a
single factory left, but it is making lint rollers.  Not exactly automobiles,
but "At least people's clothes will be lint free."
     It is this ability to point out the absurdity that abounds when corporate
America has gone wrong that make this film not only entertaining, but
enlightening.  
     The film's strongest point is its ability to cut back and forth between
the affluent and the destitute.  One minute he will be showing street after
street of vacant houses to the Beach Boy's "Wouldn't it be Nice."  And in the
next minute having Anita Bryant, the Orange Juice Queen, tell us that there is
a lot that America has to be proud of - though she is only able to think of
"Freedom, and sunshine."  
     Not willing to rest, Moore keeps on going at a frantic pace.  He tries to
visit Smith's office, and after being told that Smith is currently unavailable,
Moore shows us the desperation of some families being evicted by deputy Fred
(who Moore points out is actually a nice guy, and is fortunate to have a job --
however unpleasant it might be.)  Then, without a breath, he cuts to a group of
ladies playing golf, who feel that there really is not a problem in Flint,
except that there are a few too many lazy people.  "They could find jobs if
they wanted to."  Then it is back to more families being thrown out by deputy
Fred, this time with the General Motors chorus singing Christmas carols ("You'd
Better Watch Out") in the background.
     By the end, Moore has not been able to talk with Smith, much less convince
him to visit Flint.  However, this does not mean that Moore has given up.  In
an unusual agreement with the distributors, Warner Brothers and Famous Players
have agreed to leave a seat empty at every screening.  This is just in case
Smith ever decides that he wants to see the result of his actions in his own
back yard.  
     Which of course is the whole point to the movie, that this can happen in
our own back yard, and that if it does that we should not shun the problem.
Rather, as Roger & Me urges, we should attack it.  Unfortunately, if you count
the slashing of VIA rail, the closing of numerous fish plants in Atlantic
Canada, and the closing of several automobile factories in Southern Ontario
(one of which is ironically being moved to Flint), we can see that Moore is
right.  It can happen here, and in fact, it is.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A biting documentary about the
     destruction GM does by closing plants in Flint, Michigan.  It
     is razor-sharp and bitter.  Moore's film is a compilation of
     footage he took and pieces from stock footage, documentaries,
     television, etc.  Moore rarely has to use narration to tell
     the audience the point of a sequence; the point is clear from
     the footage he chooses.  The film has a very effective
     documentary style.  Rating: high +2.
     Michael Moore will likely turn out to be a flash in the pan.  He has a
lot to say about a subject he has been intimately involved with, but it
seems unlikely there is any other subject he will be able to make another
film about with such wit and insight.  But the film he did make may be a
real shot in the arm for documentary filmmaking.  How long has it been since
a documentary has made it to first-run popular (as opposed to art) theaters?
ROGER & ME has, and with very few overt jokes, it is one of the funniest
films of the year.  It seems amazing that by filming a true story as it
actually is happening Moore could have come up with a film at once as funny
and as sad as ROGER & ME, but that is the power of the documentary film
maker and editor.
     ROGER & ME is Moore's funny, bitter account of the decline of Flint,
Michigan, due to its plant closings, and of Moore's own attempts to
interview Roger Smith, the chairman of General Motors.  Smith clearly did
not want to be interviewed by Moore and it is easy to understand why.
Moore's interviews turn everyone he talks to into pate'.  So time after time,
Smith--or people who work for Smith--foil Moore's attempts at an interview
and they become the film's running gag.  Happening once or twice it would
look like daily business, but when Moore is foiled time after time Smith
just ends up looking worse and worse.  And just as surely as we occasionally
have national heroes, Moore has succeeded in making Roger Smith a national
villain.
     But the film is more than just an indictment of Smith or even of the
auto industry.  Moore has captured on film Middle America with every pimple
and pore showing.  He shows hare-brained schemes for reviving Flint, such as
the GM-built theme park Autoworld, built under the assumption that if GM is
in love with cars, the whole country is in love with cars.  It featured a
puppet auto-worker singing love songs to a robot assembler which Moore notes
will replace him.  GM brought in celebrities such as Pat Boone, Anita
Bryant, and Robert Schuller to spread messages of silly optimism.  "Turn
your hurt into a halo," Schuller advises with as straight a face as Schuller
ever has.  When people are in real trouble there is little that can be said
to make it better and Moore's camera zooms in on the foolishness of trying
to fix things up with mere words.  One woman becomes an Amway distributor
and seems to have gone off the deep end on somebody's theory that everybody
has a "season of color" like a zodiac sign, and you must get cosmetics and
clothing in colors determined by your season of color.  The theory sounds
like Elizabeth Arden meets New Age thinking.  Another woman goes into
raising rabbits for pets or meat and cheerfully kills and flays a rabbit for
the camera.
     GM also gets "The Newlywed Game"'s Bob Eubanks, who fails from Flint,
to come to town and tell people how great Flint is.  While Moore is doing a
number on Roger Smith, Eubanks is doing a number on himself that could be
just as bad.
     While I do not have any particular respect for somebody who is a black
belt at karate, I can respect a perfectly placed karate kick.  While I do
not always respect Moore's methods, his film is a perfectly placed kick to
the auto industry and all those who support it.  This is not fair
documentary filmmaking, but it is entertaining and it is effective.  It has
precisely the effect on the audience that it was intended to have.  I would
give it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
