Title
Review for Woman on Top (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Jon Popick
It's a surprise to find out that Woman on Top isn't a student film made
by a couple of horny frat boys.  The picture is amateurish and uneven,
and its female lead has giant breasts and a tiny waist.  And in case she
wasn't desirable enough already, the character is a fantastic cook,
too.  The only thing keeping her from becoming a man's idea of the
perfect woman is the fact that she isn't a mute.
It's even a bigger surprise to find out that Woman was written and
directed by two women.  The film is about a young Brazilian lady named
Isabella Oliveira (Penélope Cruz, All About My Mother) who, as a child,
developed a severe case of motion sickness.  Her unique disease kept
Isabella in the kitchen, where she learned the intricacies of South
American cuisine from the family maid.  Eventually, Isabella landed a
job as a chef in a local restaurant owned by Toninho, the fisherman that
became her husband (Murilo Benício, Orefu).
Still suffering from motion sickness as an adult, Isabella has to assume
control (or be `on top') of every situation, whether is driving, dancing
or having sex.  But the man-on-bottom sexual position is too much for
Toninho to handle, and he begins seeking satisfaction from other
sources.  Isabella catches him, and hightails it to San Francisco where
she plans on moving in with a cross-dressing Brazilian friend named
Monica (Harold Perrineau Jr., OZ).  Call me crazy, but if somebody told
me that I could marry Penélope Cruz, but couldn't ever have sex in the
man-on-top missionary position, it would only take me about two seconds
to accept the offer.
In San Francisco, Isabella has the typical cinematic rags-to-riches
journey.  She's unable to find work as a chef, but lands a teaching job
at a culinary school.  Her first class features an erotic lesson about
the passion of peppers, and afterwards, Isabella runs home to rub a
photograph of Toninho all over her chest and crotch.  Yup  we're
talking about one strong female role model, kiddies.
Isabella's teaching gig and good looks earn the attention of every man
within a five-mile radius.  One of which is Cliff Lloyd (Mark
Feuerstein, Rules of Engagement), a television producer looking for a
slot to fill on his on-air schedule.  Long story short, Isabella winds
up hosting `Passion Food Live,' a popular cooking show with Monica (who
exclaims, `Holy Mary and Rhoda,' when she gets the news) as a sidekick.
Isabella begins to fall for Cliff, but also finds herself constantly
pursued by Toninho.
The film tries to show men becoming bedazzled by Isabella's cooking
skills, but they're really just a bunch of horny guys stepping on their
tongues while they follow a hot babe around.  They don't give a crap
about what she's cooking (the only time one of them tastes something
she's made, he burns his mouth), but seem to be hanging around for the
chef to make double entendres about round coconuts and firm, ripe
tomatoes.
Woman was penned by debut screenwriter Vera Blasi and directed by Fina
Torres (Celestial Clockwork).  Failing to entertain in the slightest,
the least the film should do is make you hungry (like Big Night), but it
doesn't even accomplish that.  You don't even know which guy you should
be rooting for to win Isabella's hand.  With the burgeoning popularity
of the Food Network and charismatic chefs like Emeril Lagasse, the film
may have sounded like a good idea on paper, but in practice, Woman is
just bad filmmaking.
1:25 - R for some nudity, strong sexual content and adult language

Author
Chad Polenz
The first that strikes you about "Woman On Top" is how non-sophisticated it 
is. It tells a rather simple, easy-to-follow story that includes only a 
handful of characters instead of a whole ensemble. There's nothing wrong with 
this technique and it's something I haven't seen used well in a long time. 
This is a movie that shows you all you need is some heart to tell a good 
story. 
When you think of a "simple" movie what comes to mind? If you're having 
trouble with that question it's probably because you've been so conditioned 
by Hollywood to think everything has to be complex, intricate, fast-paced and 
sometimes confusing to be fun to watch. "Woman On Top" is the antithesis of 
this mindset - there's no complicated plotlines or torrid love affairs or 
even a stupid subplot that could turn the tables. It just tells the story of 
"girl leaves boy, boy tries to get girl back." 
"This is the story of love, motion sickness and cooking," explains the 
narrator over the opening sequences in which our heroine, Isabella, is 
introduced. She's a beautiful Brazilian woman with a gift for cooking but 
suffers from the worst case of motion sickness. We're told that Isabella must 
control her motions and movement so she won't get sick. She has to be behind 
the wheel when in a car, she has to lead while dancing and she has to be on 
top during sex. She's the chef at a thriving restaurant owned and managed by 
her husband Toninho. He understands her motion sickness problem but it 
humiliates him so he tries to be with another woman to "prove his manhood" 
but is caught in the act. Isabella flees to San Francisco to be with her 
transvestite friend Monica (a former resident of her village) and look for a 
job where she can use her uncanny culinary skills. 
I never thought great cooking could be thought of or used as a "super power" 
like in comic books, but this movie is able to pull off that notion. There's 
a scene when Isabella arrives in the U.S. and cooks a spicy dish and the 
aroma is so powerful it knocks out a man in his apartment across the street. 
The man's name is Cliff, a local television producer looking for a show to 
fill the 7:30 time slot and asks Isabella if she'd like her own cooking show. 
This all comes about after a pretty lighthearted and silly routine where all 
the men in San Francisco follow her around because they're just so attached 
to her natural aroma ("aura aroma" if you will). She's so charming that when 
she walks by some wilting flowers they spring up and bloom instantly (a 
cartoony phallic symbol but it's cute). 
Meanwhile Toninho's restaurant is tanking without Isabella, plus the fact 
that he blasphemes the ocean goddess the village residents worships. This was 
one aspect of the film I wasn't sure how seriously we're expected to take it. 
It's hard to believe in this day people would still be part of a pantheist 
religion. The characters seem genuinely affirmed in their faith and there's 
even a few sequences in which they go through some rituals and pray to the 
sea goddess. I have a feeling American audiences are going to find this 
aspect silly, if not completely absurd and I can understand that. As a critic 
I find it at least a little interesting because of its originality, although 
I think the film could have been much better had the characters been more 
assured of themselves rather than leave everything up to the so-called 
goddess. 
But let's not dwell on this, it's actually a moot point. The majority if the 
story is concerned with both Cliff and Toninho's attempts to woo Isabella. 
What's so effective here is that you have a hard time deciding who she should 
be with. Cliff's a pretty nice guy who respects her and gives her a big 
break. Toninho is really sorry for what he did and when he says he'll change 
you believe him. I can't recall any other story in which the cheating guy 
wanted his woman back and was genuinely sincere in all the promises and 
romantic gestures he makes to get her back. 
The screenplay needs work though. Little happens in terms of plot and story 
for the second half of the film. Isabella's character isn't fleshed out 
enough, in fact, she comes off as being a little shallow and not as 
sympathetic as she should be for a woman in her situation. I smiled every 
time that mystique she possesses did something to the story or made for a 
cute joke or gag, but I wanted even more. 
What the film lacks in story it makes up with in style. It's a quiet, calm 
and relaxed film - there's no melodramatic/all-or-nothing scenes or 
storylines. Everything's taken slowly and passively, the characters mostly 
wait for things to happen to them, they don't take much action themselves. On 
the soundtrack is a constant rhythm of the soothing bossa nova music that 
gives the film an authentic, "organic," atmosphere. Despite the fact much of 
it takes place in the United States in the present day there's almost no pop 
culture references, nothing hip thrown in for marketing value. It's a 
pleasant change of pace. 
I'll admit "Woman On Top" is pretty minimal filmmaking, but it doesn't come 
off as half-assed or amateurish or whatever. If you can take its charming 
elements at face value it'll make you smile. If you want to be a cynic and 
point out the flaws then the only reason it'll fail is because you wouldn't 
allow it to. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-3EB8-A4651CB-39E13532-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Susan Granger
  Spanish star Penelope Cruz is as intoxicating as Brazilian
bossa-nova rhythms in Fina Torres's wannabe "Like Water for Chocolate"
that also uses cooking as a metaphor for passionate romance. As
Isabella, she's both cursed and blessed. She's cursed with severe
motion sickness that forces her to be "in control" of her movement -
driving, dancing and being on top when she makes love. Yet she's
blessed with culinary genius, working as chef in a small seaside
restaurant owned by her mucho-macho musician husband, Toninho (Murilo
Benicio). But when she catches him in bed with another woman, she
flees Bahia, seeking solace with her childhood friend, a transvestite
(Harold Perrineau, Jr.) in San Francisco, where she's "discovered" by
a TV producer (Mark Feuerstein) and becomes the sultry star of a local
cooking show. Meanwhile, despondent Toninho is determined to win her
back. So much for story. It's charismatic Penelope Cruz that
fascinates. Curiously, she's not a traditional beauty; her thin nose
is far too long. But she's stunning, radiant and utterly compelling,
particularly when she sways to Luis Bacalov's Latino score. On the
other hand, Vera Blasi's flimsy plot goes beyond disbelief, needing
far too much voice-over narration. And Fina Torres' clumsy attempt at
magical realism cannot compare with Alfonso Arau ("Like Water For
Chocolate"), even with Thierry Arbogast's caressing
cinematography. Aside from Murilo Benicio's realization that, without
his wife, his life is barren, there is no character
development. Harold Perrineau Jr. serves as comic relief, and Mark
Feuerstein's fumbling ineptitude grows cloying quickly. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Woman on Top" is a frothy, sensuous 6, as
ephemeral and enchanting as the aromas that waft from Isabella's
cuisine.

Author
Robin Clifford
Isabella (Penelope Cruz) is a beautiful, talented chef living in contented bliss
with her husband, Toninho (Murilo Benicio), at their little restaurant in the
Brazilian port town of Bahia. But, while Isabella works in isolation in the
kitchen, Toninho sings and socializes with the patrons nightly. The pretty cook
can deal with her husband's flirtations as long as he can live with her
affliction: severe motion sickness. It's a condition so bad that she must be in
control of her movements at all times, or get very sick. She must drive when
they go out; she can't take the elevator; and, she must lead when they dance.
Even worse for the macho Toninho, Isabella must be on top when they make love.
This last fact drives the couple apart and Isabelle flees to San Francisco to
seek a place to practice her culinary skills in "Woman On Top."
Director Fina Torres ("Celestial Clockwork") uses the screenplay by newcomer
Vera Blasi to create a magical little love story that owes much more than a
passing nod to the 1992 food and fantasy film by Alfonso Arau, "Like Water For
Chocolate." In both films, the cuisine is a character unto itself that, in the
hands of the magical maestro, takes on a sensuality that will "fire the blood
and satisfy the heart." The Arau film is more involving in its combination of
complex and numerous characters and a wonderfully lyrical mysticism that makes
the film so magical.
Blasi's original story is more forced in it situational setup of plot devices as
the fantasy story unfolds. For example, how many people live in obscure little
Brazilian towns, but run off to San Francisco when the marriage breaks up? This
is a real stretch for the imagination and is just one of the problems with the
story. There is the best "girl" friend, Monica Jones (a marvelous performance by
Harold Perrineau, Jr.), who is supposed to be a childhood friend of Isabella's,
but seems to be there just to be the off-beat transvestite comic relief.
Isabella's success and popularity, especially among the guys in San Francisco,
is made believable only because of the charisma of Cruz.
The love story that is drawn through the film does have a certain amount of
charm as Toninho realizes his loss when Isabella leaves after catching him with
another woman (where he got to be on top). When the despondent restaurateur
learns where his true love has fled, he makes a beeline to the US to find her.
Isabella has had a spell cast to make her fall out of love with Toninho, but
that won't stop the passionate Brazilian as he risks anything, including arrest
and incarceration, to get Isabella back. Toninho is aided in his quest by a
three-piece band that  (magically, of course) accompany him in his continuous
serenades to the beautiful Isabella. The love story is sweet and the music,
especially Toninho's love songs, helps set the romantic mood.
The acting will not bring any attention at the end of the year. Cruz is lovely
to look at and has a real presence on the screen, but the actress is more eye
candy than character. Don't get me wrong, Isabella is a beautiful object of
affection. And, she can cook! Murilo Benicio is a handsome, personable young
actor and does a fine job as the tortured Toninho. When he realizes just what he
lost when Isabella left him, nothing else matters as he does all he can to get
her back. Harold Perrineau, Jr. (TV's "Oz") gets lots of opportunities to camp
it up as Isabella's best friend, though the point of the character is lost to
me, except as comic relief. There is little, if any, other character development
by the rest of the supporting cast, which is a problem.
Food may be the focus of the film, but it is obvious that cinematographer
Thierry Arbogast has a crush, visually at least, on Cruz. The camera lovingly
captures every move and expression of the actress in a way that is almost a
caress. This helps to build the sensuality of the film while giving the guys in
the audience a chance to linger awhile and gaze at one of the world's most
beautiful women. Other tech credits are first rate with costumer Elisabeth
Tavernier giving Cruz a complimentary look and she has some fun dressing up
Monica. Production design by Philippe Chiffre is slick, especially with the sets
for Isabella's cooking show.
The music used in "Woman On Top" must be noted, too. Classic Brazilian songs
from the '40s and later are used to wonderful effect, with Toninho using the
soulful romantic ballads as tools to get his beloved wife back, even if on her
terms. Scoring, by Oscar-winner Luis Bacalov, carries the Latino music theme
through the whole film that blends nicely with the songs.
The forced artificiality of much of the story tends to dim the shine of the
sweet romance that develops between Isabella and Toninho. The overt magical
references and effects, the glitter of Isabella's sudden fame on TV, thoughtless
network honchos, spell casting and other such devices end up hurting the film,
making its 92 minute run time seem excessive.
Penelope Cruz has been gaining popularity internationally with her
collaborations with Spanish directors Pedro Almodovar and Fernando Trueba. The
actress is stunningly beautiful and casts a sensuous shadow across any role she
plays. With "Woman On Top," she gets the chance star in a film that is a
showcase for her beauty and her entry into the great American star machine.
While "Woman On Top" may not be all that it could have been - a more mature
screenplay that delved into relationships, magical or not, would have helped -
it does has a gentle nature that helps cancel out some of the film's problems,
but not all. It just doesn't cast a spell on me. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"A story of love, motion sickness, and the art of cooking," Fina 
Torres's WOMAN ON TOP stars the fetchingly gorgeous Penélope Cruz as a 
sexual Pied Piper named Isabella Oliveira.  Cooking food that draws men 
like flies to honey, Isabella, after she leaves her cheating Brazilian 
husband, Toninho (Murilo Benício), gets her own television cooking show 
in San Francisco.  Called "Passion Food Live," the show rockets to 
popularity with its hot-pepper, aphrodisiac cuisine and its sweetly 
erotic star.
Cruz's performance is easily the best thing about the film and is the 
only reason one might want to see the picture.  Known for her work in 
foreign language movies such as ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER, Cruz is a charming 
knockout.  With one of the most delicious accents that you've ever 
heard, her lines come out sounding like they've been flavored with milk 
and honey.  With her mixture of childlike innocence and fiery passion, 
she couldn't have been a more perfect match for what the movie should 
have been.
Filmed in lush tropical colors and loaded with dynamite food, the movie 
looks like it should come with a caloric warning label.  Surely, 
watching it must be fattening.
Opening with "Once upon a time in the world of Bossa Nova, a girl was 
born - Isabella," the film tries to be a romantic, adult fairy tale -- a 
big budget version of LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE crossed with BOSSA NOVA.  
But Vera Blasi's thin script comes across as more silly than magical.  
Last year's Sarah Michelle Gellar picture, SIMPLY IRRESISTIBLE, covered 
much of the same ground but with more appeal.  Except for the handsome 
cinematography, WOMAN ON TOP plays like a made-for-TV movie.
The title comes from Isabella's need to be on top during sex, lest she 
get motion sickness.  (This is the cause of the breakup of her marriage 
since her husband, who says that he has to be on top sometimes, is 
discovered by Isabella in bed with a less positionally-challenged 
partner.)  The story gets remarkably little mileage out of the idea, 
concentrating almost entirely on the sensual food angle.
Isabella's assistant on her culinary show is her friend Monica Jones 
(Harold Perrineau Jr.), who is described as "5-foot-10, great legs, and 
she's a man."  The producer, Cliff Lloyd (Mark Feuerstein), falls 
head-over-heels in love with Isabella, although his love of the almighty 
dollar proves to be slightly stronger.  Cliff's interest in Isabella is 
complicated by her husband's showing up on the set, singing sad, soulful 
Brazilian love songs to her.
WOMAN ON TOP isn't much, but it does get you excited about Cruz's next 
English language film, ALL THE PRETTY HORSES.  Hopefully her next 
project will be a better showcase for her talent.
WOMAN ON TOP runs 1:33.  It is rated R for some strong sexuality and 
language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, screensavers, trailers & more, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I've been hearing about this "up and coming" actress named Penelope Cruz for
what seems like years now. She's the next Salma Hayek...she's the next big
thing...she's this...she's that! Alright, now here was my first opportunity
to actually see her on the big screen. To be honest, I was pretty sick of
hearing about her and just wanted to get this over with already. To my
surprise, she was actually quite charming. In fact, I can freely admit that
she owns this film! If you don't like her or her personality, the film will
not win you over. If you are taken by her (which I was), you will be swept
away like many others. Now get ready to be taken on a Cruz...
PLOT:
A story about love, motion sickness and the art of cooking. A strange
description but certainly an accurate one. This film is about a beautiful
woman who loves to cook but cannot allow others to "control" her, due to her
motion sickness. She must always be "on top" of things. After finding her
husband cheating on her, she flies off to San Francisco to start anew. An
instant cooking star in America, she is eventually tracked down by her
wayward husband and asked to love again. Will she? Can she? Should she? Find
out...
CRITIQUE:
A cute comedic fantasy romance whipped out of a recipe with a pleasant bossa
nova groove, a LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE-type story, and dessert featuring
the adorable Penelope Cruz. This film is very light on its feet. It doesn't
take itself too seriously and doesn't ask that any audience member does
either. It's filled with fun Brazilian tunes, bright colors, tasty settings,
magical moments, easy humor and dashes of romance. It seems to be wrapped up
in a neat little bow asking for you to love it, and with Penelope Cruz's
enchanting charisma, it succeeded in tangling me in its web of fluffy
amusement. Do the characters attain any deep states of consciousness? Not
really. Is the ending telegraphed from scene one? Pretty much. But this
isn't that kind of film. It's the type of movie that you see in order to
"watch the pretty colors", or in this case, the pretty people, settings and
cuisine. I enjoyed it all the way through. It was an easy watch, moved along
at a rapid pace and presented just enough mystical mumbo-jumbo for me to buy
into its fantastical elements.
Not sure if "regular" audiences are ready to accept the
fantasy/comedy/romance combo, but I'm confident that this will find at least
a certain niche of red-hot lovers out there. The one thing that is sure
about this movie is that it's all about Penelope! She's glued to the camera
for the entire picture, with close-ups, tight shots and body parts swaying
across the screen throughout (no nudity though!). She makes this film with
her wonderful smile, her cuter-than-Hayek accent and her oh-so seductive
appeal. Is she a good actress? Sure. For what the role demands, she was
perfect but certainly could've benefited from a few more third-dimensional
characters around her. Everyone from her comic-relief-based best friend to
her Antonio Banderas Jr. boyfriend was decent, but mostly underwritten.
Ultimately, the film touches everything with a "light" brush. Light drama,
light humor, light fantasy, light performances, a light soundtrack and a
light ending. Personally, the film won me over with its top performance by
Cruz and its groovy tunes. For those who have seen LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE,
consider this its light American cousin. Perfect for dates and those cozy
late nites together in front of the VCR. A delicious fairy tale that goes
down easy.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This is actress Penelope Cruz's first English-speaking lead role, despite
having over a dozen films to her credit, and already being a superstar in
her native Spain. She is probably best known in the States for her role in
the Oscar-winning film ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER, by Pedro Almodovar. Her upcoming
American projects set her up with Matt Damon (ALL THE PRETTY HORSES), Johnny
Depp (BLOW) and Nicolas Cage (CAPTAIN CORELLI'S MANDOLIN). Ironically,
Penelope became a vegetarian after filming ALL THE PRETTY HORSES.
Screenwriter Vera Blasi suffers from motion sickness herself and also spent
much of her own childhood and teen years going back and forth between Brazil
and San Francisco (as does the main character in this film). This is her
first produced screenplay.
All of the characters in this film speak English but when they sing, they
sing in Portuguese.

Author
Laura Clifford
Beautiful Isabella (Penelope Cruz, "All About My Mother") is gifted with
the art of cooking but cursed with severe motion sickness.  Things would
seem perfect when she marries handsome restaurant owner Toninho (Murilo
Benicio), but she ends up holed away in his kitchen while he charms his
patrons outside.  When Toninho's macho need to be on top causes him to
stray, Isabella flees Brazil for San Francisco and her childhood friend
Monica (Harold Perrineau, Jr., "The Best Man").  There she becomes the
star of her own television show, 'Passion Food,' while Toninho tries to
win her back in "Woman On Top."
"Woman On Top" is a "Like Water for Chocolate" wannabe that isn't.  While
it features cooking as a metaphor for love and has plenty of Latin fantasy
elements it just doesn't have the richness of Arau's film.  And the motion
sickness plot element is just plain weird.
Cruz is gorgeous (in one scene, every man that crosses her path ends up
following her right into her cooking school class) and it's enjoyable 
watching her whip up Brazilian dishes heavy on the chilies, but Isabella
isn't really that interesting of a character.  It's actually more involving
seeing Toninho develop from a careless charmer to a devoted husband
(and Brazilian actor Benicio is quite easy on the eyes, resembling a
Latin version of Russell Crowe).  Harold Perrineau is delightful as
drag queen Monica who revels in dressing up in traditional Brazilian 
costume to serve as Isabella's cooking sidekick, yet he doesn't provide
his character with the appropriate accent.  Mark Feuerstein ("Rules of
Engagement") mostly mugs for the camera as Isabella's producer and new
love interest.  Anne Ramsay ("A League of Their Own") stands out in a tiny 
role as the TV show's director with her witty quips.
The script is the first produced work of Brazilian Vera Blasi, who suffers 
from motion sickness herself (which at least explains, if not excuses, that
element).  The story is told like a fairy tale, yet relies far too heavily
on voiceover narration.  The film was directed by Venezuelan Fina Torres 
("Celestial Clockwork"), so two Latin women have given Spanish star Cruz her 
first English language lead.  
The film pops with color as shot by award winning cinematographer Thierry 
Arbogast ("The Fifth Element"), yet for a film about Brazilian soul, we're 
shown little of the country.  San Francisco is somewhat better represented.  
Lots of traditional Brazilian music is provided, as performed by Murilo 
Benicio while rewooing his wife.  
While this lightweight Penelope Cruz vehicle has its charms it seems to take
forever to reach a forgone conclusion.  "Woman on Top" wafts away like
the aromas seen coming from Isabella's cooking pots.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WOMAN ON TOP (director: Fina Torres; screenwriter: Vera Blasi;
cinematographer: Thierry Arbogast; editor: Leslie Jones; cast: Penélope
Cruz (Isabella Oliveira), Murilo  Benício (Toninho Oliveira), Harold
Perrineau Jr.  (Monica Jones), Mark Feurerstein (Cliff Lloyd), John De
Lancie (Alex, TV station manager), Anne Ramsay (TV director), Ana
Gasteyer (Claudia Hunter); Runtime: 83; Fox Searchlight Pictures; 1999)
A sensuous romantic comedy, about as appealing as your average
lightweight TV sitcom. There is no special ingredient on the menu for
what is dished out, its the kind of stuff I've seen before and was made
nauseous by its silly idea of love and what it thinks is funny. The film
plans to exploit the beauty and sweetness of its delicious star Penélope
Cruz, who plays a Brazilian chef with a magical touch for bringing out
the spices in her preparations, the aromas just sensually waft from her
cooking pot, but who can't get by on looks alone in this transparently
predictable story.
Penélope was wonderful in Pedro Almodóvar's "All About My Mother," but
here she is so visible in such a stale story, where she can only smile
and tease the audience by having us see a constant barrage of cleavage
shots as she bends when cooking, that she somehow looks ridiculous, as
if she got egg all over her face. The best you can say about her, is
that she's not to blame for this picture being so off. This exploitation
of sex film without even delivering nudity or sex, is in my opinion,
worst than a raunchy film that delivers what it says it will.
The story is all about the love, motion sickness, and cooking ability of
Isabella (Cruz), who is born in Bahia, Brazil and learns to cook at an
early age from her parents' cook. To cure her motion sickness, her
parents tried every remedy, until they went to a spiritualist who prayed
to the goddess of the sea for her cure. She is able to control it now as
long as she doesn't drive a car, ride elevators, follow in dancing, and
is the woman on top when making love. In other words, she has to be in
control of things.
In her small fishing town she falls in love with a handsome macho Latin
waiter, Toninho Oliveira (Murilo Benício) and marries him. They open up
a successful restaurant, where she slaves away in the kitchen but he
gets all the credit for it, even though he's a loafer. One night she
catches him in bed with another girl and decides to leave for San
Francisco. We don't see her in flight, so I can't tell how she handled
her motion sickness problem -- unless she flew the plane.
She visits her friend's apartment Monica (Harold Perrineau Jr.), who is
a cross-dresser,  blending right into the San Francisco scene.
To cast away her love for the irresistible Toninho, she calls her
spiritualist friend and gets her to cast an irreversible spell, freeing
her from ever loving him again. Her luck changes when a local TV
producer Cliff (Mark Feurerstein) gets a whiff of her cooking and storms
into her cooking class as if were in a spell and presents her with her
own live TV cooking show.
You can really write the script from here on by yourself...as the
despondent Toninho begins to realize what a good thing he had, but
things continue to go bad for him: there is a curse he caused on the
fishing in his village, there is no chef to replace his wife, as the
restaurant is about to close for good. So he comes to San Francisco,
figuring he can charm her again. He brings along with him his guitar
playing musicians, the ones he used when courting her, when he serenaded
her under her window.
He sees his wife on TV with Monica as her sidekick, the yuppie TV
producer chasing after her, and sees that she is no longer charmed by
him. When he sneaks on her TV show set and tries to woo her with his
musical group and him singing corny love songs to her, the ratings go up
and he's hired as a regular on the show. The show gets so big, that the
network honchos come onboard, taking it national. But they want to
change the ethnic flavor of the show, get rid of Monica because he's a
freak, have Isabella cook with Tabasco instead of the Brazilian peppers
she uses, and they change her ethnic dresses to low-cut Vanna White type
of sexy dresses. Cliff, her would-be boyfriend, acts creepy and sides
with the network big-shots, even though he loved everything she did.
These TV scenes were not only bad stereotype scenes of TV honchos, they
were revolting. It was an insult to one's intelligence.
I'm sure that I'm not spoiling the ending for anyone, when I tell you
that Toninho reforms his macho ways and together they cook up a meal
that breaks her spell of loving him again. If the film wasn't terrible
enough, Monica and Cliff act on their attraction for each other and
become lovers. It was so awkwardly done, that it had no sense of truth
or humor to it.
This film might as well have been made by the same network guys featured
in this film, because it doesn't look or feel like an Almodóvar film,
the type of film it aspired to be, but more like a film that was
interferred with from above. Its more like a futile commercial film that
is more annoying than charming and more dull than chic, as it searches
for box office heaven.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Blame it on the Olympics.  No distributor wants to risk opening 
anything good this week, because they figure everyone's home watching 
synchronized swimming and beach volleyball from down under.  NBC, 
meanwhile, is taking a ratings beating.  Where is everybody?  Abducted 
by aliens?
     Fox Searchlight's sacrificial lamb is a relatively inoffensive bit 
of derivative fluff called "Woman On Top", starring Penelope Cruz ("All 
About My Mother") as Isabella, a Brazilian chef with motion sickness.  
She gets nauseous when she's riding or being ridden; for everything from 
cars to sex she has to be in the driver's seat.
     When her husband Toninho (Murilo Benicio) craves the missionary 
position, she catches him in flagrante delictu, and promptly decamps for 
San Francisco.  She bunks in with her old transvestite friend Monica 
(Harold Perrineau Jr.), and solicits the sea goddess (by phone) to cast 
a spell to remove the cheating bastard from her affections.  She lands a 
cooking show on San Francisco TV.  People fall in love with her.  
Toninho comes to Frisco to get her back.  Nobody cares.  Her show goes 
national, but the creeps from network mess with the formula.  
Hum-de-ho-de-hum.
     The story is full of moments that reveal a careless attitude toward 
the material and the audience.  When Isabella walks down the street in 
San Francisco, men follow her like cats after a fish, but only once; the 
rest of the time they pretty much leave her alone.  When Monica 
accompanies her to the beach for an offering to the sea goddess he 
carries a dog, but there's no dog at their apartment.  When Isabella 
runs after Toninho and gets sick because she had to take the elevator, 
she is foiled because he's turning the corner by the time she reaches 
the street.  Everybody speaks English with a Brazilian accent.
     "Woman On Top" is a by-the-numbers attempt at a "Like Water for 
Chocolate" confection of cookery and magic realism that comes out more 
like last year's half-baked Sarah Michelle Gellar culinary vehicle, 
"Simply Irresistible".  The screenplay is a first try by Vera Blasi, who 
was a film student when she wrote it, but director Fina Torres 
("Celestial Clockwork") has no such excuse.  They seem to be under the 
delusion that by calling something magic you make it magical.   The 
movie tries to survive on the wattage of Cruz's considerable appeal, but 
it's just not considerable enough.  It does get some lift from a lively 
and knowing drag performance from Harold Perrineau Jr. (Mercutio in 
"William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet"), and it gets plenty of help from 
Luis Bacalov's wonderful Bossa Nova soundtrack featuring various 
Brazilian artists.  But its charm never rises above the calculated level 
of the gift shop at Disney World.

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c3b5c2f0cf53e1ce8825694d0004b121?OpenDocument
Once in a very great while a motion picture comes along to captivate the
minds and spirits of audiences everywhere, magically suspending
disbelief in all who witness it. And, though it tries earnestly, Woman
on Top is not that picture.
I love movies. In particular, I hunger for films that invite me into a
world beyond the limits of mundane, material, daily existence. While
Woman on Top deserves some credit for its fresh, innocent effort to make
this invitation, it is disappointingly infantile once we all get to the
party.
It's not for lack of a talented cast, or good screenwriting, or even
smart directing, that this movie fails to charm. All the ingredients for
wonderment are here, they're just poorly blended.
Isabella (Penelope Cruz) is a vibrant young Brazilian woman with a
talent for cooking. (Note: the film is in English.) After marriage, she
and her good-timing husband, Toninho (Murilo Benício), open a restaurant
in Bahia, where Toninho basks in the glory created by Isabella's unseen
labors in the kitchen. Otherwise, apparently, he's quite charming. But
Isabella can't be stifled, she can't be put down. She is, after all, a
woman on top, which is just how she likes it.
Alas, however, poor Toninho is too manly to be on the bottom every time,
even if it does take less work. To satisfy his need for the dominant
position, among other things, he climbs out the bedroom window in the
still of night and into the bed of his next-door neighbor.
Naturally, Isabella wakes up minutes later and, finding her husband
missing, does what any sensible woman would do: walks right over to the
neighbor's apartment, lets herself in, and catches that cheating bastard
red, er, handed. Then dear Isabella does some little Santeria
prayer-thingie and jets off to San Francisco, where there is only one
cab driver and she is a lesbian Rastafarian who works all hours and will
let you drive yourself around for a hundred bucks. (Which is good
because Isabella is such a sociopathic control freak that she not only
needs to be on top every time she makes the lovin', she also can't ride
as a passenger in any vehicle without spraying orange salsa puke all
over the street--which, by the way, happens repeatedly in this film.)
"Okay," I say to myself, quietly so as not to disturb the other people
in the theater, "This is a fantasy film. It's a magical romance, full of
whimsy and my God! How did they manage to drive down Lombard Street at
45 miles an hour without waiting in that 30 minute line first?" But I
accepted this, went with the flow so to speak, and shut my mouth.
Once she arrives at her destination, she is informed by an old man that
her friend Monica (Harold Perrineau, Jr., from HBO's Oz), the fabulous
drag queen who invited her in the first place, is "detained." By which
he means incarcerated. They don't say why, but I like to assume that
she's a twenty-dollar Tenderloin streetwalker. Again, though, the
fantastic bubble bursts when Monica steps out the door of the prison to
find Isabella waiting for her in front of historic Fort Mason! The
Golden Gate stands majestically in the background as they hug
enthusiastically and here begins the continuous downhill slide of this
brazenly idiotic attempt at magical realism.
Now, I can already hear about a hundred of you out there clacking away
at your keyboards to write me hate spam and accuse me of having no
heart, or whatever it is critics are supposed to have but don't. So let
me reiterate: I love movies. In particular, I love magical realism. But
if you want to see a finely crafted work of this sort, go rent Like
Water for Chocolate or even A Pyromaniac's Love Story and see how the
grown-ups do it.
In fairness, many of you who don't live in San Francisco probably won't
notice the tremendous liberties taken with the city's geography. But it
doesn't stop there. Woman on Top takes liberties with everything. There
is no foundation, no realism to work magic on. The characters are hollow
and daft. They fall in and out of love like children. They're well
acted, but poorly sustained by the material, though the script isn't
terrible; it's often incredibly funny. What really seems to be missing
here is the maturity to create continuity within the fantasy-something
even Saturday cartoons try to do.
Okay, so back when Isabella was stifled away in the kitchen of Toninho's
restaurant in Bahia, master chefs the world over had stopped in, dined,
recognized her talent, and offered her jobs. Now, in San Francisco,
she's calling them on their offers. But alas, they don't remember her
and she's out of luck. She can't even land a job at a fish and chips
place because she insists on making the butter spicy. She is, after all,
a hot Latin lady.
So she gets a job teaching at a culinary school, performs some more
Santeria rituals to fall out of love with her husband, and makes herself
some coffee, the scent of which is so delectably powerful that her
neighbor across the street, a local television producer, falls madly in
love with her and follows her to work. It must have been some potent
java, because by the time she actually arrives at the cooking school she
is being trailed by a hundred men.
Cliff, the TV producer (Mark Feuerstein), is so smitten that sets her up
with her own prime time cooking show, which becomes the talk of the
town. Toninho flies to San Francisco, where the only cabbie in town
picks him up and drives him around in search of his love. Madcap
craziness ensues, and they all live happily ever after.
Warning: viewing this film may be hazardous to your intelligence.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
WOMAN ON TOP (2000)
Rated R; running time 83 minutes
Genre: Romantic Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0206420
Official site: http://www.womanontopmovie.com/
Written by: Paul Mayersberg
Directed by: Mike Hodges
Cast: Penelope Cruz, Murilo Benicio, Harold Perrineau Jr.,
Mark Feuerstein, John de Lancie
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsontop.html
Hey, I'll admit it: the built-in double entendre of WOMAN ON TOP was
more than enough to draw me to the theater to see it.  That, and the
chance to see the gorgeous Penelope Cruz [which leads me to an
observation: how many straight men would you ever "hear" admit to how
gorgeous a given *male* is, hmmm?  But I digress.] strut her stuff
alongside Mark Feuerstein (one of my favorite actors from ABC's ONCE AND
AGAIN series) in a comedy, was all I needed to spend 83 minutes in a
dark theater looking at a projection on the wall.  It was enough to get
me there; but would it be enough to hold my interest?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Brazilian-born Isabella Oliveira (Penelope Cruz) has two great
qualities: she's extremely beautiful, and she's a great cook - and one
strike against her: debilitating motion sickness.  It affects her to the
point where she can't move at all unless she controls her movement; she
has to drive, she has to dance lead, and during sex, she has to be the
one on top.
This creates a problem with her equally beautiful husband, restaurateur
and balladeer Toninho Oliveira (Murilo Benicio); a man's man who takes
the credit for his successful restaurant while his chef wife does all
the work in the background, Toninho just can't hack not being in control
of every facet of Isabella's life, and rebels in the best way he knows
how: he has a quickie with one of their neighbors.
Isabella, outraged, leaves Toninho and flies - with terrible motion
sickness - to San Francisco, where she hooks up with her childhood
friend Monica Jones (Harold Perrineau Jr.), who happens to be a
transvestite [and thankfully, not a "tragic" one; Perrineau looked good
as a woman, dayam!]  After a wee struggle in looking for a job, Isabella
gets a teaching gig in a local culinary school, which leads to her
discovery by TV Producer Cliff Lloyd, who is as awe-struck as nearly
every other man (and, woman) by Isabella's beauty as well as her cooking
talents, as is Lloyd's boss, Alex Reeves (John de Lancie).  But even as
things go well for Isabella, she still finds herself missing one
important thing: control.
The Upshot:
Let's go back to The Story for a minute, to the part where I said
"Toninho just can't hack not being in control of every facet of
Isabella's life" - because that's where my first problem with the
beautifully-filmed and lead-casted WOMAN ON TOP begins: I didn't get
that impression right off.  Yes, the script did mention it here and
there, and yes, from all the generalizations of Brazilian men and
"their" women that I've ever heard, I could believe it; but precious
little in the early bits of the movie, convinced me that it was such a
Problem that it became unbearable to Isabella.  In fact, I was surprised
that events played themselves out as quickly as they did in this short
(time-wise; long, story-wise) film; the audience was treated to many
idyllically-romantic scenes of the two beautiful lovers doing what comes
naturally to them, a couple quick glances of Isabella's Control Issues,
then BAM!, her Control Issues (and his sudden need to be On Top himself)
break them up.  Uh...huh?  Where'd that come from all of the sudden?
Problem two: we switch quickly to San Francisco, where we meet Monica
"RuPaul with better makeup" Jones and swiftly learn, in the space of a
sentence or two from Monica and Isabella in their bathtub scene (an
interesting set-up, to be sure) of their Long-standing Childhood
Friendship.  These quick snippets - and the similarly speedy
introduction of TV Producer Cliff Lloyd - seemed an afterthought, a way
of identifying the characters without giving the audience a solid look
at what they were made of.  It felt rushed, as if the filmmaker was
hurrying to get to a certain point in the movie, only to repeat that
point over and over again.  Which leads me to...
Problem three: the sense of deja vu.  That is, the feeling that the
movie constantly repeated itself; how irritating, then, that the film
switched gears from being too little, too quickly, to being too much,
too often.  Hard to believe that in the space of only 83 minutes, a
movie can Say what it had to Say, and still have, oh, a good 40 minutes
of filler added.  This part of WOMAN ON TOP was classic Lather, Rinse,
Repeat: Isabella and Toninho Lovingly Gaze at each other, they embrace,
they have a Misunderstanding; Lather, Rinse, Repeat.  Isabella
smells/tastes something that reminds her of Toninho, she remembers
making love to him, she gets flustered and angry; Lather, Rinse, Repeat.
Toninho pursues a reluctant Isabella, he sings love ballads to her
(complete with travelling band), Monica says something Sassy; Lather,
Rinse, Repeat.  This happens ad nauseam throughout the movie, enough to
give *me* motion sickness.
Three things that WOMAN ON TOP did have going for it, and that elevate
it from the mundane straight-yellowlight rating, were the strong
attractiveness of, and chemistry between, Cruz and Benicio; the
funkiness of Perrineau's Monica Jones (save the broadness of the
character, it was hard to remember at times that there was a *man* under
all that!) until he...uh, she...eventually wore that Go Girl thing out;
and the best, most non-commercial soundtrack I've heard in ages.  Alas,
these strengths were not enough to make this one-note film work its
magic in the end; while there were pleasant moments scattered
throughout, the moments didn't congeal into a satisfying whole.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
    [Or, to be more precise for this movie, the "Ethnic Factor"]
Another thing bothered me about this movie, though I'm not sure whether
it should have; whether it was reasonable for me to expect to gain
Cultural Understanding from a comedy about people who happen to be
Brazilian simply because I'd never seen a comedy about Brazilians
before.  What bothered me here is that I came away feeling that the only
thing I Learned about Brazilians is that they make great music and great
food.
The most ironic thing about Isabella's Issue with the Network TV Suits'
insistence on her show not being "so ethnic", is that the only thing
that seemed at all ethnic about "Passion Food", was Monica's dress and
Toninho's backup band.  "Sexy as all get up"?  Sure.  But "ethnic"?
Hmmm.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I wavered on rating this film: part of me wanted to give WOMAN ON TOP an
unabashed greenlight for its beautiful Brazilian music and its even more
beautiful stars, Penelope Cruz and Murilo Benicio.  My Greenlight,
though, generally indicates that I'd pay to see a movie again - and I
just don't think that's the case, here.  Still, it's worth seeing once,
if only to see Harold Perrineau Jr. outdo RuPaul's schtick.  Man, whadda
woman...
WOMAN ON TOP (rating: flashing yellowlight):
WOMAN ON TOP was teasingly Spicy, to be sure; but like many Hot things,
its Heat alone wasn't enough to satisfy my appetite, and left my thirst
unquenched.  But I will be buying the soundtrack, sho'nuff.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The Age of Miracles is not over. Maybe in the corporate-
driven U.S. and highly industrialized areas of the world the
closest thing to a miracle is a cell phone or a hand-held
computer, but in the magical, mystical town of Bahia, the
colonial capital of Brazil, marvels still happen.  A single such
wonder occurs when an incredibly beautiful woman reverses
the usual fairy-tale cliche by wishing AWAY her love,
petitioning the goddess of the sea to delete the intensely
romantic feeling she had held for what could only be called
the human equivalent of a male god in the guise of a man
who sings like the angels.
   Since "Woman on Top" is a fairy tale, Venezuelan-born
director Fina Torres evokes the proper magic from Vera
Blasi's frothy script to put across a film that can scarcely help
enchanting the crowds who come to see it.  The story opens
in Bahia, Brazil, as the eponymous woman, Isabella Oliveira
(the Madrid-born Penelope Cruz) is almost literally walking on
air, now married to her partner in the restaurant business,
Toninho Oliveira (Murilo Benicio).  As in all legends, Isabella
has a flaw: she has motion sickness.  She cannot hold down
her lunch in the back seat of a car: she must be the driver. 
Nor can she tolerate even the movement of a trolley car, and,
most detrimental of all, she becomes ill while engaging in sex
unless she can be in the driver's seat, that is, the woman on
top.  Her macho husband is tired of being--as he put it--flat
on his back for years, and when caught in flagrante with a
neighbor, Isabella bolts for San Francisco where she hooks
up with her child friend, transsexual Monica Jones (Harold
Perrineau Jr.).  She lucks out with a job teaching a cooking
course which leads her to take a role with Monica on a local
TV program--eventually to go national.  Meanwhile back in
Bahia, the miserable Toninho curses the sea goddess,
Yemanja--the very same deity invoked by his wife--leading to
a dearth of catches for the local fishermen.  As Toninho flies
to San Francisco to reactive Isabella's lost love, even
sneaking into the TV station with a crew of troubadours to
romance her while she is carried live before the cameras,
Isabella develops a relationship with her producer, Cliff Lloyd
(Mark Feuerstein), who is eventually to forsake his uptight
American ways for the unleashed live-for-life culture of Brazil.
   If this movie does not get you to call Varig or American
Airlines to book the next flight to the world's coffee capital,
perhaps nothing will.  "Woman on Top" is as flamboyantly
romantic as it is bubbly, helped enormously by the staggering
good looks of its two principals.  Director Torres must have
had as much fun as the cast, watching flowers spring to life
at the drop of Isabella's tears or wilted blossoms priapically
coming erect as she walks past on the hilly streets of San
Francisco.  One riotous scene will remind movie fans of a
similar one in Gary Sinyor's "The Bachelor," as Chris
O'Donnell in the role of a 30-year-old man with a $100 million
inheritance is followed by a veritable army of women in bridal
gowns, all seeking his hand in marriage.  In "Woman on
Top," virtually the entire male neighborhood falls into lock
step behind the stunning Isabella as she saunters down the
street with a knowing grin on her face, a radiant flower of
Brazil.  Torres knows how to stage a food fight as well, as
colorful fruits and vegetables are hurled during an outdoor TV
filming of a cooking lesson as though the contenders were
mano a mano in the bar of a tough San Francisco
neighborhood.
   Elisabeth Tavernier's costumes do much to show off Ms.
Cruz's drop-dead figure while the CD of the music, featuring
ballads like "Cinzas," "Nos Bracos d'Isabelle," and "A Flor E
O Epinho" should do a brisk business at the Virgin
Megastore.  The production notes indicate that "Falsa
Bahiana" is about a woman trying to pass as Bahian and
lacking the sex appeal to pull it off.  A magical town indeed. 
An enchanting movie!
Rated R.  Running time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
