Title
Review for Bandits (2001)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Here's a question for our women readers who are dating.  What
sort of man would you prefer: one who is strong and knows what
he wants, or one who is quiet, somewhat intellectual, and has
various symptoms of illness which are merely forms of
hypochondria?  The answer would seem obvious, and I wouldn't
be surprised if 90% or more of you would list the first choice. 
Imagine what a relatively meek hypochondriac would feel if he
pals around with the strong, confident type, what with all the
women looking at the other guy and treating him as though he
were invisible!  Yet think of the kind of ecstasy the Woody-Allen
type would experience if a woman actually chose him instead of
his hardy pal!
   Though "Bandits" is about bank robbery, the real theme of
Harley Peyton's story directed by Barry Levinson--whose
previous projects afford him experience with the genre like
gangster pic "Donnie Brasco" and one about a mentally
challenged guy, "Rain Man"--is the conflict between two pals who
fall in love with the same woman and compete actively with each
other for her favor.  They're equally famous (or infamous) with
the general public who know the pair as The Sleepover Bandits,
but the forbearing Terry (Billy Bob Thornton) becomes
increasingly competitive with his partner Joe (Bruce Willis)
because he believes he will inevitably lose Kate (Cate Blanchett),
the woman of his dreams, to him.
   The story opens as a flashback.  We watch Joe and Terry in
one of their numerous disguises at work pulling a job on a west
coast bank (the movie is filmed in gorgeous Oregon and in parts
of California).  They have apparently been sold out by an
accomplice.  The cops have the place surrounded.  A narrator,
who runs a TV show on crime and famous criminals, reports that
the men have actually shot each other seemingly to avoid
surrendering and going back to the jail from which they escaped,
and then tells the TV audience the account he had heard directly
from the well-known duo when Joe and Terry slipped into his
house and insisted that he record their tale.
   As a romantic comedy, "Bandits" thankfully avoids the
saccharine nothingness of such current movies as "Serendipity,"
choosing an off-beat style to depict the unusual methods of these
two robbers--who never fail to say "good morning" to their victims
as they are initiating a job and wouldn't think of hurting any of
them despite their possession of guns.  Levinson shows Kate to
be a woman who seems to have it all--a spacious house, the time
and inclination to pursue her hobby of gourmet cooking--but who
is unhappy because of her passive-aggressive husband and for
whom living dangerously with these celebrated bandits would be
just the prescription.  
   "Bandits" is overlong at over two hours and repetitive as well:
how often can we laugh at Terry's descriptions of his alleged
brain tumor, his migraine headaches, his twitches, his eye
problem, his tintinnitus?  There are cute meetings that the
robbers, aided by their very willing female hostage, have with the
people they are going to rob.  What they do is enter the houses
of bank managers the night before a planned job, have dinner
with the executive and his family, and then force the guy to open
the bank early and withdraw the money. But these victims, who
are taken in by the charming personalities of their urban pirates,
act in predictable manners, as does one family whose kids think
the whole affair is a pleasant enough diversion and one older
woman who escorts the duo in her bank and then refuses to
open the vault knowing that "you wouldn't hurt a fly."
   There is a surprising twist at the conclusion, one that I would
challenge any in the audience to have guessed, and far fetched
though it may be is the cleverest part of this generally average
fare.
Rated R.  Running time: 125 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
If you start a movie by telling people how it's going to end, well,
telling us how it gets there better be one hell of a good time.  And to
be sure, Bandits begins with its ending, but the story leading up to the
dramatic finale is just about as lame as they come.
Doing time for unknown crimes, Joe (Bruce Willis) and Terry (Billy Bob
Thornton) are milling about the clink one day when our hunky inmate Joe
engineers a daring escape, taking his milquetoast pal Terry along for
the ride.  Within a few nights on the lam, they've engineered a plan for
a new kind of bank robbery -- kidnap the bank manager at his home, spend
the night at his house, then waltz in with him first thing in the
morning and abscond with all the money.
The plan works so well as Joe and Terry rob their way from Oregon to
L.A. (en route to open a nightclub in Mexico, of course!) that they
become infamous as "The Sleepover Bandits."  Through happenstance (and
of course it has to be through happenstance), the bandits end up with a
bored, rich housewife along for the ride.  Kate (Cate Blanchett) ends up
stealing their hearts, and along with those go any semblance of
watchability that Bandits might have had.
Bandits wants to be Fargo -- a kitchy, light-hearted, and wryly funny
comedy set against the backdrop of a caper.  Instead, Bandits is a messy
debacle of awful jokes, unbelievable romance, and a ploddingly obvious
storyline that feels even longer than its two-plus hours.
Bruce Willis can be fun, even in throwaway material like The Whole Nine
Yards, but Bandits puts his balding head in trashy long hair and tries
to convince us that he's some wonderstud that can charm ladies even when
he's holding them at gunpoint.  On the flipside, Thornton's one-note
character (he's an obsessed hypochondriac that can actually delude
himself into paralysis) is sold as someone with whom Kate falls in love
simply because they both dislike black and white movies.  But while
details like logic are glossed over, increasingly irrelevant director
Barry Levinson (Sphere, An Everlasting Piece, you get the picture...)
opts to spend long, pregnant moments developing irrelevant,
uninteresting storylines, the end result being one awfully boring movie.
In search of something positive to say, I'll acknowledge that at least
Bandits has a fair number of giggle-worthy moments, a tense dinner as
the kidnappers dine with a bank manager and his suburban family being
the comedy highlight of the movie.  Too bad that's 30 minutes into the
picture -- and the film just heads south from there.  The love triangle
wherein the guys agree to share the girl (a plot stolen from Splendor --
lame source material, in my opinion) isn't believable, and the robbery
scenes are barely suspenseful at all; in fact, the only real danger
arises when the criminals act with complete stupidity: joyriding on the
road or when the driver (the sleepy Troy Garity, a minor highlight in
this sea of boredom) leaves the waiting getaway car to chase a hot
chick.  Uh huh.
It's amazing that seven producers were unable to figure out how to turn
a moderately promising premise into something worth watching.  (Well,
not really.)  The bottom line is that this is a Levinson vanity project,
pure and simple, and there's nothing uglier than vanity.
Director: Barry Levinson
Producer: Ashok Amritraj, Michele Berk, Michael Birnbaum, David
Hoberman, Barry Levinson, Arnold Rifkin, Paula Weinstein
Writer: Harley Peyton
Starring: Bruce Willis, Cate Blanchett, Billy Bob Thornton, Troy Garity
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
"Mexico? You know I have sanitation issues!"
Starring Bruce Willis, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate
Blanchett. Rated PG-13.
Bandits is a fun, uninhibited little comedy, with a
plot that's a red herring for the bizarre wit of its
dialogue. It also offers the rare sight of Billy Bob
Thornton aping Woody Allen, as well as Cate Blanchett
doing physical comedy. How great to see a mainstream
film that revels in writing and little character
moments rather than trying to overwhelm us with
overwrought action and story. Its attempts at "heart"
and any other form of significance are quickly and
cruelly dashed, but there are images here that are so
strange, I won't soon forget them.
The film was directed by Barry Levinson, a remarkably
versatile director who has experimented with nearly
every genre one could imagine and his results have
ranged from abominable to incredible. Here, he's
assembled two great character actors and one great
leading man and sticks them into a plot that
compensates for its conventionality with sublime
ridiculousness. There's also an oddball structure:
Bandits begins with what seems to be the title
characters' last crime, then fast forwards to a
reality crime show where it is announced that the
"Sleepover Bandits" died in a shootout immediately
following it.
The next scene goes back to the beginning, as Joe
(Bruce Willis) and Terry (Billy Bob Thornton) escape
from prison by hijacking a cement truck and driving it
through numerous chain-link fences. After they're sure
that they have lost their pursuers, Joe proceeds to
rob a bank with a magic marker. Later, as they're
stealing new clothes from a random house, Terry comes
up with the perfect bank robbery: do it early in the
morning, with the full cooperation of the bank manager
whom they kidnapped the night before.
Back up. To explain my fascination with this seemingly
formulaic heist flick, I need to describe the
personalities of the two partners-in-crime. Joe is
actually a fairly "regular" (in the Hollywood sense)
criminal: fast-thinking, charming, charismatic and
cocky. But Terry, ooooh boy. He's intelligent and
pragmatic, but his positive qualities are far
outshadowed by his unbelievable neurosis. One of his
phobias is antique furniture, and he doesn't want to
escape to Mexico because of "sanitation issues."
If it seems impossible for Blanchett to somehow wedge
her way into this story, it is, which is why Levinson,
consistent with the tone of the rest of the script,
gives her a completely non sequitur entrance before
actually integrating her with our protagonists. She
plays a neglected housewife who accidentally winds up
tagging along with our sleepover bandits and falls in
love with both of them. I don't think I need to
mention (but I will anyway) that she is the source of
all of their problems.
Certain scenes here are pure comedic gold. The problem
with reviewing the film is that it is impossible to
convey the humor, or even the spirit, of those scenes
in words. Suffice it to say that while little here
would be funny if taken out of context, seeing
Blanchett's character try to scare Terry out of a
sneezing fit is one of the funniest things I have seen
in a long time.
It's strange, at first, to see the A-list stars and
director devote their time to what is doubtlessly an
exercise in frivolity. Lately it becomes clear: rarely
has so much talent been dedicated to writing such
frivolity. Bandits is absurd, rambling, and very, very
funny. 

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "BANDITS" (MGM)
  Bruce Wills and Billy Bob Thornton play bickering ex-cons who become
America's Most Wanted bank robbers in this screwball caper comedy. After a
somewhat confusing, chaotic setup in which they're heisting the Alamo Savings &
Loan in L.A., a flashback reveals who they are and how they got there. They're
"The Sleepover Bandits" who take a bank manager and his family hostage the night
before a theft. Hampered by an anger-management problem, Willis is a suave if
impulsive man of action, while the more thoughtful Thornton is an
obsessive/compulsive hypochondriac. They dream of margaritas and tuxedos,
running a little hotel near Acapulco. To this end, they recruit Willis's cousin
(Troy Garity), a dim-witted stunt man, to drive the getaway car. But life gets
more complicated when they take a hostage, Cate Blanchett, an unhappy housewife
who's giddy with delight at their antics, falling in love with them both,
reasoning, "I can't choose between you because, together, you're the perfect
man." "She's mentally unbalanced to a spectacular degree," Thornton astutely
observes. And the plot is punctuated with interviews on TV's "Criminals at
Large." Working from Harley Peyton's screenplay, Barry Levinson's direction is
expertly sharp and funny, including a brief nod to the motel scene in "It
Happened One Night." While the Willis-Thornton comedic chemistry clicks, Cate
Blanchett delivers a deftly daffy, richly funny and volcanically sexy
performance, the kind that deserves Oscar attention. As does Victor Kempster's
production design and Gloria Gresham's costumes which are - to say the least -
outrageous. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bandits" is a smart, savvy,
wickedly funny 8, evoking a quirky, contemporary "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance
Kid" romp.

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A cool guy and a nervous guy break out of jail and begin robbing banks together,
by kidnapping the bank manager on the nights before their robberies, and getting
them to hand over the money early in the morning. One day, they stumble onto a
woman named Kate, whose life sucks with her husband, and who decides to latch on
to these outlaws. It isn't long before each of the boys has a crush on her, and
their life on the run gets more complicated.
CRITIQUE:
Very ho-hum. This movie isn't about anything original, so that's out the window.
The trailer makes it look funny, but after having seen the movie, I can
guarantee you, it's not a comedy, so let's drop that to the side. The dramatic
elements in the film are few and far between, and to be honest, not all that
interesting either. So that's in the sack. Hmmmm...what else? Oh yeah, the
acting...yes, that's pretty good, but nothing extra-ordinary. So what the hell
is it about this 2-hour movie that makes it worth seeing, you might be asking
yourself? Well, not too much according to me, and you can definitely skip it in
the theatres, because there ain't much here in which you should invest your
hard-earned bucks. Rent it on video, you ask? Sure, it's a decent time-spender
(that is, if you have two hours to kill and don't mind slowly prodding through
this thing) and the opening jail break-out scene is pretty cool, the ending
surprising (although pretty unbelievable) and Billy Bob Thornton, a joy to
watch. But the basic idea behind the film is played out after the first half
hour and the film just goes into major "re-dial" mode soon after that. Alright,
we get it, they're "clever" bank robbers who found a unique way to rob
banks...but what else?!? Is a love triangle really worthy of another plot-line?
Not really. I thought the film was supposed to be about these bank-robbers
(hence, the title), but most of the time, it seemed to rotate around this whole
three-way love tryst, and it rarely stimulated anything original, engaging or
interesting in that respect.
Sure, Cate Blanchett is fun in her role, but how many dysfunctional people can
you fit inside a movie before you lose any true relation to them and stop giving
a crap? I was sorta into this movie the whole way through but it just dragged on
for too long, went over the same things over and over again, and didn't really
have much of a point or entertainment value to it. And what's with all of the
characters being strangely abnormal? Willis' cousin in the movie seems to start
off as a "goofball" but progresses into a full-blown mentally-challenged
individual by the end of the movie. Was that done on purpose or was he just
over-playing his stupidity role? Also, why was his lame little sub-plot in the
film at all...or that bogus "America's Most Wanted"-type TV show? (this was
parodied in NATURAL BORN KILLERS back in 1994, guys...give it a rest!) So why am
I even giving this film that high of a rating? Well, I really dug Thornton's
hypochondriac character and Blanchett is generally pretty solid in anything she
does. I also liked the opening and ending sequences, the latter fooling me into
believing something that wasn't there, and I also enjoyed most of the banter
between Willis and Thornton. But overall, the film goes on for too long, doesn't
bring much originality to the "bank robbing" movie motif and rarely cracked me
up (but comedy is a very subjective thing, so it might just tickle your funny
bone). So are you bored and interesting in seeing a so-so movie in the comfort
of your own house? Look no further, this generic flick might just be the ideal
rental for your basic needs. Now is that a hearty recommendation or what?!? 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Mad City (4/10) - Natural Born Killers (9/10) - Out of Sight (8/10) - The Score
(6/10) - Small Time Crooks (7/10) - Sugar & Spice (6/10) - Where the Money Is
(5/10)

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Somewhere within the scattershot confines of Barry Levinson's "Bandits"
lies a halfway decent movie struggling to get out.
        There's probably not a whole lot wrong with the film that a decent editor
couldn't fix (cutter Stu Linder appears *not* to be it).  It's got a cute
premise, likable stars, and the potential for many laughs along the way.
But director Levinson seems to have asked Mr. Linder to make sure that
every frame of available footage--funny or not, relevant or not, good, bad,
and indifferent (or not)--wound up in the finished film.  And to heck with
continuity: just throw it together in any old order!
        "Bandits," then, is a caper comedy starring Bruce Willis, Billy Bob
Thornton, and Cate Blanchett that flashes back early and often.  Joseph
Blake and Terry Lee Collins are "America's Most Wanted," lovable Robin
Hood-style bank robbers known as "The Sleepover Bandits" by virtue of the
fact that they hold a bank manager hostage the night before a heist.  What
I could never figure out is why they hang around for the tellers to show up
the next morning but I'm sure that's one of the many plot details I missed
during this unnecessarily frenetic and surprisingly clumsy movie.
        There are scenes in "Bandits" that'll leave you scratching your head in
bewilderment.  Like when Blanchett, as a frustrated housewife who winds up
on the lam with Joe and Terry and cannot chose between them, starts
spontaneously lip-synching to a Bonnie Tyler hit while preparing a gourmet
dinner for her unappreciative husband early in the film--where did *that*
come from you ask?  And then the puzzlingly brief montage of her and Bruce
Willis's character cavorting on the beach with those Polaroid snapshots
thrown in to accentuate the positive--what was *that* all about you wonder?
 And the soundtrack: one cringe-worthy pop song after another!
        It's as if Levinson deliberately wanted to cram as many clichés into the
film's overly long two hours as he (or his screenwriter Harley Peyton)
could, not to mention every available style of filmmaking.  Even the film's
tag line, "Two's Company.  Three's a Crime," reeks of the overused.
        Willis and Thornton have a pretty nice chemistry, though.  Joe (Willis),
the charmer, has long hair; Terry (played by the ever-changing Thornton),
the brains, has short hair.  They might be likened to Bonnie and Clyde on
the syndicated TV show that follows (and exploits) their exploits, but with
their seemingly bottomless grab bag of bad wigs and outrageous disguises,
Joe and Terry more often resemble Sonny and Cher.  By contrast, Blanchett's
performance is closer to overwrought than impassioned.
        I take back what I said about the editing of this film (although when
separating the wheat from the chaff one typically tends to keep the
wheat!).  There's probably not a whole lot wrong with "Bandits" that a
decent *director* couldn't fix.  Levinson used to be a decent director
("Diner," "Tin Men," "Rain Man," "Bugsy"), but recently he's been all over
the map, quality-wise, with as many uncomfortable shifts in genre in the
last ten years ("Jimmy Hollywood," "Sleepers," "Sphere," "An Everlasting
Piece") as Leelee Sobieksi has had openings in the last ten days.
        There's a germ of a fine film in "Bandits," some decent ideas and a few
genuine laughs, but nobody took the time to develop these comic situations
into anything beyond obligatory.  Don't go expecting another "Get Shorty"
that's for sure.  In contrast to that film's smart, sharp dialogue and
dynamite performances, "Bandits" feels labored and haphazard, a big in-joke
where the joke, unfortunately, is on us.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Bandits (2001)
Bruce Willis, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Troy Garity, Stacey
Travis, January Jones. Music by Christopher Young. Cinematography by
Dante Spinotti. Written by Harley Peyton. Directed by Barry Levinson.
125 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Joe Blake (Bruce Willis) and Terry Collins (Billy Bob Thornton) are
prison escapees with a dream: They want to run a resort south of the
border, entertaining guests while savoring that perfect mixture of hot
sun and cool ocean breeze. "I just have one question," asks Terry, "How
do we pay for it?" "Well," says Joe, "we are bank robbers."
The men come up with an interesting gimmick. Instead of simply bursting
into banks and demanding cash, they start off early, going to the home
of the bank manager and his family the night before the heist and taking
them hostage. After soothing the family, they all have dinner together
and get a good night's rest. Then, the next morning, they go to the bank
before normal business hours and quietly take the money. No fuss, no
muss.
The plan works like a charm and the duo gains fame as "The Sleepover
Bandits." Frequently profiled on the weekly TV crime program "Criminals
at Large," they become folk heroes.
Everything changes one day when Kate Wheeler (Cate Blanchett), a
disaffected housewife, hits Terry with her car. She hooks up with the
boys as they continue robbing their way down the West Coast, from Oregon
towards California. Along the way, romance rears its inconvenient little
head. First Joe falls for Kate, then Terry does the same. Kate enjoys
the group dynamic – Joe is handsome, charismatic and self-absorbed,
while Terry is sensitive, intellectual and a hypochondriac –
individually the guys are deeply flawed, but collectively they make the
perfect man.
Needless to say, Joe and Terry do not share her enthusiasm. Jealousy
between the two friends simmers, while their growing notoriety makes it
ever more difficult for them to follow their modus operandi. Eventually,
the estranged friends end up in a crowded bank, with police officers, TV
cameras and spectators galore outside, aiming their guns at each other.
Which brings us to the beginning of the film.
Yes, "Bandits" is one of those kind of movies, opening at a crucial
moment, then using narrative and flashbacks to show how everything came
together. Directed by Barry Levinson, whose work has ranged from the
sublime ("Rain Man") to… well, to "Sphere" and written by Harley Peyton
of "Twin Peaks" fame, the film is entertaining, but suffers from a lack
of discipline, loping along too casually and clocking in at 125 minutes.
The finished product screams for editing. Had Levinson and company been
forced to cut out around 20 minutes, the story would have packed more
punch. As is, the latter part of the production is repetitive and talky.
Have you ever had a friend who came to call with a wealth of good
anecdotes, only to overstay and jabber too much? "Bandits" is the
cinematic equivalent of that verbose visitor.
Still, there is much to enjoy. Filming in the American northwest gives
the movie a different look than most Hollywood offerings. The locations
seem crisper and earthier than what we usually see.
The rapport of the cast is a plus. Willis, Thornton and Blanchett work
well together, establishing a nice rhythm with their banter. The
individual performances vary in quality. Bruce Willis, in full
smirk-mode, offers nothing new. Those who are put off when Willis starts
swaggering should take a few deep breaths and concentrate on the work of
his co-stars.
Cate Blanchett, an actor of considerable skills, pulls another bright
performance from her bag of tricks. In the role of Kate (described as
"an iceberg waiting for the Titanic"), she crackles with intelligence,
sensuality and skittering energy. Physically, she looks like a young
Rene Russo this time around.
Once again, Billy Bob Thornton surprises with the range of his acting
abilities. He drops any hint of his trademark drawl while playing Terry,
investing the extremely bright character with an endearing fragility.
Unfortunately, as the screenplay meanders on and on, he is forced to up
the ante of his hypochondria. By the latter portion of the film, he
deteriorates into little more than a bundle of twitches and grimaces.
The fourth member of the group is Joe's cousin Harvey J. Pollard (Troy
Garity), who drives for the robbers, but tells anyone who will listen
that his true goal is to become a Hollywood stuntman. In fact, he says
it so many times that even the least attentive audience members will
recognize that his career aspiration will somehow play a role in the
climax of the tale.
With another script rewrite and some ruthless editing, "Bandits" could
have been a grand mixture of character study and nonsense. In its
current form, it serves as a windy, moderately entertaining trifle. You
could do a lot worse than "Bandits," but the filmmakers could have done
much better.

Author
Laura Clifford
Impulsive man of action Joe Blake (Bruce Willis) and brainy hypochondriac
buddy Terry Collins (Billy Bob Thornton) are escaped convicts who cook up
a unique bank robbing scheme in their pursuit of a Mexican retirement -
they take bank managers hostage in their homes, stay the night, and rob the
bank first thing in the a.m., before the bank opens for business.  After
Terry is hit by bored, somewhat crazed housewife Kate (Cate Blanchett), he
has her drive him to their hideout, and refusing to go home, she
stays making the duo a trio of "Bandits."
Directing from a script by Harley Peyton ("Keys to Tulsa," TV's "Twin Peaks"),
veteran director Barry Levinson ("Diner") delivers a road movie that's
part "Robin Hood" and part "Jules et Jim."  This gentle comedy slowly builds
to a pleasing payoff.
Bookended by narration from Darren Head (Bobby Slayton, "Get Shorty"), the
host of the fictitious 'Criminals at Large' TV show, we see the late Terry and
Joe in their final bank standoff arguing about which one of them allowed
Kate to get them into this predicament.  Flashback to their humorous prison
breakout, where Terry and Joe's opposite qualities are immediately
established.
Joe recruits his cousin Harvey (Troy Garity, "Steal This Movie"), a none too
bright wannabe Hollywood stuntman, as their getaway driver and 'The Sleepover
Bandits' are born, quickly becoming folk heroes and a media sensation.  The
guys are able to avoid capture by donning hilarious disguises for their 
overnight heists.  When Kate enters the picture, coming from a deadend 
marriage, she sees the romance of their escapades.  She also falls first for
Joe, then Terry, deciding that together, they make the perfect man.
The threesome are also the perfect costars.  Willis spins an affectionate
sendup of the action roles that made him a megastar, and looks cool while
doing so with his becomingly scruffy ponytail.  Thornton is all ticks and
twitches and physical comedy, as neurotic as Woody Allen, but quieter and
more laid back.  His performance is the most mannered of the three. 
Blanchett,
stunningly flame haired here, is all wide eyed enthusiasm with a flair for
the dramatic displayed as she lip synchs to Bonnie Tyler and Tanita Tikaram.
She joins Cameron Diaz ("My Best Friend's Wedding") and Candice Bergen 
("Starting Over") in the hilariously awful screen singing club with her 
rendition of "Walk on By."
Also strong are Garity as the dopey but true blue driver.  His practicing
of special effects and stunt work provide some of the film's best visual
jokes.
In a small role as the gang's last sleepover victim, Peggy Miley ("A Little 
Princess") is a small, stout, senior firecracker of a bank manager.  Willis'
daughters Scout and Tallulah Belle are featured as the children of the
first hostage.
Peyton's script is full of amusing dialogue and situations.  When Terry and
Kate are forced to take the last room at a hotel called the Pink Flamingo,
which is overrun with a Mary Kay-like cosmetics convention, it at first seems
like a one-off Elvis impersonator joke, but Peyton inventively takes it one 
step further.  Production design (Victor Kempster, "Natural Born Killers")
and cinematography (Dante Spinotti, "L.A. Confidential") take full advantage
of the charming small towns of the Northwest coastal region.  Levinson's
direction keeps everything just right at left of center, although the film
could have flown higher with some tightening, particularly in its early
meanderings.  The film features a terrific soundtrack ranging from U2's
"Beautiful Day" to "Wildfire."
"Bandits" takes a while to find its groove, but once it does it'll steal
its way into your heart.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Argue.  Argue.  Argue.  That's how the robbers spend their time in BANDITS,
directed clumsily by Barry Levinson.  In it, Bruce Willis and Billy Bob Thornton
play a couple of "ha ha" funny bank robbers named Joe and Terry.  Although they
are supposedly the most successful bank robbers in the history of the United
States, these two irritating characters appear to be smart guys acting dumb, or
perhaps it's the other way around.  In either case, after a half hour of their
schtick, I was ready to yell out, "All right already."
Thornton, channeling Woody Allen at his worst, plays the story's central
character.  With nerdy, rimless glasses, Terry is a hyper-hypochondriac who begs
sheepishly to go back to the safety of prison after their big breakout.   
With a reality TV twist, the host of "Criminals at Large" tells the robbers'
story in flashback.  Cate Blanchett plays Kate, the wacky wife of a bad kisser,
who leaves her uncaring husband for a life of crime with the "sleep-over
bandits," the nickname given to Joe and Terry for their M.O.  They kidnap the
bank manager the night before the robbery.  This necessitates having a little
slumber party with the manager's family before the heist.
The movie fails the laugh test miserably.  I never laughed although there were a
few members of my audience, including two women on either side of me, who went
wild over it.  Terry kept staring at Joe with a "This is stupid" kind of
condescending look.  I'm with Terry.  As bad movies love to do, BANDITS has a
Steve McQueen movie playing on television in one of the scenes.  I couldn't tell
which one it was, but it had to have been better than BANDITS.
BANDITS runs a long 2:05.  It is rated PG-13 for "some sexual content, language
and violence" and would be acceptable for kids around 9 and up.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 12, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
BANDITS (2001)
Rated PG-13; running time 123 minutes
Genre: crime adventure with random and yet unfunny "comedic" elements
Seen at: Lowes Star Southfield (Detroit, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.mgm.com/bandits/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0219965
Written by: Harley Peyton
Directed by: Barry Levinson
Cast: Bruce Willis, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Troy Garity,
Bobby Slaton
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsbandits.html
So, what do you do when the very first scene in a movie has you rolling
your eyes...and you've barely made it through the credits?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
Impulsive Cool Dude Joe (Bruce Willis) and his Neurotic Hypochondriac
Buddy Terry (Billy Bob Thornton) are escaped cons [roll] on the run, who
decide - rather, Joe decides on the cuff; the more careful Terry just
hangs on for the ride - to get back into the bank robbing business.
Needing to come up with a plan, they settle on a scheme to make enough
money doing bank heists to front a legit restaurant business in Mexico.
Being Gentlemen Bandits, they decide to take the unusual tack of
kidnapping bank managers and their families the night before a holdup,
taking them to the bank the next morning, thus causing as little
disruption as possible.  It is in Mom & Pop USA's homes where Hilarity
begins to Ensue.
The duo becomes a trio when Terry is nearly run over by almost equally
neurotic (and definitely sex-starved) Bored Housewife Kate (Cate
Blanchett), who pisses Terry off and melts over Cool Dude Joe's Manly
Manliness [roll]. They grow into a foursome when Joe brings on his
Braindead Stuntman Cousin Harold (Troy Garity) to drive the getaway car
[ooh roll].
Meanwhile, this unnecessarily long flick is further elongated by a
completely unnecessary "America's Most Wanted" take off, with Bobby
Slaton as a reporter tracking the "notorious" Sleepover Bandits, and
their supposed hostage Kate, across Oregon and Califunny, to what could
be their ultimate showdown.
The Upshot:
It is my custom to give my readers a "spoiler" warning, since any plot
info I divulge in "The Story" might be something for which the audience
did not want to be forewarned.  I needn't have bothered with BANDITS,
though.  This movie is actually its own self-contained spoiler, leaving
traces of itself all over the theater floor.  I wasn't surprised by a
single frame of it, not for one millisecond.  Every plot device,
inanimate or human, was clearly recognized for what it was from the time
it showed on-screen.  Forget the "too much information! They've shown
all the best bits!" trailers in the weeks before its release; BANDITS
spoiled *itself*.
In more ways than one.  I'll admit that I lost interest in this train
wreck early on, when Joe got all High And Mighty about being called out
his name by Kate when she chided him about stealing hard-earned moolah
from The Little People.  'Nonsense!', spewed Joe; 'this bank money is
FDIC-insured, I'm just stealing from the government who stole from us'.
PeeYEW, who left that fetid meat out on the editing table?
The only reason BANDITS doesn't get my full redlight wrath is because
you gotta love somebody named Billy Bob who doesn't also have most of
his teeth missing, fly a rebel flag at a civil rights picnic, and have a
broke down trailer for a home.  As often happens, Billy Bob Thornton
plays the only interesting character in the bunch.  His Terry is the
only one - and I do mean the! only! one! - I didn't feel like taking a
baseball bat to every time he opened his mouth.  And even then, Billy
Bob Thornton's presence just barely moved this flick to yellowlight
territory.  I especially cringed at e-v-e-r-y  s-i-n-g-l-e  m-o-v-e by
Kate; then again, Cate Blanchett tends to have that effect on me.
Terry's neuroses made him interesting, in a way that Joe's and Kate's
didn't even come close to, not to mention Harold the ObDoofus.  I found
myself cursing the day that Barry Levinson ever saw Wills and Blanchett
and thought, "aha!"
Not that Levinson - former writer, director, and producer of TSFKABDSOT
(ask somebody), HOMICIDE: LIFE ON THE STREET - gets a pass.  Indeed, I
blame him most, especially for that bile-inducing payoff at the end.
Come on, guy, you once wrote for HOMICIDE cops on TeeVee; you *know*
better than that!  Shame on you, Levinson.
An internet friend of mine (who, coincidentally, is a member of the same
ex-"Homicide" list I'm on) asked me if I thought the "Once Upon A Time
In China" parody movie IRON MONKEY, was over-the-top.  My response?
True story or not, given the crap that BANDITS asks its viewers to
believe about Mom And Pop USA eagerly welcoming these bandits into their
homes...well, give me "over-the-top" for $200, Alex.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
     [...or, "watch Bammer piss some people off"]
Every now and then, I like to play a game called "Imagine It With Black
folks".  Wanna play?  Sure you do.
"Imagine Joe and Terry as Black bank robbers, traipsing across the
countryside, robbing banks and being generally thought of as Charming
Goofs...and no one ever calls the cops."  Can ya see it?
Then again, I can't really see this mess with *White* folks, so...
Bammer's Bottom Line:
You mean, I dragged myself out of my Warm Comfortable Bed on a rainy
Sunday morning for *this*?  Bah.
BANDITS stole two hours and three minutes of my life.  I'd like it back,
please.

Author
Robin Clifford
Joe Blake (Bruce Willis) and Terry Collins (Billy Bob Thornton) are bank
robbers looking to make the string of scores necessary to allow them to
retire, in comfort, south of the border. Their M.O. as the non-violent
Sleepover Bandits has earned them the reputation as the most famous thieves
in American history and their plan looks like it just might work. But, when
a pretty, unhappy housewife, Kate Wheeler (Cate Blanchett), joins the tiny
gang she steals something, too - their hearts - in Barry Levinson's
"Bandits."
Joe is an irresistible felon who, with a word and a smile, can melt any
woman's heart and just wants to enjoy life. Terry is a hypochondriac who is
obsessed with his imaginary diseases and worries over every day-to-day
detail. They seem like the unlikeliest team of bank robbers but, as they
say, opposites attract and between the two of them they make the ideal man
and crook. Joe, always one to shoot from the hip, breaks them out of prison
in a daring, impromptu escape aboard a cement truck. The pair, on the lam
now, talk about their future and decide that they will head down to Mexico
where Joe's uncle runs a struggling hotel. They figure that the can turn
the place into a successful nightclub if only they can lay their hands the
cash to do it. But, how to do it?
Terry, the smart one, comes up with a plan that is brilliant in its
simplicity. Since their usual trade of robbing banks, with guns and guards
abundant during a busy business day, is risky, to say the least, he devises
a way to avoid getting shot and caught. The idea is, kidnap the bank
manager, hold him/her hostage with the family overnight, have a nice dinner
and sleepover, then go to the bank before it opens with the manager,
collect all the cash and split. No fuss and no muss. They enlist Joe's
loyal young cousin, Harvey J. Pollard (Troy Garrity), to be their getaway
driver, put the plan into action and, to Joe and Terry's surprise, it all
works! They split the loot and go their separate ways until the next heist.
Things go as planned for the next robbery, too, but after they separate,
Terry's car runs out of gas and, before he can get more and take off, the
cops show up. He needs another set of wheels in a hurry and decides to
carjack a ride. Enter Kate, a lonely, unhappy housewife whose husband pays
her scant attention. Distraught after his latest bout of ignoring her, she
takes her Mercedes for a spin to clear her head and, literally, runs into
Terry. He is totally disoriented, thinks he has a concussion and makes the
mistake of taking a ride with the hysterical Kate. He takes her to the
"gang's" hideout and, unless they shoot her and bury the body in the woods,
Terry and Joe are stuck with the haus frau. This isn't a problem for Joe,
who immediately takes a liking to the pretty housewife and she joins them
in their spree. Things get complicated as Kate falls for both guys (and
vice versa), which leads to a dramatic standoff with the police on their
last, big job.
Levinson and screenwriter Harley Peyton, with their talented trio of stars,
have succeeded in creating a modern day version of "Butch Cassidy and the
Sundance Kid," but with a twist. In this new millennium bank robbery
western Kate replaces Etta Place (Katherine Ross) from the '69 flick as the
romantic interest, this time showing her love for both of her versions of
Butch and Sundance. It is obvious from the beginning that the very
different Joe and Terry, though flawed, do have their good points. Together
they make the perfect man - strong, sensitive, intelligent and capable -
and Kate refuses to choose between them. This makes "Bandits" a fine
buddy/road/romantic comedy film that wears its non-violent larceny as a
benevolent badge of honor.
Willis, Thornton and Blanchett are a solid triumvirate of actors who forgo
the usual star power and work hard to be convincing as the characters the
play. Bruce Willis is understated as the charismatic, action-oriented Joe
and plays well as part of the ensemble instead of his usual focal star
persona. His onscreen charm is obvious and he keeps it in part with his
costars. Billy Bob Thornton, once again, shows his mettle as an
experienced, convincing character actor. He puts a solid spin on his Terry,
creating a nerdy, smart felon who, though a rampant hypochondriac, is able
to survive life day by day. Cate Blanchett, once again, proves herself to
be one of the finest actors in the business. The Australian is capable of
playing any kind of character and is able to do an American accent that
would make a native proud. The three actors display a chemistry that allows
you to lose yourself in their interplay and believe them as real people.
Supporting cast is limited, mainly, to a funny, goofy performance by Troy
Garrity as the none-too-bright Harvey. The newcomer portrays his character
as what Joe says is "honest and follows good." He doesn't have the stomach
for a direct part in the larceny but he is loyal and does what he can for
his older cousin, Joe. What Harvey really wants is to be a movie stunt man
and this career endeavor makes for some of the film's best slapstick
moments. The rest of the cast is there to fill the void around the stars
and not much more. One exception is Peggy Miley as Mildred Kronenberg, a
bank manager who is thrilled to be one of the Sleepover Bandits hostage
victims but refuses to give the crooks a red cent, knowing that she will
not be harmed in the least by her captors. Willis fans will note that two
of the stars kid's, Scout and Tallulah, appear as the daughters of one of
the kidnapped bank bosses.
As one expects in a film by Levinson, techs are solid. Veteran lenser Dante
Spinotti gives the film a cool, clean look and adjusts smoothly between the
warmth of those intimate moments between the three principle and the almost
clinical look of the heists. Costumes, by Gloria Gresham, is Oscar caliber
as Joe and Terry (and, eventually, Kate) are clothed in funky, funny
disguises that are more subtly funny than outrageous. Pop music plays a
prominent part in the film, especially for Kate who's a sap for sentimental
tunes like "Walk on By" and "Just the Two of Us."
"Bandits" is a little on the long side, clocking in at over two hours, and
could have been trimmed of some of its fat, but that's a relatively minor
nitpick. All in all, I had a rip roarin' good time and liked the story
about these amiable crooks. I give it an B+
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
