Title
Review for Kill Me Again (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Film noir is rather popular genre choice for young,
independent filmmakers making their directing debuts. This
is hardly surprising, since the genre originated in
B-studios of 1940s Hollywood, where cheap sets and low
budgets mandated stories and characters with dark
nitty-gritty realism being the anti-thesis of A-production's
glamour. Since such films usually have contemporary settings
and rather ordinary, every-day set of characters and
situations, even today they tend to be cheap and rather
simple. But there are directors who tend to stick to that
particular genre even after reaching fame and having a
ticket to mainstream Hollywood. One of them is John Dahl,
author of RED ROCK WEST and THE LAST SEDUCTION, two film
noirs that are often considered to be among the best pieces
of American cinema in 1990s. But even his directing debut -
KILL ME AGAIN, made in 1989 - shows truly great talent at
work.
The plot of KILL ME AGAIN, based on the script co-authored
by Dahl and David A. Warfield, begins with two lovers and
small-time criminals - Fay Forrester (played by Joanne
Whalley) and Vince Miller (played by Michael Madsen) -
successfully stealing 825,000 US$ from Nevada mobsters. Fay,
however, can't resist the temptation to spend all the money
by herself, especially since Vince happens to be rather
violent and possessive sort of man. So she uses opportunity
to escape with the loot and takes refuge in Reno. There she
devises a plan to get rid of Vince permanently by faking her
own death. Private investigator Jack Andrews (played by Val
Kilmer) agrees to help her due to his own financial
problems. He stages the fake murder but soon afterwards Fay
disappears and Jack becomes murder suspect. He manages to
get out of custody and starts looking for Fay, but he is not
the only one who does so since Vince and mobsters are also
trying to get their hands on the loot.
KILL ME AGAIN could be best described as film noir stripped
to its essential elements. Here we have them all -
seductive, manipulative and utterly immoral femme fatale,
who also happens to be brunette (same as in Dahl's next two
film noirs); weak male protagonist who is manipulated by
that character although he should have known better; stash
of money as "Mac Guffin" and series of plot twists. Dahl
keeps everything simple in this film - his characters, with
the sole exception of Jack, seem to lack their own past and
all their actions are motivated by their present-time needs
and situations. Because of that the film is relatively
short, and the desert scenery of American Southwest seem to
underline said simplicity of the characters and story. Said
simplicity is somewhat compromised with William Olvis'
musical score which happens to get irritating after a while.
The acting in the film is generally very good, although Val
Kilmer minimalist performance doesn't quite explain some
elements of his character. However, he has a good chemistry
with Joanne Whalley, who used to be Mrs. Kilmer during the
production of the film, although two of them couldn't be
described as one of the great film noir couples. Joanne
Whalley is, nevertheless, very good in the role of femme
fatale. But the best performance comes from Michael Madsen,
who shows superb talent in his portrayal of possessive,
violent and psychopathic criminal, in many ways similar to
his best known role of Mr. Blonde in RESERVOIR DOGS. He too
has a good chemistry with Joanne Whalley, thus providing
KILL ME AGAIN with one of the more interesting love
triangles in modern cinema.
All in all, KILL ME AGAIN, although somewhat obscured by
John Dahl's latter works, is a very good example of modern
film noir and as such it should be recommended to every
viewer who likes this particular genre.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com 
