Title
Review for Sa tree lex (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Strand Releasing 
 Director:  Youngyooth Thongkonthum
 Writer:  Youngyooth Thongkonthum
 Cast: Jesdaporn Pholdee, Sahaphap Tor, Ekachai Buranapanit,
Giorgio Maiocchi, Chaicharn Nimpulsawasdi, Kokkorn
Benjathikoon, Shiriohana Hongsopon
 Screened at: Loews Screening Room NYC 8/22/01
   Contrary to what some scientists may tell you, time travel is
indeed possible.  Ask any world traveler.  If you're from the first
world, say from Beverly Hills, take a flight to the Moroccan city of
Fez and you've gone back in time about 2,000 years to Biblical
days.  Donkeys compete with people shrouded with robes for
space on cobblestone streets.  Too hot for Morocco?  If you're in
New York in September, take a subway or bus ride to the Quad
theater to see Youngyooth Thongkonthun's film "The Iron
Ladies," known to the native Thai people as "Sa tree lex."  
  I don't mean to say that Thailand is a "developing" nation like Morocco
because in fact that western ally is one of the southeast Asian
economic miracles. But the movie which was put in the can just
last year based on a recent true story could easily make a viewer
think that this picturesque country is living in the 1950's just like
the one visited by the American brother and sister transported 
from the recent decade magically back to that time in the movie 
"Pleasantville."  How so?  The movie deals with what we in the 
United States must consider thoroughly passe unless we were hiding 
under that proverbial rock or hiding in the jungle like that brave
Japanese soldier who didn't know the war was over for a while. 
What subject is that?  Gays.  Oh, it's not that gay themes are out
of style.  There's lots of room for motifs centering on
nontraditional sexual roles.  But comedies dealing with guys
making the most elemental fun at the expense of transvestites,
transsexuals, lesbians, gays, and miscellaneous manners of
effeminate men are simply not funny. They're pathetic.  Maybe the Thai
people go for them, I dunno.  I haven't been there and I
don't know much about Thai culture except for the fact that you're
not supposed to cross your legs when you're seated there
because it's an insult to point the bottom of your shoe toward
your partner in conversation.  But how can the producers thinks
there's a market for this sort of hopelessly dated, hashed-over stuff 
in any culture whose sexual politics is slightly more sophisticated
than that of the Taliban?  
   The story features an assortment of picked-upon folks who do
not conform to the traditional boy-girl relationships, making them
a threat to every red-blooded Thai citizen who hopes to be a
grandfather or grandmother one day.  Chai (Jesdaporn Pholdee),
Mon (Sahaphap Tor), Wit (Ekachai Buranapanit), Nong (Giorgio
Maicchi), Jung (Chaicharn Nimpulsawasdi), and Pia (Kokkorn
Benjathikoon) are in their early twenties, I'd guess, and they are
an assorted lot of outcasts because they are the aforementioned
transsexuals, transvestites and gays.  They are about to redeem
themselves, to become heroes, through the game of volleyball
which is, strangely enough, the second-most popular sort in
Thailand (I think).  When the straight coach takes himself out of
the running in favor of a short, bespectacled lesbian mentor
(Shiriohana Hongsopon), the film follows a trajectory as
predictable as, oh, say, Adam Sandler's "Waterboy."  Will the Iron
Ladies as they call themselves beat the macho men who laugh at
them?  Take three guesses.  Will they beat them 3-0 or 3-2? 
Duh.  Will they beat them in the final game 15-13 or 15-0?  Uh,
golly...That's tough.  Will there be brawls in the bar and will at
least one of the gays be upset about breaking a fingernail?   Will
the concluding music boldly indicate that these young heroes,
who were "born that way, we never had a choice" be tolerated by
Thai people from Chiang Rai to Bang Lamung?  (Hey, did I spoil
the really clever twists for you?  Sorry.)
Not Rated.  Running time: 104 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
