Title
Review for Too Tired To Die (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Dream Search Entertainment
 Director: Wonsuk Chin
 Writer: Wonsuk Chin
 Cast:Takeshi Kaneshiro, Mira Sorvino, Jeffrey Wright,
Michael Imperioli, Geno Lechner, Ben Gazzara, Sandra
Prosper, David Thornton, Aida Turturro, Hye Soo Kim, Drena
De Niro
    You know those college applications that ask you to write
an essay about yourself?  What they ought to ask,
specifically, is "What would you do if you found out you had
just one year to live?"  Liberate the candidates' imaginations
and see who can come up with something more original than
"See the world" or "Donate all my money to your college."  In
"Too Tired To Die," Korean-born Wonsuk Chin's first
production and one which took eight years to get released,
the writer-director poses a question even more focused and
immediate: "What would you do if you found out you had just
twelve hours to live?"  Hug a stranger, as one character in the
film advises?  Have a quick bedroom fling?  Take the
Concorde to Paris?  "Too Tired To Die" deals with one
person's choices, not the kind that you or I would probably
make, but nonetheless options which should have provided
for an engaging set of adventures.  Unfortunately, though its
script strives for originality above all, it is merely a pastiche of
vistas culled from some of the noted directors like Ingmar
Bergman, Woody Allen, and John Woo thrown together
without cohesiveness, making for a phlegmatic, talky movie
with neither humor nor philosophic depth.  At best, movie
buffs will find satisfaction in identifying the styles of the
masters which are duplicated here.  About the only real
existential gem that emerges from all the banter is that "life is
short: seize the day," and one assumes that somehow many
of us had heard that before.
   "Too Tired to Die" starts off in an absolutely promising way,
a homage to the era of silent films as Death, in the form of
the glamorous Mira Sorvino (who is appears time and again
in an array of Melissa Toth's smashing outfits), approaches an
Arab in Old Baghdad, who temporarily escapes her embrace
by running for his life.  Cut to contemporary Manhattan, to the
hip SoHo artists' neighborhood, where a collection of oddballs
sit at a cafe pretending to be other than what they are.  As a
man who allegedly reads Balzac, Jeffrey Wright expresses
himself, mostly about the charms of the opposite sex, while
feigning the air of a world-weary intellectual.  In truth he has
not even read page one.  Fabrizio (Michael Imperioli) turns up
as a aesthetic film-maker, perhaps the raissoneur for the
regisseur himself.  The reality is that he is merely a ticket-
seller at a theater box office.  When Kenji (Takeshi
Kaneshiro), a rootless, unemployed Japanese sponging  off
his Tokyo-residing mother, meets Pola (Geno Lechner), an
exotic German woman about to travel to Paris, he is
entranced, makes a date with her for that very evening.  One
day after a disappointing post-prandial visit to her apartment
he is told by Death that he has just twelve hours to live.
   The movie gives Mira Sorvino the opportunity to appear in
several guises, in one case picking up some gangsters who
oblige her by falling prey to a John-Woo style gunman ("I'll
meet you soon, considering your profession," she advises the
killer), in another situation as a Japanese geisha, and in yet a
different scene as a Yentl-style figure in a man's outfit.  As
Kenji remains at a loss for what to do with the remaining
hours of his life, he winds up at a dinner party through the
invitation of a famous artist (Ben Gazzara) whom he criticizes
for hanging out with a woman much younger than he (Hye
Soo Kim).
   The only real insight we get from the time spent with this
oddball cast of characters is the Death is not an automaton,
despite her need simply to follow orders.  She has feelings,
particularly regarding the taking of people who are young and,
in fact, can resort to tears in the execution of her gig.  You've
got to wonder what was in Wonsuk Chin's mind when his
payoff is so out of tune with the rest of his story.  "Too Tired
To Die" feels like a talky French film--the Eric Rohmer variety-
-itself a tired effort that departs from the screen an
unsatisfying death.  it succeeds only too well in pointing out
the deadly dull flavor of some European arthouse fare and the
exhausted flavor of pseudo-hip victuals.
