Title
Review for Lost Souls (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
You can't help but go into a movie like this one with low expectations. Here
we are, up to our umpteenth "devil" thriller of the past two years, and
still, Hollywood keeps churning them out like there's no tomorrow. But with
this film, we have reason to expect even less. It was originally supposed to
be released in October 1999, and has basically been sitting on the shelf
ever since. So is it as stinky as many of the others? Does it provide for
any type of entertainment value whatsoever? Stick around...
PLOT:
A best-selling author has apparently been chosen by Satan to become his
physical vehicle to return to earth. A young woman, who herself once went
through an exorcism of her own, takes it upon herself to try and convince
the skeptic writer of his oncoming doom. Will they be able to save the young
man in time or will Satan come back to earth and kick mighty human ass?
CRITIQUE:
Despite its lame title, general feeling of deja-vu and somewhat slow pace, I
enjoyed this film based on its interesting script, abundance of creepy
atmosphere, grungy look and neat-o ending. Yes, I'm as sick of "satanic
thrillers" as the next guy, but all things considered, this movie kept me
interested pretty much the whole way through, and that's a mighty big chore
at this point. It didn't have any major plot holes, it had a very believable
character in the lead, one Ben Chaplin, and it didn't bog the story down
with all kinds of biblical mumbo jumbo. The one thing that did surprise me
about this film was its lack of MTV-ness. I say that only because its
trailer makes it look like yet another thrill-a-minute, split-second edited,
soundtrack enhanced disposable horror movie, but that is far from what we
have here. This movie doesn't have any fake scares. It doesn't play the
latest "teen band" on the soundtrack and it doesn't feature any nutballs in
masks. It's eerie, features a dark look and muddled cinematography, saddled
up to an appropriately brooding score and exorcisms galore (nice timing on
the release, guys...just as THE EXORCIST is scaring up the youngens in the
theatres).
I liked this movie because it was able to pull me into its world and make me
a believer. Forget BLESS THE CHILD and END OF DAYS, movies featuring name
actors hopping around plot holes left and right. Ben Chaplin won me over in
this film. He turns out to be the poor chap who is about to be taken over by
Satan himself, and as you would expect, he's quite distraught by the
thought. A couple of scenes from this film even managed to stick in my mind,
especially one really great scene early on featuring a bathroom which
suddenly becomes...well, possessed of sorts. A highly stylized film. I
suppose that the story could've benefited from a few more "thrilling"
moments, and certainly been cut by about ten minutes in the middle, but all
in all, this late entry into the satanic world of Hollywood thrillers,
generally held my attention. Winona Ryder, I could've done without, but
kudos to Chaplin for convincing me of the possibility of his dilemma. I look
forward to seeing what director Janusz Kaminski will take on next. Not a
film that will win over the MTV generation, but definitely a decent creepy
thriller that'll keep you on your toes while cuddled under a blanket, late
at night, all by yourself. Far from being a classic, but decent as a
stylishly passable concoction.
Little Known facts about this film and its stars:
This is director Janusz Kaminski's directorial debut. He is best known as a
cinematographer. His previous work on SAVING PRIVATE RYAN and SCHINLDER'S
LIST have won him Oscars in cinematography. He is currently doing the
cinematography for Steven Spielberg's next project entitled A.I. He was also
the cinematographer on JERRY MAGUIRE, LOST WORLD and AMISTAD.
This film was originally slated for an October 1999 release but was held
back due to concern over too many similarly themed movies coming out around
that same time (STIGMATA, END OF DAYS, BLESS THE CHILD).
Alfre Woodard has an uncredited role in this film as the head nurse of the
prison.
Actress Meg Ryan is one of the producers of this film. How that happened is
beyond me!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 New Line Cinema
 Director: Janusz Kaminski
 Writer:  Pierce Gardner (story), Betsy Stahl
 Cast: Winona Ryder, Ben Chaplin, John Hurt, Elias Koteas,
Sarah Wynter, John Diehl, W. Earl Brown, Ashley Edner
   If you want to know why the cost of library paste has gone
up more or less proportionally to the price of gasoline, look
no further than Janusz Kaminski.  A master cinematographer
("Saving Private Ryan," "Schindler's List"), Kaminski took on
the job of directing this time and seems to have cornered the
market in glue, pasting together some strips of film to
construct a frustratingly fragmented, unconvincing movie
about satanic possession.  "Lost Souls," which I've been told
situated itself on a production shelf for about a year before
being released, is a godawful story about God's awful foe
whose only claim to fame is its grainy, stylized visual form. 
Even here, though, rather than having an audience sit
through 106 mintues of depressingly granulated film, couldn't
Kaminski simply deliver about ten minutes of the stuff and
then exhibit a subtitle saying, "OK, folks, you get the
idea...the texture is like that of 'The Blair Witch Project'
because this is one spooky story...now let's get on with the
tale using real film"?
   The film opens with an ominous black-white section,
numbers floating about as in Darron Aronfsky's "Pi," then
liquefying to transform into names.  A number of characters
are introduced helter skelter, none developed though each
needs to be told to lighten up.  Father Lareaux (John Hurt),
John Townsend (Elias Koteas) attended by parochial-school
teacher Maya Larkin (Winona Ryder) are testing their skills as
exorcists on jailbird Henry Birdson (John Diehl), and though
the rite is a failure, Maya is put in touch with the reality that
she was herself possessed at one time.  By scrutizing
Birdson's writings, she realizes that the handsome and
popular writer Peter Kelson (Ben Chaplin) has been chosen
for possession, but as an atheist he has only himself to
blame.  To prove his secularism, Kelson had told a TV
interviewer that there is no such thing as evil, i.e. not with a
capital E, but that what we ordinary people think of as evil is
nothing by a psychological state of narcissism.  Maya has a
tough time convincing the author about the danger which
Satan poses to his life given the man's fame, his good-
looking girl friend (Sarah Wynter) and his swank urban
apartment.
   If Pierce Gardner and Betsy Stahl's story is hopelessly
segmented, at least we're treated to a few (but far between)
scary sequences embodying Maya's hallucinations. The best
occurs in a women's room as Maya, putting on a fresh face,
is confronted with a veritable flood of sewage seeping from
the three toilets, crumbling walls, and enigmatic missives
written on walls.  But if you've seen the classics of the genre
such as "The Exorcist" and "Rosemary's Baby" you've seen it
all.  
   The film's conclusions, a confrontation in a car between
Maya and Peter, is laughable, which is more than you can
say about the bulk of this soporific, pasted-together disarray
of a film.
Rated R.  Running time: 106 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Christopher Null
     It looks like Winona Ryder gets two strikes in a row in 2000, as
the long-delayed Lost Souls emerges as one of the worst duds of the
year.  How bad can it be?  Well, the only moments of terror in this
ostensible horror flick are brought about by the appearance of the words
"Producer: Meg Ryan," giving you chills in a way that only those words
can.
     Hopefully the last in a line of man vs. devil movies let loose by
Y2K hysteria coupled with the success of The Sixth Sense (which wisely
steered clear of religious metaphors altogether), Lost Souls actually
ranks below End of Days and just about ties the pitiful Bless the Child
for sheer badness.
     The story slowly (and I mean slowly) unfolds, revealing the
following plotline.  Winona Ryder's Maya is the survivor of a demonic
possession during childhood, and she was one of the lucky ones that had
Satan exorcised right out of her body.  Through some strange pact with
renegade clergyman Father Lareaux (John Hurt, beneath his station in
this junk), she is a kind of part-time assistant on other exorcisms when
they arise in the greater New York metropolitan area, a city in which,
according to Lost Souls, it is always raining.
     Through some clever codebreaking during one such exorcism, Maya
stumbles upon the fact that the antichrist will rise up in a matter of
days to inhabit the body of writer Peter Kelson (Ben Chaplin of The
Truth About Cats and Dogs).  And although Maya and her exorcist crew
have no idea how to stop it, they go out of their way to scare the pants
off of Peter, telling him it's pretty much inevitable that he's going to
turn into the devil.
     What follows is mostly drawn-out self-discovery as Peter wrestles
with his nonexistent faith, while Maya is haunted by demons -- real and
imaginary -- that lead us to believe that possession by the devil isn't
just something you get rid of with a shot of penicillin.  It's something
that stays with you for life!
     And that's about the long and short of it.  The moody lighting and
underexposed camerawork lead me to believe Lost Souls once aspired to be
great art, but it's ultimately another plot-to-foil-Satan movie with few
thrills aside from Maya's stylish hallucinations.  Simply put, the story
is utter nonsense.  Frankly, if the devil is stupid enough to choose
some lowly writer to be the vessel for earthly destruction, well, he
deserves what's coming to him.
     If you're determined enough to see Lost Souls, I challenge you to
stay awake.  But if Friday the 13th really has you itching to see a
devil movie, then I urge you, just go see the re-release of The
Exorcist.
Director: Janusz Kaminski
Producer: Meg Ryan, Nina R. Sadowsky
Writer: Pierce Gardner
Starring: Winona Ryder, Ben Chaplin, John Hurt, Elias Koteas, Sarah
Wynter, Philip Baker Hall
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "LOST SOULS" (New Line Cinema)
  You gotta wonder about a Winona Ryder movie that was
supposed to be released in 1999 and doesn't make it into theaters
until Friday the 13th in October, 2000.  In this faith vs. reason
supernatural thriller, Winona plays a devout Catholic who is not only
obsessed with the concept of demonic possession but often hallucinates
about Satan. She was once exorcised by a priest (John Hurt) and is now
convinced that the Devil is about to re-appear on Earth in the body of
an atheistic, best-selling criminology writer (Ben Chaplin) who
believes "Good and Evil are only illusions" and that serial killers
are motivated by "malignant narcissism." True, he's been troubled by
weird dreams in which the letters XES appear. When his brother points
out that the letters spell SEX backwards, he's mollified - at least
until he learns that XES is also the Roman numeral "666," the sign of
the Devil, and a renegade priest tries to shoot him, muttering, "The
time of transformation is near!" Written by Pierce Gardner, this
mangled, derivative muddle of banal mumbo-jumbo is based on his story
with Betsy Stahl, and Oscar-winning cinematographer Janusz Kaminski
("Schindler's List," "Saving Private Ryan") makes an inauspicious
directorial debut. Working with lenser Mauro Fiore, Kaminski's stark,
stylized lighting and surrealistic imagery create a creepy atmosphere
of murky darkness, heightened by Jay Riddle's special effects and Jan
Kacmarek's score. It's no stretch for Winona Ryder to be a terrified,
wide-eyed waif (i.e.: "Bram Stoker's Dracula" and "Alien IV"), but
credit Ben Chaplin for not laughing at her when he says: "You really
should get some professional help." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Lost Souls" is a far-fetched 2. "Deliver us from evil..." says
the ads. Deliver us from movies like this!

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Janusz Kaminski.
Cast: Winona Ryder, Ben Chaplin, John Hurt, Philip Baker Hall, Elias Koteas, 
Sarah Wynter, Alfre Woodard, John Diehl.
2000 - 94 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 14, 2000.
The "World-In-Jeopardy-By-Satan" genre has gone into overplay in the last 
couple years, offering viewers so many vague variations on the same subject 
that it has long-since grown tiresome. Acquiring a shooting gallery of 
pop-religious mumbo-jumbo, it seems present-day producers who grew up with 
the spooky likes of 1968's "Rosemary's Baby" and 1973's "The Exorcist" have 
no idea how to write a believable, involving story. Look no further than 
1999's "Stigmata," 1999's "End of Days," and 2000's "Bless the Child" to find 
pure rubbish disguised as something more stylized and intellectual.
"Lost Souls," the directorial debut of brilliant cinematographer Janusz 
Kaminski (1999's "Saving Private Ryan"), is the latest entry in the "end of 
the world" cinematic sweepstakes, and, surprisingly enough, it is a stylish 
and purely adult psychological thriller that pays respect, rather than 
tarnishes, its worlds-of-old predecessors. 
Winona Ryder stars as Maya Larkin, a Catholic school teacher who has devoted 
her life to religion and helping others ever since she was possessed by a 
demonic spirit several years before. As the film opens, she is called upon by 
Father Lereaux (John Hurt) to act as an assistant in an exorcism he plans to 
perform on family-man-turned-serial-killer Henry Birdson (John Diehl). 
Although they fail to save Henry, Maya does uncover a series of numbers Henry 
wrote, and after carefully decoding them, discovers the name of Peter Kelson 
(Ben Chaplin), who happens to be a best-selling true-crime novelist living in 
Manhattan with his girlfriend (Sarah Wynter). It seems that the faithless 
Peter is set to become the antichrist on his 33rd-birthday and take over the 
world, even though he doesn't know it yet.
Moving at a deliberately slow pace, and free of any sort of MTV-style film 
cuts or false alarm scare sequences, "Lost Souls" is a refreshing throwback 
to the days when a horror film didn't have to rely on a mad slasher chasing 
teenagers around a house, or a cat jumping out of a closet, in order to be 
scary. That said, "Lost Souls" has its heart in the right place, but still 
isn't very frightening. Disturbing? Yes. The ingenious idea of an innocent 
man who gradually comes to find out that he will soon be transformed into the 
antichrist is cause for several thought-provoking, evocative notions, but the 
movie doesn't gain the momentum to become downright scary. In director Janusz 
Kaminski's attempt at making a horror picture that is somehow "above" all the 
other recent efforts, he has, perhaps, gone too far in the opposite 
direction, causing this film to be too glacial to be completely touching.
At 28-years-old, Winona Ryder (1999's "Girl, Interrupted") is still the same 
captivating presence that she has always been, and the ability she has to 
capture the screen every time she appears is quite remarkable. Ryder is 
earnest and likable as Maya Larkin, even when we, as an audience, are unsure 
if she is possibly going crazy herself, and she holds the film together even 
through its questionable patches. Meanwhile, Ben Chaplin (1998's "The Thin 
Red Line") starts off blandly, but becomes enthralling by the final act, as a 
man who can't quite believe the tragic things Maya tells him, but can't deny 
that some very strange things are occurring to him, as well. All supporting 
roles are filled by powerful veteran actors, none of which are given much 
material to work with: John Hurt (1998's "Love and Death on Long Island") is 
Father Lereaux; the incomparable Philip Baker Hall (1999's "Magnolia") is 
Peter's girlfriend's religious father; and Alfre Woodard appears unbilled as 
a strong-willed worker at the psychiatric ward where the possessed Henry 
Birdson resides.
For the majority of its 94-minute running time, "Lost Souls" left me 
wondering exactly where everything was going, and I feared it wouldn't add up 
to much, joining the rest of the recent ill-fated attempts at a 
religious-themed thriller. Moving slowly throughout and with few truly 
astounding scenes beforehand, the ending blindsided me. Without giving it 
away, what occurs is not at all what you would expect, yet it is really one 
of the few honest ways to conclude the story, downbeat or not. Its final 
scene is challenging and fairly equivocal, casting a whole new light on 
everything that had come before. By taking his times and building to a 
fateful climax, Kaminski has realized that the most riveting films are not 
those with non-stop action and a scare a minute, but the ones that ask for 
its audience to slowly get involved and open up their minds, in exchange for 
an ultimately rewarding experience. Kaminski may not hold a firm grip on the 
picture the whole way through, but he does conclude on an unexpectedly high 
note that questions life, faith, and one's mortality. In other words, fans of 
the recently reissued "The Exorcist" will be impressed. Fans of "Leprechaun 
in the Hood" will decidedly not be.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     LOST SOULS has been on the shelf at New Line for over a year since
its originally scheduled release date last fall. The official story was
that it was pushed back to avoid the slew of similarly-themed films slated
for the pseudo-end of the millennium (END OF DAYS, STIGMATA). In order to
avoid comparisons and find an open market for a film about demonic
possession and exorcism, they waited and waited until October 13, 2000 --
the day the successful re-release of THE EXORCIST went nationwide. So much
for avoiding comparisons.
     LOST SOULS isn't just bad because it's not as good as THE EXORCIST. 
It's bad because it's yet another exercise in moody production values
supporting an utterly weightless story. Winona Ryder stars as Maya Larkin,
a young woman working on the Catholic Church's equivalent of the X-Files. 
Once upon a time she was saved from a demonic possession by Father Ledeaux
(John Hurt); now she works with him and his associates on other exorcisms. 
But the granddaddy of all possessions is on the horizon: Maya has
discovered the identity of the man who will become the Antichrist, a
best-selling non-fiction writer named Peter Kelson (Ben Chaplin). Kelson
himself has no idea that he may be part of a dark plan, but Maya is
determined to clue him in, even if it means going toe-to-toe with Evil
With a Capital "E."
     Gifted cinematographer Janusz Kaminski (who worked with Steven
Spielberg on SCHINDLER'S LIST and SAVING PRIVATE RYAN) makes his directing
debut with LOST SOULS, and he trots out plenty of visual goodies to tart
up the proceedings. Unfortunately, they're the sort of visual goodies that
just make you chuckle at their obviousness. There are ominous slow-motion
shots of Maya and her associates heading towards an exorcism like an
ecclesiastical crew of reservoir dogs. There are jagged edits and
low-angle shots intended to evoke evil through obscurity. And there are
plenty of shots of slowly-dripping water, which apparently has become the
standard-issue portent of Satanic antics. On exactly one occasion,
Kaminski's freaky imagery evokes a shiver. For the other 94 minutes of
LOST SOULS, it evokes a sense of desperation.
     And it's no wonder he's desperate, considering the script he's
working with. It's one thing for a film about the Prince of Darkness to be
melodramatic, or overwrought, or even silly. It's quite another for it to
be an outright bore. LOST SOULS is an incredibly monotonous experience,
never once working up a really good scare or a palpable sense of unease. 
It doesn't develop anything resembling momentum towards a satisfyingly
harrowing conclusion, which makes it all-too-easy to dwell on the
sluggishly paced expository scenes. Ryder spends the film looking vaguely
tormented, while Chaplin spends the film looking puzzled and _then_
vaguely tormented, and there's no reason whatsoever to care about either
one of them. It sometimes seems that every part of LOST SOULS that could
have inspired a genuinely visceral reaction has been edited out, leaving
an indistinct morass of gloomy cinematography in its stead.
     Occasionally LOST SOULS shakes itself from its coma-inducing torpor
just long enough to be aggressively dumb. The hilarious climax comes as
Peter's car radio clock ticks down to his "transformation," suggesting not
only that the Apocalypse will be filmed like a scene from SPEED, but that
Peter conscientiously synchronized his clock that morning to Hell Mean
Time. At the very least, such foolishness provides a distraction the rest
of LOST SOULS can't be bothered with. There's no excuse for a movie about
the primal forces of evil to make Satan's influence seem so banal. 
Twenty-five years have passed since THE EXORCIST was first released, and
it's still a jolt to the system. LOST SOULS could have remained on New
Line's shelf for another twenty-five years, and no one would have missed
it. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
LOST SOULS, opening on a carefully chosen Friday the Thirteenth, is 
liable to elicit strong reactions from its audiences.  The emotion 
realized, however, will likely not be what the filmmakers intended.  The 
overwhelming feeling that the film imparts is pity, not fear.  We feel 
sorry for the talented actors who perform their craft as hard as they 
can but have no hope of overcoming Pierce Gardner's uninvolving, 
unimaginative and unoriginal script and first-time director Janusz 
Kaminski's lackluster direction.   
The only moments of fright come from a couple of unexpected loud noises.  
You can create much scarier moments in the privacy of your own home 
simply by coming up behind someone and screaming, "Boo!"
LOST SOULS is a supernatural thriller that borrows so liberally from 
previous movies that you'll swear that you've seen it before.  But, no, 
you haven't since this is a new movie and not a re-release.
An Academy Award winning cinematographer (SAVING PRIVATE RYAN), director 
Kaminski has LOST SOUL's cinematographer, Mauro Fiore, serve us some 
artsy images that look like homages to other thrillers from SEVEN to 
STIGMATA.   The truly awful STIGMATA is also the picture to which 
moviegoers will most likely compare LOST SOULS.  Personally I'd prefer 
LOST SOULS, but it's a close call.  In defense of STIGMATA, it was at 
least laughably bad.  LOST SOULS is more likely to have you just staring 
at the screen.
As the story opens, an older priest, Father Lareaux (John Hurt), 
accompanied by an attractive younger assistant, Maya Larkin (Winona 
Ryder), is busy behind closed doors performing an exorcism.  I know what 
you are thinking now, "Been there. Done that."  And if you want to see 
it done right, a re-release of THE EXORCIST is in the theaters now.
Well, the exorcism doesn't go as planned, but the exorcisee, Henry 
Birdson (John Diehl), does conveniently provide the name of the 
anti-Christ, Peter Kelson (Ben Chaplin), the best selling author of 
"Vicious Intent," a book about serial killers.  Actually, Henry puts 
Peter's name in code, but the code appears to be so simple that a third 
grader could break it.
Peter, of course, doesn't know that he's about to become the number one 
bad guy of all time, and, of course, Maya will risk life and limb to 
keep it from happening.  People run around saying "The time of the 
transformation is near!" like the colonists saying "The Redcoats are 
coming!"  If this transformation occurs, Peter will become the devil on 
earth just as God became man in Christ. 
When one of the movie's tag lines -- "They've had their 2,000 years. Now 
it's our turn."  -- is finally spoken, it produces the movie's only big 
laugh, albeit an unintentional one.  The story, however, is instructive.  
We learn that if your digital clock ever reads 666, it's not a good 
sign.
LOST SOULS runs 1:35.  It is rated R for violence/terror and some 
language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
