Title
Review for Chocolat (2000)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Homer Yen
Once upon a time in a little French village, a "sly
wind blew in from the north."  With it came a radiant
woman named Vianne (Juliette Binoche) who would
descend upon the sleepy hamlet.  Through her own
unique brand of wide-eyed optimism and a delectable
recipe for making savory chocolate candies, she would
instill a new sense of life into its soporific
citizens.  
Some, however, saw her as a threat to the village's
tranquility.   This place, lifted from the pages of a
fairy tale book, seems to have been untouched by the
passage of time.  And the morally staunch Mayor Compte
de Reynaud (Alfred Molina) wanted to make sure that
its sanctity would remain intact.  To him, she was a
Succubus who brought temptation.  Vianne would
politely decline to go to church although everyone
else in the village would attend.  She also opens up
her chocolate shop during Lent, creating an
uncomfortable challenge to the citizens as they pass
by.  The wonderfully decorated window display, filled
with her delightful array of confections, could easily
turn anybody's head.  Needless to say, the Mayor was
not pleased.
On the surface, "Chocolat" is a fairly sweet drama
about how Vianne struggles to gain acceptance in a
village that has trouble accepting outsiders.  But
beneath its sugarcoated surface, the story is a
parable about the forces of Christianity that battle
the forces of paganism.  
Here, Christianity and the Mayor are portrayed as
prudish concepts that extol discipline and reverence. 
The Mayor has a narrow view about how things should be
done.  He even goes so far as to edit all of the
sermons that are given in Church.  Of course, most of
the language has been altered to indirectly denounce
the presence of Vianne and her shop.  But his sermons
are no match for Vianne's mysterious chocolate
creations.  The town soon finds her shop to be
something of a clinic for their vapid souls.  There's
something magical about the cacao powder that she
uses.  But the movie never elaborates on whether she
is an evil priestess or whether she has some kind of
hidden agenda.  But it is clear that she does
represent paganism, from the lavish decorum in her
shop to her off-the-shoulder outfits to her status as
an unwed mother to her attraction with a raffish boat
captain (Johnny Depp).  Whatever great power she may
possess, she seems just fine dispensing advice along
with her chocolates.
As a result, good things begin to happen.  Many
villagers benefit from its effects in one way or
another.  Even the Mayor is affected.  But, the most
tender subplot involves the divide between a cranky
grandmother (Judi Dench) and her daughter (Carrie
Anne-Moss).  
Despite its allegorical references, the film opts to
be more of a whimsical fairy tale rather than an
ambitious piece of work.  The majority of the film,
for example, takes place in two or three locations
giving it the feel of an off-Broadway production. 
Meanwhile, most of the screentime is focused on
dialogue exchanged between Vianne and those that she
has touched.  Although the ensemble performance made
this movie enjoyable on its own sweet level, the drama
didn't nearly have the potency of Vianne's chocolates.
 Some of that magic was needed to make this a truly
memorable film.  


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films
 Director: Lasse Hallstrom
 Writer:  Joanne Harris (Novel) Robert Nelson Jacobs
 Cast: Juliette Binoche, Victoire Thivisol, Johnny Depp, Alfred
Molina, Hugh O'Conor,Lena Olin, Peter Stormare, Judi
Dench, Carrie-Anne Moss
   Although chocolate is a high-calorie food, health honchos
have discovered that it has benefits aside from its heavenly
taste.  Chocolate releases hormones that affect our mood
and our feelings of love--but then we guys who have been
giving boxes of the stuff to our women friends along with the
flowers always knew that.  Chocolate in moderate quantities
has been found not to elevate cholesterol and some
researchers even believe that it has anti-carcinogenic
properties.  No wonder, then, that this enchanted confection
can change the attitudes of an entire town, as we see in a
wonderfully atmospheric, exquisitely paced fable called
"Chocolat."  Though the principal performer is French and all
action takes place in an isolated French village, the dialogue
is English--which should be a selling point for the ninety-nine
percent of American moviegoers who seem to eschew any
film that requires the reading of subtitles.
  As Roger Pratt's camera brings us to another world, the
fictional village of Lansquenet that would be the delight of
tourists but would bore the breeches off any urban traveler in
two days, we wonder whether we are in the year 1363 rather
than the actual time of the setting eighteen years after World
War II.  The cobblestone streets that embrace the shadow of
the town's single church form the pavement for a group of
citizens who appear alike in their beliefs but whose
experiences run the gamut from a crotchety grandmother to
an abused wife to an uptight mayor and a sex-starved
matron.  
   As the entire hamlet pays homage to God on one blustery
Sunday, in walks unwed mother Vianne Rocher (Juliette
Binoche) together with her young daughter, Anouk (Victoire
Thivisol).  She is introduced to us as a wanderer whose
agenda may be more than the mere opening of a chocolate
shop.  Renting a storefront from the grouchy old Armande
Voizin (Judi Dench), she tries to coax the townspeople into
patronage by offering free samples of her wares, but those
not biting include the reactionary mayor, the Comte de
Reynaud (Alfred Molina)--whose ancestor once chased the
"radical" Huguenots out of the town and whose statue frowns
down on the citizenry--and Josephine Muscat (Lena Olin),
who is more interested in shoplifting a small box of goodies
than in honest patronage.
  Though the mayor, allied with the reluctant priest
Pere Henri (Hugh O'Conor), urge a boycott of the store since
it has opened during the Lenten season, most of the folks
cannot resist taking in the aromas of the divine food.  Vianne
even wins over the kleptomaniac Josephine, who has been
abused by her boorish husband Serge (Peter Stormare), and
becomes an assistant in the shop regularly turning out Venus
Nipples and an array of confections that would make New
York's Godiva fans drool.  When Vianne--whose refuses to go
to church like the rest of the town--begins hanging out with
the knavish Irish gypsy Roux (Johnny Depp), the lines are
firmly drawn.  Townspeople like up behind their mayor in
favor of ridding the hamlet of both Vianne and the gypsy
band, while others like Josephine and the newly cheerful
grandmother, ally themselves with the newcomer.
   Lasse Hallstrom's film, based on an adaptation of Joanne
Harris's novel by Robert Nelson Jacobs, shares a motif with
Gary Ross's "Pleasantville" (a brother and sister infiltrate a
narrow-minded environs with their cosmopolitan sensibilities),
with "Gabriel Axel's "Babette's Feast" (about people using
religion as a substitute for life who are at least temporarily
converted to worldliness via a gourmet dinner), and with 
Stanley Tucci's "Big Night" (immigrants trying to survive as
restaurateurs against the competition of an established food
emporium).  "Chocolat," which is as light and fluffy as a
bonbon, does not quite support the weight of its message--
that people everywhere must learn to tolerate those who are
different from them--though the picture does most adequately
convey the notion that we should all lighten up.  One movie
buff in effect mentions on an Internet site that the religious
townspeople are made to look like ignorant hillbillies while the
agnostic, nature-worshipping Vianne is the bearer of truth:
that the film condescends, taking sides with the sophisticated
wanderer who seems to need no money (she hands out more
samples than she sells).  This criticism has merit, just as
does the similar point made about "Pleasantville."  On the
whole, "Chocolat" must be accepted as a fairy tale, beckoning
the audience to suspend disbelief and to go with the central
idea that conventional views ought to be challenged, that
change is the nature of things, that life is not a dress
rehearsal.  "Chocolat" is a lovely, atmosphere-rich tale, a
heartfelt, Capra-esque fable well suited to the coming holiday
season.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 121 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
CHOCOLAT, from director Lasse Hallström (THE CIDER HOUSE RULES), tells  
the story of the liberating powers of chocolate, at least the chocolate 
concoctions made by Vianne Rocher (Juliette Binoche), the new 
chocolatier in a tiny, nosey French village.  With its whimsical music 
and its bright colors set against a hazy background, the movie wants to 
be savored as a sweet fairytale for adults.
Working from Joanne Harris's novel, screenwriter Robert Nelson Jacobs 
creates a script that is little more than a sketch, a problem that he 
had in his last effort, Disney's poorly plotted DINOSAUR.  Jacobs throws 
in a myriad of slightly quirky characters that give us some reasons to 
smile but rarely to laugh.
Alfred Molina is the town's puritanical mayor, who writes the priest's 
stern sermons and promises to run Vianne and her daughter, Anouk Rocher 
(Victoire Thivisol, PONETTE), out of town by Easter.  The film starts at 
the beginning of Lent, when temptations of the flesh, like chocolates, 
are officially in disfavor in this highly religious town.
Lena Olin plays an abused wife, whose spine is stiffened by the power of 
the brown bean.  Peter Stormare plays her drunken husband.
Some of the townsfolk find that a chocolate fix is better than Viagra, 
so they buy it in bulk.  Even the dogs are aroused by its consumption.  
Our audience found the funniest scene to be that of two dogs, doing it 
well, doggie style.  The fact that canine sex produces the movie's 
largest laugh is proof that the script needs some major surgery.    
Johnny Depp, who usually infuses any role with an intriguing energy, 
plays his part of a river rat, an Irish Gypsy, with good looks and 
little more.  He seemed to be posing for the movie's promotion stills 
and didn't realize that the director had called, "Action!"  
After lots of chocolate eating and a few nice little moments, the movie 
throws in a couple of predictable tragedies to invoke some quick tears 
in the audience before it rolls the ending credits.  The only thing you 
might remember about the film a day later is one of its chocolate 
confections.  Eat a chocolate; skip the movie.
CHOCOLAT runs 2:01.  Regardless of what the title and the setting might 
lead you to belief, the film is in English, not French.  It is rated 
PG-13 for a scene of sensuality and some violence and would be 
acceptable for kids around 12 and up.  Most kids, however, are likely to 
be bored.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 CHOCOLAT (director: Lasse Hallstrom; screenwriter: Robert Nelson
 Jacobs/based on the novel by Joanne Harris; cinematographer: Roger
 Pratt; editor: Andrew Mondshein; cast: Juliette Binoche (Vianne),
 Johnny Depp (Roux), Judi Dench (Armande Voizin), Alfred Molina (Comte
 De Reynaud), Lena Olin (Josephine Muscat),  Carrie-Anne Moss (Caroline
 Clairmont), Hugh O'Conor (Pčre Henri), Peter Stormare (Serge Muscat),
 Leslie Caron (Mme. Audel), John Wood (Guillaume Blerot), Victoire
 Thivisol (Anouk); Aurelien Parent Koenig (Luc Clairmont), Runtime:
 121; Miramax Films; 2000)
CHOCOLAT by Lasse Hallstrom is a thoroughly manipulative and
indigestible art-house, comedy-drama, fluff film. It sets up a war
between sensualists and those repressed by their religious beliefs.
Every character is a cliché, everything about the story is predictably
smug. It is so easy to make fun of the one-dimensional villains and feel
morally superior to them. I grew nauseous from how bourgeois this film
was in attitude, where even the rebels are merely lovers of sweet
things. I found not much about the film that I enjoyed (though the
cinematography was beguilling and the cast was adept). It was a labor
just to sit through it and not gag, while waiting for the inevitable
preachy sermon that comes at the end, so even the church is redeemed for
its unchristian attitude toward strangers. Lasse Hallstrom has come down
a few pegs after his more engaging recent films "My Life as a Dog" and
"The Cider House Rules," as he couldn't pull this fairy tale off without
being tainted by the mediocrity of it all. This film got nominated for
an Oscar as best picture, which should show you what kind of films
Hollywood falls in love with.
Set in 1959, in a small traditional medieval French village, where the
centerpiece of the town is the church and the town's nobleman mayor,
Comte De Reynaud (Alfred Molina), who is their guiding force to
righteousness. He is the one who makes sure everyone knows their moral
place. Tranquility and resistance to change are the only mood swings of
this unchanging town. Into this serene but rigid climate, when the north
wind was blowing, come two drifters in red-hooded coats, Vianne
(Binoche) and her school-aged, illegitimate daughter Anouk (Thivisol).
They rent a shabby apartment across from the church from a cranky old
woman, Armande Voizin (Judi Dench).
Hoping to win over the locals, Vianne, who is an atheist, opens up a
specialty chocolate shop, but unfortunately she opens up during Lent,
and from the pulpit, the newly arrived, Pčre Henri (Hugh O' Conor),
reluctantly but slavishly follows the dictates of the repressed mayor
and warns the parishioners against yielding to temptation. So a war
ensues between the pleasure seekers and the followers of the church,
with the mayor's aim being to get her to close her shop before Easter.
The shop is painted over in bright pastel colors and when Armande sees
what the decor  has become, she cleverly states that it's like a
"Mexican brothel." But Vianne can bake some extraordinary sweets and
soon exerts a sensual influence over some of the townspeople, whom she
lures into the shop with free samples and her friendly gestures.
Her magical chocolates bring sexual pleasure to one couple previously
having an empty sexual life and an elderly man (John Wood) uses her
chocolates as a present to an elderly widow he always admired (Leslie
Caron), but was too timid to let her know that. Miraculously her
chocolates get the despondent Armande to meet her artistic-minded young
grandson (Aurelien Parent Koenig) in the chocolate shop, who must obey
his widowed mother's (Carrie-Anne Moss) wishes not to see her because
she thinks Armande is a bad influence on him, reading dirty books and
being a free thinker, but he can't resist having his grandmother pose
for her portrait. Vianne will make friends and teach a very troubled
woman how to make chocolates, who initially steals from her, Josephine
(Lena Olin), the long-suffering wife of the town's abusive cafe owner
Serge (Peter Stormare).
The film drags on for an hour setting up how these uninteresting figures
battle their natural temptations and all the repression they have been
burdened with all their lives, before the arrival of the 'River Rats,' a
guitar-strumming boat crew of gypsies, led by the Irish accented Roux
(Pitt), invigorates the films with some more clichés of rebels. They are
also strangers the church will turn its anger towards as moral sinners.
The moral war led by the mayor intensifies, and a near fatal tragedy is
narrowly averted by luck, after the mayor's strong words to the piggish
Serge, that something must be done about these strangers, brings about
the burning down of their boats. These events cause Vianne to give up on
the town and want to leave, but something happens that pulls the town
magically back to its senses and they all undergo a change of spirit and
become more tolerant and better people. This contrived turn-around was
just too much for me to digest without getting sick from all the sugar I
was taking in.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brandon Herring
Comedy, Fable, Story...these three words best describe the delectable 
"Chocolat", the new film directed by Lasse Hollstrom (1999's The Cider House 
Rules). There are films out in the world that are just great, but not worthy 
of Oscar Nominations. In 1999 "The Cider House Rules" took the world by 
surprise and received an Oscar Nomination, of course even being a fantastic 
movie, it wasn't a movie that needed an Oscar Nominator. In 2000 "Chocolat" 
was nominated for Best Picture, and unfairly as well for still being a good 
movie, it isn't Oscar Material.
The film starts with a prologue of a voice-over of a woman, telling about a 
small village in France. This is a peaceful, humble village where all the 
people go to church every Sunday, they all keep their streets clean, and 
their children all go to a nice school. One Sunday the North wind brought in 
a chill, but also a surprise, for two new people are moving into this small 
French Village. Vianne Rooter (Juliette Binoche) and her young daughter Anouk 
Rocher (Victoire Thivisiol) open up a Chocolate shop in this town, and take 
it by surprise. For Vianne herself puts special ingredients in her chocolat, 
for such things as sexuality, moodiness, or insomnia. Much despised by the 
townfolk, especially by the mayor Comte de Reynaud (Alfred Molina), they try 
to run them out of the village, but of course Vianne stands up for herself 
and tries to prove that she is not a bad person, but just a different one. 
The movie's underlying tone is that of a good message, there are a lot of 
stereotypes in the film, and the character of Vianne tries to stop that in 
this town. A feeling of warm and fuzzy overcomes the viewer as the end 
credits go up, and you are left with a smile on your face and a thought in 
your head. Lasse Hollstrom's direction is very nicely done, especially in the 
opening sequence with a nice CGI effect of a camera drop in on the town 
(which for being described as very small, it actually good size). 
The characters are very nicely portrayed by many well-known faces. First up 
is the French Actress Juliette Binoche (who is nominated for an Oscar for her 
role, and deservedly so), she is a very beautiful and graceful actress who 
brings out the best of her character. Dame Judi Dench (who is also nominated 
for an Oscar) for her role as the cranky landlord of Vianne. Two well known 
American actors are also involved in this project. Carrie Anne-Moss of "The 
Matrix" fame, does a great job playing the uptight character of Caroline 
Claimont (who we find out some interesting tidbits about), and the misplaced 
character of Roux (played well by Johnny Depp) the pirate type man who almost 
brings the town to a stop.
"Chocolat" is based on the novel by Joanne Harris, and is written for the 
screen by Robert Nelson Jacobs. His script is well written, with some clever 
and witty dialogue that actually had me laughing out loud a couple of times. 
This isn't your type of comedy where your going to be bent over laughing, but 
a nice, sweet little comedy where a smile comes over your face and even a 
laugh here and there.
Even with these good things, "Chocolat" suffers it's share of bad things as 
well. Besides being somewhat predictable, the characters especially that of 
Roux are needless, and really just cliched. In my opinion, the film would 
have been better without him. Also a sequence in which I got so mad I almost 
left, and then it just turned around of course just messing with our 
feelings. It may sound like I am ragging on this movie, but believe me I'm 
not, just a few flaws the movie has. In the end, "Chocolat" is a rewarding 
experience that I could watch many times, and never get tired of.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 2/25/01.

Author
John Sylva
In Chocolat, a chocolate shop owner tells her customers to look into a 
spinning object of obscure textures, patterns, and lines, hoping she'll be 
able to foresee the kind of chocolate they'll most enjoy.  Some scoff the 
idea, but everyone who gazes into the complexity of the spinning object winds 
up seeing something different than the next, revealing personality traits 
which the person may not have known they had before.  This can easily stand 
as a model for Chocolat as a whole: On the surface, it appears to be a light, 
fluffy fable with no depth or true worth, but when one takes a second, deeper 
look, Chocolat's true colors begin to shine through.  Making a bold statement 
about organized religion and those who practice it, Lasse Hallstrom's 
Chocolat is flawlessly acted and meticulously crafted-not to mention one of 
the best films of the year.  
What gives Chocolat its magic, much like Hallstrom's 1999 winner of two 
Academy Awards, The Cider House Rules, is its willingness to say what's on 
its mind without holding back to prevent offending audiences.  The bold and 
honest message Hallstrom conveys with Chocolat will no doubt outrage a select 
group of viewers, but those who are willing to suspend their bitterness 
because they feel they are being intimidated or attacked should find 
themselves to be in agreement with what the film says about narrow-mindedness.
Chocolat centers its story around the small French village of Lansquenet, 
where majority rules, and the majority lives by only one law: religion.  The 
bulk of the townspeople (with few exceptions) are preparing for the sacred 
time of abstinence, Lent, but when the independent thinking, seemingly 
non-religious Vianne Rocher (Juliette Binoche) and her daughter Anouk 
(Victoire Thivisol) make the village their home, the people will be tempted 
beyond belief by the mouth-watering confections in the chocolate shop Vianne 
opens.  Many are predictably opposed and deeply offended by Vianne's opening 
of the chocolate shop just in time for Lent, especially the mayor, Comte de 
Reynaud (a cartoon-like Alfred Molina), who will stop at nothing to put her 
out of business.  On the other hand, the shop is a delight to others, 
including the cranky Armande Voizin (Judi Dench), who sits day by day in 
Vianne's shop, telling the single mother about her unfortunate detached 
relationship with her grandson (Aurelien Parent-Koening), which comes as a 
result of his mother (Carrie-Ann Moss) believing Armande is a bad influence, 
as she does not hold the same, strict religious beliefs that she does.  Also 
a fan of the chocolate is the nervous wreck Josephine Muscat, whose husband 
is constantly beating her, to whom Vianne offers a home and befriends.
Juliette Binoche is charming and honest as Vianne, genuinely capturing her 
character's determination to turn the narrow-minded townspeople into more 
happy, independent human beings, but most of Chocolat's success is 
unquestionably a result of the remarkable performances of the supporting 
actresses.  Lena Olin, previously nominated for an Oscar in 1989, deserves 
her second nomination for her earnest, moving portrayal of a lost, scared 
woman torn between staying true to her battering, manipulative husband or 
leaving him to live the life which for which she longs.  Judi Dench is sharp, 
incisive, and occasionally greatly touching as Armande Voizin.  Carrie 
Ann-Moss, in what is likely to be her first largely noticed (and acclaimed) 
role since The Matrix, shows a more solid side of her acting skills not 
previously seen, crafting a character that the viewer both sympathizes with 
and despises simultaneously.  Victoire Thivisol shows much promise as Anouk, 
a young girl hoping her always-on-the-move mother will eventually settle 
down.  A trade ad for Chocolat sums up best the power the actresses have on 
screen with the tagline: "Five extraordinary women, one extraordinary movie."
That's not to say the men don't do their share, though: Alfred Molina makes 
for a sly and utterly repugnant antagonist, Hugh O'Conor adds quite a bit of 
comic relief as the priest who seems to not even know why he is who he is, 
and Johnny Depp gives a strong performance as the pirate Roux, who enters the 
film late in the game and sparks the romantic interest of Vianne.  
The technical aspects of Chocolat are strong across the board: Lasse 
Hallstrom directs his enchanting fable with great care, perfectly balancing 
the elements of each genre to be found within the film.  Cinematographer 
Roger Pratt brings an atmospheric, fairy tale look to the film, and Rachel 
Portman's masterful score is her best and most memorable since The Cider 
House Rules.           
Chocolat, adapted by Robert Nelson Jacobs from the Joanne Harris novel, is a 
wonderful little treat of a film, one that will most likely win over the 
hearts of audiences and the votes of Academy members this winter, and the 
aggressive backing of Miramax Films assures the latter.  While not as 
powerful as The Cider House Rules, Lasse Hallstrom's Chocolat is a film which 
works on all levels-as a drama, a comedy, a fable, a romance, and a fairy 
tale.  And it even lives up to its name: It is delicious to savor the taste 
of, easy to digest, and, like all excellent chocolate, it is memorable for 
days afterward. 
THE BOTTOM LINE: Chocolat is pure pleasure.

Author
Ross Anthony
Delicious cinematography tops this creamy small town tale about a 
non-conformist spirit who opens up a temptingly luscious chocolate shop 
during the Holy Lent season in a rigidly religious French village. 
Though a variety of not necessarily French accents abound, it's an 
English speaking film. After initially stirring up some sticky thick 
first third acting, the performances sweeten. Likewise, the pace picks 
up during the second half. Lena Olin is standout marvelous as Josephine, 
the town kleptomaniac. 
The good-hearted, but nomadic Chocolate-maker/spirit-lifter asks another 
drifter, "Did you ever think about belonging somewhere?" 
His response takes little thought, "No, you end up caring what people 
think of you." 
The film's only fault lies in its light fluffy center. Though the 
characters are all very lovely and endearing ... they seem far away. 
They don't reach into our hearts and choke us up. 
Filmed so gorgeously, the term eye-candy rolls apropos in the mouth. At 
times the script dips a bit into the too cute; but for the most part 
this is a solid, even Disney story. In fact, it reminded me a great deal 
of Disney's "Balloon Farm." "Chocolat's" last shot even includes a 
dangling balloon. A strong B+. 
Chocolat. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Juliette Binoche, Lena Olin, Johnny Depp, Judi Dench, Alfred 
Molina. 
*  Directed by Lasse Hallstrom. 
*  Written by Robert Nelson Jacobs. 
*  Director of Photography: Roger Pratt. 
*  Produced by David Brown, Kit Golden, Leslie Holleran distributed by 
Miramax. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
CHOCOLAT  (UK, 2000)  *** 1/2  Directed by Lasse Hallstrom. Written 
by Robert Nelson Jacobs from the novel by Joan Harris. Photography, 
Roger Platt. Editing,  Andrew Monsheim. Production design, David 
Gropman. Music, Rachel Portman. Cast: Juliette Binoche, Lena Olin, 
Alfred Molina, Judi Dench, Johnny Depp, Peter Stormare, Carrie-Anne 
Moss, Leslie Caron, Hugh O'Connor, Victoire Thivisol. Aurelien 
Parent Koenig.  Producer David Brown. A Miramax co-production and 
release. 121 minutes. PG-13.
In French, "chocolat" means both chocolate and hot chocolate. In 
1988  there was another film by that title, a splendid 
socio-political work which had nothing to do with sweets but was 
director Claire Denis's  semi-autobiographical reminiscence of her 
youth in then colonial French Cameroun's (sic) in North-West Africa.
By coincidence, the year 2000 also saw "Thanks for the Chocolate," 
the 52d feature by the redoubtable Claude Chabrol. It won the major 
Delluc Prize in France, has not yet arrived in the USA, and has 
little to do with food --even though Chabrol is the most 
gastronomy-oriented of major directors.
Our "Chocolat" is only indirectly political, as it refers to forces 
of enlightenment versus obscurantist and conservatist attitudes. But 
it does fit nicely within the sub-genre of "food movies and their 
magic," one that includes the Mexican "Like Water  for Chocolate," 
the American  "Big Night,"  and the great Danish :Babette's Feast." 
(The fine Canadian lesbian film "Better than Chocolate" gets its 
title indirectly as its protagonist happens to be a chocomaniac).
Director Lasse Hallstrom made several movies in his native Sweden. 
"My Life as a Dog" rightly became an international hit and led to 
America. There he made the quirky and under-seen "Once Around," the 
lauded "What's Eating Gilbert Grape," the fair "Something to Talk 
About," and the excellent "The Cider House Rules." 
Hallstrom's movies have originality and deal with offbeat 
characters. With "Chocolat" he goes several steps further by giving 
us a real fairy tale. It is Lent time in 1959.  In a French village, 
single mother Vianne (Binoche) and her daughter Anouk (Thivisol of 
"Ponette" fame) appear out of nowhere. (Juliette Binoche's most 
recent films include the "Three Colors" series, "The English 
Patient" and "Alice and Martin.") 
Vianne has come to purchase a derelict "chocolaterie." Where her 
money comes from, how she transforms the locale into a decorated, 
well-equipped shop with chocolates, truffles and other goodies to 
die for, plus other aspects of the film, remain a mystery. But after 
all the movie is an A to Z pantasy. Before you know it, the place 
looks great -- and he confections can make audiences drool. This 
shop is a genuine "salivatorium."
Soon Vianne has a small group of faithful followers, including the 
curmudgeonly  old Mrs. Amande Voizin (Dench) who early on had 
declared the shop's look to be "early Mexican bordello." But she 
gets tamed and forms a trio with Vianne and Josephine (Lena Olin who 
is Mr. Hallstrom's wife and had co-starred with Binoche in "The 
Unbearable Lightness of Being.") Josephine, first shown as a 
kleptomaniac then as a battered wife,  leavesher abusing bar-owner 
husband, finds refuge in the chocolaterie, gets prettier, becomes 
Vianne's co-worker and finally--just like Madame Voizin-- can smile, 
laugh and be normal.
The chocolates, the hot chocolate and other sweets have magic 
ingredients, including hot chili peppers. Also odd names such as 
"Nipples of Venus." Tasting almost anything does miracles, changes 
lives, lifestyles and attitudes.
But -- there's always a "but" in fairy tales--, there is Opposition 
with a capital O. The village's uncontested boss and Mayor (the 
England-born  Alfred Molina, he of a thousand faces) is the Comte de 
Reynaud. His word is law, his odd religiosity a kind of substitute 
for a traumatized psyche. He covers up the fact that his wife has 
left him for good (why is not explained but could be guessed) by 
pretending that she keeps extending her trip abroad.
The other major character is the Mayor's secretary, husbandless 
Madame Clairmont (Moss), a high-bourgeoisie lady with a talented 
young son, Luc. She is also the estranged daughter of old Mrs. 
Voizin and forbids Luc to talk to his grandmother.. And she's 
against the chocolate shop and its people. (There are reasons given, 
sort of reasons, that is. Don't expect Cartesian logic.)
The Count is a fine specimen of unreasonable intolerance. When 
defied by Vianne, he reminds her that his ancestors had put to the 
sword hordes of Protestants (or Albigensian heretics?)  He 
communicates his dislike of Vianne to the parishioners, who follow 
meekly, and tries to do the same to the very young new priest who is 
smart, tolerant and not taken in by the "capital offense" of Vianne 
who dares open her place while Lent is going on.
How the plot develops must remain unsaid, except for the later 
addition of Johnny Depp. He shows up on water, with other river rats 
who, much like gypsies, are disdained, mistrusted and indeed opposed 
by the villagers. This adds another element of discrimination 
against people who are "different" by knee-jerkily religious, 
extreme-right, sclerotic, unthinking peasants. The film's main body 
goes from Lent in 1959 to Lent the following year.
The  message is tranparently about tolerance vs. mindless 
suspiciousness, but it is also a paean to gustatory delights. Food 
is a religion in France, but it can co-exist with "regular" faith, 
just as tradition can peacefully co-exist with novelty. The story 
reminds me of the near-classic in the early days of the Cold War's 
Red Scare (and future  McCarthyism) "The Boy With Green Hair" 
(1948). A war orphan wakes up with green hair one day, and that's 
enough to make him "different" and discriminated against.
"Chocolat" is most entertaining, light even when things get serious, 
often very funny (note the parts with the young priest.)I. It was 
made mostly in England, with some footage in France. I suspect that 
the real French village used was for high shots of rooftops, later 
patched in with studio scenes. All the performers speak in English 
with a variety of would-be French accents. A delicious film, easy on 
the eyes and, I hope, on the digestion of any chocolate-eating 
actors. 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Lasse Hallstrom's new film is a parable about believing in
oneself and even more on getting a little joy from life.  It is a
contrived story in which the good guys are a little too good and the
bad guys are obvious.  But its message is disarming and sweetened
with tempting visions of chocolate that seduce the viewer.  But it
is getting a following in a time when so many of the popular films
are pushing nihilism and showing violence.
     In a little French village life is painted like the village
itself in tones of brown and gray.  Everyone knows his place and
knows exactly what is expected of him.  Those who forget their
responsibilities are quickly reminded.  Pleasure is for the most
part to be deferred for the next life.  Instead life is piety and
submission.  But in 1959, as Lent is approaching, a mysterious woman
Vianne (Juliette Binoche) arrives in town with her daughter and in
the shadow of the church at the beginning of Lent sets up a
chocolate shop.  Vianne is immediately countered by the forces of
convention and of self-denial.  These forces are marshalled and lead
by the town's mayor the Comte de Reynard (fine comic actor Alfred
Molina).  Slyly Reynard affirms his number-one position by turning
the townspeople against Vianne and the change she is bringing.  He
and Vianne are poles apart and the little French town is
figuratively and nearly literally not big enough for the two of
them.
     At the same time some who are lower in the town's pecking order
are giving in to the temptations of self-indulgence and even
breaking from their established places.  The respectable people of
the town side with the mayor, but the marginal people, those who
normally get swept aside, become friends with Vianne and find they
enjoy her sweet chocolate and her easy friendship.  For those in the
middle, between the mayor and Vianne, there is the constant
temptation of all that chocolate.  One of the women who joins the
circle of friends is Josephine Muscat (Lina Olin) whose brutish
husband Serge (Peter Stormare, who played the quiet killer in FARGO)
owns the local saloon and beats Josephine when he is drunk.  Another
of Vianne's circle is an old woman, Armande Voizin (Judi Dench),
nearly disowned by her family.
     While CHOCOLAT is not ultimately negative on religion, the
alliance between the young priest and the mayor is looked on as one
of the negative forces in the town.  Too often the local priest
takes a cold and unfriendly stance.  The pleasures of chocolate are
said to be evil.  A dog, we are told, has no soul.  But the rules of
Lent still apply to the dog.  The historic town hero is remembered
for having turned out the Huguenots.  In the end the film is a
little pat, even for the parable that it is.  The ending is a little
contrived and not quite believable.
     There seem to be two major themes in the photography (at
least).  One is the color in the town.  It is drab grays and browns
until Vianne arrives in her bright red cloak and hood.  Echoing
ideas of PLEASANTVILLE, though in a more subtle fashion, Vianne
brings color to the village.  Her shop is bright with color, while
the rest of the town is muted in color.  Vianne has the courage to
break from the dismal color scheme and bring some life to the
village.  The other theme is tempting the audience with luscious
photography of chocolate.  Like BABETTE'S FEAST and LIKE WATER FOR
CHOCOLATE, this is a film that seduces the viewer with its
photography of food.
     CHOCOLAT is generating some controversy; it seems to be a film
people either love or hate.  For my part I rate it a 7 on the 0 to
10 scale and a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Chocolat" is the kind of syrupy, mystical fable that audiences will able to 
fully ingest and come back for seconds. It is simple and simple-minded enough 
for mainstream audiences but for others, its ambitions point to something far 
more than what is delivered. 
As "Chocolat" opens, a brazen wind blows through the French countryside until 
it arrives in a small religious town where it settles upon thrusting open the 
doors of the local church. Inside the church are the locals, including Comte 
de Reynaud (Alfred Molina) who is a bit perturbed by the sudden whiff of air. 
Nevertheless, the wind brings in two nomadic, red-cloaked outsiders, Vianne 
(Juliette Binoche) and her daughter, Anouk (Victoire Thivisol). They arrive 
in town ready to open a delicious chocolate shop, though their timing 
couldn't be more off. Vianne is opening her shop during the Lent season, 
observed by most of the local denizens who intend on fasting. The problem is 
Vianne is atheist and causes turmoil with the Comte, who basically runs the 
town despite the fact he is only a historian. The Comte even revises the 
young priest's sermons to his own moralist liking!
What is Vianne to do? She has a wonderful shop full of Mayan chocolate 
recipes served with chili powder and whipped cream but thanks to Comte's 
rising intervention, she may not be able to keep any customers. It is bad 
enough that her darling Anouk, who has an imaginary kangaroo friend, is 
Vianne's illegitimate daughter. That doesn't seem to irk the crotchety, 
rebellious Armande (Judi Dench), Vianne's landlady, who favors Vianne's hot 
chocolates. Pretty soon the kleptomaniac Josephine (Lena Olin), physically 
abused by her cafe owner husband (Peter Stormare), moves into Vianne's shop 
and begins baking chocolate with her. And as luck would have it, a gypsy 
named Roux (Johnny Depp) arrives in town, ready to dazzle and court Vianne, 
causing rising temper tantrums in Comte and the town itself who oppose 
gypsies. 
Nothing in "Chocolat" occurs that can't be predicted on some level yet it is 
Lasse Hallstrom's assured direction that makes up for the film's too tidy 
climax and formulaic structure. Hallstrom also has a gift for knowing how to 
handle actors and make them luminescent. Nothing could be further from the 
truth than Juliette Binoche, who gives new meaning to the term 
"incandescent." Every shot with Binoche is bright and lovely beyond words, 
and I can't think of a better actress to play the seductive Vianne. She is 
delightful, witty, beautiful and tempestuous. Comte refers to her as Satanic, 
but her seductive charm is in guessing what kind of chocolate her customers 
prefer and thus tempting them to sample it.
Alfred Molina gives one of his most magnificent performances yet, teetering 
on the edge between cartoonish villain and a virtuous, righteous man. His 
subtle glances and grimaces are terrifically timed. Dame Judi Dench also cuts 
another beautiful performance as the snippy landlord who is estranged from 
her strict daughter (Carrie-Ann Moss). Lena Olin is at her most emotionally 
heartfelt since "Enemies: A Love Story" as the battered wife who tries to 
separate herself from her loutish husband. 
"Chocolat" is delightful but also fluffy, and ends with a sermon from the 
young priest that is superficial and preachy beyond words - the dialogue as 
said sounds written, not spoken. And isn't it possible that the film could 
have taken place in some other season besides Lent to accommodate the film's 
theme of how intolerance can corrupt yet can also prove to be incorruptible? 
Isn't it enough that a woman in a red cloak and red shoes with an 
illegitimate daughter comes into a Catholic town unveiling the repressed 
spirits of all the townsfolk with her Mayan chocolate? Still, "Chocolat" is a 
nice treat but it could have used the weight of films like "Like Water For 
Chocolate" or "Babette's Feast" to make for a richer dessert. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or general comments at 
Faust667@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Annette Cardwell
Take Footloose and Like Water for Chocolate, steep the combo in a
heaping helping of corn syrup, and you'll come out with the sticky,
sickly-sweet romantic cautionary tale Chocolat.  The Cider House Rules
director Lasse Hallström helms this adaptation of the best-selling novel
by Joanne Harris, and delivers yet another pretty package of tempered
social messages -- this time preaching about social tolerance instead of
abortion.
Set against the idyllic backdrop of a quaint puritanical village in the
French countryside, mysterious Vianne (Juliette Binoche) and her
daughter, dressed in identical Red Riding Hood outfits, literally blow
into town "on the North Wind."  Within days, the duo brazenly opens a
magical chocolaterie across the street -- gasp -- from the church, and
on the first week of Lent, no less.  Vianne -- who comes off as a
50's-era Erin Brockovich sporting low-cut tops and bright red stilettos
-- is turning the townsfolk on to her sweets, which a la Pleasantville
miraculously inspire increased sex drives, feminist awakenings, familial
reconciliation and even criminal rehabilitation.  Soon, the town's
prudish mayor launches a campaign to drive the sin-inducing shop out of
business.
As if the girl-against-God story doesn't hit you over the head with
enough meaning, along comes a swarthy band of Irish "river rats," headed
up by the Blues guitar-playing, ponytailed Roux (Johnny Depp), to stir
the xenophobic waters even further in the tiny hamlet.  This Erin gypsy
bad boy with a heart of gold finds an ally in fellow ne'er-do-well
Vianne.  She's a little bit country, he's a little bit rock and roll,
and romance ensues.
But regardless of its good intentions, Chocolat wastes the talents of a
great cast.  Juliette Binoche manages to eke out a little dignity among
Vianne's folklorish jibberish, and Judi Dench lends weight to her role
as a local diabetic curmudgeon.  However, all of these otherwise adept
actors must deliver their lines in French-accented English, which comes
off as a chintzy device to remind the audience that, hey, the movie's
set in France -- and perhaps also to explain the lack of an "e" at the
end of the title.
Plus, the story has some serious problems of its own.  The only reason
given for Vianne's obsessive nomadic tendencies is that her foolish
French dad married a wild-eyed Mayan woman who instilled the need to
blaze a trail across Europe, leaving cavities and heightened libidos in
her wake.  Of course, things all wrap up rather neatly in the end,
something that becomes very apparent less than halfway into the film,
and there's even a Disney-esque treat to close the picture that's sure
to incite a few groans.
Of course, Chocolat will be ideal fare for the Oprah's Book Club crowd,
and will surely be a great pick for seeing with mom over the holidays or
maybe a cute first date.  Just be warned; Chocolat is more
Russel-Stover's than Godiva.
Director: Lasse Hallström
Producer: Kit Golden, David Brown, Leslie Holleran
Writer: Robert Nelson Jacobs
Starring: Juliette Binoche, Johnny Depp, Judi Dench, Alfred Molina, Lena
Olin, Carrie-Anne Moss, Peter Stormare
Web site:
http://www.miramax.com/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=1&midStr=1453
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Chocolat" is the kind of syrupy, mystical fable that audiences will able to 
fully ingest and come back for seconds. It is simple and simple-minded enough 
for mainstream audiences but for others, its ambitions point to something far 
more than what is delivered. 
As "Chocolat" opens, a brazen wind blows through the French countryside until 
it arrives in a small religious town where it settles upon thrusting open the 
doors of the local church. Inside the church are the locals, including Comte 
de Reynaud (Alfred Molina) who is a bit perturbed by the sudden whiff of air. 
Nevertheless, the wind brings in two nomadic, red-cloaked outsiders, Vianne 
(Juliette Binoche) and her daughter, Anouk (Victoire Thivisol). They arrive 
in town ready to open a delicious chocolate shop, though their timing 
couldn't be more off. Vianne is opening her shop during the Lent season, 
observed by most of the local denizens who intend on fasting. The problem is 
Vianne is atheist and causes turmoil with the Comte, who basically runs the 
town despite the fact he is only a historian. The Comte even revises the 
young priest's sermons to his own moralist liking!
What is Vianne to do? She has a wonderful shop full of Mayan chocolate 
recipes served with chili powder and whipped cream but thanks to Comte's 
rising intervention, she may not be able to keep any customers. It is bad 
enough that her darling Anouk, who has an imaginary kangaroo friend, is 
Vianne's illegitimate daughter. That doesn't seem to irk the crotchety, 
rebellious Armande (Judi Dench), Vianne's landlady, who favors Vianne's hot 
chocolates. Pretty soon the kleptomaniac Josephine (Lena Olin), physically 
abused by her cafe owner husband (Peter Stormare), moves into Vianne's shop 
and begins baking chocolate with her. And as luck would have it, a gypsy 
named Roux (Johnny Depp) arrives in town, ready to dazzle and court Vianne, 
causing rising temper tantrums in Comte and the town itself who oppose 
gypsies. 
Nothing in "Chocolat" occurs that can't be predicted on some level yet it is 
Lasse Hallstrom's assured direction that makes up for the film's too tidy 
climax and formulaic structure. Hallstrom also has a gift for knowing how to 
handle actors and make them luminescent. Nothing could be further from the 
truth than Juliette Binoche, who gives new meaning to the term 
"incandescent." Every shot with Binoche is bright and lovely beyond words, 
and I can't think of a better actress to play the seductive Vianne. She is 
delightful, witty, beautiful and tempestuous. Comte refers to her as Satanic, 
but her seductive charm is in guessing what kind of chocolate her customers 
prefer and thus tempting them to sample it.
Alfred Molina gives one of his most magnificent performances yet, teetering 
on the edge between cartoonish villain and a virtuous, righteous man. His 
subtle glances and grimaces are terrifically timed. Dame Judi Dench also cuts 
another beautiful performance as the snippy landlord who is estranged from 
her strict daughter (Carrie-Ann Moss). Lena Olin is at her most emotionally 
heartfelt since "Enemies: A Love Story" as the battered wife who tries to 
separate herself from her loutish husband. 
"Chocolat" is delightful but also fluffy, and ends with a sermon from the 
young priest that is superficial and preachy beyond words - the dialogue as 
said sounds written, not spoken. And isn't it possible that the film could 
have taken place in some other season besides Lent to accommodate the film's 
theme of how intolerance can corrupt yet can also prove to be incorruptible? 
Isn't it enough that a woman in a red cloak and red shoes with an 
illegitimate daughter comes into a Catholic town unveiling the repressed 
spirits of all the townsfolk with her Mayan chocolate? Still, "Chocolat" is a 
nice treat but it could have used the weight of films like "Like Water For 
Chocolate" or "Babette's Feast" to make for a richer dessert. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or general comments at 
Faust667@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
"We Put the SIN in Cinema"
 ŠCopyright 2000 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
So my cousin asks me what the movie Chocolat is about, and I tell him,
"Some woman opens a chocolate shop and everybody in town falls in love
with both her delicious concoctions, as well as each other."  Then my
cousin muses, "So it's like that movie with Buffy," referring to the
beyond-awful Sarah Michelle Gellar film, Simply Irresistible, which
shares a similar theme with Chocolat.
After the dry heaving stopped, I stepped into the theatre and was
greatly relieved to find Chocolat wasn't anywhere near as bad as
Irresistible, or the equally unpleasant and more recent Woman on Top.
If you head for the theatre expecting to find a wonderful film about
food preparation and consumption (like Big Night) or a romantic movie
that focuses on food as a tool of seduction (Like Water for Chocolate),
you might go home disappointed.  A light, crowd-pleaser with
above-average acting and a predictable ending, Chocolat lands somewhere
between the wide gap created by Irresistible and Night - thankfully
landing a bit closer to the latter than the former.
The film is set in 1959 in the tiny French town of Lansquenet, a hamlet
populated by a flock of conservative bible-thumpers that would sooner
lose a limb than miss a mass.  And when Vianne (Juliette Binoche, The
English Patient) and her daughter Anouk (Victorie Thivisol, Ponette)
stroll into Lansquenet, the whole town is in the midst of Sunday
sermon.  Vianne rents a pastry shop from a dour old woman named Armande
(Dame Judi Dench, Tea With Mussolini), the only Lansquenet resident who
refuses to go to church.
Vianne turns the storefront into a chocolate shop, but makes the mistake
of having its grand opening just as Lent begins.  As if that wasn't
enough to piss off the locals, Lansquenet's mayor, Comte de Reynaud
(Alfred Molina, Magnolia), gets everyone even more riled when he finds
out that Vianne is both a single mother and an atheist (the horror!).
It's all too much for the town to handle and, as a result, the shop
doesn't get much business despite Vianne's uncanny ability to pick the
right sugary morsel to suit everyone she encounters.
In fact, the only customers Vianne gets at first are her landlord and a
shoplifter named Josephine (Lena Olin, The Ninth Gate) who eventually
escapes her loveless marriage to Lansquenet's café owner (Peter
Stormare, Dancer in the Dark) to become Vianne's assistant (a pretty
dumb development).  Both Armande and Josephine supply Chocolat with the
necessary plots to keep the film from just being about a candy store.
In case that isn't enough to interest you, Vianne gets a love interest
in the form of a guitar-playing, Irish gypsy (Olin's Gate costar, Johnny
Depp) who doesn't show up until an hour into the film.
With the exception of Depp's disappearance, which occurs about 20
minutes after he first appears (not bad for somebody who gets their mug
plastered on the film's poster), Chocolat is fairly predictable.  The
film is sparsely narrated, which makes it seem like it was added as an
afterthought.  There's also an awkward flashback that shows how Vianne's
family discovered the secret of chocolate.  All of the laughs (and I
mean all of them) come at the expense of the church, and most involve
Lansquenet's new, wide-eyed priest (Hugh O'Connor), who has trouble
dealing with the puritanical Mayor and his unexplainable anger toward
Vianne.
Binoche delivers a one-note performance and is outperformed by most of
Chocolat's supporting cast (especially Dench).  Thivisol, who was so
stunning in Ponette, has little to do but prattle on about her imaginary
kangaroo friend.  Depp's Irish brogue is impeccable but, unfortunately,
he doesn't get to stick around long enough to leave any kind of mark on
the film.
Based on Joanne Harris's novel of the same name, Chocolat is a bit of a
disappointment following the success of director Lasse Hallström's last
film, The Cider House Rules.  Something could have been lost in the
adaptation from Harris' story, as Chocolat's screenwriter's (Robert
Nelson Jacobs) only two other credits are the less-than-stellar Dinosaur
and Out to Sea.  Although Hallström packs the film with great acting
talent, a decent score (Cider House's Rachel Portman) and warm
photography (Roger Pratt, The End of the Affair), Chocolat is not unlike
eating a fistful of Vianne's creations:  They taste great on the way
down, but give you a bit of a stomach ache after you've finished.
1:56  PG-13 for a scene of sensuality and some violence

Author
Susan Granger
  "Once upon a time, there was a quiet little village in the
French countryside, where people believed in tranquillity. You knew
your place in the scheme of things and, if you happened to forget,
someone would remind you." That's the way Lasse Hallstrom ("The Cider
House Rules") begins this romantic magical fable about a mysterious
single mother (Juliette Binoche) opens a chocolate shop during Lent,
antagonizing the righteous, patriarchal Mayor (Alfred Molina) and
young priest (Hugh O'Conor) but tempting and transforming the stodgy,
drab townsfolk with her tasty confections - while teaching
tolerance. A Julia Roberts lookalike, Juliette Binoche embodies this
sensual, cocoa-obsessed woman, delving into life's dark bitterness and
frothy sweetness, as she mothers her troubled daughter (Victoire
Thivisol) and romances sexy Johnny Depp, a guitar-strumming
vagabond. Carrie Ann Moss is a repressed mother whose keeps her son
away from his feisty, outspoken grandmother, played by Judi
Dench. Hallstrom's real-life wife, Lena Olin engages as the abused
wife of brutish cafe-owner Peter Stormare but Leslie Caron has barely
a cameo as a Gallic matron. Combining a dollop of "Like Water for
Chocolate," a dash of "Tom Jones" and a pinch of "Woman on Top," the
story uses chocolate as a metaphor for pleasure, freedom and
rebellion. Adapting Joanne Harris' richly layered best-seller,
screenwriter Robert Nelson Jacobs has wisely changed the villainous
priest into a prissy nobleman. Roger Pratt's cinematography is
luscious so, although it's utterly predictable, this is a scrumptious
morsel that melts "ever so slowly on your tongue and tortures you with
pleasure." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Chocolat" is a
delicious 8, a decadent, delectable treat. Indulge yourself!

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Like its heroine Viane (Juliette Binoche), a drifter who pulls up 
roots and relocates more often than Hillary Clinton, Lasse Hallstrom's 
Chocolat is a hard movie to pin down.  There's an undeniable sweetness 
to this fable of the redemptive power of pleasure, but there's a 
troubling lack of inspiration as well.  It aspires to the territory of 
the great food movies like Babette's Feast, Like Water for Chocolate, 
and Eat, Drink, Man, Woman, but it lands somewhere closer to the 
packaged entree blandness of this year's Woman on Top.  
     We are introduced to an enchanting little French river village and 
informed by a voice over that "if you lived in this village, you knew 
your place in the scheme of things, and if you forgot, someone reminded 
you."  As likely as not, that someone would be the Comte de Reynaud 
(Alfred Molina), the town's petty nobleman, mayor, and moral policeman.  
     But one day a bizarre north wind kicks up, and on its blustery 
gusts two red-hooded figures blow into town.  They are Viane and her 
little daughter Anouk (Victoire Thivisol, remembered from Ponette), and 
they immediately rent an empty patisserie which Viane sets about turning 
into a chocolaterie.  As luck and timing would have it, the opening of 
the house of confection coincides with the beginning of Lent.  This, 
combined with the newcomer's refusal to attend the village church, where 
Reynaud monitors and takes attendance, quickly chills the locals' 
welcome. 
     The theme of Chocolat, which is adapted from a popular novel by 
Joanne Harris, is that goodness is not measured by self-denial, but by 
openness and charitable love.  The Catholic Church takes a good measure 
of the flat end of the stick here as the instrument of repression.  To 
be sure, the young priest (Hugh O'Conor of  The Young Poisoner's 
Handbook) is a tender-hearted, rock 'n' roll-loving softie, but he is 
putty in the hands of the overbearing Count, and the church he serves 
does enforce Lent, and Viane's refusal to attend it has nothing to do 
with the Count's authoritarianism. 
     Bit by bit, or bite by bite, the populace succumbs to the 
temptations of Viane's chocolate delicacies, and of her understanding 
nature.  Long-dormant sexual passions are reawakened, flinty old grumps 
are softened, timid lovers are emboldened, the oppressed cease from 
distressing and take control of their own lives.  And there is a 
wonderful caliber of actors to do all this.  Dame Judi Dench, Lena Olin, 
John Wood, Leslie Caron, Peter Stormare, and Carrie-Ann Moss all bring 
their great talents to the telling of this fable.
     But there are no surprises.  Nobody does anything you couldn't 
predict from the first moment he or she is introduced.  This creates the 
problem of a flatness of character.  There is a certain charm, for 
instance, to the geriatric romance between the shy John Wood and the 
widow Leslie Caron still mourning her husband forty years after his 
death in WWI, but there is no real humanity to it.
     The case can be made that this is a fairy tale, after all, and 
fairy tales live on a menu of atmosphere and satisfaction, not surprise. 
 Viane and her daughter arrive cloaked like mother-daughter Little Red 
Riding Hoods, wafted on a wind of magical realism, and they set about 
concocting a magic potion to awaken the villagers trapped in a cheerless 
spell.  For some viewers that potion will work, that spell will be 
broken.  Others will be unconvinced.
     If it has taken a long time in this review to get to Johnny Depp, 
well, it takes a long time in the movie too.  He turns up midway through 
as a "river rat", an Irish gypsy who drifts from town to town with the 
river's current.  He's a welcome addition, but truth to tell, he never 
gets much to do other than fix a door, play a guitar, provide a kindred 
outcast spirit to go with Viane's, and look meltingly handsome.  Still, 
there aren't many actors who can put what he does into a line like "I'll 
come around some time and get that squeak out of your door."
     Juliette Binoche never gets comfortable in her role.  Lena Olin 
does better as an abused wife who finds sanctuary in the chocolate shop. 
 The performance that makes the biggest impact belongs to Alfred Molina, 
who takes the role of ogre and seeds it with flakes of humanity that 
promise an ultimate redemption.
     Chocolat keeps veering between fulfillment and disappointment.  
There are wonderful scenes, adorable characters, funny bits, moments of 
real magic and magic realism.  But it never quite finds itself, and the 
blame has to fall to director Hallstrom, just as much of the credit for 
last year's The Cider House Rules belongs to him.  He can't quite figure 
it out.  There is a favorite bedtime story that little Anouk pries from 
her reluctant mother, about her grandmE8re and grandp=E8re.  As Viane =
tells the story we go to a flashback of their romance that includes an 
unaccountable sex scene.  As sex scenes go these days, it's pretty 
modest, but there's no reason for it in this movie.  It's an indication 
of Hallstrom's lack of mastery of this material.
     Don't misunderstand - there is an audience for this movie, some 
people will love it, and even the grinchiest critic can hardly hate it.  
But the magic wand Lasse Hallstrom tries to wave in this broad-stroked 
fairy tale sometimes feels more like a cattle prod.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
How many movies are they going to make in which someone prepares food which
by itself seems to magically transform folks into more vibrant, horny and
happy people? I personally really liked both LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE and
WOMAN ON TOP, both of which followed the same tradition, but now it seems to
be getting a little out of hand. It was a clever idea at first, Mr. Holly
and Wood, but how about holding off on any new incarnations unless an
extremely creative touch is added to the now-dated concept.
PLOT:
A mystery woman and her daughter enter a "tranquil" town and open their own
chocolatterie (chocolate shop). Soon enough, the puritan locals fall in love
with her confections but not without much backlash from the town's mayor,
who considers her to be a troublemaker.
CRITIQUE:
An interesting, uneven, if entirely predictable fairy-tale comedy featuring
some solid acting all around and a cute story which needlessly sticks around
way past its final course. I enjoyed this movie for the most part. It was
light, fluffy, romantic, funny and it played out very well in the little
village in which it was set up. The intros were well done, the characters
sharpened by the experienced actors and the set-up, despite feeling quite
deja-vu for me, interesting enough to keep my eyes wide awake.
Unfortunately, the movie just didn't seem to know where to stop. It went on
and on and on and on and on. Near the end, it just started feeling like it
was never gonna stop. With its purposely magical feel, I expected a cutesy
story, some romantic and funny moments, which I received, and a quick and
easy ending. But the filmmakers seemed to veer off course about 2/3 of the
way in. That's about the time Johnny Depp entered the picture for the first
time, a man who looks great in just about anything that he does, and
suddenly the film took on a "darker" tone. Things got ugly, death entered
the picture and the film suddenly became...dare I say, realistic! Of course,
realism is fine in most films but with the whole mythical amusing feel of
the movie up until that point, the ending just seemed out of place. It was
like the director wanted to create a fun-loving movie, and get us all
emotional as well. For me, it didn't work.
But the whole movie wasn't an entire waste. In fact, not at all. The actors
were all great, especially Alfred Molina, who by all counts, should be the
one and only choice to redo the part of Inspector Clouseau in any future
PINK PANTHER movies. A great character actor, always! Binoche was good as
well, with enough range to make her character real and believable, and
Carrie Anne-Moss, great move by you and your agent! I barely recognized her
out of those black leather pants...good show! Sadly, Johnny Depp was
woefully underused. This was even more disappointing to me because 1) I love
the man...uuuh, the actor, that is...harumph and 2) Uhhhm, his face is
plastered all over the poster! He might draw people into theatres, but many
will leave disappointed once they acknowledge his grand absence. Anyway, his
character was also very underdeveloped, and I wish we could have had more
time with him, instead of some of the more serious moments near the end of
this film. In the end, the movie was simple enough for me to enjoy for the
most part, thanks to all of the interesting actors in the film and the cute
premise, but it truly does outlast its stay and doesn't really have all that
much to say when you think about it afterwards. Oh yeah and did I mention
that Johnny Depp is one great looking man? Me go eat some chocolate now...

Author
Laura Clifford
The French village of Lansquenet, ruled by the morally rigid Comte De
Reynaud (Alfred Molina, "Boogie Nights"), prides itself on its tranquility.
That surface peacefulness is churned up when a cold North wind blows the
red cloaked Vianne Rocher (Juliette Binoche, "The English Patient") and
her daughter Anouk (Victoire Tivisol, "Ponette") into town in director
Lasse Hallstrom's ("The Cider House Rules") "Chocolat."
Ironically, the first resident Vianne meets turns out to be the like-minded
Armande (Judi Dench, "Shakespeare in Love"), an old woman estranged from
her daughter (Carrie-Anne Moss, "The Matrix," as Caroline) and grandson 
(Aurelien Parent Koenig as Luc), who is renting the dilapidated patisserie
Vianne is interested in.  After applying art and elbow grease, Vianne
opens Chocolatier Maya at the beginning of Lent, outraging the Comte yet
intriguing many of his townspeople.  Soon her chocolates have sparked the
love life of a middle aged couple, started a senior romance between dog lover
Guillaume (John Wood, "An Ideal Husband") and war widow Madame Audel (Leslie
Caron, "Funny Bones"), engaged timid battered wife Josephine 
(Lena Olin, "Mystery Men") and secretly reunited Armande and Luc.
The Comte tries to run Vianne out of business by spreading rumors at the 
local hair salon and having Pere Henri (Hugh O'Connor, "The Young Poisoner's
Handbook") denounce her wares as sinful in his sermons, but he can't
argue with her harboring of Josephine.  The Comte makes Josephine's loutish
husband Serge (Peter Stormare, "Dancer in the Dark") his mission by
attempting to turn the man into a gentleman and save the sanctity of his
marriage.
The standoff is intensified when Irish gypsies known as river rats dock
along Lansquenet's river to sing, dance and sell trinkets.  The Comte
declares them morally bankrupt and posts signs at the town's businesses,
but Vianne not only welcomes them, she falls for the dashing Roux (Johnny Depp).
Vianne further tweaks the Comte by planning a fertility festival on Easter
Sunday.
Adapted by Robert Nelson Jacobs ("Out to Sea") from Joanne Harris' novel,
"Chocolat" is one of those prefabricated fables about a life affirming
stranger who rails against the repressed status quo and wins.  Yet, while it 
sounds sickly sweet, it plays better than it has a right to, largely due
to a grounded yet glowing performance from Juliette Binoche.  She makes
Vianne a non-pushy puppetmaster whose gentle guidance rewards all who
allow her influence into their lives.  Vianne, after all, tempers the
sweetness of her confections with chili pepper.  This fiesty flavor also
symbolizes the firey nature of Armande, a woman who lives life to its
fullest.  Dench, like Binoche, tempers the gooeyness which keeps her
refound relationship with her grandson from becoming overly sentimental.
Of the supporting cast, Depp (who's in, maybe, ten percent of the film)
gives some juicy line readings, but is really relegated mostly to the
sidelines.  John Wood is touching as the elderly courter and Hugh O'Connor
is amusing as the pop eyed young priest.  Young Aurelien Parent Koenig
brings layers of darkness to budding artist Luc while Thivisol makes for
a determined Anouk.  Alfred Molina, however, drifts into caricature as
the Comte, barely toning down the mustache twirling he brought to "Dudley
Do-Right."
The film looks terrific with fairy tale production design by David Gropman
("The Cider House Rules").  Roger Pratt's ("The End of the Affair")
cinematography captures the sparks of color which dot the gray, walled
medieval town of Flavigny.  Costume design by Renee Erlich Kalfus ("The
Cider House Rules") is particularly inventive for Binoche.
Hallstrom's confection may be nothing new, but it goes down easyily.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom

Chocolat  (2000) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Juliette Binoche, Alfred
Molina, Judi Dench, Lena Olin, John Wood, Leslie Caron, Victorie
Thivisol and Johnny Depp. Screenplay by Robert Nelson Jacobs. Based on a
novel by Joanne Harris. Music by Rachel Portman. Directed by Lasse
Hallstrom. Rated PG-13.
 Chocolat is a whimsical fairy tale that covers familiar ground about
the ills of blind conformity.
 This tasty little treat, while not wholly original, is a movie to savor
and enjoy.
 Chocolat, directed by the marvelous Lasse Hallstrom (The Cider House
Rules, My Life as a Dog) is reminiscent of the magical Like Water for
Chocolate, in that food is the means to unleash the hidden desires and
emotions of the various protagonists.
 Set in a small French village, this comic fable stars the luminous
Juliette Binoche as Vianne who, with her daughter, Anouk (Victorie
Thivisol), literally blows with the North Wind into the village of
Lansquenet, where tranquility is prized and life has not changed for
decades.
 Vianne soon opens a chocolaterie that awakens hidden desires and
appetites among the populace. Over time these changes are noted by the
local nobleman and town mayor, the Comte de Reynaud (Alfred Molina), who
sees Vianne as a threat to his domainís strict moral code.
 Any savvy filmgoer knows how all this will turn out, of course. But
that should not deter you from viewing this fluffy confection.
 While watching Chocolat, I was reminded of another recent movie set in
France that dealt with a battle between conformity and self-expression,
Quills. Of course, Chocolat is nowhere as dark or brutal as the
18th-century drama about the last days of the Marquis de Sade, but the
two do follow similar tracks.
 Both feature authority figures who battle fiercely to retain the status
quo and link non-conformity to godlessness. Quills, of course, is Grand
Guignol, while Chocolat is more French farce.
 Chocolatís main shortcoming is its portrayal of the villagers. They
seem more archetypes than real people: There's the sexually starved wife
who uses chocolate to rekindle the passion in her marriage; the grumpy
old woman (Oscar-winner Judi Dench) a pariah to her family because of
her independence and outspokenness; the timid, abused wife (Lena Olin)
who learns assertiveness and self-confidence; and the old man (John
Wood) who works up the courage to court an elderly widow (Leslie Caron)
he has loved for years from afar.
 But it is the charming performance of Binoche that gives Chocolat its
magic. At once, wise and mystical, she quietly works her magic on the
various townsfolk through her sweet confections, guessing their favorite
types of chocolate and using those as a means to awaken their apathetic
spirits.
 Binoche is winning, otherworldly and beautiful as the sweet sorceress.
 Molina has a more difficult task, portraying a rigid, unforgiving,
repressed man who ó though decent ó allows his strict moral code to
create a tragedy that almost cost lives.
 Dench, of course, holds the screen as the wise old woman who marches to
her own drummer.
 Acting honors, though, belong to Olin, who at first seems like a
madwoman, but who we come to realize is so brutalized by and frightened
of her husband that she cannot even think straight.
 Watching her blossom as the movie progresses is expected, but she
carries it off in such a grand manner that one cannot help but admire
her transformation.
J
 ohnny Depp makes an appearance as a houseboat gypsy who has a short,
loving fling with Vianne, who, of course, is at first the only person in
town to treat the gypsies with any humanity.
 Chocolat is a flavorful excursion, an entertaining bite for the
cinematic sweet tooth. It may be something you have seen before, but
thereís no law stopping you from going back for seconds.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net. More reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com and click on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database site: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
