Title
Review for Twilight of the Golds, The (1997) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
The most relevant, thoughtful, provocative and timely film so far
this year, TWILIGHT OF THE GOLDS will give you something to think
about long after you have left the theater.  Based on a play by
Jonathan Tolin, this wonderful film is at once controversial and
entertaining. . . controversial only because the moviegoer is
forced into asking himself/herself, What should have been done?
There are no easy answers.
Walter Gold (The lovable actor, director, writer Garry Marshall)
and his wife, Phyllis (the equally famous Faye Dunaway) are the
parents of Suzanne (Jennifer Beals) and David (Brendan Fraser).
Although David is gay, his family has long ago made peace with
themselves about his homosexuality; in short, he is their dear son
and they love and accept him and his lifestyle.
The loving family is made further happy with the announcement by
Jennifer and her husband, Rob (Jon Tenney) who is a geneticist,
that Walter and Phyllis Gold will soon be grandparents. After a
series of tests to reveal sex, birth defects, etc. are performed
on the baby, there is good news and bad news.  The good news is
that the baby has no inherited illnesses; the bad news is that the
baby is carrying a gene which is found in 90% of gay men. The
chances are very great that the child, a male, will grow up gay.
As of this writing, there has been no medical breakthrough that
reveals a specific "gay gene."    However, for purposes of the
movie, it fits in perfectly.
What to do?  Do they opt to continue with the pregnancy and have a
child who will suffer the same hurts that David has had to endure
in growing up?  (How about that some of the hurts may have been
caused by the parents until they could "adjust?") Or should they
in the best interests of their potential son (of course!) abort
the pregnancy?
When David learns that there is that problem of the child being
gay and that there is abortion under discussion . . . but by no
means a final decision . . . he is hurt and furious, asking his
parents, "Would you have wanted an abortion if you had known I was
going to be gay?"
This is a "liberal" family but even families that are liberal and
loving find that there are always tough decisions in life . . .
and the Golds are now having the biggest they have ever had to
face.
Among others in the cast are Sean O'Brien, John Schlesinger and
Rosie O'Donnell.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In town to receive an award from San Jose's Cinequest film festival,
Jennifer Beals chose a funny, touching and controversial film of hers,
1997's THE TWILIGHT OF THE GOLDS, to accompany the award presentation.
The movie, written by Jonathan Tolins and based on his play, tells the
story of a couple who finds through genetic testing that their unborn
son will be gay.  You may have trouble believing a few of the
characters' reactions, but, if you haven't yet come to appreciate
Jennifer Beals's acting talents, you will after watching this movie.
She is astounding, not with dramatic bravado, but with a deep inner
strength that she brings to the part of the new mother.  Beals said she
likes scripts like this one that make her "want to take care of the
character," which she does here with grace and power, stealing the movie
from a good cast.
The film starts with a seemingly happy party at the maternal
grandparents-to-be's house.  Garry Marshall and Faye Dunaway play the
grandparents, Walter and Phyllis Gold.  There with the big "we're
pregnant" secret is Suzanne Stein (Jennifer Beals) and her husband Rob
(Jon Tenney).  The peace of the evening is shattered by the prejudice
the parents show toward their grown, gay son, David Gold, played by
Brendan Fraser from GODS AND MONSTERS and BLAST FROM THE PAST.  Using
both his comedic and his dramatic skills, Fraser gives an unflinchingly
strong performance.
The first hint that trouble is brewing in Gold country is when David
sarcastically remarks about the absence of his long-time, live-in lover,
Steven (Sean O'Bryan).  "Steven sends his regards," he tells everyone
with a big smile.  "He would have come, but he wasn't invited."  Lest we
think the attitude problem lies in any way with David, his mother
certainly lets us know how deep her homophobia goes.  Without thinking,
she barks at her daughter, telling her not to eat a macaroon since
David's lips have touched it.  Many viewers will find that the actions
of the characters sometimes stretch credulity, but the script, with one
exception, never goes too far afield.  You may loathe the way that David
and his friends are treated, but the movie doesn't make the parents into
easy-to-write-off devils.  They are in many ways wonderful parents,
unlike Rob's parents who are uniformly oppressive.
The story's first act uses some hilarious but biting comedy to relax and
entertain the audience.  "Are they sure?" Walter asks about the
experimental genetic test.  "They're doctors," his wife retorts.
"They're never sure.  They just tell you enough to destroy you."  As
Suzanne and Rob are just starting to grapple with the issue of whether
to keep or abort the gay fetus, David is busy with his opera production.
He's presenting a small-scale -- 6 hour rather than the normal 23 hour
--version of Wagner's Ring Cycle.  After he gets a sponsor, it is billed
as "Blimpie Presents Wagner's Mini Ring."
Just when you've pushed back in your chair and relaxed a bit, the more
intense second act begins and the comedy turns to drama.  When
confronted, Walter admits to David that he considers him "sick and
diseased" and that they probably would have aborted him if they had had
the test available back then.
Second-time director Ross Kagan Marks is more adept at the comedic
portions of the story that the drama.  The first act flows rapidly and
smoothly and scores just as many points about the tragedy of the
situation as the dramatic second act.  Any flaws in the direction,
however, are ameliorated by the quietly dominating performance of
Jennifer Beals.  Even in the second act, the comedy provides much of the
dramatic punch.  David asks, for example, "What if Orson Welles's mom
didn't want a fat one?"
Most of the problems with the story come back to basic plausibility.
Assuming that there is a 90% accurate test that can predict
homosexuality is a stretch.  And then late in the story there is a
tragedy that is so clearly nothing more than a cheap plot device that it
again reminds us of the weaknesses of the storyline.  Yet even with its
limitations, the movie knows how to touch your heart and tickle your
funny bone.
THE TWILIGHT OF THE GOLDS runs a fast 1:32.  It is rated PG-13 for
mature themes and a little profanity and would be fine for kids around
12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
