Title
Review for Room for Romeo Brass, A (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Alliance Atlantis on February 4, 2000; certificate 15; 
90 minutes; countries of origin Canada/UK; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Shane Meadows; produced by George Faber, Charles Pattinson.
Written by Paul Fraser, Shane Meadows.
Photographed by Ashley Rowe; edited by Paul Tothill.
"A Room for Romeo Brass" is alternately a tender suburban comedy and a harsh 
cautionary tale about a violent psychopath. Yes, that is as weird as it 
sounds. On my way out of the screening, I glanced over a synopsis which 
described the movie as a "tender coming-of-age tale". Thank goodness that's 
an inaccurate description -- if coming-of-age were as unsettling as this 
movie, most people would commit suicide before getting out of high school.
The movie takes place in Nottingham, where we meet two schoolchildren, Romeo 
(Andrew Shim) and Gavin (Ben Marhsall). The two exchange playful insults, but 
are close, really, spending every day together and depending on each other's 
moral support to get through their hardships: Romeo has been abandoned by his 
father, except for occasional visits which provoke huge family rows; Gavin is 
awaiting a serious back operation.
Early in the story, the boys are involved in a fight with two older lads, 
which is broken up by the quaint Morell (Paddy Considine), a scruffy chap who 
tells odd stories and seems somewhat clueless as to how most people behave. 
When dropping Romeo home, he meets the lad's sister Ladine (Vicky McClure), 
is instantly attracted to her and proceeds to pester her for a date.
Feeling sorry for this social misfit, Ladine eventually agrees, which is a 
mistake, as it makes him a permanent fixture around the neighbourhood. He 
befriends Romeo, but secretly obsesses over Ladine and threatens Gavin's 
family, in sinister scenes which reveal Morell to be an angry, disturbed 
individual. But at times his phoney accent, conversational tangents and 
shifty body language are presented as comic. I wouldn't have minded if the 
film had started in this vain and then gradually become serious, but even 
after the introduction of danger, the film still feels able to dart in and 
out of tomfoolery.
At first this is embarrassing; it goes on long enough to be repellent. Things 
get confusing, too, in terms of the characters' interaction with each other. 
We never see Romeo and Gavin fall out, for example, but halfway through the 
movie they suddenly start avoiding each other, then start speaking awkwardly, 
and finally become mates again. Eh?
Each scene is involving in itself, whether funny, creepy, or whatever, but 
the movie as a put-together whole doesn't go anywhere or make a whole lot of 
sense. Is there a point to this juxtaposition of dark terror and light 
humour? The director is Shane Meadows, whose feature debut was the excellent 
"TwentyFourSeven" (1998), a straightforward, moving story of a boxing 
instructor helping the kids in his area stay on the straight and narrow. 
We'll have to take "A Room for Romeo Brass" as a case of the Sophomore Slump 
-- the jinx that often affects directors of terrific first films, making 
their second ones muddled and odd.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Athan Bezaitis
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Athan Bezaitis.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/02898aa859c1aca78825697f0016f18d?OpenDocument
     There's something sick about a 25-year-old man wanting to befriend
kids the age of 12 or 13.  But it makes for great cinema, especially
when the guy is affable and goofy, like newcomer Paddy Considine's
character Morell, in A Room for Romeo Brass.  Once he gains the trust of
his two adolescent pals Romeo and Knocks, the good times start to roll
as the two boys ditch school and head for the hills in search of
adventure with their newfound friend.  Directed by Shane Meadows
(TwentyFourSeven), the film is at its core a twisted comedy about a
young boy, Romeo Brass (Andrew Shim), and his search for love,
attention, and acceptance through his friends and in defiance of his
family.
     The story begins with Romeo and best friend Knocks (Ben Marshall)
as inseparable pals who live as neighbors in suburban England.  Knocks
has a rare back disorder that requires surgery and keeps him constantly
limping, but his family is supportive, especially his mother and father
as they excitedly anticipate his recovery.  Romeo, on the other hand,
lives with his mother and older sister in a volatile household with no
father figure.  In fact, Romeo's estranged dad Joseph (Frank Harper),
shows up right around the same time the boys encounter Morell.
     When Romeo sees his dad, he threatens to move out.  The 13-year-old
Romeo then decides to stay with Morell; who doesn't seem to mind because
he doesn't work, will go along with just about anything, wears the
oddest of clothes, and has become infatuated with Romeo's older sister
Ladine (Vicky McClure).  Everything seems dandy as Romeo and pals hit
the streets playing hooky from school.  In fact, Morell seems so
gullible that the boys take charge of the relationship by teasing him
and making him look like a fool in front of Ladine.
     But there's more to Morell than he lets on.  To put it mildly,
Morell has some major identity problems and soon becomes a thorn in
Romeo's life and a wedge between his and Knock's once-sacred
friendship.  The plot takes a sharp turn as the audience learns just how
disturbed Morell actually is.
     Well acted and humorous, Shane Meadows is successful in creating a
very realistic impression of adolescent friendship.  One minute the two
young friends are best pals taking a blood oath, and the next day the
tables are turned.  Meadows deserves praise for weaving the problems in
Romeo's family life, like his abrasive mother and nonexistent father,
with the emergence of his new friend Morell, who represents a
pseudo-parental figure simply because he is fully-grown and drives a
car.  The blending of humor as portrayed through Morell's quirkiness
helps lighten the somber tone, as Morell symbolizes a freedom for Romeo
from his problems at home.  Appropriately, Knocks creates a moral
dilemma for Romeo, as he comes to hate Morell while Romeo is duped by
his charm.  These twists add to the dramatic mix in creating a competing
triangle of distorted relationships between Knocks, Romeo's family, and
Romeo and Morell.
     Aside from a score of cheesy British rock, the movie was memorable
and enjoyable.  From beginning to end the pace is fluid, and at 88
minutes, it doesn't often flag.  Of course, as a foreign (British) film
it unfortunately won't be playing in many theaters, so it will be a
challenge to find on the big screen.  But I urge you to see it; I
promise you won't be disappointed.
Director: Shane Meadows
Writer: Shane Meadows, Paul Fraser
Producer: George Faber, Charles Pattinson
Starring: Andrew Shim, Ben Marshall, Paddy Considine, Frank Harper,
Julia Ford, James Higgins, Vicky McClure, Ladene Hall, and Bob Hoskins
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect'tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
