Title
Review for Roommates (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release on 3/10/95  
Running Length: 1:48 
MPAA Classification:  PG (Mature themes, language) 
Starring: Peter Falk, D. B. Sweeney, Julianne Moore, Jan Rubes, 
          Ellen Burstyn  
Director: Peter Yates 
Producers: Ted Field, Scott Kroopf, and Robert W. Cort 
Screenplay: Max Aple and Stephen Metcalfe 
Cinematography: Mike Southon 
Music: Elmer Bernstein 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     Interscope Communications, the production company behind such
films as THE CUTTING EDGE and THE AIR UP THERE, has developed a
reputation as a purveyor of feel-good, formula-reliant motion
pictures.  Interscope's latest, ROOMMATES, isn't much of a departure
from their standard fare--it's basically a buddy movie/romantic
comedy/family drama all rolled into one.  Trying to cram so many
stories into one-hundred eight minutes is an ambitious undertaking that
results in sketchily-developed characters and half-realized
relationships.
     The most successful personality in ROOMMATES is Peter Falk's Rocky
Holeczek, a grouchy old man with the "personality of a clenched fist."
When we first meet Rocky in 1963 at his daughter-in-law's funeral, he's
already seventy-six.  To prevent his now-orphaned grandson Michael
(Noah Fleiss) from being consigned to a church home, Rocky agrees to
take him in.  So the young boy grows into manhood during the '60s and
'70s in Pittsburgh, under the watchful eye of his indefatigable
guardian.
     By 1983, Michael (now played by D. B. Sweeney) has matured into a
twenty-five year old medical student, living and working in Columbus,
Ohio.  One day, he gets a call from his aunt--Rocky's apartment
building is about to be torn down and he won't leave.  So Michael makes
the trip to Pittsburgh, and when he returns home shortly thereafter, he
has a new roommate--his ninety-six year old grandfather.
     Of course, Rocky has some old-fashioned ideals, as becomes
apparent when Michael brings a girlfriend (Julianne Moore) home one
night.  There is friction between Rocky and Michael's friends, yet
somehow everyone eventually comes to like the cantankerous old
curmudgeon.
     Falk is very convincing--and hardly recognizable--as Rocky.
Makeup artist Greg Cannom has created old age applications that are far
better than the norm, and the actor underneath all the latex imbues his
body with a host of appropriate mannerisms.  Would that D.B. Sweeney
were as effective, since his single-note performance sucks the emotion
out of several potentially-wrenching scenes.
     The plotline, which largely follows a familiar course, manages a
few unexpected acts of commission or omission.  One "twist" that I
spent the whole movie waiting for never materialized, and something
that happened took me a little by surprise.  In those instances,
ROOMMATES seems to be struggling to escape the confines of its
"comfortable" genre.  Sadly, such bursts of freedom don't last long.
     The persistent theme of ROOMMATES is that "reason and family
[have] nothing to do with each other."  Through the film's peaks and
valleys, this message is always there, either being disseminated
through subtle and effective touches, or repeated in absurdly
heavyhanded dialogue.  ROOMMATES certainly isn't as good as it might
have been, but it represents a game try at a different perspective on
life and love, and offers an opportunity (for those so inclined) to
shed a few tears.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Peter Falk, D. B. Sweeney, Julianne Moore.
Screenplay:  Max Apple & Stephen Metcalfe.
Director:  Peter Yates.
     It is a frequent but rather silly criticism leveled at certain
Hollywood films that they are "manipulative," or push emotional
buttons.  It is silly because it is self-evident; all art tries to
make you feel a certain way, and movies are no exception.  The real,
unspoken criticism is that the movies targeted manipulate too
obviously, and are usually specifically manipulating the audience
towards a good cry.  ROOMMATES is one of these awww-inspiring
efforts, but it doesn't do the job.  Comprised of all the pieces
that are supposed to work, ROOMMATES doesn't work because it lacks a
cohesive story to complement Peter Falk's engaging performance.
     ROOMMATES opens in 1963 Pittsburg, where 6-year-old Michael
Holeczek (Noah Fleiss) finds himself oraphaned when his widowed
mother also dies.  Some relatives suggest sending him away to
school, but Michael's feisty, 77-year-old immigrant grandfather
Rocky (Peter Falk) will have none of that.  Michael grows up with
Rocky, and eventually moves to Columbus, Ohio to become a doctor.
Soon, however, the adult Michael (D. B. Sweeney) will have a chance
to repay Rocky for his support, as Rocky is forced to move out of
his condemned apartment and in with Michael.  Unfortunately, Rocky
tends to cramp Michael's style, especially when Michael starts
dating Beth (Julianne Moore), a social worker whose personality
clashes considerably with Rocky's.
     ROOMMATES seems like it could have been an interesting concept.
Generational conflict in film rarely involves characters separated
by two generations, and there are very few films that deal with
characters over 70.  There are two key differences between what
could have happened and what did happen.  The first is that while
Peter Falk is playing a character who ages from 77 to 107, he is
actually just 60.  Consequently, he is buried under layers of
prosthetics by Greg Cannom (MRS. DOUBTFIRE, THE MASK) which draw
garish attention to themselves.  Make no mistake, Falk's performance
as Rocky is entertaining; he delivers his Old World wisdom with wit
and bite.  But at a certain point, his characterization becomes
caricature, just another Grumpy Old Man who is one step ahead of his
youngers.  It is pleasant to watch Rocky grow closer to his
grandchildren, but it is less so to watch him grow progressively
entombed in latex.
     The second, and far more glaring, problem is that the
generational conflict angle is only a fraction of the story.  For a
while, ROOMMATES makes the most of the comic possibilities inherent
in a young, single man sharing a small room with a very
old-fashioned old man.  When Michael brings Beth home, Rocky makes
no secret of his disapproval of pre-marital sex, and it is
refreshing that his point of view is given a certain amount of
respect by the filmmakers.  A tense exchange between Beth and Rocky
is very well handled by both Julianne Moore and Falk, and highlights
everything that was most promising about the idea for ROOMMATES.
     Then, far too suddenly, ROOMMATES lurches onto a completely
different plot branch, with Rocky living with both Michael and Beth
and offering commentary on domestic life.  After a while, the plot
jerks onto another tangent, this one spending far too much time
focused on a custody battle and movie-of-the-week style family
squabbling.  ROOMMATES is based on a personal remembrance by
co-writer Max Apple, and it appears that he wanted to write a long
love letter to his grandfather.  That is a noble goal, but it simply
does not work as a movie because there is never a clear enough sense
of what this relationship is really supposed to be about.  It
certainly does not help that D. B. Sweeney seems to be dazed and
bored through most of the film's running time.  ROOMMATES had the
potential to be a warm and sentimental film, and for about half an
hour it has the right tone of good-natured whimsy.  But for over an
hour, it is little more than a bad soap opera:  drawn-out, confused
and maudlin.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     If you've ever perused my college comedy diary "Another 
Year in the Life of a Nerd" (I never run out of cheap plugs), you know 
I didn't get along with my first-semester roommate too well.  In fact, 
during the three-week period between Thanksgiving and Christmas 
Break, I said a total of four sentences to him.
     So when I saw in the residence hall cable listings a movie 
called ROOMMATES, I envisioned 90 minutes of conflict between a 
couple of bickering young adults trapped in a 10 x 13 foot dorm room.  
Then I saw that the star of ROOMMATES is Peter Falk.  Scratch that 
idea.  But I still say someone should film the story of two college 
roommates whose relationship is less than ideal. Of course, in my case 
it would be a silent picture.
     Even without the college element, I still decided to watch 
ROOMMATES because I had absolutely nothing to do, unless you 
count studying for final exams (And who does?).  I'm glad I did.  Peter 
Falk's performance was actually what made the movie.  And this is a 
guy I never considered a real actor, more like someone who went 
around in a trenchcoat solving prescripted mysteries.  Falk pleasantly 
surprised me here, permanently earning my respect, so all you 
"Columbo" fans who think I live to insult the guy can just falk off.
     Falk plays Rocky, a 107-year-old Polish baker who raises his 
grandson after both the kid's parents die.  The movie begins with the 
mom's death and the son moving in with his grandparents.  After a 
couple stops along the son's journey to manhood, ROOMMATES 
progresses to the present day, with the grandson a surgeon and Rocky 
in a condemned house he refuses to leave.  The surgeon reluctantly 
offers the only possible solution -- Rocky will have to move into his 
place, the basement of a building rented by a group of Chinese 
students ("Communists!").
     The movie spans nine more years of Rocky's relationship with 
his grandson, and the trials posed when the grandson meets and falls 
in love with--gasp--a woman, and starts spending all his time with her.  
So, in his grandson's absence, Rocky turns his pursuits to professional 
boxing, achieveing the world heavyweight title in a climactic fight 
with Apollo Creed...  Or am I confusing movie plots again?
     ROOMMATES has an almost epic feel to it, covering several 
generations of a family with one fiesty immigrant who refuses to die.  
Death, though, knocks at the door of almost every other major 
character in the the movie.  ROOMMATES has about as many 
casualties as the first Halloween.  The number can't be counted on one 
hand, unless of course you're the victim of some hideous genetic 
mutation.  And you can probably guess who says farewell to Planet 
Earth at the end of the movie (no, not Duran Duran).  I won't come out 
and say it.  Instead, I'll just sit here and hum "Eye of the Tiger" until 
each and every one of you figures it out.
     ROOMMATES plays on all the major emotions.  It knows 
when to make you laugh and when to make you cry.  Movies that can 
perfectly mix comedy and drama are always hits with the audience, 
even though this one bombed at the theaters.  My point?  There are no 
absolutes.  Or, another possible point, Peter Falk just isn't such a great 
box office draw.  Either way, this is still a good movie and you should 
give it a chance like I did, whether you hate your roommate or not.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Lots to see this weekend.  Some of what's new includes ANCHORESS,
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, EXOTICA, FEDERAL HILL, MARTHA AND ETHEL, MURIEL'S
WEDDING, MAJOR PAYNE, SATAN'S BREW, and TALL TALE: THE UNBELIEVABLE
ADVENTURES OF PECOS BILL.  Check local listings and, then on Monday
night, sit back and enjoy the most exciting evening of the year, when
Mujibur & Sirajul host the 67th Annual Academy Awards.
     The latest twist on the PARENTHOOD formula stars Paul Reiser,
Matthew Modine, and Randy Quaid as a trio of divorced dads trying to
adjust to the demands of dating.  The cast is extra-appealing, but the
film fails in so many ways that it hardly seems worth the trip.  (Said
problems range from extraneous plotting to oppressive product plugs.) If
there's a single reason to see this film, it's to catch Randy Quaid's
hilarious Blind Date From Hell with Janeane Garofalo (CLERKS).
     Another one of the "good" Stephen King films, and a fine companion
piece to THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.  Director Taylor Hackford (AN OFFICER
AND A GENTLEMAN) and writer Tony Gilroy expand the bestseller-- about a
feisty New England woman (Kathy Bates) facing her second accusation of
murder-- by introducing an adult daughter (Jennifer Jason Leigh) who
does not appear in the novel.
     Purists may scoff, but the added conflict works.  Sure, the film
gets heavy-handed in spots--as well as a bit too tidy toward the
end--but the warmth of the source material still shines through.  A
fine showcase for the talents of the cast, which includes Christopher
Plummer as the local investigator.  Great cinematography by Gabriel
Beristain, too.
     Homey the Clown as a soldier.  That's the idea behind this silly,
rude, and ultimately hilarious comedy about a strict military officer
(Damon Wayans) assigned to a platoon of junior ROTC cadets.  What sounds
dangerously uplifting is really nothing more than two hours of Damon
Wayans spouting insults and excrement jokes.  Set in the same universe
as the Three Stooges-- where anything can happen and usually does-- this
is critic-proof comedy at its best.  Don't even bother to bring a brain.
     Forget the ads that promise slapstick and silliness, Disney's MAN
OF THE HOUSE is really just a kiddie-drama about a single mom, her son,
and her fiance.  Farrah Fawcett is the mom, Jonathan Taylor Thomas is
the son, and they *both* sleepwalk through their parts.  Chevy Chase
plays the the fiance and he plays it straight.
    The story appears to have been written for an audience under twelve.
Parents may appreciate the refreshingly inoffensive story, but it's a
long sit for the rest of us.  Even us former Indian Guides.
     Go see it.  First-time writer/director David Frankel has made his
own Woody Allen movie, albeit one with a younger cast and brighter
locales.  Forget WHEN HARRY MET SALLY, this is the Allen homage to beat!
Sarah Jessica Parker stars a young, single woman who becomes
increasingly neurotic as she discovers that everyone in her family is
having an affair.
     The plot is predictable, sure, but the tone is light, and the jokes
are fresh.  The superb supporting cast includes Gil Bellows, Antonio
Banderas, Kevin Pollak, Paul Mazursky, and, yes, Mia Farrow.
     Yet another mild drama, this one starring Peter Falk in heavy latex
as a ninety-something Polish immigrant who moves in with his 25 y.o.
medical student grandson (D. B. Sweeney).  Though Falk is fun to watch,
there isn't much of an edge to the story.  Characters come and go,
situations happen, and each person gets fleshed out just enough to be
interesting, but not necessarily engrossing.  Tastefully directed by
Peter Yates (BREAKING AWAY).
     Three flat-mates, one body, and a suitcase full of money are the
motivations behind this tepid thriller from Scotland.  Director Danny
Boyle has visual style to spare, but his characters are too unappealing
to be interesting.  How can you care about people that you don't even
like to watch?  Grisly fun in spots; quite boring the rest of the time.
