Title
Review for Two Hands (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Greg King
The gritty urban crime thriller is one genre that Australian
film makers have rarely tackled, and not very well at that.  Tyro
feature film director Gregor Jordan is to be congratulated for not
only treading a path less well worn, but for also carrying it off
beautifully.  Two Hands follows the same irreverent, jokey and blokey
approach that worked so appealingly with last year's hit British
thriller Lock, Stock And Two Smoking Barrels.  However, Jordan
carefully steers away from too much gratuitous violence and deftly
avoids the misogynistic touches of that film.
Rising young Aussie star Heath Ledger, recently seen in the
enjoyable if formulaic teen comedy 10 Things I Hate About You, brings
plenty of charm and sex appeal to the film.  He plays Jimmy, a naive
youth who works as a doorman at a Sydney strip club.  But Jimmy has
aspirations of making it big through mutual connections with Pando
(Bryan Brown), the unforgiving villain who rules Sydney's Kings Cross
area.  He finally gets his chance when Pando offers him an opportunity
to prove himself.  All Jimmy has to do is drop off $10,000 at a flat.
But complications quickly set in.  Thinking that no-one is
home, Jimmy goes to the beach to fill in time before trying again.
While he is swimming, two homeless kids snatch the money.  Jimmy is in
deep trouble as Pando is out for his blood.  His only hope of
salvation lies in replacing the money, and quickly.  Which is how he
comes to be involved in a bank robbery, organised by his sister-in-law
(Susie Porter, from the awful Welcome To Woop Woop, etc) and the
incompetent Wozza (Steve Le Marquand).
The various characters continually cross paths and interact
with each other on an inevitable collision course that will end in
death and violence.  Jordan has a razor sharp writing style, and
brings touches of black comedy to the energetic plot.  He directs with
remarkable assurance and confidence, and also keeps the action moving
at a rapid pace.  Jordan makes good use of Sydney's streets and the
sleazy, neon drenched area of King's Cross, giving the film a sense of
realism.
The characters are well-drawn and brought to life by a cast
attuned to the nuances of the script.  Jordan draws a wonderfully
menacing performance from Brown, an often wooden performer.  Brown
actually looks like he's enjoying himself with his role here and he
seems far more comfortable than he did in the recent, embarrassingly
awful Dear Claudia.  Ledger confirms his status as the next Australian
to hit it big on the international scene with his confident and brash
performance here.
The only weak point of the film is the creaky device centring
around the almost supernatural character of the dead man (Steven
Vidler), who acts as a narrator and moral conscience of the story.
Fast-paced, action-packed and immensely enjoyable, Two Hands
is easily one of the most exciting and entertaining locally produced
films for quite some time.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Things are starting to go right in Jimmy's world.  Until now Jimmy
(played by Heath Ledger) has been a street hawker for a second rate
Sydney strip club.  But Jimmy has fallen in love with Alex (Rose
Byrne), a woman he has seen outside the club.  And a local gangster
Pando (Bryan Brown) offers a small job as courier to Jimmy.  What Jimmy
does not know is that Pando killed Jimmy's brother.  Now Pando wants to
make things up to Jimmy and offers him a job that could lead to bigger
things if Jimmy does not screw up this first job.  Of course we would
not have much of a story if something did not go wrong.  In a careless
moment Jimmy loses $10,000.  Now Jimmy needs $10,000 to square things
with Pando and a few of his friends want to see Jimmy dead.  Before the
film PULP FICTION was made this all could have been a fairly serious
matter.  But now we expect crime films to have really strange dialog
and really weird interconnected plots with very strange twists and odd
characters.
     Heath Ledger is a good actor and carries his part well.  Bryan
Brown is particularly enjoyable as a vicious hood by profession but
also a caring and loving family man at home.  There are occasional
astonishing touches like the Narrator from Hell.
     This is not a bad little film.  One of the people in a Cairns
audience said it was the best Australian film he had seen in a long
time.  I can believe it.  The real problem is the timing.  TWO HANDS is
just one more creative, violent, semi- comedic crime film made in the
wake of PULP FICTION.  Its pacing and its plotting remind one a lot of
LOCK, STOCK, AND TWO SMOKING BARRELS.  And in the comparison it is
nearly but not quite as good.  My recommendation for Showtime Australia
is put this film in a vault for five years and release it again when it
will again be fresh and a discovery. I rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale
and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
TWO HANDS
Cast: Heath Ledger, Rose Byrne, Bryan Brown, David Field, Susie Porter,
Tom Long, Tony Forrow, Mariel McClorey, Evan Sheaves, Steven Vidler
Director: Gregor Jordan
Screenplay: Gregor Jordan
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 stars
The mid-to-late 90's obsession with urban crime fables has resulted in
some sensational efforts, most of which aspire to the success -
artistically and commercially - of a Quentin Tarantino movie.  I never
expected that the Australian film industry, famous for its quirky and
simple-minded films, would enter the realm of these violent and often
darkly humorous pieces of in-your-face entertainment.  The film in
question is 'Two Hands,' an engaging and often intense picture that is
fresh, lively and different to the norm.  Debut writer/director Gregor
Jordan finds a pulsating energy in his production elements - ranging
from the cast's diverse appeal to the film's bright cinematography, it's
clear that this one is out to impress.  Impress it does, and in large
abundance.  'Two Hands' is a breath of fresh air for the Australian film
industry; a fun adrenaline rush that will probably linger in your memory
for some time.
Rising Aussie star Heath Ledger plays Jimmy, who works in Kings Cross,
Sydney, as a street promoter for a strip club.  Hoping to improve his
salary and his work, Jimmy accepts a job from neighborhood goon Pando
(Bryan Brown).  He is given $10,000 in an envelope and an address to
deliver it to, but, as the plot unfolds, the job goes drastically wrong,
and Jimmy is being chased all over town by Pando and his goons.  Still,
he makes sure that he has enough time to pursue love-interest Kate (Rose
Byrne), a friendly art student who enjoys taking photos.  Also involved
in the story are two homeless kids, played by Mariel McClorey and Evan
Sheaves, who have small but integral parts, and serve as tools in which
to question audience morality.
It seems inevitable that titles like 'Pulp Fiction' and 'Lock, Stock and
Two Smoking Barrels' will be mentioned in a review of this film, for
their obvious familiarities in genre filmmaking.  'Two Hands,' like
these films and many more, is distinctive in its own way.  For starters,
the film has an obvious Australian touch to it - the dialogue is laid
back and relaxed, the settings are not glamorous or appealing.  The
screenplay doesn't delve into stories and debates like 'Pulp Fiction',
and its editing doesn't produce the clockwork pacing that made 'Lock,
Stock and Two Smoking Barrels' fast and furious.  There is something
different here, a kind of new texture to the genre.  'Two Hands' doesn't
constantly try to win audiences over, it simply follows its narrative to
the end without glancing back to notice whether we were still watching.
Chances are, you will be.  'Two Hands' is a bold drama wrapped around a
comedic lesson of morals, wrapped around a simple, even slightly messy
thriller. Gregor Jordan captivates his audience time and time again,
reaching a good mixture of amusing gags and fast action.  What he
doesn't create is a film that is engaging as a whole, but rather one
that has plenty of memorable and amusing scenes and subplots.  It's
bound to be a crowd pleasing movie, and contains enough jags and
recurring plot elements to keep the viewers who don't find the central
plot interesting still amused.
Heath Ledger struts his stuff so confidently as the title character that
there is absolutely no doubt that we will be seeing him again in the
future (in fact, in his next film, he plays Mel Gibson's son).  I'm not
sure whether he channeled that energy into a good performance, though
it's certainly an entertaining one.  Bryan Brown also fares very well as
the married, and quite amusing tough guy Pando.  Others are slightly
less impressive, like Rose Byrne, who is solid but her part is
considerably underdeveloped, probably as a result of the film's
ninety-two minute running time.  Come to think of it, that's an odd
choice for a running time in a film of this nature - the story unfolds
fairly slowly (although its never boring), and even then, there's some
unnecessary bits like its narration by Jimmy's dead brother.  'Pulp
Fiction,' which I've refused to mention too much in this review, was
almost double its length.  Perhaps 'Two Hands' could have benefited from
a little more meat.
But there's still so much here to like. Jordan's direction is
multi-layered with impressive production elements; the cinematography,
the music, the camera shots and the editing all give the film a truly
cinematic feel.  The jokes - I wished there was more of them - are funny
and memorable.   'Two Hands' is a likeable film that isn't original
enough to become a cult classic, but a damn good time at the movies.
Sometimes you don't get everything, but sometimes, you just enjoy what
you've got.


Author
Dennis Schwartz
TWO HANDS (director/writer: Gregor Jordan; cinematographer: Malcolm McCulloch;
editor: Lee Smith; cast: Heath Ledger (Jimmy), Bryan Brown (Pando), Rose Byrne
(Alex), Susie Porter (Dierdre), David Field (Acko), Tom Long (Wally), Tony
Forrow (Eddie), Steve Vidler (Michael/The Man), Mariel McClorey (Helen), Evan
Sheaves (Pete); Runtime: 102; Meridian Films/REP Distribution; 1999-Australia) 
A sophomoric action comedy with a distinctive Australian flavor, relying on
screw ups to provide the comic situations. Should appeal to teenagers and to
those who think like them, and for those who just like a madcap film and don't
concern themselves with plot and character development. I'll give the film
credit for having a lot of pep and for being quirky. It's much like Ritchie's
"Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels," as its humor is of the physical kind
equally mixing a crime caper story with dumb or, if you prefer, black comedy. 
Jimmy (Heath Ledger) is a 19-year-old hunk, working as a doorman in a Sydney
strip club who is asked by local underworld kingpin Pando (Bryan Brown) to do a
job for him--deliver $10,000 to a woman's apartment. When that person is not
home, he goes down to the beach to kill some time and then goes for a swim. But
his clothes are pinched, along with the money. 
The kid is confused as what to do, as he's not exactly the sharpest pencil in
the Kings Cross section of Sydney. He now has Pando's incompetent but still
deadly gang after him. So he decides to rob a bank to pay him back the money,
and goes to his sister in law Dee (Porter) to put together a gang made up of two
other deadbeat fathers. They were pals of his dead brother, who is seen doing
the voice-over. 
He has also just met a girl fresh from the country, ditzy blonde Alex, (Rose
Byrne ), who strikes his fancy. The best part of the film was the relationship
between these two Einsteins. On their first date they meet at a Chinatown hotel
bar on the night before next morning's bank heist, and he looks at the
uninteresting pictures she has been taking all day and the inarticulate couple
fall madly in love. But his doorman partner tips Pando off where to find him,
and Pando's gang takes him for a ride in the woods where they plan to shoot
him--but their gun misfires. It seems the bullets got into the gangster's
machine wash and cannot work now. 
Jimmy escapes by using his skill as a boxer, (thereby the film's title), to
overtake the gang and run away from them. 
After they pull off the robbery, despite their ineptness, Jimmy delivers the
money to Pando. The film doesn't know how to gracefully end, but it does end on
an a too cutely done amoral note. This comes after a few more plot twists. 
Two Hands has been written and directed by Australian Gregor Jordan; this being
his first feature. It was shown at the Sundance Film Festival of 1999. 
It was a harmless entertainment venture, of limited value. It's one of many
recent world-wide films about combining comedy in a urban crime pic, though a
new type of pic for the Aussies. This one is forgettable, but somewhat likable
because of the lead characters. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
