Title
Review for Doctor Dolittle (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Steve Rhodes
The happy but silly Rex Harrison musical DOCTOR DOLITTLE has been
remade into half of a good movie, albeit without any songs.
The new movie's menagerie of talking animals, while not exactly BABE
cute, are quite funny. If the animals could have just eaten all of the
humans in the beginning, the animals could have starred in a first-rate
production. The terminally boring humans with their dismal lines and
their lethargic acting kill an otherwise promising picture.
It all starts with the young John Dolittle conversing with his dog. His
father, played by Ossie Davis, sends the dog away and bans further
animal communication.
John grows up to be a father and a human doctor. One day a bump on the
head revives his old communication skills. Soon cacophonies of talking
animals are making his life miserable. Once they hear about him, they
turn his home into a veritable Noah's Ark. He becomes a self-taught vet
to help his new furry and feathered friends.
When the animals talk, prepare to laugh. (And conversely when humans
speak get ready to catch up on your sleep.)
Sometimes the humor is directed only at the adults as when one dog in
the pound confesses, "I am Keyser Soze."
At the vet's office a mutt drags his heels on the way to an undesired
surgery. "Please don't fix me," he whines. "I won't look at another
girl ever. I swear." He stops his oration briefly to check out a cute
pooch that goes sauntering through the office.
The animals are good at physical comedy as well. When the vet gets a
thermometer stuck up Dr. Dolittle's dog, Lucky (voiced by Norm
Macdonald), watch how effectively and humorously Lucky can illustrate
his discomfort by scrooching up his rear.
Another dog suffers from obsessive compulsive behavior. Jumping like a
perpetual motion machine, he keeps demanding with a hyperactive
cadence, "Throw me the ball; throw me the ball."
The guinea pig named Rodney (voiced by Chris Rock) is arguably the
cutest animal after Lucky. Albert Brooks, last seen as a white-collar
criminal in OUT OF SIGHT, shows up as a serious tiger with a bad blood
clot.
The movie's jokes contain so much crude and sexual humor that the
filmmakers appear to be targeting an audience just a year or two shy of
teenagehood, but the animal antics seem aimed more at the kindergarten
and younger grade school set.
The one-joke movie wears out its welcome quickly. There are many
laughs, but there would have been a lot more if we could have gotten
rid of those abysmal humans.
DOCTOR DOLITTLE runs 1:25. It is rated PG-13 for profanity and crude
humor and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, laughed long and hard during the movie. He gave
it **** and said his favorites were the guinea pig and Lucky.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Betty Thomas
Writers: Nat Mauldin and Larry Levin (based on the novel by Hugh
Lofting)
Starring: Eddie Murphy, Ossie Davis, Kristen Wilson, Oliver Platt,
Richard Schiff, Jeffrey Tambor, Kyla Pratt, Ramon-Simone, Peter Boyle,
Norm MacDonald, Chris Rock, Albert Brooks, Reni Santoni, John Leguizamo,
Julie Kavner, Gary Shandling, Ellen DeGeneres, Brian Doyle-Murphy, Jenna
Elfman, Gilbert Gottfried, Paul Reubens, Jonathan Lipnicki
I just can't believe there was actually a bit of controversy surrounding
this film.  Though aimed specifically at children (and those of childish
minds), this film was awarded a "PG-13" rating for basically toilet
humor, and it still grossed well over one hundred million.  But upon its
release, many critics were almost brutal in their dislike for the film.
Nathaniel R. Atcheson, for instance, completely flew off the handle and
said that this film made him want to vomit.  "Feces are never funny," he
proclaimed, as he completely dismissed toilet humor as an adequate
artform,  especially not as entertainment for kids.  Roger Ebert rebuked
that (though not directly).  In his review, he claimed that toilet humor
is not at all a bad thing, and in fact is part of the grounds for
developing a sense of humor.  I agree.  There are no rules to comedy,
and in fact anything can work as humor - that's the point of it:
laughing at the shit life drops on us, so to speak.  In fact, if I had
not been taught at a very young age to laugh at flatuation, I would have
never survived the way Elementary School and Junior High chose to
torment me because of the pronunication of my last name (and they didn't
even know what a "prig" was).
Ebert awarded the film a 3-star recommendation because of this.  I won't
even come close to taking it that far.  Yes, I agree that toilet humor
is a valid type of comedy, as I agree that anything and everything can
be a valid type of comedy.  But that doesn't mean this new adaptation of
"Dr. Dolittle" is actually funny, just because it was attacked for its
application of toilet humor.  In fact, I think I may have grimaced once,
if not twice, during the entire length of this film.  The problem, I
fear, is not in its tone or all that other bullshit it's been attacked
for, but rather in its actual jokes.  There's one thing wrong with them:
they're not funny.  You've heard a bad joke, right?  Not the kind that
offends you or anything, but instead the kind that isn't even worth
acknowledgement because it's just so unhilarious.  Well, think of an
entire 90 minutes of jokes exactly like that, and you have the newly
enhanced "Dr. Dolittle," which has nothing to do with the original Rex
Harrison musical classic except that for namesake and its very basic
skin-and-bones gimmick (that a man can hear animals talk).
The fact that this is a loose remake is not a problem, though: I don't
care what they do with a remake, even if they decided to remake "Citizen
Kane" starring Carrot Top; as long as they just made it work.  This one
doesn't, and it's not even in the plotting.  This one deals with a John
Dolittle (Eddie Murphy) who, as a kid, could hear animals talk, notably
his dog/best friend (voiced by Ellen Degeneres), but lost the ability
when his father (Ossie Davis) took the dog away.  He's grown up to be a
successful doctor, with a pretty wife (Kristen Wilson), and two nice
daughters (Kyla Pratt and "The Cosby Show"'s Ramon-Simone), and has
since forgotten all about his childhood ability.  One day, for no real
reason, animals start talking to him, first by a dog named Lucky (voiced
by Norm MacDonald), who is almost hit by him when driving, and then by
numerous others.
This begins to tax on his sanity, and when no one believes him, and he's
making unbelievably awkward decisions to accomodate his ability (such as
helping all the animals like the world's greatest veteranarian so
they'll just leave him alone - yeah, that's your cure, John), he winds
up in a nuthouse.  Meanwhile, his hospital staff is merging with another
one (in the form of Peter Boyle) and his two head assistants are divided
into the conservative nice guy (underrated character actor Richard
Schiff) and greedy-as-balls pseudo-villain (the great Oliver Platt), so
there's a bit of forced let's-take-up-some-screen-time conflict going on
other than the animals/sanity bit.
The most humorous thing about this film is the celebrities who play the
animals, but not really because of the writing involved.  I more or less
was mildly amused throughout the film as I distracted myself from the
boredom I had succumb to by playing "Guess Whose Voice That Is?"  Chris
Rock pops up as a guinea pig.  John Leguiziamo shows up as a rat.  Julie
Kavner and Gary Shandling make a cameo as a pair of bickering pigeons.
And (my favorite) Albert Brooks stars as a suicidal tiger.  Not that
their scenes are actually gut-bursting or anything.  Brooks, especially,
isn't given anything very interesting to talk about, even when it has
the potential to be the funniest thing about the movie (and it probably
is anyway).  Instead, his subplot is played nearly straight, and since
the idea of a sucidal tiger can probably only be played as comedy, his
subplot comes off as disturbingly, well, Live-Action-Disney-esque.
Never would I have thought that a side story involving a suicidal tiger
would be the cherry on the top of a dramatic arc, but then again, I can
be easily surprised.
The handling of the animals should have worked, though, as the
foundation of the comedy in this film.  There are many opportunities for
jokes, and it has the right fallacy: that the animals are exactly like
humans personality-wise, but have bitchings about their own kind of
lives.  Nothing they say is particularly humorous, though, and with
Murphy playing the straight man (and nicely, I should add - though this
film doesn't require old school Eddie Murphy tactics, it does show great
modesty on his behalf...or, at the very least, insecurity to take a big
comic risk after the result of his early-to-mid 90s career), there's
really nothing to keep interest.  The result is that the film is a big
fat bore, and after about a half hour or so of unfunny funniness, I
began checking my watch repeatedly, wondering how long I had left until
I could watch something with a little more class.  Say, "Dumb and
Dumber."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Nat Mauldin and Larry Levin
Starring: Eddie Murphy, Kyla Pratt, Oliver Platt, the voice of Chris
Rock as a hamster
Ingredients: Physician who talks to animals, dog, hamster, tiger
Synopsis: 
When he was a kid John Dolittle could talk to animals, but as the adult
Doctor John Dolittle, the memory is completely repressed. One day, after
he drives his little daughter off to camp, John suffers a bump on the
head that revives his ability to understand what animals are saying.
When people don't understand Dolittle's strange new behavior, it leads
to a lot of comedic situations - - like getting put in the looney bin,
hiding a circus tiger within his health clinic, giving CPR to a rat, and
being chased by the police. 
Meanwhile, other situations are complicating Dolittle's life. For
example, a big, unethical HMO is trying to buy out his humble health
clinic. And DoLittle's smart little daughter is being cruelly shunned by
kids at camp. 
Can the good doctor straighten out the situations and also cope with the
emergence of his peculiar talent? 
Opinion: 
There's a scene in this movie where Eddie Murphy, as Dr. Dolittle, is in
his car, and he blasts the radio and overspeeds to drown out the sound
of a hamster's voice because he doesn't want to believe that the hamster
is talking to him. The loud car comes peeling into his daughter's camp,
and we all get a big laugh because dear old "Dad" is all of a sudden
acting so nutty. Yet just a few years ago, Murphy seemed typecast to
play wisecracking macho characters (METRO and BEVERLY HILLS COP) who
always blasted the radio and sped down the street. 
When saw that scene in DOCTOR DOLITTLE, I was impressed because Murphy
plays a such believable dad, not to mention the acting job of having to
pretend to talk to animatronic puppets and look credible. This summer
must be Murphy's year, because he's doing a fantastic job in both DOCTOR
DOLITTLE and MULAN. Wow!
Some of the humor is low brow (burps, farts, dogs complaining about
enemas, etc.) but the overall theme ("we should accept people as they
are") of DOCTOR DOLITTLE is heartwarming. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Matt Williams
Given the success of Babe, it's easy to see why Hollywood would be eager
to remake Dr. Dolittle. But, though they remembered the talking animals,
someone forgot to give this movie a sense of humor.
Even as a young boy, John Dolittle had a gift...he could talk to the
animals.  But after learning some inappropriate social customs from the
family dog (voiced by Ellen DeGeneres), he is forced to repress his
ability.  In fact he goes so far that he forgets his gift completely.
All is well until, twenty five years or so later, he receives a
convenient conk on the head.
As a grownup, John (Eddie Murphy) has become a successful doctor, and
has a wife (Kristen Wilson), and two daughters.  His partners (Oliver
Platt and Richard Schiff) and on the verge of selling their practice to
an HMO.  Just when Dr. Dolittle needs a level head, all the animals
around begin speaking to him.
The animal voices are mostly familiar, and it's actually more
entertaining trying to spot all the celebrity voices than it is
listening to what they have to say.  The most vociferous duo are Chris
Rock as the family pet guinea pig, and Norm MacDonald as a stray dog.
But John Leguizamo, Albert Brooks, Gary Shandling, Julie Kavner, Gilbert
Gottfried and others lend their pipes as well.
There are a few, a very few, funny moments with the speaking animals. If
you've seen the commercials for this one, you've seen them all. A
neurosis here, a raunchy reference there...after a while the repetitive
humor gets as stale as a box of three month old animal crackers.
When you're left with the human story in this film, you know you're in
trouble.  Your average TV sitcom has more depth than the characters here
(and at least twice the humor).  As an audience, you couldn't care less
about the whole HMO plot, which is the strongest element the human story
has in it.
As Dr. Dolittle, Eddie Murphy is stuck playing the straight man,
sidekick to the animals strutting their stuff.  However, in his previous
straight man role (that of Sherman Klump in The Nutty Professor), at
least he was a likable and interesting character in his own right.
Here, he's merely bland.
For a movie about animals, you'd expect a few animal tricks here and
there.  That's not the case in Dr. Dolittle. They simply wander about,
with animated lips thrown in later. The special effects are never
groundbreaking, but aren't too bad (except when they resort to that
guinea pig hand puppet).
If this is all animals have to say, we're not missing anything. And by
skipping Dr. Dolittle, neither will you.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
I cried during _Babe_.  I admit it.  The special effects, the story, the
great dialogue were woven together so delicately and successfully that
my mind lost track that this was a "children's film"--so much so that,
yes, I got a little overly sentimental.  Such, my friend, is the power
of cinema.
When word came out that they were using this newly developed F/X for a
Doctor Dolittle update, in which Eddie Murphy plays the title character,
and many great comic actors supply the voices, my anticipation rose to
great expectations.  They can't possibly drop the ball on this one.
Can't miss.  Can't possibly miss.
What went wrong?  After much thought, I supply three general rules.
(1)  Don't let a television actress-turned-comedy movie director near an
urbanite script (i.e., Penny Marshall's dreadful "Preacher's Wife").
Betty Thomas worked wonders with "The Brady Bunch Movie", but the same
sitcom-airiness doesn't quite work here.
It's as if she lifted a generic sitcom, and iced it with light doses of
modern R&B.  Take away the black cast, take away the atrocious
soundtrack, and you have the residue of some mid-80's Kirk Cameron show.
(2)  The greater the cast, the less the individual cast-member has to do
(i.e., "Con Air").  It is great to have the comic voices of Jenna
Elfman, Garry Schandling, John Leguizimo, Ellen Degeneres, and Gilbert
Godfried in your lineup, but they have nothing to do but improvise their
underdeveloped, stereotyped characters, one-line-at-a-time.  It's even
worse, because sometimes their voices are so unrecognizable that you
don't get the satisfaction of linking the voice to the comedian until
the credits.
Now there are three character actors who do get special treatment:
Albert Brooks brings dignity to nearly every project he's in, and the
scenes as a depressed tiger do resonate a certain poignancy.  Norm
McDonald fares nearly as well, as a stray dog who learns to bond with
Dolittle.  But there's little humor here.  That rests on the shoulders
of Chris Rock, sorely miscast and unfunny as the voice of their wise-ass
guinea pig.  Even the mouth is ill-synched.
(3)  Don't let the Special Effects technicians walk away with the
script.  There's a certain timing that's mandatory in comedy.  To have
this timing usurped by the brilliancy of computer generated mouths or
lifelike creations of Jim Henson's Creature Shop, is a travesty.  This
is not to say that special effects filled comedies or Muppet movies
aren't well-timed laughfests; with the right director, they can be and
have.  Here, Betty Thomas is clearly over her head.
I wish I could commend the special effects, but they're merely average.
Count the number of times where the animal's mouth is turned away from
the camera, or too far to notice, or ill-synched.  This is less a "Babe"
and more of a "Look who's Barking" clone.
You may be wondering, 'How does Eddie Murphy fare?'  Well, he came back
with the exceptional "Nutty Professor", and I don't doubt he can come
back again.  Here, he's tied into a straight man and given little to do.
The exceptions are when he fears he's going crazy:  a far cry from his
smarter-than-you'd expect routine that he's more adept at.  It's
unfortunate that he is where Richard Pryor was ten years ago, making
lame comedies without the same bite he had given in his early years.
After all this, what's left?  Butt jokes.  A _lot_ of butt jokes.  I
guess for kids that may be funny, but I was stone-faced.  If there's a
lesson the film may be telling us, is that animals have feelings too,
and they care way too much for your butt.

Author
Bob Bloom
 You can't help but laugh during Dr. Dolittle.
 And the funny thing is, it has nothing to do with Eddie Murphy.
 The laughs are generated by the lines coming from the mouths of the
various animals who turn Dr. Dolittle's life into a zoo.
 It's shows how the funny have fallen when a guinea pig, tiger, dog and a
couple of pigeons can upstage Eddie Murphy.
 Not that Murphy isn't funny, but he basically is playing straight man to a
menagerie. Most of the laughs he inspires are not from his lines, but from
reacting to the lines and situations created by others.
 It's just a little sad to see Murphy, who brought such savvy, sass,
attitude and a hint of the rebel, to such movies as 48 HRS, Trading Places
and the first Beverly Hills Cop, being in a position in which he has to be
second banana.
 Despite these underpinnings, Dr. Dolittle is a most enjoyable romp, one
that the kids will enjoy.
 Basically an updating of the clunky old Rex Harrison late '60s musical of
the same title, this Dr. Dolittle is set in contemporary San Francisco.
Whereas Harrison's Dr. D talked to the animals by learning their language,
Murphy's doc just hears them talking to him in English.
 It seems he was born with this ability. But, as a child, his father,
fearing his son would be ostracized for his gift, had young John Dolittle
"exorcised." The trauma led the boy to block out his unique talent.
 Only as an adult, after a bump on the head from a car accident in which he
swerved his vehicle to miss a dog, does the power return.
 Of course, Dolittle thinks he's going crazy. But eventually he learns to
accept his role as friend and doctor to the animals and everything works
out all right in the end.
 The script by Nat Mauldin and Larry Levin is a bit weak, improbable and
filled with plot holes. Yet, they are benignly overlooked because of the
animal antics.
 They also rely on an overabundance of animal scatalogical humor.
 And it is the vocal talents of these unseen stars that carry Dr. Dolittle.
 The juiciest lines go to Norm MacDonald as Lucky, the stray dog adopted by
Dolittle, and Chris Rock as Rodney, the pet of Dolittle's daugther, Maya.
 Albert Brooks brings a touch of melancholy to the part of an ill tiger,
while Garry Shandling is in fine form as a neurotic pigeon. He is
complemented by Julie Kavner as his female partner.
 Other contributors include the annoyingly funny Gilbert Gottfried as a
compulsive dog who only likes to play fetch, and Reni Santoni and John
Leguizamo as a couple of wise-cracking rats.
 This Dr. Dolittle, directed by Betty Thomas (who also directed The Brady
Bunch Movie), is a straight comedy.
 It's filled with laughs and it's entertaining.
 But, one sad aspect sticks in your subconscious. They could have made this
movie without Eddie Murphy. Basically, any other comic actor - Steve
Martin, for example, could have played the doctor.
 Is this a portend on path of Murphy's career - remaking and updating old
movies? First, The Nutty Professor, now Dr. Dolittle. What next, Gilligan's
Island.
 Murphy is a charismatic performer on screen. We can only hope that these
successful outings are the impetus to get him back into the style of comedy
he knows and does best.
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
You can e-mail him at bloom@journal-courier.com.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Doctor Dolittle (1998)
Eddie Murphy, Ossie Davis, Oliver Platt, Peter Boyle, Richard Schiff, 
Kristen Wilson, Jeffrey Tambor, Kyla Pratt, Steven Gilborn. Voices of 
Norm Macdonald, Albert Brooks, Chris Rock, Reni Santoni, John 
Leguizamo, Julie Kavner, Garry Shandling, Paul Reubens, Ellen 
Degeneres, Gilbert Gottfried. Directed by Betty Thomas. 85 minutes
Rated PG, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Doctor Dolittle should have become a proctologist. Then he'd have 
been better prepared for the unrelenting onslaught of scatological humor 
in this crappy comedy. There's nothing wrong with a gross-out 
joke and "Doctor Dolittle" has quite a few funny ones, but the film's 
unrelenting barrage of butt, rectal and poop humor quickly becomes 
tiresome, and eventually flat-out annoying. Is this really the best these 
guys could do with the concept?
Related to Hugh Lofting's children stories and the 1967 Rex Harrison 
film in name only, this "Doctor Dolittle" begins with a pup (Ellen 
Degeneres) explaining to young John Dolittle that dogs sniff each others 
rears as a way of saying hello. When the boy emulates the behavior and 
takes a whiff of the new minister's ass, it's off to the pound for Ellen, 
while John's father (Ozzie Davis) calls in an exorcist to rid the boy of 
his ability to talk to the animals.
Cut to the present, where the adult John (Eddie Murphy) is a successful 
doctor so caught up in his work that he neglects his family. Although his 
partners are excited that their thriving practice is about to be snapped 
up by an HMO, John has lost his enthusiasm for practicing medicine. 
Things change when he whacks his head in an auto mishap and his gift 
returns. To his amazement, John hears the dog he struck call him 
"bonehead." 
Of course, John and Lucky (Norm Macdonald), the recovering mutt, 
become pals. Soon after, the doc treats a wounded owl and word spreads 
through the animal kingdom about the doctor who can talk with the animals.
 John adjusts to the situation and finds his love of healing renewed, 
although his co-workers and family fear he's lost his mind. 
That's certainly a sturdy enough framework for a comedy, had the writers 
stretched their imaginations a bit. If you take a couple minutes right 
now, I guarantee you'll come up with at least a dozen gags more inventive 
than those that appear in this film. After viewing "Doctor Dolittle," 
it's easy to imagine the producers strapping writers Nat Mauldin and 
Larry Levin in chairs facing a wall covered with photos of various 
animals' posteriors and saying "Create!" From pigeon poop gags to a long 
scene involving the retrieval of a thermometer from Lucky's rectum, it's 
obvious that Mauldin and Levin spent considerable time sniffing butts in 
preparation for their work.
Despite the repetitive theme, a number of the jokes are funny and several 
of the actor's providing the animal voices do fine work. Norm 
Macdonald is quite likable as the sarcastic Lucky. If only he had been 
this engaging in "Dirty Work," his own recent comedy misfire. Garry 
Shandling and Julie Kavner are funny as squabbling pigeons and 
Albert Brooks contributes a sympathetic performance as a sick tiger. 
Look for quick, but cute, voice work from Paul Reubens as a raccoon, 
and Gilbert Gottfried as an obsessive-compulsive dog. On the other side 
of the coin, Chris Rock is just loud and irritating as a guinea pig with 
attitude.
And then there's Eddie Murphy. In a lapse of judgment more annoying 
than the potty-humor fixation, Murphy is cast in a role where he has 
little to do but react, wasting the actor's comedic skills. Noticing that 
their star has nothing to do, the desperate writers insert a mawkish 
subplot in order to give Eddie the chance to deliver a heartfelt speech 
or two. It doesn't help.
Despite a few good scenes, "Doctor Dolittle" is a drag, a phenomenal 
waste of a good concept and a talented actor. How did such a misfire 
occur? My theory is that someone told the writers that they should 
create a film like "that charming comedy about a pig." Then, in doing 
research, they made the fatal mistake of studying "Porky's" instead of 
"Babe."

Author
Scott Renshaw
DOCTOR DOLITTLE
(20th Century Fox)
Starring: Eddie Murphy, Oliver Platt, voices of Norm Macdonald, Albert
Brooks, Chris Rock, Julie Kavner, Garry Shandling.
Screenplay:  Nat Maudlin and Larry Levin, based on the stories by Hugh
Lofting.
Producers:  John Davis, Joseph M. Singer and David T. Friendly.
Director:  Betty Thomas.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, adult humor)
Running Time:  85 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I'm not sure exactly when it happened, but a sad development has
seized juvenile comedy as we know it.  Only token film-makers like the
Farrelly brothers (KINGPIN, DUMB AND DUMBER) have resisted what I call the
John Hughes-ification of low-brow humor:  the insistence upon wrapping up
90 minutes of crude sight gags with a great big group hug and an edifying
life lesson.  In effect, it's a con playing on the low-level guilt of
viewers who want to convince themselves that the bodily function humor is
just a necessary evil on the way to an Important Social Message.  And I'll
bet they read Playboy for the articles, too.
     Some viewers obviously manage to get past this dichotomy.
Personally, I don't want any metaphorical chocolate in my peanut butter.
DOCTOR DOLITTLE takes a salty little dab of peanut butter and smothers it
in chocolate syrup.  Eddie Murphy stars as physician John Dolittle, whose
childhood gift for communicating with animals was throttled out of him
because it made him different.  Now a straight-laced family man with a
thriving practice, Dolittle has no memory of his zooglotism until a fender
bender revives his latent ability.  Suddenly Dr. Dolittle is hearing
animal voices all around him, the news of which gets around to sick
animals everywhere keen to take advantage of being able to tell him
exactly what ails them.  This development troubles non-believers like his
medical partner Dr. Mark Weller (Oliver Platt) and his wife Lisa (Kristen
Wilson), both of whom suspect John is going a bit animal crackers.
     DOCTOR DOLITTLE has plenty of predictable charms, most of them
connected to the digitally-doctored menagerie surrounding the good doctor.
The A-list voice talent -- Norm Macdonald as the sarcastic family mutt,
Albert Brooks as a depressed circus tiger, Julie Kavner and Garry
Shandling as a pair of bickering pigeons -- offers plenty of appeal,
though prominently-featured Chris Rock as a guinea pig can only crank up
the volume on his rather boring lines.  The other critters spend a lot of
time doing cute tricks and firing off wise cracks, particularly MacDonald
and Gilbert Gottfried in a brief bit as a dog obsessed with chasing a
ball.  It's hardly classic comedy, but it's effective enough for a few
belly laughs, even with the obligatury use of various animal calls of
nature by screenwriters Nat Maudlin and Larry Levin.
     Low-brow comedy isn't the problem; lacking the nerve to stick with
low-brow comedy is.  DOCTOR DOLITTLE stretches and strains for sub-plots
on which to hang sentiment, from the self-absorbed attempts of Dr. Weller
to sell the practice to an HMO, to the troubles of Dolittles introverted
youngest daughter (Kyla Pratt), to Dolittle's noble efforts to save the
tiger from a blood clot (and you haven't really brushed aside a tear until
you've seen the touching hand-in-paw scene).  "Be who you are and love who
you are," Dolittle tells his daughter with paternal gravity, and at
precisely that moment you may want to reach out, smack him in the head and
tell him to get back to the goofy animal tricks.
     Actually, it would have been nice if Murphy had gotten back to any
tricks at all.  Murphy can be a brilliant comic performer, but he works
his finest magic as an instigator.  Aside from a few token moments of
frantic behavior, he is asked merely to react in DOCTOR DOLITTLE, to play
straight man to the talking animals, which is a huge waste of his talents.
I suppose it made sense to try another wacky re-make after the success of
THE NUTTY PROFESSOR, and I suppose it made sense to hope that director
Betty Thomas (THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, PRIVATE PARTS) could work similar
slight-of-hand with another premise that didn't sound very promising.  It
may have seemed like a good idea at the time, but Doctor Dolittle only
works until you realize it would have worked much better with Murphy --
and the whole film -- let off the leash of excess sincerity.  When the
guffaws give way to solemnly-intoned platitudes, it spoils all the fun of
a good pigeon-crap-on-the-head gag.  Of course, I only watch for the
Important Social Message.

Author
Brian Koller
The original Dr. Dolittle was a children's book by
Hugh Lofting.  It was later a 1927 German-made silent
film.  The version most familiar, of course, is the
1967 film starring a diffident Rex Harrison, which was
perhaps the worst film ever to be nominated for
Best Picture.  The 1967 film did win an Oscar for
Best Song, "Talk to the Animals".  The song is the only
link to the latest incarnation, which is a comedy
starring Eddie Murphy.
Murphy began his film career on a high note, in "48 HRS."
and "Trading Places".  His films have never the same
since then, although "Coming to America" and "The Nutty
Professor" were good efforts.  Murphy is a gifted comic,
an inspired mimic and trash talker, and a master of the
double take.  But as he has succeeded in reaching a
mass audience in making films with strongest appeal to
children, he has had to abandon much of his R-rated
persona in the process.  The older, tamer Murphy still
owns the double take, but I miss his more dangerous side.
The plot of "Doctor Dolittle" has Murphy cast as a
successful surgeon, about to complete some kind of sell-out
to a conglomerate with some fellow doctors that will make them
all even more rich.  Murphy suddenly realizes that he can
communicate with animals, and his resulting bizarre behavior
threatens to sabotoge the business deal.  There are
four plot lines to provide mild suspense: Will the business
deal come off?  Will Murphy's loyal wife (Kristen Wilson)
write him off as a lunatic?  Can Murphy save the life of
a tiger with double vision?  Will Murphy accept his misfit
daughter (Kyla Pratt) who also has a thing for animals?
Other movies, notably "Babe" and certain Disney cartoons,
have had success with talking animals.  But these animals
only talked to other animals, and lived in an innocent world
unaware of human pop culture.  Not so in "Doctor Doolittle",
which has the spunky pet guinea pig (voiced by Chris Rock)
disco dancing and imitating Bob Dylan.  Other incongruities
(e.g. a pair of penguins appear unescorted at Murphy's
door; a tiger threatens to commit suicide by jumping from
a tower) tag the film as pandering to an audience of pre-adolescents,
the only audience who will buy into the fun.
"Doctor Doolittle" earns its PG-13 rating with some bathroom
humor, and a repeated story line that has Murphy about to
make love to his wife, but gets interrupted by pesky talking
animals.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Betty Thomas.
Cast Eddie Murphy, Ossie Davis, Oliver Platt, Richard Schiff, Kristen
Wilson, Jeffrey Tambor
Written by Hugh Lofting, Nat Mauldin, Larry Levin
There's probably one thing that annoys me more than a rude, verbose,
hyperactive Eddie Murphy, and that would be  smart-mouthed, lip
malleable, talking animals. So, I had every reason to dislike this movie
from the outset, but instead I decided to sit back and re-evaluate my
life. After momentarily journeying to the depths of my soul and
relieving myself of the hate I bore for the ones named Murphy and
talking animals, I decided to enjoy the holiday spirit of the movie.
This movie is great for the kids. They love animals and they love
animals that talk, even more. Eddie is well behaved, and if I had to
choose between watching him as a smart mouthed BEVERLY HILLS COP, or as
a disillusioned MD who can talk to animals  MD wins hands down. The
animals are o.k. Yes they generate great one liners, with style and
human expression thanks to Jim Henson and co.
In the opening credits of the movie, it is stated that the movie is
based on Hugh Lofting's children's books of the same name. To clarify
this further, I will say that they are only very, very, very loosely
based on the novels. In fact the only thing vaguely resembling Lofting's
characters is the name Dolittle and of course the talking animals.
The plot is simple. Dolittle (Murphy) has the gift of talking to
animals. A gift that he has repressed since childhood, and only recently
been awoken since hitting a stray dog with his car. After this, the
Doctor mostly psychologically counsels animals about their bowel habits,
sex life and numerous psychiatric disorders. By keeping the plot simple,
and the focus on the talking animals and away from Eddie Murphy, the
children will remain delighted and 20th Century Fox has another
potential box office hit on their hands.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 20th Century Fox
 Director: Betty Thomas
 Writer: Nat Mauldin and Larry Levin
 Cast: Eddie Murphy, Ossie Davis, Oliver Platt, Peter Boyle,
Richard Schiff, Kristen Wilson, Jeffrey Tambor, Kyla Pratt
   If you talk at length to your dog, don't worry about it.
Everyone does.  When the dog starts answering you, then
you've got problems. Or do you?  If only the world accepted
such a two-way communication both you and they would be
better off.  You'd learn something about yourself relayed
straight from the horse's mouth from their four-legged views
and might even become as human as the animals themselves
are.
   With this in mind, Betty Thomas--perhaps most celebrated
by teens and adults for directing Howard Stern in "Private
Parts" and for subteens for helming the squarest of the
square families in "The Brady Bunch Movie"--seems eager to
bring a strong moral point home to her mostly small-fry
audience, a suggestion that will be most appreciated by the
adults who are escorted by them.  One is that doctors--and
even people--should relate to their fellow living creatures as
ends in themselves and not for what others can do to
advance their careers and income. She takes aim against the
shoddy practices of HMO's and should find little dissension in
the audience for that posture.  
   The movie opens on little John Dolittle, played as a three-
year-old by Raymond Matthew Mason and by a five-year-old
by Dari Gerard Smith.  The kid has is precocious.  He has a
way with animals and like St. Francis is devoted to gabbing
with them, though at this stage of development he does not
get a reply.  Many years later, when John (Eddie Murphy) has
become a successful doctor with a lovely wife, Lisa (Kristen
Wilson), he almost strikes a stray dog with his van.  When the
dog, at first appearing dead, rises, the animal remarks "Why
don't you look where you're going, you bonehead?"  No
explanation is given for Dolittle's new ability, though a blatant
product placement implies it might have been the Dunkin'
Donuts he had just eaten.  In no time flat, the title character
colloquies with his daughter's guinea pig, a couple of rats
fighting in a trash bin, a tiger in a circus, until he is packed off
to a mental institution.  His partner, Dr. Mark Weller (Oliver
Pratt), is concerned that John's behavior will ruin a lucrative
HMO buyout deal, and his wife wonders why he frequently
wanders off just when she feels her seductive powers working
on him.  The only understanding folks are his daughter Maya
(Kyla Pratt), who already considers herself weird and a misfit
and thereby identifies with dad; and John's father Archer
(Ossie Davis) who sees John's dialogues as a gift.
   Since special effects at a high stage of development, the
audience has no problem really believing that the animals are
mouthing the words, be they owls, rodents, goats, ducks,
dogs or cats.  As for lines, the best belong not to Eddie
Murphy but to the four-legged creatures, though Oscar Wilde
has nothing to fear from them. For example, in the pound as
one dog is being led to his death, another behind the cage
remarks "Dead dog walking."  A German shepherd in the vet's
office whines, "Don't fix me...I won't look at another female,"
but when an attractive collie passes by, he can't resist: "Yo,
baby!"  A horse carrying a mounted police officer remarks,
"Oh, look, a doughnut shop!" and one large woman's pet
comments as his owner bends over, "Isn't that the biggest ass
you've ever seen?"
   "Dr. Doolittle" is not "Masterpiece Theater" and no way can
it compete with the stories in Hugh Lofting's book, but it's a
heck of a lot better--less pretentious--that the overproduced
musical of the same name starring Rex Harrison that almost
wrecked Fox in 1967.  Eddie Murphy seems headed down the
route of Jim Carrey--less manic, more somber messaging,
and he does just fine.

Author
Homer Yen
Cats meow; dogs bark, birds chirp, and tigers roar.  Have you ever
wondered what they might be saying to us?  For Dr. John Dolittle (Eddie
Murphy), he possesses a very special ability.  He can actually
understand them.  And those animals can also understand the Doctor.
Imagine the kind of unique information that they may hold.  A woodland
owl may tell of how its forest habitat is being destroyed.  Stray cats
could reveal where illegal activity may be taking place in some darkened
alleyway.  Perhaps the Doctor could do something to save an endangered
species with his unique communications skills or help to unravel the
mysteries of the animal kingdom.  But this film never gets even close to
the possibilities that naturally present itself.  
"Doctor Dolittle" is about a successful, straight-as-an-arrow doctor who
is too absorbed with his work.  But that is just fine for his fellow
co-worker Mark Weller (Oliver Platt), since they are about to ink a
lucrative deal to sell their practice.  After a traffic accident,
however, Dolittle is rekindled with his gift of gab.  Shock and hysteria
begin to settle in as he tries to push these unexplainable voices from
his head.  Dolittle carries on conversations with, among others, a stray
dog (voiced by an acerbic-sounding Norm MacDonald) and a hip-hop talking
hamster (voiced by Chris Rock).  This weird behavior alarms Weller as
this jeopardizes the deal.  But Dolittle begins to develop a renewed
sense of passion for his work knowing that he can help to heal animals
too.  Now all he must do is convince his family, co-workers and other
skeptics that he's not crazy.
Dolittle, the character and Murphy, the actor suffer from similar
scenarios.  They both make decisions that elicit disbelief.  The biggest
problem here is that we have a 30-minute scenario stretched into a
feature-length film.  And, the movie just isn't all that interesting.
The talking animals amounted to little more than a gimmick.  No real
bond is established between man and animal.  We just get a bunch of
unfunny sequences featuring talking animals.  Witness the scene at a the
vet's waiting room where animals discuss their ailments and another
extended sequence in Dolittle's house where a gallery of animals come
for some medical attention.   Celebrity voice-overs try to make these
animals sound funny (contributions from Julie Kavner, Albert Brooks,
John Leguizamo, Paul Reubens, and others), but most of the dialogue is a
real bore.  Also appallingly odd for a Disney film, the movie seemed to
lack the energy, magic and warmth that we have come to expect from their
studio.
Murphy does a charming job, but he just doesn't have enough material to
work with here.  Perhaps the funniest thing about this movie is the
inclusion of Oliver Platt, who seems relegated to playing perpetually
worried sidekicks.  Though a fine actor, he really looks like he wants
to be somewhere else.  Somewhere else is where you should be too.

Author
David Wilcock
DR DOLITTLE
(20TH CENTURY FOX)
RUNNING TIME: 1 HOUR 25 MINUTES
STARRING EDDIE MURPHY
DIRECTED BY BETTY THOMAS
Riding high on the success of The Nutty Professor (1996), Murphy returns in
this abysmal comedy. He plays Doctor John Dolittle, who as a child had the
ability to understand animals. However, after being 'exorcised' he loses
this ability, and we fast forward to see Dolittle in a crummy job
surrounding by crummy people (most notably Dr Mark Weller, played by Oliver
Platt.) However, with a bonk on the head his ability to understand animals
returns, and 'comedy' is ready and waiting to happen.
Except comedy never does happen. Doctor Dolittle, even with the excellent
premise, rarely manages to raise a laugh. Poor old Murphy looks bored stiff
throughout the whole movie, and his performance suffers. The manic Murphy we
saw in the 80's is gone, his more mature (and more boring) twin appears to
be getting all the work in the 90's. The voices of the animals, which
include Albert Brooks, Chris Rock (the 'new' Eddie Murphy) and Norm McDonald
as 'Lucky' the dog are marginally better, and at least they put enthusiasm
in the movie. Sadly, most of their lines are pretty dumb. And they're not
'funny' dumb, like Dumb & Dumber (1994), but just boring dumb. The film even
succumbs to fart jokes halfway through, in a desperate attempt to raise some
laughs. There are a few good jokes in the script, but they are few and far
between. If I had to choose a favourite performance, it would probably be
Albert Brooks tiger, who has a certain charm about him. Sadly, he's barely
in the movie, and Rock's really annoying Hamster is given far too much
screen time.  Joke wise, we are thankfully, spared the mocking and insulting
type of jokes that featured heavily in The Nutty Professor.
The director, Betty Thomas, has, well, done better films. She bought us
Private Parts (1997) and The Brady Bunch Movie (1995) which were, sadly,
much better than this. The scenes lack any charm, she just gets the job
done. The animals themselves, are reasonable realistic, although most of
them are obviously puppets. There's an impressive looking tiger, however,
and the lip sync is pretty good. You'd have no problem guessing that most of
the close up's are puppets, however, with their jilted movement. I was
hoping Jim Hensons workshop, who created the furry friends, would have done
a better job.
Doctor Dolittle, in the end, is a disappointment for everyone involved.
Murphy has done much better movies (i.e Trading Places) the director has
seen better days, and even the creatures aren't that good. The target
audience, aged between 7-13, who are undemanding, will probably like it
however, thanks to it's dumbed down humour. Everyone else, however, should
give Doctor Dolittle a miss.
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!

Author
Jamie Peck
DR. DOLITTLE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Murphy's John Dolittle is an esteemed doctor (of course) whose 
relationship with his wife (Kristen Wilson) and daughters (Kyla Pratt 
and Raven-Symone) needs a little work, though much of his recent 
distraction can probably be attributed to the big financial deal he's 
about to sign at the office. Matters are complicated one night when he 
whacks his head during a car crash and is suddenly revisited by his 
childhood ability to communicate with all creatures great and small, 
namely the down-on-luck pooch (voiced by Norm Macdonald) that caused the 
accident and a brazen guinea pig (Chris Rock) belonging to his youngest 
child. There's also a subplot about evil HMOs and a greedy hospital 
colleague ("Bulworth"'s Oliver Platt), but they're largely dispensable. 
Before Dolittle knows it, word of his talent spreads to the entire 
animal kingdom and he's performing marriage counseling on pigeons and 
giving advice to an alcoholic monkey (one of the best bits). 
"Dr. Dolittle" veers off course as it nears its end, when the tone 
abruptly shifts and the film asks us to emote over an ailing tiger 
(Albert Brooks) whose neurotic ramblings, up until then, have provided 
some of the movie's funniest moments. These climactic scenes blatantly 
attempt to tug at the heartstrings, but "Dolittle" is far more 
successful when it masks its moral ("You be who you are, and you love 
who you are") behind the guise of Murphy and his chatty critters. For 
the record, there's nothing wrong with positive messages, and the one 
here is particularly worthwhile, but it clashes with everything else 
when it's forced to the front of the film. Still, that's not as big a 
flaw as it might seem given that A) it's only apparent during "Dr. 
Dolittle"'s last reel, and B) the movie is a pretty irresistible romp 
beforehand. 
Murphy, effective and genuine as a family man, holds his own against his 
furry, feathered co-stars; though they get all the best lines, he plays 
off them good enough to remain the real star of the show. The special 
effects that allow the menagerie to speak and the celebrities who 
provide their voices are a lot of fun as well; while much of what they 
have to say will be appreciated by the youngest audience members, "Dr. 
Dolittle" throws more than a few jokes the way of grown-ups. (A 
conversation between two rats: "If he dies, I don't know what I'll do!" 
"You'll take me outside and eat me!" "Only out of respect.") There are 
even punchlines that kids will guffaw at without really getting. ("Our 
butts hurt," a group of sheep complain to Dolittle.) While nothing 
incredible even as comedies come, the movie does its job and does it 
well, all inside of a running time that barely fills up 90 minutes. If 
laughter is the best medicine, then "Dr. Dolittle" should come in pill 
form.

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
There is a rule among entertainers.  Never perform with children and/or
animals because you'll be upstaged every time.  Eddie Murphy performs
with both in 'Doctor Dolittle'.  The first film version of this story
appeared in 1967 and starred legendary actor Rex Harrison in the title
role and while the film was a critical disaster, it received a Best
Picture Oscar nomination and won an Oscar for Visual Effects.  One thing
that puzzled me upon watching this film is the fact that many references
in the film's comedy are made to body parts and bodily functions in
general and that is a little hard for some very conservative parents to
handle in allowing their children to see it.  The matinee performance I
saw was full of kids and they seemed to handle it well and the parents
laughed right along with their little ones and they seemed to be
enjoying themselves as well.  The film runs a short 85 minutes, perfect
for appealing to the attention span of youngsters.
'Doctor Dolittle' opens about 30 years in the past, in the late 1960's
and a little boy named John Dolittle is discovering that he understands
animal language and can make conversation with animals in general.  No
doubt concerned for his well being, his parents, in particular his
father (Ozzie Davis), try and put him on the right track and send away
his pet dog when they feel he's spending a little too much time with it
while talking to it all the time.  Skip forward to the present day.
John Dolittle (Eddie Murphy) is now a doctor.  Don't be confused.  He's
an MD of the people and not a vet.  He has a wife and two young
daughters.  One of the daughters has a guinea pig, voiced by Chris
Rock.  He's one of the first to make conversation with Murphy.  The
other main characters (if you can call them that) are a tiger, voiced by
Albert Brooks and a dog, voiced by Norm Macdonald.  The plot that
unfolds around the whole thing is the sale of Murphy's large clinic to a
potential buyer (Peter Boyle).  Murphy's two partners at the clinic
(Oliver Platt and Richard Schiff) are portrayed as buffoons and are
wasted characters.
I enjoyed the film for several reasons.  First off, it's summer and its
a pleasure to see a film entertain children and adults on the same level
and while the Disney franchise has gotten stale, a film like this with a
major star like Eddie Murphy, in something he's never done before, is
quite interesting to watch in light of remembering some of the very
adult films that Murphy has done in the past such as '48 Hours' and
'Beverly Hills Cop'.  Murphy shows he can do a family film.  The film is
simple, straight forward and has some genuine belly laughs and clever
wit in its presentation by director Betty Thomas ('The Brady Bunch
Movie', 'Private Parts').  Not a classic and a film you'll probably want
to see only once, 'Doctor Dolittle' is a film that I can see having a
sequel because its box office strength so far is strong.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
Walter Frith's Top 100 Movies Of All Time Are Now Online At:
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/wftop100.htm

Author
Brian Takeshita
In the mid and late eighties, Eddie Murphy was the king of movie
comedy.  48 HOURS, TRADING PLACES, BEVERLY HILLS COP, and COMING TO
AMERICA, among others, put him firmly at the top of box office draws.
Then his career began to slide with films such as BOOMERANG,  THE
DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN, and A VAMPIRE IN BROOKLYN, only to revived
with the hilariously outrageous THE NUTTY PROFESSOR.  It seemed as
though Eddie was back and out for revenge.  Then he followed it up
with METRO, and the whole slide happened again.  We got films like the
despicable HOLY MAN and the subject of this review, DOCTOR DOLITTLE.
DOCTOR DOLITTLE is a remake of the 1967 Rex Harrison musical in which
Dr. John Dolittle has the uncanny ability to talk to the animals.  In
this 1998 version, Eddie Murphy plays the title character, this time a
family man and general medical practitioner in San Francisco,
California.  His life, unlike that of the 1967 Dr. Dolittle, is
anything but fanciful.  His children are giving him the stresses that
young children do, and his practice is about to be acquired by a big
HMO.  One evening, while driving home, he nearly runs over a dog and
ends up crashing into a concrete trash can.  As the canine walks away,
however, it yells an insult at Dolittle in what appears to be perfect
English.  So resurfaces Dolittle's ability to speak to and understand
the language of animals, which he repressed for decades following a
traumatic event with his childhood pet dog.
A main difference between this version and the one from 1967 is that
the communication between the Murphy Dolittle and the animals is in
English, whereas the Harrison Dolittle communicated in animal noises.
This allows the animals to be quite a bit more humanized as we hear
what they are saying, but it also degenerates the film into a one-joke
prospect, as nearly all the humor comes from listening to a dog talk
about the way the vet takes his temperature or a horse talk about his
bad eyesight, for example.  It also upstages Murphy, who is
comedically relegated to facilitating the appearance of one animal to
the next.  At least that's the way it seems, since his contributions
are not all that funny.  The rest of the humor in the film revolves
around Dolittle's attempts to reconcile the fact that his ability to
understand animals as a child was not just a fantasy after all, and
his equally daunting task of convincing others that he's not crazy.
Unfortunately, Murphy's reactions to hearing animals talk largely
consists of him screaming in surprise, and the strange looks he gets
from people around him aren't new enough to elicit many viewer laughs.
One thing I wasn't sure of when it came to talking to the animals was
whether or not Dolittle were actually speaking to them in English or
if we were listening to a translation of his barking at dogs and
hooting at owls.  The confusion arises when his wife (Kristen Wilson)
catches him talking to his dog Lucky (voiced by Norm Macdonald), and
says, "You were barking," even though we only hear him talking.  At
other times, however, Dolittle is caught talking to an animal, and a
passerby obviously hears what he's saying.  This might be a little
nitpicky, but it's enough to distract.
Both real and fake animals were used in filming this movie, the latter
provided by Jim Hensen's Creature Studio, the same award-winning folks
who gave us the animatronic characters in BABE and it's less-acclaimed
sequel.  The Hensen legacy lives on in the wonderfully lifelike
appearance of the talking creatures, but if you've seen BABE, you've
pretty much seen the effects already.  There's nothing new here except
for a few different types of animals, really, and at this point it's
only enough to serve a function, not contribute substantially to the
movie as a whole.
Screenwriters Nat Mauldin and Larry Levin fashioned an uninspired
screenplay which works by the numbers.  We've got a daughter who
doesn't fit in (Kyla Pratt), a grandfather who is wiser than his son
(Ossie Davis), a greedy medical partner (Oliver Platt), a timid
medical partner (Richard Schiff), an overbearing big business guy
(Peter Boyle)....it's like a form where all you have to do is fill in
the blanks.  Everything you think is going to happen happens, and
that's all there is to it.  I wish I could say there were more, but
there just isn't.
There are a lot of cases where the comedy in DOCTOR DOLITTLE comes
close to hitting the mark, but in almost no case is it dead-on.  As a
result, we only get a steady stream of mediocre jokes and not the kind
of side-splitting humor we're used to from Eddie Murphy.  Well, I
suppose these days we're not even really used to that anymore, only
hoping for it once again.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is the second in a no-doubt long series of Eddie Murphy
remakes that remove the essence of the original in favor of fart and poop
jokes. Over the course of DR. DOLITTLE, you'll see Murphy give
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to a rat, a thermometer get lost up a dog's
butt and two pigeons take a crap in Oliver Platt's mouth. If the thought
of any of this appeals to you, I'm sure there's an opening for an
overnight janitor to clean toilets at the local bus depot. 
        Murphy plays a good-natured physician who doesn't like animals. We
learn why in the movie's prologue, when little Eddie has a conversation
with the family dog (voice of Ellen DeGeneres), who tells him sniffing
butts is just another way of shaking hands. (If that's true, I'm glad I
never witnessed the first meeting of DeGeneres and Anne Heche.) Upon
seeing a demonstration of this, Eddie's dad (Ossie Davis) brings in an
exorcist to remove the foul spirit of animal communication from his young
son, or something like that. 
        Flashforward about thirty years. Murphy has his practice, a gorgeous
wife (GIRL 6's Kristen Wilson) and two daughters (one of which is Raven
Symone from "The Cosby Show"). At work, there's talk of selling out to an
HMO, and colleague Platt is all over the idea. One look and it's obvious
Platt will be the greedy bastard figure in DR. DOLITTLE. Considering how
pissed off people are at HMOs, the filmmakers probably expected audiences
to erupt in applause at the climactic mouth-crap scene, but not me.
        The fun starts one day as Murphy hits a dog (which is a lot of fun
in itself) and the dog calls him a bonehead in Norm Macdonald's voice.
Then the pet hamster starts talking to him with Chris Rock's voice and all
hell breaks loose. Murphy is one with the animals and the animals are
stand-up comics, so break out the comedy set-pieces. Things like the
thermometer scene, Murphy pulling a stick out of an owl's wing and playing
therapist to two dysfunctional pigeons, one voiced by Julie Kavner. 
        No one reacts all that well to Murphy's rapport with the animals. He
ends up in a mental hospital after trying to help a suicidal tiger (Albert
Brooks) who eventually supplies the movie's climax. It happens to be just
as childish and unbelievable as the rest of the movie. Don't get me wrong;
there are some funny moments in DR. DOLITTLE. The fact that the Macdonald
dog is onscreen for at least half of the movie is a definite plus. Since
Murphy is basically a straight man here, Macdonald and Brooks provide most
of the laughs, although both are in better movies right now (DIRTY WORK
and OUT OF SIGHT, respectively). 
        If you're trying to decide whether to see DR. DOLITTLE, let me put
it this way -- it's a step down from THE NUTTY PROFESSOR. 
Address responses to c667778@showme.missouri.edu
Visit my homepage at http://students.missouri.edu/~ahicks/movies.html
More than 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair.
Serving America for almost 1/20th of a century!

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Betty Thomas
Cast:  Eddie Murphy, Ossie Davis, Oliver Platt, Richard Schiff, Kristen
Wilson, Jeffrey Tambor, Kyla Pratt
Screenplay:  Nat Mauldin, Larry Levin
Producers:  John Davis, David T. Friendly, Joseph Singer
Runtime:  85 min.
US Distribution:  20th Century Fox
Rated PG-13:  crude humor, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        I almost began this review writing something like, "Pigeons defecating
on Oliver Platt's face is not a funny sight," but then I remembered that
there were, in fact, people in the theater laughing as this statement
becomes reality in the final moments of Doctor Dolittle.  I don't want
to sound condescending, because there are clearly people in the world
who will find this to be a good family film (Roger Ebert, for instance,
actually *liked* it).  I felt kind of the same way I did as I watched
Flubber, which is unbearable in many of the same ways.
        Doctor Dolittle is not a funny film.  It has entertaining moments, and
I might have chuckled once or twice, but mostly I was just bored.  It's
under 90 minutes, which I found to be a blessing, even though it feels a
little longer than Lawrence of Arabia (but without the excitement). 
It's a one-joke movie (talking animals!), in which the joke gets old
almost as it's told --  it's not cute, or fun, and it substitutes trite
sentimentality for Deep Themes and Messages.  The only thing I felt as I
walked out of the theater was the urge to vomit, and I'm not
exaggerating.
        Eddie Murphy, seemingly unmoved by the fact that his roles no longer
require his comic talents as an actor, plays John Dolittle.  It's
established that he could talk to animals as a child, but a nasty
preacher scared the talent out of him.  Now, as the preview shouts, "the
doctor is in!" (I don't know what that has to do with anything, but I
though it would make a nice quote).  His talent is back, and he finds
that animals are going to him with their problems.
        Some animals are easy to repair, like the owl with a stick in its
wing.  Then there are the harder ones, like the suicidal tiger (voice by
Albert Brooks).  It might be totally useless to bother with the
logistical errors of the film, but, frankly, they irritated me.  Now,
when was the last time you saw a tiger attempt suicide?  And by jumping
off a building?  Don't bother answering that, for I doubt many people
have.  The animals in this film don't act like animals -- they act like
people trapped in the bodies of animals.
        So, no one believes poor Dolittle, and he gets put in a mental
institution, because he's a danger to himself and to everyone around
him.  What I didn't understand is why Dolittle was also the only person
who could see the animal's lips moving.  I'll buy the fact that he's the
only one who can hear their voices, but their lips are clearly moving. 
Why can't anyone else see that?  The film is so poorly conceived that
even a minor problem like this is simply ignored, as if no one will
care.  I really hope someone else does.
        Now, like all stupid wannabe family films, I'll say that I would have
looked past all these problems had the film something to offer.  Paulie,
which was another talking animal thingy, was a nice film, with a little
wit and a lot more entertainment value (and I buy a talking parrot more
than anything presented in Doctor Dolittle).  This film, directed by
Betty Thomas, is boring.  The animals may have a few good lines, and
some of the special effects are easy on the eyes.  But, most obvious is
the lack of energy out of Murphy, and the general lack of intelligence
in the film.
        And, of course, it resorts to defecation for laughs.  Feces is never
funny, and especially when it's splashed on the face of an actor as
talented as Oliver Platt (who is shamelessly wasted here).  Why do
"family" films have to fall back on this kind of material?  Had the
talking animals bit been done more competently, then feces and
flatulence would not have been necessary.  Kids were laughing at the
things I thought were amusing here, so I'm going to hold with the belief
that feces is not necessary to entertain children.  You can call me
old-fashioned for thinking that kids deserve more than this.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1998. Director - Betty Thomas, Screenplay - Larry Levin & Nat 
Maudlin, Based on the Novels by Hugh Lofting, Producers - John Davis, 
David T. Friendly & Joseph Singer, Photography - Russell Boyd, Music - 
Richard Gibbs, Music - Pilar McCurry, Visual Effects Supervisor - Jon 
Farhat, Visual Effects - Banned from the Ranch Entertainment (Supervisor 
- Van Ling), Cinesite, The Computer Film Co, C.O.R.E. Digital Pictures 
(Supervisors - John Mariella & Bob Munro), Pacific Title/Mirage Digital 
&  Pop Film and Pop Animation, Animatronics - Jim Henson's Creature 
Workshop (Supervisor - David Barrington Holt), Production Design - 
William A. Elliott. Production Company - Joseph M. Singer 
Entertainment/Davis Entertainment Co/20th Century Fox.
Eddie Murphy (Dr John Dolittle), Kristen Wilson (Lisa Dolittle), Kyla 
Pratt (Maya Dolittle), Oliver Platt (Dr Mark Weller), Richard Schiff (Dr 
Gene Reiss), Ossie Davis (Archer Dolittle), Peter Boyle (Calloway), 
Jeffrey Tambor (Dr Fish)
Voices: Norm MacDonald (Lucky), Albert Brooks (Tiger), Chris Rock 
(Rodney)
Plot: By accident GP John Dolittle suddenly rediscovers his forgotten 
childhood ability to talk to animals. He is promptly driven around the 
bend as animals everywhere come to him seeking help. His family think 
him crazy while his seemingly eccentric behaviour threatens a corporate 
takeover of his practice.
I grew up with Hugh Lofting's original Dr Dolittle stories written in 
the 1920s and still remember their delightfully fabulist charms - not 
unakin to the absurdist joys of a Pippi Longstocking or a 'Wind in the 
Willows'. So you may understand my bias against this current adaption of 
the stories. This is a version that might be politely termed a 
bastardization. About all the film has in common with the stories is the 
central concept of a doctor who can talk to animals - with everything 
else having been tossed out. It does have a brief scene in common with 
the 1967 film version where Dolittle gets thrown in an asylum but other 
than that the stories have been fed through the modern American 
children's film formula. Out has gone the period setting and all of Dr 
Dolittle's fantastical encounters with exotic animals - the talking 
hamsters and tigers here, technically superb and all as they are, sadly 
never compensate for the lack of any Push-Me-Pull-You's or Giant Pink 
Snails. Instead we have a cute, feelgood film which is merely about a 
character with an outlandish gift. The film wheels out all the cliches 
associated with this sort of comedy - the doctor's family thinking him 
crazy, the one-dimensional tightass villains, trite little speeches 
about being special, the doctor's eventually proving himself and 
everybody accepting his gift. The 1967 film version may not have been 
particularly good but it certainly had more of the spirit of the 
originals than this does.
The film is directed by Betty Thomas, a former actress best known for 
the part of Lucy Bates, the beat-cop with a frustrated mothering complex 
on tv's 'Hill Street Blues'. Thomas began to branch out into directing 
with the likes of the highly acclaimed tv movie 'My Breast' (1994) and 
received a Best Directing Emmy nomination for the tv movie 'The Late 
Shift' (1996) about the network wars between the David Letterman and Jay 
Leno talkshows. Thomas then broke into feature films and had notable 
success with 1995's 'The Brady Bunch Movie' followed by 1997's 'Private 
Parts' about the on-air hijinks of Howard Stern.
Unfortunately Thomas is not a very good director. 'The Brady Bunch 
Movie' consisted only of  a single-note joke about sarcastically 
puncturing the original tv series' naivete, and 'Private Parts' seemed 
entirely taken up by a scatological admiration for its subject matter 
Howard Stern's adolescent on-air antics. 'Dr Dolittle' might have been a 
funnier film if it had a better director - there are several scenes like 
Dolittle being caught giving mouth-to-mouth to a hamster or acting as an 
animal therapist that would have been hilarious on paper. But under 
Thomas's hand the film grovels in an extraordinary excess of toilet 
humour - a fat lady getting a hamster stuck in the crack of her butt; a 
rectal probe becoming lost up a dog's ass; CPR being performed on a rat 
only to find it is a pent-up fart. The talking animals are voiced with 
the irritating people-saying-silly-things-in-falsetto-voices that shows 
like 'America's Funniest Home Videos' seem to regard as the height of 
humour. The film stars funny man Eddie Murphy who over the last couple 
of years has been trying to rejuvenate a flagging career by reinventing 
himself in fantasy films but the film fails to give him any opportunity 
to open up and do the wild and crazy things he does best. In all a sad 
and lamentable vulgarization of a fine set of children's stories.


Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Eddie Murphy is back in what is being touted by Fox as `The funniest
movie since The Nutty Professor'.  Hell, it's not even the funniest
Eddie Murphy movie since The Nutty Professor.  Well, that's true if you
can count Mulan as an Eddie Murphy movie.  And who would have thought
that the trash-talking comic would have two kiddie-pics open in
back-to-back weekends?
Based on the Hugh Lofting books and its 1967 musical predecessor, Doctor
Dolittle stars Murphy in the title role of a man who can communicate
with the animals.  It's a bless/curse he discovered as a child, but
blocked it out when his father (Ossie Davis, I'm Not Rappaport) sent the
family dog to the pound.
Dolittle resurrects his special talent when he accidentally hits a dog
in his fancy doctor utility vehicle.  The fun ensues via dozens of cameo
voice appearances by seemingly every star in Hollywood.  Half of the fun
is trying to figure out who is who and the other half is trying to read
the credits while the people in front of you stand up and scratch their
asses for the better part of five minutes.
I'm not saying that Doctor Dolittle is bad or boring.  In fact, it's
quite funny for the first thirty minutes, but after that it's kind of
like beating a dead horse.  A dead talking horse.  Most of the good
stuff has already appeared in the trailer and most of it can be
classified as `toilet humor' or `potty jokes', which is my favorite.
Murphy is pretty bland in his somewhat confined roll, but more
disappointing is the direction of Betty Thomas (Private Parts, The Late
Shift), whose previous efforts are more of a fly-on-the-wall documentary
style features.  Perhaps the limited subject matter (from first time
writer Larry Levin and The Preacher's Wife scribe Nat Mauldin) has cost
Thomas her usually brilliantly sharp comic edge.  Dolittle seems very
flat and very by-the-numbers.  But, at least it's not a musical.
