Title
Review for Beneath the Valley of the Ultra-Vixens (1979)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
Beneath the Valley of the Ultra-Vixens (1979) 93m
If this manic, lurid, plotless sex romp had been the only thing ever made by 
writer-director-producer-editor Russ Meyer, it would no doubt have become an 
instant classic.  It still has, as far as its fans are concerned.  It turned 
out to be my introduction to Meyer, double-billed with SUPERVIXENS (talk 
about being thrown off the deep end) so I was able to enjoy it more than 
Meyer devotees who had already seen better films like MUDHONEY and FASTER, 
PUSSYCAT! KILL! KILL!  Here's the story: a narrator (Stuart Lancaster) 
introduces us to diverse characters populating Small Town, USA, who spend 
the next hour and a half jumping into bed (and rivers, and bathtubs, et al) 
with each other.  Most of the 'action' revolves around sexually frustrated 
Ken Kerr and unsatisfied wife Kitten Natividad (Meyer's girlfriend at the 
time) getting it on with a variety of partners.
What makes Meyer's films unique among other skin flicks is his dexterity as 
a film-maker, most notably his energetic editing which inserts 
flash-forwards and cross-cutting to humorous effect.  His characters are 
larger than life - oversexed, fervent, bitchy, and (if they're female) 
astonishingly proportioned.  He fills his frame with hicks and white trash 
and then films them at tilted angles against bright cartoony colors.  When 
Meyer first attracted a following, movie buffs figured that he was too smart 
a talent to be involved with grindhouse material.  However when he strayed 
from the independent scene and worked on the studio projects FANNY HILL, THE 
SEVEN MINUTES and BEYOND THE VALLEY OF THE DOLLS, the results fell short of 
expectations.  Meyer returned to indie adult fare, eventually calling it a 
day with BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRA VIXENS (even though a further 
'Vixens' episode was promised in the final credits).  To compare ULTRA 
VIXENS with a much earlier Meyer film, WILD GALS OF THE NAKED WEST, is to 
see a lack of stylistic development despite the gulf of years and 
experience.  Both are a series of lewd, comic vignettes filmed in the 
trademark Meyer fashion - the main difference is that ULTRA VIXENS is a lot 
more graphic.  Not only does Meyer up the ante on the sexual couplings but 
the breasts of the heroines are even bigger than in his previous films.  In 
his early days, Meyer was spoofing the genre; in ULTRA VIXENS he is spoofing 
himself (he even dubs in his own flatulence for the sex scenes!).  It's an 
amplification of everything that has gone before, but at least this time 
Meyer backs off from the rape and violence that was beginning to infuse his 
work (in BLACKSNAKE it had become so over-the-top it was more ludicrous than 
offensive).  In ULTRA-VIXENS the hot-tempered characters still have 
fistfights, but instead of blood they spill brightly colored paint.
Is ULTRA VIXENS worth seeing?  Yes: it is deliciously crude and well-made 
cinema.  But it's probably a good thing that Meyer quit when he did.  
There's a telling moment when he appears at the film's end, toting his 
camera about and wondering where his crew has gotten to.  Perhaps he knew he 
couldn't really top ULTRA VIXENS without descending straight into porn, 
which was fast becoming big business with the advent of home video 
technology.  Or maybe there's an even more insidious reason - with the 
proliferation of breast implants, every actress was becoming a potential 
Meyer performer, and the 'King of the Nudies' no doubt had too much of an 
eye for natural beauty to accept substitutes (the talents on display in the 
opening scene are highly suspect!).  In the meantime stacked women appeared 
in everything from teen comedies to music videos.  It wasn't censorship or 
economics that killed Russ Meyer.  It was silicone.


Author
Eric Walker
For a while, the Internet Movie Database had a link to a review at
film.com (now conveniently deleted) of Russ Meyer's FASTER, PUSSYCAT!
KILL!  KILL! that described that movie as so bad, it "approached the
level" of Ed Wood Jr.'s movies.  This review was an obvious admission of
two things: 1) The writer of that movie had never seen Ed Wood Jr.'s
movies; and 2) he didn't even bother to realize what Meyer's movies are
about. 
The films of Russ Meyer are a legend in themselves, largely (very large)
because of the qualities of his leading ladies: enormous breasts.  Meyer
is known by the title of "King Leer" because of his unabashed fascination
with gigantic bosoms. Whether his w omen are clothed (as in MOTOR PSYCHO
or the aforementioned FASTER PUSSYCAT) or baring all for the camera (as in
VIXEN, Meyer's biggest box office hit), you know that a Russ Meyer movie
is going to give you a show mammoth proportions...at least as far as c
hest size is concerned.
But if there's one thing that *can't* be said of Meyer's movies, it's that
they're demeaning to women.  The women in his movies are not only
possessed of Brobdingnagian mammaries of the type that men only dream of
-- they're possessed of zest and willpowe r that puts your typical
Hollywood leading lady to shame.  BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRA-VIXENS
gives us four women of this type, shown in the outrageous fashion that
only Meyer has succeeded in achieving: they're sex-crazed, exhilarating,
gigantic beau ties who perform with enough zeal to put any of today's
so-called "porn stars" to shame.  The sex in this movie is of a sort that
one could only dream of seeing in today's porn: the women are happy,
energetic, and they enjoy the hell out of what they're d oing.  His women
aren't passive, submissive sex toys; rather, they're towering beacons of
femininity who utterly dominate every scene they're in, with energetic
performances that force us to see that these are WOMEN who just happen to
be naked.  Your typi cal Russ Meyer woman can take on any ten men, smile,
and come back for more...and you know she means it. 
This is what gives Meyer's best movies their appeal: the acting may not be
the greatest, but the performers carry us along with sheer, lustful
energy.  And that's why watch Russ Meyer's movies: not for the plot, but
for the women! 
But having given all of this praise to Meyer's movies as a whole, what can
we say about BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRA-VIXENS as a movie?  Only that
it's lewd, crude, ridiculous, and often shockingly funny.  Meyer's movies
have always been comedies, thou gh as he approached the end of his
filmmaking era his movies became wilder, more outrageous, more blatant and
unbelievable...and in their best moments, gut-bustingly funny.  This movie
is one of his best efforts, simply because Meyer goes all out to give us a
sex comedy of unbridled proportions.  The plot, such as it is, is
bare-bones and simple: the hero and heroine (Kitten Natividad) are trying
to settle their differences.  She prefers simple, straight sex; while he
prefers a different approach that tur ns her (and just about everyone
else) off.  Kitten's attempts to "convert" her husband to the pleasures of
sex are the source of the movie's more outrageous situations, such as her
dressing up in a wig and performing at a strip club; or taking him to a de
ntist who happens to be a flaming queer, and ends up trapping him in a
closet while smashing at the door with a sledgehammer and a chainsaw. 
In the tradition of Meyer, all of the men in this movie are stupid idiots,
though the hero is a likable fool who just happens to be too stupid to
realize the trouble his wife is going through to get him into bed.  But
the true star of this film, of course , is Kitten Natividad.  She's naked
for about four-fifths of the entire movie, but more importantly she's
smiling throughout the entire movie.  Whether she's trying to seduce her
dumb-ass husband, or having a quickie with an alleged "fourteen-year-old"
to wn boy (yeah, right - he sure looks fourteen years old!), or even
succumbing to the charms of the hostess of the local radio Gospel hour,
Kitten proves herself to be the epitome of the Russ Meyer woman. 
A "narrator" pops up all through this film, providing a completely
"serious" (albeit tongue-in-cheek) explanation for our benefit of
everything happening in the film, and he even gets to play the role of
Peeping Tom himself (in much the same way that we, the audience, are
voyeurs).  Meyer says the narrator is his tribute to Thornton Wilder's
"Our Town," and the similarity between the two comes in the film's opening
speech, when the narrator explains that the entire sex-crazed population
of this Small Town consists of "normal people" and "everyday people."  In
Meyer's universe, Kitten Natividad is nothing exceptional; *all* the women
are as outgoing and satisfied as she is.  And quite frankly, if all the
women in our own real world were as outgoing as her character is, we'd
probably have a lot less incentive (and energy) to fight wars with each
other. 
Sure, the movie is silly and completely non-serious (with a jaw-harp
musical "soundtrack" reminding us not to take it seriously.  Sure, the
movie goes on too long and loses itself in the ending.  This isn't THE
AFRICAN QUEEN we're talking about here, and it isn't even BEYOND THE
VALLEY OF THE DOLLS (often touted as Meyer's "best" movie)...but the lack
of seriousness is what puts it head and shoulders above most of the other
porn films of its time, and especially above most of today's porn films. 
I person ally find most of the typical so-called "adult" films so
ridiculous and downright *boring* that it's difficult to imagine getting
turned on by those things, with their godawful "musical" scores and
silicone-inflated breasts and ugly kinks that have very l ittle to do with
true enjoyment of sex.  But BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRA-VIXENS is a
*fun* adult movie, which Meyer freely admits to making just for the hell
of it.  If I wanted to rent a porn movie, I'd rather watch one that wants
you to know that ev eryone is enjoying themselves.  After all, that's what
movies are all about: entertainment. 
And strangely enough, we can say the same thing about Ed Wood Jr.'s
movies, too.  Meyer's movies are technically more competent than PLAN 9
FROM OUTER SPACE, but he certainly does share a love for his subject
matter with Ed Wood.  These two filmmakers had (Meyer's not dead, but he's
retired) a true love for their work, and one thing you can say about their
films is that they are labors of love.  Is Russ Meyer as "bad" a filmmaker
as Ed Wood?  No, but he's certainly as dedicated. 
So if you ever want to watch a Russ Meyer movie, you can pop this one into
the VCR, turn off your brain...and turn on other parts of your anatomy. 
And laugh. 
