Title
Review for Nicholas and Alexandra (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Russian Revolution was not just the most turbulent period in
the history of that great nation. It was regarded as one of
the most important events in the global history, at least
until the fall of the Berlin Wall and subsequent degradation
of Communist ideology to one of the tragic mistakes of human
spirit. As such important event, Russian Revolution inspired
many filmmakers, including even some that contributed a lot
to the history of cinema as art, like Eisenstein. However,
due to ideological reasons, almost all of those films were
presenting the Revolution from the perspective of its
victors, Communists. Western cinema, that was suppose to
offer somewhat different picture, was mostly silent on the
subject. There were, of course, few exceptions, most notable
being celebrated DOCTOR ZHIVAGO by David Lean. Seven years
later, Franklin J. Schaffner directed NICHOLAS AND
ALEXANDRA, another epic that covers the same period, this
time from the perspective of the ultimate losers.
For almost three centuries, Romanov dynasty, using the iron
grip of oriental despotism, ruled Russia and witnessed the
rise of that country into the most powerful empire of
Europe. But, in the same time, Russia is also most backwards
empire in Europe, because autocratic regime bars any serious
reforms and leaves most of the people in utmost poverty and
deprived of basic rights. In 1904, when movie begins, Tsar
Nicholas II (Michael Jayston) is convinced that the things
are good as they are. Soon, the humiliating defeat in the
war with Japan brings the wrath of oppressed masses and
Nicholas reluctantly agrees to begin reforms. But the
attempt is half-hearted, because Nicholas is basically
weakling, unable to be act strongly because of cowardice,
yet unable to compromise because of pride. The woes of his
empire are secondary to the woes of his family - wife
Alexandra (Janet Suzman) and the children, including
haemophilic Alexis. Power vacuum is quickly becoming misused
by many shady characters, including demonic Rasputin (Tom
Baker). But, the real danger emerges only after Russia gets
sucked into World War One, and when the military disaster
shatters any authority of Tsarist regime. The ensuing chaos
would give opportunity to revolutionaries - first moderates
under Kerensky (John McEnery), than radicals under Lenin
(Michael Bryant) and his Bolsheviks.
Based on the novel by Richard K. Massie, screenplay by James
Goldman neatly condenses last thirteen years of Romanov's
rule into three hour long film. Direction by Franklin J.
Schaffner (known for epic films like PLANET OF THE APES and
PAPILLON) is also superb, with segments that balance well
between the intimate tragedy of the last Russian Tsar and
the even greater tragedy that looms in front of him, his
family and country. The film is perhaps less successful in
contrasting the luxurious, almost fairytale life of Tsar and
the utter poverty and misery of his subjects - the unwashed
masses are given role in rather short segments that are
sometimes not so subtle in illustrating the growing
discontent that would lead into revolution. The acting, on
the other hand, is superb. Apart from Jayston, we have many
fine actors in side roles, with Tom Baker being one of the
more humane Rasputins in the long series of actors that used
to portray that mystical personality. Also, the film doesn't
lack spectacle, but the biggest value is great care for
period details, with eye-pleasing production design and
costumes. The film ends brutally, which is somewhat
disappointing, but filmmakers are less guilty for that than
history itself.
