Title
Review for Ceux qui m'aiment prendront le train (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/f276090834325062882568f000095244?OpenDocument
The family, friends and lovers all rush to make it to the train. We're
thrown into a whirlwind of over a dozen characters all clamoring to get
on board, and we soon learn that they are en route to the funeral of the
mercurial painter, Jean-Baptiste. This man was a fixture in their lives
– a hostile cad with a miserable sense of humor who kept them attached
through sex, his vitality for life and encouragement to keep moving
forward, whether he meant it or not.
In a boldly theatrical touch, Jean-Baptiste demanded that those
gathering to pay their last respects must make a journey by train to his
final resting place in Limoges, knowing full well that the damage he has
done within their lives will come to a passionate, tumultuous head. As
if to mock them, his body is being transported in a small white car
driven on the road alongside the tracks.
Directed by Patrice Chereau, who seems to bring passion and vitality to
any film he touches (his previous film was Queen Margot), you have to
settle into his new film as though diving into the middle of a stormy
sea. The main characters gradually emerge, and as they begin to talk
about their loves, hopes, wants and needs, we quickly see that Those Who
Love Me Can Take the Train will be a microcosmos of restrained but grand
emotion.
The desire to be loved and the fear of death and humiliation are the
elements of classical drama, handled as familial revelations in this
movie. If it bears a passing similarity to The Celebration, it's only
those notions handled with a fresh and engaging eye. Chereau makes the
lonely waiting areas of railway stations and the expanses of graveyards
into the emotional battlegrounds of a John Ford western. There are no
guns here, though – these characters don't need them. Words will
suffice.
Jean-Baptiste is given a misanthropic run for his money in the form of
Francois, whose prevailing attitude toward relationships is summed up as
follows: "Loving people means putting up with their shit."
Unfortunately, the dead artist has the last laugh by placing Francois'
current dejected lover (Bruno Todeschini) on the same train as his
previous one, Bruno (young Sylvain Jacques). Bruno still hates Francois,
who deserted him upon learning that he (Bruno) was HIV positive.
Other potentially melodramatic subplots follow suit, including the
tormented relationship between recovering drug addicts Claire (Valéria
Bruni-Tedeschi) and Jean-Marie (Charles Berling), who Jean-Baptiste
played off of each other during the ten years of their marriage. Claire
and Jean-Marie can barely speak to each other without erupting into
horrible torrents of rage and fists.
Chereau plays out his scenes naturally, avoiding any trace of narrative
exposition in his screenplay. He allows scenes to play out without
turning into an overglorified soap opera. He also handles the gay and
straight characters without the fanfare of American films, simply
allowing them to be who they are.
Underscored by surprising doses of pop music (including Bjork and the
Doors), it feels surprisingly free of the self imposed confines of `art
house cinema'.  It has more in common with the feeling of watching
Breathless for the first time, a tingling excitement of seeing something
fresh and new.
Pascal Greggory lends intensity and a bitten back humanity to the role
of Francois. The legendary Jean-Louis Trintignant, best known to modern
audiences as the judge from Red, plays Jean-Baptiste's kind hearted
brother who has a surprisingly tender moment showing large women's shoes
to his transsexual friend, Viviane (Vincent Perez, a long way from The
Crow: City of Angels).
The film thankfully never allows itself to wallow in dramatic moments,
making each of them fleeting. The camera is quick to move among the
characters and spread its interest in everything happening around it. By
the time we have arrived at the beautiful final shots sweeping across
highways, fields, cemeteries and houses, we feel a sense of
interconnected lives which have touched each other, and are now drifting
far apart, perhaps a little wiser.
Director: Patrice Chereau
Producer: Charles Gassot
Writer: Patrice Chereau, Daniele Thompson, Pierre Trividic
Starring: Pascal Greggory, Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, Charles Berling,
Jean-Louis Trintignant, Vincent Prez, Bruno Todeschini
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.
