Title
Review for Joe Gould's Secret (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Edwin Jahiel
JOE GOULD'S SECRET (2000) *** 1/4  Directed by Stanley Tucci. Written 
by Howard A. Rodman, based on "Professor Sea Gull" and "Joe Gould's 
Secret" by Joseph Mitchell. Photography, Maryse Alberti. Editing, 
Suzy Elmiger. Production design, Andrew Jackness.Music, Evan Lurie. 
Produced by Elizabeth W. Alexander, Stanley Tucci and Charles 
Weinstock. Cast: Sir Ian Holm (Joe Gould), Stanley Tucci (Joe 
Mitchell), Hope Davis (Therese Mitchell), Sarah Hyland (Elizabeth 
Mitchell), Hallee Hirsh (Nora Mitchell), Celia Weston (Sarah), 
Patrick Tovatt (Harold Ross), Susan Sarandon (Alice Neel), Patricia 
Clarkson (Vivian Marquie), et al. A  USA Films/October Films release. 
108 minutes. R. (occasional language)
This is a true story. In the early 1940s, Joe Mitchell, a staff 
writer of the New Yorker Magazine encountered Joe Gould  - an 
eccentric, bohemian,  self-styled writer and genius, a bum, 
panhandling drunkard,  sponging, scrounging street person, strikingly 
ragged, ever-performing and grandstanding figure, the author - he 
claimed - of a monumental work-in-progress, "The Oral History of 
Time," and a man who spoke seagull language.
The latter trait became the title of a 1942 New Yorker profile by 
Mitchell, "Professor Sea Gull." It was a hit, which brought no riches 
to anyone yet made Gould famous in certain circles, notably the 
Greenwich Village sort. Gould's new celebrity opened doors for him, 
though there were no drastic changes in his personality or modus 
vivendi.
He kept referring to Joe Mitchell, a courtly, diffident Southerner 
married to a photographer and the father  of two charming girls, as 
"my biographer," a title that soon became a burden for Mitchell, 
just as the now-dependent-on-him Gould did.
The movie is a now flowing, now starts-and-spurts depiction of the 
relationship of the two Joes. Its epicenter is the portrait of Gould, 
whom Sir Ian Holm plays with in-your-face passion, demonic energy, 
ego-projection, explosiveness, and hamminess (appropriate here) that 
make it the most electric role of his career.
Eccentrics and/or bohemians are not uncommon, but genuine as well as 
lovable eccentrics are rare. Forget  the mythology of much 
literature, film and journalism which often depict them as the salt 
of the earth --when at most "spice of the earth" would have sufficed. 
Professed anti-conformism is not by itself enough to make great 
characters. Joe Gould is not great, but he does stand out, and in a 
sense, that's all that is needed to hold your attention today, in our 
era of homogenized sameness when individualism --notably on-screen 
figures -- is at a low ebb. (Beyond films and people, think of cars. 
 From the 30s to the 50s kids used to play the game of identifying 
each marque and model. The autos were so distinctive. Now they're 
like the proverbial peas in a pod).
Joe Gould reeks with personality while blurring the line between who 
is the real Joe and who the invented one. Hirsute, dishevelled and 
unkempt, must also reek with odors, the result of not bathing, not 
changing clothes, sleeping in flop houses or missions. 
Delicately--and unrealistically-- the film does not mention this 
point, and when Gould attends a party we don't see the other guests 
sniffing the air.
Joe Mitchell, on the contrary, is a breath of fresh air. Quiet and 
polite,  he suggests a bundle of complexities that do not come to the 
fore, a mystery of creativity, writer's blocks and problems that 
remain un-analyzed and seldom suggested. Of the two Joes he is the 
more interesting behind his near-but not-quite-placid facade. And 
indeed, in his lifetime, Mitchell produced one book, "Up in the Old 
Hotel," a collection of his writings. And after Gould died (1957) in 
a mental hospital, Mitchell did another New Yorker story on him in 
1964, "Joe Gould's Secret." That was the last thing he ever wrote, 
even though for the next 30 or so years, Mitchell dutifully came to 
the magazine office where he was heard typing away. The mystery is 
Mitchell, and not Gould.
Stanley Tucci plays Mitchell with extraordinary realism. He is not a 
star, an actor, or a player, but he is, in an unshowy fashion, a 
living, complex presence that is totally credible and implies a great 
deal more than meets the eye. Tucci lives his part with immense yet 
guarded understanding, and buttresses this with the great love Tucci 
has always professed for the New York of many decades ago. It shows 
all the time, with a certain sweetness that, curiously, goes as far 
as eliminating any references or allusions to the on-going World War 
II in the 40s.
In a time when film soundtracks consist of platitudes, grunts, jejune 
dialogue and noises from explosions or crashes, Tucci is kaking us a 
gift of a real talkie. And of a real adult work. I don't mean "adult" 
as in sex and expletives but as in grown-up. We ought to genuflect.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Actor/director/producer Stanley Tucci ("Big Night," "The
Impostors") specializes in gentle, cerebral, low-budget films about
male friendships and their consequences. This true story by Howard
Rodman celebrates the relationship between bohemian Joe Gould, who had
a gift of gab, and courtly Joseph Mitchell, who wrote his story in
"The New Yorker." Tucci plays the North Carolina-born Mitchell who
specialized in literary portraits of the denizens of New York City in
the 1940s, while Ian Holm is disheveled, cantankerous Joe Gould, a
homeless Harvard graduate sometimes known as Professor Seagull for his
penchant for reciting poetry in seagull cawing. Gould was also the
author of "The Oral History of the World," which he would offer up in
return for $2 contributions to "The Joe Gould Fund," since a man needs
whiskey, beer, and cigarettes if he's going to talk all
night. Mitchell made the demented panhandler, a tormented soul, into a
Greenwich Village celebrity. Mitchell was a gifted listener and his
wife, played by Hope Davis, was a noted photographer. Stanley Tucci
composes scenes in the style of the great street photographers of old
New York, but this film is not cinematic in scope, relying, instead,
on long, talky scenes as opposed to quick cuts. And the titular secret
is part of the enigmatic character study, not a mystery. Stanley Tucci
delivers a droll, deliberately understated performance, while Ian
Holm, not inappropriately, chews the scenery, drawing attention by
table-top proclamations like: "In the winter I'm a Buddhist; in the
summer, I'm a nudist." Susan Sarandon and Steve Martin do distracting
cameos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Joe Gould's Secret" is
a rambling, poignant, bittersweet 7, aimed at sedate art house
audiences.

Author
Scott Renshaw
JOE GOULD'S SECRET
(USA Films)
Starring:  Ian Holm, Stanley Tucci, Patricia Clarkson, Hope Davis.
Screenplay:  Howard A. Rodman, based on articles by Joseph Mitchell.
Producers:  Beth Alexander, Stanley Tucci and Charles Weinstock.
Director:  Stanley Tucci.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, brief nudity)
Running Time:  104 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     With JOE GOULD'S SECRET, Stanley Tucci continues his development as a
film-maker. 1996's BIG NIGHT, co-directed with Campbell Scott, was a
beautiful low-key gem, easily one of that year's best films. 1998's THE
IMPOSTORS, Tucci's debut as a solo director, was an amusing but slight
piece of episodic farce. Now comes JOE GOULD'S SECRET, a fact-based slice
of Americana that moseys along inertly in search of a compelling
point. Yes indeed, Tucci's development as a film-maker continues -- slowly
but steadily -- in reverse.
     Tucci's tale is drawn from the writings of 1950s "New Yorker" writer
Joseph Mitchell (played by Tucci) about one of his more fascinating
subjects. A low-key, Southern-born essayist, Mitchell learns of a colorful
character named Joe Gould (Ian Holm), a Harvard-educated homeless man held
in high regard by many members of the Gotham intelligentsia. Gould is said
to be working on an oral history of the people of New York, a magnum opus
of common man commentary and observational narrative Gould says runs well
over a million words. Mitchell turns Gould into the subject of one of his
profile pieces, turning Gould into an even bigger bohemian celebrity in
the process. But that's not the end of the story for Mitchell, who finds
that Gould has become unusually attached to his "biographer."
     There's no question that the eccentric Gould makes for just as
interesting a character today as he would have made 40 years ago. It just
never appears that Tucci knows exactly what to do with that character. He
fiddles about with analogies between Josephs Gould and Mitchell as
deliberate writers and human chroniclers, suggesting the very fine line
between those who can manage their neuroses and those who can't. He toys
with notions of celebrity, touching on the absurdity of those who become
famous for being famous. He nods at the ever-popular fine line between
genius and madness. And that's about all he does with any of his themes --
he fiddles and toys and nods, leaving JOE GOULD'S SECRET to drift along
with little more than its value as historical curiosity to hold it all
together.
     Mostly, Tucci indulges Ian Holm as Gould. It's the kind of role that
screams for Oscar attention, infinitely more flamboyant than Holm's
devastating turn in THE SWEET HEREAFTER yet infinitely less deserving of
praise. Sometimes Holm nails the sad soul of the exhibitionist Gould, and
even when the performance isn't perfect it's still plenty interesting to
watch. The same is true of Tucci's performance, which takes on an
interesting edge as Mitchell finds himself plainly annoyed by his
inability to close the book on his Gould story exactly when he wants
to. The interplay between Holm and Tucci makes for most of the best
moments in JOE GOULD'S SECRET, but there's always the nagging sense that
this should have been more than a showy character study.
     Every once in a while, Tucci makes the kind of interesting
film-making choices that show what he's capable of. There are a few crafty
sequences in which characters duck in and out of the frame, the individual
speakers subjugated to the conversation and the space between them. There
are also dozens of tiny distractions that make hard to view JOE GOULD'S
SECRET as more than a potentially provocative missed opportunity. It's
ironic that the story chides notions of celebrity, then casts Susan
Sarandon and Steve Martin in cameo appearances. It's even more ironic
that, in a story of artistic indecision, Tucci can't quite settle on a
solid center for his film. JOE GOULD'S SECRET is the sort of film you find
fitfully interesting while never really finding it gripping. It found me
lamenting the direction Tucci's behind-the-camera career has taken,
increasingly wondering whether Campbell Scott might have been the real
talent behind BIG NIGHT.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

JOE GOULD'S SECRET (director: Stanley Tucci; screenwriters: Howard A.
Rodman/based on "Professor Sea Gull" and "Joe Gould's Secret" by Joseph
Mitchell; cinematographer: Maryse Alberti; editor: Suzy Elmiger; cast:
Sir Ian Holm (Joe Gould), Stanley Tucci (Joe Mitchell), Hope Davis
(Therese Mitchell), Sarah Hyland (Elizabeth Mitchell), Hallee Hirsh
(Nora Mitchell), Celia Weston (Sarah), Patrick Tovatt (Harold Ross),
Susan Sarandon (Alice Neel), Patricia Clarkson (Vivian Marquie), Steve
Martin (Publisher), Max Gordon (David Wohl), Sadie Gordon (Julie
Halston), 2000)
Joe Mitchell (Tucci) is a transplanted southerner living in New York
City in the 1940s, earning his keep by writing for The New Yorker
magazine. He speaks in a hesitatingly slow, thick southern drawl, and is
a very modest, inward man. He is always the gentleman, and appears to be
vulnerable to criticism, even unduly concerned when his elementary
school-aged daughter thinks one of the stories he is working on is
boring. When his editor Mr. Ross (Tovatt) compliments him on a story he
turned in, he seems too shy to accept the praise without stammering. He
is comfortably ensconced into his New York Greenwich Village apartment,
living there with his wife Therese (Hope Davis) and his two young
daughters.
Joe's life will be altered forever when he decides to write a feature
story on a homeless, Harvard educated, bohemian, the legendary Joe Gould
(Sir Ian Holm). Gould is a disheveled, raving madman, living off his wit
and charm to get handouts from those in the Village sympathetic to his
plight, in what he playfully calls the Joe Gould Fund that he has
established to take care of his basest needs. He has dedicated his life
for the last 25 years or so to writing a literary tome entitled "The
Oral History of Our Time." So far he has supposedly written over a
million-words to record his essays and the ordinary conversations people
have. He claims to have stored most of the writings in the basement of a
chicken farm in Long Island, writings that are composed in a school
composition book. But when asked to produce these writings by Mitchell,
he can only come up with two books of essays.
His life is a difficult one, where his level of discomfort is beyond
reasonable expectations. He is also too gabby, too drunk, too much of a
liar, and cannot discipline himself to write as much as he talks. But he
is not dull. At one Poetry Society recital, he propels himself onstage
to recite his comical zen ditty as an opposite response to all the
stuffy poems from the society members: "In the winter I'm a Buddhist, In
the summer I'm a nudist."
All the film's energy goes into Ian Holm's stellar performance. Gould is
personified as a fiery maniac and first-class exhibitionist, who when
painted by Alice Neel (Sarandon), an artist who is quite taken with him
as a genuine bohemian character, she nevertheless unromantically paints
his portrait by giving him three penises, as she says one won't be
enough for him. He does most of his performing at a few local Village
bars, where he is given free drinks. The actual bar he hung out in was
The Minetta Tavern, where he was viewed as a tourist attraction.
Joe Mitchell had great success with the 1942 story he did on Gould,
entitled Professor Sea Gull, where he wrote about the strange man in
terms of being a folk hero, telling how he can communicate with seagulls
and about his history tome. The magazine story made him a local
celebrity.
Mitchell tells how he first met Gould in a Greek luncheonette, where the
owner lets him have a free bowl of soup, whereby Gould insanely pours in
a whole bottle of ketchup.
After Mitchell finished the well-received story, he couldn't get rid of
Gould, who made himself a nuisance by visiting his office daily. They
then went their separate ways. In 1964, Mitchell wrote Joe Gould's
Secrets, which had a more downbeat tone to it than his first Gould
story. Strangely enough, he seemed to have caught something of Gould's
madcap psychological state himself or became enveloped by Gould's
doppelganger, because he never was able to write again for the magazine,
though he still reported to work there until he died in 1996.
Joe Gould after living in countless homeless shelters and on the street,
died as a pauper and in a mentally unbalanced state at Pilgrim State
Hospital on Long Island in 1957, with his tome never found, as Joe
Mitchell knew it wouldn't be.
This is a wonderful screen adaption, as scripted by Howard A. Rodman,
who caught the nostalgic and generous mood of Greenwich Village of the
1940s. Ian Holm's performance is brilliant and sparkling, one of his
best in his long and distinguished career. Stanley Tucci mirrors the
inward struggle Gould has in writing down what he feels, even though
they have completely opposite personalities. There's gold to be mined in
this story about understanding writers who can't write anymore and of
characters who can't stop themselves from destroying their gift of life.
This cautionary story pictures a city that has changed so much from Joe
Gould's time, that a talented eccentric nowadays should expect to
receive no help from a city that is becoming less interested in helping
its weirdo artists or its mentally ill, instead turning its attention to
more mundane concerns.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c0d6e455b2f67551882568ca005e094f?OpenDocument
Produced by Beth Alexander and Stanley Tucci
Starring Ian Holm, Stanley Tucci, Patricia Clarkson, Hope Davis, Steve
Martin, and Susan Sarandon
 When Mel Brooks played the Louis XVI in The History of the World, Part
I, he often commented, `It's good to be the King.'  Joe Gould, a
voluntarily homeless man, thinks that it's good to be the Bum and it
shows.
 Joe Gould spends his days in Greenwich Village, making notes on the
subject of humanity.  He is compiling an oral history of mankind, a
series of transcripts of conversations and essays on the nature of man.
He does this by writing at every opportunity in composition books and by
mooching off of rich Beatniks during the 50s in New York City.  Amongst
his supporters: painter Alice Neel (Susan Sarandon), E.E. Cummings,
gallery owner Vivian Marquie (Patricia Clarkson) and publishing
executive Charlie Duell (Steve Martin).  These supporters frequently
allow Joe Gould to stay at their homes, as well as contribute small sums
of money to the Joe Gould fund.
 One day, Gould catches the attention of a New Yorker writer from North
Carolina, Joe Mitchell (Stanley Tucci), who writes an article about Mr.
Gould in his magazine, and, by consequence, is forced into the role of
being Gould's best friend.
 Per one's expectations from such a bizarre plot, Joe Gould's Secret
proves to be blessed by being funny, mildly touching, and highly in
touch with the Beatnik atmosphere that was prevalent in New York during
the 50s.  The flip side to this coin is that Joe Gould's Secret is
cursed by being somewhat corny, slightly melodramatic, and very
pretentious (as most of the Beatniks were).  Holm will launch into a
hilarious speech one second and a soliloquy the next.  Tucci will be a
serious journalist one minute and a recovering hick the next.
 The movie simply cannot make up its mind.
 Holm (The Sweet Hereafter) acts up a storm, per his usual.  Tucci, with
his trench coat and newsman's hat, looks like he used his wardrobe from
Winchell.  Sarandon is bland, as is Martin, who appears briefly in this
movie seemingly only to prove that The Spanish Prisoner was not a
fluke.  Tucci's own work behind the camera is decent, but, as is par for
the film, is not noteworthy.  Big Night it ain't.
 Joe Gould's secret really isn't that hard to figure out, but the film
is entertaining enough that it doesn't quite head down that road to
being terrible.  Thus figuring Joe Gould's secret is like the crossword
in the New York Post.  You'll finish it, but its so easy that it's a
sort of hollow victory.  But hey, at least you had fun.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
