Title
Review for Dellamorte Dellamore (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CEMETERY MAN is an English language horror story by Italian 
director Michele Soavi.  It tries to be erotic, funny, supernatural, and 
shocking.  It succeeds with the later.  This is a gross picture with few 
redeeming features.  I can not think of them now, but I am sure there 
must have been some.
     CEMETERY MAN tells the story of Francesco Dellamorte (Rupert 
Everett from DUNSTON CHECKS IN) who is the watchman at the Buffalora 
Cemetery.  He is assisted by an enormous and gross half-wit known as 
Gnaghi (Francois Hadji Lazaro).  I hope never to see this terrible actor 
again.  Watching him is painful.
     Dellamorte has a problem.  As soon as his guests arrive, they do 
not politely stay buried.  Instead they rise from their coffins, and he 
must split their heads open to make them stay dead.  The is done with 
brains exposed.  Best to eat before you see the show.
     Dellamorte is a philosopher and a playboy.  He muses that, "at a 
certain point in your life you realize you know more dead people than 
living."  An intellectual he is not although he is a college graduate.  
He says that, "I haven't read more than two books in my whole life.  One 
I never finished, and the other is the phone book."  This is one of the 
few lines in the script by Giovanni Romoli, and based on the book by 
Tiziano Sclavi, that is actually funny.  
     Most of the humor is macabre sight gags.  If you find extreme 
grossness humorous, you may like it.  To me when Gnaghi eats with food 
pouring out of his mouth onto his chin and clothes, I was not impressed.  
When he constantly drools, I do not find it cute.  The low point of the 
humor is that when Gnaghi meets girls that turn him on, he throws up on 
them, literally.
     Let me describe a typical scene so you get an idea as to what this 
uniquely bad film is like.  One of three women known only as "she" and 
all played by Anna Falchi takes Dellamorte into an ossuary.  There she 
kisses him but insists they kiss each other only through thick flowing 
veils.  A skeleton pulls her blouse partially off, and then she takes 
Dellamorte to make love on top of her recently buried husband's grave.  
Supernatural small torches like large insects keep interrupting them.  
     The scene switches to a view from inside the husband's coffin.  He 
pushes the top open and steps out of his grave to attack them.  He has 
large vines growing through his body.  He starts realistically chewing 
off large sections of skin from his wife's body.  Dellamorte stops this 
by grabbing a cross and splitting the husband's head open with brains 
and blood flying.  Sickening enough for you?
     As Dellamorte puts it to Gnaghi toward the end, "pass this town is 
the rest of the world.  What do you think the rest of the world looks 
like?"  I take just the opposite view and wonder why the rest of the 
world had to look at this town through this movie.  There are people who 
love these Italian blends of horror and comedy, but I now know that I am 
not one of them if this monstrosity is representative.
     CEMETERY MAN runs 1:40.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, some bad 
language, and lots of gore and violence.  I would not want my teenager 
to see it.  I suggest everyone avoid this show like the plague.  I give 
it 1/2 of a * only because did not quite reach the threshold of pain I 
reserve for zero star films, but it did come close.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Brian Matherly
Retitling of the Italian black comedy/horror Dellamorte Dellamore
(meaning "of Death and Love") and based on the novel by Tiziano Sclavi,
Cemetery Man features Rupert Everett as Francesco Dellamorte, operator
of Buffalora Cemetery.  Whenever someone new is buried in the cemetery,
seven days later they return from the grave, hungry for flesh.
Dellamorte and his mentally handicapped assistant, Gnaghi
(Hadji-Lazaro), must shoot them in the head and rebury them in order to
keep them from doing any harm.  Between replantings, Dellamorte tries to
make his best friend's seemingly perfect life miserable, most of the
younger townspeople taunt him because they think he is impotent, and the
mayor won't listen to his plight involving the graveyard. 
When the most incredibly beautiful woman Dellamorte has ever seen (Anna
Falchi) appears at his workplace to mourn the passing of her
substantially older husband, he immediately falls in love.  She rebukes
him at first, but finally warms up to him, and they end up making love
on her dead husband's grave ("I never kept any secrets from him" she
explains when questioned as to why).  Unfortunately for her, it's been
seven days since her husband's passing, and he returns from the grave
taking a large bite out of her arm before Dellamorte manages to ram a
large metal cross through his head.  Dellamorte incorrectly thinks she
is dead, so when she seemingly comes back to life he shoots her, again
incorrectly thinking it has killed her when all it did was graze her. 
Dellamorte's life then turns upside down more than it already was.  His
assistant falls in love with still-living severed head of the mayor's
daughter, a busload of dead boy scouts comes back to life (still trying
to rub two sticks together!), and two women who look exactly like his
previous love suddenly enter his life.  Dellamorte snaps and kills the
teenagers who taunted him and three prostitutes.  All of the murders get
blamed on his best friend, who confesses to those crimes and the murder
of his own wife and children because he also snaps under the constant
barrage of pessimism from Dellamorte.  When Dellamorte tries to leave
town to get away from all the madness, what he finds humbles but
doesn't surprise him.  
Cemetery Man is currently available only on videocassette and laserdisc,
neither of which is letterboxed, effectively ruining many of the jokes
and impressive visuals that were seen on the big screen.  Director
Michele Soavi uses the gothic statuary and shadows of the cemetery to
great effect, and some of his wonderful visually striking imagery is
lost in the transfer.  A Japanese import was available letterboxed, but
unfortunately, is no longer in print.  It's a shame a decent letterboxed
copy isn't available, because a movie this great deserves better. 
Unceremoniously dumped into theaters with a poor advertising campaign
that inaccurately reflected the tone of the film, Cemetery Man was
virtually ignored at the box office, then was unceremoniously dumped
onto home video.  
Cemetery Man was shot and dubbed in English (as many Italian films are)
using the original actors, who just post synched every line, so those of
you who don't prefer to read subtitles have nothing to worry about.  I
highly recommend this quirky little film to anyone looking for something
a little different in his or her movie watching experience, especially
if you are tired of the milieu of teen horror romps that Hollywood has
churned out in the wake of Scream.  It's nice to find a well written
horror film that can combine gore, comedy, and human psychology as
deftly as this film does.  Originally presented in 1.85:1 (but good luck
finding a copy of that anywhere). 
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Bryant Frazer
Directed by Michele Soavi
Written by Gianni Romoli (based on Tiziano Sclavi's DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE)
Cinematography by Mauro Marchetti
Music by Manuel de Sica
Starring Rupert Everett, Anna Falchi, and Francois Hadji-Lazaro
Italy (English language), 1994
U.S. Release: 1996
        Francesco Dellamorte has a bit of a problem. He's the live-in
watchman at Buffalora Cemetery in northern Italy, where the corpses are
crawling back out of their graves after spending a mere week or so in the
ground. As you can imagine, that's something of a nuisance, but if he
reports it to the authorities, he's certain of one thing -- they'll shut
down the cemetery to investigate, and Francesco will be out of a job. 
Since he can't have that happening, he keeps a loaded pistol with him,
which he carries to the door whenever he answers a knock. It's usually
just one of them coming back, and a single bullet blown solidly through
the head -- where have you gone, George Romero? -- takes a zombie down
easily enough. For a misanthrope like Francesco, it's a pretty good gig. 
        Surrounded by death, and with only the clumsy and deformed Gnaghi
for company, Francesco's life is pretty stable until he falls for a
mourning widow. Anna Falchi plays the object of his desire (known in the
credits as "She"), whom he seduces in the Buffalora Ossuary (where the
bones of the dead are deposited); the two indulge their strange affections
on her poor husband's grave.  Naturally, the old man comes back. The woman
dies in her spouse's ensuing fit of jealous violence, and Francesco is
stricken with despair.  Naturally, She comes back again. And again. 
        That's only the surface of the remarkable DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE. 
You might expect even a stylish horror director to milk these situations
for all they're worth, but Michele Soavi knows that zombie hijinks have
been done to death by such precocious directors as Sam Raimi and Peter
Jackson.  Accordingly, the movie never stops moving, twisting and turning
its way to an oddly existential climax. The scenario, written for the
screen by Gianni Romoli from a comic book scenario by Tiziano Sclavi,
concentrates on the human characters rather than the zombies, and gives as
much play to turmoil of the spirit as it does to the carnage that spills
from the body. The world of Francesco Dellamorte runs parallel to George
Romero's zombie apocalypse. Like Romero's trilogy, and quite unlike many
of its imitators, DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE is a zombie movie with character. 
        I have to wonder what American audiences are expecting on the way
into this picture, given that the normally staid October Films has created
a mild cheeseball of an ad campaign to push the film into U.S. theaters. 
"Zombies, Guns and Sex, OH MY!" reads the tagline, stripped across poster
art that may lead audiences to believe that CEMETERY MAN is actually a
cheap horror flick from the 50s or 60s. I find it hard to believe that
this campaign will actually attract a discriminating audience, but
stranger things have happened, and we'll just have to see. Rest assured
that CEMETERY MAN/DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE is a confident, creepy little
horror film with a winning sense of humor, a sure feel for outrageous
imagery, and a healthy mean streak. 
        As played by Rupert Everett (READY TO WEAR), Francesco is a misfit
and a nihilist. (The main character in the Dylan Dog comic book series
originated by Sclavi is based on Everett, and his casting here is
something of a coup.) He's also a remarkable Everyman who commands our
attention and our sympathy as he slouches toward the inevitable. Francois
Hadji Lazaro's Gnaghi is by turns irritating and pathetic. (You may have
seen Lazaro as the meanest-looking cyclops in THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.)
By the time he develops a decidedly unhealthy crush on the mayor's
daughter (and the mayor's daughter's disembodied head), Lazaro has invited
viewers to inhabit his character, and the results are unsettling. The
relationship is consummated at the end of the film, but these two are
shown early on to be classic codependents. Along those lines, the movie
exhibits a well-developed sense of humor that Goes a long way toward
eliciting the viewer's sympathy. The characters aren't very pleasant, but
you start to identify with them in spite of yourself. By the time the
movie is over, their predicament almost seems to take on mythic
proportions. 
        Herein seems to lie the problem for many American critics, who
have been less than impressed with what may be a vigorous political
allegory.  I guess I'm a little slow, but I didn't understand right away
that the Italian citizens who are zombified -- a disquietingly fascist
troupe of boy scouts, Buffalora's highest ranking incompetent bureaucrat
-- may represent the dead archetypes of Italian society come back to haunt
the living. Instead, I fell for the grisly comedy and the sharp cinematic
style, which references such influential pictures as VERTIGO and ONCE UPON
A TIME IN THE WEST (on which Soavi's progenitor Dario Argento received a
story credit). And while that bastion of genre reporting, CINEFANTASTIQUE,
had decidedly unkind words for the film's alleged misogyny, I read it
instead as a look inside poor Dellamorte's head. Francesco, as noted
above, is an equal opportunity curmudgeon, and if She is treated as the
most maddening of all the characters, it's because she is the object of
Francesco's most maddening obsessions. At the same time, I think these
critics complain a little too much. Stephen Holden, writing in THE NEW
YORK TIMES, criticized the film's decision to make Francesco impotent --
missing the important joke, which is that he's really not impotent at all,
despite the rumor around town (you have to wonder if Holden left partway
through). 
        The cemetery itself is a triumph of production design, an
inhabited world with curious nooks and crannies (the Ossuary, Gnaghi's
cellar in the watchman's house). It's also a representation of Francesco's
state of mind, and the essence of the movie rests in the ways he discovers
to break away from it. Gory and playful, darkly humorous and flippantly
bleak, Soavi's film is a joyride through a sullen state of mind. After
Francesco takes his revenge on the world outside, and sets himself to
escaping from the life he's made, DELLAMORTE DELLAMORE finally offers up
its own definition of madness. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Rupert Everett, Francois Hadji-Lazaro, Anna Falchi, 
      Fabiana Formica, Anton Alexander, Mickey Knox, Stefano Masciarelli
Director: Michele Soavi
Producers: Tilde Corsi, Giovanni Romoli, and Michele Soavi
Screenplay: Gianni Romoli, based on DELLAMORTE, DELLAMORE by 
      Tiziano Sclavi
Cinematography: Mauro Marchetti
Music: Manuel De Sica
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     If MEET THE FEEBLES wasn't your cup of tea, NIGHT OF THE LIVING 
DEAD grossed you out, and you didn't see the humor in THE EVIL DEAD, 
then CEMETERY MAN is definitely not for you.  On the other hand, if you 
don't mind horrific, grotesque comedy that mixes the gore of George 
Romero and Dario Argento with         the quixotic irreverence of Monty Python 
and DELICATESSEN, CEMETERY MAN provides the opportunity for a funny, 
strange time at the movies.  This Italian picture, directed by Michele 
Soavi, is an all-English effort with plenty of violence (wall-to-wall 
blood-and-gore), sex (occasionally with dead bodies), and general 
weirdness.  By the end of the one-hundred minute feature, you'll either 
be totally revolted or smirking at the inventiveness and audacity of the 
whole thing. CEMETERY MAN recalls Bob Balaban's 1993 feature, MY 
BOYFRIEND'S BACK, but with a much nastier edge.
     British actor Rupert Everett (the Prince of Wales in THE MADNESS OF 
KING GEORGE) has the title role of Francesco Dellamorte (literally 
Francesco of Death), the "Cemetery Man."  In Francesco's town of 
Buffalora, the dead don't stay dead.  Seven days after burial, they come 
back, clawing their way out of their graves, looking for flesh to eat.  
Francesco has been employed by the local mayor (Stefano Masciarelli) to 
live in the cemetery and dispatch the zombies before they escape into 
the community.  The only way to eliminate a ghoulish "returnee" is to 
destroy its skull.  Francesco's favorite weapon is a pistol, but he's 
not above using any other handy object.  The matter-of-fact manner in 
which he eliminates the zombies provides a source of constant humor.
     CEMETERY MAN is loosely divided into three episodes.  The first 
involves Francesco's love affair with a beautiful widow (Anna Falchi) 
who visits the grave of her husband every day.  The second is about the 
affection for a bodiless head exhibited by Francesco's sidekick, a mute 
named Gnaghi (Francois Hadji-Lazaro).  In the third, an unbalanced 
Francesco starts killing living people, then becomes enraged when 
someone else takes credit for his murders.
     Some of the comedy is inspired -- in a deranged way, of course.  
Those who only enjoy films like SENSE AND SENSIBILITY aren't likely to 
venture near a venue showing CEMETERY MAN.  For this movie to come 
across as something more than an exercise in gratuitous gore, it's 
necessary to embrace CEMETERY MAN's bizarre subject matter.  There are 
plenty of laughs for those who view the film in the intended spirit.  
Plus, there's a fair amount of artistry lurking just beneath the surface 
-- Soavi's love for the horror genre shows in the composition of almost 
every scene (although he uses the camera-on-a-lazy-Susan rotation effect 
a few times too many).
     Despite its boldness, CEMETERY MAN falls considerably short of 
being a masterpiece.  The film runs out of comic momentum about two-
thirds of the way through, and has to lurch and stumble towards the 
finish line.  Soavi can only sustain the humor for so long before it 
starts becoming repetitive.  CEMETERY MAN never really ends -- it just 
stops, and the scenes leading up to the closing credits are easily the 
movie's weakest.  If you left the film twenty minutes early, you 
wouldn't miss much.
     So, do I recommend CEMETERY MAN?  Only to a select few.  This is 
definitely not a mainstream motion picture, and its capacity to offend 
may startle unprepared movie-goers. Personally, I have nothing against a 
film that plays such intentionally extreme, over-the-top horror for 
laughs.  CEMETERY MAN could have been better, but it more easily could 
have been a lot worse.  The best thing I can say abut Michele Soavi's 
film is that it elicited more laughter from me than about 90% of 
Hollywood's bland comedies.  And it's refreshing to see, if only for one 
film, a stylish tastelessness that swims against the prevailing tide of 
political correctness.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
From berardin@bc.cybernex.net Mon Jun 10 15:04:37 EDT 1996
Article: 3655 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.att.com!not-for-mail
From: berardin@bc.cybernex.net (James Berardinelli)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: CEMETERY MAN (1994)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 10 Jun 1996 18:25:26 GMT
Organization: -
Lines: 94
Sender: ecl@mtcts1.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: ecl@mtcts1.att.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: berardin@bc.cybernex.net (James Berardinelli)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtcts2.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #05426
Keywords: author=Berardinelli
Originator: ecl@mtcts2
Status: RO
Cast: Rupert Everett, Francois Hadji-Lazaro, Anna Falchi, 
      Fabiana Formica, Anton Alexander, Mickey Knox, Stefano Masciarelli
Director: Michele Soavi
Producers: Tilde Corsi, Giovanni Romoli, and Michele Soavi
Screenplay: Gianni Romoli, based on DELLAMORTE, DELLAMORE by 
      Tiziano Sclavi
Cinematography: Mauro Marchetti
Music: Manuel De Sica
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     If MEET THE FEEBLES wasn't your cup of tea, NIGHT OF THE LIVING 
DEAD grossed you out, and you didn't see the humor in THE EVIL DEAD, 
then CEMETERY MAN is definitely not for you.  On the other hand, if you 
don't mind horrific, grotesque comedy that mixes the gore of George 
Romero and Dario Argento with         the quixotic irreverence of Monty Python 
and DELICATESSEN, CEMETERY MAN provides the opportunity for a funny, 
strange time at the movies.  This Italian picture, directed by Michele 
Soavi, is an all-English effort with plenty of violence (wall-to-wall 
blood-and-gore), sex (occasionally with dead bodies), and general 
weirdness.  By the end of the one-hundred minute feature, you'll either 
be totally revolted or smirking at the inventiveness and audacity of the 
whole thing. CEMETERY MAN recalls Bob Balaban's 1993 feature, MY 
BOYFRIEND'S BACK, but with a much nastier edge.
     British actor Rupert Everett (the Prince of Wales in THE MADNESS OF 
KING GEORGE) has the title role of Francesco Dellamorte (literally 
Francesco of Death), the "Cemetery Man."  In Francesco's town of 
Buffalora, the dead don't stay dead.  Seven days after burial, they come 
back, clawing their way out of their graves, looking for flesh to eat.  
Francesco has been employed by the local mayor (Stefano Masciarelli) to 
live in the cemetery and dispatch the zombies before they escape into 
the community.  The only way to eliminate a ghoulish "returnee" is to 
destroy its skull.  Francesco's favorite weapon is a pistol, but he's 
not above using any other handy object.  The matter-of-fact manner in 
which he eliminates the zombies provides a source of constant humor.
     CEMETERY MAN is loosely divided into three episodes.  The first 
involves Francesco's love affair with a beautiful widow (Anna Falchi) 
who visits the grave of her husband every day.  The second is about the 
affection for a bodiless head exhibited by Francesco's sidekick, a mute 
named Gnaghi (Francois Hadji-Lazaro).  In the third, an unbalanced 
Francesco starts killing living people, then becomes enraged when 
someone else takes credit for his murders.
     Some of the comedy is inspired -- in a deranged way, of course.  
Those who only enjoy films like SENSE AND SENSIBILITY aren't likely to 
venture near a venue showing CEMETERY MAN.  For this movie to come 
across as something more than an exercise in gratuitous gore, it's 
necessary to embrace CEMETERY MAN's bizarre subject matter.  There are 
plenty of laughs for those who view the film in the intended spirit.  
Plus, there's a fair amount of artistry lurking just beneath the surface 
-- Soavi's love for the horror genre shows in the composition of almost 
every scene (although he uses the camera-on-a-lazy-Susan rotation effect 
a few times too many).
     Despite its boldness, CEMETERY MAN falls considerably short of 
being a masterpiece.  The film runs out of comic momentum about two-
thirds of the way through, and has to lurch and stumble towards the 
finish line.  Soavi can only sustain the humor for so long before it 
starts becoming repetitive.  CEMETERY MAN never really ends -- it just 
stops, and the scenes leading up to the closing credits are easily the 
movie's weakest.  If you left the film twenty minutes early, you 
wouldn't miss much.
     So, do I recommend CEMETERY MAN?  Only to a select few.  This is 
definitely not a mainstream motion picture, and its capacity to offend 
may startle unprepared movie-goers. Personally, I have nothing against a 
film that plays such intentionally extreme, over-the-top horror for 
laughs.  CEMETERY MAN could have been better, but it more easily could 
have been a lot worse.  The best thing I can say abut Michele Soavi's 
film is that it elicited more laughter from me than about 90% of 
Hollywood's bland comedies.  And it's refreshing to see, if only for one 
film, a stylish tastelessness that swims against the prevailing tide of 
political correctness.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
