Title
Review for Young Poisoner's Handbook, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK is a wickedly funny black comedy
that is inspired by a real mass murderer, but is a fictionalized story.
The movie takes place in the 1960s in England.  On a black comedy
scale, this show is much darker than the classic HAROLD AND MAUDE.
Here have 14 year old Graham Young (Hugh O'Conor) who is a scientific
wizard and inventor who loves to spend his time with his test tubes.
The problem is that his specialty is poisons, and he eventually decides
that, "I want to be the greatest poisoner the world has ever seen."
     Two minutes into the film with the eclectic sets (Maria Djurkovic)
plus the wide eyed expressions on Graham's face, and you know this show
is going to be great.  The film is a mixture of macabre and great
comedy.  It has a strongly developed plot and script (Jeff Rawle and
Benjamin Ross) that races along and yet that are many humorous side
stories.
     Graham gets kicked out of the library for attempting to get
forbidden books on poison, but a librarian helps him out.  She turns
out to like to stamp the guys she picks up with the library stamp.  In
one scene, he stops reading his poison books, and he and a friend show
each other exactly where she has stamped them.  From the position of
his friend's stamp, he realizes that his friend is clearly in the lead
with her.  He eliminates this competition by trying out his first batch
of poison on him.  Poison makes you vomit, and all the vomiting scenes
in the show are too realistic for my taste.
     Graham lives with his father Fred (Roger Lloyd Pack), stepmother
Molly (Ruth Sheen) and sister Winnie (Charlotte Coleman).  One day, his
stepmother finds dirty magazines in the house so she forces him to take
a bath while she scrubs furiously, saying, "You contaminate everything
you touch.  I'm going to scrub you till you are raw."  After that, he
decides he is going to kill her.  He declares, "I had decided the
direction my scientific career was to take and there could be no
turning back."
     Eventually, Graham winds up in Harshhurst, which is a hospital for
the criminally insane.  He continues to be devious and worms his way
into being treated by the famous psychotherapist Dr. Ernst Ziegler
(Antony Sher) since if Dr. Ziegler says Graham is cured, he can get
out.  This section of the movie is as fascinating as that of the
family.  The movie ends with yet another section even more involving.
Although there is an excellent supporting cast, I think the performance
by Hugh O'Conor is outstanding and outshines all the others.  He can do
more with his eyes that most actors can do in ten pages of dialog.
     The director (Benjamin Ross) is in absolute control.  The film has
a strong presence, and moves with an energy and fluidity that is a
marvel to watch.  The cinematographic images by Hubert Taczanowski
added to the strangeness of the experience.  He is great at close-ups
of inanimate objects and at zooming in unexpectedly on his subjects.
The lighting has faces with deep shadow on one side and the harsh
incandescent glow of cheap bulbs on the other.  There is an abundance
of music (Robert Lane and Frank Strobel) in the show and has just the
right blend of deviousness.  One time trumpets will wail and the next
time chimes will ring.  The instruments change but the strange rhythms
keep flowing.  This is consistent with a movie that has a highly
developed mood.  The show is a cornucopia of effective cinematic
elements.  A tour de force and a fascinating story.
     THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK runs a quick 1:39 thanks to fast
paced editing by Anne Sopel.  It is not rated, but would probably get
an R.  It has a little bad language, no sex, nudity only in pictures,
but some scenes are quite horrific and can be hard to watch.  These
include the vomit ones, the ones of his mother bleeding at the mouth
while brushing her teeth, people's hair falling out, people being
poisoned and getting very sick, etc.  These scenes do not occur very
often, but they are there and essential to the blackness of the comedy.
This show should be fine for most teenagers, although I would, of
course, hope they do not plan to make their own handbooks after seeing
the film.  If you like black comedies, I strongly recommend this one to
you and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
UK/Germany, 1994
U.S. Release Date: Spring 1996 (limited)
Running Length: 1:39
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Violence, mature themes, vomit)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Hugh O'Conor, Anthony Sher, Ruth Sheen, Roger Lloyd Pack, 
      Charlotte Coleman
Director: Benjamin Ross
Producer: Sam Taylor
Screenplay: Jeff Rawle and Benjamin Ross
Cinematography: Hubert Taczanowski
U.S. Distributor: C/FP Distribution
     The time is the late 1960s.  The place is Great Britain.  If this 
setting somehow doesn't seem quite real, it's because we're seeing it 
through the eyes of Graham Young, a teenage boy who wants to become 
history's most accomplished poisoner.  As defined by the courts, Graham 
is an incurable psychopath, and, as portrayed in Benjamin Ross' 
deliciously malicious debut feature, he hasn't got a heart.  Thus, our 
perspective of events, which is filtered through Graham's point-of-view, 
is cold, clinical, and, occasionally, downright disturbing.
     Based on a real-life case, THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK is the 
blackest of black comedies.  None of the humor is of the laugh-aloud 
variety, but the script drips with acidic irony, and there are moments 
of clever, quirky comedy that are easily appreciated on an intellectual 
level.  THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK rarely engages the emotions, but 
empathy with Graham isn't what Ross is aiming for.  In fact, had we felt 
anything for the main character, it would have disrupted the director's 
delicate balance of horror, comedy, and social parody.
     The world according to Graham Young (memorably portrayed by Hugh 
O'Conor) is a strange place.  To the 14-year old, it's populated by a 
series of bizarre caricatures, and the only feeling he can muster for 
any of them is contempt.  His stepmother (Ruth Sheen) and father (Roger 
Lloyd Pack) are uncaring buffoons, and his sister, Winnie (Charlotte 
Coleman) suffers from excessive narcissism.  Graham starts tinkering 
with chemistry because, in his words, "Life is a series of illusions 
that only a scientist could strip away."  When he begins putting 
antimony sulfide in his vials, he's trying to make a diamond, but the 
inadvertent byproduct of this experiment, a lethal toxin, intrigues 
Graham more than any sparkling gem could have.
     Soon, Graham has poisoned his mother.  Keeping a meticulously-
detailed diary of her day-by-day progress, he charts her improvements 
and relapses as he decreases and increases her dosages (he puts it in 
the medicine that's supposed to cure her).  Eventually, she dies, and, 
when Graham tries to repeat the experiment with his father, the police 
catch him.  He's committed to an institution for the criminally insane, 
where, after several years of intense psychotherapy, he is deemed fit to 
re-enter society.  However, it's only a matter of time before Graham is 
again seduced by the poisonous lure of a skull-and-crossbones marked 
bottle.
     When it's on target, as it is during most of the first and last 
half-hours, THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK is fascinating, lively, and 
(admittedly) slightly sick.  But it also makes a pointed statement about 
how men in the criminal justice system, when assuming the role of God, 
can make horrible mistakes simply because they can't conceive of ever 
being wrong.  Graham Young is a case in point.  He never should have 
been let out of the mental hospital, but, because a doctor (Antony Sher) 
pronounces him cured, he is released. 
     THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK sags noticeably in the middle.  The 
sequences featuring Graham in the hospital aren't compelling, and the 
young man's supposedly-legitimate conversion from heartless manipulator 
to model prisoner feels artificial.  Graham's relationship with another 
parent-killing prisoner comes across as flat.
     THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK is designed to keep the audience off-
balance, and that's exactly what it does.  As presented here, Graham 
isn't worth caring about, but he provides the perfect filter for Ross' 
exploration of life's macabre side.  More than anything else, THE YOUNG 
POISONER'S HANDBOOK can be appreciated for its grotesque satire.  Be 
warned, however:  those without a taste for this sort of thing will find 
themselves unpleasantly surprised by the toxic manner in which this 
picture develops.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     I may have laughed twice in this supposed black comedy about a
suburban London lad who conducted chemistry experiments on his friends
and family in the late '60's.  Based on one of Britain's most notorious
true crime stories, Graham Young (Hugh O'Conor, who played the young
Christy Brown in MY LEFT FOOT) fatally poisoned his step-mum.  He was
sent to a mental institution, where he was supposedly rehabilitated,
until the young sociopath was caught, again, this time "preparing the
tea" for his co-workers at an optical lab.  As directed (and co-written)
by first-timer Benjamin Ross, THE YOUNG POISONER'S HANDBOOK is a
meticulous study in detail.  We watch, patiently, as Mr. Young varies
the dosage of thallium, a "heavy metal" more toxic than anything Black
Sabbath was creating at the time.  He carefully charts the progress of
his various subjects, noting when they begin exhibiting such symptoms as
vomiting or hair loss.  The whole story is rendered in a very cold and
calculated fashion that, I suppose, might be amusing to prospective
science students. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
