Title
Review for Spy Hard (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The rapid-fire formula that worked so well in AIRPLANE!, the
"Police Squad!" television series, TOP SECRET!, three NAKED GUN films,
and two HOT SHOTS!  movies has finally reached a desperate dead-end with
SPY HARD.  Even Ezio Gregio's THE SILENCE OF THE HAMS is arguably
funnier than this over-extended spy- and action-movie spoof.  Leslie
Nielsen stars as secret agent WD-40, who returns from retirement to
battle his old nemesis, General Rancor (a cackling Andy Griffith).  The
jokes fly in every direction and with hardly a hint of restraint,
timing, or tact.  Most the movie is comprised of recycled AIRPLANE and
NAKED GUN gags, recreated movie sequences, and soggy star cameos.  Yeah,
maybe we *do* need Ray Charles driving an L.A. bus bound for a SPEED
bump, but did Mr. T, Hulk Hogan, and Dr. Joyce Brothers also have to
appear in the same movie?
     Leslie Nielsen plays it straight with his usual dopey flair.  There
is something oddly inspiring about the sight of Nielsen wearing a nun's
habit, even the resulting SISTER ACT spoof is silly.  As are the bits
directly lifted from HOME ALONE, PULP FICTION, TRUE LIES, etc. etc.
(Adolescent males might enjoy this mess, tho.  The butt shots, breast
peeks, penis pokes, flatulence gags, and related innuendo are right up
Beavis and Butthead's alley.) Beyond the hilarious title sequence with
"Weird" Al Yankovich performing the theme song, SPY HARD is barely the
stock that it's printed on.  My recommendation:  duck in while you're
waiting for another movie to start.  Stay long enough to see the camera
dart inside of Weird Al's nostril and then leave.  You won't miss a
thing.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Andrew Hicks
        SPY HARD isn't quite on the comedic level of the NAKED 
GUN trilogy, but it does definitely hold its own in the realm of 
joke-a-second parody movies. This time Leslie Nielson, looking 
about 70, takes on the James Bond series while also working in 
parodies of HOME ALONE, TRUE LIES, APOLLO 13, and others. 
He plays suave secret agent WD-40, who is called out of retirement 
to rescue the daughter of his only true love, who he accidentally 
dropped off a cliff fifteen years ago.
        The daughter is being held captive in the island hideout of 
the evil General Rancor, played by Andy Griffith, just one of the 
many down-and-out Hollywood faces you'll recognize in SPY HARD. 
Nicolette Sheridan, whose resume is eternally marred by the fact that 
she's voluntarily had sex with Michael Bolton, plays Nielson's love 
interest. There are also token appearances by Mr. T, Hulk Hogan, 
Fabio, Dr. Joyce Brothers and a few other second-rate cameos who 
are notorious for saying or doing anything as long as there's a check 
involved.
        Nielson's secret agent co-workers themselves prohe director of the
spy organization is so paranoid about 
secrecy that he always disguises himself as a piece of office furniture 
(or a pair of blinds [or the floor] ) for the ultimate stealth. Then
there's 
the seven-year-old agent who looks like Macaulay Culkin and attacks 
a couple intruders to his house. This time we see what would have 
happened if the blow torch over the door didn't work and the swinging 
paint cans hadn't caused enough damage to knock the burglars out.
        Some of the best moments are direct parodies of the Bond 
films, as when a secretary named Miss Chevious trades obscure sexual 
innuendoes with Nielson in the tradition of Bond and the venerable 
Miss Moneypenny. Even the opening credits skewer the Bond series, 
with "Weird Al" Yankovic singing the theme while the usual lithe 
female silhouettes swim by in the background. Soon a few incredibly 
obese women swim by as well, followed by a few farm animals and 
inanimate objects. Before too long you're wondering if you're in the 
wrong theater watching TWISTER again.
        Nielson is definitely the actor most suited for this genre of 
film. He can deliver the most corny jokes possible in such a serious 
way that it's funny for an entirely different reason. Yes, comedy is just 
that complicated, but if you like these kind of movies, SPY HARD is 
well worth watching. If you thought the NAKED GUN movies were a 
bunch of crap, stay away. And if you feel suicidal hearing dialogue 
exchanges like "I'm gonna shoot you so full of holes you'll look like 
Swiss cheese," followed by Nielson's Italian-accent reply, "That's no 
Gouda," you're better off sticking to something a little more serious... 
like TWISTER.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Chris Casino
** out of **** (fair for cable, but don't go out of your way for it)
Cast: Leslie Nielsen (Dick Steele), Nicholette Sheridan (Veronique
Urinksy), Charles Durning (the Director), Barry Bostwick (Norman
Coleman), Mason Gamble (McCluckey), Andy Griffith (General
Rancor).
Crew: Directed by Rick Friedberg, Written by Rick Friedberg,
Jason Friedberg, Aaron Seltzner & Dick Chudnow. Produced
by Rick Friedberg, Dick Chudnow, & Leslie Nielsen.
The problem with this mediocre spoof of spy movies
(which should've been much better considering how
good it's star is at this kind of stuff)
is so simple, and that makes me think the person
who gave it the green light must have an I.Q.
lower than Forrest Gump not to realize it.
And I'll get to that in a minute.
Special Agent Dick Steele (Nielsen, who rises above the material,
as he is his usual funny self here) lost his girlfriend
fifteen years ago to his longtime nemesis, General Rancor
(Griffith, who is totally pathetic!) in a parody of CLIFFHANGER,
which caused him to retire. Fifteen years later, Rancor
is still alive and armless. He's preparing to blow up
the world (or something like that, I only saw
this once, give me a break, will you?) with a
prototype bomb invented by special agent 3.14 (Sheridan)'s
father, and Steele is called back into duty.
Anyway, the problem with this movie is, the people
who made the movie are amateurs when it comes to
the parody field (they never even did a film!), and you 
can tell because they try to copy the Zucker Bros. and 
Jim Abrahams and think they can get away with it.
As a result, the occasional misfired joke that
is inevitably found in a Zucker Bros. film every now
and then is all over the place in this movie.
I'm not blaming any of this on Leslie Nielsen,
however. You always have to call him
when you want a parody leading man done
correctly because people like Armand Assante
(FATAL INSTINCT) and Emillo Estevez (LOADED
WEAPON ONE) don't even compare to him.
He's good at this kind of stuff, and he's
always funny. Here is no exception.
In fact, he's the best part of this
movie. If not for him, this movie
might've been worse than FATAL INSTINCT, if that is
at all possible.
Avoid this, please. If you want to see a funny spy movie
spoof, stick to AUSTIN POWERS.

Author
Christopher Null
     Ugh.  This is one of those reviews where I don't really know how to
begin.  Suffice it to say that I should have listened to all the friends of
mine who refused to go see SPY HARD with me, saying that it wasn't their
style, that star Leslie Nielsen had lost his comedic sense, or that the
movie just plain looked bad.
     SPY HARD is the most recent in Nielsen's franchise of spoof films,
parodying the Bond genre and about a dozen other movies along the way,
including IN THE LINE OF FIRE, CLIFFHANGER, SPEED, TRUE LIES, PULP FICTION,
and even SISTER ACT and HOME ALONE.  I won't bother recounting the
negligible plotline, except to say that it involves two good guys (Nielsen
as Dick Steele, "Agent WD-40," and Nicollette Sheridan as Veronique
Ukrinsky, "Agent 3.14") and one bad guy (a masterfully cast Andy Griffith).
     Here is what's funny about SPY HARD:  "Weird Al" Yankovic's opening
credit sequence and Andy Griffith's presence during his eight or so lines
of dialogue.
     Basically because the writers (and there were four of them) chose to
play for cheap laughs instead of extended humor value, the film fails like
a linebacker in a calculus exam.  Director Rick Friedberg has absolutely no
sense of comedic timing, and even the editing works against the film to
lessen the impact of the jokes.  It's almost an exercise in how to do
everything wrong.
     The best spy spoof out there is TOP SECRET!, Val Kilmer's homage to
the war/Elvis movie and true laugh-a-minute material.  Trust me, it's a lot
cheaper to rent that film than to see SPY HARD.  And much better for you.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Leslie Nielsen, Nicolette Sheridan, Andy Griffith, 
      Charles Durning, Marcia Gay Harden, Barry Bostwick, 
      Stephanie Romanov
Director: Rick Friedberg
Producers: Rick  Friedberg, Doug Drazin, and Jeffrey Konvitz
Screenplay: Rick Friedberg & Dick Chudnow and Jason Friedberg & 
      Aaron Seltzer
Cinematography: John R. Leonetti
Music: Bill Conti
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     Those are the sounds of the would-be jokes in SPY HARD repeatedly 
falling flat (alternatively, it could have been the sound of my head 
hitting the seat-back in front of me as I tried to knock myself 
senseless to avoid watching any more of this film).  Director Rick 
Friedberg (who made the "bad golf" videos with Leslie Nielsen) has 
crafted a dreadfully unfunny comedy that takes NAKED GUN-like sketches 
and rehashes them without a whit of style or energy. Lead actor Nielsen 
appears worn out and co-star Andy Griffith looks like he'd rather be 
solving murders in MATLOCK. 
     Despite the title, which might lead you to believe that you're in 
for a lampoon of Bruce Willis' highly successful action trilogy, SPY 
HARD has nothing to do with DIE HARD.  This is actually a spoof of the 
James Bond movies, with a few uninventive jabs at PULP FICTION, 
CLIFFHANGER, IN THE LINE OF FIRE, MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, SPEED, ET, SISTER 
ACT, TRUE LIES, RAMBO, and JURASSIC PARK thrown in.  However, these are 
guaranteed to provoke more winces than laughs, even from those who find 
just about anything funny.  And, as far as mocking Bond goes, SPY HARD 
does a worse job than CASINO ROYALE.
     There are two memorable, moderately-entertaining sequences in SPY 
HARD.  The first is the opening credits -- a direct take-off of Maurice 
Binder's 007 work, with naked, silhouetted models doing underwater 
acrobatics. Only in this case, half the women are obviously overweight.  
Meanwhile, Weird Al Yankovic sings "Spy Hard", a none-too-subtle takeoff 
of "Thunderball" with moderately-clever lyrics.  In fact, if there's one 
aspect of SPY HARD worth lauding, it's Bill Conti's music, which 
suggests just about every film that's parodied without ever resorting to 
a strict rip-off.
     Then there's a HOME ALONE spoof, with Mason Gamble (DENNIS THE 
MENACE) standing in for Macaulay Culkin.  This time, however, the tables 
are turned, and the two crooks get to have their way with the kid, 
giving him more than a taste of his own medicine.
     The basic storyline, such as it is, has agent WD-40, aka Steel, 
Dick Steel (Nielsen), out to stop the armless madman, General Rancor 
(Griffith), before he destroys the world.  Steel is accompanied by a 
beautiful young spy, Veronique (Nicolette Sheridan).  Along the way, 
Steel and Veronique get help from a number of Bond-esque characters, 
including an "M" in his dotage (Charles Durning), his oversexed 
secretary, Miss Cheevus (Marcia Gay Harden), and a "Q"-type.  Cameos 
abound:  Mr. T, Fabio, Robert Guillaume, Robert Culp,  Ray Charles, Pat 
Morita, Alex Trebek, Hulk Hogan, and Dr. Joyce Brothers.  (Not exactly a 
list like the one from THE PLAYER, is it?)
     For movie-after-movie, Leslie Nielsen has milked this same 
personality, and it's starting to wear very thin.  As affable as the 
actor is, there's just nothing left in this caricature.  However,  while 
SPY HARD might have worked better with, say, Roger Moore in the title 
role (his 007 was a parody towards the end, anyway), Nielsen's 
performance is only a small part of a massively-flawed production.  HARD 
is the operative word here, because, even at just eighty-one minutes, 
this movie is unbelievably difficult to sit through.

Author
Jonathan Hardison
        Upon first viewing of this movie, the phrases "Been there" and 
"Done that" come quickly to mind. SPY HARD manages to steal almost every 
joke from the Zucker brothers films, the most popular of which are 
AIRPLANE and the NAKED GUN series. Stealing stuff can be profitable in 
this industry, but only when you steal the right stuff.
What little plot there is involves Dick Steele, aka. agent WD-40 (Leslie 
Nielsen) trying to save the world from an almost deranged madman played 
by Andy Griffith. Along the way to it goal (goal?), the film manages to 
spoof mainly the James Bond type films, but also manages to hit on films 
such as HOME ALONE and SISTER ACT. The trick about spoofing is that you 
have to actually be funny, or at the least, satirical. 
SPY HARD achieves neither, as it borrows all of the wrong elements from 
the superior Zucker brothers films. The "Dick, the world is in danger. 
What is it? Well, it's a big roundish ball floating in space around the 
sun.. (I'm paraphrasing)" type of exchange is used at least four times in 
the opening ten minutes of the film, each time getting progressively less 
funny. What they should have stolen were the background sight gags which
were so effective in the Zucker Brother's films while writing their own 
dialogue. 
Director Rick Friedberg focuses more on the mug shots of his actors 
(especially Nielsen, who can do this quite well) than on the delivery and 
context of their lines, much of the time cutting the punchline short. The 
whole film seems to be in a race with itself to be over, as is evident in 
the final sequence, where there is no comedic denouement after the 
climax. As was usual in the Zucker brothers films and in SPY HARD, the 
end credits tend to replace this by being out of context. One of the more 
amusing was, "Captain of the Enterprise......James T. Kirk". 
Overall, I thought this was a very weak effort. While all of the right 
films to spoof were chosen, they used none of the right spoofing 
methods. Next time they should "spy" a little bit harder.

