Title
Review for House on Haunted Hill (1999)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
John Beachem
In a Hollywood slowly growing devoid of original ideas, the current trend is to
remake the movies of old. How the 1958 Vincent Price vehicle "House on Haunted
Hill" was ever chosen for a remake will remain a mystery. While the original
film was a fun, cheesy, "b" horror movie, the remake only possesses one of
those qualities. I'll allow you to guess to which one I refer.
Steven Price (Geoffrey Rush) is a multi-millionaire, who has acquired his
fortune by creating a series of terrifying amusement parks. His wife, Evelyn
(Famke Janssen), is utterly miserable in their marriage, but remains with her
husband for his money. Her latest idea for how to spend his cash, is to rent an
old, abandoned mental institute and hold a party. Steven, however, has
different plans. Inviting four strangers in place of Evelyn's chosen guests
(Taye Diggs, Ali Larter, Bridgette Wilson, Peter Gallagher), Steven offers one
million dollars to anyone who can survive a night in the house.
It will forever remain a mystery to me, how great actors are occasionally drawn
to horrible scripts. Geoffrey Rush acts terrifically in almost anything he is
cast in. Here, however, he so shamelessly overacts that you'll find your teeth
grinding whenever a word comes out of his mouth. The other actors are uniformly
terrible, the only exception being Chris Kattan (A Night at the Roxbury) as the
owner of the house, who is given the film's few funny lines, and seems to
realize what a terrible movie he's in.
I try to find something positive in every movie I see, so here goes. Chris
Kattan's performance is one of the few hightlights here, along with three or
four truly eerie scenes in the first 45 minutes of the movie. Among them, a
scene in which a long dead doctor's ghost begins stalking one of the
characters, and where an angry spirit flies from a corner at a character with a
video camera. The amusement park rides shown during Steven Price's introduction
are quite entertaining, as well. 
Now, onto the majority of the movie. The characters here, with the exception of
Kattan's Watson Pritchett and Rush's Steven Price, possess no character
whatsoever. A character dies, and all one can think is "who was that?" while
blood covers the screen. The story attempts one or two shocking moments, though
they can be predicted far in advance. Speaking of predictable events, when the
characters were first introduced, I was able to pick out the survivors right
away.
As I said, there are a few eerie parts in the movie, but just as these begin to
show promise, the last 45 minutes of the film turn into one long, boring chase
scene for no apparent reason. I normally don't give away plot points like this,
but I felt obliged to point the following out. The effects are, for the most
part, rather well done, but the chase scene which is the film's finale offers
one of the most moronic looking ghosts I have ever seen. 
If you're desperate for another haunted house movie, I reccomend seeing the
original version of "House on Haunted Hill" or the original "The Haunting". If
you feel like dishonoring Vincent Price's memory, go ahead and catch this.
Otherwise, I reccomend everyone steer clear. "The House on Haunted Hill" runs
too long at 115 minutes. I grant it a charitable two stars.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Jamey Hughton
This Halloween, you have the choice of two vastly different horror
movies. One is `Bats', a blatantly incompetent creature feature about
flying mammals that eat everyone in Texas. The second is `House on
Haunted Hill', a spooky haunted house movie about party guests trapped
inside a former medical institution. For intensive purposes, go with
`House on Haunted Hill'.
Neither film has exactly the right mixture of feverishly creepy
elements, but at least `Hill' succeeds on certain levels. After the
disappointment of the offbeat summer offering `The Haunting', audiences
may be pining for a decent haunted house movie. Despite the similar
premise shared between the two, they are relatively incompatible. `The
Haunting' carried a PG-13 rating and relied heavily on spooky production
design and expensive special effects. `House on Haunted Hill' is rated
R, putting the emphasis on elaborate gore and disturbing atmosphere and
plot devices. It too eventually evolves into an all-out special effects
barrage during the closing minutes, but everything seems more
appropriate, and not all logic is abandoned as it was in `The Haunting'.
Both films are also remakes, this of the 1958 William Castle camp
classic of the same name. That version has gone unseen by me, so
venturing into the theater for the restructured 90's rendition, I didn't
know exactly what to expect. There were some intentionally cheesy
elements, but mainly, the film is a creepy exercise in eerie atmosphere
and frightening images. With it's agreeable pace and potent shock
formula, `House on Haunted Hill' is surprisingly decent for a movie not
originally screened for critics. There is the matter of underdeveloped
characters, botched direction and missed opportunities. But whoever digs
this sort of thing will have some fun, and the film is almost perfectly
suited to the demands of the season.
Geoffrey Rush plays Steven Price, an eccentric theme park tycoon who
constructs new-age rides for the public. His wife Evelyn (Famke Janssen)
wants her upcoming birthday party set a unique environment. So, why not
have it at (say in low, rumbling voice) .... The House on Haunted Hill!!
This towering structure was once a medical institution where a psychotic
doctor (Jeffrey Combs) conducted torturous experiments. Five guests have
been invited to spend the night, with an interesting catch: whoever
survives until sunrise will receive a payment of  one million dollars
each. Of course, Steven has wired the place with elaborate booby traps
intended to scare everyone away.
The guests who show up are, strangely enough, not the original invitees.
A former pro baseball player (Taye Diggs of `Go' and `The Best Man'), a
secretive doctor (Peter Gallagher), a business executive (Ali Larter)
and a former game show host (Bridgette Wilson) are all anxious to get
their paws on the proposed money. Steven and Evelyn, who despise each
other religiously, believe that the other is playing a dirty trick. When
the locking mechanism comes down abruptly, the group is trapped inside.
Perhaps they should heed the words of the jittery Prichitt (Chris
Kattan), who rambles on amusingly about how the house is alive and
aware.
This is not a character driven film. The only actors who register are
Rush (enjoyable and over-the-top) and Kattan - although Peter Gallagher
delivers an adequate performance with his one-note caricature. The
entire cast does little but wander around aimlessly, waiting to be
served up for a slaughter. But there is the slight presence of style
over substance, and a few twists in the plot, although not especially
mind-blowing, provide enough juice to keep things pumping.
`House on Haunted Hill' has the potency to be something truly
nerve-wracking, but it settles comfortably on disturbing atmosphere.
There is a really chilling scene in which Wilson captures images of
patient dismemberment on her camera, only to notice nothing is actually
there. The graphic and unsettling prologue sets the mood nicely in the
opening sequence. It doesn't quite function altogether, but `House on
Haunted Hill' is fun. And it also gives you the major creeps.
But what about this curious ending? It's initially dumb, but is there
more to it? It may have you absorbed in conversation afterward, although
the rest of the film is quite clear: it's a campy little fright film
brimming with special effects and gooey gore.
Comments Appreciated!  ">HREF="mailto:movieviews@hotmail.com">

Author
Steve Rhodes
What do you do for a living?  Whatever it is, assume for a moment that
instead you're a talented carpenter, who takes pride in his work.
People are always complimenting you for the houses you build, and you've
even won some prestigious awards.
One day, a wealthy man comes and offers you a handsome commission to
construct a large mansion for him.  Everything sounds promising until he
shows you the blueprints.  He wants you to remake one of the ugliest
houses in town.  Moreover, he demands that you use substandard materials
and not take the time to build it properly.
So what do you do?  Do you take the money, close your eyes and hold your
nose?  Or do you tell him that you have your reputation to uphold and
refuse his lucrative job offer?
For Geoffrey Rush and his costars in HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL (Taye Diggs,
Ali Larter, Bridgette Wilson, Peter Gallagher and Chris Kattan), the
money proved more valuable than a risk that they might insult their fans
and damage their careers.
William Malone's HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL, wisely not screened in advance
to critics, is a remake of William Castle's 1958 bad B-movie of the same
name, which starred Vincent Price.  (This new movie should not be
confused with a terrible movie released earlier this year called THE
HAUNTING.  This one manages, amazingly, to be even worse.)
The setup is that 5 guests must stay overnight in a haunted house.  If
they do, they'll earn one million dollars each, more if some of them
die.
So what new ideas does the remake have to improve upon the original?
First, there's the money.  It was only $10,000 back in the 50s.  Second,
there are lots of uses of the F-word to punch up the script.  Finally,
the characters employ crude sexual insults and humor to keep the
audience awake.  In order to create fright, the movie employs the
canonical techniques of loud sounds (you're going to need ear plugs) and
lots of blood.
Dick Beebe's script contains nothing but retreads.  "Take my word for
it, everything's fine," Steven Price (Rush) says in limp reassurance in
one scene.  "Is this dump really haunted?" asks one of the movie's
bimbos in another.
Geoffrey Rush shamelessly overacts with a vengeance in this chillingly
awful movie, which leaves us with one nagging question.  Can Oscars be
recalled?
HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL runs 1:36.  It is rated R for violence, gore,
language and nudity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Brandon Herring 
Rated R for horror violence and gore, language and some nudity.
Starring: Geoffrey Rush, Famke Jansen, Ali Larter ,Brigette Wilson, Taye Diggs,
Chris Kattan, Lisa Loeb, James Marsters.
Running Time: 115 minutes
So here is the second of 1999's remakes of classic horror movies. The first was
the dumb, pathetic but OK remake of the classic 'The Haunting'. Now comes the
highly awaited remake of House On Haunted Hill. The classic which starred
Vincent Price as a man who pays a group of people 100,000 to stay in his house.
If they survive the night they get the money. If not well you get the
jurisdiction. Having not yet seen the film (DVD on its way) I wasn't sure if I
would really like the remake. But sure enough it comes through and has a great
storyline to fall back on. 
Geoffrey Rush (in a fantastic role with an incredible performance) is Steven
Price, the owner of an amusement park destined to scare the wits out of people.
His wife Evelyn Price is throwing a party with her friends. Steven dismays at
the idea and makes his own list. Somehow someone, or something changes that
list and five other people are invited to the party. Eddie (Taye Diggs) an
ex-baseball player, Sarah (Ali Carter) an ex-assistant who can re-wire
anything, Melissa (Brigette Wilson) a talk-show host in sorts, Dr. Blackburn
(Peter Ghallager), and Watson (Chris Kattan) a smart-mouthed humorist in ways.
What he is gonna do is pay these five people 1,000,000 dollars if they can
survive through the night. If they can they get the money, if not well they
don't. 
The House On Haunted Hill used to be an insane asylum. Years before mental
patients broke out and killed the Dr. there, forcing him to lock the place up
because if he died, so did they. Everyone who was in there burned to death. Now
it is Steven Price's home and he is throwing this party for these five people.
What starts out as a seemingly normal night, turns into a horrifying, blood
splattering night. The deep dark secrets of what really happened in that asylum
and why those guests are actually there are revealed. One-by-one the people
start to disappear. Conspiracies start to turn up, and Steven Price finds out
that his house may be alive after all. The people find rooms, which once held
mental patients. Rooms which once had people dying. Rooms which may still
contain these people. Now these five people must try and survive the night and
try and survive the house, and they must survive each other with terrorfying
results.
Since I officially haven't seen the original I can't say which is better. I can
say however I liked this movie. Geoffrey Rush gives a one in a million
performance as the rich Steven Price, and does a great job doing a Vincent
Price role. Famke Jansen as his wife was great and even kind of eerie at times.
Ali Carter and Taye Diggs sort of become the main characters and Ali Carter who
debuted in Varsity Blues gives a fantastic performance here as does Taye Diggs.
Chris Kattan gives us great comic relief and the movie contains a lot of
comical lines. Peter Ghallager and Brigette Wilson were great as well and gave
commanding performances as potential victims.
The plot was well conceived and was very absorbing. The movie has atmosphere
the whole way through that is disturbing and creepy, and even sometimes
downright scary. I found even the opening credits to me a little ominous. One
thing I knew not to expect was a 'Haunting' type movie with special effects
galore. Even though it had fantastic gore and special effects, the movie has
only a 19 million dollar budget, which doesn's show all the way through but you
can tell. The movie was written well, and it's only major flaw is the
under-developed characters and plot holes that we are left with.
The ending is quite clever and some may not even get it. I must say House On
Haunted Hill was a surprise. I was expecting another Haunting with special
effects, no scares and a dumb ending. Instead I found a good Halloween movie
with gore, scares and great acting. House On Haunted Hill is one of those
movies you really can't take seriously. Though it is a well-made movie with a
good storyline it still has some flaws. But besides that the movie is fun,
smart and scary and makes us wonder why remakes like this can't be made all the
time!
Reviewed By Brandon Herring October 28, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Justin Felix
All of my film reviews are archived at 
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix
This review has been submitted to The Shrubbery  
http://www.theshrubbery.com
Any comments about this review?  E-mail me at justinfelix@yahoo.com
Inspired by the 1958 film HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL starring Vincent Price.  
Starring Geoffrey Rush, Famke Janssen, and Chris Kattan. 
Rated R (contains violence, profanity, and brief nudity). 
Synopsis:  Eccentric millionaire Price offers $1,000,000 to each of his 
guests who appear at a gathering at a former sanitarium.  The only catch 
is that they have to survive the night at the establishment, an 
establishment haunted by its former staff and patients.
Comments:  HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL is based upon the original 1958 film of 
the same title directed by William Castle and starring Vincent Price.  
In an obvious homage, the millionaire's name is Price and he sports a 
thin mustache like Price used to have.  This is a pretty bad horror 
film, yet bad horror films sometimes are very entertaining, and HOUSE ON 
HAUNTED HILL is just such a film.  It is, surprisingly, better than 
another recent haunted house remake, THE HAUNTING, a film which owes its 
basis to the classic horror novel by Shirley Jackson.  THE HAUNTING had 
literary pretensions and fell flat on it face.  HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL 
owes its lineage to a B-movie 40 years old and makes no illusion that 
it's a crappy horror movie.  Thus, somehow, it proves slightly more 
successful. 
I can't think of another recent film which has had such an eclectic 
cast.  It is this cast which lifts this ho-hum thriller into a 
borderline entertaining exercise in camp horror.  Price, the main 
character, is played by Geoffrey Rush, the Academy-Award winning actor 
of SHINE.  Rush seems to be making a downward spiral in the movie 
industry, a spiral reminiscent of Ben (GHANDI, SCHINDLER'S LIST) 
Kingsley's ridiculous appearance in the camp sci-fi classic SPECIES.  I 
don't know why, but sometimes it's entertaining to see "quality" actors 
in bad movies.  More surprises?  Rising star Taye Diggs plays a 
stereotypical African American sports figure (rather lamely too), and 
singer Lisa Loeb (!) appears as a TV news reporter.  The highlight of 
the cast, however, has to be SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE member Chris Kattan.  
Kattan's comic sense provides several good humorous moments as he plays 
the hysterical proprietor of the former sanitarium. 
While the first half of the film leaves the audience guessing as to 
what's exactly going on, the second half dissolves into standard ghost 
story stuff and loses some of its suspense.  A disappointingly cheesy 
ending really mars this movie too.  HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL, I suspect, 
has just about left the second-run theaters.  It's worth catching on 
cable next year, if you get a chance.  If you have a choice, pick this 
movie over THE HAUNTING, it's the better of two evils, you could say.  
Though, more appropriately perhaps, it'd be better to say that it's the 
better of two turkeys. 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
House on Haunted Hill (1999)
Geoffrey Rush, Famke Janssen, Taye Diggs, Ali Larter, Bridgette Wilson, Peter Gallagher, Chris Kattan. Story by Robb White. Screenplay by Dick Beebe. Directed by William Malone. 
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com 
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott 
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with the word "subscribe" in the subject line. 
The second spook house movie of 1999, "House on Haunted Hill" is considerably better than "The Haunting." Of course, that's not exactly high praise. "The Haunting" was an inept, leaden mess that served primarily as a showcase for flashy, poorly executed special effects. To make matters worse, it wasn't the slightest bit scary. While far from a success, "House on Haunted Hill" is often frightening and has several scenes that actually deliver the kind of thrills one would expect from the genre. The film starts off strong, only to settle into an all too familiar series of chase scenes, but at least its nasty little heart is in the right place.
The original 1958 "House on Haunted Hill" was a moderately entertaining mix of thrills and high camp, starring Vincent Price and directed by gimmick-king William Castle, who attempted to juice up the proceedings by rigging skeletons to fly through theaters over the heads of viewers. The 1999 "House" works best when remembering its cheesy roots.
It begins with a prologue set decades ago at the Vannacutt Psychiatric Institute for the Criminally Insane, where Dr. Vannacutt performed hideous experiments on his captives, until the day when the inmates took over the asylum. Cut to the present, as filthy rich theme park mogul Steven Price (Geoffrey Rush) prepares to host a birthday party for his wife Evelyn (Famke Janssen) at the long abandoned facility.
Steven, who distrusts his wife almost as much as she detests him, has set up a number of surprises in the cavernous building, and has substituted his wife's guest list with a different set of names. Unbeknownst to him, the list has been altered yet again, resulting in the arrival of a group unknown to either of the Prices. Surprised but undeterred, Steven lays out the ground rules: each guest will be awarded $1,000,000 if they stay in the house overnight. In the event of death, the money will be split between the survivors. 
Jittery caretaker Pritchett (Chris Kattan) greets the money-hungry partygoers: former pro-baseball player Eddie (Taye Diggs); Sara (Ali Larter), a personal assistant masquerading as her ex-boss; TV talk show host wannabe Melissa Marr (Bridgette Wilson) and Dr. Blackburn (Peter Gallagher).
After the requisite tour of the creepy estate, things begin to go wrong as steel plates slide into place, locking everyone into the joint. With secret cameras hidden throughout the building, Steven initiates his head games, which do not go as planned. He guesses that Evelyn has sabotaged his tricks. Evelyn assumes that everything is part of her husband's ghoulish agenda, and the guests simply want to get out of Dodge.
At first, "House on Haunted Hill" looks like big fun. The prologue is suitably disturbing and a visit to Steven Price's terror-themed amusement park works quite well. The simmering animosity between Mr. and Mrs. Price is juicy and the entire set-up seems as promising as in the original. Unfortunately, the film soon becomes formulaic, jumping from one chase scene to another. Moments of effective horror pop up on a semi-regular basis, but they are not enough to offset the increasingly tedious feel. 
While the sparring Geoffrey Rush and Famke Janssen give saucy performances and Chris Kattan exhibits some flair, the other cast members remain mere archetypes. Within minutes, you figure out who will live and die, and which two characters are destined to become honey bunnies. The frequent swearing does not work in this context, either; it seems too contemporary and mannered, shattering the timeless sense that best serves haunted house movies.
Despite its many problems, "House on Haunted Hill" works as a minor guilty pleasure. Come to think of it, so did the original. Though I doubt it was intentional, the filmmakers managed to recreate the "I know this isn't very good, but I'm still enjoying myself" appeal of the first "House on Haunted Hill." A perverse tribute, but a tribute nonetheless.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by William Malone.
Cast: Geoffrey Rush, Famke Janssen, Taye Diggs, Ali Larter, Chris Kattan, 
Peter Gallagher, Bridgette Wilson, Lisa Loeb, James Marsters, Jeffrey Combs.
1999 - 90 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 30, 1999.
"House on Haunted Hill," like the startlingly similar "The Haunting," which 
was released last July, is a frustrating experience more than a frightening 
one. There are differences between them, to be sure. While "The Haunting" was 
more sophisticated, with a superior cast, a budget of around $80-million, and 
a kid-friendly PG-13 rating, "House on Haunted Hill" is a gory, atmospheric, 
$20-million, R-rated spookathon. What the two films do have in common, 
however, aside from the basic plot mechanisms, is a sense of real promise 
early on, only to abysmally fall apart in the cheesy, special-effects-laden 
climax. Both directors, William Malone and Jan De Bont, clearly spent a great 
deal of time getting the mood and "look" of their films exactly right, and 
yet they forgot that not only is the setup often times scarier than the 
payoff, but that in order to care about a movie like this, you have to want 
to root for the characters. No such luck here. Oh, and both films are 
receiving from me a none-too-positive 1 1/2-star, though "House on Haunted 
Hill" is probably a little better, simply because it has the courage of its 
convictions to make an actual horror movie, rather than "The Haunting," which 
was akin to taking a ride in the Haunted Mansion at Disney World.
After a memorably stylish opening credits sequence and a brief prologue set 
in 1931, in which all but five patients at a sprawling psychiatric hospital 
die in a mysterious fire, the film really takes off with the first appearance 
of Steven Price (Geoffrey Rush), a twisted amusement park entrepreneur. 
Holding an interview with a local news reporter (singer Lisa Loeb, in the 
most engaging performance of the whole film), she questions exactly why the 
newest rollercoaster is supposed to be so scary, and Steven physically shows 
her and her cameraman (James Marsters) why. As we are taken on the ride with 
the characters, the film plays with your mind and offers genuine surprises 
and excitement not seen once the main storyline comes into focus. 
On a dark, foreboding night, five strangers are lured into a mansion that is 
sprawled upon a cliff overseeing the ocean--the same one that the fire took 
place at in 1931. Four of the people--former pro football player Eddie Baker 
(Taye Diggs), physician Donald Blackburn (Peter Gallager), washed-up gameshow 
host Melissa Marr (Bridgette Wilson), and supposed-to-be CEO of a film 
company Jennifer Jenzen (Ali Larter)--have all gotten an invitation to attend 
the birthday party of Steven Price's gold-digging wife Evelyn (Famke 
Janssen), and along with the cautious owner of the property Watson Pritchett 
(Chris Kattan), become trapped in the building once inside. It is here that 
Steven makes everybody a proposal: stay in the house all night long, without 
dying, and they each will be rewarded with a $1-million check. The catch, it 
turns out, is that the house really is being haunted by the maniacal doctor 
(Jeffrey Combs) who was killed in 1931, and that all five guests are 
unknowingly related to the five inmates who survived decades before. 
Admittedly, "House on Haunted Hill" has a zinger of a premise, a sort of 
ghastly rendition of 1993's "Indecent Proposal," in which people were asked 
if they'd cheat on their spouse for one night, and a million smackers, with 
Robert Redford. After the marvelous first fifteen minutes, the picture's 
interest quickly unravels because the stick-thin characters that inhabit the 
film are thoroughly repugnant people who either you want to die, or don't 
particularly care either way. 
But then, once the two sole virtuous characters (played well, under the 
circumstances, by Taye Diggs and Ali Larter) make their way down into the 
decrepit basement to look around, the film gradually starts to grow very 
creepy, at least more so than last week's godawful "Bats." The middle section 
of the film is surely the best, offering up haunting (no pun intended) images 
that are truly disturbing and surprisingly psychological in nature. Very 
little violence is shown onscreen, nor are there many blatant visual effects 
that mar its effectiveness. Sitting back and watching the film, it occurred 
to me that maybe, after all, this late-Halloween offering might actually have 
something to offer. One particular sequence, in which Melissa is 
investigating the house and comes to an empty room that, through her video 
camera, shows a doctor and two nurses working on a mental patient who 
suddenly stop and stare straight at her, is scarier than the whole 
2-hour-plus "The Haunting." 
The film ultimately begins to sour soon after, as the interplay between 
Steven Price and Evelyn not only is cold-hearted and off-putting, but also 
disastrously acted by the usually talented performers Geoffrey Rush and Famke 
Janssen. Descending on its shameful downward spiral, plot twists that come 
off as more dubious than unpredictable begin arising, the psychotic ghost of 
the doctor completely disappears from the proceedings, and indiscernible 
visual effects take over, foolishly revealing its low budget. Topping things 
off are a despicable, ragtag group of victims whom you practically learn 
nothing about throughout, unless they are uncovered to be involved in one of 
the late plot developments. The ending, especially, leaves you begging the 
question, "Is that it?!"
With an ominously unforgettable production design and appropriately brooding 
cinematography, by Rick Bota, watching "House on Haunted Hill" is like going 
to a restaurant where the food looks delectable, but tastes awful. There are 
several hints of the subjectively horrifying experience the film might very 
well have been, along the lines of "The Blair Witch Project" or "The Sixth 
Sense," but director William Malone and screenwriter Dick Beebe botch the 
results. It's about time filmmakers realize that character and story are more 
important than special effects, particularly when you obviously don't even 
have the money to make the effects the least bit believable to begin with.

Author
John Beachem
In a Hollywood slowly growing devoid of original ideas, the current trend is to
remake the movies of old. How the 1958 Vincent Price vehicle "House on Haunted
Hill" was ever chosen for a remake will remain a mystery. While the original
film was a fun, cheesy, "b" horror movie, the remake only possesses one of
those qualities. I'll allow you to guess to which one I refer.
Steven Price (Geoffrey Rush) is a multi-millionaire, who has acquired his
fortune by creating a series of terrifying amusement parks. His wife, Evelyn
(Famke Janssen), is utterly miserable in their marriage, but remains with her
husband for his money. Her latest idea for how to spend his cash, is to rent an
old, abandoned mental institute and hold a party. Steven, however, has
different plans. Inviting four strangers in place of Evelyn's chosen guests
(Taye Diggs, Ali Larter, Bridgette Wilson, Peter Gallagher), Steven offers one
million dollars to anyone who can survive a night in the house.
It will forever remain a mystery to me, how great actors are occasionally drawn
to horrible scripts. Geoffrey Rush acts terrifically in almost anything he is
cast in. Here, however, he so shamelessly overacts that you'll find your teeth
grinding whenever a word comes out of his mouth. The other actors are uniformly
terrible, the only exception being Chris Kattan (A Night at the Roxbury) as the
owner of the house, who is given the film's few funny lines, and seems to
realize what a terrible movie he's in.
I try to find something positive in every movie I see, so here goes. Chris
Kattan's performance is one of the few hightlights here, along with three or
four truly eerie scenes in the first 45 minutes of the movie. Among them, a
scene in which a long dead doctor's ghost begins stalking one of the
characters, and where an angry spirit flies from a corner at a character with a
video camera. The amusement park rides shown during Steven Price's introduction
are quite entertaining, as well. 
Now, onto the majority of the movie. The characters here, with the exception of
Kattan's Watson Pritchett and Rush's Steven Price, possess no character
whatsoever. A character dies, and all one can think is "who was that?" while
blood covers the screen. The story attempts one or two shocking moments, though
they can be predicted far in advance. Speaking of predictable events, when the
characters were first introduced, I was able to pick out the survivors right
away.
As I said, there are a few eerie parts in the movie, but just as these begin to
show promise, the last 45 minutes of the film turn into one long, boring chase
scene for no apparent reason. I normally don't give away plot points like this,
but I felt obliged to point the following out. The effects are, for the most
part, rather well done, but the chase scene which is the film's finale offers
one of the most moronic looking ghosts I have ever seen. 
If you're desperate for another haunted house movie, I reccomend seeing the
original version of "House on Haunted Hill" or the original "The Haunting". If
you feel like dishonoring Vincent Price's memory, go ahead and catch this.
Otherwise, I reccomend everyone steer clear. "The House on Haunted Hill" runs
too long at 115 minutes. I grant it a charitable two stars.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
What's scary about this picture is how many people went to see
it last weekend, proving two things: 1) you can't beat good timing,
and 2) when you have a creepy dud on your hands, don't let people know
it's coming - that's why critics were not permitted to view this film
before it opened. Oscar winner Geoffrey Rush (Shine) plays a nasty
amusement-park tycoon who invites four supposed strangers to help
celebrate his wife's birthday in the notorious Vanacutt Psychiatric
Institute for the Criminally Insane, promising "terror, humiliation,
perhaps even murder." He obviously detest her as much as she loathes
him.  Rush is made-up to resemble Vincent Price, the star of William
Castle's campy 1958 version, including the pencil-thin mustache. His
character is even named Price, in case you missed the point. Anyway,
this eccentric host offers each of his jittery guests $1,000,000 at
daybreak - if they can survive the night. Directed by William Malone
from a screenplay by Dick Beebe, based on a story by Robb White,
there's little horror and zero originality. The villainous Vanacutt
was a demented doctor who performed hideous experimental surgery
without anesthesia until, once night, the inmates rebelled, igniting a
fire that destroyed the place - so we're told. Of course, the ghosts
still run rampant, causing death and destruction. Famke Janssen, Taye
Diggs, Ali Larter, Brigitte Wilson, Peter Gallagher, and Chris Kattan
look as though they fervently wished they were elsewhere. Heh! Heh!
Heh! So did I. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The House on
Haunted Hill is a ghoulish, wretched 1. But the only thing frightening
about it is the waste of talent. If you thought The Blair Witch
Project was ridiculous, this is far worse.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
The premise of The House on Haunted Hill is as schlocky as they come:
whoever lives through the night gets a million dollars. Forget about all the
foreshadowing and character motivations and exposition &etc that a typical
horror movie usually has to wade through in order to get to the haunted
house. The House on Haunted Hill neatly circumvents all that, via 'random'
invitations. Meaning of course there's that many more minutes it can devote
to horror. Which is to say it can pack more scares into two hours than your
typical horror movie.
It all starts in a mental hospital that would do Terry Gilliam proud: all
electroshock and twisting pipes--the interior of the house on haunted hill,
where the inmates are in the process of doing to the doctors what the
doctors have been doing to them all along. Disturbing Behavior type stuff,
times about twenty-six. And the mad doctor here is none other than evil Dr.
Vannacutt, a cenobite candidate if there ever was one. Fifty years later,
all that remains is the building, which entertainment park mogul Steven
Price (Casanova Frankenstein himself, Geoffrey Rush) chooses as the
extravagant site of his wife Evelyn's (Famke Janssen, recovered from The
Faculty perhaps, going for another Lord of Illusions role) birthday party.
Add to this five anonymous guests and the fact that Steven and Evelyn are
each using the 'party' as a means of murdering the other, and you've got The
House on Haunted Hill.
But it's more than that, too. If The Blair Witch Project disturbed us with
the unseen, then The House on Haunted Hill disturbs us with what we have to
see. From the opening credits until the last ten minutes (when it loses it,
trying to portray evil as black smoke) it's something of a mix between the
imagery of a Marilyn Manson video and the stop-motion feel of a Jan
Svankmajer short, with some Jakob's Ladder thrown in for good measure. And
forget about The Haunting. This is a whole nother neighborhood, a
significantly darker neighborhood. Too, with Zemeckis and Silver at the
controls, you know the whole thing's going to be a music-fed adrenaline
rush, complete with the necessary level of comedy, which Chris Kattan's
Pritchett delivers time and again.
In keeping with the spirit of things, the guests/contestants--Eddie (Taye
Diggs), Sarah Wolfe (Ali Larter), Melissa Marr (Bridgette Wilson) and Dr.
Blackburn (Peter Gallagher)-all do what they're supposed to do, which more
or less just includes fighting among themselves, separating, and
investigating those things which should never ever be investigated. And of
course they tend to die gruesome little deaths, which just serves to remind
us that this isn't Hitchcock: the horror is no longer in the motion being
completed off-screen, in our minds. Now it's right there, for better or
worse. A lot of the images we take with us too, whether we want to or not.
Specifically, how director William Malone rearranges the human face from
time to time--lengthening the jaw, erasing the eyes, enlarging the mouth,
all of which disturbs us at a primal level. We're comfortable with an
augmented face, so long as it has recognizable, bilateral features. Take
that away though, and things aren't so comfortable anymore.
The House on Haunted Hill does make you want to look away at times, yes, but
it's that kind of wanting-to-look-away you pay for, too, you peek through
your fingers for. And, as narrative counterballast, it does have it's
tongue-in-cheek moments. Take how Pritchett's Brad-and-Janet mobile has
characteristically broken down, as if the flaw in that particular model is
that it tends to putter out in the presence of lonely, deserted houses. And,
as with most horror, The House on Haunted Hill has its weak moments as well,
when a character's comeback to whatever situation falls flat, but so be it.
The next scene is guaranteed to either make you forget it or die trying,
which is what a good Halloween release is all about.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Lars Lindahl
House on Haunted Hill (1999)
Starring Taye Diggs, Geoffrey Rush, Ali Larter, Famke Janssen, Peter Gallagher,
Bridgette Wilson, Max Perlich, Lisa Loeb, James Marsters, and Chris Kattan.
Directed By William Malone,
Written By Dick Beebe,
"House on Haunted Hill" initializes itself to the audience with a scene
involving zombie-like mental patients attacking and murdering doctors in the
goriest ways possible. One doctor is killed instantly after having a pencil
rammed completely through his neck. A nurse has her head forced into a barrel
of water. These mobs of zombies presented are like those in previous B-horror
flicks, with grunting noises and cadaverous movements. Except this time, at the
end of the millenium, the film is given the power to show exactly how horrific
these creatures can be. In past horror films, the actual murder scenes are left
out or not shown forcing the viewer to assume their own nasty bloody deaths for
the hapless victims. "House on Haunted Hill" doesn't want their audience to
have an imagination, everything is provided for them to watch and squirm, not
think. This nonsense violence thrown out of nowhere is unfortunately the most
refreshing part about this film.
        "House on Haunted Hill", which is based on the 1958 film of the same title,
introduces a handful of characters as quickly as it can, following the opening
blood fest. The film has no intention of providing character development or a
laudable plot. The aim here is to scare the audience with chilling, unexpected
shots of blood, guts, and mayhem. However, the film is neither scary nor
unpredictable. The plot involves five people who are dared to spend the night
in a haunted house for one million dollars by an amusement park owner (Geoffrey
Rush). Each character is a failure in the external world and acknowledges that
they would do anything for that money. Since the characters are immediately
generalized as either greedy or caring, the expectations of who will survive or
not is killed five minutes after you meet them. The problem is that every
character is not likable. The two who come closest to being civilized are a
womanizer (Taye Diggs - who should be doing films a lot better than this with
all of his talent) and a businesswoman who accepts being womanized (Ali
Larter).  The characters presented are so annoying and pathetic, that it is
hard to cheer for them or scream them. The worst character in this film, or
maybe in any film released this year, is Chris Kattan's Watson Pritchett. He
spends the whole film whining about the spooky house in a tone so irritating
and inappropriate, that he unintentionally begins to seem more evil than the
house itself. Waiting for Pritchett to die, was a strenuously difficult act to
sit through. The most humorous actor of the bunch is Geoffrey Rush playing
Steven Price (an homage to Victor Price who starred in the original). Playing
the rich man who supposedly organized the party, he plays the role perfectly in
a twisted way where it is obvious that he is up to something just by the
expressions on his face. However, Rush is pretty much wasted in a confusing
subplot involving a hateful marriage with Evelyn Price , played by Famke
Janssen. 
        The main problem is that "House on Haunted Hill" is not scary. To top off that
huge disappointment, every actor was wasted and the script was completely
ludicrous.  If the annoying characters and hilariously bad dialogue were
intentionally underdeveloped (similar to "Deep Blue Sea"), the goal for
creating a creepy, suspenseful action film was completely missed.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Bromborough)
Released in the UK by UIP on February 4, 2000; certificate 18; 115 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by William Malone; produced by Gilbert Adler, Joel Silver, Robert 
Zemeckis.
Written by Dick Beebe; based on an original screenplay by Robb White.
Photographed by Rick Bota; edited by Anthony Adler.
William Castle was one of the great showmen of cinema, a creator of cheesy 
horror features who once said he modelled his career on that of P.T. Barnum. 
The gimmicks Castle used to market his films would make a good movie in 
themselves -- he once, for example, arrived at one of his premieres in a 
coffin, delivered by a hearse.
Far more characteristic for Castle were mechanical tricks such as 'Percepto', 
whereby people would get a signal that a monster was loose in the auditorium, 
and the only way to kill it was to scream. His 1958 film "House on Haunted 
Hill" boasted 'Emergo', a system of fitting theatres with huge plastic 
skeletons that would jump out on unsuspecting members of the audience.
It is probably impossible to recapture Castle's unique brand of 
stunt-orientated entertainment for today's moviegoers. Gone are the days when 
cinemas would consider letting you fit seatbelts or electro-shock buzzers in 
their seats, and it's doubtful that savvy modern kids would respond to 
B-movies as enthusiastically as youngsters did in the 1950s.
The new remake of "House on Haunted Hill", which has been directed by William 
Malone and produced by Hollywood giant Joel Silver, is an admirable if not 
completely successful attempt to get into the spirit of Castle's genre. It 
has few ironic references, and most of the actors don't go to great lengths 
to point out that their tongues are in their cheeks -- the movie really does 
play like an attempt to scare us using grotesquely over-the-top atmosphere 
and fairground techniques. We only know the filmmakers aren't that stupid 
because we trust nobody would ever expect us to take this schlock seriously.
The characters are a goofy bunch, perfunctorily thrown together in accordance 
with some hack screenwriter's manual. You've got a dumb blonde (Bridgette 
Wilson) and a smart one (Ali Larter); a cheap, goofy loser (Chris Kattan) and 
an affluent professional (Peter Gallagher); and a wise-cracking tough guy 
(Taye Diggs), who also happens to be the token black character, as all the 
others are white and there isn't really room for anyone else. These kids find 
themselves invited to a spooky mansion that used to be an asylum, by 
eccentric zillionaire Stephen Price (Geoffrey Rush). He makes an offer of one 
million dollars... "To whoever can survive the night!"
Price is an innovator in theme-park design, you see, who loves his work and 
gets a kick out of scaring people in new and exciting ways. He has rigged the 
house with perilous gadgets galore in order to do this, too, but -- need I 
even say it? -- the house really does turn out to be filled with evil 
spirits, and all the characters find themselves fighting for their lives.
Rush gives a good performance here, with a sly, trailing voice that is 
perfect for relishing his odd, playful lines -- his character is the kind 
who, if asked whether a phone call is business or pleasure, would give a 
twisted grin before responding "Neither... it's my wife!" He has a crazy 
little moustache that was grown to be twirled, and bushy eyebrows meant for 
raising. Rush is the only big star in the picture, and that's a nice touch, 
as Vincent Price had the same distinction, and the same role, in the original.
Other visual and aural treats arise from the haunting itself -- to be honest, 
a few of them really did creep me out in some basic, crude way.  We see the 
passageways of the house as grimy, labyrinthine, ominous; the soundtrack 
manipulates the rear speakers brilliantly, giving us the sensation that 
sinister whispers, scratches and squeals are happening in the aisles of our 
screening room.
I was not as endeared by the human violence in the movie -- much of it is 
inappropriately gruesome, in contrast to the innocence of the supernatural 
gore. And the film never quite goes as far off the rails as it should -- 
those original B-movies, you will recall, resembled loud protests against 
refinement, craftsmanship and good taste.
Still, I'm impressed that the film is watchable at all. Remakes and horror 
movies are so hard to do right they're disaster areas for filmmakers, and 
embarking on a horror remake is like actively seeking public embarrassment. 
"House on Haunted Hill" was critically savaged in the States, where it was 
seen as a slapped-together attempt to cash in on Halloween. That's unfair -- 
it's a lot more sophisticated than the adverts suggest. I didn't exactly like 
it, but it's hard not to have some affection for it; no film that reminds me 
of dear old William Castle can be all that bad.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Jonathan F Richards
     Where was Wes Craven when we really needed him?  "House on Haunted
Hill", a gloss-and-guts remake of William Castle's 1958 horror flick, is
left in the journeyman hands of William Malone ("Creature").  It starts
with some nice campy fun, but it's designed as a thrill ride, and a 95
minute thrill ride gets long.
     Geoffrey Rush ("Shine", "Shakespeare in Love") reprises Vincent
Price's role as a billionaire amusement park tycoon who rents a haunted
house to throw a birthday party for his wife (Famke Janssen) and invites
four guests to whom he puts this proposal: stay the whole night, stay
alive, and leave in the morning with a cashier's check for a million bucks
(oh, inflation; Price only offered $10,000).  
     The joint is the former Vanacutt Institution for the Criminally
Insane, a towering structure closed and haunted since a grisly inmate
rebellion in the '31 left everyone within its walls horribly slaughtered. 
Now it's overseen by the nervous Pritchett (Chris Kattan), a descendant of
the evil Dr. Vanacutt.  But as soon as the four guests -- Eddie (Taye
Diggs), a baseball player, Sara (Ali Larter), a pretty blonde executive,
Melissa (Bridgette Wilson), a pretty blonde game show hostess, and Dr.
Blackburn (Peter Gallagher) -- are assembled, along with their host and
hostess, the house locks itself up tight as a drum, and there's no escape. 
     That's all you need to know about the characters.  The movie
concentrates on scaring them, not developing them.  Mostly it lures them
into the basement, a dank place packed with ghosts and grisly displays.  It
hacks them up, twists some back to life only to devour them again, crawls
with creepy effects, and throws in a few random naked women when things
threaten to get unbearably tedious.
     When Castle unveiled the original in '58 he had skeletons dropping
from the ceiling and ambulances stationed outside. At the showing I saw at
the UA South, the lights and the FM between-the-shows broadcast kept coming
on during the movie.  I don't know if that was a device or not.  It was a
little weird.

Author
David Bezanson
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/a92fbd19d4c5c874882568d3000492c2?OpenDocument
     A film review by David Bezanson - Copyright (c) 2000 filmcritic.com
Every so often, most recently with Scream, a film will briefly try to
make the horror genre something it's not --- like creative,
entertaining, cool, or self-aware.  But The House on Haunted Hill is not
one of those films.
Instead, it's pretty much a copy of all the other haunted-house horror
movies that have run briefly in theaters over the years (and then run on
cable channels indefinitely, giving teenagers something to stare at for
a minute or two before leaving the house or switching channels).  I
understand that the beast of cable programming must be fed, but I still
don't understand why directors are still making new movies like this,
given the thousands that have already been made.  Why don't the cable
channels just run old ones from the late 1980s that nobody remembers?
Five people are invited to a party at a deserted former institution for
the criminally insane.  They've been promised a million dollars --- if
they get out alive.  I could summarize some of the other clichs in
Haunted Hill, but anybody who's had cable for a while can probably do it
for themselves.
There's nothing new or innovative about this movie except maybe for the
baffling presence of a few name actors.  Almost every actor or actress
is haunted by a few B movies, and hopefully the careers of Diggs,
Larter, and Kattan will get out alive.  But nothing can explain or
excuse the participation of Geoffrey Rush, who actually has won an
Oscar, for God's sake. Faced with the pressure of following up his work
in Shine and Shakespeare in Love, Rush choked, I guess.
I guess these movies are fun to make, but they're not interesting to
watch.  Please, no more!
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Evans
House on Haunted Hill  Dir: William Malone. Starring Geoffrey Rush, Famke
Janssen, Taye Diggs, Ali Larter, Bridgette Wilson, Peter Gallagher and Chris
Kattan.
The pitch: A wealthy amusement-park owner promises a group of strangers $1
million each if they survive a night in a haunted house.
Tis the season for lousy horror films. This one could have been called
House on Moron Hill, since idiots typically congregate in these movies,
waiting in some dark manor for the bogeyman to come along and slit their
throats. Vincent Price hammed it up in the cheesy 1958 original, directed by
gimmickmeister William Castle. Back then, the going rate for sleepovers in
haunted houses was a paltry $10,000. Well, the pay is better these days,
even if the movie isn't. Hell, in this picture there isn't even a proper
house up on yon haunted hill. It's a derelict hospital.
As we learn in flashback, the 1937 art-deco building was actually an asylum
for the criminally insane. The equally mad doctor who runs the place decides
to practice surgery on the inmates without benefit of anesthesia (graphic
and gory). They revolt and kill the staff (pencil stabbing through one man's
neck, implied rape, much blood letting and other mayhem unsuitable for
children). But when the crazies set the building on fire, they're trapped
inside after steel shutters automatically seal off the doors and windows.
The ridiculous shutters serve no purpose except to advance the plot when we
fast-forward 60 years.
Cut to: Geoffrey Rush as Steven Price, successful owner of spooky-themed
amusement parks (the character's name is no doubt a nod to Vincent Price,
though we wonder if the late actor would have been honored or appalled).
Chewing the sets, Rush acts like James Woods acting like Vincent Price.
He forgets that his bitchy wife (Janssen) wants a birthday party. Their
marriage is the real horror show. The poisonous verbal exchanges between
these two are both obvious and lowbrow (Screenwriter Dick Beebe could learn
a lot from Edward Albee).
When Janssen reminds her hated hubby about the party, he shreds her guest
list and replaces it with one of his own. Preparing the invitations, Rush
offers $1 million to every person who lives through the night at the
house/hospital on haunted hill. The reason for this generosity is never
explained, which shows the contempt everyone involved in this project has
for the audience. Rush snickers at his little joke and goes back to
designing roller coasters. Problem is, something erases the guest list on
his computer and sends party invitations to four strangers. Could it be the
work of that evil house/hospital? Golly!
Greed compels an out-of-work pro baseball player (Diggs, who's treated like
a token black) to attend the party. He's joined by a bland doctor
(Gallagher), who doesn't need the money, and a couple of interchangeable
blondes (Larter and Wilson) who probably do. Kattan (who is seldom funny on
Saturday Night Live) is their escort to the gated entrance at the foot of
the haunted hill. Knowing something of the hill's storied past, he whines
and snivels, and demands his money from Rush, who seems as puzzled to be in
the old place as everyone else. That doesn't make sense, which is in keeping
with the silly story.
Soon Janssen comes a-slinkin' down the stairs, and she and Rush start
squabbling again. But before either can hurl a choice insult, those creaky
steel shutters come down, the lights go out and the screaming begins.
Damn shame it isn't scary. Anyone who's been plunking down cash for
horror-movie tickets for any length of time may well slip into a coma
watching this one. The special effects (reportedly rushed) are unconvincing
and cheap-looking. The only diversion comes from guessing which of the
repugnant characters will get killed next.
There's plenty of acting talent on board, all of it wasted. Rush scored an
Oscar? for Shine and was hilarious in Shakespeare in Love. Gallagher can do
good supporting work when he has an exceptional script to work with (check
out sex, lies and videotape, The Player and, especially, American Beauty).
Diggs set the screen on fire with Angela Bassett in How Stella Got Her
Groove Back, but he throws nary a spark in this low-rent drivel.
House on Haunted Hill could have been big fun, if some of the gore and
language was toned down to drop the rating to at least a PG-13. Then the
picture would have had an audience.
William Castle, who's been dead these 22 years, understood showmanship and
his audience. He delivered cheap thrills to bored 1950s kids. Castle was not
a brilliant filmmaker, merely competent. But he excelled at marketing and
promotion. Castle directed more than 50 no-budget movies, mainly in the
horror genre.
Funny thing is, all of them are better than this ridiculous remake.
Rated R for gore and naughty language.
Cinema Uprising copyright C 1999 by Stephen B. Evans. All rights reserved.
This work may not be reproduced or transmitted in any form, by any means,
without the prior, written permission of the author.

Author
Fontaine Lien
I had an epiphany today.  It occurred to me while I was watching
"House on Haunted Hill." It is as follows: If a trailer makes the film
it's advertising look like a trashy, stupid movie, well guess what?
Chances are, there *is* truth in advertising.
Too bad I didn't trust my own instincts when something-or-the-other
possessed me to see this movie.  I blame it on my sudden craving for a
scare and my anticipation of "Sleepy Hollow." That and "Dogma" started
too late in the afternoon for my schedule.  An hour of "Angel" or
"Buffy" is scarier than this doozy that tries to be scary and shtick
but falls flat on its face.  I wish I'd seen it when it was Halloween.
At least I would have been forgiving.  Hey, tis the season.
The movie was scary (albeit very confusing, dizzying, and nauseating)
at first, but soon the horror got repetitive and downright laughable
because the film obviously wasn't going anywhere.  Now I truly
appreciate films like "Scream," "Halloween," or any old Hitchcock film
where the scariness stems from situations that are at least somewhat
realistic.  That's what spooks people out, the fact that it could
happen to them or someone they know.  There has to be a logical
precedent for the situations they want to scare us with.  Sure,
utterly unpredictable is good, too, but that's different from utterly
nonsensical.  HOHH (House on Haunted Hill), on the other hand
. . . Well let's just say I about fell off my chair laughing when they
oh-so-cleverly revealed that everyone who got invited to the party was
related to the psycho doctors who died in the house a couple of
decades ago.  Riiiiight.  Y'know, that just sends chills down my
spine.  Yeah.  Just like I wet my pants when they told me THE HOUSE IS
EVIL.  Ooooooo.  Hint: blood and guts only work a few times.  Sooner
or later people start to tell themselves that it's just ketchup and
props and you've got to come up with something better than that.
There were just too many things in this movie that we've all seen
before; from the inevitable "plot developments" of strangers
unwittingly trapped together; strangers turning against each other;
the evil manifesting itself; the dead coming back for a last scare.
Each was more predictable than the last.  Why didn't these fools just
stay together in one place anyways?  Sheesh.  Was I grossed out?  Yes.
Did I get spooked a few times?  Yes.  But WHY?  I get really disturbed
when there is no why.  When there weren't random scares that were
there for no other reason than for the visual effect (which wasn't
that good either, trust me) and the scare, the film was filled with
drab, laughable dialogue.
The characters were incredibly flat and cliched.  Not to mention
downright annoying.  You've got a bunch of people going nowhere in
their lives; of course they're dumb enough to go to a party some
stranger invited them to provided they win a million dollars if they
survive the night.  Jeez, I thought no one fell for those "You may
already be a winner" things anymore.  And of course, all three gals
are babes.  I wonder how on earth the Geoffrey Rush of "Shine" ended
up in this movie.  Keep that up, Geoff, and you'll qualify for the
next Batman venture.  The only single person I enjoyed was Chris
Kattan because, well, he just cracks me up.  And Famke Jansen (sp?)
because she reminds me of the delectable Brosnan.  Pierce Brosnan
(hey, I willingly endured "Dante's Peak" three times for him :).
All right, I concede.  There were a couple of things I enjoyed.  That
perverted little amusement park at the beginning.  I probably won't
ride a rollercoaster for a while.  And the machine they used to drive
Geoffrey's character mad (see, I don't even remember their names).
The machine, not that stupid fishtank with naked wimmin in it.  I kept
waiting and waiting for that inevitable twist at the end of the movie.
It wouldn't have redeemed the film, but at least it would have made me
feel better.  But no, they opted for the beautiful sunrise ending.
Thank God they didn't add a kiss at the end or I would have puked.
God, there is no hope.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Forget THE HAUNTING! Forget those kids running around in their backyard with
a VHS camera! Forget your common sense, grab some friggin' nachos and an
ice-cold Coke and prepare to have yourself a mindless haunting of a time! I
have never seen the original of this film, so you don't have to worry about
me boring you with useless comparisons. I saw it clear-minded, ready to be
thrilled (Halloween), and well, I'll admit, a little sleepy. Well, it all
worked for me!
PLOT:
Five people get invited to spend a nite at a "haunted" house by a reputed
master of terror and his weirdo wife. He offers them each the purse of
$1,000,000 if they are able to last the night, without being killed. It's
not long before everyone begins to feel the real horror oozing out of the
house itself. Terror ensues.
CRITIQUE:
I had a blast at this movie! It was pure, unadulterated fun set perfectly on
the weekend of ghouls and goblins. It's funny because due to the lack of
press screenings by the studio, I was convinced that soon after the film's
slick opening credit sequence, the other shoe would eventually fall off. So
I waited and waited and waited, but never a shoe did fall. The film began on
a campy B-movie feel and kept going strong with enough blood, gore,
creepiness and thrills to give me a haunted woodie. The soundtrack also drew
another one of my thumbs up, as well as the main over-the-top performance
from the Vincent Price-esque Geoffrey Rush. And unlike THE HAUNTING, this
film didn't waste any time to get going, and resorted to very few CGI
special effects, and even then, only in the last twenty minutes or so. I'll
admit that the special effects and the ending were this film's weakest
links, but all in all, it kept me interested, creeped out, full of energy
and believe it or not, guessing...the whole time!
Were most of the characters in this movie based in stock wood? Did they put
themselves in unbelievably stupid situations like in most other horror
flicks? Sure, but it didn't matter since these type of movies aren't about
character development, they're about thrills, blood, murders and overall
creepiness, and stab me in the back if that ain't what this film delivered.
I also enjoyed all of the film's grungy sounds, whispers and screams which
seemed to be resonating throughout the movie and the unique style delivered
by director William Malone. The one thing which I did find amiss was the
humor aspect which seemed to have been forgotten in the script, but then
again, maybe that's what kept me more "into" the movie (Granted, Chris
Kattan did have some pretty funny lines). No pop references galore and no
teeny-bopper girls bouncing around in their tight tanktops (although there's
something to be said about them as well:). It's a straight scary movie done
in a campy way with plenty of energy and a handful of twists and turns. See
this movie if you're in the mood to be taken through a fun haunted house at
an amusement park without the long waits in line. Skip this movie if you
want a deeper terror a la SHINING and expect to be blown away by its precise
narrative. It's easy, it's loud, it's fun, it's gory, it's junk food for the
scary bastard in all of us, and I'll be damned if it ain't my guiltiest
pleasure of the year! It's cheesolicious!!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
COMING SOON to JoBlo's Movie Emporium...

Author
Jerry Saravia
It is a telling sign of how times have changed when the William Castle horror 
flick from eons ago, "House on Haunted Hill," passes for restraint in this 
jaded, anything-goes era of cheap thrills and gory violence. Sadly, this 
gore-laden remake of the original classic is another example of why the 
horror genre is dying - bloody thrills are never a substitute for character 
or plot. 
Set in the 90's, we now have Stephen Price (Geoffrey Rush), a rich amusement 
park expert who knows how to draw screams from his customers, and relishes 
and prides himself on the visceral thrills he creates. His beautiful yet 
conniving wife, Evelyn (Famke Janssen), is having a birthday and Stephen 
plans to hold the bash at the House on Haunted Hill, formerly a mental asylum 
where the bloodiest, most savage murders took place this side of the Charlie 
Manson moon. Evelyn is not receptive to Stephen's morbid plans, nor to his 
inviting five unknown guests to spend the night at this house for 1 million 
dollars each. The catch is that they have to spend the entire night, no 
matter the consequences. 
A splendid premise, as it was in the original, but the five-person group is 
hardly inviting company. There is Eddie Baker (Taye Diggs), a former athlete, 
Melissa Marr (Bridgette Wilson), a videographer who is fascinated by the 
house and its interiors, Donald Blackburn (Peter Gallagher), a doctor with a 
hidden agenda, and Sarah (Ali Arter), impersonating her boss with an agenda 
to just get the dough. 
Since these five characters barely ignite our interest, we are left with 
Price and his wife, but their obscene shrewdness is a far cry from Vincent 
Price. Put simply, Rush overacts to the nth degree yet Janssen at least would 
have a field day if she was cast in a remake of "Double Indemnity" - she has 
fire, passion and a heart of coal. The dynamic Famke puts the rest of the 
cast to shame. 
The house at least has some character but the shots of the interiors and the 
hallways are rendered so darkly that it may as well be Freddy Krueger's 
boiler room. Contrast this house with its 1958 counterpart, and at least the 
latter was somewhat inviting yet a sense of dread enveloped the place. Oh, 
my, how I miss the glory of black-and-white.
The biggest difference between the original and this remake is the 
introduction of the asylum and the horrors that once inhabited it. There is a 
curious 1931 prologue with Jeffrey Combs ("Reanimator") as some mad doctor 
who conducted grisly experiments, shown in docu-style, black-and-white 
footage. Sadly, none of this is really followed up on. Instead, we get 
high-pitched screams and fits, lots of canted angles, and a few gory deaths, 
not to mention a highly laughable special-effects monster that would barely 
scare Sigourney Weaver's Ripley. No wit, no scares, no purpose, and as with 
most recent remakes, no need.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com 
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Scott J. Promish
Although I don't know that it hurt it in any way, it's too bad this film
came out after Jan de Bont's flashy but boring remake of THE HAUNTING,
released a few months earlier.  I wouldn't have been surprised if that film
had put people off this particular sub-genre entirely.  Myself, I'm glad I
gave it another chance.
After a gorgeous, macabre title sequence, we are introduced to Steven Price
(Geoffrey Rush), an amusement park mogul whose trademark is gimmicky rides
that are designed to scare the rider somewhat more than your typical roller
coaster drop.  His wife's birthday is coming up, and she's found the perfect
place to hold it: The now-defunct Vannacutt Institute for the Criminally
Insane.  In 1931, the inmates took over the asylum, killed the staff, and
were in turn killed while trapped in the ensuing blaze.  Since then, the
place has sat perched atop its cliff, unused.
Mrs. Price (Famke Jannsen) gives her husband a list of guests, but since he
probably hates her friends almost as much as he hates her, he trashes it in
favor of his own selections.  But the five people who finally arrive for the
birthday bash are not whom he expected, either
Making the most of the situation, Price carries out his plans anyway.  Each
guest is offered one million dollars -- provided they can last the night.
True to his profession, he has rigged some scares of his own, guaranteed to
tempt any normal person to get out of the building as fast as they can.
Eventually, of course, strange and frightening things start happening.  But
Price appears to be a victim as much as the others; is he merely playing
along, or does his wife have an agenda of her own?  Is the building, as one
of the guests insists, truly haunted?  When two of the main characters are
master tricksters, who do you believe?  This adds a whole new level of
mystery, and goes successfully keeps the movie unpredictable.
The film is full of genuine scares, not just cheap surprises included to
make you jump.  There is quite a bit of disturbing imagery, both outright
horrific and subtly chilling, that goes a lot further than any overblown CGI
ghostwork.  The final sequence is the only part that really succumbs to F/X
abuse, and though it does weaken the film a little, it doesn't keep me from
recommending it.
The cast is great, particularly Rush who seems to delight in his role as
master of proceedings.  And keep an eye out for cult favorite Jeffrey Combs
as Dr. Richard Vannacutt.
While HOUSE ON HAUNTED HILL doesn't transcend its genre, it still stands out
from the crowd.
(Oh, and stay past the closing credits.)

Author
Bob Bloom
 House on Haunted Hill (1999) 1 star out of 4. Starring Geoffrey Rush, Taye
Diggs and Peter Gallagher.
Why do filmmakers always feel that by adding color, gore and high-tech
special effects they can improve on old movies?
Case in point, the current dreadful remake of "House on Haunted Hill."
 Up front, I will admit to a prejudice. The William Castle original is one
of my favorite childhood memories. I fondly recall sitting in the theater
watching Vincent Price ham it up on the screen, and listening to others -
but not me, of course - scream when the phony skeleton came flying down
from the rafters.
That was Emergo, Castle's gimmick to lure audiences to the theaters. We all
knew it was phony, but it was fun.
And that is what is missing from this lame remake. As hard as it tries,
it's not fun. The spirit of tongue-in-cheek, winking at the audience has
all but disappeared.
 Oh, star Geoffrey Rush tries hard. Adorned with a pencil-thin mustache and
given the name Stanley Price, he is supposed to be a walking homage to the
great Vincent.
Well, Mr. Rush - Oscar or no Oscar - I knew Vincent Price - having the
privilege of twice interviewing him - and you are no Vincent Price.
This remake starts off promising, with a gruesome prologue that explains
how the house on haunted hill earned its reputation.
>From there we meet the bickering Prices who have as much love for each
other as Jesse Helms and Carol Mosley-Braun.
But once the movie shifts focus to the haunted mansion, it becomes nothing
but a series of chases as the various guests - none of whom are known by
either Price, nor do they know who invited them - merely run, gasp, scream,
shout and die.
The guests - including Taye Diggs and Peter Gallagher - are merely types,
and we really don't give a damn what happens to any of them.
 If you want to have a really good time, forget this insult to William
Castle and rent the original. It's hokey, it's corny, but at least it has a
spark of life.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net.
