Title
Review for Boogie Nights (1997)
Number of Reviews
30

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Like its own opening shot, from out of the darkness BOOGIE NIGHTS
   triumphantly explodes upon the film scene with stunning authority and
   clarity, persuasively heralding its helmer Paul Thomas Anderson as a
   bonafide major talent.  A sprawling epic set in the heart of the
   disco era and focused upon the ascension and decline of a troupe in
   the adult film industry, BOOGIE NIGHTS is an astonishingly ambitious
   feature film which is completely effective both as an utterly
   entertaining joyride and as a strikingly impressive piece of
   filmmaking.
   The film follows a soft-spoken young man, Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg)
   from Torrance, through his induction into the erotic picture business
   to stardom, and later, to a harrowingly precipitous drop.  As BOOGIE
   NIGHTS opens, he's toiling as a dishwasher in a trendy San Fernando
   Valley nightclub, and living at home under the thumb of a tyrannical
   mother who denigrates him at every opportunity.  Recruited by
   fatherly Jack Horner (a rejuvenated Burt Reynolds), a successful porn
   filmmaker, Eddie abandons his old life in favour of a new one as Dirk
   Diggler, pornstar.  Wholeheartedly embraced by Jack's troupe,
   including the maternal Amber Waves (Julianne Moore), Reed Rothchild
   (John C. Reilly), Buck Swope (Don Cheadle), Rollergirl (Heather
   Graham), Dirk and his "one special thing" are quickly propelled to
   the top of his field, fulfilling his mantra of being a "big bright
   shining star".  His lack of discipline, however, incites a chain of
   circumstances which sees Dirk and his friends unravel as a new decade
   is ushered in.
   The element of BOOGIE NIGHTS which literally commands attention is
   the bravura direction by Mr. Anderson, whose fascination and prowess
   with the camera is obvious.  From the terrific tracking shot
   throughout a nightclub which opens the film and introduces the
   players through to the showy sequence in the camera follows a female
   partygoer diving into a pool, Mr. Anderson's accomplished command of
   the camera is without question.  While novice directors often
   demonstrate an unfortunate lack of restraint in terms of flamboyant
   camerawork which ultimately proves to be aggravating, impertinent and
   self-congratulatory (case in point: Marc Rocco's unforgettable
   perpetual-motion helming of MURDER IN THE FIRST), in BOOGIE NIGHTS
   every zoom or pan by Mr. Anderson, be it slow and deliberate or
   energetically sharp, is purposeful and potent.  It's a rarity and a
   delight to discover such a confidently assured work so early in a
   filmmaker's career -- BOOGIE NIGHTS is only his second feature film,
   following up his debut feature from earlier this year, HARD EIGHT --
   and although it's somewhat derivative (his storytelling style is
   reminiscent of Robert Altman, while in terms of visuals he's clearly
   influenced by Martin Scorsese), at least he's borrowing from some of
   the best, and it's entirely effective within the context of this
   film.
   While BOOGIE NIGHTS is astonishingly polished from a technical
   perspective, in terms of sheer entertainment value it's also
   rollicking good fun, with a wickedly deadpan sense of humour.  The
   film perfectly captures the essence of the disco period in terms of
   music, clothes, hairstyles, dance, idioms, and culture, aided
   immeasurably by impeccable production design by Bob Ziembicki and
   costume design by Mark Bridges, and BOOGIE NIGHTS convincingly
   catapults the audience back to this recent, pre-AIDS-scare period in
   American history where uninhibited, free-wheeling lifestyles
   abounded.  While much of the film's humour pertains to the
   characters' obliviousness of now-outdated aspects of their lives then
   prevalent in society -- a prime example is part-time salesman Buck
   Swope's demo of a stereo system with an eight-track tape, and
   inviting a prospective customer to get 'freaky deaky' with the music
   -- it's elicited with an undercurrent not of ridicule, but of wistful
   reminiscence, and some the throwback elements in the film are
   strangely wondrous.  A giant ensemble disco dance production number
   in a nightclub is funny, to be sure, but oddly magical, and the
   sequence which lovingly explores Eddie/Dirk's bedroom, completely
   adorned with posters and elements of iconic 1970s figures (Farrah
   Fawcett, Cheryl Tiegs, Bruce Lee) is breathtaking.  Ably supported by
   a well-selected collection of period music (all of which purportedly
   came straight from Mr. Anderson's personal collection), there's a
   clear affection for the era in BOOGIE NIGHTS.
   It's the period aspect and the playfully comic nostaligism of BOOGIE
   NIGHTS which has been played up in its marketing campaign in
   deference of the pornography element of the storyline; the film's
   promotional trailer markedly avoids any explicit reference to the
   adult film industry which unites its characters.  After the debacle
   with 1996's Milos Forman film, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT, another
   finely-crafted work which was knocked off the market prematurely due
   to controversy regarding its pornography-related storyline, the New
   Line marketing team faced a unique challenge with BOOGIE NIGHTS in
   terms of attempting to deemphasize the relatively risque erotic
   picture element of the story in order to increase salability to the
   general public.
   However, while BOOGIE NIGHTS delves into the world of the adult film
   industry of two decades ago, it's hardly a lurid or seamy film --
   given the subject matter, there's very little nudity, and virtually
   none of it can be construed as gratuitous -- and BOOGIE NIGHTS
   smartly depicts erotic filmmaking not as a hotbed of carnality, but
   simply as a business.  The glimpses on the sets of Jack Horner's
   shoots reveal that while the films he makes are intended to
   titillate, there's a candid matter-of-factness in terms of sex; his
   cast and crew are professionals who are merely doing a job, and it's
   refreshing that the obvious cliches of depravity and sinful lechery
   often linked to dismissive portraits of adult filmmaking, such as
   coercion or debauchery, are avoided.
   If anything, BOOGIE NIGHTS is more interested in the process of adult
   filmmaking than the adult films themselves.  Jack Horner's dream is
   an honourable one -- he genuinely aspires to make a great film -- and
   to some degree BOOGIE NIGHTS is reminiscent of ED WOOD (albeit
   lacking a certain wistful innocence).  In both films, the world of
   quickie low-budget filmmaking is explored, and both Jack Horner and
   the version of Ed Wood by Tim Burton, Scott Alexander, and Larry
   Karaszewski share similar mindsets -- Jack's retort of "There are
   shadows in light, baby" to his cinematographer's complaint about poor
   set lighting echoes back to Ed Wood's "It's not about the little
   details, it's about the big picture!" rant when it is pointed out
   that his graveyard set for PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE appears patently
   false.  In BOOGIE NIGHTS and ED WOOD, the aspirations of the
   respective filmmakers' prove to be bemusing, not in their intentions
   -- there's nothing inherently silly in the goal of making an
   'artistic' erotic picture -- but in the degree that they miss the
   mark.  Much like the humour lacing ED WOOD, the laughs involving Jack
   Horner are double-edged; after viewing a hilarious excerpt from one
   of his latest films which hybridizes the James Bond and porn genres,
   when Jack breathes "This is the best work I've ever done", it's
   genuinely funny, but given his utter sincerity, also possesses a
   tinge of sadness.
   Mr. Anderson is at this point clearly a greater talent as a director
   than a screenwriter.  While BOOGIE NIGHTS shows great inventiveness
   in staging, there really isn't any clever dialogue in the film,
   though a valid point certainly can be made that none of the film's
   characters particularly lend themselves to thoughtful verbal
   exchanges; when one considers that the film's *protagonist* literally
   doesn't say a single insightful thing throughout the entire 152
   minute running time, it's no wonder why the playfully inane "How much
   can you bench?" banter between Dirk and Reed constitutes one of the
   film's finest exchanges.  And while Mr. Anderson creates a rich
   collection of fascinating characters, it's problematic that some of
   the the threads given to the film's characters are simply stale
   material -- Julianne Moore's child custody battle is fairly cliched
   stuff, better suited for a less risque and uninspired TV-movie
   version of her character's story, and far less interesting than the
   thread dealing with her woefully hackneyed filmmaking ambitions.
   Still, even if he doesn't always know what to do with his characters,
   Mr. Anderson most definitely captures their essences, and his
   resolutely nonjudgemental affection for them is infectious --
   misguided, even aimless, hopelessly naive, self-destructive,
   insufferable: I loved them just the same.
   In any case, it's hard to pick nits with a screenplay which contains
   one of the most audacious and inspired (and ultimately best-executed)
   scenes of the year: a scene where Dirk Diggler and Reed Rothchild are
   dragged along by their loose-cannon compadre to the home of drug
   baron Rahad Jackson (a mesmerizing Alfred Molina in an unforgettable
   performance, even if it's a small one) in a suicidal drug deal scam,
   only to find that the millionaire is a crazed eccentric (the part
   where he stops the deal to listen to the crescendo of Night Ranger's
   "Sister Christian" on his stereo system is sheer brilliance) flanked
   by an armed bodyguard.  If this scene already wasn't tense enough
   with these elements, Mr. Anderson introduces a Chinese boy that
   wanders through the scene, who for no discernable reason is tossing
   firecrackers around the room, pushing the scene to a new, surreal
   level of delightful giddiness.
   There are some other interesting touches in BOOGIE NIGHTS.  Mr.
   Anderson recycles the use of long methodical chimes on the soundtrack
   from HARD EIGHT; here, it accompanies the violent intercut sequences
   which depict the prostration of various characters to frightening
   effect.  Similarly, a painful scene where crew member Scotty J
   (Philip Seymour Hoffman) breaks down in tears in the driver's seat,
   sobbing "I'm so stupid" after being rebuffed by Dirk after an awkward
   but heartfelt advance is strikingly played out exactly as a later
   scene with Dirk in the driver's seat after a particularly tumultuous
   and traumatic evening.
   BOOGIE NIGHTS is exceedingly well cast, and each of the actors rise
   to the occasion; the ensemble cast is uniformly good.  While most of
   the acting accolades will no doubt go to Mr. Wahlberg (fulfilling
   upon the sparks of promise he demonstrated in some of his earlier
   films) and Mr. Reynolds (terrific as the father figure and stable
   anchor of the film, ringing true in every respect), a handful of
   other performances which might otherwise be overlooked deem mention.
   Mr. Reilly demonstrates here, as he did for brief glimpses in Ulu
   Grosbard's GEORGIA, a genuine aptitude for comedy -- many of his
   scenes in BOOGIE NIGHTS are among the very funniest in the film.
   I'm not sure how much of his performance as Reed was scripted and how
   much was done on the spot, but he plays the quintessential second
   banana character to a tee.  Mr. Reilly is the best part of the big
   disco dance production number, and it's wickedly funny to watch his
   Reed join in with Dirk after the fact in threatening the new stud on
   the block during a macho altercation.  Worth the price of admission
   alone is the glimpse of him getting down in the recording studio
   while the Dirk character is laying down a numbingly bad (and
   dead-on period; it sure sounds like bad early 1980s to me) demo track
   "You Got The Touch" in a vain attempt at a musical career.  Mr.
   Reilly plays his vacant character with utter conviction which is
   convincing and effective.
   Ms. Graham, with her long dirty blonde hair, innocent demeanour, and
   huge hazel eyes, looks like a Disney animated heroine come to life
   -- or in this case, a Disney animated heroine who came to life, made
   a wrong turn, and ended up on the New Line lot in a film focused on
   the late 70s / early 80s adult film industry.  Consequently, it's a
   bit incongruous to see this cheery sweet-faced starlet whizzing about
   the set on her roller skates, but in a scene where she's lounging in
   a limousine prowling the streets, garish red lipstick messily smeared
   on, giving the camera a hilariously pouty come-hither look, all one
   can do is gulp.  Her role in the film sadly needs more fleshing out
   (err -- in a figurative sense) -- she's essentially a glorified extra
   -- but she does score impressively in her key scene which is
   unnerving in its sheer primal ferocity.  (If only Mr. Anderson had
   filmed the scene so that we could actually see the expression of rage
   and anguish on her face, though!)  And a cautionary tale for the
   strict and prudish: as a teen, Ms. Graham's parents forbade her to
   take a part in the twisted cult classic HEATHERS; since then, her
   most notable roles have been as a junkie (Gus Van Sant's DRUGSTORE
   COWBOY) and now a porn starlet.  Draw your own conclusions.
   Perhaps the most quietly touching performance in BOOGIE NIGHTS is
   that of Mr. Cheadle, who lends dignity to his role as a character in
   search of his identity, and whose quest is comically manifested by a
   series of changes in his sense of fashion.  His relationship with his
   cheerfully supportive new wife Jessie St. Vincent (an interesting
   Melora Walters) is wholly compelling has genuine sweetness, and
   although his general longing for acceptance from others is
   perceptible, it's no more so than in the bank scene where his loan
   application to open a stereo store is rejected due to his background
   in the porn industry.  While the scenario is familiar, the wounded
   look in Cheadle's eyes makes the scene unforgettable.
   Luis Guzman's most famous work is possibly in Brian De Palma's
   CARLITO'S WAY, and here he plays a variation on the same character:
   Maurice T. Rodriguez is a hapless but good-natured nightclub owner
   who's a hanger-on to Jack's group, ingratiating himself into the
   clique and constantly hounding Jack, with little disguise made of his
   desperation, for a part in one of his erotic pictures.  Jack's
   eventual acquiescence to Maurice's request leads to one of BOOGIE
   NIGHTS' biggest comic payoffs.
   BOOGIE NIGHTS is a stunning achievement due to the virtuoso direction
   by Mr. Anderson, who immediately asserts his presence in the film
   industry as a presence of note with this work.  Striking a fine
   balance between humour and drama, and exceptionally well-crafted,
   there's no doubt that BOOGIE NIGHTS is among the very best films of
   the year.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Don't leave this girl alone with any handsome deaf-mutes Marty, that's my
 advice to you." - Parker Posey, THE HOUSE OF YES

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Let's get one thing straight . . . BOOGIE NIGHTS is *not* a sensationalistic
peak at the world of pornography, nor does it try to glamorize the porn star
image. In fact, it does quite the opposite, showing us how dreamy-eyed
youngsters can end up on a lonely, dark, dead-end street. We begin in 1977
with Eddie Adams (Mark Whalberg), a 17-year-old nightclub busboy who dreams of
making a name for himself. With not a lot going for him, aside from a 13-inch
reproductive organ (hey, who'd complain?), Eddie is quickly befriended by Jack
Horner (Burt Reynolds), a charming porn director who has taken notice of
Eddie's "abundance". It seems Jack sees real potential in Eddie's
"excessiveness", and plans to turn Eddie into the next big *adult* movie star.
Eddie is easily seduced into the adult film-making industry with a lot of help
coming from Amber Waves (Julianne Moore), Jack's main starlet. Amber and
Eddie's lives seem to parallel each other's, even if in a mirror-image way.
Eddie's home-life was anything but desirable. His mother was distant, cold,
harsh, and totally unsupportive. Amber, on the other hand,  has a son whom she
never sees due to her debauched lifestyle. The two, whether consciously or
sub-consciously, use each other to fill these vacant roles.
Taking up residence in Jack's home, where Amber and a few others also live, we
meet a bevy of characters: "Rollergirl" (Heather Graham), a high-school
dropout who has turned to the porn industry as a means to "success", Reed
Rothchild (John C. Reilly), who becomes Eddie's best friend, Little Bill
(William H. Macy, most notably from FARGO), a behind-the-scenes man whose wife
can't stop sleeping around, and Buck Swope (Don Cheadle), a porn star with a
heart, whose only dream is to marry, have kids, and own his own stereo
equipment store.
The first half of the movie shows the non-stop party lifestyle that soon
envelopes young Eddie as he rises to pornographic fame. He has indeed made a
name for himself - and the name is Dirk Diggler. Under the name Dirk Diggler,
Eddie stars in a series of Jack Horner directed films while Horner tries
endlessly to create the ultimate "artistic" adult flick. When the 1980's
arrive, however, things take a drastic turn for the worse as we watch each and
every character fall into a downward spiral of drugs, lost hope, and jealousy.
Many people have complained about the sudden dark turn that BOOGIE NIGHTS
takes upon itself. I didn't find it as annoying or jarring as most people
seemed to, and I thought it flowed quite smoothly. I'm a sucker for character
studies, and BOOGIE NIGHTS is a captivating one. The acting, by absolutely
everyone, is phenomenal! Who would have thought that Mark Whalberg, who we
first came to know as rapping Marky Mark and by his Calvin Klein underwear
ads, could be such a fantastic actor? I've said it before about other movies,
but when a movie can use the words "um" and "like" in the dialogue without
ever sounding staged, you know it's good acting!
Burt Reynolds is terrific, Julianne Moore is impeccable, and Graham, Reilly,
Macy, and Cheadle all turn in such fine performances that it would be
difficult knowing where to start the Oscar nominations. Writer/director Paul
Thomas Anderson handles this film with ease and substance, never once wavering
into mediocre film-making. As we watch the characters' declining lifestyles,
Anderson allows us to peak into each - a deep, heart-felt peak that makes you
genuinely feel for each and every character.
BOOGIE NIGHTS is a prime example of excellent film-making. We laugh, and then
we want to cry. We are smiling one moment, and the next, we are sadly
contemplating life. One thing that character studies seem to enable us to do
is simultaneously be intrigued, entertained, and inwardly philosophical, and
BOOGIE NIGHTS stimulates all three senses quite well. Lavish and exquisite,
BOOGIE NIGHTS is one to be seen . . . and don't let the subject matter
frighten you away!

Author
Walter Frith
The amount of vice contained within 'Boogie Nights' serves as a profound 
statement on the culture of the 1970's, perhaps the most decadent in American 
society this century.  It's about the lowest common denominator in society's 
diversity but has a gradually progressive look as it spans six years from
1977 to 
1983.  It's an examination of the pornography business and its seedy side 
undoubtedly comes through not as gratuitous but as a well defined and artful 
statement about seduction through fast money, drugs and an illusion of the 
what the 'good life' really is. 
Beginning  in 1977 in California's San Fernando Valley, Mark Wahlberg plays 
Eddie Adams, a busboy in a disco dance club who meets the key player to his 
turbulent and sometimes successful future, a pornographic filmmaker named 
Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds).  Horner approaches him one night in the kitchen 
as he's performing his nightly duties and tells Eddie he sees him as a
future star 
in the business he excels in. 
Convinced of his future success, Eddie comes up with a show business name 
"Dirk Diggler" and his career begins.  Other key players in the film's
complexity 
are a female porno star, Amber Waves (Julianne Moore) in the film's best female 
supporting performance, Reed Rothchild (John C. Reilly), Little Bill
(William H. 
Macy), Rollergirl (Heather Graham) and the film's best male supporting 
performance in Buck Swope (Don Cheadle).  Each character has a goal and a 
dream to live up to.  Amber has a young son who she is trying to see in life
after 
divorce, Buck has dreams of owning his own stereo store and the others are 
less goal driven but are still fascinating characters.  It has a scene where
Horner 
is told as the 80's are about to begin that pornographic films will become the 
property of the videotape industry and Horner says he will not stoop to making 
videos because he is a "serious" filmmaker which brought out a few laughs 
from the audience with whom I saw this movie. 
The film's writer and director (Paul Thomas Anderson) has molded a film out of 
a relatively unknown cast who are known more to movie fans instead of casual 
movie goers.  It is a good comeback role for Burt Reynolds whose career has 
been sagging for years.  Anderson's direction is sure footed and built on a 
command of subject material which looks as if it was carefully written and 
researched in detail. 
This motion picture is unlike any I have ever seen before.  It starts slowly
and 
focuses more on solidifying its message in the second half and the film's last 
half hour is its most powerful.  But that isn't what makes it so strikingly
original.  
Its adult theme is countered by its convincing message that what you're 
watching isn't porno but a Hollywood production which stands up as academic 
gold.  There are scenes where the cast is involved in filming the porno scenes 
where their acting is extremely bad and for good actors to act bad when they're 
supposed to adds a dimension of talented creativity.  Their lives change 
drastically as the film winds down and the final scene is shocking if nothing 
else but you should see it coming.  One of the best films of 1997 and a likely 
candidate for a Best Picture Oscar nomination. 
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Tim Voon
Let's take a long hard deep look at the porn industry. Far removed from
the norm are these gods and goddesses of sex, who use their bodies as
tools to arouse the onlooker. They're movies show sirens lost in the
addictive sea of lust as they mingle and mix scents and issues. We hear
repeated throaty moans as they go over and over and over the mechanics
of love making like the pistons of a steam engine. Performing the erotic
dance with possessed twist and turns, seemingly lost in a depraved
embrace as if they didn't get enough of it. They are seemingly able to
reach greater heights of pleasure with each successive multiple orgasm.
Yeah, tell me about it!
So who are these titans of sex? A homeless boy (Mark Wahlberg) who
didn't get enough love from his mama proves himself to the world by
using his greatest asset  a big dick. A forlorn mother (Julianne Moore)
caught up with her success' in the sex industry, makes up for her lost
child by mothering and f'king the homeless lad. Then there's
Rollergirl', a blonde bimbette school dropout well known for giving
good mouth, also gets mothered and f'kd. There are others, but in
particular the Godfather of this big f'king family, the director of the
movies himself (Burt Reynolds).
What makes this movie interesting, is that it shows us what life is like
behind these fantastic orgies. The lonely pain, the inner suffering, the
craving for love and acceptance, and the profound emptiness within. Add
to this poor self-esteem, psychological instability, alcohol and illicit
drug dependence and you have perfected an emotional wreck. It shows us
how easily young and homeless teens are led into the seemingly
glamorous' sex industry, tempted by its easy material gains. This is
followed by a vicious cycle of ups and downs caused by an industry that
chews up its stars quicker than a mouse can breed. Those who manage to
break the chain are the lucky ones, those who don't die young.
The actors who perform this study on the sex industry are marvellous.
Mark Wahlberg fills the shoes of the young, naďve boy who is transformed
by the sex industry with great sincerity. Julianne Moore shows us with
her performance that she has done her study by accurately portraying a
slut queen, but it is Burt Reynold's who excels and shines as the
business man porno king.
This is a well made, finely crafted, humorous study on the world of
pornography and is good resource material for anyone thinking about
becoming a counsellor for young people.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There certainly is nothing unusual in a film about a rise to fame
and a fall of some entertainment sensation. In the field of popular
music there is THE ROSE, IDOLMAKER, THE COMMITMENTS and THAT THING YOU
DO.  Another rise and fall film might be KNIGHTRIDERS, a personal
favorite.  If you want to stretch a point CITIZEN KANE is about the
same theme.  What is unusual is to see a good film set in the world of
pornographic films.
     Jack Horner (played by Burt Reynolds) is a super-mellow director
of pornographic films, but he has a dream.  He no longer wants to make
just good pornographic films, he wants to make good films that also
happen to be pornographic.  His dream is a continuing series with James
Bond-like plots framing his usual show-everything explicit sex scenes.
He wants his audiences to want to know how things come out, not just to
see what things come out.  But it is tough to be experimental in a
medium with such a high budget.  As Horner puts it, "Before you turn
around, you've spent maybe twenty, twenty-five, thirty thousand dollars
on a movie."  And Horner has a new star for his series.  Eddie Adams
(Mark Wahlberg) is a bus boy at a San Fernando Valley night club.
Eddie's home life is a mess and he is looking for an excuse to leave.
Horner sees something in Eddie that could make him a sex-film star.
When things get bad enough at home Eddie agrees to make one film for
Jack.
     At Jack's insistence he chooses a new name for himself and Dirk
Diggler sounds "sharp" to him.  But this is not just an invitation to a
one-time job.  It is an adoption into something between a repertory
company and a family, a tightly knit group who make Horner's low budget
films.  In fact, one of several running gags in the film is that it is
always the same faces showing up in the films, only in different parts.
Among the regulars are Rollergirl (Heather Graham) who never removes
her roller-skates, even when making love.  In spite of her silly-
looking persona she demands to be taken on her own terms, especially by
her lovers.  William Macy plays Little Bill whose wife's cheating on
him is about as subtle as a billboard on Broadway.  Perhaps the most
normal of the crew is Buck Swope (Don Cheadle) who is acting in
pornography only long enough to earn enough to open a hi-fi store and
whose country-western persona seems out of place for an Afro- American.
If the company is a family, the father is Horner and it has porno star
Amber Waves (Julianne Moore) as the nurturing mother.  Then funding the
who operation is The Colonel (Robert Ridgely) who produces and likes
what he produces.  The general format of the film is sort of a rise and
fall as Horner pulls his dream all together, but has problems keeping
it all together in the face of monstrous egos, the changing market, and
the easy availability of cocaine.  The film's longest segment takes
place in 1977, then has shorter and shorter pieces showing how the
group fares as the years go by.
     The best performance is certainly the super-mellow Burt Reynolds
who is trying hard to hold on to what pretensions his group has.
Julianne Moore is certainly a scene stealer, sustaining the group in a
motherly way, but unable to get custody of her own child because of her
business.  Bill Macy, who has become familiar in mostly unsavory roles
manages to generate real pathos in what is basically a comic
situation-a wife who cares so little for her husband that she is
willing to have sex on a driveway with a crowd standing around and
watching.
     BOOGIE NIGHTS creates a very plausible look at a moment in the
history of the pornographic film when it looked like it might get some
respectability from the mainstream.  I give it an 8 on the 0 to 10
scale and a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Don't be put off by the title: "Boogie Nights" is one of the most vivid,
tantalizing and unconventional American films of the past few years. It is
intense, dazzling filmmaking by 26-year-old director Paul Thomas Anderson
("Hard Eight") and it is guaranteed to give him a major boost in the world of
film and in his career. Yes, folks, he's that good. 
"Boogie Nights" is an epic tale of the porno industry in the 1970's and early
1980's, and how it affected the lives of the actors, directors and everyone
else involved in the making and production of what is now a billion dollar
industry. Burt Reynolds, in what may be his finest role since Deliverance, is
surprisingly credible and understated as a porn director named Jack Horner who
yearns to make this industry respectable. One night at a disco, he discovers a
potentially hot star in the form of a waiter, Eddie Adams (the extraordinary
Mark Wahlberg). Jack talks to Eddie and tries to entice him into becoming one
of his actors. Eddie is reluctant but decides it may not be such a bad idea.
 The naive Eddie is nineteen years old and lives at home with his domineering
parents who pressure him into going to school. Every night he practices some
kung-fu moves in front of his mirror and his Bruce Lee and Cheryl Tiegs posters
- Eddie aspires to be one of them. He gets the chance with Jack, and shortly
becomes an overnight success. He becomes Dirk Diggler, the biggest porn star in
the business. "That's a catchy name," says Jack.
After a while, Eddie moves into Jack's home and becomes part of his unusual
"family," which includes Jack's leading lady star Amber Waves (the always great
Julianne Moore) who will gradually become Eddie's maternal co-star, and an
energetic blonde named Rollergirl (Heather Graham - an actress who keeps you on
the edge) who will remove all her clothing for a sex scene except for her
roller skates. The house becomes a haven for excess in the numerous drug
parties and the sexual dalliances in the bedrooms. Eddie is immersed in this
world and loves all of the excess and addictions, particularly the addiction to
cocaine that leads to his downfall. This is the heavenly dream of the 1970's
party scene - to indulge in drugs and sex forever.
The world of porn filmmaking is one aspect that writer-director Anderson does
not fully explore. He shows us only glimpses, such as the scenes where Eddie
does his first sex scene with Amber demonstrating how the crew maintains their
composure while the sex gets hot and heavy. Amber even tells Eddie to come
inside her thereby ruining the close-up come shot in a hysterically funny
scene. What Anderson is really interested in is the effect porn has on the crew
members and the actors: there's a credible section involving one crew member
(William H. Macy) who sees his wife, a porn star, continually having sex with
other men at parties or on the street in plain view. She has become addicted to
sex, but he has not because he doesn't allow it to become a part of his life.
 Eddie's rise and fall and rise again are the most startling chain of events
in the movie - he becomes so heavily addicted to cocaine that he is fired by
Jack on the set due to his temper tantrums. Eddie begins to lead a life of drug
deals, homosexual encounters in parking lots, and finally a nearly fatal
encounter with a rich drug addict where firecrackers are exploding and the song
"Jessie's Girl" by Rick Springfield plays in the background while he and his
pals are getting ready to rob the guy. It's a no-win situation and it shows
that if sex is no longer an addiction for Eddie, then the gratification
pleasure of his drugs is.
 "Boogie Nights" has a similar structure to Scorsese's "GoodFellas" and
"Casino" in the stylistic camerawork and editing, and the two-act structure
where we see the eventual rise leading to the downward abyss where nothing is
left except...more excess. The transition from the decadent 70's of
promiscuity, endless blissful fun and halter tops to the nastier, more violent
era of the 80's, where all that bliss and decadence peter out (Jack has to
resort to making porno on video because it is cheaper), is handled flawlessly
by the deftly written screenplay and the audacious, engaging narrative
structure. Anderson's point is that those who survive in the 80's, including
Eddie, will still succumb to their initial addictions because that is all they
have. 
"Boogie Nights" is a garish, violent, unsentimental, alternately funny,
humanistic and intricately layered film that will stay with you. It has no
particularly likable characters, easy resolutions or sentimental situations.
What it does brilliantly, though, is to make us empathize with the characters
and with the crucial decisions and surprising events that take place in their
lives, and how they learn to cope with their emotions and move on. "Boogie
Nights" is about as pure a cinematic treat as you're likely to get. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
Faust667@aol.com 

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Mark Whalberg, Burt Reynolds, Julianne Moore and
Heather Graham
One way of telling if a film is good or not is by the length. If a film
is only 90 minutes, but feels like 300 minutes, then it's crap. But if
a film last 2 1/2 hours, and feels like 90 minutes, then it's excellent.
Boogie Nights falls into the latter catagory. The director,
Anderson, delivers a funny, hip, yet sometimes violent film, which
flies along.
Mark Whalberg, a.k.a Marky Mark, plays Eddie Adams, a
seventeen year old with a certain 'gift' in the midriff area. Jack
Horner (Reynolds) is a adult film director, who decides that Eddie
would be great in the adult movie business. After running away
from home, Eddie joins Jack, changes his name to Dirk Diggler,
and starts making erotic movies.
In the movie business, Dirk meets a whole load of characters
(which the film introduces very quickly and slickly) such as Scotty
(Phillip Seymour Hoffman), Rollergirl (Graham) Amber (Moore)
and Floyd (Phillip Baker Hall), and Little Bill (William H. Macy)
All the characters are well written, well played, and the audience
gets to know them pretty well, thanks to the excellent script. We
learn about Ambers grief about not being able to see her child due
to a divorce, Rollergirls hard time at school, and Little Bills wife,
who sleeps with everyone except her husband.
But the best thing about the excellent Boogie Nights is Paul
Andersons direction and writing. The direction is fast, thrilling, and
never holds up. There are some great shots, some lovely
steadiocam and handheld camera sequences, and lots of other neat
directional touches. The writing is fabulous, with some intelligent
dialogue, some funny dialogue, but none of the dialogue is crap,
like most Hollywood films (such as The Lost World: Jurassic
Park (1997), or Tommorow Never Dies (1997).) Boogie
Nights really is a spectacular feat of direction and writing, on par
(and sometimes betters) Quentin Tarantino's films Resevoir Dogs
(1992) and Pulp Fiction (1994)
The soundtrack is also excellent. Like American Graffiti (1973),
the film features some great old songs on the soundtrack, which
heightens the atmosphere, and gives the film an extra lift. Also, the
costumes are great. The clothes really do look like what people
wore in the seventies and eighties.
The film, although excellent, does have some flaws. Firstly,
Wahlberg, although excellent, cannot do highly scenes which
require him to be angry. In both scenes where he has to act angry,
his acting is so 'off', the scenes tension and anger is lost. But the
rest of the cast are excellent. Burt Reynolds is brilliant, Julianne
Moore shows real emotion, and William H. Macy is great aswell
(but he always is.) Another flaw with the film, though, is that the
ending seems a bit tacked on. It seems Anderson saw the film was
going on a bit, and needed to wrap up quickly. It's a shame, really,
as the rest of the film is perfectly paced.
But they're small niggles really. Boogie Nights is an excellent film.
Superb directing, writing, acting and music, all combine to make
one spectacular film. Whatever you do, do not miss out on
Boogie Nights.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Paul Thomas Anderson
Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Burt Reynolds, Julliane Moore, John C. Reilly,
Don Cheadle, Heather Graham, William H. Macy, Luis Guzman, Philip
Seymour Hoffman, Philip Baker Hall, Alfred Molina, Robert Ridgley, Nina
Hartley, Joanna Gleason
Everyone has something they can do better than anyone else.  Eddie Adams
(Mark Wahlberg) is good at fucking.  With a huge penis that is not shown
until the perfect time (in a hilarious scene), Eddie is nothing but a
good, dumb swinger.  I mean, the guy has a little sideline to his manual
labor job of showing his penis for 5 bucks, and stroking off for 10.
One night at his nightclub job, a man observes him.  This man turns out
to be none other than Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds), adult filmmaker.  He
approaches him in the dishroom, saying "You got something wonderful in
those pants just waiting to pop out," and after a little, uh, soul
searching, Eddie has renamed himself Dirk Diggler, seems to be living
with him, and two fellow porn stars - Amber Waves (Julliane Moore), a
coke-snorting maternal woman who has a kid from another marriage who she
wants to see more of; and Rollergirl ("Swingers"' Heather Graham), a
drop-out who seems to be glued to her rollerskates; among others; and
has soon become a rising porn star.
"Boogie Nights" takes place in the 70s, during a time when porn was
still made for film presentation, and when the artists cared enough to
include a story of sorts, or at least a couple hints of a plot (i.e.
"Emmanuel" and its numerous incarnations, and "Deep Throat," and ITS
numerous incarnations).  Jack himself states that his dream is to make a
porn that will keep the jack-offs in the seats even after they've jacked
off.  This is basically a parallel to fame: after the initial
breakthrough, something or someone looses the interest, and the quality
begins to wane.  That is, unless you're Martin Scorsese.
The film brings all the together in a flashy, almost orgasmic style,
luring us into their world, then watching as it tragically collapses.  I
mean, the story is set up a lot like Scorsese's "Goodfellas," that is,
of course, without the voice-over narration.  The film starts out
introducing us to a wide variety of characters, then brings them
together, then seperates them over the course of the film, as they all
deal with fame and numerous other problems, mostly incarnations of the
fame.
Among the several characters we meet in this ensemble cast are: Buck
Swope (Don Cheadle), an actual actor and very kind person who takes the
porn job to pay money, and who hopes to one day open a Hi-Fi shop of his
own so he can sell stereos (and 8-tracks); Reed Rothchild (John C.
Reilly), another porn star who becomes bosum buddies with Dirk, and ends
up being his a kind of more intelligent side kick of sorts, even though
he's only a hair smarter than Dirk; Scotty (Philip Seymour Hoffman), a
gay and very neurotic boom mike operator and other mechanical things
worker, who kinda has a thing for Dirk (nudge nudge); and Little Bill
(William H. Macy), a behind-the-scenes worker who doesn't seem very
comfortable with his job, especially since his nymphomaniac wife (porn
star Nina Hartley) is always having sex (well, whenever we see her,
which means that this is one of the only women whose name I know that I
have never seen with clothes on).
We also have the management, including a man named The Colonel (Robert
Ridgely), who has a little secret...; and Floyd Gandolli (Philip Baker
Hall), as a man who shows up on the cusp of the decade, with the
foreboding news of the death of porn "film" and the birth of porn
"video," which would bring about the demise of the former.
The acting by all of them is incredible, with no one really sticking
out, which is perfect since this is an ensemble film.  But notable
performances go to Jullianne Moore (big surprise here), the underrated
John C. Reilly (who is a great scene-stealer), Don Cheadle (for giving
one of the most sympathetic and human performances), Heather Graham, and
of course, Burt Reynolds, who gives what may be the performance of his
career.  And Mark Wahlberg is awesome as the lead role.  Who knew Marky
Mark could act?  Except for those of you who saw "The Basketball
Diaries."
While all the actors give stunning performances, the real star of this
film is without a doubt the Paul Thomas Anderson, writer and director
extraordinaire.  He brings us a hysterically funny, and incredibly
dramatic story, which engulfs us into its story, and holds our undivided
attention for the full two and a half hours.  Like "Goodfellas," there
is never a dull moment, and the story never fails to generate interest. 
I was shocked how this film didn't run out of steam for the full time. 
Not many directors can do that. 
And the film is very funny, with several great scenes throughout that
are laugh-out-loud hilarious.  But, structured in the way it is, it's
mostly funny in the beginning, and gradually what was funny becomes
tragic and sad.  Take the whole Little Bill subplot, for instance, as
well as the whole Scotty spiel.
As far as direction, Anderson has an amazing flair for style, with lots
of steadicams, great zooms, tricky camerawork, and close-ups at the
perfect time.  He also has a great knack for picking the perfect music
or song to accompany a scene, with notable uses of "Mama Told Me Not To
Come" (hee hee, I said "come") during an introductory steadicam shot,
and the 80s classic "99 Luff Balloons" during a tense scene of
violence.  It's almost kinda like deja vu...that's because it's a lot
like that of Scorsese!  As I said, this is a lot like "Goodfellas"
story, theme, and structure-wise.  But also directing wise.  Some could
call him a "hack," but one has to realize that to pull it off so
perfectly is pure genius.  There's a reason Scorsese is so lauded by us
film geeks: part of it is because he's so original; the other is because
every frame and shot is choreographed to get the maximum effect for each
scene.  And Anderson knows damn well how to do this, so even if it
originated with Scorsese, you still have to respect Anderson a lot.
Besides, this film starts out as a homage, but just when it seems to
head into pure rip-off, it luckily steers towards parody (accentuated
with a hilarious scene based on the final scene of "Raging Bull").
I want to make a litte side-note about a great scene towards the end
during a little drug deal, which is one of the most tense scenes I've
seen in awhile.  With the potential of a bloodbath, bringing out the
impending death of three of the characters in this film, Anderson gives
the scene every kind of potential fear: loud, annoying music; a
drugged-up buyer; a large bodyguard with a gun; and to top that off, a
little boy in the house setting off those annoying-as-hell sounds that
sound distinctly like shots.  There are a couple things going on during
this sequence too, each tense in its own way.  I just wanted to point
that out, since it's one of the film's strongpoints.
I was blown away by "Boogie Nights," and the world it brings out so
garishly.  The whole film is amazing in bringing out the world of the
late 70s and early 80s, especially in such a mircrocosm.  Of all the
films I've seen so far this year, this is the best I have seen.  And of
all the new directors to arrive as of late, Paul Thomas Anderson will
probably get my vote for the best.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Michael Dequina
Aside from a fleeting glimpse of a sign reading "2nd Annual Adult Film
Awards," the trailer for Paul Thomas Anderson's Boogie Nights does not
offer a single clue of its porn-industry setting.  This might seem
misleading, but in skirting the provocative issue, the prudish preview
ironically gives a more accurate sketch of what this fascinating,
decade-spanning drama is truly about.
The adult film industry is front and center as the film opens in the San
Fernando Valley in 1977.  Anderson introduces the major players
GoodFellas-style with a single shot winding through a crowded discotheque:
producer/director Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds); stars Amber Waves (Julianne
Moore), Buck Swope (Don Cheadle), Reed Rothchild (John C. Reilly), and
Rollergirl (Heather Graham); production manager Little Bill (William H.
Macy); and 17-year-old waiter Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg), who catches the
attention of Jack.  Jack sees superstar potential in the fresh-faced Eddie,
and he is right--propelled by his large natural endowment and its ability
to perform on camera, Eddie becomes an overnight porn sensation under the
name of Dirk Diggler, sweeping the Adult Film Awards every year and
creating a popular franchise character in secret agent Brock Landers.
Tragic gunshots ring in the 1980s, and at this point Anderson uncovers
Boogie Nights's true nature.  As Dirk's fortunes take a slide and advent of
video changes the adult entertainment industry forever, the film reveals
itself as not a mere portrait of the porn business but above all else a
study of the people involved, the hopes and dreams within this makeshift
family.  For some, porn is just a means to a greater end: Buck dreams of
opening up his own stereo shop; Reed would rather be a full-time magician.
But a lot of the time, involvement in the business proves to be an
insurmountable and humbling obstacle, a large skeleton in the closets of
all involved.  While the porno setting hooks the viewer and remains as a
backdrop thoroughout, but it is the characters that carry the audience
through.
Ironically, though, the focal character is one of the least interesting.
Eddie/Dirk starts off as an ambitious, naive kid and becomes an ambitious,
naive, and egotistical man.  Wahlberg, who gives a very competent
performance, conveys the naivete and eventual arrogance well, but he needs
to work on his vulnerability; above all else, Eddie/Dirk is portrayed as a
dreamer, but I could not connect with the distant Wahlberg.  More engaging
emotionally and in every other way are Moore's Amber, the porn vet who
yearns to be a mother to her absent son; Cheadle's Buck, who prides himself
on being a real actor; and Graham's Rollergirl, a parentless high-school
dropout whose freewheeling ways hide deep anger and pain.  Reynolds should
be on his way to a real comeback with his confident, relaxed work as Jack,
the idealistic porn auteur who strives for some legitimacy.
Most of all, Boogie Nights is a showcase for 26-year-old
writer-director-producer Anderson, who proves himself a major talent to
watch with this, his second feature (following the acclaimed Reno
underworld saga Hard Eight). Not only does he effortlessly juggle a wide
canvas of characters and storylines, coax fine performances from his entire
cast, and employ some bravura camera work, he shows an amazing eye for
detail.  The tacky '70s hairstyles, costumes, and dance moves are so
dead-on as to be almost painful to watch.  Also hilarious are the porn
sequences; the wafer-thin premises, lame dialogue, flaccid line readings,
cheap production values, suggestive character names--all of the most minute
details are paid attention to.  Adding even more authenticity is the great
soundtrack filled with numerous '70s and '80s standards (though, curiously,
the title tune is nowhere to be heard).  Anderson's wry sense of humor
shows through in the most subtle of ways; title cards stating dates are
frequently posted onscreen, the last of which drolly reads "one last thing
(long way down)".
Boogie Nights rounds out its swift 152-minute running time with a scene
that is simple and quiet, yet deceptively so.  With the mere sight and
sound of one character talking to himself, Anderson sums up the joy and
optimism of dreamers everywhere, as well as the sadness that come with the
ultimate awareness of one's limits.  "You're a star," goes the film's final
line.  Truer words cannot be spoken about Paul Thomas Anderson.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in you heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Scott Renshaw
BOOGIE NIGHTS
(New Line)
Starring:  Mark Wahlberg, Julianne Moore, Burt Reynolds, Heather Graham,
Don Cheadle.
Screenplay:  Paul Thomas Anderson.
Producers:  Lloyd Levinn, John Lyons, Paul Thomas Anderson, Joanne Sellar.
Director:  Paul Thomas Anderson.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, nudity, profanity, adult themes, drug
use, violence).
Running Time:  150 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Potential viewers who may be scared away from BOOGIE NIGHTS by its
subject matter, take note:  you're not likely to find a more potent
morality tale anywhere this year.  The milieu may be the pornography
industry of the late 1970s and early 1980s, but those with prurient
interest need not apply.  BOOGIE NIGHTS is that rare example of riveting
film-making which also instructs, so unobtrusively you almost can't tell
you're being instructed.  Never has the self-delusional narcissism of the
"Me Decade" been portrayed with such an eye to the repercussions.  This is
the story not just of an endless party, but of the harrowing morning after
the party finally does end.
     Writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson opens his narrative in 1977,
swooping through a San Fernando Valley disco as he introduces his
principle characters:  adult film director Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds);
his leading lady Amber Waves (Julianne Moore); perpetually skating ingenue
Rollergirl (Heather Graham); black leading man Buck Swope (Don Cheadle)
and a 17-year-old busboy named Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg).  Horner sees
something in the young man -- not the least of which is his spectacular
male endowment -- which encourages him to bring Eddie into his film-making
family.  Re-christened Dirk Diggler, the new stud on the block becomes an
instant sensation in the industry headlining the erotic adventures of
private eye Brock Landers.
     And just as instantly, he gets caught up in the glitter and glory of
the 70s in Southern California.  BOOGIE NIGHTS does a spectacular job of
re-creating its era, with its Pee-Chee folders, 8-track tapes and Fresca,
but its greater triumph is making the tunnel vision of its characters both
hilarious and pathetic.  When Jack's sincere pronouncement that he longs
to make story-centered sex films clashes with our glimpses of the 
mechanical, blank-faced films he is creating, it's enough to make you
laugh out loud; when Dirk proudly shows off his "imported Italian nylon"
print shirts, it's like watching a smug dinosaur blissfully unaware of his
own impending extinction.  The characters in BOOGIE NIGHTS have no sense
that everything they do and everything they enjoy will soon be considered
utterly ridiculous -- or worse, that they will cast a shadow over the rest
of their lives.
     That is exactly what happens as BOOGIE NIGHTS blasts into the 80s
with a literal bang.  Anderson takes the story on a darker turn, watching
the characters discover consequences for their actions they never
anticipated.  The pace flags somewhat in the second half hour, but in a
way it had to -- after the coke-fuelled pool parties, all that remains to
show us is the inevitable, painful hangover.  It is here that the
exceptional cast truly begins to shine:  the always dazzling Julianne
Moore as a mother in search of children; a surprisingly dignified Burt
Reynolds becoming a disgusted auteur of the amateur video era; Don Cheadle
as an aspiring entrepreneur who finds his past thwarting his attempt to go
legit; and Mark Wahlberg as a cocaine addict who discovers his one true
talent vanishing with the drug's effect on his ability to "perform."
Appropriately, there isn't much about the final 45 minutes of BOOGIE
NIGHTS which could be considered "fun."  Cautionary story-telling rarely
gets this grim, electrifying and compelling.
     The most talked-about moment in BOOGIE NIGHTS will probably be the
final shot, in which Wahlberg finally displays the equipment
(prosthetically-enhanced, if you must know) which has been the subject of
so much discussion through the rest of the film.  It would be easy to
consider that moment gratuitious, but it would be just as inappropriate as
thinking of BOOGIE NIGHTS just as a movie about the porno business.  In
effect, the whole film is about the ultimate "dick thing," a group of
people who simply can't see the world beyond what's going on between their
legs.  Dirk's pep talk to his own genitalia undercuts the seemingly
idyllic conclusion which precedes it -- it turns out he hasn't really
learned much of anything.  Viewers, on the other hand, have a chance to
learn more than they might expect from BOOGIE NIGHTS...for instance, that
sometimes a sex film isn't just a sex film.

Author
Brian Takeshita
It is hard to imagine today, but in the late 1970's, porno movies were
actually a lot like regular movies.  They were shot on film and shown
in theaters.  Marquees and posters advertised the latest X-rated
flicks in blatant view of motorists on the street.  You actually
bought a ticket from the guy at the box office, and walked into the
theater.  The problem was, you might have been seen doing so.  In the
early 80's, the adult film industry made a profound change.  Most
movies were shot on video with minuscule budgets, mass produced, and
marketed through mail order.  While losing the "artistic" quality of
larger productions, the increased anonymity afforded by mail order
resulted in a huge growth in sales.  After all, the only one who might
have known you were watching these tapes would have been your mailman.
Today, the adult industry is booming like never before, even keeping
up with the latest trends in technology; films are now available on
CD-ROM and even DVD.
BOOGIE NIGHTS starts out in the earlier era of adult entertainment,
when the filmmakers counted on star power to get viewers into the
theater seats.  "Exotic" film director Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds)
notices a young dishwasher named Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg) in a
nightclub and offers him a career in X-rated movies.  Eddie has
dropped out of school and faces continual verbal abuse from his mother
at home, and so one evening, after his mother (Joanna Gleason) crosses
the last line, the seventeen year old Eddie runs away, ending up at
Jack Horner's house.  To Eddie, Jack's offer is his ticket out of his
little life and into one of stardom.
We meet a lot of colorful characters in the business.  First there is
Amber Waves (Julianne Moore), a porn queen who lives with Jack, but
under apparently platonic circumstances.  There's also a high school
dropout-turned porn starlet who goes by the name "Rollergirl" (Heather
Graham) because she never takes off her rollerskates, even
while...ahem...acting.  We also meet Buck (Don Cheadle), a black
pornstar who is a hi-fi salesman on the side.  He wears
country-western outfits on the job and uses music to match when
selling stereos, prompting the store manager to ask, "What kind of
brother are you?"  Another one of the male talents is Reed Rotchild
(John C. Reilly), who's so insecure about himself that the first
question he asks Eddie is, "You work out?"  Behind the camera, we meet
Jack's set manager Little Bill (William H. Macy), who regularly
catches his wife having sex with other men.  Scotty (Phillip Seymour
Hoffman) is a set hand who is decidedly more attracted to the male
actors than the female ones.  Finally, sitting behind it all is a man
called "The Colonel" (Robert Ridgely) who puts up the money to produce
Jack's movies.
With such a cast of characters, there are a lot of possibilities for
some great scenes, and the viewer is not disappointed.  Take for
example, a scene at a party where Little Bill sees a group of people
gathered around in a circle.  He goes to find out what everyone is
looking at, to find his wife (played by real-life porn star Nina
Hartley) having sex with a stranger.  Little Bill demands to know
what's going on, to which his wife responds with, "Bill, you're
embarrassing me!"  Another great one is when Eddie meets Reed, and
each wants to find out how much the other benches at the gym.  Just so
one doesn't make up a figure higher than the other's, they agree to
say their bench weights at the same time, "on three."  They count to
three and there's silence.  Then Eddie says, "You didn't say
anything."
Some of the scenes involving the shooting of a porn film may seem
preposterous to the unindoctrinated, but director Paul Thomas Anderson
makes no apologies.  To his credit, the scenes are treated almost with
the factual nature of a documentary, and very few attempts are made at
colorizing the proceedings for the purpose of eliciting a laugh.  The
result is a surprisingly evenhanded representation of the filmmaking
process, with laughs naturally occurring at actions which seem
ridiculous to most, but which are simply another day's work for adult
entertainment employees.
Anderson does a good job at presenting us with a film about journeys.
We witness each character as he or she changes with the times or has
the times run over them.  Not one character is the same at the end of
the movie, and that is something very satisfying.  We even get to see
the journey made by the industry itself, in it's move from film to
mass marketed video.  In a great scene, Horner is taping in the back
of a limousine, saying they are "about to make film history....right
here on videotape."  Of all the journeys made, the most compelling is
Eddie's, who we see progress from dishwasher to pornstar "Dirk
Diggler" (the persona he assumes), his displacement from the industry,
and his decent into drugs and crime.  Wahlberg, perhaps still more
widely known as a rapper than an actor, comes through with a great
performance.  I look forward to what he will do in the future.
The real joy of this movie, however, is watching Burt Reynolds.  There
has been much talk about the Jack Horner role being his comeback
performance, and I do not doubt the truth to this.  Over the last
number of years, Reynolds has been playing mostly comical,
tongue-in-cheek type roles which shied away from the kinds of
characters he played in the past.  Although he has been quite amusing
in some of these cases, this has caused the public to in a way forget
that he is capable of really putting forth as a good actor.  Reynolds
is sincere, and plays Horner without the indulgence in which another,
less experienced actor might be tempted to engage.  It definitely pays
off.
There are only a few problems with BOOGIE NIGHTS, and only one that
really bothers me.  One of the major plot points is that Dirk Diggler
was easily replaced by up and coming talent.  This is one thing that
the movie got wrong, as it is the women who are in constant danger of
being the flavor of the month.  Males have a much better chance of
staying in for the long haul, often remaining in the business for a
decade or more.  The good thing is, if you didn't know this until now
(and I'm sure most people don't), it won't detract one iota from
enjoyment of the film.  Make no mistake; there is a great deal of
explicit language being tossed about, but most of the obscenities are
the words themselves.  Although there is a lot of sex going on, it is
tastefully shot and often more alluded to than anything else.  It
would be a shame if the subject matter dissuades you from taking in
this great film.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
BOOGIE NIGHTS
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Line Cinema
 Director:  Paul Thomas Anderson
 Writer:  Paul Thomas Anderson
 Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Julianne Moore, Burt Reynolds, Don
Cheadle, William H. Macy, Heather Graham, John C. Reilly,
Ricky Jay, Joanna Gleason
   Paul Thomas Anderson, who wrote and directed "Boogie
Nights," is just twenty-six years of age.  This is only his
second feature, made shortly after a fine independent work,
"Hard Eight," which had limited success at the box office.  Yet
already there are signs that Anderson could be our next
Martin Scorsese.  Without taking credit away from two other
youthful directors, Harmony Korine ("Kids" and "Gummo") and
Sal Stabile ("Gravesend"), Anderson is something else.  He
seems to have transcended the world of the small indy work
for which Stabile has just made a name--the sort of stuff that
Harmony Korine does not romanticize but describes as "the
same as studio films but cheaper, so they look worse." 
"Boogie Nights" features lenser Robert Elswit's flamboyant
cinematography, a delightfully garish production design by
Bob Ziembicki, and some fine, on-site shots of Los Angeles
which could give a foreigner watching the film the impression
that the whole town is a big, adult Disneyland made for
snorting, partying, and dealmaking.
   "Boogie Nights," a title derived from the name of a dazzling 
night club, deals with the porno industry in L.A. from 1977 to
1984, and while this controversial form of adult entertainment
is certainly not glossed over or used simply as metaphor, the
enterprise is exploited as an example of family values.  Jack
Horner (Burt Reynolds), a well known, successful director of
adult films, is the sort of fellow who might be considered a
sleaze-bag by those who disapproves of his movies and who
do not know the man.  Yet as portrayed by Mr. Anderson in
this startling, original and daring film, Horner is a good family
man who welcomes outcasts into his extravagantly designed
estate and acts as surrogate father to those who are unable
to find places of warmth that they could call their homes.  The
folks who do the dirty deeds in front of Horner's camera
perform their hard-core sexual acts openly and before the
eyes of a dozen or so onlookers, yet they consider their
behavior no more scandalous than they would social dancing. 
Yet Horner, ever the craftsman, will not tolerate indifferent
work but insists they show passion for what they are doing.
   While "Boogie Nights" possesses a strong plot and is not
simply character-driven, Anderson has furnished each of his
principals with solid and individual personalities.   Dirk Digger
(Mark Wahlberg), as he becomes known, is the young stud
whom Horner finds bussing in a restaurant, immediately
recognizes his potential for the trade, and makes him a star. 
An uneducated, naive lad suffering from putdowns by his
terrible mother (Joanna Gleason), he finds affection and
success as the sexual partner of Amber Waves (Julianne
Moore), who becomes the seventeen-year-old's surrogate
mother.  Others who inhabit the Horner estate include Little
Bill (William H. Macy), an aging assistant who does a slow
burn over his own wife's promiscuity; Buck Swope (Don
Cheadle), who insists that he is a bona fide actor and dreams
of opening a hi-fi store; Rollergirl (Heather Graham), a high-
school failure who demands respect from her sexual partners;
Maurice TT Rodriguez (Luis Guzman) as Dirk's chief
supporter and co-actor; and The Colonel (Robert Ridgely),
who finances the projects.
   Anderson has no problem mixing dark and serious
concerns with comic vignettes, breaking away from Horner's
filming studios to uncover scenes of particular poignance,
hilarity, and violence.  The film sprawls out increasingly so
that during the second half it virtually breaks up into a pursuit
of individual dramas only to come together during the closing
moments--revealing its characters with both optimistic and
tragic outlooks.  Yet Mark Wahlberg firmly centers the movie
as the school dropout who is discovered by Horner, succeeds
as a porno star beyond his wildest imagination, and devotes
his years to pornography, partying and living in palatial
splendor (his vast wardrobe is arranged according to
designers), until his ego gets the best of him.  Even James
Bond gets sent up in a series of short films starring Dirk as a
Bond-type character whose prowess with women leaves
nothing to the imagination.  Nudity is flaunted from time to
time, yet discretion by the camera allows the film to avoid an
NC-17 rating.  
   One scene is a classic of 1990s film-making, a model of
anarchic hilarity.  When Dirk and two of his buddies go to the
home of drug dealer and compulsive user Rahad Jackson
(Alfred Molina), violence ensues, but not before Molina turns
in some side-splitting shtick as an easy-going fellow who just
wants to party throughout the day.  Burt Reynolds turns in
perhaps his best character role ever as Jack Horner, ably
assisted by Julianne Moore as his leading lady of lechery,
with a particularly good performance by Heather Graham as a
free spirit who has found warmth in the home of a porno king
but whose lack of education catches up with her.  And Mark
Wahlberg, hardly a household name, with films like
"Renaissance Man" and "Fear" in his resume, will emerge a
star.
   Director Paul Thomas Anderson probably cares no more
about the porno industry than Martin Scorsese cares about
boxing.  Like Scorsese, Anderson believes that form and
emotional design are more important than the facts of the
industries they study, and are far more involved with making
personal journeys into the hearts of their characters. 
Anderson has chosen his time period well, the early eighties,
symbolic of greed and drugs and other forms of excess
throughout the country.  (It's no coincidence that Ronald
Reagan's picture figures prominently in one scene.)  For all its
gloss--its throbbing soundtrack and exploitation of a libidinous
enterprise--"Boogie Nights" is a work of art, an unusually
vigorous work and exceptional accomplishment for its 26-
year-old creator. Rated R.  Running Time: 152 minutes.  (C)
1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This over-praised ensemble drama that thinks it's an epic, set in
the skin flick industry of late seventies L.A., ostensibly stars Mark
Wahlberg (TRAVELLER, FEAR) as a troubled teen whose "natural endowment"
attracts the attention of a renowned pornographer and, soon enough, has
him plunging little-headfirst into the increasingly intoxicating world
of sex, drugs, and disco.  No, it's not the year's best movie-- not by a
13-inch long shot-- but it *is* frank, funny, and surprisingly poignant.
(And, at times, quite exciting, with several exceptionally energized
sequences, such as an explosive cocaine heist that happens late in the
film.) The big dick problem of BOOGIE NIGHTS is an abruptly unfocused
narrative, signaled in the second hour by an out-of-the-blue turn by
Wahlberg's character.  After he throws a hissy fit, we wander about for
a good hour, never sure of which character we're following or why.
Things *do* improve in the final reel, however, when writer/director
Paul Thomas Anderson (HARD EIGHT) scares several of the characters
straight with three separate (and shocking) instances of violence.
Still, with so many other accomplishments all under one roof-- camera
work, set design, soundtrack, etc.-- this has gotta be an easy movie to
overrate.  BTW, how many of those TOUCH OF EVIL takes did P.T. pull off,
anyway?  With Julianne Moore, John C. Reilly, Heather Graham, Don
Cheadle, Luis Guzman, William H. Macy, and, in one of his best roles in
years, Burt Reynolds.

Author
Timothy Scott
Dir: Paul Thomas Anderson
Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Julianne Moore, John C. Reilly, William H. Macy,
          Don Cheadle, Heather Graham, Nina Hartley & Burt Reynolds
        I was born in 1970, which makes me barely old enough to remember 
bell buttons, 8 tracks and disco.  However, since I was 17 years old I've 
seen more than my share of adult films.  I mention this only because I 
thinks its important to state up front that I'm not against pornogrpahy.  
I've seen enough of these films to know the range of content and quality 
available.
        Director Paul Thomas Anderson's Boogie Nights  offers us a view 
into the world of porn during the period considered to be the Golden Age 
of adult cinema, the mid to late
70s.
        This was the period when X-rated movies were real movies, shot on 
film, shown in movie theaters and even reviewed by legitimate critics.  
This was an age when porn directors actually aspired to make innovative 
often educational films, films that attempted to tell a real story.  One 
of the more fascinating aspects of this film is how, like in an any 
other billion dollar industry, the creative visionaries tend to be 
ignorant to the trends that will soon make them obsolete. In this case, 
the arrival of the now ubiquitous videocassette.
        Burt Reynold's manages to resuscitate his career portraying such 
an auteur, known as Jack Horner.  Horner's has a steady "family" of 
performers, some of whom live in his plush L.A. home.  But in the world 
of porn, performers are a commodity - the fresher, the  better.  
When Horner scouts a fresh faced stud bussing tables at his 
favorite discotheque, he decides to add him to his stable. It is a 
pairing that leads to a meteoric rise and fall for a young man 
reaching his prime and an old man rapidly speeding past his.
        As directed by Anderson, the camera moves through many of the 
scenes with an eerie omnipresence and an almost childlike curiosity to 
peer beyond the closed door.
        Boogie Nights provides a voyeuristic peep into the underbelly of 
L.A.'s hardcore film scene.  But the peep show doesnUt let us walk away 
when the titillation ends.  The downside of voyeurism is sometimes we end 
up seeing things we wish we hadnUt.
        By the film's final image, what we we once found titillating has 
now become a grim reminder of the vanity of fame and the high price of 
realizing your dreams.
        Boogie Nights is not about sex.  It does not glorify porn or the 
lifestyles of the performers.  In fact, the film isn't really about 
pornography at all.  Pornography is merely the setting to tell a 
compelling story about a lost and forgotten group of people who form 
their own sub-culture to find acceptance of who they are.
        The film goes to brilliant, often hilarious and sometimes 
harrowing lengths to show us that the people who choose to produce or 
perform in these films are generally not all that bright and lack the 
basic tools to function in the mainstream world.  Yet, like in the lauded 
Tarantino films, these people still have their own moral code, their own 
concepts of integrity and their own needs to experess themselves creatively.
        The characters we meet are like a road map of dysfuntion. First 
stop, the den mother (Julianne Moore) in denial about her addiction to 
cocaine as she tries to retain custody of her son. Second stop, the 
cuckold crewman (William H. Macy) who keeps discovering his wife having 
sex with anyone and everyone (the wife is played in hilarious cameos by 
real-life porn star Nina Hartley).     
        But the driving force behind the plot is 17 year old Eddie 
Adams.  Eddie is blessed with a natural endowment so famous that people 
actually pay just to see it.
        With no real ambition of his own, he hooks up with Jack Horner to 
fullfill his destiny of fame.  His alcoholic mother, clearly dissatisfied 
with her own lot, abuses him verbally and drives him out of the house.  
Horner introduces him to Amber Waves (Moore) who immediately adopts him, 
a nuclear family is born.  The surrogate relationship that develops 
between Amber Waves and her "babies" provides some of the films most 
poignant scenes. Clearly, she is not even fit to manage her own life, 
let alone nurture these lost children. But the need to love and be loved 
is so strong, they easily ignore the dangers of the less subtle addiction
she introduces them to. Even the viewer is somehow lulled into feeling like 
the love she offers is similar to being in a real family.  Then again,
perhaps its not so different from real families at all.
        Eddie Adams, who later takes on the screen name "Dirk Diggler", 
is skillfully acted by former pop-star, Mark Wahlberg. I say "former" pop 
star because with this performance Wahlberg can officially quit his day 
job.  This is bold and brave territory for such a young man.  He pulls it 
off marvelously. Wahlberg is a "big, bright star" with a big bright future.
        Boogie Nights  plays very much in the spirit of The People versus 
Larry Flynt, without the First Amendment preachiness.  Its intimate 
studies of character make it the superior film.  Wahlberg's surprising 
performance is on par with Woody Harrelson's.
        But in my opinion, Boogie Nights, is not the best film of the 
year.  I got the feeling that itUs 2 1/2 hour running time could have 
been cut by 15 or 20 minutes without losing any of its resonance.
        Still, if the subject matter of this film intimidates you, 
thereUs no doubt that once you start watching Boogie Nights  you may 
still feel like its not your thing, but youUll find yourself grooving to 
it anyway...ya know, kinda like disco.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Boogie Nights (1997)
Rated R for strong sex scenes with explicit dialogue, nudity, drug use,
language, and violence.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Mark Wahlberg, Burt Reynolds, Julianne Moore, Heather Graham,
Luis Guzman, William H. Macy, Don Cheadle, John C. Reilly.
Darkness.  A little shimmer of light from the New Line Cinema credit.
Then darkness again.  Darkness, and more darkness.  Suddenly, breaking
the darkness and the silence is a huge neon sign sporting the title of
the film: BOOGIE NIGHTS.  The 70s music destroys the peaceful silence
when the audience finally shuts up.  The neon sign is vibrant, wild,
and very descriptive of the film we are about to see.  Preparing for a
good time, and not really knowing what to expect, I walked into the
theater for a special engagement of the film.  In fact, it was obvious
most audience members didn't know what to expect.  Overall, I feel
that the film left its mark for life on every single audience member,
in one way or another.
BOOGIE NIGHTS is one of the best films of the year.  Period.  I have
heard all the praising done by critics, but never had I expected this
film.  Opening with probably the best character-introducing scenes
that I have ever seen in all my years of watching films, a smile came
across my face which never left for the first hour of the film.  The
camera pans away from the neon sign and drifts across the street and
into a local club.  We follow the host of this club, Maurice
T. Rodriguez (Luis Guzman), as he seats a couple of people.  This
couple is Jack Horner and Amber Waves (Burt Reynolds and Julianne
Moore).  The camera never cuts throughout this entire sequence,
following one person, and then landing on someone else to introduce us
to.  We follow Rollergirl (Heather Graham) and we finally meet Eddie
Adams (Mark Wahlberg).  This one sequence is so impressive that even I
was marvelling the great camerawork done.  I have never seen a scene
like it before, and if I ever do, it will probably not be as well done
as this one.
Director Paul Thomas Anderson has fully recreated the 70s decade in
vivid and shocking detail.  The colorful clothes and wild hairstyles
are magnificently reproduced.  But despite this, BOOGIE NIGHTS is more
of a character-driven drama.  Deriving its plot from the hardcore porn
films of the late 70s and early 80s, Nights creates an atmospheric
setting in which the adult film actors rise and fall from stardom.
The film centers around Eddie Adams, who changes his name to Dirk
Diggler after venturing into the porn business.  Adams is a busboy at
the club in which the film begins.  Jack Horner, a respected adult
fimmaker (respected in the porn industry anyway), who spots Eddie in
the club.  Later, he asks Eddie if he would like to be a star in one
of his films.  "I got a feeling that behind those jeans is something
wonderful just waiting to get out," remarks Horner.  All of this
happens within the first 15 minutes.
The rest of the film deals with many different characters, but focuses
mainly on Dirk Diggler and Jack Horner.  Amazingly, with all the
characters, all of them are well developed making us care for them and
their situations.  Among them include Little Bill (William H. Macy,
FARGO), Reed Rothchild (John C. Reilly), Buck Swope (Don Cheadle), and
the Colonel (Robert Ridgely).  Of course, these are just a few of
them.  Many critics complained that the film didn't develop any of the
characters completely.  On the contrary, BOOGIE NIGHTS does develop
every single character, but what screenwriter Anderson does is cut out
all the scenes which supposedly bring the characters out even more.
Many of these scenes are fillers and unnecessary.  Running at around 2
hours and 30 minutes, BOOGIE NIGHTS establishes the characters, shoves
them into the porn industry, and then yanks everything out from under
them.  At its most basic, this film is a simple "Rise and Fall" story.
But what lies beneath this is a world of discovery and surprise.  And
beneath that is a world of love and hope.
More goes on in BOOGIE NIGHTS than in most movies of this genre
(whatever that may be).  It has more subplots than PULP FICTION and
more characters than any film out this year.  Many characters appear
in other films, but BOOGIE NIGHTS actually focuses on the happenings
of all the different people.  Little Bill is disturbed because his
wife (porn star Nina Hartley) keeps committing adultery, and not being
too shy about it.  In one scene, she displays her sexual talent in the
driveway, surrounded by on-lookers.  When Little Bill asks her what
she is doing, she says, "Shut up Bill.  You're embarrassing me."  Reed
Rothchild becomes one of Dirk's best friends, and he also becomes his
sidekick in some of the porn films.  Buck Swope has an entire subplot
devoted to him, beginning with him as a country-loving stereo salesman
to a loving hubsand.  Due to his activity in the porn industry,
however, Swope is prejudiced against in his future business deals.
One of the most inventive and effective techniques used by Anderson is
the change from the 70s to the 80s.  During the 70s, the porn industry
is done on film and shown in theaters.  Jack Horner's dream is to make
movies with actual stories to keep the audience in their seats once
they have achieved their purpose for watching the film.  The change to
the 80s is done in one remarkable scene.  During the New Year's Eve
party, everybody is at Horner's house, and having a good time.  Little
Bill finds his wife with another man, and fet up with her
adulterations, gets a gun from his car.  He walks into the house,
shoots his wife and her partner, walks into the living room with all
the guests, and sticks the gun into his mouth.  The transition from
the disco, fun-loving 70s to the violent, disturbing 80s is very well
executed.
Despite what may sound like a sex-filled drama, BOOGIE NIGHTS cleverly
manages to show us very little.  In fact, what it does show us is done
in such a way that it is more humorous than erotic.  In one scene, the
film expires and they have to change reels.  Horner tells Dirk and
Amber to pause while they reload.  The conversation between Dirk and
Amber at this moment is truly hilarious, and also makes us realize
that sexual pleasure is more like this ("Does it feel good?") than in
other films with sex scenes.  The nudity is more explicit, showing
full frontal nudity of both sexes.  However, Anderson wisely waits
till the very last shot (considered to be the "money shot") to show
the audience Dirk's possession.  Previously, Anderson relies on
actor's expressions to display the impressive size of Dirk Diggler.
In one of my favorite scenes, The Colonel asks to see it, and gets an
awkward grin on his face, replying, "Thank you."  Never leaving the
actor's face during this moment, we are left to imagine... until the
last scene, of course.
The cast of BOOGIE NIGHTS is top-notch and I sense a couple of Oscar
nominations headed towards Burt Reynolds and perhaps even Mark
Wahlberg.  Burt Reynolds does an incredible job, giving one of his
best performances ever.  Instead of overacting (like he did in
STRIPTEASE), he relies on the character's depth and conviction to
propel the character forward.  He remains low-key, but everything
seems to revolve around him.  Mark Wahlberg gives an outstanding
performance, proving to be a better actor than a singer.  His turn in
Fear was quite frightening, but here he establishes a star-making
performance.  Julianne Moore gives one of the best performances in the
film with one of the best characters.  Moore's character becomes
Dirk's surrogate mother when Moore regrets losing her son years ago.
Heather Graham, as Rollergirl, is very good and charming.  Refusing to
take of her skates--which also aid in a very violent scene--Graham
gives the character added depth with a sweet face and an innocent
appearance (which, as we all see, is not entirely true).  William
H. Macy gives yet another good performance, providing a lot of humor
himself.  John C. Reilly gives a good performance in a slightly
underdeveloped character.  Don Cheadle is extremely effective as the
stereo salesman, who provides one of the most complex characters in
the film.  Many other actors appear, and all are very good.
BOOGIE NIGHTS is rated R (and a very hard R it is) for strong sex
scenes with explicit dialogue, nudity, drug use, language, and
violence.  Nearly receiving an NC-17 rating, Anderson cut several
scenes out.  By doing so, he creates an "R rated depiction of XXX
rated movies."  The sex scenes are filmed not by showing the actual
deed, but by showing the filmmaker's reactions.  The language is very
harsh, but it is to be expected.  Be advised that this film is not for
the weak of stomach or heart.  In fact, several people walked out in
disgust during the screening of the film.  Perhaps they were offended
by Anderson trying to put the porn industry into a good light, but
they also missed the downfall of the porn stars, which gave the film
added depth.  BOOGIE NIGHTS is a courageous and daring film which
reminds us how fun watching a movie can really be.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
During the seven years the movie covers (1977-1984), Los Angeles was
a busy place: pornographic films, drugs and disco were the rage.  It
was during those same years that one film maker of porno films made
an attempt to legitimatize the genre and raise it to respectability.
Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds) is one such who gives it a try.   What
happens next is what this film is all about, the ups and downs of
all whom the pornographic industry touched.
BOOGIE NIGHTS, under the watchful eye of its 26-year old director,
contains frontal nudity; despite this, at no time is there a single
frame that can be thought of as erotic.  Quite a feat.
All the characters in that industry want to be loved.  All have an
astigmatic view of the genre and their part in it.  There is the
story's star who changes his acting name from a simple Eddie Adams
to Dirk Diggler (Mark Wahlberg), a name he feels is in keeping with
the kind of roles he plays, someone who can put on a simulated (and
not so simulated) act of making love any time he wishes.  He is
young and dashing and invincible, etc. etc. . . . or so he thinks.
Everyone loves him; he has more money than he ever dreamed existed
as well as women all around him.  What more could an innocent,
untalented, uneducated young man want?
As the industry grew, Jack Horner became a kind of father to everyone
around him.  At the same time he is well aware that Freud would have
had a ball with any of them; in some way they are all sick or
deficient but none can see it.   They think they are just as good
actors as in legitimate films.   In his role as the "father" and
film maker, Reynolds does a superb bit of underlaying.
Amber Waves (Julianne Moore) wants to be a star, to be adored and
never stops to consider what is necessary to give up in order to
achieve stardom in porno films.   Then there is Rollergirl (Heather
Graham) an innocent who all picture long moves on roller skates,
lacking the intelligence to see the idiocy of that.
There are many more characters in the film, each meticulously drawn
to show the era, the madness and finally the disillusionment.  Fine
acting helps make the film very real.  There is Don Cheadle who
keeps changing his wardrobe in attempts to find out who he is.  Little
Bill is played by William H Macy.
For one fleeting second during the period covered by the film, some
thought that the film industry and the public would finally realize
that porno films was a serious, real art form;  that never happened.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The revered director Robert Altman's films are populated with a
dizzying cornucopia of characters that assault your emotions.  Although
there are Altman aficionados who dote on his every movie, most people
are impressed by some but bored by others.  For every brilliant SHORT
CUTS, there is a confusing KANSAS CITY.
     Young director Paul Thomas Anderson's much talked about film
BOOGIE NIGHTS can be viewed as a homage to Altman's style.  Set in the
San Fernando Valley in 1977-1983, the movie chronicles the life of porn
film director Jack Horner, played in his best performance in dozens of
years by Burt Reynolds.  Although Jack is the story's glue, most of the
picture focuses on Jack's stars and backers and on the whole porn
industry scene of sex, drugs, and violence.
     "Before you turn around, you've spent maybe 20, 25, 30 thousand
dollars on a movie," complains Jack to his "17-year-old piece of gold,"
Eddie Adams.  Eddie, who later picks a new name of Dirk Diggler, is
played with charismatic intensity by Mark Wahlberg.  Although Jack has
visions of making a classy porn film where people will actually stay
until the end, he knows his bread and butter is titillation.  Eddie,
who tells himself that "everyone is blessed with one special thing,"
has just the right sized equipment to make it big in the "adult film
industry."
     The storyline uses the descent into hell structure.  Starting on
an upbeat note, the players are all one happy family even if their
ritual proclivities are certainly what most people would view as
deviant.  FARGO Academy Award nominee William H. Macy plays Jack's
assistant director, Little Bill.  Little Bill has to have a pretty
thick skin since his wife, played by real-life porn star Nina Hartley,
has sex with other men in every place imaginable, including the
driveway, while others watch.  Macy is terrific as the hopelessly
trapped wimp of a husband.
     Although one young waif ODs early on, the drug taking accelerates
as the story advances.  And as the characters begin to hit bottom, they
turn with increasing frequency to violence.  (Although different people
will have different levels of sensitivity, I found the most shocking
aspect of the film to be the amount of drug usage.  There is more
cocaine snorting in this one movie that I've seen in the last 500
combined.)
     Undoubtedly the praise for the movie, which many have already put
it in the best picture of the year category, comes from the depth of
the characters and the exemplary quality of the acting.  Julianne Moore
plays Jack's live-in companion and porn actress Amber Waves.  Amber
approaches her fellow actors with maternal instincts even when having
sex with them on camera.  My favorite minor character is Floyd Gondolli
(Philip Baker Hall), who, like the man in THE GRADUATE, has a one word
piece of advice to Jack about the future.  This time it's "videotape"
rather than "plastics."
     The picture has everything in it, right down to a dance routine
straight out of SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER, and that is the problem.
According to published reports, Anderson had only two constraints.  His
contract with the studio obligated him to get an R rating rather than
the dreaded NC-17 and to bring in the picture within a two-and-a-half
hour running time.  Although he did both, the pictures suffers greatly
from being too long.  With fewer characters, tighter editing, and a
more focused story, it would have been much more palatable and
enjoyable.  At the theater I was in, the audience all looked exhausted
when they left.
     After a devastating ending, there is a upbeat and cutesy epilogue
as if to say that we should not have taken the show or its characters
too seriously.  The movie BOOGIE NIGHTS suffers from too much promise
but not enough control.  Anderson seems to load the film up with every
idea he's ever had.  BOOGIE NIGHTS is considerably better than his last
film, HARD EIGHT, and I hope in his next one he uses better judgment
when it comes to pruning.
     BOOGIE NIGHTS runs 2:32.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, violence,
profanity, and massive amounts of hard drug usage.  The movie is not
appropriate for teenagers.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Boogie Nights (1997)
Mark Wahlberg, Burt Reynolds, Julianne Moore, Don Cheadle, Heather Graham.
 Directed by Paul Thomas Anderson.
Rated R, 4 out of 5 stars
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
In terms of highly anticipated films, "Boogie Nights" is the 500 pound 
gorilla of the fall season. For months, through reports from trade 
screenings and film festivals, the buzz for this sprawling look at the L.
A. world of pornographic filmmaking in the 70s has been phenomenal. The 
big surprise is that the actual movie almost lives up to all of the hype. 
Writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson's wildly entertaining epic captures 
the late 70s/early 80s era in all its tacky glory, with terrific 
performances from a large ensemble cast. To be sure, the film has its 
problems. After a near-perfect first hour and a half, Anderson stumbles 
badly during an abrupt transition in tone, but quickly regains his 
footing for a powerhouse wrap-up. "Boogie Nights" is two and one half 
hours long, but the time whizzes by. 
The film tells the rags-to-riches-to-rags story of a young man with a 
dream. 17-year-old busboy Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg) believes that 
"everyone is blessed with one special gift." In Eddie's case, the gift is 
a 13" penis and boundless sexual energy. Seasoned porn filmmaker Jack 
Horner (Burt Reynolds) discovers the kid and before you can say John 
Holmes, Eddie becomes Dirk Diggler, porn superstar.
A great deal of the fun in "Boogie Nights" comes from Anderson's perfect 
re-creation of the outrageous attitudes and godawful fashions of the 70s, 
the most embarrassing decade in memory. Bad taste reigned supreme back 
then, and it's all up there on the screen; a leisure-suited, polyester 
paean to days gone by. It was an era of unparalleled hedonism as well, 
and the film overflows with scenes of copious drug use and unprotected 
sex. In the 70s, pornography went from being everyone's dirty little 
secret to actually becoming trendy; accordingly, Jack Horner and his 
entourage wheel around Los Angeles like kings and queens.  
Once a movie star, more recently a national joke, Burt Reynolds reclaims 
his career with his portrayal of Jack Horner. Reynolds ditches his 
trademark smirks and cackles, playing the character in an straightforward,
 extremely assured manner. Jack Horner is a wry old pro who knows the 
business of pornography, and Reynold's performance is earning him the 
respect he has always almost had. As Dirk Diggler, Mark Wahlberg is 
excellent, evolving from shallow kid to pampered superstar to desperate 
stoner, all while maintaining a disarming sense of naiveté. 
In real life, Burt Reynolds and Mark Wahlberg have led similar careers. 
Both became pop icons by taking their clothes off (Reynolds as the first 
male centerfold in Cosmopolitan, Wahlberg in the legendary Calvin Klein 
underwear ads.)  Both mismanaged their fame and saw their careers decline.
 It's ironic that the men have now achieved redemption in a film dealing 
with sex, drugs and violence. Ironic, and kind of nice.
Wahlberg and Reynolds aren't the only good actors here. The casting of 
"Boogie Nights" is virtually flawless, with standout performances from 
Julianne Moore as Amber Waves, the earth mother of the group; "Swingers" 
Heather Graham as the blissed-out Rollergirl and Don Cheadle as Buck 
Swope, a porn actor whose real ambition is to open up a "really bitchin' 
stereo store."
27-year-old Anderson's influences show in both the structure and the film 
techniques of "Boogie Nights," not that that's necessarily a bad thing. 
Beginning with a long, gliding track shot, the first two thirds of the 
film are reminiscent of Martin Scorcese's "Goodfellas," with hints of 
Robert Altman's "Nashville." The last third of the film comes straight 
from the hyper-violent land of "Pulp Fiction's" Quentin Tarantino, with a 
twisted homage to Scorcese's "Raging Bull" wrapping things up. Anderson's 
big stumble comes in the films last third, as the action shifts from the 
decadent late 70s to the greedy 80s. After an hour and a half of giddy 
randomness, Anderson lunges into a cluster of scenes depicting various 
characters suffering a variety of nasty consequences to their earlier 
actions. The sequences badly thrown off the rhythm of the film, making it 
feel like some demented Afterschool Special. Luckily, he regains his 
balance quickly, leading into a terrifying, dazzling segment of a drug 
deal gone wrong that ranks among the most riveting scenes ever laid down 
on film.
To its credit, "Boogie Nights" doesn't make any grand statement about the 
human condition. The film is just a series of stories about a intriguing 
group of people during a very goofy and dangerous period of American 
culture. What makes this film transcendent is Anderson's vast talent and 
the sheer exhilaration of his vision. Each of us is blessed with one 
special gift and Anderson certainly has discovered his.
review copyright 1997, Ed Johnson-Ott

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen with Tony on 10 November 1997 for $8.75 at the Sony 19th Street
Believe it or not, in life and in the movies, a 13-inch penis will only go
so far. If it happens to be attached to you, you ultimately might decide
it's more trouble than it's worth. Just look at what happens to Eddie
Adams in *Boogie Nights*. 
The hoopla surrounding *Boogie Nights* is ill-deserved. You will spend a
nonrefundable 152 minutes watching truly stupid people rise and fall (no
pun intended) in the porno industry. This was my major beef with the
movie.  Nothing counters the complete stupidity of these characters. The
few moments of pathos are worthless because none of these characters are
drawn either sympathetically *or* demonically. There is no need for the
audience to love or hate these people; it's like eavesdropping on the shop
class kids who smoke near the bike rack at your high school. Would you
want to do *that* for 152 minutes? 
Like many movies set in the 1970s, there are lots of unintentional laughs
in *Boogie Nights*, which spans 1977 through about 1985. One has to credit
the actors in this movie; it takes a lot of talent to act this stupid.
Eddie Adams (Mark "Marky Mark" Wahlberg) possesses the forementioned
13-inch penis. It is "his one special thing," and he uses it to his
advantage, because he is not a bright boy. He catches the eye of the
ridiculously named Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds), a pornographer who thinks
he is a "filmmaker." An overnight success, Eddie becomes "Dirk Diggler"
and is able to fund his hapless American dream--a house featuring a lot of
wood panelling, a closet full of hideous clothing, and a red Camaro. The
movie touches on the notion that he comes from a broken home; his shrill
mother (Joanna Gleason) inexplicably hates him, so he immediately becomes
a porn star. Rollergirl (Heather Graham) isn't prepared for a test, so she
runs off to become the porn star (who never removes her rollerskates). 
These are motivations? None of this is developed or makes sense! 
There are other subplots too numerous and stupid to mention; in the end
none of it means much of anything. There are consequences to the
pornographer's actions, but instead of feeling for these people, all you
can think is, "Well, what did they expect would happen." Many
opportunities to make the characters more pitiful or more ironic or
nastier are missed; they remain simply annoying.  The idea that they form
a "special kind of family" is would be okay if it were not so
bizarre--like Amber Waves (Julianne Moore), who sees herself as a mother
to Dirk and Rollergirl. Ahem! Mothers usually do not *have sexual
intercourse* with their children! 
Also, shame on director Paul Thomas Anderson for ripping off Quentin
Tarantino, and numerous others.
BONUS: In the event rampant drug use and pornography simply was not enough
for you, there is also senseless violence. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Burt Reynolds, Julianne Moore, Don Cheadle, 
      Heather Graham, John C. Reilly, William H. Macy, Nicole Parker, 
      Luis Guzman, Philip Baker Hall, Alfred Molina, Melora Walters, 
      Robert Ridgely
Director: Paul Thomas Anderson
Producers: Lloyd Levin, John Lyons, Paul Thomas Anderson, Joanne Sellar
Screenplay: Paul Thomas Anderson
Cinematography: Robert Elswit
Music: Michael Penn
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     There was a time during the long history of the adult entertainment 
industry that porn films showed signs of artistic ambition.  During the 
late '70s, a small cadre of directors believed that they could combine 
the raunch of real sex with an involving plot.  It was a lofty goal, and 
one that ultimately proved impossible to realize, especially with the 
advent of video forcing movies to be made cheaper and faster.  In his 
new film, BOOGIE NIGHTS, writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson takes us 
back to the disco era, and, by following a small group of characters, 
recreates the rise and fall of "artistic porn" and those who 
participated in it.
     But BOOGIE NIGHTS isn't just an expose of the porn industry -- it's 
a provocative and involving character study, as well.  While it could be 
argued that Anderson has bitten off more than he can chew -- a few too 
many of the men and women populating his film are left half-developed -- 
an overambitious approach is always preferable to the alternative, and 
BOOGIE NIGHTS does enough things right that it's easy to overlook its 
few shortcomings.
     One of the movie's greatest, and most immediately obvious, assets 
is its ability to capture the feel and mood of the late '70s and early 
'80s.  At different times throughout the film, Anderson uses long, 
single takes where the camera pans from one character to another, 
putting the viewer in the midst of a swirl of activity.  The director 
also has a talent for picking just the right songs for each scene, 
making the soundtrack an integral part of the movie rather than just a 
jumbled collection of old disco hits.  Add to that the hairdos, 
clothing, decor, and attitudes of the era, and you have an effective re-
creation of recent history.  And, unlike THE ICE STORM, which transpires 
in '70s suburbia, BOOGIE NIGHTS is set in the sleazy heart of Los 
Angeles' drug-and-sex industry. 
     Anderson also does a wonderful job of delineating the differences 
between the late '70s and the early '80s.  The first half of the film, 
which takes place between 1977 and late 1979, is lively and energetic, 
with the focus on parties and good times.  Then, following a pivotal 
sequence at a 1979/80 New Year's Eve gathering, BOOGIE NIGHTS' tone 
shifts to something more grim and contentious.  The porn industry goes 
into a downward spiral with mass-market video supplanting carefully-made 
movies, and the actors and directors are sucked down with it.  Drugs and 
death run rampant.  No one dies during the movie's first half (although 
there is a drug overdose), but the final hour features a body count.
     At BOOGIE NIGHTS' center is Eddie Adams (Mark Wahlberg), a waiter 
at a San Fernando Valley night club who is "discovered" by idealistic 
porn movie producer/director Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds).  Jack's dream 
is to make a movie that is "true, and right, and dramatic," and his 
vision excites Eddie, who changes his name to Dirk Diggler and quickly 
becomes the hottest young stud in the industry.  Together, the director 
and his star seek to elevate the Adult Film to the next level (which 
actually resembles a cheap exploitation action flick).
     Dirk isn't the only one under Jack's wing.  His home has become the 
gathering place for all sorts of damaged souls working in the business.  
There's Amber Waves (Julianne Moore), a top female star who has lost 
custody of her son because of her involvement with Jack.  Rollergirl 
(Heather Graham) is an airheaded young starlet who drops out of high 
school to be in the movies.  Buck Swope (Don Cheadle) is one of Jack's 
veterans, but his dream is to have a wife, a family, and his own hi-fi 
equipment store.  Reed Rothchild (John C. Reilly) is a hanger-on who 
becomes close friends with Dirk.  And Little Bill (William H. Macy) is a 
behind-the-scenes worker who never feels comfortable with the kind of 
movies that he's involved in.  His resolution to this dilemma leads to 
BOOGIE NIGHTS' change of direction.
     Although Mark Wahlberg has the starring role, and gives the best 
performance of his still-young career (although there are still times 
when he is stiff), he is easily overshadowed by two more impressive 
portrayals.  Burt Reynolds, doing his best motion picture work in recent 
memory, develops Jack into a three-dimensional individual who really 
believes in his job until disillusionment hits.  Matching Reynolds' 
performance step-by-step is Julianne Moore, who can add her role in 
BOOGIE NIGHTS to an ever-increasing list of interesting and challenging 
characters.  Meanwhile, Heather Graham, Don Cheadle, and William H. Macy 
are impressive in smaller parts (all of them deserve more screen time).  
And porn icon Nina Hartley gets some mainstream exposure, and even a few 
lines, as Little Bill's wife.
     BOOGIE NIGHTS is filled with so many subplots and secondary themes 
that it would be impossible to recount them all here.  Some of the most 
obvious involve the allure of stardom and the price certain individuals 
are willing to pay to attain it, the difficulty of "rehabilitating" 
one's name after being associated with something as "damaging" as the 
porn industry, and the inner need to belong.  All of the men and women 
populating BOOGIE NIGHTS encounter at least one of these elements as 
they traverse their character arc.
     With BOOGIE NIGHTS, Anderson has realized the potential he showed 
in his previous feature, HARD 8 (which featured John C. Reilly and 
Philip Baker Hall, two members of this movie's ensemble cast).  BOOGIE 
NIGHTS is a dramatically rich and visually arresting motion picture that 
has earned (and is deserving of) comparisons to the films of Robert 
Altman.  Anderson takes risks with this movie, few of which fall short.  
(One of these is the pointed and sure-to-be controversial final shot -- 
a perfectly conceived and framed statement about the de-humanizing 
effects of the porn industry.)  The result is a memorably penetrating 
motion picture.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1997, R, 152 minutes [2 hours, 32 minutes]
starring: Mark Wahlberg (Eddie Adams/Dirk Diggler), Burt Reynolds (Jack
Horner), Julianne Moore (Amber Waves), Heather Graham (Rollergirl); produced
by Paul Thomas Anderson, Lloyd Levin, John Lyons, Joanne Sellar; written and
directed by Paul Thomas Anderson.
Seen Saturday, November 1, 1997 at 3:15 p.m. at Mohawk Mall (Schenectady, NY)
for $4.25 by myself.
There's been a number of epic, "The Rise and Fall of..." films released in
the last few years. It's a formula that's guaranteed for success if the
characters are developed well enough so that when they "fall" it's effective.
Most films using this formula are about low and/or high class criminals, but
what makes "Boogie Nights" so original and daring is the fact it's about
people who produce pornography. Yet this isn't a film about freedom of speech
and ethics (a la "The People Vs. Larry Flynt"), it's just a detailed study of
characters most mainstream films wouldn't dare deal with.
I'm sure everyone has wondered make kind of people are involved in the porn
industry. Are they sick and twisted or are they everyday people? Are they
exploiting their wild sexuality with porn, or does porn make them sexually
wild? It's a classic case of "the chicken and the egg," and the film leaves
it up to us to answer those questions.
This idea is perfectly illustrated through the main character, Eddie Adams
(Wahlberg), a busboy who's very well-endowed and doesn't consider himself a
stud, or at least realize he is and what he could do. He is approached by
Jack Horner (Reynolds), an adult filmmaker who takes his profession seriously
and knows Eddie could be a major star. Eddie comes from a dysfunctional
family, and when his mother kicks him out, he takes up Horner's offer not
knowing whether he'll enjoy it or not.
Although Eddie (who changes his name to Dirk Diggler) is the film's
protagonist, Horner is the catalyst around whom everything revolves. The film
takes place in the late 1970s and early 80s when porn was moving from
theaters to home video, but Horner insists on shooting all his movies on film
since he considers it an artform. This fact on its own makes it seem as if
Horner is one sick puppy, but within the film's context it makes sense
because we get to know him well enough to understand his rationalization, yet
we're not asked to condone or condemn him.
In fact, that idea symbolizes the film's usage of characterization and
theme. It delves deep into the industry, creating for an extremely
nihilistic, almost anarchic lifestyle (it's surprising this wasn't rated
NC-17). Many of the "actors" are drug addicts who do it for the money, while
others are seemingly normal people who just happen to be porn stars. The
business is such a part of their daily routine and their overall lifestyle
there's almost no distinction between the characters' personal lives and
professional lives. For example, consider the starlet Rollergirl (Graham) who
is called by that name at all times because nobody even knows her real name.
Or Amber Waves (Moore), a starlet who tries to be something of a mother to
the actors - someone they can look to for support.... among other things.
The first half documents the rise of Diggler from a nobody to a somebody,
and in the process does a good job in defining atmosphere and character. But
history proves fame can be taken away just as quickly as it was given, and
this happens here as Diggler (along with some of his co-stars) becomes a drug
addict. At first, he was coerced into drug use, but eventually he seemed to
genuinely enjoy it - so whose fault is it?
By the two-thirds point the film becomes more of a straight crime story
showing Diggler's attempts to get by using any means necessary. At the same
time, Horner starts losing his edge because he's so adamantly opposed to
switching to the mass market appeal of VHS home video ("Like any amateur can
just pick up a camera and make a movie!?"). I didn't like the gloomy
direction the story takes at this point. I felt as if I had seen most of it
before, in films such as "Trainspotting," "GoodFellas," and "Casino." The
story wanders a bit more than it needs to and I found myself becoming a
little restless. However, the ending is clever and poetic.
There's much to commend "Boogie Nights" for, mostly for the chance it takes
in telling the story it does, but also for its use of open-ended themes so
everyone will leave without feeling as if they'd been preached to, just
intellectually stimulated.


Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
The great Yogi Berra was once hanging out with his Yankee drinking
buddies when one of them suggested going to see a porno movie.  "C'mon,
Yogi," one of them said, "let's go see a dirty movie."
"I don't know," Yogi replied.  "Who's in it?"
By their very nature, pornographic movies don't spend a lot of time on
character development or acting ability or costumes or, well, anything.
Boogie Nights is a real movie, with the goal of showing the audience the
personalities and the lives of the otherwise anonymous naked people
working in the 1970's  pornography industry.  It spends time on all of
the things that the dirty movies leave out, and its attention to the
details of the period and to the development of its characters make it a
very watchable and sometimes gripping film.
This is a movie that walks a narrow knife blade.  If this was a movie
devoted to romanticizing and glamorizing its characters, people would
have stayed away in droves.  The subject matter is not the stuff of high
tragedy, and the characters who populate the film are a little too
sleazy to merit overly dramatic treatment.  At the same time, it
wouldn't have taken much of an effort to turn this script into a piece
of comic fluff as insubstantial as Burt Reynolds's hairpiece.  The
1970's setting, the sexual content, and the essential dimness of the
characters, if handled improperly, could have landed this film into the
straight-to-video "Wild Comedy" shelf at Blockbuster.  Boogie Nights is
a balanced movie, walking the knife blade steadily, and almost without a
slip.
The center of the Boogie Nights universe is the San Fernando Valley
mansion of stag film director Jack Horner (Reynolds).  It's sort of a
low-rent Playboy Mansion, complete with string bikinis, a hot tub, a wet
bar, and a basement studio where (apparently) all the movies are
filmed.  And almost everybody we see in the movie is down in that
basement at one time or another, running the cameras, checking the
lighting, taking off their clothes...  it's an odd setup, and could have
been interpreted as a hedonist's Valhalla or a moralist's Sodom and
Gomorrah.  Boogie Nights only works because we get a third perspective:
the creative perspective, where the details of lighting and sound and
storyline are actually taken seriously by a dedicated team of people who
are sincere about their desire to make better dirty movies.
The movie is ostensibly about the rise and fall of Dirk Diggler (Mark
Wahlberg), a young busboy-turned-video matress dancer.  Wahlberg does a
better acting job than anybody had a right to expect -- unless he's just
naturally dim and earnest by nature.  If the Dirk character is ever --
for one second -- unlikable, or if the audience ever takes his macho
posturing seriously, the movie is doomed.  A movie like this is a heavy
load for a young, untried actor, but Wahlberg carries the movie like a
veteran.
He is aided by a spectacular supporting cast.  I'm not convinced that
the performances of Julianne Moore and Burt Reynolds are Oscar-caliber,
but Moore is sweet and affecting as the earth-mother porn-star Amber
Waves, and Reynolds's sleazy charm is made-to-order for his role.
Heather Graham is luminous in the thankless role of Rollergirl, whose
ever-present rollerskates are one of the movies many sight gags --
speaking of which, William H. Macy's hairstyle and drooping mustache
accentuate his brief part as a hangdog assistant director and unloved
husband (whose wife has the movie's signature line).
The unsung hero of Boogie Nights is Don Cheadle, best known for his role
as a district attorney on TV's Picket Fences.  He plays Buck, the only
member of the porno crew to have an independent existence outside the
industry -- as a low-rent stereo salesman, aspiring to open his own shop
with low wholesale prices.  He must have done something in a past life
to earn the enmity of the costume shop, because they're unmerciful to
him, dressing him in everything from Roy Rogers cowboy outfits to a Pat
Boone white suit.  Neverthess, Cheadle has one scene that defines the
movie.  He is (for once) dressed in a conservative suit, and is in a
bank looking for a loan to open his shop.  The bank manager denies
Buck's loan application on the grounds that he's a "pornographer".
"It's not fair," says Cheadle, and the great thing about this movie is
that we the audience agree with him.  We're relating to Buck as a person
and not a piece of meat.  We know his hopes and ambitions, we know
they've been crushed, and we identify with him completely -- just as we
identify with Julianne Moore as she loses custody of her son, just as we
identify with Burt Reynolds as he's forced to give up his pretentions of
being a filmmaker.  Without that identification, without that
relationship, Boogie Nights would sink like a stone -- but the acting is
so good that we're rooting for the characters, even as their worlds come
crashing down around them.
Boogie Nights also boasts superb set design and costume work.  Having
spent the latter part of the 1970s at Lyndon B. Johnson Elementary
School in suburban Texas, I am not qualified to judge whether or not
director Paul Thomas Anderson has successfully recaptured this era, but
it certainly looks that way.  The movie looks like a whole squadron of
UCLA cultural anthropology students have spent the past twelve months
digging through the flea markets and bargain bins of Los Angeles just to
find the appropriate Cheryl Tiegs poster to put in Mark Wahlberg's
bedroom, or the appropriate 8-track hi-fi for stereo salesman / porn
actor Don Cheadle to sell, or the just-right platform shoes and
"imported Italian nylon" costumes. By making the audience chuckle at the
bell-bottoms and disco balls that abound in Boogie Nights,
writer/director Anderson keeps them from taking the story too seriously,
and also allows the set design to carry the burden of the humor.
Dirk Diggler tells us that everybody has "one special thing" (his being
the size of his manly region, a running joke throughout).  Boogie Nights
is fortunate to have at least two special things:  the excellence of its
set design and the quality of its actors. If it's not a great movie,
it's an exceptionally well-crafted movie, and these days, that goes a
long, long way.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
Christopher Null
     Now this is some production.  I'm lucky enough to live in one of the
"selected cities" for BOOGIE NIGHTS's limited opening (it goes wide on Oct.
31), and in all my years as a moviegoer, I think this is the first time I've
seen a mirrorball in the theater put to use during a film.  Outside of that,
BOOGIE NIGHTS may have generated the most enthusiastic audience response I've
heard in ages.
     The premise is simple and well-known.  Young "Dirk Diggler" ("Marky" Mark
Wahlberg) is a busboy discovered in a Receda nightclub by a big-time porn
flick producer (Burt Reynolds, in perhaps his best role *ever*).  Mingling
with the likes of Amber Waves (Julianne Moore, my fave actress), the innocent
Rollergirl (Heather Graham, who doesn't have nearly enough screen time), and
other bigshots of the biz, Diggler rises (so to speak) and falls as the porn
industry ruptures during the dawn of the 1980s.
     One of the more frightening portrayals of life in the 70s to hit screens
recently, BOOGIE NIGHTS is full of kitsch and sprawls over a full decade of
excess.  Writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson, who hit-and-missed with HARD
EIGHT, takes a dozen characters through 2 1/2 hours of meandering storylines,
supporting players, drug/sex binges, and more costume changes than you can
fathom.  Because he has so much to say, and because everyone's story goes in a
different direction, a lot of this film gets lost in the margins.  Too many
characters are too much alike, and most of them are too shallow to merit any
screen time at all.
     The result is a sloppy, scattered feature that, surprisingly, completely
engaged me from the opening shot.  I don't exactly know why BOOGIE NIGHTS is
so enjoyable, but it's probably because it's just so much fun to *watch*. 
Porn has never been handled with such style and irony before, and watching
Anderson serve up slice after slice of the industry's excess and self-defeat
is hysterical, despite the obvious problems with the script.  (Note that the
film's sex scenes are very inexplicit.)
     There's probably not much of a message to take away from the film (Don't
Do Drugs has been done before), but it doesn't suffer much from it.  You'll
need to swallow your preconceived notions, but I would not hesitate to
recommend the film to just about anyone.
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael Redman
"Everyone's blessed with one special thing," explains Eddie Adams. Eddie's
blessing is his extraordinarily endowed "special thing".
Set in the seventies and eighties, Adams' (Mark Wahlberg of Marky Mark fame)
journey into the porn industry is the center point for this comedic yet dark
film. Reminiscent of Robert Altman's "Nashville", the movie also follows a
gaggle of other characters, each more damaged than the next.
Adult film auteur Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds) notices Eddie in a nightclub and
recognizes the possibilities that the young man possesses when he tells him "I
have the feeling that behind those jeans is something wonderful just waiting
to get out." Fresh from being kicked out of his parent's house because he will
never amount to anything, Eddie accepts the invitation into Horner's film
production dysfunctional family.
It looks like the good life. Full-tilt partying, easy sex, drugs, platform
shoes, the chance to be a movie star: what more could a kid in the seventies
want? As you might expect, no good time goes unpunished. As the eighties start
off with a bang (in all meanings of the word), things fall apart. Hedonism
turns to violence, crime and drug addiction. The good life isn't.
As with many current films, this one is long. Often the story is so engrossing
that you won't notice the length, but occasionally the rambling plot makes you
feel all two and a half hours. There are scenes that could have been exorcised
and we wouldn't have lost a thing.
Invoking the seventies is one of the most successful aspects of the movie and
also one of its most irritating. There are so many icons that bring to mind
that time period and the film has all of them right. The problem is that it's
shoved in our face. When porn star/stereo salesman Buck Swope (Don Cheadle)
shoves an eight-track into a player, he has to _tell_ us it's an eight-track.
"Seventies! Seventies! It's the seventies!" everyone screams. Yeah, we get the idea.
The hindsight of looking back 20 years provides some of the humor. When Eddie
(now renamed Dirk Diggler) brags about his "authentic imported Italian nylon"
shirt, we all know how comfortable plastic clothes turned out to be. Dancing
in platform shoes in the disco doesn't look cool anymore, it looks ludicrous.
Director Paul Thomas Anderson calls that decade "a wonderful period of music
and fashion." Anderson is 26. His memories are those of a 6-year-old.
But the era is only the backdrop to the real drama. When Eddie is sucked into
Horner's oxymoronic kindly and paternal sleazy clan, he finds the home that he
needs. Along with numerous other hangers-on, they provide support for each
other. Even when the gold turns to sludge, they still try to hold things
together -- they just don't know how.
Wahlberg is the perfect combination of youth and determined naivete to play
the up and coming stud. Like most of the characters, his Eddie is all drive
and little skill. In their microcosm, the horrendous "Mod Squad" knockoff
action-adventure porn series wins awards. Eddie's abortive rock and roll
career is doomed from the start.
Burt Reynolds turns in his most successful role in years. His laid back
director wants to produce "artistic" porn that will keep the audience in their
seats after they have enjoyed the film in the traditional manner. His nemesis
is video tape. As VCRs invade the American home and adult films are being
produced by everyone who can pick up a camera, Horner attempts to hold out for
quality. In the kingdom of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.
The rest of the cast is equally capable. Julianne Moore as Amber Waves is an
especially sympathetic character. Besides acting in the films, Waves is the
substitute mother to the rest, compensating for her biological son who was
taken away from her.
Rollergirl (Heather Graham), a teenage runaway, doesn't have much of a
personality until the final half, but is amusing zooming through the scenes in
her roller skates -- which she _never_ removes. 
Little Bill (William H. Macy) is outstanding as the grim crew member whose
wife cheats on him at the drop of a hat. At one party, he walks up to her as
she is naked in the middle of a crowd entertaining a gentleman friend on the
driveway. When he attempts to talk to her, she replies "Shut up Bill. You're
embarrassing me." He is powerless to change his life and lets it build up until...
A film about the porn industry without any real porn? Although there is full
frontal (and full backal) nudity, the sex scenes are mostly portrayed in
facial expressions of the onlookers. Even Eddie's revelation of his famous
gift (made possible with a prosthesis for Wahlberg, in case you're interested)
is not played for thrills.
The message here will play well nowadays. Have too much fun and you'll trash
yourself. There's some truth to that, but finding the middle road between the
mundane and the extreme is a difficult one. Good luck.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 22 years and is enjoying the
crisp colorful southern Indiana autumn instead of staying inside watching
adult videos. mredman@bvoice.com is the eaddress for recommendations of either activity.)
[This appeared in the 11/5/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:mredman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Jason Overbeck
Paul Thomas Anderson can be compared to Dirk Digler of BOOGIE NIGHTS.
Dirk and Paul rose to the top of their fields quickly at young ages and
find themselves the hottest things around. Anderson first directed a
short film called CIGARETTES AND COFFEE (***) then made a feature with
Gwenith Paltrow called HARD EIGHT (***1/2) -- I took notice. 
BOOGIE NIGHTS had a buzz around it as it rode through the film
feastivals with a vengeance. It kept the buzz untill it arived at a
theater near me and then I carried on the buzz. What an exciting film
this is?! Every scene is handled with the pure joy of making films. Paul
Thomas Anderson was unjustly robed of an Academy Award Nomination for
directing, yet there was not a better job of it. PTA looks to be the
real thing. In any other year this would be the best film on my list but
it was narrowly beat by LA. CONFIDENTIAL (****).
Set in the seventies (with a knocking soundtrack) a young man (Mark
Wallberg) is discovered by a porno film director (Burt Reynolds) and
quickly becomes a star with the name DIRK DIGGLER, first seen on an
exploding neon board. We follow Dirk (I love that name) and his family
of porno film-makers through the ups of the seventies and the drug-laced
downs of the eighties.
All great films have one wonderful scene at least. This one has many;
the pool party, the awards, film shoots and my favorite - let me set it
up. Dirk and his friends are on their downward spiral and go to a drug
dealers house with the asspirations of ripping him off. They sit and
wait  while the drug dealer (high as a kite) sings and dances in a robe,
his bodyguard has a gun and a chinese associate walks around the room
throwing firecrackers. Must be seen to be believed.
This movie carried comparisons to PULP FICTION (****) and GOODFELLAS
(****) and it is deserving of it. All the films play with drugs, fun and
anticipation of violence. ONE HELL OF A RIDE this BOOGIE NIGHTS is.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Ecstatic and elegiac mini-saga of a slice of time in the porn
industry. Fascinating, and not just voyeuristically.
I love movies that dive into a universe of their own and examine it
exhaustively. There's a short but growing list of American movies that work
like that, which Roger Ebert once called "experimental epics": THE GODFATHER,
THE RIGHT STUFF, GOODFELLAS, NASHVILLE.
Now add BOOGIE NIGHTS to the list --a funny, enthralling movie about what
many people might not think to be a compelling subject -- the birth of the
American porn-movie industry as we now know it. But it's not a chronology;
it's about how things felt at the time, about a sense of community and shared
life, both good and bad. It's also not sensationalistic or sleazy -- two ways
this movie could have collapsed in on itself. It's an intelligent and knowing
movie that seems to have been put together with a fair amount of insider
knowledge. (I had a friend who worked in a low-rent porn magazine for some
time, and I imagined him nodding furiously in agreement to a lot of what
appeared on screen.)
BOOGIE NIGHTS gives us Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds, in a role that shows he
can play more than beer-drinking good ol' boys), director of "exotic, adult
films". He catches sight of a gangly seventeen-year-old, Eddie Adams (Mark
Wahlberg), bussing tables in a nightclub, and heads back into the kitchen to
talk to him. Adams unblinkingly thinks he's being picked up by a gay man, and
responds appropriately: "It's five bucks if you just want to look at it. Ten
if you want to watch me jerk off." Curiously, this scene -- which is
perfectly observed and played out -- sets a pattern for the movie: Sex is
business, and business happens to be damned good.
Horner is gentle and empathic, and offers to put Adams into his movies. Adams
cheerfully agrees, and soon tosses over his wretched life with his mother (a
frightening Joanna Gleason). Sure enough, the kid's a natural, and after a
very funny name-change / re-christening in a hot tub ("Dirk Diggler"), he's
in one top-flight porn production after another. He's having fun, and is
enjoying the admiration he gets over his outsized talents. (One of the single
funniest moments in any movie this year comes here, when The Colonel asks
Diggler to whip it out for inspection; the shot is played entirely off of The
Colonel's face and is all the funnier for it.)
What is best about the movie is the way it portrays the porn-film crew as an
extended family. There's Amber Waves (Julianne Moore), Horner's beau and
major female lead "actress", who mothers and pampers Dirk unceasingly --
almost certainly as a substitute for her own son. (One truly agonizing scene
has a trying and failing to regain custody of the boy.) Little Bill, the
lighting director (William H. Macy) and Kurt Longjohn, the cinematographer
(Ricky Jay) take their work seriously; they like making movies, even if
they're "dirty" movies. Rollergirl (Heather Graham), a high-school dropout,
gives Dirk his first crash course in on-camera sex -- and whose apparently
unremovable roller skates become her other on-screen trademark. Scotty
(Philip Hoffman), the gaffer, has a confused, possibly homosexual attraction
to Dirk that more likely stems out of his sense of being sidelined in the
middle of the action. Reed Rothchild (John C. Reilly), Dirk's co-star in a
series of Bond-style spoof porn flicks, also becomes his confederate and
close friend; instead of the predictable one-upsmanship and jealousy, there's
a sense that they've toughed it out together. They make a nice team. And Buck
Swope (Don Cheadle) is the one member of the porn crew who tries to go back
to the real world and re-open a stereo store, with hilarious and unnerving
results.
Then there are the people who wander into this circle and make life tougher.
Philip Baker Hall shows up as Floyd Gondolli, a "connections man" who tries t
convince Horner of the future of porn: "Videotape." (Unfortunately, Horner
takes a lot of convincing.) The Colonel (Robert Ridgeley), Horner's main
connection, winds up getting busted for messnig with an underage girl.
Pushers, creeps, and drug-crazed weirdos begin to hang around in the corners,
pop out of the woodwork, and it isn't long before Diggler himself is a coked-
up mess. One truly saddening sequence has him trying to prime himself for a
scene, only to discover that his major asset isn't on its best behavior that
day.
Porn in the Seventies was once considered a halfway artistic and serious
venture, and there's a sense of how that could be true in BOOGIE NIGHTS.
Horner has one great scene about how to keep people in their seats (even
after they've probably got no reason to say). And for a while we sense how
that's possible as well, but the bubble is slowly disintegrating around them,
and soon Diggler and his friends are trying to pull off a drug burn that
could get them either very killed or sorta rich.
The acting is superb, and depends on more than a little typecasting. Despite
many familiar faces, even "stars" like Wahlberg and Reynolds relax and let
the material absorb them. They're not only credible, they seem almost
familiar. The movie also never stops for breath. Two and a half hours feel
like half that length -- it's amazing how much character and drama and
information we get, all of it incredibly absorbing.
The director, Paul Thomas Anderson, also did the memorable HARD EIGHT, which
was unjustly relegated to video and deserves to be seen by anyone reading
this review. Now BOOGIE NIGHTS, which is a giant quantum leap of moviemaking
for a 27-year-old director. This was one of the best movies of 1997, hands
down.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Author
Andrew Hicks
        BOOGIE NIGHTS is a movie that mixes two of my favorite 
things -- Marky Mark and pornography. I'm being sarcastic, of course.
        Like PULP FICTION, this is an intelligent epic of the 
tasteless, a movie that makes sweeping points about our society and 
has likeable people doing reprehensible things. Written and directed 
by Paul Thomas Anderson, BOOGIE NIGHTS forgoes the gynecology 
and eroticism in painting sex as cold, emotionless and mainly just a 
commodity, and its success is finding the humor of '70s porn business 
as well as the sadness.
        In that sense, it's like THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLINT, 
alternating between being fascinating and funny in its realistic 
portrayal of the motivations of pornographers and focusing on the 
empty lives of those who make their living this way. Its main actors, 
Mark Wahlberg and Burt Reynolds, are two people I'd never thought 
I'd praise, but they do great work in BOOGIE NIGHTS, as do the 
people you'd expect to kick ass, like Julianne Moore, Don Cheadle 
(from ROSEWOOD) and William H. Macy.
        The story begins in 1977, as 17-year-old Wahlberg is washing 
dishes in a nightclub populated by an adult filmmaker (Burt Reynolds, 
in perhaps his most disgusting hairpiece yet). Reynolds likes what he 
sees in young Wahlberg -- youth, muscle tone, a 13-inch penis -- and 
entices him back to his den of sin, where Wahlberg gets it on with 
fellow high school student Rollergirl (Heather Graham), who never 
removes her roller skates. After a pool party, Wahlberg agrees to join 
the porn star family under the name Dirk Diggler.
        It's in these early scenes that we meet the other family 
members. There's Moore, a single mother who has been denied 
custody of her children because she's, well, a coke whore, acting as 
surrogate mother and sex partner to the other porn stars instead. 
Cheadle is a second-string actor hoping to make it big in the world of 
stereo sales, Macy is one of the crew and can't seem to keep his wife 
(real-life porno queen Nina Hartley) from humping everything in sight 
and John C. Reilly is Wahlberg's best friend and a damn good porn 
actor in his own right.
        In about 150 minutes, BOOGIE NIGHTS covers five years in 
the pornography industry, from the rise and fall of Dirk Diggler to the 
decline of porn as an art form. That's the funniest thing about this 
movie, the conviction held by all the characters that they're making 
something significant. The Reynolds character's main goal is to make 
a XXX-rated movie that is so good that its customers stay in the 
theater long after sticky-ing up the floor and Dirk helps him out by 
making some hilarious action hero porno flicks.
        BOOGIE NIGHTS, like LARRY FLINT, humanizes something 
most people don't think of as very worthy of epic treatment. A lot of its 
middle scenes, the ones involving Dirk's brief recording career and the 
imminent arrival of videotape as the medium for porno, are amusing, 
but the closing scenes pack a punch. This is the kind of movie that 
makes you laugh, (maybe) makes you cry and makes you sit in shock. 
It's frank without being graphic, emotional without being 
melodramatic and funny without being unbelievable.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For More Than 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Homer Yen
In the late 1970s, disco was the all the rage, sex was safe, and
pleasure was a growing industry.  Indeed, during this period, one of
America's darkest subcultures began to establish its prominence within
the entertainment industry.  This was the heyday of pornography, when
films of this nature made it onto the big screen and wasn't relegated
to the small confines of the living room television set.  But, behind
the scenes, it is a debilitating world that is marked by broken
dreams, drugs, and lost souls.
Boogie Nights is an amazingly revealing look at this frenzied world.
In the opening shot, the camera swoops through a nightclub frequented
by adult film auteur Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds).  It pans left and
right, introducing us to the various characters whose lives we'll be
following throughout the movie, including future porn star, Eddie
Adams (Mark Wahlberg).   Horner apparently has an eye
for...um...gifted actors, and approaches Eddie, who works as a lowly
dishwasher.  "I got a feeling that behind those jeans," says Horner, "
is something wonderful just waiting to get out."
Given Eddie's broken homelife, he eventually agrees to work for him.
When all of the characters are introduced, we meet up with the
cocaine-addicted, porno den mother Amber Waves (an inspiring Julianne
Moore), fellow porn stars recruited by Horner (John C. Reilly as Reed
Rotchild; Don Cheadle as Buck Swope; Heather Graham as Rollergirl), an
obese financier and a bevy of other behind-the-scenes crew.
The primary focus is on Eddie and his ascension (or fall) into porn
stardom.  Parlaying his biggest 'asset', he captures adult film's
highest awards, the matriarchal love of Amber and is the catalyst for
the ongoing success of Jack Horner and his family of helping hands.
But in a world as unpredictable and reckless as this, it is easy to
crash and burn.  Eddie soon falls victim to the dark side of stardom.
But Eddie's precarious path is just one of many engrossing stories
that explore the trials and tribulations of those who support the
industry, but then ultimately become victim to it.
The supporting cast of characters is richly developed, and each one
has a story to tell.  Some generate poignance, such as Amber's, who
desperately hopes to get custody of her child after divorcing her
husband.  Some generate a sickly feeling, such as the chubby male
stagehand who displays more than a passing interest in Eddie.  Some
generate uneasy tension, such as the stagehand who is slowly being
driven mad because his wife constantly has sex with any guy that she
sees.  There are many other interestingly inter-related tales.
Is this merely porn that tries to pass as art?  No.  This film is not
about sex or the turn-ons that accompany it.  The audience views the
sex with a detached eye.   To that effect, the real director films
this movie more like a documentary.  The look and feel is almost like
that from a super 8mm.  The mystique of sex is dispelled, and what we
see are the lives of ordinary people in a not-so-ordinary environment.
Writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson finds nifty ways of presenting
different looks at a world that's seemingly styptic.  Through all the
characters and all the action, Anderson's screenplay centers on the
human qualities of the players.  They may live in a disreputable
world, but they have the same goals, needs and values as anyone trying
to make it in Hollywood.  In an industry that offers little future,
fates seem all too random, and each character will meet with their own
happy or sad ending.  Making it in life requires so much more than
making it in this business.  But as Eddie comments: "Everyone is
blessed with one great gift, and you have to make the most of it."
This movie offers several gifts.  Reynolds is well-cast as the sleazy
director, giving his role an almost deadpan feel as he, for example,
graphically explains how to perform the 'money shots.'  Wahlberg also
shows good depth as the dishwasher-turned-porn star who displays
maturity and confidence.  But, the real surprise is Moore, who is
touchingly effective.  I foresee an Oscar nomination for her, as well
as one for Anderson's raw but absorbing screenplay.
Boogie Nights is not a film for everyone.  With graphic sex scenes,
raw dialogue, and a soundtrack featuring pop songs heavy on isolation
and destruction, it is a sobering look at a world that simultaneously
bonds people together while tearing individuals apart.  Still, as
shocking as it is original, this is a finely developed piece of film.

Author
Philippe de Saussure
"Les années 70 en Amérique, encore elles ?" Il fallait des idées pour
reprendre le sujet : Paul Anderson en a eu, et beaucoup ! Dans cette longue
saga californienne vous verrez un jeune mec sorti trop tôt du lycée (Mark
Wahlberg, "Dirk Diggler"), qui entre dans l'univers du film porno, sous
l'aile d'un pčre adoptif-réalisateur de cul (Burt Reynolds). Ses débuts,
ses amours, son ascension, sa chute...
Les personnages ont de l'appétit; le réalisateur, de la gourmandise ! Il
nous emmčne dans une West-Coast de 1977 qui fait revivre tout naturellement
les maillots de bain, les chemises, les hanches, les démarches... et le
cheap omniprésent des temps du disco. Comme son double Burt Reynolds,
Anderson (derričre la caméra) semble garder d'un bout ŕ l'autre un petit
sourire au coin des lčvres. Il nous dit "Tiens, regarde !" et hop ! nous
place ŕ l'oeilleton de sa 32mm, ou carrément dans la salle (vous
apprécierez la texture de l'image lorsqu'on est "au cinéma dans le film").
Boogie Nights est l'histoire bouffonne de plusieurs regards, et aussi un
petit témoignage sur l'effet des transitions techniques (ici, le
remplacement du film celluloďd par la vidéo, au début des années 80).
Pourquoi le porno ? Parceque c'est un sous-cinéma, c'est ŕ dire un univers
miniature. Grâce ŕ sa super-queue, Dick devient une vraie sous-star,
obtient des succčs de sous-critique, gagne des sous-Oscars, croit en son
super-talent... Et on le comprend tellement bien ! Le message du film est
lŕ. Tout sérieux momentanément oublié, ne sommes-nous pas tous des
"sous-quelque chose" ? Attention, pas d'erreur, Boogie Nights n'est pas un
film porno ! Le fameux zizi, Anderson vous le montrera une fois, mais il
choisira son moment ! 
Aprčs la gloire, le succčs de Dirk fléchit. Les films doivent ętre plus
racoleurs, deviennent violents. Brouillé avec son mentor, le héros sombre
lentement (dčche, délinquance). Malgré des moments inspirés, la prise de
vue et le scénario de Boogie Nights se relâchent. Alors que l'histoire
roule de plus en plus vite vers une fin lugubre, Anderson reprend toutes
les ficelles des personnages qui divergeaient, les noue en un paquet-cadeau
inattendu, et concocte une sorte de happy end provisoire et un peu
décevant. Sincčre volonté d'éviter une conclusion pessimiste ? Ou exigence
des producteurs ? Malgré ces défauts, l'ensemble garde une exceptionnelle
densité  humaine et esthétique.
Je vous ai mis l'eau ŕ la bouche ? Ma recommandation : allez-y. Votre
voisin vous prendra pour un cochon. Sortie prévue en France le 18 mars
1998.
Philippe de Saussure - Boston - Merci de m'envoyer vos impressions !

Author
Jamie Peck
New Line / 2:32 / 1997 / R (violence, drugs, sex, nudity, language)
Cast: Mark Wahlberg; Burt Reynolds; Julianne Moore; Don Cheadle; Heather
Graham; John C. Reilly; William H. Macy; Nicole Parker; Luis Guzman;
Philip Baker Hall; Alfred Molina; Nina Hartley
Director: Paul Thomas Anderson
Screenplay: Paul Thomas Anderson
Disco balls, big hair and bellbottoms -- it's the fashionably gory glory
days of the 1970s in Paul Thomas Anderson's sophomore feature "Boogie
Nights." The movie is already garnering raves and even early fall Oscar
buzz, but this critic was left with a slightly sour taste in his mouth.
By no means a poor film, or even an unsatisfactory one, "Boogie Nights"
manages to keep momentum spinning for over an hour before giving into
shaky ground in its final last half. Don't get me wrong -- there's much
rich material within its long running time of 150 minutes-plus, but it's
being dazzlingly overrated.
Mark Wahlberg (formerly of Marky Mark fame and a lead turn in the stinky
"Fear") plays the main character here, a 17-year-old San Fernando Valley
busboy named Eddie Adams. Following an escape from his relentlessly
tough home life, Eddie falls into the vortex of seemingly painless
pleasure that is the adult film industry in '77. His recruiter, porn
director Jack Horner (Burt Reynolds), is amazed by the kid's prowess
on-screen, his benevolence off-screen and his general contributions to
the business. Of course, his 13-inch endowment doesn't hurt, either.
The other characters that make up the extended family of entertainers
are as follows: Amber Waves (Julianne Moore), Jack's wife and the den
mother of their small clan; Rollergirl (Heather Graham), a hot starlet
who's willing to take off everything but her skates; Buck Swope (Don
Cheadle), a veteran performer who dreams of marriage, children and his
own electronics store; Reed Rothchild (John C. Reilly), an actor who
quickly forms a bond with Eddie; and Little Bill (William H. Macy), a
technical worker who can never quite come to terms with the people and
situations around which he works.
Jack plans to redefine the genre by putting plot into porn -- giving
viewers reason to stay in their theater seats after they, uh, don't have
the motivation to. Eddie plays an integral part in this quest to make a
film that is "true and right and dramatic" -- he changes his name to the
highly suggestive Dirk Diggler and takes the starring role of a James
Bond-type hero with more of a focus on the women and sex than the
gadgets and foreign intrigue (sample title: "Brock Landers 7: Oral
Majesty"). But as Dirk, Jack, Amber and company make the transition into
the early 1980s, the pornography progresses from film to video and
their happy lives and sense of togetherness are threatened by ego,
violence, drugs and other extremes.
"Boogie Nights" tells a story that depends on its characters and for the
most part, it succeeds. Wahlberg, Reynolds, Moore and Reilly are all
fantastic creations: funny, flawed and full of life. Some members of the
supporting cast come across with colorful personalities even though they
aren't fully developed -- they're allowed to stay too much in the
background. You come away wishing you got to know Macy, Graham and
Cheadle better, because what you're given are interesting details that
don't amount to anything especially complete. All of the actors are
strong, including a performance by Reynolds that ranks among his best
work.
What restrains the movie from achieving a higher ground is a quite
jarring shift in tone, which takes place around the time that Little
Bill makes a disturbing resolution to the ongoing dilemma of constantly
finding his wife (actual porn star Nina Hartley) in compromising
positions with other men. From then on, "Boogie Nights" is less a satire
of the industry than a commentary on its evils, as these characters are
sucked down into a vortex of drugs, death and lascivious sex crimes. The
movie's final sequence is hopeful, but its sure-to-be-controversial last
frame is rather unnecessary.
Flaws aside, "Boogie Nights" is still a subversive, gutsy release from
New Line Cinema, a production company that usually specializes in ho-hum
genre pictures. It's a visual dynamo, a credit guaranteed from
Anderson's brilliant opening, a single-shot journey inside a disco club
that introduces us to most of the movie's main players. That the story
eventually spins out of control is forgivable, because the film is such
a technical marvel, accurate in its depiction of the 1970s from clothes
to hair to music (I still haven't stopped humming Three Dog Night's
"Mama Told Me Not to Come"). And even the movie's fumble of overlength
doesn't hinder it from being fully alive, because "Boogie Nights" is an
admirably enthusiastic jolt of cinematic caffeine -- you're never bored
with it.
When all said and done, "Boogie Nights" is an admirable picture, even if
its shortcomings (no pun intended) amount to more than expected. The
acting is distinguished, and the storytelling, for a long while, is
extremely well-crafted; there's just no reason to stretch everything out
to less than 30 minutes shy of three hours. In the end, "Boogie Nights"
is pretty similar to Dirk Diggler -- quite a sight but little more than
the sum of its parts, however nifty they might be.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
