Title
Review for Cook the Thief His Wife & Her Lover, The (1989)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Peter Greenaway
Starring: Richard Bohringer, Michael Gambon, Helen Mirren, Alan Howard, Tim
Roth, Liz Smith, Paul Russell, Ciarán Hinds, Gary Olsen, Ewan Stewart, Alex
Kingston
Every night at "Le Hollandais" restaurant, the owner, Albert Spica (Michael
Gambon), shows up with all his friends, and eats all he can, while talking
loudly, and making a general rucous.  Instead of being a dedicated,
peaceful owner, Albert is actually a vile gangster who has recently bought
out the restaurant from its head cook, Richard (Richard Bohringer), who
nevertheless still works there.  Every single evening, Albert annoys
everyone he can, showing off his power and richness, and every single
evening, Richard holds back his disgust at him with a blank expression, and
replies of "Yes, Mr. Spica...right away, Mr. Spica."
But one night, Albert's bored and beautiful wife, Georgina (Helen Mirren),
glances across the restaurant at one of its many customers, Michael (Alan
Howard), and soon the two begin to flirt across the room.  After he
accidentally walks into the women's bathroom where she is, the two begin a
silent affair, lasting over the course of the film as they have passionate,
quiet sex in every nook and cranny of the restaurant...and with the aid of
Richard, who allows them entrance into little hiding places where they can
continue their tryst.
So begins the fable-like story writer/director Peter Greenaway has brought
us.  "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife, and Her Lover" is a lavishly directed
film, filled with gorgeous production design, wild costumes, and scenes of
such depravity and disgustingness that even John Waters would be shocked. 
It's a film which has the balls to do a scene where Albert beats a broke
man who owes him money by stuffing shit down his mouth, and the
intelligence to back it up with a purpose.
For the first hour, the film gets into a kind of routine: Albert and his
goons (including one played by a pre-"Reservoir Dogs" Tim Roth) arrive, eat
while talking annoyingly, and somewhere in there, both Georgina and Michael
get up simultaneoulsy from their respective tables, and head into a hiding
place to screw around, with some variation in there.  But the second hour,
as with most films which get into routines in the first hour, changes
everything.  After Albert finds out about them from one of the goon's
mistresses, the two lovers flee to his place, a book depository where he
works, and after awhile, Albert finds him, and brutally kills him.
I will not reveal the ending, primarily because it's such a great ending,
truly one of the greatest endings to a film I've ever seen.  But I will say
this: it's definitely delicious (hee hee), and it's bound to have the
audience leaving with a big smile in their face...unless they're completely
grossed out.
There are hundreds of great things about this film, but sone of them are
the direction by Peter Greenaway, and production design by Ben Van Os and
Jan Roelfs, music by Michael Nymann, and costumes by the god-like Jean-Paul
Gaultier, all which contribute into a film which is one of the most
visually stunning films I've ever seen.  The film is incredibly lavish, and
the restaurant, where most of the film takes place, is one of the most
incredible sights on celluloid.  Outside, there is blue fog and lime
lights; in the kitchen, the color is green, and seems to be a giant
warehouse, with a pan shot of it lasting forever; the actual dining room is
an ominous crimson red (which gets more crimson as the film goes on); and
the bathroom is bright white, so white that when the door opens from the
inside, it looks like hell is creeping in.  This is probably the most
gorgeous-looking film in the past decade.
Not only that, but every primary actor deserves individual praise.  Richard
Bohringer, a staple of French cinema, is perfect at portraying a man who
hides his emotions and hatred for Albert under a plastic facade, creating
the perfect look of a pot ready to boil over.  Michael Gambon is perfect as
the obese, horrific Albert, being able to pronouce every line of his
dialogue realistically and with style.  Helen Mirren portrays the bored
Georgina as a woman who's been hollowed out by her marriage to Albert, and
later shows a touching emotion when she finds out she's really in love with
Michael (one scene has her talking to him when he's not there - I almost
cried).  And Alan Howard, who doesn't even speak until about 50 minutes
into the film, is wonderful, playing a man who hints at everything with
facial expressions, and is the exact opposite of Albert.  Tim Roth, in a
supporting role, is pretty awesome too.
I've read that this film is a film about the connection between food and
sex.  I've also read that it's nothing but a wild tale, not really
deserving of the title of "art."  These are both wrong in their own
respects.  "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife, and Her Lover" is actually a
condemnation of gluttony, not so much as in respect to eating, but in
respect to all kinds of excessiveness.  The film is not a contemporary
"Last Tango in Paris," showing a pair of lovers trying to escape through
casual sex.  It's not even really about the affair of Georgina and Michael.
 It's about Albert, a man who's so polluted to the core that he's blind to
his own selfishness and worldly gluttony. 
Albert struts around his restaurant like a king, messing around with people
who are merely trying to eat good food, and talks about changing Richard's
restaurant into a place filled with every excess imaginable.  Not to
mention, he rants on about every subject imaginable, making crude jokes at
others' expenses, and generally speaking way too much on things he knows
little or nothing about.  In fact, Albert has most of the lines in the film
(notice how the film sometimes cuts to other people and places when he
speaks?). Greenaway is trying to point out that this kind of excessiveness
is pure evil, and that anyone who acts remotely like this deserves the
sweet justice he receives, like Albert does in the finale (no specifics, I
promise).  While the stories of the other three protagonists are emotional
and intriguing in their own respects, they are merely acting out as people
who have been harmed by Albert's selfish gluttony.
What puts the cherry on the top of this film is the way the film feels
during and after viewing it.  "The Cook, the Thief, His Wife, and Her
Lover" is a film that lingers in the memory long after, with scenes and
moments stuck in your head.  I will never forget the look of the
restuarant, the way it's so vast and always filled with life.  I can never
get the images of Georgina and Michael making love without talking, and the
love they share for eachother in the second half after the silence has been
broken between them.  And the ending is so incredible that it will hold up
to any film where a character gets his just desserts as a perfect example
of how to do it right and proper.
"The Cook, the Thief, His Wife, and Her Lover" is a film I will never get
over seeing.  It may be disgusting, vile, and even excessive, but it's a
film that will haunt you and never let you forget its message and wild
imagery.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jim Pellman
SUMMARY: Not an entertainment, but an art film which does not compromise (even
for the sake of "decency") its pure visions of beauty, cuisine, evil, greed,
lust, and revenge.  At times repulsive, it nonetheless is a beautifully
crafted, unique, and thought-provoking film.  * * * *

Rather than accept the X rating, the film's distributor has released it without
a rating, but no one under 18 is admitted.  Even with all these warnings, more
than a few people in the audience walked out at various points.
     I enjoy seeing a movie which makes me think about it for several days
after seeing it.  When this one ended, I wasn't sure if I liked it or not.
Having now thought about it for a few days, and realizing that there are
certain images from it that I will never forget, I want to go see it again.  I
think the first viewing left me numb because it was so unlike anything I had
seen before.
     The Thief is Albert, a London gangster, who is sadistic, greedy,
insensitive, and grotesque.  Michael Gambon (who starred in PBS' "The Singing
Detective") gives a bravura performance.  Albert decides to use gourmet dining
as a way to gain society's acceptance, and show off his wealth.  He acquires an
interest in London's finest French restaurant, and holds court there every
night with his fellow gangsters and entourage of hoodlums.
     The restaurant is run with perfection by the Cook, and its menu and decor
are the ultimate in taste and refinement, with service beyond reproach.  The
depiction of the various areas of the restaurant, in which most of the action
takes place, is one of the striking aspects of the film.  The impossibly
elegant dining room is dominated by a huge 17th Century Dutch painting, and at
various times Albert and his gang seem to imitate poses from the painting.  The
perfectly coiffed and dressed diners (except for Albert and his crowd) and the
fabulous food presentations form beautifully composed still lifes.  The dining
room is surrealistically juxtaposed with the cavernous dungeon-like kitchen,
where hygiene is of little concern, and dozens of workers endlessly prepare
mountains of food.
     A different color is used in each area of the restaurant--red for the
dining room, white for the bathrooms, green for the kitchen, and blue for the
back alley behind the restaurant.  The color of the costumes change as the
characters move from one area to another, so that they are always perfectly
coordinated.  And the camera always moves with the characters from area to
area.
     In this setting, Albert yells at the restaurant staff, abuses and attacks
the other diners, and makes fun of the food.  As his wife walks towards the
bathroom, he yells after her to be sure to wipe her bottom.   His henchman
casually vomits down his shirtfront.  When the girlfriend of one of his
henchmen challenges Albert, he disfigures her with the silverware.  And at the
beginning of the movie, Albert has one of his rivals beat up, forced to eat dog
feces, and urinated on.  Since Albert now owns the restaurant, the Cook can
only stand by and watch.
     The passing of time is indicated by shots of the changing daily menu, and
in the seven days during which the action takes place, Albert's long-suffering
wife Georgina, makes eye contact with a solitary diner, and quickly starts a
passionate affair with him.  They meet and make love in the restrooms, closets,
and prep rooms of the kitchen at every possible opportunity, with the aid of
the Cook.
     Being naturally distrustful and suspicious, it is only a matter of time
before Albert discovers the affair, and the tension of the various near escapes
is almost unbearable.  When Albert does find out, his revenge on the Lover is
horrific.  But Georgina also gets her revenge, and it is just as satisfying for
us in the audience.
     The actress who plays Georgina (Helen Mirren) calls the film a Jacobean
drama (a form of theater from the days of James I that emphasized tragedy
through violent action, spectacle, and revenge).  The director (Peter
Greenaway) refuses to discuss its meaning.
     Being so graphic, it is not easy to sit through.  But as Mirren points
out, this film is no more graphic than the typical teenage slasher movies,
which routinely get R ratings.  What makes this more difficult to watch?  In an
article in the San Francisco Chronicle, Mirren said, "This is a film that
pushes people's buttons.  It gets to areas we're most prudish and prurient and
embarrassed about.  It gets under our skin.  If you don't find it a bit much,
you're a bit much yourself."
     The San Francisco Chronicle review summed it up nicely: "What's more
important [than the graphic nature of the film] is that it is a bracingly
intelligent and often beautiful work--a chilling black comedy that tells its
heartless story in a virtuoso style marked by visual elegance and dark, ironic
wit.  Anyone able to stomach its graphic imagery will find it an unsettling but
unforgettable movie."
-- Jim Pellmann         Internet: jpellmann@rational.com

Author
Brian L. Johnson
123 min., NC-17, Drama/Comedy, 1990
Director: Peter Greenaway
Cast: Richard Bohringer, Michael Gambon, Helen Mirren, Alan Howard,
      Tim Roth, Liz Smith
     Almost all of this film takes place in a fancy restaurant.  Thief
Michael Gambon owns a very fancy French restaurant and dines there
nightly with his wife Helen Mirren.  Helen Mirren spies diner Richard
Bohringer in the restaurant.  Richard Bohringer and Helen Mirren start a
nightly affair in various parts of the restaurant, while Michael Gambon
is dining in the main dining room room.  The head cook at the restaurant
hides Helen Mirren and Richard Bohringer's activity from Michael Gambon.
     I think that THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER is
British director Peter Greenaway's most famous film to date (partially,
I think, because it was one of the first films to receive the NC-17
rating).  I was first exposed to Peter Greenaway with his film
PROSPERO'S BOOKS, which I hated.  Because of a recommendation from a
reader, I then tried his film DROWNING BY NUMBERS, which I thought was
great.  So, after what I thought of DROWNING BY NUMBERS, I thought I
would try another one of Greenaway's films, namely this one.  I am
pleased to say that I liked this film very much.
     I can't recommend this film to the average film goer, because you
would probably hate it.  I can recommend this film to those who have had
exposure to Greenaway's work and enjoyed it, those who enjoy weird films
(like SANTA SANGRE), those who are bored with modern cinema, and those
who like to try different types of films.  Those of you who have seen
PROSPERO'S BOOKS and disliked it still might want to give this film (and
DROWNING BY NUMBERS) a try for I feel that they are very different.  On
a scale of zero to five, I give THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER
LOVER a four.  THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER is rated
NC-17 for male nudity, female nudity, violence, explicit language, and
adult situations.
     Don't let the NC-17 rating scare you away from this film.  Like
the films WHORE, SANTA SANGRE, and HENRY AND JUNE, this is not a porno
film.  If the NC-17 rating does scare you, I believe that there is a cut
R rated version, which you could try to find.  This is, however, not a
film for the squeamish because there are several scenes that are
disgusting (nothing that is anything worse than some of the things that
Monty Python has done in the past).  I saw this film on video cassette,
and as with other films by Greenaway, this film is best seen on a big
screen.  I don't believe that this film is still playing in theaters, so
you will most likely have to see it on video cassette.
     One of the things that Peter Greenaway plays with in this film is
colors.  When watching the film pay attention to the different colored
rooms, or areas, and the furnishings and clothing.  Also pay close
attention to a person's clothing when they change rooms.  I think that
this idea is clever, and makes the film seem different.  The sets were
very well designed to go according to the different color schemes in
this film.  Also Greenaway made very good use of colored lights,
especially in the kitchen.
     The people in this film are great.  Several of the people in this
film I have never seen before, but they did an excellent job.  Richard
Bohringer was excellent as "The Lover."  His best scene is when Michael
Gambon first goes over to talk to him.  Michael Gambon (MOBSTERS) was
great as "The Thief."  I think that he gave the best performance in this
film.  His character was extremely rude and vulgar, and Gambon seems to
fit this role perfectly.  Helen Mirren (WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD) was
good as "His Wife."  Her performance changed perfectly when she changed
from being with Michael Gambon to being with Richard Bohringer.  The
person who played "The Cook" (Alan Howard, I think) was also great.  Tim
Roth (ROSENCRANTZ AND GUILDENSTERN ARE DEAD) as one of Michael Gambon's
acquaintances, even though he was not around for much, was excellent.
Writer/Director Peter Greenaway has made an excellent film that makes me
want to find the other films by him that I have not seen yet.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Peter Greenaway's most famous film to this point was THE DRAUGHTSMAN'S
CONTRACT.  On the surface that was a mystery set at a country estate.  Its
subtext was that beneath the affected surface of the upper class there is
mischief and dirt.  The style was, however, very affected and uninvolving
and bloodless.  To be frank, I could not wait for the film to end.  In THE
COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE & HER LOVER, Greenaway seems once again to have it
in for the upper classes (or at least for the nouveau riche) who dine at a
very fine French restaurant (as well as for the people who put up letters on
theater marquees).  But this time around the cold and uninvolving style is
gone.  Really gone.  The film starts like a Monty Python sketch that goes on
a bit too long, then it fades to John Waters, then Herschel Gordon Lewis,
and when it is all over we find we have been watching an intricately mounted
E.~C.~Comic and a story that could have been taken from the pages of VAULT
OF HORROR or TALES FROM THE CRYPT.  I laughed my way through the film, was
delighted by every ghoulish turn, but I have to say that I cannot recommend
this film to most of the people I know.  I do not remember when I have seen
a film that more people walked out on.
     What we have here is one week behind the scenes at The Restaurant From
Hell.  Actually, the restaurant is "La Hollandais"--soon to be known as
"Spica and Boarst's."  Richard Boarst is a superb Cordon-Bleu-class French
chef whose restaurant was taken over by gangster Albert Spica.  Spica does
not live by halfway measures.  He is extremely violent, exceptionally loud
and rude, and supremely vulgar.  Night after night he holds forth at his
restaurant, piling vulgarity on vulgarity and often savaging his customers.
We are led to assume that the cuisine must be very, very good for anyone to
be willing to sit in the same restaurant as Spica.  The gangster repeatedly
brutalizes his wife Georgina, whom he virtually holds prisoner.  Georgina,
however, is able to sneak away from Spica occasionally to rendezvous with a
rather studious, quiet customer, Michael, with whom she makes passionate
love.
     Greenaway, who wrote as well as directed, has written what could well
have been a stage play.  There are only a very limited number of sets, and
the sets are designed for use of color and for effect rather than for
accuracy.  First we see the parking lot infested with a veritable army of
stray dogs.  The kitchen is a hilarious revelation of what goes on behind
the scenes at a fancy restaurant.  What goes on in the kitchen is
unbelievable.  The transition from this kitchen that you would not feed a
dog from to the ultra-posh dining room stuns the viewer.  And so it goes,
from one room to the next.
     Michael Gambon plays Spica and must speak two-thirds of the lines in
the film.  He never shuts up and he never says anything you want to hear.
Gambon was good in the BBC drama THE SINGING DETECTIVE but his Albert Spica
will easily eclipse that role.  Helen Mirren is usually good and this is
probably a role that will get more attention than her (perhaps better) films
such as THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY.
     THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE & HER LOVER is not really an art film but
a ghoulish horror comic book with art film trappings.  If you see it, I
cannot promise you will like it, but I can promise you that you have not
seen any other film like it.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
France/United Kingdom, 1989
Screening:  Best of the Ritz Film Festival, 9/21/96
Running Length: 2:05
MPAA Classification: NC-17 (Sex, nudity, violence, profanity, 
      rotting fish and meat)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     If there's anything disgusting or grotesque that THE COOK, THE 
THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER doesn't dabble in, I'm at a loss to 
figure out what it is.  This film, a wildly exuberant, bitingly 
satirical examination of excess, bad taste, and great acting, is the 
kind of over-the-top experience that will have timid movie-goers running 
(not just walking) for the exits.  Taboos?  If director Peter Greenaway 
has any, you can't tell by this film.  
     Common wisdom suggests that you don't go into films like BABETTE'S 
FEAST and EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN on an empty stomach.  By the same token, 
my recommendation would be that you don't venture into THE COOK on a 
full stomach.  There are times when Greenaway's vision becomes 
excessively graphic, and this goes beyond just sex and violence 
(although there's a fair amount of both).  Perhaps the most disgusting 
sequences involve trucks of meat and fish left outside to rot.  The word 
"gross" was coined for this kind of stuff.
     Roughly two-thirds of the film takes place inside the fine French 
restaurant, Le Hollandais.  With a dungeon-like kitchen that looks like 
it was snatched out of Terry Gilliam's BRAZIL, this is a fantastically 
bizarre place to eat dinner.  The chef, Richard (French actor Richard 
Bohringer), is a gastronomical genius who cares as much for the artistry 
of a meal as for its taste.  Le Hollandais' owner, an uncouth rogue by 
the name of Albert (Michael Gambon), visits the restaurant nightly in 
the company of his wife, Georgina (Helen Mirren), and a flock of 
toadies.  There, sitting in the center of Le Hollandais' dining room, at 
the biggest table, Albert holds court, spouting often-absurd discourses 
about any subject he can think of.  But, while he's talking, his 
neglected wife catches the eye of a nearby diner (Alan Howard), and soon 
those two sneak away for a tryst in the Ladies' Room.
     THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER LOVER is well-written, with 
dark humor and irony peppering nearly every conversation and monologue.  
More than half of the lines belong to Michael Gambon (of Dennis Potter's 
THE SINGING DETECTIVE), and he delivers them with relish.  His is a 
wonderful, larger-than-life performance, and he knows just how to 
present Greenaway's dialogue to its best effect.  Watching Gambon's tour 
de force is one of THE COOK's chief pleasures.
     Helen Mirren, a British actress of some repute (best known for her 
portrayal of Jane Tennison in the PRIME SUSPECT series), has never been 
sexier than here.  Her performance is proof that a female lead doesn't 
have to be under 40 or classically beautiful to heat up the screen.  
Mirren's lovemaking scenes with Alan Howard are charged with eroticism, 
and her final confrontation with Gambon is tense and bitter.
     Set design is top notch.  Le Hollandais is a surreal place, the 
kind of fantastic setting that Jeunet and Caro would bring to the screen 
years later in films like DELICATESSEN and THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.  
This is also a movie of vivid colors:  reds for the dining room, pinks 
for the rest rooms, and greens for the kitchen.  THE COOK is always 
visually interesting, even on those rare occasions when other aspects of 
the production aren't as arresting.
     One message that Greenaway clearly conveys is the association 
between two of life's most obvious sensual pleasures:  eating and sex.  
He litters this picture with the brutal and the grotesque -- including 
murder, covering someone with excrement, and cannibalism.  THE COOK is 
always as visceral as it is visual, with Gambon on hand to provide acid 
commentary for everything (he never seems to stop talking).  Then 
there's the ending, which contradicts the saying that revenge is a dish 
best served cold.  In this case, it's warm, and very, very appropriate.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
