Title
Review for Secret of Roan Inish, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Wendy E. Betts
     I've now seen THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH twice, and what I've
noticed most about it is that it's the only movie I've ever watched
that, to some degree, captured the feeling of reading a book.  That's
partly because much of the movie is told as stories, but it's also
because the movie unfolds so deliberately, developing with such
delicate momentum it gives the rare illusion that you're moving at your
own pace.  I was afraid that a second viewing of the movie might be
boring--but like a rereading of a really good book, the second viewing
was even better than the first, as I could now appreciate the
significance of each event.
     THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is a story about a little girl named
Fiona.  But it's also the story of her ancestor Sean, who almost
drowned but was rescued by a seal; and of her ancestor Liam, who stole
the sealskin coat from a selkie (half-seal, half-human) and married
her; and of her baby brother Jamie, whose coracle-like cradle was swept
out to sea, moving with unbelievable swiftness.  Most of all it's the
story of an island where seals and people lived in harmony--until the
people deserted it.  As Fiona's relatives tell her the history of her
family and the island of Roan Inish, she comes to believe that her baby
brother was taken deliberately by the seals because her family deserted
their island ... and that he is still there, a last representative of
her family on Roan Inish.  Strong and steadfast in her belief, Fiona is
determined to bring her brother back to her family, even though her
"daft" cousin Tadhg says that he's just with "another branch" of it.
But a bargain must be kept between the family and Roan Inish before
Jamie can return.
     With utterly natural performances, perfect authenticity in every
detail and exquisite cinematography that captures the atmosphere of
solitude and wild beauty of the sea and those who live in it, this
movie quietly reveals its secrets--and we delight in believing them,
feeling the wonderful rightness of a story happening just as it
should.  It may be the most fitting homage to storytelling ever
filmed.  See it.  Twice.
-- 
Wendy E. Betts, Editor "The WEB: Celebrating Children's Literature"
finger web@deepthought.armory.com; http://www.armory.com/~web/web.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is a lovely fairy tale set in an isolated
island off the Irish coast.  The land is bleak and breathtaking and the
cinematography (Haskell Wexler) shows it off without ever overpowering
a simple story.  Similarly the hunting Irish music (Mason Daring) sets
the mood without ever dominating a scene.
     A supposedly true fable is told to Fiona (Jeni Courtney), a
ten-year-old girl, by her Grandfather (Mick Lally).  Her
grandmother (Eileen Colgan) does not approve of Fiona hearing any
of the story.
     Her grandfather tells her that they had to evacuate their long
time home on the island of Roan Inish a few years back and move to the
coast not far from the island.  He points it out to her in the
distance.  The unusual occurrence of the move was that her baby brother
Jamie (Cillian Byrne) was washed out to sea in his crib and has never
been seen since.
     Later her cousins Eamon (Richard Sheridan) and Tadhg (John Lynch)
tell her even more bizarre tales of generations back.  One has to do
with a part seal and part human creature.  Especially cute seals are
prominently featured in a quarter of the scenes in the show.  Much
cuter than those in ANDRE for example.
     The key to the success of THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is John Sayles.
He was the writer (based on a book by Rosalie Fry), director and
editor.  Sayles is extremely gifted.  Of Sayles 9 movies, my favorites,
in addition to this one, are: MATEWAN, THE BROTHER FROM ANOTHER PLANET,
and BABY, IT'S YOU--they are all worth looking for.
     The movie was very carefully crafted, cast, and acted.  All
performances were excellent and the movie had a relaxed, deliberate,
and measured pace.  My favorite acting was that by Jeni Courtney.
Although most scenes had her just listening pensively, she was
nevertheless moving at it.
     The movie runs a leisurely 1:43.  It is rated PG for its
intensity, seriousness, and slow pacing.  There is the natural nudity
of a small child, but no adult nudity, sex, or violence.  I suspect it
will be too much for kids under 5.  My 5 23/24th year old boy, as he
calls himself, liked the show, gave it a thumbs up and talked about it
a lot after the movie.  On the other hand, he spent most of the show in
my lap since its intensity did scare him, and he hated the scene of the
fish being cleaned.  Kids used to movies with constant and changing
action, may not know what to make of this show.  For anyone over 4 I
certainly recommend it--it is not a kids' show, rather it is a tale
that make interest children as well.  I award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The scene is an Irish fishing village in the late 1940s, and this
is the sort of story that might be told to children around the hearth.
Fiona (played by Jeni Courtney) goes to live with her grandparents so
she can get away from the city and so that her father can devote his
time to drinking.  There, amid the gulls and the fish and the seals,
she hears mysterious folktales of her family history, especially the
story that one of her relatives had really been a selkie.  A selkie, in
Irish tradition, is a seal who can turn into a human.  The "dark ones"
of her family are really just showing more of their seal heritage.  And
there is the tale of Fiona's own brother who was washed out to sea ina
boat-shaped cradle, but who some say is occasionally still seen.  Fiona
hears the folk stories from her grandfather (Mile Lally) and other
members of her family--"superstition" her grandmother (Eileen Colgan)
calls the stories.  But they send Fiona's imagination racing and the
somber, wet landscapes under what always seems an overcast sky (even
when it looks blue) only set the mood for the mystical and the
supernatural.  Before she is done Fiona's own experience will make for
a new tale to join the others.
     In Ireland this may well work as a family film, but it is a little
hard for American children to follow.  The Irish-American co-production
is written and directed by John Sayles in a style very different from
his MATEWAN or his EIGHT MEN OUT or just about anything else that
Sayles has done.  Sayles has taken as his source Rosalie K. Fry's
children's novel SECRET OF THE RON MOR SKERRY.  Indeed, in the United
States some children will enjoy this film, but the thick, sometimes
impenetrable, Irish accents and the generally somber tone and
photography may make this a children's film that can be appreciated
only by adults.
     Much of the interest value of the film is in its portrait of
fishing village life in Ireland.  The simple hearthside diet of fish
and soup in the thatched houses, the hard work on the fishing boats and
on the shore, and the eternal gray skies combine to make a portrait
that is bleak, but well-observed.  Sayles takes his time telling his
story as a combination of Fiona's experiences and a mosaic of the
stories told to Fiona.  Apparently this structure is hard on some
children.  Several of the children in our audience had to have the plot
details explained to them by parents who were probably having some
problems themselves, at least with the accents.
     Fiona is played by Jeni Courtney who seems already accomplished as
an actress in spite of her young age.  Lally and Colgan are each
enjoyable to watch in each's own way.  Veteran cinematographer Haskell
Wexler has managed some nice animal photography.  Irish music also
helps to set the feel of the film.  Not a bad film, but the story is a
little slow and unambitious.  I give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian Nelson
[Originally posted to rec.music.celtic.]
     I highly recommend the new film release THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH.
     This Irish production is the story of a young girl and her family
as they struggle with moving from the simple life of an island fishing
village interlaced with superstition and old tails of the families
involvement with selkies.  The selkies are mythical creatures who are
humans and seals in one.  The story is at once simple and complex and
all the while enthralling.
     Visually the film carries the rugged and often bleak look of the
Irish coast.  What one reviewer called "moody ... and hard to warm up
to," I found it reflective of the hard lives of people in a hard land.
While the film may be slow and lack action and color by American
film-going standard, it is a wonderfully crafted tail well worth
seeing.
     By far the most striking feature of the film to me and my wife was
the music.  That is why I am posting a film review here in
rec.music.celtic.  The film is filled with the most masterful and yet
subtle Celtic music.  The gentle background of whistle, flute, strings
and bodhran, along with other instruments may melt into a mood for the
average viewer, but the virtuoso performances will be breathtaking to
the those of us familiar with the genera.  Of particular note is the
bodhran playing throughout.  Take time to stay for the final credits
and be rewarded with a percussion composition featuring two sets of
bones and one or several bodhrans, not to be missed.
     The credits listed a number of individual musicians whose name, I
am sorry to say, I did not catch.  No performing group was noted
outside of the Irish Film Orchestra.  I saw no notice of a soundtrack
album, but I will be searching to find one if it exists. If anyone has
information on such an album please notify me by e-mail.
     This is a fine Irish film all will enjoy, particularly those of us
with a Celtic tilt of mind.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jeni Courtney, Mick Lally, Richard Sheridan, Eileen Colgan, 
           John Lynch
Director:  John Sayles
Producers:  Sarah Green and Maggie Renzi
Screenplay:  John Sayles based on THE SECRET OF THE RON MOR SKERRY by 
             Rosalie K. Fry
Released by Skerry Movies Corporation
     In content, setting, and cast choice, THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is a 
departure for writer/director John Sayles.  The creative force behind 
such memorable and diverse films as MATEWAN, CITY OF HOPE, EIGHT MEN OUT, 
and PASSION FISH, has taken pen and camera across the Atlantic to 
Ireland, a land steeped in mystery and legend.  There, using the folklore 
of the locals, he has brought to life an enchanting story about magic and 
tradition that is suitable for family viewing.
     Before embarking on his adaptation of Rosalie K. Fry's out-of-print 
children's book, Sayles spent time researching the customs and language 
of the place where this film was to be set.  His intention, from the 
beginning, was to create a picture in which Irish actors would not be 
given dialogue that seemed obviously written by a foreigner.
     THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is the story of 10-year old Fiona Coneelly 
(Jeni Courtney), a motherless girl living in the city who is sent to stay 
with her grandparents (Mick Lally and Eileen Colgan) when her father 
determines that his poor lifestyle is not suitable for raising a 
daughter.  Fiona's grandparents live in a small fishing village across 
the waters from Roan Inish ("seal island"), the island where the 
Coneellys had thrived for generations until tragic circumstances forced 
them to the mainland.  Now, however, legends about the family's 
connection to Roan Inish abound.  Is Fiona's little brother, who drifted 
out to sea in a storm years ago, really dead, or have the seals nurtured 
and protected him?  Is there any truth to the story that in Fiona's veins 
runs the blood of a selkie, a seal who became a woman?  And what will it 
take to restore the ways of the past, something which inspires equal 
portions of longing and dread?
     Geographically, Sayles may be in unfamiliar territory with THE 
SECRET OF ROAN INISH, but his inimitable style has been imprinted on this 
movie.  Two of the director's trademarks--the ability to tell an 
engrossing story and the development of strong, three-dimensional 
characters -- are in evidence.  With ROAN INISH, Sayles has found the 
perfect balance between the mystical and the concrete.  Much like INTO 
THE WEST, the result is exuberant and compelling.
     None of the actors in THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH are likely to be 
familiar to American viewers.  Mick Lally, who does a wonderful job as 
the grandfather, is an accomplished Irish thespian whose work is rarely 
seen overseas.  Jeni Courtney, another impressive child actor, has never 
before done a screen role.  Her fiery performance is as much a testimony 
to her talent as to Sayles' direction.
     There's no doubt that THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is a most atypical 
motion picture, but in many ways, this is the best kind of movie -- one 
that takes us to a land where magic is real, and where a little girl can 
strive to find a lost brother and bring happiness to an entire family.  
The story, although straightforward, is by no means simple, and there's 
enough in THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH to delight both children and adults.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Mick Lally, Eileen Colgan, Jeni Courtney, Richard
Sheridan, John Lynch.
Screenplay/Director:  John Sayles.
     That John Sayles continues to make films is something of a
testimony to his dedication, and that his films continue to be
released is a testimony to an audience somewhere out there with
taste and intelligence.  Sayles has been relentlessly his own animal
as a writer-director, making movies like THE BROTHER FROM ANOTHER
PLANET, MATEWAN and PASSION FISH which have been marketing
nightmares because they were unique tales that a single tag line
couldn't capture.  As those examples also show, Sayles doesn't help
his cause any with catchy titles.  THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is
another of Sayles' unconventional efforts, and yet another work of
art, a beautifully filmed tale of myth, magic and the power of oral
history.
     THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH opens in 1946, with 10-year-old Irish
girl Fiona Coneelly (Jeni Courtney) being sent away to live with her
grandparents on the isle's Western coast after the death of her
mother.  Grandfather Hugh (Mick Lally) is a fisherman who tells
Fiona tales of the family history, and brings her out to the
family's abandoned lands on the island of Roan Inish.  It was during
the family's mass departure from the island five years earlier that
Fiona's infant brother Jamie was washed out to sea in his cradle, an
event which still troubles Grandmother Tess (Eileen Colgan).  But
Tadhg (John Lynch), a Coneelly cousin, tells Fiona of a legend
connecting the Coneelly family to the seals of Roan Inish, a legend
which strengthens Fiona's belief that Jamie is still alive and
living on Roan Inish.
     I have made no secret in the past of my inordinate fondness for
tales of mythical Ireland (most recently 1993's INTO THE WEST), and
it is true that THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH plays to all of my
weaknesses.  Gifted cinematographer Haskell Wexler captures stunning
land- and seascapes with clarity even through layers of mist, and
his interiors are close but inviting.  Mason Daring's arrangements
of traditional folk melodies provide the perfect complement to
Wexler's images, full of soaring tin whistle and plaintive violin.
Most effective is Sayles' unsentimental directing style, which
presents ROAN INISH's more mythical elements so matter-of-factly
that they take on even more of an aura of wonder.  The Ireland of
THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is full of magic, and Sayles presents magic
as an understood part of the tapestry of Irish life.
     What keeps the magic alive, however, is the oral tradition, and
this is what Sayles is truly celebrating in THE SECRET OF ROAN
INISH.  Several key events in the film unfold in flashback, but
always accompanied by the voice of a tale-teller (usually Hugh, on
one occasion Tadhg).  Even though we are also seeing the events
described, it is the words which are truly memorable, spoken with
passion and conviction, a direct link through time between
individuals and their history.  The story eventually becomes very
much about the consequences of abandoning one's history, and Sayles
makes his case strongly for the importance of maintaining those
connections, as well as the sheer joy to be derived from the
sharing of family legends.  At a time when tradition is a somewhat
unfashionable concept, Sayles has crafted a love poem to tradition.
     There is probably not a single name or face in the cast of ROAN
INISH which is familiar to American audiences, but the performances
are mostly charming and understated.  Mick Lally is delightful as
the seafaring grandfather, and John Lynch is dark and mysterious in
a small but significant role.  Newcomers Jeni Courtney (Fiona) and
Richard Sheridan (Fiona's cousin and co-conspirator Eamon) have
their weak moments, but are basically solid.  THE SECRET OF ROAN
INISH is lyrical, low-key and evocative, which could translate to
"slow and boring" for some audiences.  Those with a taste for
something crafted with grace, confidence and a feel for the power of
a well-told tale will find this one SECRET worth sharing.
