Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
Number of Reviews
41

Author
C. Michael Bailey
Starring:  Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell,  David
Strathairn, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito.
Directed by:  Curtis Hanson
Screenplay by:  Brian Helgeland and Curtis Hanson
Warner Brothers 1997
130 minutes
I read James Ellroy's White Jazz first.  It was hard to read, the language
and rhythm was fast, improvised, and unpredictable.  Several years later I
read L.A. Confidential in anticipation of Curtis Hanson's (The River Wild,
The Hand That Rocks The Cradle) movie of the same name.  I found the book
much easier to read because of White Jazz.  Ellroy used the same techniques
he used in White Jazz:  Short, fast chapters devoted to stream of
conscience, police logs, and Los Angeles newspaper and tabloid articles. 
The fictional rag Hush, Hush, with its funky, hip 50s tabloidese appears in
both books.  It is with this urban patois that Danny DeVito's Hush, Hush
editor Sid Hudgens introduces the film by narrating his next by-line as he
pecks it out to the, "Accentuate the Positive."  Indeed, one of the cooler
movie intros of recent memory.
Briefly (as there have been several fine synopses published previously on
this newsgroup by Walter Frith, Timothy Scott, Travis Daub, James
Berardinelli,  and Michael Dequina) L.A. Confidential is a story focusing
primarily on three Los Angles detectives in the early 1950s.  These vastly
different men are the bookish and ambitious Edmund Exley (Guy Pearce), the
brutish Wendell "Bud" White (Russell Crowe, previously in Virtuosity), and
the cavalier Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey).  These three odd acquaintances
are brought together to investigate a mass murder in an urban coffee shop
called The Night Owl.  Into this main plot fabric is woven several
competing subplots that illuminates the true genius of this film--  its
screen writing.
James Ellroy's book was accurately described as "sprawling" by Joe
Morgenstern in The Wall Street Journal.  It is a very complex and involved
book that would be difficult (if not impossible) to adapt for the screen
with anything approaching perfect fidelity.  Brian Helgeland and Curtis
Hanson do a admirable job with this adaptation, compressing the book's less
than neat story lines into a tellable tale without sugarcoating it.  Of
note is their treatment of the two main characters, Exley and White, as
diametrically opposed and essential to one another as a one glove is to the
other.
The book portrays Exley as an educated, ambitious, and duplicitous
fledgling police officer who wants to present the appearance of being a
straight arrow while manipulating his way politically up the ladder.  In
the book he presents with a moral opacity not easily understood.  Exley's
persona in the movie tends more to the straight arrow, who while still
ruthless, is not as ruthless as in the book.  Where Exley has a moral
opacity, his counterpart Wendell White is portrayed in the book as not
having the intellect to act any other way than violently.  White has no
hidden agenda; what you see is what you get.  He is everything that Exley
is not (and vice versa).  In the film together they form a perfect whole. 
Helgeland and Hanson expertly take the images of Exley and White from the
book and with their screenplay focus their blurry print personas into ones
made for the cinema, and readily digestible by the viewing public, who
typically do not care for gray areas.
Happily, Kevin Spacey's Vincennes needed little fine tuning in his
translation from the book to the film.  Hanson captures his cheerfully
amoral character perfectly on film.
Hanson adds some nice period touches to Ellroy's already encyclopedic
treatment of 1950's Hollywood with nuggets like the Gerry Mulligan and Chet
Baker pianoless quartet playing a party and the insinuation of fiction in
fact by having had Jack Vincennes' be the cop who arrested actor Robert
Mitchum for his well publicized marijuana possession.
Aussies Pearce and Crowe speak perfectly accentless Californian without a
whiff of down under twang, no small feat (remember Kevin Costner's anemic
English Accent in Robinhood?) and are really the stars of the show,
overpowering Kevin Spacey's truly superb performance as the Hollywood
social animal Vincennes.  Danny DeVito is delightfully well cast as the
Hush, Hush editor, as James Cromwell is as police captain Dudley Smith. 
The only possible disappointment is a poorly cultivated Lynn Bracken
(White's Love interest) played by a stunning Kim Basinger.
L.A. Confidential is a fine film by any standard.  It is American noir
without being too noir.  It has a sensibility that does not cater to
today's delusional nostalgia for the 1950s.  I think it has been
presumptive of other critics to compare this film to Chinatown, The Two
Jakes (two masterpieces), or Mulholland Falls (a hack Chinatown wannabe). 
This film cannot be evaluated based on these earlier films.  It has no peer
in this genre of films that have been released in the past several years. 
A fine film and a fine book.  Treat yourself to both.

Author
Jason Overbeck
This is the best film of the year. If TITANIC (****) wins Best Picture
at the Oscars it will be a tragedy the size of FORREST GUMP (***) over
PULP FICTION (****). The sad fact is that TITANIC will win. Nothing
against TITANIC which is one of the best films of the year, LA.
CONFIDENTIAL is just soo much better.
LA. CONFIDENTIAL is a masterpiece of a film set in the 1940's and
dealing with three cops, one a "celebrity" cop, one a pit bull, and the
other a kid raising through the ranks by screwing over other cops. They
are thrown into a massacre that turns out to be a very complex puzzle of
twists and turns. 
Every aspect of this film is beautifully composed, the look, dialog and
acting is key. Who would expected a film this wonderful from Curtis
Hanson (co-writer/director) after he inflicted us with THE RIVER WILD
(**1/2) and HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE (**)? Who would have expected a
film this complex and intricate?
The cast is fantastic, consisting of 4 red hot actors. Guy Pearce is
quite a discovery as the department hated cop, his last film was
ADVENTURES OF PRICELLA QUEEN OF THE DESERT(!). Kevin Spacey delivers a
knockout performance that out does that of THE USUAL SUSPECTS (****).
Russel Crowe hasn't been this good since his Aussie film ROMPER STOMPER
(***1/2). James Cromwell continues his critical waves, created with BABE
(***).
All hope of a Best Picture oscar is not completly lost. TITANIC didn't
recieve a nomination for screenplay or lead actor. The distinction that
made it so much higher than other films were action awards (sound,
visual effects,...). If CONFIDENTIAL comes up unvictorious to the boat
don't be suprised. Remember Fargo, Pulp, .........

Author
Scott Renshaw
L.A. CONFIDENTIAL
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell, David
Strathairn, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito.
Screenplay:  Brian Helgeland and Curtis Hanson, based on the novel by
James Ellroy.
Producers:  Curtis Hanson, Arnon Milchan, Michael Nathanson.
Director:  Curtis Hanson.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, violence, brief nudity)
Running Time:  140 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Early though it may be to make such a prediction, I'm going to do so:
no one will be more deserving of an Adapted Screenplay Oscar in 1997 than
Brian Helgeland and Curtis Hanson.  James Ellroy's 1990 novel "L.A.
Confidential" was 496 pages of sprawling, tangled plotting and a staccato
prose style in which entire chapters seemed to fly by without a single
verb rearing its active little head.  Even the author himself said he
didn't always know what was going on at any given time.  Hanson and
Helgeland took that narrative and tamed it into an intricate but
accessible crime drama.  They remained true to both the style and gritty
substance of the story while giving it the appeal of pop entertainment.
     Which is not to say that they have created an unqualified triumph.
L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is the kind of sturdy, satisfying studio vehicle which
turns up rarely enough that it's easy to mistake it for a minor
masterpiece.  It's well-crafted but never dazzling, consistently
interesting without being engrossing.  Helgeland and Hanson haven't
exactly taken an unfilmable novel and turned it into a classic.  They've
taken a novel which would have been a three hour art film and made a
140-minute mainstream multiplex success.
     Set in 1951-52, the bulk of L.A. CONFIDENTIAL focuses on Hollywood
police precinct filled with shady characters.  Det. Jack Vincennes (Kevin
Spacey) pays more attention to serving as technical advisor to a
"Dragnet"-style TV show and getting pay-offs from a tabloid reporter
(Danny DeVito) than he does to his job; Det. Bud White (Russell Crowe)
regularly beats uncooperative suspects into submission.  Into this world
steps Ed Exley (Guy Pearce), the son of a decorated cop who appears 
determined to do things by the book.  Unfortunately, the book doesn't
cover how to deal with complex cases like the mass slaying at the Nite Owl
diner, a case which turns out to have far broader implications than anyone
suspects.
     There's more than a whiff of CHINATOWN to L.A. CONFIDENTIAL -- it's
hard not to break into a chuckle when one character appears with a Jake
Gittes Memorial Nose Bandage -- but the story manages to stake out its
own unique territory in exposing the dark side of booming post-war Los
Angeles.  It does a particularly impressive job of hooking into the
relationship between high-profile crime and the media, skewering the
public's inexhaustible appetite for sordid tales about which they can feel
morally superior.  Curtis Hanson's direction manages to navigate a smart
path between the glossy image of Hollywood and the sleazy reality.  It's a
perfectly appropriate ambiguity that L.A. CONFIDENTIAL (photographed by
the talented Dante Spinotti) may be one of the best-looking films ever
made about ugly doings.
     It's also appropriate that the characters are similarly ambiguous,
complex people whose motivations are never as pure or as selfish as they
appear at first glance.  Another of the accomplishments in this fine
script is that those characters feel softer and more humanized than they
do in Ellroy's novel, easier to sympathize with.  Yet one of the problems
with L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is that while the characters are uniformly
well-acted and multi-dimensional, there's not enough time to get under the
skin of any one character.  We find ourselves surprised by some of the
decisions the characters make, but once we understand a single basic
motivation for each one there's not much left to learn about them.
Pearce, Crowe and Spacey do solid work with solid characters.  They're
never boring, and never fascinating.
     Hanson and Helgeland still do an impressive enough job that I
couldn't help wishing they had trusted their own skill with material a bit
more.  The plot twists of L.A. CONFIDENTIAL may be a lot to take in, but
not so much that they require the constant nudging the script and
direction provide.  Every character is identified in bold letters
(sometimes literally), every significant development is accompanied by a
flashback or wordy exposition to make sure we realize the significance,
and whole chunks of the film are summarized at various points like
chapter-ending Cliff's Notes.  It all gives a smart film the feeling that
it's not quite so smart after all, or that the audience isn't expected to 
be smart enough to figure it all out.  Perhaps when Mssrs. Helgeland and
Hanson are standing at the podium, trophies in hand, they'll realize what
they've accomplished.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        As of today, October 6, 1997, L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is the 
best film I've seen in a theater this year. By far. I've gotten so used to 
formula hash like EXCESS BAGGAGE and SPEED 2 that when an 
intelligent, suspenseful, absorbing action drama like this comes along, 
I feel privileged. So often when I take the time and money to go to a 
theater, I lose IQ points on the drivel that is tossed at me. That's not to 
say there isn't highly entertaining drivel out there; it's just much better 
to see something original and unpredictable that makes you think but 
never bores you.
        L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, a noirish film adapted from the James 
Ellroy novel, is one of those movies it seems impossible not to like. 
>From its very opening, it sucks you in and never cuts corners. Set in 
the 1950s, L.A. CONFIDENTIAL paints a portrait of a corrupt police 
department (nice to know LAPD has been corrupt for _decades_, isn't 
it?) whose sense of brotherhood and greed overrides any real sense of 
justice, although all the lies and evidence planting are done in the 
name of justice. The police captain (James Cromwell) explains this to 
an ambitious sergeant (Guy Pearce) just before he is faced with the 
decision of whether to rat on some of his fellow officers.
        On Christmas Eve, a few Mexican immigrants are hauled into 
the station. Some officers, buzzing from the spiked eggnog, decide to 
whip the hell out of them. (This always occurs on the eleventh day of 
Christmas, by the way.) Pearce is the only objector and the only one 
willing to testify, the only officer in the entire precinct who wants to be 
an honest cop. Russell Crowe plays his polar opposite, an all-muscle-
and-no-brain cop who loves to administer brutal justice to wife beaters. 
Crowe turns down Cromwell's request to testify against his partner, 
who is to be used as the fall guy for the Yuletide Immigrant Bashing 
party.
        The partner gets suspended, then he gets killed. Bad day. 
Pearce gets to the scene of the crime first and is put on the 
investigation, while Crowe begins to orchestrate an extracurricular 
revenge investigation. Pearce arrests three black men who were seen in 
the area with the guns, but it's obvious the case doesn't end there (and, 
again, it's nice to know LAPD has framed black men for _decades_). 
It involves a few of the movie's colorful non-police characters.
        There's a millionaire (David Strathairn) who makes some of 
his profit pimping hookers who have been surgically altered to 
resemble Hollywood starlets. Kim Basinger plays the Veronica Lake 
look-alike (the Lake-alike, you might call her) whom Crowe falls for, 
and Danny DeVito takes his weasel persona to new heights as the 
publisher of Hush-Hush, a rag that prints lurid crime stories. DeVito 
is tipped off to these crime exclusives by one of the officers (Kevin 
Spacey).
        To reveal anything more would spoil some of the fun, since 
at least half of L.A. CONFIDENTIAL's appeal lies in the intricacies of 
the crime story. The direction, from Curtis Hanson (taking a break 
from his "MMMBop" world tour), is stylish and colorful, in grand '50s 
style, and the acting is wonderful from all sides. The people you know 
will be great -- Spacey, Basinger, DeVito -- are, but the movie belongs 
to the two complicated cops, played by Pearce and Russell. I loved 
everything about this movie.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at:
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving the World for Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Nigel Bridgeman
L.A. Confidenial is a rare bird indeed: a modern American crime epic with
great acting, a great script, great direction and a great look to boot. How
many films these days can you say such a thing about these days? The old
saying that 'they don't make them like they used to' can really be put to
the test here.
Director Curtis Hanson is not the sort of filmmaker who would normally be
associated with this sort of movie - best known for his escapist films such
as The Hand That Rocked the Cradle and The River Wild (which costarred
Confidential's David Strathairn), Hanson managed to get enough street cred
to be able to risk making a film which could finally launch him to the
Hollywood A-list.
A risk because L.A. Confidential doesn't have what one would consider bona
fide movie stars, in the U.S., at least - Kevin Spacey, while being an
Oscar winner and having a sizable cult following, has never proven that he
can open a film; Russell Crowe, while an award-winning actor for his
Australian films Proof and Romper Stomper (which managed to make headlines
by creating controversy because of its racist characters), has had a
Hollywood career which so far been less than successful; and Guy Pearce,
the former soapy heartthrob who only came to international prominence with
The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert and who seemed to be
destined afterwards to a life of more Australian films (the gender-swapping
comedy Dating the Enemy, for example) and television series (The Man From
Snowy River).
Hanson, then, should definately be applauded for managing to overcome the
obvious difficulties he would have had in securing such a risky cast and
succeeding. Casting two little known, non-American actors in a major
Hollywood picture is almost unheard of, but hopefully we'll be seeing more
of it in the future after this film. "No stars, just talent," indeed.
Bud White (Crowe) is a firey young cop who acts before he thinks, beats up
on men who beat up on women and is fiercely loyal to his comrades,
especially when he's pressured into giving evidence to an inquiry when he
and his partner Dick Strensland (Graham Beckel) are photographed beating
into a group of Mexican prisoners suspected of assailing a couple of
policemen.
White's polar opposite is Ed Exley (Pearce), a by-the-book college boy who
doesn't mind creating a few enemies if it can further his career. After
spilling the beans on the beating, he becomes a Detective Lieutenant and
becomes second-in-command behind police captain Dudley Smith (the brilliant
James Cromwell) in a murder investigation which runs far deeper than either
he or White could imagine.
The entire cast (which also includes Danny De Vito, Kim Basinger and
another former Australian soap star, Simon Baker Denny) are terrific, but
special mention must of course go to Crowe, Pearce and Spacey (as Jack
Vincennes, another cop who gets caught up in the investigation) for their
exceptional performances.
Hanson proves that he is definately a force to be reckoned with as a
director. He has made a modern classic with this film, one that can very
admirably stand alongside the films from the 40s and 50s. See it.
Nigel Bridgeman (nigelb@powerup.com.au)
The Movie Pages - a movie page: http://www.powerup.com.au/~nigelb/movies

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     They are almost a genre by themselves, Los Angeles and San
Francisco crime dramas.  Set in the short space of time around the
World War II are the Philip Marlowe, Easy Rawlins, Sam Spade and a host
of others.  Ranking with the best of them and inviting comparison to
CHINATOWN (which it may even beat) is L. A. CONFIDENTIAL.  Curtis
Hanson who also directed THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE and THE RIVER
WILD has given us a rich adaptation of the James Ellroy novel,
directing and co- authoring the screenplay with Helgeland.  He has
retained a complex interconnected plot, but rarely a bewildering one--
not an easy thing to do.  In it Los Angeles is a completely
interconnected ecosystem of police, organized crime, small-time crime,
race, politics, TV, movies, law, and journalism.  There is a second
system interconnecting idealism, bigotry, lies, half-lies, blackmail,
posturing, cover-ups, frame-ups, delusions, and publicity.  It is
impossible to give a decent description of the plot in one or two
paragraphs as the film has enough plot for two or three films.  At 136
minutes, L. A. CONFIDENTIAL can pack in this much plot only because
nothing is wasted.
     Against the backdrop of a 1953 Los Angeles rotting from within we
have the story of three cops.  Each an idealist in certain ways but
willing to get his hands dirty for his principles.  Bud White (played
by Russell Crowe) has a personal crusade against men who beat women.
He also believes in the code of silence protecting other cops who break
the law.  His captain, Dudley Smith (James Cromwell) figures that make
White not very smart and uses him for muscle and for semi-legal
activities of keeping mobsters out of Los Angeles.  Almost precisely
the opposite is Ed Exley (Guy Pearce).  Exley loves the letter of the
law and sees no reason to be loyal to other cops, but he also wants to
climb the ladder and to get all the glory he can gather.  The third cop
is Sgt. Jack Vincennes.  He gets his kicks being the police expert for
TV's "Badge of Honor" (a thinly disguised "Dragnet").  He like
hobnobbing with celebrities and with people like Sid Hudgeons (Danny
DeVito) the editor for the oxymoronically-named "Hush-Hush" true crime
magazine. The three cops get involved with a movie-star look-alike
prostitution ring run by suave Pierce Patchett (David Strathairn) and
particularly his Veronica Lake look-alike Lynn Bracken (Kim Bassinger).
A friend of hers gets herself murdered in a six-victim massacre at the
Nite Owl Coffee shop.
     One nearly wants to call the execution of this film flawless.  The
dialogue is crisp and ironic.  The script is tightly written with not a
single scene wasted or unimportant.  This is not a film that leaves you
a safe moment to go out for popcorn.  The characters are finely
defined.  No two are interchangeable.  Eventually we understand each
and why he does what he does.  If the film does anything superficially
it is in its explanation of why Exley is such a straight-arrow and why
White so hates men who beat women.  But the visuals really capture the
period.  (One minor error in period: the film shows the premiere of the
film WHEN WORLDS COLLIDE.  That would have been in 1951, George Pal's
follow-up WAR OF THE WORLDS was released in 1953.)  Jerry Goldsmith has
written a jazzy score with the feel of a 1950s film.
     It is amazing how much is packed even into a film of 136 minutes
and into what a neat package the pieces fit.  Be prepared to sit
through the entire film, there is not a single scene wasted and few
scenes the film can function without.  I give the film a +3 on the -4
to +4 scale.  Objectively this film probably ranks with CHINATOWN and
THE MALTESE FALCON.

Author
Michael Dequina

L.A. Confidential (R) **** (out of ****)
        Curtis Hanson's adaptation of James Ellroy's crime novel L.A.
Confidential earned a strong buzz after premiering at Cannes this past May,
and it's easy to see why: it is Hollywood moviemaking at its finest--a
classy piece of entertainment made with equal parts passion, style, and fun.
        The seemingly idyllic Los Angeles of the early 1950s provides the
glitzy backdrop for the grisly crime that is the focus of the story: a
bloody mass murder in an all-night coffee shop.  One of the victims is Dick
Stensland (Graham Beckel), a subpar police officer who was forced into
retirement after a brutality incident not too long before his death.
Heading the investigation into the murders are Stensland's former partner,
Wendell "Bud" White (Russell Crowe); ambitious but naive Edmund Exley (Guy
Pearce); and vice cop Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey), who soon find out the
case is not as open and shut as it appears to be.
        Yes, L.A. Confidential is an uncommonly complex and intelligent
mystery; the ever-twisting plot continually surprises the audience without
insulting its intelligence, and the wry sense of humor Hanson and
co-scripter Brian Helgeland keeps the film from coming off as self-important
and pretentious.  But as sturdy as the story is, the film would not have
come to life in such fabulous form without its richly drawn characters,
particularly the All-American pair of Ed and Bud, played in career-making
turns by Aussies Pearce and Crowe.  For the most part, the central character
is Ed, a prototype for the "new" officer in the LAPD being introduced at
this time--one who prides himself on high moral principles, seeking justice
and truth without beating it out of a suspect.  While the intelligent Ed is
able to negotiate himself into a high position within the department, he
doesn't have the street smarts or toughness that commands respect from his
peers or elicit fear from his enemies; his reliance on eyeglasses only adds
to the problem.  On the other hand lies Bud, the "muscle" cop known to take
a brutal stand against perps, especially women beaters.  He is what is
perceived as the ideal cop, but as the film progresses, we see how his
hot-tempered style is quickly becoming obsolete, setting up an interesting,
intricate contrast.  Ed and Bud are not so much opposites in the manner of
black and white as they are in the yin and yang sense--they contrast, but
neither is clearly right nor wrong, and while they appear flawed and
incomplete on their own, together their qualities make an ideal whole.
        Surrounding Ed and Bud are an equally colorful cast of characters,
played to perfection by the impressive ensemble.  Spacey is terrific as
Jack, the spotlight-seeking cop who regularly busts showbiz personalities
with gossip rag editor Sid Hudgins, played with the right balance of smarm
and charm by Danny DeVito.  Kim Basinger is stunning, dangerous, and
vulnerable as glamorous top-dollar whore Lynn Bracken, even if her character
is one of the least effectively developed in the film.  James Cromwell (as
Capt. Dudley Smith), Ron Rifkin (as District Attorney Ellis Lowe), and David
Strathairn (as wealthy, shady Pierce Pratchett) also make lasting impressions.
        In the end, the reason why L.A. Confidential is such a juicy piece
of pulp fiction is that it is, quite simply, a good story told exceptionally
well.  It is superlative Hollywood entertainment--the type of picture that
Tinseltown likes to congratulate itself for making come March.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/

Author
Jerry Saravia
"L.A. Confidential" is the densest and most complex crime film since
"Chinatown." It is richly satisfying, brutally compelling and slickly acted and
directed, and one of the best films of the year. 
Based on James Ellroy's novel, "L.A. Confidential" is set during the early
1950's when L.A. was the mythical "city of angels" where nuclear families
existed, orange groves filled the countryside, and movie stars and celebrities
were in the spotlight. It was also a time when police corruption was rampant
and racism was beginning to boil over everywhere. Guy Pearce stars as a young
cop, Exley, who is eager to become a detective in the very corrupt police
system because he believes that a cop should have strong morals and values and
follow rules by-the-book - he doesn't believe in beating a confession out of a
suspect. Russell Crowe stars as the tough detective White who is just the
opposite - he beats confessions out of suspects, he beats up abusive men
involved in drunken domestic violence cases, etc. The unlikely pair become
embroiled in a murder case at an all-night diner where a cop was killed - a
group of inner-city blacks may have been responsible. It turns out they may
have been set up by someone in the police force, but who? The brutal Irish
police captain (James Cromwell) is unsure of Exley's capacity as a detective
especially since he's ratted out all the cops who beat up a few illegal Mexican
immigrants. Exley is hated by everyone in the force but does he have the guts
to deal with everyday brutality like White has? 
Then there's Det. Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey), a charming, impish cop who
takes extra cash on the side whenever he provides tip-offs or juicy details
within the department to the unctuous Sid Huggens (Danny DeVito), a reporter
who writes for "Hush, Hush," a scandal magazine that offers gossip and crimes
sold to the public for thrills, like today's tabloid shows. Vincennes also
moonlights as a technical adviser for a TV show called "Badge of Honor" (a nod
to "Dragnet").        Meanwhile as the murder case unfolds, White discovers a
connection to a sultry call girl, Lynn Bracken (the better-than-ever Kim
Basinger) who works for a prosperous pimp (David Strathairn) - he provides a
very kinky service where women are "cut" to resemble movie stars such as
Veronica Lake. White interrogates Lynn and falls in love with her, but is Exley
interested in her too? 
"L.A. Confidential" is an amazing movie full of plot twists, dozens of
subplots, and numerous vignettes. Director Curtis Hanson (who co-wrote the
script with Brian Helgeland) provides a dazzling ride making us feel as if we
have been transported back into the 1950's as he unravels the web of corruption
that leads from the police department to politicians, criminals, pimps,
mobsters and the traditional femme fatale. Still, this movie is not quite film
noir because we have two traditional heroes, the handsome Exley and the rugged
White, who overcome all odds and, to no one's surprise, find the killers (I
just won't tell you who the culprit is). The film is not quite on the level of
"Chinatown" but it is a more vivid experience than the fatuous "Cop Land."
"L.A. Confidential" has one of the best ensemble casts of the year: we have
the witty, reliable Danny DeVito and Kevin Spacey; the effervescent cool of Guy
Pearce as Exley who undergoes a transformation in the movie that is thrilling
to watch, and the contemplative, explosive nature of White as played by the
magnetic Russell Crowe (both are Australian actors). Kim Basinger is at her
best here since "Batman" with an alluring and sensitive side that brings
enormous pathos to her character. 
"L.A. Confidential" is a fast-paced, cynical, dirty, violent, mean and
thoroughly entertaining tapestry of a different period where innocence was more
prevalent but underneath, corruption and evil still roamed the streets. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with comments, suggestions or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Timothy Scott
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell with Kim
          Basinger and Danny DeVito.
        As a film critic, it   's rare to see a film of such quality where 
one has to wonder if heUll run out of superlatives to describe it. L. A. 
Confidential presents such a dilemma. Of course, these are problems a 
critic loves to have. Forget about The Game. Forget about Conspiracy 
Theory and these other wanna-be neo-noir impostors. L. A. Confidential is 
the RReal McCoy.S
        WhatUs truly amazing is how this film comes completely out of 
nowhere.  None of the major leads in this film are household names, nor 
is the director Curtis Hanson. Hanson achieved modest success with The 
Hand That Rocks The Cradle.  However, he also helmed Bad Influence and 
The River Wild.  This kind of inconsistency certainly demonstrates his 
ability to weave yarn that cloaks an audience in paranoia or steer his
shaky raft right into the rocks. Let it be known that Curtis Hanson is 
now on the A-list.
        There are other A-list names featured in the cast. Danny DeVito, 
Kim Basinger, James Cromwell and Oscar-winner Kevin Spacey all add their 
own spice to the mix. Yet, the real meat and potatoes are found in the 
performances of Russell Crowe (Virtuosity)  and newcomer Guy Pearce.
        Los Angeles, California, La-La Land, the city where dreams come 
true.  A city with an image of bright lights and even brighter stars. Yet 
as the say, RAll that glitters is not gold.S Underneath the surface of 
this glamorous town is an underbelly of organized crime and corruption. 
The kind of town where the Media and Law Enforcement can create their own 
news to control or simply destroy anyone who wonUt play ball. The kind of 
town that consumes the innocent souls of anyone who buys into the hype 
and the routine promises of fame and fortune. The kind of town the Los 
Angeles Police Department always claims to have under control. 
        If the city your picturing looks an awful lot like the L.A. of 
1997, roll your clock back about 40 years. Now youUre getting the idea. 
WeUve all heard the old cliche, RThe more things change, the more they 
stay the same.S  Well, thereUs a reason we have old sayings like that. If 
you take a good look at this film, you can see the roots of a cannibalizing
 system based on a tradition of violence, racism and self-glorification.
        To reveal anything more specific about the plot would be robbing 
you of all the pop-corn popping fun as you watch the story start to 
percolate before your eyes.  This is a movie for people who love going to 
the movies. The surprises are endless, the tension is thick, and the 
action hits you head-on. Every element of the film is so skillfully 
mounted on top of the other that even the most logical developments of 
the plot make you gasp. Curtis, we hardly knew ya.
        I hesitate to call L. A. Confidential  a Rthrow-back.S It 
certainly feels like one. Yet, I feel thatUs only because most of the 
people making films in Hollywood today are just lazy. One ironic note I 
find interesting is how, in the film, Kim Basinger plays a prostitute 
whose appearance is altered to make her look like a movie star (a subplot 
that provides the filmUs funniest scene).  To me, this is a great 
metaphor for Hollywood itself. Ultimately, everyone is in simply for the 
money and theyUll make themselves look like something they arenUt to 
whore themselves that much easier. Basinger delivers her role with style 
and grace; two words that perfectly epitomize this film.
        Having said all that, I cannot conclude this review without 
giving special praise to Russell Crowe and Guy Pearce. I know IUve talked 
a lot about clich s already. In crime-dramas, there is no cliche
 more enduring then RGood Cop-Bad Cop.S If there is one element of this 
film that I loved more than any other, it is the brilliant manner in 
which this cliche is turned on its ear. With Crowe as muscle cop, Bud 
White and Pearce as intrepid detective, Ed Exley, to simply call these men 
RGood CopS and RBad CopS would be a staggering over-simplification. These are
 two of the most complex police portrayals in screen history. The script allows them 
to drift within the gray area of law and order, but Crowe and Pearce 
never get lost. Comparisons could be made to Keitel, DeNiro, Nicholson, 
or even Bogart and Brando. Obviously, no one can become an instant 
legend, but these performances are as good as any of the aforementioned 
in their prime.
        With L. A. Confidential, Oscar season is officially open. I 
imagine Contact is the only other possibility for a Best Picture 
nomination, so far this year. As the fall season progresses, the 
competition is sure to get stiff. Will Hollywood be willing to do justice 
to a film that pulls back the curtain behind their glittering facade? 
Only time will tell. If not, well...thereUs a great line in the film 
where Russell Crowe asks Guy Pearce if heUs willing to tear down the 
corrupt system that established his career. He quietly replies, Rwith a 
wrecking ball.S Amen.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell,
      David Strathairn, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito
Director: Curtis Hanson
Producers: Arnon Milchan, Curtis Hanson, Michael Nathanson
Screenplay: Curtis Hanson and Brian Helgeland based on the novel by
      James Ellroy
Cinematography: Dante Spinotti
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Crooked cops.  The mystery and allure of Hollywood in the '50s. 
Death, double-crossing, and secret alliances.  Paparazzi waiting to get
that one breakthrough picture.  These are just some of the elements that
make Curtis Hanson's L.A. CONFIDENTIAL one of the most exhilarating noir
thrillers to reach the screen in recent memory.  With a script that pays
homage to the films of the '40s and '50s and may remind some viewers of
the likes of CHINATOWN, L.A. CONFIDENTIAL proves that every period piece
thriller doesn't have to go the way of MULHOLLAND FALLS. 
     It's 1953, and the City of Angels is in the grip of an
unprecedented wave of violence.  Cops on the take turn their backs on
crimes.  The jailing of a major mob boss leaves a vacuum of power that
leads to a turf war.  Then comes the Night Owl Massacre, where six
victims (including an ex-cop) are brutally gunned down at the Night Owl
Cafe.  The police begin routine investigations, but it quickly becomes
apparent that this is no ordinary multiple homicide.
     There are three cops on the job.  The first, Bud White (Russell
Crowe), is a "muscle" guy who believes that violence solves almost
everything and is willing to bend (or even break) the rules to obtain
results.  The second, Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey), is the kind of
officer who prefers the spotlight to a down-and-dirty lifestyle.  He's
the high-profile technical advisor to the hit TV series, BADGE OF HONOR,
and has a clandestine agreement with the editor (Danny DeVito) of HUSH
HUSH magazine, a sleazy tabloid that publishes photos and stories
showing Jack arresting celebrities in compromising positions.  Finally,
there's Ed Exley (Guy Pearce), a by-the-book cop who thinks he can rise
through the ranks without resorting to Bud's boorish methods. 
Obviously, the tactics used by these three differ greatly, but, as they
delve deeper into the murky mysteries of the L.A. police force, it
becomes clear that their survival depends on working together.
     The difference between L.A. CONFIDENTIAL and numerous other, more
routine films of the genre begins with the script.  Smart, insightful,
and consistently engaging, Hanson and Brian Helgeland's faithful
adaptation of James Ellroy's novel is a real treat for anyone who views
film as a medium for both art and entertainment.  The movie is filled
with small twists and turns, but not so many that the plot becomes
difficult to swallow or to follow.  The subplots =96 and there are several=
=96 are as well-developed as the main story, and the supporting characters=
are presented as more than mere colorful misfits decorating the
background.
     Atmosphere is another of L.A. CONFIDENTIAL's strengths.  This is
Technicolor noir =96 a film made in color that has black-and-white
sensibilities.  Like DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS, this movie proves that
multi-hued film stock does not automatically hamstring such a
production.  And, while the Los Angeles of L.A. CONFIDENTIAL may not
accurately reflect the real city during the '50s, it nevertheless
represents what we expect Hollywood to have been like, from the glitzy
buildings to the cool-but-beautiful femme fatales and the sure-handed,
silent men.
     The three leads give strong performances.  Spacey's Jack is cocky
and confident, Crowe's Bud is brimming with tightly-controlled anger,
and Pearce's Ed is caught between his towering ambition and his desire
to do the right thing.  It's interesting to note that two of the three
main actors in this distinctly American tale are Australian.  Despite
having appeared opposite Denzel Washington in VIRTUOSITY, Crowe is best
known for roles in the likes of PROOF and ROMPER STOMPER.  Pearce's big
break came when he cross-dressed in THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN
OF THE DESERT.  It's worth noting that both actors have perfected their
American accents to the point where it's virtually impossible to detect
a down under twang.  Meanwhile, the supporting performers include James
Cromwell as the chief of police, Kim Basinger as the woman torn between
Ed and Bud, and David Strathairn as a high-class pimp.
     It takes L.A. CONFIDENTIAL nearly two and one-half hours to spin
its tale, but the time passes remarkably quickly.  There's hardly a
wasted moment in the entire movie, and director Hanson (whose previous
credits include THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE and THE RIVER WILD)
maintains tight control of every scene.  Lately, it seems that film noir
has become the province of independent productions.  As a result, it's
refreshing to see a big-budget, studio effort of this sort that does
nearly everything right.  L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is likely to be one of the
best offerings of the early Autumn.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1997, R, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
starring: Russell Crowe (Sgt. Bud White), Guy Pearce (Lt. Ed Exley), Kevin
Spacey (Det. Jack Vincennes), James Cromwell (Cpt. Dudley Smith); written by
Curtis Hanson, Brian Helgeland; produced by Curtis Hanson, Arnon Milchan,
Michael G. Nathanson; directed by Curtis Hanson; based on the novel by James
Ellroy.
Seen by myself at the Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas in Oneida, NY at 7 p.m., Oct.
7, 1997 for free (free pass).
There's nothing more satisfying than a good, old-fashioned mystery story done
right. The last few years have seen a slew of Hollywood thrillers that are
nice to look at, but don't always stimulate your mind because of their
confusing storylines and plots. "L.A. Confidential" may be just as complex and
confusing as other mass-market thrillers, but what makes this film superior is
the sense of depth it has to all its elements.
All filmmakers should know that a hierarchy exists in storytelling. The most
general elements must be defined in order for specifics (i.e. plot detail,
characterization, etc.) to work. This film starts off well by defining its
setting - early 1950s Los Angeles. As Sid Hudgeons (Danny DeVito), the editor
for a Hollywood tabloid, narrates, we get a real sense of the time and
location, where Hollywood is  booming  but so is organized crime. This might
seem like a cliche setup, but the storytelling is very intriguing and
authentic. 
The story focuses on the men of the L.A.P.D. and their struggle to fight
crime as individuals, but not necessarily as a team. Why there's such a
division in the force we don't know, but it's almost irrelevant because of the
great characterization and how it works with the plot.
First there's Sgt. Bud White (Crowe), a Dirty Harry-like cop who doesn't play
by the rules, but is likable. There's also Lt. Ed Exley (Pearce), who looks
and acts like Clark Kent, and it's no surprise he's the only cop that believes
in following procedure. Then there's Det. Jack Vincennes (Spacey), a primma
dona  who serves as a technical advisor to a "Dragnet"-like TV show and only
likes to handle cases which give him publicity. Finally there's the old Irish
captain, Dudley Smith (Cromwell), who has that stern, wise look and runs his
force with cold authority. All four deliver powerful performances, especially
considering how different the characters are, and still manage to keep
everything in synch.
An incident involving a jailhouse rumble between the cops and inmates causes
the division among the precinct to split further. And just when it seems like
the force will tear itself apart, a multiple homicide involving a recently
discharged officer brings everyone together in their efforts to solve the
case. From this point on, the film becomes a fascinating, multi-layered
mystery and still manages to be a gripping drama between a handful of
characters.
It would be difficult to explain the numerous, overlapping storylines that
occur throughout the picture. In fact, I couldn't follow all of them, yet I
was never frustrated at the confusion. It is the way in which the characters
go about solving the case that is so interesting. Here we get actual, manual
detective work which is fascinating. You don't see these kind of details in
modern police films because everything is done by computer. These characters
are sympathetic, and as they try to put pieces together, it's as if we're
their invisible partners. One step leads to another and just as the case is
solved (or seems to be solved), it's broken wide open.
It's clear the film was based on a novel, but the screenplay adaptation
doesn't have the rigid storytelling a film based on such a complex novel would
usually have. Most Hollywood screenwriters just drop in random clues, facts,
and details, but here you can tell the writers have kept everything relative.
There are so many shortcuts the film could have taken, but it never does and
that's why it works so well.
The only problem with the film is that it becomes slightly melodramatic
regarding the character's personal lives. I also feel there's too many double
crosses, but they do keep with the story. The ending is probably more violent
than necessary but it does give a sense of justice.
I'm not usually a fan of complicated movies, but "L.A. Confidential" has such
a great sense of charm you can't help but get caught up in the excitement and
mystery of it all. The ending is certainly surprising, but it makes complete
sense and proves how intelligent the film is. It's nice to watch a movie
without feeling as if you're being talked down to.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 160
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz.

Author
Christopher Null
     L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, despite what you've heard, is not the best film in 20
years.  It's not even the best film of 1997 (current titleholder: IN THE
COMPANY OF MEN).  But if you consider all films ever made that have the nasal
Danny Devito providing voice-over work, L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is certainly at the
top of that list.
     Comparisons to CHINATOWN are obvious and appropriate.  Both films take
place in the Los Angeles of yesteryear, feature multi-layered crime riddles,
and have stars with questionable morals as ersatz heroes.  And both are very
good.  While Brian Helgeland and Curtis Hanson's script isn't the tight
masterpiece that CHINATOWN is (the writers meander for a good 45 minutes
before his story starts to shape up), and Faye Dunaway wasn't half the
cheeseball that Kim Basinger is as the femme fatale, CONFIDENTIAL makes the
audience do what few films of the 90's have achieved:  think.
     And you'll have to.  Director Hanson's convoluted plot -- tracing the
rise, fall, and redemption of L.A. cops played by Guy Pearce, Russell Crowe,
Kevin Spacey, and James Cromwell -- is all over the map until its handy,
bloody ending (body count > 25).  Even then, you probably won't have all the
details figured out.  But at least it's fun to try.
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Travis "Howling Mad"
L.A. Confidential is the best film of the year. Hands down.
As a masterpiece of filming, editing, writing and acting, it never asks
the audience to wait for a predictable outcome or Hollywood clichi, it
never disappoints, and never says "I'm a blockbuster, so pay more for
your tickets."  In essence, when I left the theater, I wanted to give
the box office more money. 
The film serves up James Ellroy's novel like a seven course meal, with
each distinctive dish a separate plot layer. There are mini-climaxes and
dramatic showdowns and some of the most smartly written dialogue to
grace the screen since Bogart's days.          Ellroy gives us a story ripe
with rotten public servants, overflowing with corruption in the L.A.
Police Department and then he pulls the rug out from under our feet when
we realize there are no "good guys" to clean up this town. L.A.
Confidential is a Dick Tracy cartoon with no Dick Tracy. 
The film is somewhat autobiographical for Ellroy. He grew up outside
Los Angles with his divorced mother and watched as her alcoholic life
went down a drain of scumballs and sleazy jerks. Ellroy's mother was
raped and murdered when he was 8 years old. The killer was never caught.
Ellroy has spent the rest of his life obsessed with her, her killing,
and pulp crime. Ellroy lived in the same world of sleasebags his mother
had inhabited. He was a stalker, a burglar and a pseudo-sexual predator.
When drug abuse threatened to take away his sanity, Ellroy turned to
writing to re-sharpen his senses. He spent some jail time and decided to
clean up his act. He started to uncover information about the Los Angles
Police department in his investigations of his mother's death. His case
was even on "Unsolved Mysteries." Ellroy befriended retired L.A. police
detectives and learned about the love affairs they developed with their
cases. He realized that in Los Angles, women are victims and men are
abusers. 
"Men Killed to impress other men. Men killed so they could talk about
it. Men killed because they were weak or lazy. Murder sated their lust
of the moment and narrowed down their options to a comprehensible few. 
Men killed women for capitulation... 
 Ellroy's intimate knowledge of his characters and their motivations is
only half of what makes them so powerful on screen. The performances
tells the audience everything they need to know. Russell Crowe plays Bud
White, a cop with a beef for wife beaters. Crowe is a jolt on screen. He
is swift justice and capitol punishment personified. Zeus's lightening
bolt. He is a 1950's Judge Roy Bean who answers questions in short,
controlled sentences or bursts of fury. When the police chief asks if
White understands his orders, he replies "In Technicolor." Crowe uses
his massiveness like a silent loaded gun, stepping on stage and creating
apprehension in the audience. Even his shadow is intense. One look into
Bud White's eyes in a scene where he handcuffs a drunk abusive husband
to his front porch handrail sums up that entire passage above. Bud White
can't accept that women are a race of victims in Los Angles. 
Guy Pearce gives the character Ed Exley the same depth of presence on
screen with is masterful delivery of brilliant dialogue and a chiseled
young face. Pearce has an amazing ability to portray tension without
speaking, and strength without action. He makes a Clark Kent-Superman
transformation by removing his glasses, and we want to believe that his
motivations for justice are as pure as a super hero, but even Ed Exley,
the precinct's star policeman, has a personal agenda. Together Crowe and
Pearce are like two characters of Greek pathos. Their faces, as well as
their performances are Greek statues, too complex for the eye to
conceive, too beautiful to look away from. 
Kevin Spacey is the Hollywood cop, Jack Vincennes, and he is the comedy
of the story. Vincennes is tied up with Sid Hudgeons, Danny Devito, the
publisher of a local tabloid crime rag, in a scam to set up celebrities,
bust them and publish the photos. Vincennes always gets the front page,
a $100 pay off, and sometimes he gets the chance to settle debts with
public officials. Spacey fits the role of a Hollywood hipster rather
well, but his acting talent isn't unknown in the world of film noir. His
presence creates a stable bounding board for Crowe and Pearce's
characters to bounce off. Devito and Spacey are a delight on screen
together, and all the characters make a solid  serious transition as the
layers of plot and danger unfold. This movie could be enjoyably watched
without sound, simply watching Spacey's, Crowe's and Pierce's faces. 
A prime example of the sheer fusion of acting and directing come when
Spacey reaches a point in his career where the payoffs are too much for
his guilt to handle and the sits silently contemplating his job at a
bar, studying a $50 bill. There is no doubt what is going through his
mind, but there is only speculation as to what he will do next.
Kim Basinger brings true class to a character without
self-determination. She is Lynn Bracken, a Veronica Lake look-alike
hooker who only shows loyalty in the right situations. Her on screen
presence has a depth that Bassinger has never before achieved. 
The biggest success of L.A. Confidential is director Curtis Hanson's
ability to blend the story elements. Unlike so many other films, the
violence or the sex isn't the reason for the picture. This year, "The
Lost World" was simply an excuse to get a dinosaur in downtown L.A., and
"The Saint" was an excuse to get Elisabeth Shue and Val Kilmer in bed
together, but L.A. Confidential doesn't make any excuses. 
The violence in the movie is a method that the characters use to create
themselves and the plot. It can be an extension of a character's psyche,
in the case of Bud White, or a scar on their face, in the case of Ed
Exley. In fact, each violent scene becomes another trait, or memory,
that each person carries on their shoulders. As an audience we watch the
violence knowing we'll remember it later in the film, not to get a
thrill. Not one action or gunshot is gratuitous. Every scene is as
methodical as Bud White planting a gun on a dead man he thinks is
guilty.
The final scenes of the movie set the rest of the film in stone. The
audience comes to the understanding that there can't be any perfect
"good guys" in a city like Los Angles. Because there's always going to
be somebody who gets away with their crimes. Its a hard ending to
swallow, and getting there is half the fun, but it is immensely
satisfying, none the less. 
L.A. Confidential is the best film of the year. Hands down. 
**** out of Four. "L.A. Confidential" Directed by Curtis Hanson.
Starring:  Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce (II), James Cromwell,
David Strathairn, Kim Basinger and Danny DeVito. Produced by Warner
Brothers. 1997

Author
Homer Yen
The seasoned Capt. Dudley Smith (James Cromwell) questions his new
protege, Ed Exley (Guy Pearce) about his political views when it comes
to police work.  "Would you plant evidence to get a conviction if you
knew the person to be guilty?  Would you shoot a man in the back if you
knew that it was the only way to make sure he got what he deserved?"
Exley, squeaky clean, innocent, and pent with the desire to perform his
new duties with integrity and honesty quickly answers with a pointed
'no.'  Stunned, Smith pleads, "Then, for the love of God, don't be a
detective."
LA Confidential is a dandy piece of filmmaking that brings us back to
the classic times of Hollywood in the 50s.  Organized crime was the
biggest concern, corruption existed everywhere, and every cop had his
own way of getting the job done.  There was "Hollywood" Jack Vincennes
(Kevin Spacey) who gets most of his information from the editor of a
sleazy tell-all/show-all tabloid, Sid Hudgeons (Danny DeVito).  Sporting
dark sunglasses and a white sports coat, he isn't afraid to flash his
tinseltown style.  Detective Bud White (Russell Crowe) has only a
narrow-minded view of the law, and he uses excessive force to exact his
unique kind of interrogation and brutal justice.  And then there is
golden boy Exley, wide-eyed and ambitious but extremely naive.
A horrible multiple murder begins to draw these three men together, each
of whom become inexorably connected  in their search for truth, action,
and personal vindication.  Almost immediately, an arrest is made.  But
something doesn't seem quite right.  New developments become sinuous as
the story begins to draw us deeper into the labyrinth of corruption and
crime within the department.  Suspicion and questions begin to mount.
Odd alliances are created.  And as layers of the truth become revealed,
the story grows more complex and intriguing by the moment.  When the
mystery expands, we see other seemingly guilty characters enter the
lives of these three cops, including a high-priced hooker (Kim Basinger)
and a shady millionaire (David Strathairn).  All of the characters'
levels of involvement are not immediately clear.  We watch with riveted
fascination to learn more about why they are there and their stake in
the case.  We sense a cross-pollination of clues that brings us, the
audience, closer to the truth.  We hope that the three detectives can
throw away their spite for one another and can pull their resources
together in order to untangle the intricately created web of mystery.  
Absorbing and affecting, this movie has all the necessary ingredients to
create a terrific gourmet serving of film noir.  It boasts mysterious
figures in control, double-crosses, hard information from sleazy
sources, dirty politicians, corrupt cops, haunting women, and hard-nosed
cops experiencing moral ambiguity.  The underlying mystery is
compelling.  The look and feel of the movie is gorgeous.  The entire
cast is crisp and wonderful to watch (I wouldn't be surprised if
Cromwell received an Oscar nomination for his performance).  And, the
dialogue is rich and memorable.  The best line of the movie is spoken
when a key player dispenses advice to one of the detectives unsure of
what to do.  "Don't start trying to do the right thing, boy-o," says he.
"You haven't had the practice."  "L.A. Confidential'' triumphantly
achieves the rare gift of complexity and coherence while satisfying our
desire for a good old-fashioned movie.

Author
Phil Brady
Film Noir - I am beginning to suspect that this term is alienating
casual moviegoers who think this is an artsy-fartsy term for some type
of (grit your teeth!) art film. This is the only way I can accept the
lukewarm box office numbers for L.A.Confidential, easily one of the best
pictures of the year. Well, folks, that four-letter French word just
means "dark," and, whatever its origins, film noir is a most American
form of movie. Humphrey Bogart in "Maltese Falcon," Robert Mitchum in
"Night of the Hunter," Orson Welles in "Touch of Evil," Jack Nicholson
in "Chinatown".. have I got any takers yet? The darkness is the menace,
or evil that threatens to overtake our protagonists, who frequently have
a darkness all their own to justify their plight. Coupled with many dark
night scenes, such movies portray seamy lives, on the edge. The main
character is usually a private detective or criminal, but the heavy
drama works just as well for cops, and so it is in L.A. Confidential.
The movie takes place a very movie-style Los Angeles, when the initials
LA still had the periods for punctuation. The LA cops in this post-war,
pre-Miranda world were not corrupted by money, but they had little use
for civil rights. As the film opens, crime boss Mickey Cohen is being
sent up for the same tax dodge that nailed Capone. This creates a vacuum
in the underworld leadership, and hoods are getting bumped off
regularly. Squads of LAPD muscle intercept any new gangsters, beat them
up, and send them back East. Our story swirls around four policemen.
 Captain Dudley Smith (James Cromwell) is father figure to three
officers: Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey) loves the media attention from
his technical adviser role on Dragnet, and his pot bust of Robert
Mitchum. All his celebrity arrests are written up (and staged) by a
sleazeball reporter played by Danny DeVito. Bud White (Russel Crowe,
Virtuosity) is your basic thug with a badge. He only roughs up real
criminals, so the captain appreciates his `adherence to violence as an
adjunct to the job.' With 50 pounds less muscle, we have Ed Exley (Guy
Pearce), a Dudley-Doright with wire-rimmed glasses. He's due for
promotion to lieutenant, but Smith cautions him against his ambition to
become a detective. "Are you willing to create evidence to convict a man
you know is guilty? Will you give false testimony to put him away?" he
asks. "If not, you haven't got what it takes for detective work, boy-o."
Early on, Exley breaks the code of silence and testifies against White's
partner, throwing him off the force. These two who had nothing in common
now have a grudge. Exley survives the snub of his peers by displaying a
political savvy that exceeds that of his admiring captain.
When a botched holdup leaves an all-night diner stacked with bodies,
things get interesting. One of the victims was White's disgraced
partner, and another was a high-class hooker he had encountered. Exley
becomes a hero when he finds the suspects, gets their confessions, and,
after they escape, hunts them down and wins the shootout. Even though
he's accepted again, Exley has doubts about the whole case, and so does
White, for different reasons. Vincennes finds his own tie-in, and the
improbable trio independently do some digging. They all find puzzling
resistance, but they keep their resolve by re-examining their motives
for joining the force in the first place. The truth that comes out lays
bare the corrupt underbelly of LA, much as Chinatown did.
Although L.A. Confidential doesn't borrow from that script, the
cinematography owes it something. Many brilliant sunwashed scenes
contrast not only with the night, but also to the dark reality that
awaits. Director Curtis Hanson keeps things moving right along, and just
when it promises to get heavy, he throws in a small mistaken identity
scene to give everybody a good chuckle. Kevin Spacey is as smarmy and
watchable as ever, being interesting without really stealing any scenes.
James Cromwell was ready to quit acting a couple of years back, but Babe
and First Contact have him back on the short list, and he delivers again
here. Kim Basinger has one of her best roles, as a hooker with dubious
connections to the investigation. The always-underappreciated David
Strathairn plays her boss, running a stable of celebrity lookalike
escorts. The breakout stars, however, are Australians Guy Pearce and
Russel Crowe. Our unfamiliarity with them makes it easier to get
involved in their plight, in a way we couldn't with, say, Tom Cruise and
Bruce Willis. Both give compelling performances that should stick in
your memory.
Another thing I should mention about film noir -- no computer graphics,
no big explosions. The producers fall back on that old dodge of good
actors and a good script. No wonder  we don't see more film noir.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     There is a telling moment late in L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, director
Curtis Hanson's stylish film noir about the LAPD in the 50s.  Detective
Lieutenant Ed Exley, the department's only straight arrow, asks his
partner, Sergeant Jack Vincennes, why he became a cop.  Shaking his
head, Jack allows as how he no longer remembers.
     A bespectacled Ed, who is forever getting into trouble because his
fellow officers convince him that real cops don't wear glasses, is
played by Guy Pearce from the Australian hit comedy THE ADVENTURES OF
PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT.  The director purposely cast most of
the leads to either be actors you've never heard of or actors playing
against type.  L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is a serious and dramatic mystery
decorated with stylish sets. The film's one briefly comedic scene has
Pearce playing the role of the straight man.  The audience loved it,
probably because the humor was so unexpected.
     Kevin Spacey imbues any character he plays with an unidentifiable
something special.  Here he portrays Officer Jack Vincennes, whose sole
claim to fame is that he is the technical advisor to the perennially
popular television series, "Badge of Honor," which is a clone of
"Dragnet."
     James Ellroy's novel is adapted by the director and by Brian
Helgeland.  Arguably the best and worst part of the film version is the
surfeit of characters.  While this probably worked well in the book and
while it gives the story the feel of an epic, it can sometimes be
frustrating to follow.  Most of the characters are surprising well
developed, thanks to the almost 2 1/2 hour length, but there remain
quite a few who are only sketched and who should have been left out
entirely.
     L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is set in a tough time with tough cops to match.
When one of their own is eliminated, Capt. Dudley Smith instructs his
men that, "Our justice must be swift and merciless."  And he means that
literally.  These policemen are expected to kill the suspected bad guys
and then plant evidence on their corpses.  Sinister Dudley is played by
James Cromwell, whom people associate with such sweet roles as his
Academy Award nominated one in Babe -- he played the farmer, not the
pig.
     Danny DeVito provides the story's glue and narrative as Sid
Hudgeons, a Walter Winchell-type editor of a tabloid known as
"Hush-Hush."  As he talks to the audience, his typewriter provides the
rhythm.  "Hush-Hush" supplies payoff money to the cops to ensure that
it gets good busts -- it's favorite arrests are of hop (read pot) heads
-- which are staged for maximum photo coverage.
     The "Hush-Hush" corruption is penny ante.  The bigger stories
include a background one about a gang war over drugs and a foreground
one about a mass killing at the Nite Owl Cafe.  The latter mystery
occupies most of the story.  As a mystery it isn't much, but the
director manages to elicit such good performances out of his cast and
to create such a fascinating world that the picture compels despite its
limitations.
     A side story has a group of "high-class whores cut to look like
movie stars."  Kim Basinger plays a character known as Lynn Bracken,
who is made to resemble Lana Turner.  David Strathairn in one of his
least interesting roles plays Pierce Patchett, the rich man who runs
this expensive call-girl ring.  Actually, call-boy too, as it turns
out.
     The well choreographed ending takes the canonical big shoot out
and manages to stage it in fresh and imaginative ways.  There are no
surprises about who dies, but the ingenuity of the good cops and the
director's perfect timing combine to produce the best scene in the
movie.  Although it is easy to envision a trimmer and better L.A.
CONFIDENTIAL, this sometimes bloated one does not disappoint.
     L.A. CONFIDENTIAL runs a long 2:20.  It is rated R for violence,
profanity, and brief nudity and would be fine for most teenagers.  I
recommend it to you and give it ***.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 16, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jamie Peck
Warner Bros. / 2:16 / 1997 / R (language, violence, sexuality)
Cast: Guy Pearce; Russell Crowe; Kevin Spacey; James Cromwell; Danny 
DeVito; Kim Basinger; David Strathairn; Ron Rifkin 
Director: Curtis Hanson 
Screenplay: Curtis Hanson; Brian Helgeland 
In the down-and-dirty "L.A. Confidential," almost nobody is without 
blemish. The good guys are bad, the bad guys are worse and practically 
everyone's actions hide a shady hidden agenda. But don't think of the 
film's surplus of complex facets as confusing -- rather, they make "L.A. 
Confidential" a smart, intriguing synergy of film noir and crime drama, 
where most of the recent genre pictures have solely revelled in 
pretentiousness. Take, for example, last year's "Mullholland Falls," which 
only lived up to the second half of its title. 
"Confidential" chronicles the lives of three LAPD detectives in the early 
1950s: haunted strongman Bud White (Russell Crowe), prissy but ambitious 
Ed Exley (Guy Pearce) and smooth shark Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey). 
White and Exley's lack of common ground -- one's a hothead, the other 
quite level-headed -- results in each's hatred of the other, as the former 
relies on the brash techniques that the departmental-climbing latter 
totally abhors. Meanwhile, Vincennes serves as a technical consultant on a 
hit true-crime show and spends his evenings schmoozing with celebrities, 
reporters and assorted sleazy types, people like Sid Hudgens (Danny 
DeVito), the editor of the trashy tabloid "Hush-Hush" who never met a 
photo op he didn't like. 
A mass murder -- apparently the result of an armed robbery -- at a local 
diner called the Nite Owl throws these three men into an eventual, 
unlikely union. Upon the discovery that a recently-dismissed cop and a 
rumored prostitute are two of the victims, the Nite Owl killings suddenly 
appear to be more than a random, run-of-the-mill crime. Leads give way to 
the investigation of inter-office corruption and dealings with a pimping 
service where the girls are surgically enhanced to look like movie stars. 
One of these hookers -- a comely dead ringer for Veronica Lake named Lynn 
Bracken (Kim Basinger) -- strikes up a hot-and-heavy flirtation with White 
and, much later on, Exley. 
Conspiracy is everywhere in "L.A. Confidential" -- people scheme against 
and double cross each other on a regular basis -- but the film is smart 
enough to level out its playing field and never provide so much 
information that it never becomes too hard to take in; it's always 
mesmerizing and absorbing, frequently providing a sometimes necessary, 
sometimes not story summary. Even the character-defining subplots don't 
feel like time-filler. Those regulated to smaller roles come across with a 
fully-developed personality, and no one is lost in the shuffle of 
occurrences. 
Keen period detail and dazzling cinematography heighten the experience, as 
does DeVito's on-again, off-again narration. I usually think that 
voice-overs are unnecessary, but as he riffs about how Los Angeles is like 
"the Garden of Eden, but there's trouble in paradise," the feel, for once, 
is perfect. There are flaws -- several frayed plot strands exist by the 
time the credits roll -- but they're all insignificant and never hamper 
the enjoyment of "L.A. Confidential." The colorful cast occupies the 
picturesque setting with much gusto, character is just as important as 
plot and sharp twists and turns await every development. 
"L.A. Confidential" is based on the same-titled book by James Ellroy, a 
novel of which I have heard both things good (it's an entertaining read) 
and not-so-good (it makes absolutely no sense whatsoever). If the last 
statement is true, then that's just another reason why Brian Helgeland and 
Curtis Hanson -- who also directed -- deserve an Oscar nod for Best 
Adapted Screenplay. The whole package glistens with the utmost 
showmanship, style and verve, making "L.A. Confidential" one of the best 
bits of pulp fiction since "Chinatown." 
 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Steve Lipson
Justice Remains Elusive in Excellent `L.A. Confidential'
It is Los Angeles in the 1950's, and the LAPD has just launched a campaign
to root out corruption in its ranks and make the police department `a force
you can be proud of.' This climate provides the backdrop for Curtis
Hanson's excellent new film `L.A. Confidential,' a crime drama which
examines the lives of three LAPD detectives as they attempt to unravel the
mystery of a massacre in the Nite Owl cafeteria. What seems in the first
hour of the movie as a largely open-and-shut case soon reveals itself as
just one small element of an elaborate conspiracy, but such a
transformation should surprise no one familiar with the works of James
Ellroy, on whose novel this movie is based.
Ellroy, an acclaimed author of crime fiction, specializes in stories with
deeply-flawed protagonists, and the detectives of the LAPD prove no
exception. Each sees the duty of a police officer as the promotion of
justice, but each cop's understanding of the term is as complex as the
characters themselves. To Lt. Ed Exley (Guy Pearce), justice entails doing
consistently what is right, but his nemesis Sgt. Bud White (Russell Crowe)
believes that an officer fulfills his duty as long as the ends justify the
means. Some cops use the word as a cover-up for their nefarious schemes,
while others--like Sgt. Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey)--have become so jaded
that justice no longer has any meaning for them at all. But as the three
main characters delve deeper into the Nite Owl Massacre, they soon find
their cherished values tested more than they could ever imagine.
`L.A. Confidential' is thus at its heart focused on character development,
yet it is to the great credit of director Curtis Hanson that his movie can
be appreciated on many levels. The frequent gun battles should please any
action fan, while admirers of suspenseful crime dramas will find that
Hanson keeps the tension level high through effective and sinister use of
music and lighting. But in a movie based on characterization, it should
come as no surprise that the acting is what stands out most. In a large
ensemble cast, Pearce, Crowe, and Spacey prove particularly effective in
their challenging roles, which require that subtle transformations in
personality be conveyed chiefly through body language and facial
expressions. In the end, the three detectives have changed considerably,
but they remain as morally ambiguous as ever. Many in the audience, though,
will accept that justice has been served. Perhaps our own cherished beliefs
remain just as conflicted as those of the LAPD.

Author
Michael Redman
The most difficult aspect of talking about "L.A. Confidential" is knowing
where to begin. The film is thick with subplots come together to create a
smart complex film that is one of the best police movies in recent years.
The City Of Angels of 1953 is one of police brutality, a clandestine attempt
to take over the city's crime world and the heavenly bodies are working girls.
When a chief mob figure is jailed, his lieutenants are mysteriously and
violently eliminated as someone is making major moves into his territory.
When what appears to be a robbery gone bad at the Nite Owl Cafe results in a
six-person massacre, it becomes apparent that things are not what they appear
to be. A crooked ex-cop is a victim in the killings and it looks like his
murder may have wide-spread implications.
Three officers become involved in the investigation from three distinctly
different directions. Ed Exley (Guy Pearce) is a by-the-books new-look
policeman complete with eyeglasses and a dapper look. He's so clean that he
rats out others in the squad when they engage in beatings of jailed Mexicans.
Bud White (Russell Crowe) is at first glance his exact opposite. He's not
above breaking some bones to get the co-operation that he needs even if his
victim is tied to a chair. 
Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey) is an attention-hungry media conscious operator.
His deal with a tabloid reporter (Danny DeVito) who tips him off to nefarious
activities in exchange for first-hand photos goes hand-in-hand with his
position as advisor to the television program "Badge Of Honor" which closely
resembles "Dragnet".
None of these characters are as simple as they first appear. Good boy Exley is
not above manipulating situations for advancement in his rapid rising career.
Mad dog White is particularly aggressive towards criminals who harm women.
They both learn a thing or two when forced to work together. The interaction
between the two of them and Kim Bassinger's character is right on target when
it looks at the strangeness that exists in the attraction between men and women.
The supporting cast doesn't fare quite so well as complex characters. The
millionaire who runs a stable of movie star look-alike call girls is the
personification of sleaze. Bassinger as one of his prostitutes is the
proverbial whore with a heart of gold. DeVito's "journalist" is played almost
entirely for dark comedy.
Director Curtis Hanson has done a commendable job of turning James Ellroy's
1990 almost-500 page novel into a coherent film. You need to pay attention but
it all makes sense. Converting a novel into a movie is a daunting task. Doing
this one could have resulted in a five hour film, but it feels as if nothing
were lost.
The film begs to be compared to "Chinatown". Although "L.A. Confidential"
would rank in second-best in a contest, it is one of the few that could even
come close. The noir pulp approach works well with one exception.
If I were King Of The Known Universe and had control over all films, I would
have made different choices in lighting. The sets are sharp, the
cinematography excellent, but most of the time everything looks lighted with
about 20 spotlights. For a film drenched in darkness, there is a tremendous
amount of brightness.
Look for this movie to pick up a number of little statues come Academy Awards
time. It looks good, works well and doesn't talk down to its audience...at
least not very much.
(Michael Redman, with over 22 years of writing these words of wisdom, is
currently hanging out in big sky country  one of the few places that can
rival southern Indiana's beautiful autumn. Email to mredman@bvoice.com will
still reach him because the electrons go everywhere.)
[This appeared in the 9/25/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Ryan Davis
Welcome to 1950s Los Angeles, city of greed, corruption, money, and power,
just of few of it's qualities. L.A. CONFIDENTIAL displays all of these
characteristics in under two and a half hours, an incredible achievement.  
The story revolves around three cops, Jack Vincennes(Kevin Spacey), Bud
White(Russell Crowe)and Ed Exley(Guy Pearce). These three are out to find
out the truth concerning a slaughter at a local coffee shop the Night Owl.
During their investigation they find out that the motive is far more
involved than simply robbery.  During their investigation Bud gets involved
with a prostitute, Lynn Bracken(Kim Basinger), who looks like a famous
actress. Jack is also getting payoffs from  Sid Hudgeons'(Danny DeVito)
tabloid magazine all the while investigating the murders.
This movie has a lot good about it, in fact its relatively perfect.
Director Curtis Hanson(The Hand That Rocks the Cradle) does a superb job of
pulling everyone in the crew's talent together in a movie that is very
fluid and highly entertaining. The acting is flawless, Kevin Spacey and Kim
Basinger deserve Oscars for their standout performances. Guy Pearce,
Russell Crowe, Danny DeVito and James Cromwell deliver outstanding
performances as well. The cinematography(Dante Spinotti), music(Jerry
Goldsmith), costumes(Ruth Myers) and editing(Peter Honess) are noteworthy
and add to the film's excellence. Lastly the script(Brian Helgeland &
Curtis Hanson, based on the book by James Ellroy) is taut and full of
delicious plot twist that keep you on the edge of your seat in
anticipation.  This movie is an American Film-Noir masterpiece, and one of
my personal favorites of 1997.  

Author
David N. Butterworth
It's the early 1950s and the lure of Tinseltown brings the hapless and the
hopeful to the City of Angels.  Maybe to make it as a Hollywood movie star.
Or maybe just to see one.
But beneath the glitz and the glamour and the celebrity lies a dark and
dangerous underbelly--crooked cops, mob rule, corruption, homicide, vice.
The L.A.P.D. have their hands (or pockets) full.  The relationship between
three officers--men with very different agendas--forms the fascinating core
of "L.A. Confidential," writer/director Curtis Hanson's stylish, handsome
adaptation of James Ellroy's noir novel.  It's a story about the good, the
bad, and the beautiful.
Ed Exley (Guy Pearce) is young, college educated, and politically astute.
He does things by the book, refuses to take payoffs, and snitches on fellow
officers, all in the name of justice (and career advancement).  Exley is
not the most popular policeman on the force.
Bud White (Russell Crowe), on the other hand, believes that the quickest
way to get a confession out of a suspect is to beat it out of him.  He's a
muscle guy who uses violence as "a necessary adjunct to the job."  His
sense of justice isn't much different from Exley's, but his methods are.
Then there's Jack Vincennes (the terrific Kevin Spacey), a flashy,
showbiz-influenced crimestopper who acts as technical advisor for a
Dragnet-style television show.  Vincennes also scams for a sleazy tabloid,
getting front-page notoriety nabbing potheads in the act by Hush Hush
huckster Sid Hudgeons (Danny DeVito).
Sparks fly as Ed, Bud, and Jack's distinctly differing styles come into
conflict--and out again--as they investigate the Nite Owl Massacre, a
six-person bloodbath in a coffee shop that took one of their own.  Adding
pudding to the mix is an icy cool millionaire pornographer pimp (David
Strathairn), whose hookers are cut to look like movie stars.  These include
the Veronica Lake-inspired Lynn Bracken, played by a smoldering Kim
Basinger in some great-looking, gravity-defying gowns.
Curtis Hanson has taken a significant step forward with this film,
displaying depth and detail that was lacking in his previous psycho-bound
thrillers, "The River Wild" and "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle."  Lovingly
photographed by Dante Spinotti, "L.A. Confidential" is sleek and
satisfying, full of complex characters expertly played by a fine cast.
While the plot's intricate twists and turns pay homage to noir films of the
'40s and '50s, the film maintains a 1990's sensibility with some extreme
bloodletting, so be warned.  Otherwise, "L.A. Confidential" is a solid,
confident thriller.

Author
Jeff Walters
        One of the best movies I've ever seen. I'd heard extremely
good things about this movie, and though the previews didn't really
intrigue that much, it was a movie I'd been anticipating for a few
months now. For some reason I'm not sure of - this movie was not that
big a sucess over in the U.S. It was a definite hit with the critics,
but didn't exactly set any box office records. After viewing this
incredibly well directed, written and acted movie, I can't help but
wonder - why?
     The strength of this film is it's gritty realism. The main
characters are all human with individual flaws, no stereo-type
hollywood heroes. You may not agree with many of their actions in the
movie or their approach to life, but that is what makes it
so real. I had expected this movie to be more of a drama than a
thriller, but I was mistaken. Even the interrogation scenes moved
at such a pace so that it felt just as thrilling as any car chase. And
the ending......whoa.
             I've never seen a movie in my life where everyone in it
acts brilliantly. The three male leads - Guy Pearce, Kevin Spacey and
Russell Crowe are all just  terrific. The 'Best Actor' Oscar talk
surrounding this film should have netted one of them a statue, but
there is one problem there. How could they have chosen between these
three actors? There is no way I could look at this film and say one of
them was better than the other two. It's impossible.
               Kim Bassinger's performance is also a revelation. I'd
never been a big fan of hers before and always thought she was,
well...what's the word - a twinky? That impression has changed, as she
complemented Crowe and Pearce perfectly. 
     The depth to the story and characters is truly astounding. No
cardboard characters here. The plot is full of twists and turns
and some very clever sequences. Pearce's interogation of three
seperate suspects is nothing short of brilliant.
     I really can't fault this movie at all. I was so glad to see
fellow Australian's Pearce and Crowe star in such a breathtaking
movie. I had been very familiar with Russell Crowe beforehand from his
many Australian films, but had not seen much of Guy
Pearce. I intend to change this next time I visit the video store :) 

Author
David Wilcock
L.A CONFIDENTIAL
(WARNER BROTHERS)
RUNNING TIME: 136 MINUTES (2 HOURS 16 MINUTES)
STARRING KEVIN SPACEY, RUSSEL CROWE, GUY PEARCE AND DANNY DeVITO
DIRECTED BY CURTIS HANSON
L.A Confidential is a very good detective crime thriller. The film opens
with Sid Hudgeons (DeVito) writing an article about a drugs dealer named
Mickey Cohen (Paul Guilfoyle) in his magazine 'Hush Hush', which exposes all
the latest celebrity goings on in 50's Los Angeles. Most of them are set up
by DeVito and cop friend Jack Vincennes (Spacey.) While on duty, Vincennes
usually works with Bud White (Crowe) a violent man who can't stand wife
beaters. Finally, Spacey meets new kid on the force Ed Exley (Pearce), who
wants to become a detective, but is warned by police chief Dudley Smith
(Cromwell) that he hasn't got the balls for it. All these characters are
introduced quickly and smoothly in the first 10 minutes of the picture. The
film gets going when a mass homicide occurs at the Nite Owl cafe (where a
fellow cop is killed), and all the main characters get drawn into a case
that is more interesting than what first appears.
The film has captured the look of 50's L.A very well. The costumes, cars and
music are all there, and there is also some good set design. In fact, it's
hard to fault L.A Confidential on the look of the film. It's also very hard
to fault the acting. Kevin Spacey is excellent (as usual) as the grinning
Detective Vincennes, and the audience easily goes along with his character.
Crowe is scary as violent cop Bud, he plays the tough guy role very well.
Bud also falls for girl Lynn Bracken (Kim Basinger), a hooker who works for
a firm where the boss makes his girls look like movie stars. Crowe manages
to pull off the emotion needed for these scenes, he doesn't go through the
whole film like some big thug. He shows he has feelings aswell. Guy Pearce
is also excellent as 'by the book' cop Exley, his transition from being
'goody goody' to a intense, threatening cop (a non-violent Bud, basically)
is good, and believable. DeVito is his usual smart-ass self, a role he will
always be type-cast with. His performance is good, but it damn well should
be, because he's been playing the same character for the last 15-20 years
now. Basinger is also good, she's acting much better than the crap she has
been in recently. She's greatly improved from Nine 1/2 Weeks also.
Director Curtis Hanson, who also adapted the book and wrote the screenplay,
does some neat directional tricks. Every time one of the cops remembers
something important, we get a little flashback in the corner of the screen.
The gunfights are all well directed, the 'talky' scenes are well done and
never get boring. There are no faults with the directing and writing at all.
The 'twist in the tale', when it finally arrives, seems strangely familiar,
and has been done many times before. It is generally good, though there
could of been a stronger twist, however.
Overall, L.A Confidential is a very well made thriller, with a let down with
the twist in the tale, but excellent performances, excellent directing and
writing, and excellent set design. One of the best film noirs in a long
time, and well worth seeing.
OVERALL RATING=OUT OF
REVIEW BY DAVID WILCOCK
WEB SPACE PROVIDED BY GEOCITIES
1998 David Wilcock

Author
Dennis Schwartz

L.A. CONFIDENTIAL ( director: Curtis Hanson; cast: Kevin Spacey, Russell
Crowe, Guy Pearce, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito, James Cromwell, David
Strathairn, 1997)
A 1950s history of sleazy Hollywood and corrupt cops and crime bosses
running the city, is gone over with a fine eye for detail in this
stylized, technicolor noir film, that also depicts the popular scandal
magazine of that era, Confidential Magazine, (but called in the movie,
Hush-Hush). This film will evoke memories of films such as CHINATOWN
and THE BAD AND THE BEAUTIFUL, and of the starlets of that era, Lana
Turner, Veronica Lake, and Rita Hayworth. The feel of the movie is of
nostalgia for the Hollywood glamorous life of that period, at least it
presents what we are led to believe is glamorous, while the paparazzi
click their cameras at the action and work hand-in-hand with the cops,
hoping to catch a Hollywood figure with narcotics, or in bed with
someone who they shouldn't be with, or get the goods on some commies in
Hollywood. Crime and violence and corruption run amok in the city, but
the police use the media to project their police department as the best
in the country.
There are so many wonderful performances, that it is difficult to say
which one is the best, but the Russell Crowe, dumb tough guy, muscle man
cop, takes the cake as far as I am concerned, it gives the film the raw
energy and view point it wants to get across, as he believes whole
heartedly in what he is doing, as he beats confessions out of those
accused of crimes and works over others to get information. He is a
regular Mr. Softee for woman, and is particularly rough on woman
beaters, as he explains how he was influenced to become a cop, thinking
he could do some good for society, after watching his dad beat on his
mom. Kim is the whore, made to look like Veronica Lake, working for a
millionaire (Strathairn) who sets her up with Johns, who like doing it
with some one who resembles a famous star. She falls for Crowe. And
believe it or not, these are the two most virtuous ones in this flick.
The main plot of the film involves a stick-up in a diner called the
Night Owl, where six people are slain, including an ex-cop. It soon
becomes apparent, after the arrest and shooting of the three Negroes
framed for the job, that something big is happening here, and it is more
than the ordinary crime it first appeared to be. The politically
opportunist Pearce, uses this opportunity to become a hero, first
arresting the Negroes, then shooting them when they escape. He gets his
promotion to homicide lieutenant, and stiffly grins through his clenched
shiny teeth. He is hated by the men in the department for breaking the
cops "code of silence." But he doesn't care, he is both ambitious and
eager to do his job the right way.  He wants to emulate his dad who was
a hero detective, killed in the line of duty.
Kevin Spacey plays Jack Vincennes as smoothly as he can, a role he plays
with great relish, interested in the glamor of the job, he is the
technical advisor to the detective TV series, Badge of Honor, which is a
take-off on the real TV show of the 50s, Dragnet. He works secretly with
the sleazy DeVito character, who is the edgy journalist of Hush-Hush
magazine. Spacey gets money from Devito and credits for the arrests and
DeVito scoops the other publications with these hot pictures and
stories.
Cromwell is deceptively engaging as the police chief, with a heavy Irish
accent and with the demeanor of a politically connected cop, who could
look you straight in the eye and make you feel as if you were talking to
someone who has the goods on you. His role in the film is crucial for
our understanding of the underlying sentiment of how the L.A. police
force has relished its role as savior for the citizenry, even if it has
to defy what the book says is the right way to conduct a criminal
investigation.
The film is long, but it moves at a very brisk pace, covering a
multitude of sub-plots. The most disturbing thing about the movie, might
not be that disturbing if you believe that justice doesn't work, anyway,
and that if the criminal element gets pounded on, then, so what, they
are only criminals who would be getting away with crime completely if
not for these rogue cops. The would be lesson to be learned from this
film, is that the only thing that works in uncovering the misdeeds in
this city of secret deals and corruption, is the ability of strong
arming the suspects and gangsters you need info from. The conflict of
being a cop in this town, is over what one wants his job to be like and
why one joined the force in the first place, this is answered
differently by the three lead cops: Pearce (the new kind of media image
cop, is out for himself), Crowe (the old-style of cop, we don't talk to
outsiders type), and Spacey (who has forgotten why he joined the force).
What was made to seem impossible, was a cop who is good at his job and
gets promoted legitimately without political influence and is honest.
Maybe the filmmakers are right in their slick attitude, or maybe this
film is just pure entertainment. But the film loaded the deck for any
other argument, and that is what deters me from going overboard and
praising this film to the heavens, even if it is an exceptionally
well-made, cynically humorous, and terrifically acted picture; but, yet,
it might not be as great as it appears, since its subliminal message is
that you can't change the system.
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Sanford
L.A. CONFIDENTIAL(Regency/Warner Brothers)
While it's always sad to see the warm weather fading away as the fall
approaches, few will be teary-eyed at the thought of such brainless
summer movies as "Excess Baggage" or "Money Talks" moving out of
theatres to make room for slightly smarter fare.  Take, for instance,
"L.A. Confidential," which actually asks an audience to think about
what they're watching: What is this world coming to when you go to a
movie and have to pay attention? But though some viewers may be
put-off by the serpentine plotting of "L.A.", those who've been
starving for a challenging, complex story with something to say will
come away thoroughly refreshed. Director Curtis Hanson, who adapted
the James Ellroy best-seller with screenwriter Brian Helgeland, has
produced a sterling example of what Hollywood can do when filmmakers
refuse to "dumb-down" material and when actors are cast for their
talent rather than their box-office appeal. There's not a single weak
player in Hanson's ensemble cast, and little-known Australian actors
Guy Pearce and Russell Crowe are almost certain to find Stateside fame
after their breakout roles here.
         Although set in 1953 Los Angeles (at the time the city and its
police force were being glamorized weekly via TV shows like
"Dragnet"), the story is almost frightening contemporary, since police
brutality, sleazy tabloid journalism and would-be celebrities who'll
do anything to be noticed have scarcely gone out of style in the past
40-odd years.  Indeed, parallels between the "Bloody Christmas"
beatings of prisoners in an L.A. holding-tank and the recent scandal
involving the alleged molestation of a Haitian being held in a New
York City station are quite easy to draw. Ditto the young actor who's
seized at the "Movie Premiere Pot Bust" and the recent arrest of
Christian Slater, who's admitted he was high on cocaine and heroin at
the time he was booked for a recent alleged assault.
          But even if you lose track of the multiple intertwining story
strands, you won't be able to take your eyes off Kevin Spacey as a cop
who yearns for notoriety, or Crowe and Pearce, playing morally
challenged officers who represent two sides of the same coin. Even Kim
Basinger, unfairly regarded in some circles as a joke, is strikingly
good as a call-girl looking for a way out of the opulent hell she's
made for herself. Her part is small but pivotal: She's the only one in
the story self-aware enough to understand what's going on around her,
namely the war between illusion and reality, public perception versus
the ugly truth. "L.A.  Confidential" may be a period-piece, but the
issues it raises stare each of us in the face daily. James Sanford

Author
A. Estey
"Go back to Jersey, Sonny. This is the City of the Angels and you
haven't got any wings."
        If I had to choose one particular line of dialogue from L.A.
Confidential that perfectly summarised the kind of feeling you get
from watching this film well, I don't think I could do it. The
reality is that every single moment of this film is so well crafted
that I can't see how it could possibly be improved. However, the above
quote, uttered by Dudley Smith (James Cromwell) during a violent
police interrogation, succinctly sums up the world of L.A.
Confidential. This is a world of tough justice, where the cops are
every bit as bad as the criminals and corruption lurks everywhere.
This is classic film noir.
        The story revolves around three cops in L.A. during the 50s,
whose lives become entangled following a horrendous spree killing at
the Night Owl Coffee Shop. Bud White (Russell Crowe) is the merciless
cop who prefers the violent brand of justice. Ed Exley (Guy Pierce) is
the ambitious, by-the-book cop, who is trying to live up to his
father's police career. Kevin Spacey (Jack Vincennes) is the cop who
works as technical advisor for a TV show, who, in a rather poetic
moment, admits that he can't remember why he became a cop in the first
place.
        Now this may all sound rather routine for the genre, but L.A.
Confidential is superior to almost all its noir relatives. The script
is so well written and the acting is so uniformly superb, that it's
two and a half hour length actually feels short, even upon multiple
viewings. Indeed, L.A. Confidential deserves to mentioned alongside
other landmark noir films such as The Maltese Falcon, Chinatown and
The Big Sleep. 
        The film crams so much plot into it's run-time, that there's
no way I can provide an adequate summary in this review. I haven't
even mentioned the roles of Lynn Bracken (Kim Basinger), Sid Hudgeons
(Danny DeVito), or Pierce Patchett (David Strathairn), and yet they're
all such memorable characters. 
        Probably the most amazing thing about L.A. Confidential is the
fact that Curtis Hanson's name is next to the writing and directing
credits. We're talking about the man who's previous accomplishments in
film include The River Wild and The Hand That Rocks The Cradle (just
thinking about them makes me cringe). However, Hanson has made a
complete turnaround with L.A. Confidential and proven that he can make
film on a level far above most of his contemporaries. What remains to
be seen is whether he will emerge as the latest auteur or remain a
one-hit-wonder.
Reviewed by: A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Curtis Hanson
Writers: Brian Hegeland and Curtis Hanson (based on the novel by James
Ellroy)
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, Kim Bassinger, James
Cromwell, Danny DeVito, David Straithairn, Graham Beckel, Ron Rifkin,
Matt McCoy, Paul Guilfoyle, Amber Smith, Darrell Sandeen, Brenda Bakke
I was thinking after I saw "L.A. Confidential," and I couldn't come up
with a single thing wrong with it.  And I couldn't think of one scene
where I wasn't totally engrossed, a character who wasn't at least a bit
interesting (save the really small parts), and a performance which
didn't hit the nail on the head.  "L.A. Confidential," which has been
getting some pretty just awards from critic circles as of late, is
definitely one of the most engrossing films of the year, and also one of
the best.
"L.A. Confidential" has a very complex plot, which somehow never feels
overwhelming.  The film follows three detectives in the LAPD back in the
50s: the wild fame-hungering Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey), the
hot-tempered Bud White (the awesome Russell Crowe), and the by-the-rules
newcomer Ed Exley (Guy Pearce).  The film paints a negative yet positive
view on the LAPD, as being totally corrupt, with lots of politics,
hypocrisy, but with people who really want justice to be done, even if
they have to bend the truth a little.
The plot is set in motion following a little bit of police brutality on
Christmas Eve, when a bunch of cops, drunk on the spiked egg nog, beat
some mexicans up.  Exley, the nightwatchman for the night, testifies,
and is immeadiately made a lieutenant detective, much to the dismay of
everyone on the force.  Afterwards, Bud's ex-partner, Dick Stensland
(Graham Beckel), who was fired as a result, is found dead with a bunch
of others in a coffee shop.
The three detectives, working apart for most of the film, begin to
uncover lots of twists, as well as hidden secrets of L.A. life.  They
run into a wealthy man named Pierce Patchett (David Straithairn), who
runs a little side job, pimping for high-class hookers who look like
celebrities.  One of them turns out to be a woman named Lynn Bracken
(Kim Bassinger - I know, a shock), who looks like Veronica Lake, and who
soon begins fooling around with Bud.
The film unearths even more smut, as a result of the slimy Syd Hudgeons
(Danny DeVito), who runs a little gossip page called "Hush Hush," which
gets off on making people look bad.  The magazine gets a lot of tip-offs
from Vincennes (who also has a hysterical side job of being the
technical advisor for a "Dragnet"-esque show called "Badge of Honor,"
starring none other than Matt McCoy), as well as tipping off for
Vincennes. 
>From this point on, the story is intricate, fun to watch, and filled
with depth.  The incident uncovers a lot of police corruption, leading
all the way to the top.  I loved the way the film was very responsible
about this, and showed the corruption being as a result of a lack of
justice in the world.  After all, justice is almost impossible to
inforce, and sometimes one needs to bend the truth a bit.
I also loved how every single scene in "L.A. Confidential" is
intricately planned out for the maximum effect.  For the entirety of the
film, I kept waiting for a scene to slip up, to go the wrong way.  The
plot never falters, even after twist upon twist upon twist upon twist,
etc.  And the characterization is always deep, and never false.  Curtis
Hanson (who has directed the horrible "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle,"
as well as the tepid "The River Wild") has created a wonderful film
here, filled with moody atmosphere, as well as a gorgeous backdrop.  I
mean, this is Hollywood.  In the 50s.
The acting is also amazing.  Kevin Spacey, of course, is amazing, as
usual.  But what's cool is how he shares the screen with two non-stars. 
Russell Crowe, who is an accomplished Aussie actor, who has been in a
couple American pics ("Virtuosity" and "The Quick and the Dead"), is
absolutely awesome in his role.  He has charisma, style, and even
depth.  Of course, if you've seen him in anything else, this isn't even
remotely a big shock.  And Guy Pearce is pretty incredible, looking very
stern yet kind of ignorant as to the ways of the LAPD.  And if you've
seen him as the ecstatic, overzealous, drag queen in "The Adventures of
the Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" (yes, he's also an Aussie), it's
even more incredible of a performance.  Interesting side note: all three
of the leads have played a gay man in a movie at least once.
And in the supporting region, DeVito and Bassinger are pretty awesome in
their respective roles.  DeVito has that kind of sliminess that only he
can make lovable, and he does it brilliantly here.  And Bassinger, who
is near the end of my list of actresses who would shock me with a great
performance, shocked me with a great performance.  Who knew Mrs. Baldwin
could act, what after that "Real McCoy" movie?
"L.A. Confidential" is definitely one of the best films of the year; a
masterpiece from start to finish.  There wasn't a moment where I wasn't
amazed, bowled over by its greatness.  This film just shows that one can
still do noir and make it non-Tarantino-esque.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
John Beachem
When this wonderful film was released, two things killed it at the box office.
The fact that it had very little advertising, and that it was overshadowed by
the lumbering monstrosity that was "Titanic". When masterpieces like this are
so completely defeated, it shows the rather sad state of affairs Hollywood is
in today.
The labyrinth plot is mainly about three cops. Ed Exley, who is a golden boy of
the LA police; Bud White, who is a maverick cop, playing by his own rules to
get justice; and Jack Vincennes, the celebrity cop who works with Sid Hudgeons
from the tabloid "Hush Hush" to get callers that will put his picture on the
front page. The three very different men are brought together by a shooting at
an all night coffee shop which claims the lives of over a dozen people. Soon
however, they are dragged through a maze of crimes ranging from prostitution to
heroin running, which reach through all levels of power in LA. 
This film has it all. An incredible script, wonderful music, perfect and sets
and lighting effects, and some of the best acting I've seen in a long time. The
script is truly amazing, managing to take what should be a messy, convoluted
story and turning it into storytelling at its finest. Easy to follow, despite
the many subplots and characters. The characters are all real people that are
developed and defined to the point where the audience truly believes these were
real people. The music, by Jerry Goldsmith is perfect for the film.
Highlighting every scene and giving a great impression that this is really 50's
LA

Author
Harvey S. Karten
L.A. CONFIDENTIAL
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./Regency Enterprises
 Director:  Curtis Hanson
 Writer:  Brian Helgeland Hanson
 Cast: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James
Cromwell, David Strathaim, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito,
Graham Beckel, Simon Baker-Denny, Matt McCoy, John
Mahon, Paul Guilfoyle, Ron Rifkin, Paolo Seganti, Amber
Smith, Gwenda Deacon
   Intricate in design, bold in execution, and rife with thrilling
acting especially by Russell Crowe as a tough cop with a
complex code of morality, "L.A. Confidential" scores as one of
the great police dramas of our time.  With Curtis Hanson's
direction of a film co-written by Brian Helgeland, the
sometimes perplexing but always engrossing plot threads
twist and turn but finally entwine in a movie filled with brazen
surprises, Hollywood references to delight any movie buff, and
a thoroughly adult piece which honors the text of James
Ellroy's sophisticated novel.
   Though "L.A. Confidential" deals with the Hollywood of the
1950's, recent stories of police brutality, particularly of the
abuse suffered by Haitian immigrant Abner Louiama at the
hands of officers in Brooklyn's 70th precinct give it a
contemporary resonance.   If "L.A. Confidential" were simply
an account of police depravity and mob-generated crime, it
would be a typical, though quite exciting story.  But in
faithfully adapting Ellroy's novel, Hanson brings to the fore
some musings about ethics and an outlook on the mysterious
attraction between male and female, along with an evocation
of superior acting from his performers that rival even Jack
Nicholson's exceptional accomplishment in Roman Polanski's
"Chinatown."
   The story begins with the arrest of California drug lord
Mickey Cohen on income tax evasion, often the only weapon
which law enforcement officers could use to bring otherwise
protected gangsters to justice.  Determined to prevent other
kingpins from filling the vacuum in mob leadership, the L.A.
police department employs extra-legal tactics to chase the
usual suspects out of the state.  At the same time, some
members of the force are more than willing to use excessive
vigor in dealing with petty criminals, particularly Mexicans and
blacks.  When Ed Exley (Guy Pearce), a bespectacled and
college-educated lieutenant, pulls a Serpico by snitching on
fellow officers who had used their fists and blackjacks
gratuitously against Mexican-Americans, he is shunned by
others in the precinct.  But Exley is not the only cop with a
distinct temperament in the precinct house: Sgt Jack
Vincennes (Kevin Spacey), known as a celebrity policeman
after busting Robert Mitchum for drug possession, advises a
TV show, "Badge of honor" and enjoys an alliance with Hush-
Hush tabloid magazine editor Sid Hudgeons (Danny DeVito)
who informs Vincennes of upcoming vice activity, allows the
policeman to make the arrests, and takes action pictures of
the exercises.  Bud White (Russell Crowe), still another
unique type in the station house, has a high moral code
especially in matters of protecting women, but has no
compunctions in shooting down suspects whom he known are
guilty but who would otherwise probably get away with their
crimes.
   While introducing one complexity after another including a
look at a high-priced prostitution ring managed by millionaire
Pierce Patchett (David Strathaim)--who employs attractive
women made over to look like movie stars--Hanson supplies
plenty of visceral action.  Severe beatings inflicted by cops on
petty gangsters are followed by a bloody scene at the Night
Owl Coffee shop, an alleged robbery that results in the
execution of six victims.  While a multitude of activities is
carried on against drug criminals, rapists, kidnappers and
hookers, the center of the film is the conflict between the
repressed but brutally honest cop, Ed Exley, and the violent
but sentimental sergeant Bud White, a tension that reaches
fever pitch when White discovers a brief liaison between
Exley and Veronica-Lake lookalike Lynn Bracken (Kim
Basinger).  As mob activity works to bring the two contentious
cops together against a common enemy, Hanson brings his
story to an explosive conclusion, one which unravels the
complications and assures us that what has transpired makes
a great deal of sense.  
   Kim Basinger as the irresistible Lynn Bracken is in top
shape in every way as the high-priced hustler working out of
her expensive L.A. digs, and while Kevin Spacey does not get
the opportunity to equal his dynamic performance in "The
Usual Suspects," he comes across quite well as the suave
cop whose career rivals the stories often told on evening TV
police dramas.  Rounding out the cast, Danny DeVito is
intentionally comic as a founder of modern tabloids, David
Strathaim is elegant and assured as L.A.'s leading pimp, Ron
Rifkin appropriately oily as an AC-DC D.A. and James
Cromwell convinces as a police captain with a hidden agenda.
   Best of all, New Zealand-born Russell Crowe illuminates
the screen, all traces of his kiwi accent gone, as a ruggedly
handsome, charismatic and complex human being in a movie
filled with comic touches, forceful action, and stunning Los
Angeles setting. Rated R.  Running Time: 136 minutes.  (C)
Harvey Karten.  e-mail:film_critic@compuserve.com
-- 
Harvey S. Karten


Author
Steve Kong
L.A. Confidential is what Lee Tamahori's 1996 Mulholland Falls should have
been. L.A. Confidential is a tight and well-written film about a group of
men, some cops, that all lead a ring of corruption.
L.A. Confidential follows three cops. The three cops are completely
different from each other. Two start off as enemies but end up working
together and saving each other. Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey) is a crooked
cop who has forgotten why he's become a cop. He earns extra cash giving
information to Sid Hudgeons (Danny DeVito) who is the publisher of a trashy
magazine Hush-Hush. Vincennes is also the advisor for a cop TV show. Ed
Exley (Guy Pearce) is a straight cop who does everything by the book. He's
also a good politician and knows how to get what he wants out of his
department. Bud White (Russell Crowe) is a cop haunted by his past and is
now taking every chance to try to correct what happened in the past, fully
knowing that he can't.
L.A. Confidential takes it's full two and half-hours to create its
wonderfully layered story. Sitting through the first hour I wondered what
the real conflict was. This was not because the script was unclear, but
because there are so many threads of story spun up in the first hour that I
was unable to figure out how they can all come together. As the film moved
into its second hour all the threads that were started in the first hour
start to tie together, and I was pulled into L.A. Confidential's engrossing
tale of corrupt cops.
L.A. Confidential is an adaptation of James Ellroy's book by Curtis Hanson
and Brian Helgeland. The script is the best thing about L.A. Confidential.
It is a tight script, that with the great direction from Curtis Hanson (The
Hand That Rocks the Cradle, The River Wild), winds its way through the two
and half-hours without losing the audience's attention. 
L.A. Confidential has a gritty look to it, which Hanson uses to build a
wonderfully dark atmosphere. But, unlike other movies, which depend on
atmosphere to carry them, L.A. Confidential shows that it can out do them
and have a tight script, genuine acting, and atmosphere.
If the script is the driving force of the film then the three leads carry
the film. All three are great. Spacey, like always, is a strange character
that one cannot really grasp what is going on in his head while watching
what his is doing. Spacey has a wonderful screen presence that is both
intense and relaxed. Pearce does a good job with his role but is not much
to write home about. The real great performance in L.A. Confidential is
Crowe's. Crowe who has starred in smaller films, and was really unknown to
me until L.A. Confidential, steals every scene that he is in. His tough guy
cop is an immensely likable guy and though he uses some strong-arming to
get what he wants from the criminals, we always know that he's doing it for
the good of L.A. and we can agree with what he does. Crowe does a good job
at switching between his calm-guy to mean-guy demeanor and he is the one to
watch for when you see L.A. Confidential.
Worth mentioning is James Cromwell (Babe, Star Trek: First Contact) who was
so nice and enjoyable in Star Trek: First Contact, but here in L.A.
Confidential he is a different man. A man filled with hate and evil, and
when you look into his eyes as he portrays Captain Dudley Smith, it gives
you a shiver.
Also worth mentioning is Jerry Goldsmith's score for the film. Goldsmith's
score is so well done that it is there but not distracting from the action
on the screen. And it is also worth mentioning that this is, so far,
Goldsmith's third score of 1997.
L.A. Confidential is a great film about corrupt cops. It's too bad that
L.A. Confidential hasn't had much advertising behind it. This is a great
film and is a pleasant surprise for me. It has a first hour that spins up
many threads of plot that eventually tie up into a tight cohesive story.
The build up for the story is long but the pay-off is well worth it. Don't
miss L.A. Confidential in the theatres.

Author
Jun Yan
Screenplay by Brian Helgeland & Curtis Hanson
Directed by Curtis Hanson
Produced by Arnon Milchan & Curits Hanson & Michael Nathason
Based on the novel by James Ellroy
Music by Jerry Goldsmith
Actors inclue Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell,
David Strathairn, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito.  
*SPOILER ALERT!!!!!!*
The following review contains many spoilers to the movie, if you have not
seen this movie (what are you waiting for?) and do plan to see  it in the
future, please stop here.  
Early 1950s, Los Angeles, a setting that repeatedly draws writers' and
filmmakers' fascination since the days of film noir.  The story of "L.A.
Confidential" is centered around three police officers, however, is not
really a noir, contrary to the claim of many critics.  It is not about a
simple twist of fate turning an ordinary man into a criminal, or a femme
fatale plotting an evil scheme.  It's a crime drama with a lot of brain
and blood, filled with suspense and surprise -- the result, a wonderfully
crafted piece of work.  
Lieutenant Edmund Jennings Exley (played by Guy Pearce) joined the police
force to follow his father, a highly decorated policeman killed in the
line of duty.  He quickly gains everyone's despise for snitching on his
fellow officers about "The Bloody Christmas" incidence -- a bunch of
drunken policemen beating up Mexican prisoners.  Among his haters is
Detective Wendell "Bud" White (played by Russell Crowe), a well-known
strongarmed man who is feared by all wife-beaters in the city.  The third
protagonist is Sergant Jack Vincennes (played by the always lovable Kevin
Spacey), a celebrity cop on the narcotic division who likes to bust
drug-sniffing actors and actresses and works as a "technical advisor" on
the police TV show "Badge of Honor."  He loves the spotlight and being on
the cover of "Hush-Hush" magazine, a gossip tabloid run by Sid Hudgens
(played by Danny DeVito).  
The central mistery is "The Nite Owl Massecre" in which 6 people are
slaughtered, including Bud White's partner Dick Stansland and a girl who
look like Rita Haworth.  Exley, White and Spacey start on different
tracks, all become somhow involved into this case and form an unlikely
alliance to solve it.  In the process, we have a handful of puzzling and
messy clues including 3 black young man and a gang rape, some pornographic
pcitures, call girls who are cut like movie stars and entertain the rich
and powerful of "the city of fallen angles" and a suave businessman who
run this ring of prostitution, Pierce Patchett (played by David
Strathairn), plus a romance between Bud White and a prostitute Lynn
Bracken who looks like Veronica Lake.  In the middle of all this is the
riddling Captain Dudley Smith (played by James Cromwell) who favors
violence as the basic means of solving crimes and is constantly trying to
recruit White into his "extracurricular activities" often set in Victory
Motel.  
The spirit of this film is deeply cynical, with conspiracy upon
conspiracy, and corruption of city officials closely knit with organized
criminals and Hollywood showbiz and tabloid journalism.  Police brutality
is encouraged in LAPD and coverups are routine.  It is the same city of
sins as that in Darshiell Hammet and Raymond Chandler's novels --
glamorous, filthy, decadent, corrupt and fascinating, with plenty of
shadowed spots hiding the evil. 
The original James Ellroy's novel of the same title is an incredibly
complex mass of murders, conspiracies, crimes and the darkest secrets of
human minds.  It is virtually impossible to adapt it straight from the
book, so writer Helgeland and Hanson come up with their own story line
that is equally complex and make perfect sense, but more effective and
comprehensible in a 2-hour movie, while saving all the goodies from the
book -- blocks of intense scenes, tasty dialogues, brutal actions and,
most of all, complicated, shady characters.  They also create several
twists of their own that rival the novel, eg. the amusing Lana Turner
scene and the good-cop-badd-cop interrogation of D.A. Ellis Lowe, and the
extremely original treatment of the death of Jack Vincennes that is
more clever than the book. 
Although the plot of "L.A. Confidential" is satisfyingly complex as any
good mystery/crime thriller with plenty of twists and surprises, the best
thing about it is no doubt the characters and the acting performances.  It
is mind-boggling how they picked the two young Australian actors -- Crowe
and Pearce to play the leads and fit in with such perfection.  Sporting a
squeaky-clean American accent, they are exactly how White and Exley should
look and act like and feel like.  In the mean time, the writers should be
credited for being so fearless to maintain the serious flaws in the
characters, flaws that are not decorative and easily forgivable as they
often are in the usual heroes in most police/crime dramas.  The flaws do
not function to juice up the characters, but to present truly ambiguous
and fascinating ones. 
Russell Crowe's Bud White seems to be just another tough cop who does not
hesitate to use a bit force to rough up criminals and bad guys.  His
violent tendency is hard for us to overlook and deeply troubling.
Gradually we learn of the origin of this problem and his hatred for men
who abuse women.  He is a man carrying an emnormous emotional baggage that
he's lucky for maintaining his sanity (although sometimes he doesn't look
that sane really).  Crowe's rugged good look and uninhibited tenderness at
times make White irresistable, especially to female viewers, despite the
dark side of him.  It is a passionate performance that's radient with
intense physical and emotional appeal.  
Ed Exley appears to be the straight arrow in the beginning, but the first
30 minutes of the film quickly reveals to us that he is not the
by-the-book college boy type we anticipate as a contrast to the explosive
Bud White.  He is intelligent, calculating and ruthless, ready to squash
anyone that gets in the way of his advancement.  With the cold eyes behind
the rimless spectacles and the occasional sly half-smile, Guy Pearce hits
the role with the precision that Exley would be proud of.  It is difficult
to like Exley as a character, which makes his transformation even more
interesting.  What drives his transformation is the undying conscience
that urges him to put aside his ambition and pursue the true justice.  
Conscience is also the key factor to change Jack Vincennes, who is corrupt
and sleazy at first.  This is the character most detached from the novel,
given a different personality and aura, perfected by the marvelous Kevin
Spacey.  He presents this celebrity cop with his cat-like grace,
irresistable smile and sheer confidence, and a couple of priceless moments
in which he shows internal conflict by nothing but the look on his face.
It is impossile for me not to adore him as an actor.  
Two scenes have been considered out of characters -- Exley jumping Lynn
Bracken and White beating her for sleeping with Exley.  However, it made
perfect sense to me from the first viewing and seems evern more logical
the second time.  It is not immediately obvious but definately within
charaters.  Exley and White form an nice symmetrical image.  They are not
the exact opposite as "Lethal Weapon", but the balanced harmoneous
contrast that remind me of the symmetry in Chinese poetry.  Exley is not
the straight arrow when he kills 3 suspects, and White is not the
brainless thug when he does his own investigation on Nite Owl case and
manages to always stay one step ahead of Exley who considers himself
vastly superior and smarter than White.
The characters are the stongest elements of the film, and also the
weakness.  It would work better if the writer sacrefice a little time of
the plot and invest it into digging the characters.  We know Bud White's
motivation, but what is Exley and Vincennes's personal baggage?  I wish
the filmmakers explore it a little more than a quick explanation like
"Rolo Temasi".  As interesting and complicated as the plot is, it still
goes the conventional way to tell a crime-solving story and is not
terribly profound or deep other than the characters.  
The supporting cast are well above average, James Cromwell as Cptn. Dudley
Smith, Kim Basinger as the weathered prostitute, Danny DeVito as the
sleazy Sid Hudgens.  All adaquate and wonderful.  But the winners are the
three leading men, nailing their roles perfectly.  There could be no
better interpretation of Ellroy's shady and unlikely heroes. 
The cinematography, art design and style are quite authentic, I suppose,
to the period of 1950s, but pale in comparison to Carl Franklin's smooth
"Devil in a Blue Dress".  Director Curtis Hanson delivers numerous tightly
paced and well executed scenes: eg. the 3-way interrogation  of the Nite
Owl suspects, White beating the woman he loves, naturalistic and
emotionless violence scenes.  And the final shootout at Victory Motel.
The grim anticipation of the two partners out-numbered by the villains,
the way they pump slugs into attackers' bellies, the bad guy surrending to
the approaching police and Exley shooting him in the back, all feel so
strongly like the finale of John Woo's "The Killer" minus the passion and
slo-mo.  
The first time I saw this film, the ending seems like a cop-out, pulling a
"Lethal Weapon 2" on the audience, as many other feel the same way.  It
may look better in the book, but not so convincing on screen.  The second
time really feels much better, much sadder, and more more grim as the look
on Exley's face as he look on with the lone burden on his conscience.  
I am a sucker for this genre movies as well as novels, but an even bigger
sucker for well-written and well-performed characters.  "L.A.
Confidential" satisfies both aspects of my appetite.  It is still the
unmatched best of 1997, a weak year in good movies.  I give it A-, the
only A in 97 films. 

Author
Sridhar Prasad
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell, Danny =
DeVito, Kim Basinger, and David Straithern
    Stop reading this review right now.  Quickly shut down your 
computer, and leave to go see L.A. Confidential.  Then see it again.  
Are you back?  Good.  Now we can talk
    What I have just done is send you on one of the best film-rides in 
the last 25 years.  Welcome to Curtis Hanson's "L.A. Confidential", a 
tribute to the great film noirs like Roman Polanski's "Chinatown".  If 
possible, LAC might be even grittier than Chinatown.  Hanson sets up a
brutally honest, savagely entertaining ride through a convoluted plot 
that is so confusing it makes perfect sense, with a cast so fabulous 
they deserve to sweep the Oscars. 
    "L.A Confidential" is not the best movie of the year.  It's the best 
5 movies of the year.  The plot revolves around two cops, Bud White and 
Ed Exley (the absoulutely amazing Wonders from Down Under: Russell Crowe 
and Guy Pearce).  White is a brutal tough-guy, a man who basically 
punches who is bosses tell him to punch, a loyal, fiercely honest cop 
with a hatred for wife-beaters.  Exley is the son of a heroic detective, 
he is a brilliant, ambitious cop with a flair.  The story essentially 
begins when a bunch of Mexicans are brought into the station.  The 
police take their racism into their jobs by brutally beating the 
suspects, in an incident found on the front-page of the paper.  White 
and another police officer, Jack Vincennes (the incredible Spacey) are 
implicated in the beatings, but no police officer is willing to give 
corroborative testimony....but Exley.  This results in Exley being 
promoted, and he also being the butt of everyone else's hatred.
    There's one storyline.  Here's another.  Gossip king Sid Hudgeons 
(Danny DeVito) pays Vincennes and gives him tips on how to arrest major 
stars committing crimes.  In exchange, Vincennes makes big arrests on 
the front page of Hush-Hush, Hudgeons' magazine.  Vincennes is also the 
technical advisor on Badge of Honor, a Dragnet-like show.  Vincennes 
therefore has to constantly worry about his image, as he is a rising 
star, a national celebrity in the making.  Spacey plays this role to 
absolute perfection, his glamorous smile and flamboyance are flawless.
    That's two.  I told you L.A. Confidential had 5.  Here's the major 
one, numero 3.  A prominent businessman is having plastic surgery done 
to girls to make them look like movie stars.  It turns out this 
businessman is a high-class pimp, with these girls as his celebrity 
prostitutes.  All of these plots link to a murder at the Nite Owl Coffee 
Shop, where White's partner is killed.  There are dozens of other plots, 
all connecting into one hell of a convoluted mess, which shouldn't work. 
    Not only does this movie work, it is a mindbending spell of a film.  
The line between good and evil is blurred beyond repair.  Hanson places 
his story in a dirty, wild atmosphere of pure crime.  James Cromwell, as 
both White's and Exley's boss, is simply astounding as Captain Dudley 
Smith.  Kim Basinger makes the role of her career as prostitute Lynn 
Bracken, a Veronica Lake lookalike.  The Wonders from Down Under are 
simply that: wonders.  Crowe and Pearce are simply amazing.  Spacey is 
his usually brilliant self.  His sheer confidence carries his role.  
Every plot-line comes together in this gritty, vividly entertaning film. 
 Everyone is pitch-perfect, the casting is stunning, and the direction 
is flawless.  Hanson and Brian Helgeland's script is stunningly 
captivating, with its intricate plotlines all combining to form one hell 
of a movie.  I can't think of any flaws.  L.A. Confidential may suffer 
solely from its excessive brutality and sex, but in a way, its 
absolutely needed.  LAC shows us a dirty time, in a dirty world, with 
crap infiltrating every life.  It's gorgeously done to perfection.  
Hollywood hasn't been this good in a long time.  This is the best film 
of the year. 

Author
Travis Daub
        As a masterpiece of filming, editing, writing and acting, it
never asks the audience to wait for a predictable outcome or Hollywood
clich, it never disappoints, and never says "I'm a blockbuster, so
pay more for your tickets."  In essence, when I left the theater, I
wanted to give the box office more money.  The film serves up James
Ellroy's novel like a seven course meal, with each distinctive dish a
separate plot layer. There are mini-climaxes and dramatic showdowns
and some of the most smartly written dialogue to grace the screen
since Bogart's days.  Ellroy gives us a story ripe with rotten public
servants, overflowing with corruption in the L.A. Police Department
and then he pulls the rug out from under our feet when we realize
there are no "good guys" to clean up this town. L.A. Confidential is a
Dick Tracy cartoon with no Dick Tracy.  The film is somewhat
autobiographical for Ellroy. He grew up outside Los Angles with his
divorced mother and watched as her alcoholic life went down a drain of
scumballs and sleazy jerks. Ellroy's mother was raped and murdered
when he was 8 years old. The killer was never caught. Ellroy has spent
the rest of his life obsessed with her, her killing, and pulp
crime. Ellroy lived in the same world of sleasebags his mother had
inhabited. He was a stalker, a burglar and a pseudo-sexual
predator. When drug abuse threatened to take away his sanity, Ellroy
turned to writing to re-sharpen his senses. He spent some jail time
and decided to clean up his act. He started to uncover information
about the Los Angles Police department in his investigations of his
mother's death. His case was even on "Unsolved Mysteries." Ellroy
befriended retired L.A. police detectives and learned about the love
affairs they developed with their cases. He realized that in Los
Angles, women are victims and men are abusers.  "Men Killed to impress
other men. Men killed so they could talk about it. Men killed because
they were weak or lazy. Murder sated their lust of the moment and
narrowed down their optio n
        Men killed women for capitulation...  Men did not kill women
because they were systematically abused by the female gender. Women
killed men because men f***ed them over just as rigorously and
persistently.
         Ellroy's intimate knowledge of his characters and their
motivations is only half of what makes them so powerful on screen. The
performances tells the audience everything they need to know. Russell
Crowe plays Bud White, a cop with a beef for wife beaters. Crowe is a
jolt on screen. He is swift justice and capitol punishment
personified. Zeus's lightening bolt. He is a 1950's Judge Roy Bean who
answers questions in short, controlled sentences or bursts of
fury. When the police chief asks if White understands his orders, he
replies "In Technicolor." Crowe uses his massiveness like a silent
loaded gun, stepping on stage and creating apprehension in the
audience. Even his shadow is intense. One look into Bud White's eyes
in a scene where he handcuffs a drunk abusive husband to his front
porch handrail sums up that entire passage above. Bud White can't
accept that women are a race of victims in Los Angles.  Guy Pearce
gives the character Ed Exley the same depth of presence on screen with
is masterful delivery of brilliant dialogue and a chiseled young
face. Pearce has an amazing ability to portray tension without
speaking, and strength without action. He makes a Clark Kent-Superman
transformation by removing his glasses, and we want to believe that
his motivations for justice are as pure as a super hero, but even Ed
Exley, the precinct's star policeman, has a personal agenda. Together
Crowe and Pearce are like two characters of Greek pathos. Their faces,
as well as their performances are Greek statues, too complex for the
eye to conceive, too beautiful to look away from.  Kevin Spacey is the
Hollywood cop, Jack Vincennes, and he is the comedy of the
story. Vincennes is tied up with Sid Hudgeons, Danny Devito, the
publisher of a local tabloid crime rag, in a scam to set up
celebrities, bust them and publish the photos. Vincennes always gets
the front page, a $100 pay off, and sometimes he gets the chance to
settle debts with public officials. Spacey fits the role of a
Hollywood hipster rather well, but his acting talent creates a stable
bounding board for Crowe and Pearce's characters to bounce off. Devito
and Spacey are a delight on screen together, and all the characters
make a solid serious transition as the layers of plot and danger
unfold. This movie could be enjoyably watched without sound, simply
watching Spacey's, Crowe's and Pierce's faces.  A prime example of the
sheer fusion of acting and directing come when Spacey reaches a point
in his career where the payoffs are too much for his guilt to handle
and the sits silently contemplating his job at a bar, studying a $50
bill. There is no doubt what is going through his mind, but there is
only speculation as to what he will do next.
        Kim Basinger brings true class to a character without
self-determination. She is Lynn Bracken, a Veronica Lake look-alike
hooker who only shows loyalty in the right situations. Her on screen
presence has a depth that Bassinger has never before achieved.  The
biggest success of L.A. Confidential is director Curtis Hanson's
ability to blend the story elements. Unlike so many other films, the
violence or the sex isn't the reason for the picture. This year, "The
Lost World" was simply an excuse to get a dinosaur in downtown L.A.,
and "The Saint" was an excuse to get Elisabeth Shue and Val Kilmer in
bed together, but L.A. Confidential doesn't make any excuses.  The
violence in the movie is a method that the characters use to create
themselves and the plot. It can be an extension of a character's
psyche, in the case of Bud White, or a scar on their face, in the case
of Ed Exley. In fact, each violent scene becomes another trait, or
memory, that each person carries on their shoulders. As an audience we
watch the violence knowing we'll remember it later in the film, not to
get a thrill. Not one action or gunshot is gratuitous. Every scene is
as methodical as Bud White planting a gun on a dead man he thinks is
guilty.
        The final scenes of the movie set the rest of the film in
stone. The audience comes to the understanding that there can't be any
perfect "good guys" in a city like Los Angles. Because there's always
going to be somebody who gets away with their crimes. Its a hard
ending to swallow, and getting there is half the fun, but it is
immensely satisfying, none the less.  L.A. Confidential is the best
film of the year. Hands down.
**** out of Four. 
"L.A. Confidential" 
Directed by Curtis Hanson.
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce (II), James
Cromwell, David Strathairn, Kim Basinger and Danny DeVito.
Produced by Warner Brothers. 1997

Author
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
With storytelling this compelling, who needs books? 
Based on the book by author James Ellroy, L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is probably one
of the best piece of work produced by Hollywood in recent years.  Together
with director Curtis Hanson (The Hand That Rocks The Cradle, The River
Wild) whom Ellroy corroborated closely throughout the shooting of the film,
resulted in a movie with a plot and and script so tight, an atom would have
to squeeze itself through.
Set in the 50s, the story revolves around 3 policemen of vivid
personalities. Jack Vincennes (Spacey) is the cop who is more concerned on
busting with fame and stardom ala Hollywood style, concentrating heavily on
work which will attract him media attention. There is also the young
hot-shot rookie, Ed Exley (Pearce), fresh out of the academy and all-out to
carve a name for himself in the footsteps of his legendary cop father. The
tough and unnerving Bud White (Crowe), a cop who believes in justice, the
swift and violent way. 3 policemen, distinct in their characters and paths
but all of them working in a place where there is no real distinction
between good and evil. 
When his partner is murdered on the day of his resignation, Bud sets out to
find the people responsible but unwittingly delved himself into something
more than just a simple robbery murder. Even after Exley receives a
promotion for his work on the murder case, happenings began to link itself
to the murder. The 3 eventually reach a point of convergence when what
actually began as a personal investigation turns out to be an uncovering of
a complex web of organised-crime in Hollywood.
The last time I remember a film so clever and compelling was when I watched
THE USUAL SUSPECTS. In L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, you do not get the shock and
cleverness as the former but it has a lot more of `story' going for it.
There is not a single moment in the film in which I felt was slow at all.
Surprisingly, though Spacey did a very convincing job as the street-wise
Vincennes, the movie was carried mostly by the two rather `unknowns',
Pearce and Crowe. Pearce's Exley is cool and calculative in his actions and
there is a slight hint of Val Kilmer in his appearance. Crowe's Bud White
is the most impressive of all; head-strong and temperamental, he should
obtain some sort of recognition for his work here. 
Superb acting., wonderful storytelling and one of the best climaxing
gunfights ever. Easily the best Hollywood piece for 1997. 

Author
Walter Frith
I've always been fascinated with crime movies and their stories of police
investigation that make them so memorable and while some are too obvious and
others are excruciatingly difficult to follow in detail, 'L.A. Confidential'
has found the perfect medium ground suitable to entertain, inform and move
its audience with stunning reality.
'L.A. Confidential' has such a wide variety of characters rich in personality
development that you'll probably find one of these people you'll most likely
identify with.  It has all the classic developments of a crime story but even
more significantly than that, this movie dwells not only on its characters
but on creating an identity which is separate from any other film like it.  
Set in the early 1950's in Los Angeles, 'L.A. Confidential' examines the
professional lives of three police officers played in brilliant ensemble
fashion by Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe and Guy Pearce.  Spacey is the veteran
cop who knows how to bend the rules when seeking justice but knows how to
restrain himself and escape the probes of Internal Affairs and he refuses to
testify in any way against any of his brother officers who may face criminal
charges while Crowe is the maverick cop who will kill, frame and beat
suspects he knows to be guilty in order to put them behind bars and Pearce is
the straight-laced, by-the-book and clean cut cop who wears glasses and is
told by everyone to 'lose them'.
Telling the story of crime in Los Angeles in the best style of film noir
possible, 'L.A. Confidential' proceeds with several sub plots including one
involving Spacey's professional relationship with a photo/journalist (Danny
De Vito) whose ethical practice is questionable and while he certainly is an
unattractive character, his information and dialogue exchanges with Spacey
enhance the story that many viewers should pay close attention to.  Another
bonus to this movie's credit is the way each of the three cops react when
faced with their most important scenes in the movie involving the discovery
of vital information which may cost them their lives.  It's a challenge that
director Curtis Hanson is constantly faced with in distinguishing his
characters apart from each other and it's a challenge he overcomes with great
results.  
At the core of this movie's fascinating and sharply perceptive theme is a
constant reminder of how far crime has advanced over the last four and a half
decades and the movie wrestles with the moral dilema and difficult question
of police ethics and will leave audiences debating the question of how far
cops can bend the rules in acceptable fashion if we are to agree that it's
acceptable at all.  
A coffee shop's mass murder dubbed the 'Nite Owl Massacre' is the focus of
the film's main investigation which leads the police to probing the
developmet of organized crime and which may involve corruption at a very high
level within the police force.  'L.A. Confidential' has a unique and vivid
style of keeping its writing fresh and alive courtesy of the film's authors
(Brian Helgeland and Curtis Hanson based on the novel by James Ellroy) and
has sultry photography and an over all impressive re-creation of the early
1950's and will leave a lasting impression on those willing to embrace its
classic style of story telling.  Other members of the notable cast are James
Cromwell, Kim Basinger and David Strathairn.  

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell, David
Strathairn, Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito Director: Curtis Hanson
Screenplay: Curtis Hanson and Brian Helgeland based on the novel by
James Ellroy
This movie is about good cops and bad cops, with shades of grey smudging
the fine line in between. Throw in a classy hooker and the dead rat
smells like organised crime.
The good cop (Guy Pearce) follows in the footsteps of his old man and
carries his badge with honour and duty. His father, a highly decorated
dick in the police force was gunned down by a nobody felon who got away
with it. His motivation for joining the force is to catch the ghost of
the murderer who killed his father, and any criminal that thinks he
won't get caught. With more brains than brawn, and spectacles to go with
intelligence, he's a goody two shoes who knows when to snitch on another
cop and climb the political arena of justice at the same time.
The bad cop (Russel Crowe) watched his mother beaten to death by his
father as a boy. His idea of justice comes with a fist and a punch
before reading your rights. He makes a good thug of an interrogator, and
knows how to beat all the crap and information out of you. This angry
young man won't take no for an answer, and when it comes to battered
women, he gives the abusive husband an equally good battering. He's not
your regular textbook cop who follows the rules, and will take the law
into his own hands by executing justice with the point of his gun. This
renegade lone star is someone you don't want around in a highly volatile
situation, but if your life is on the line he knows how to let the
bullets fly.
The grey cop (Kevin Spacey) can't remember why he became a cop in the
first place. His motivation and sense of right and wrong have become
blurred by the glitz of Hollywood. He's a cop seeking media attention
and knows how to play smart, look good and talk right. He'll tell you
what you want to hear, and gives you a hell of a story to sell. His
brushes with fame come in the form of catching movie stars and high
profile politicians engaging the services of prostitutes. He'll do just
about anything to make the headlines with a photo snap. His amoral life
takes a turn when a set-up between a male prostitute and councillor goes
badly wrong. This wakes up his conscience long since drowned by years of
bribe taking and easy living. Before he can make amends for his waylaid
calling, his life is snatched from him as easily as slipping a 50 dollar
bill into your wallet.
The classy hooker (Kim Basinger) looks like Veronica Lake. She knows how
to play both good cop and bad cop to her best advantage, and can make a
man come as easily as slipping out of her lingerie and into bed. Her
tools are seduction and trickery, but the moves are not hers to direct.
She is a lowly pawn on the chessboard of crime that is used by a crafty
master in the grand finale act of checkmate. She is lucky to survive the
game when so many other important pieces have already been sacrificed
for the greater goal of winning.
This is certainly one of the better suspense, mystery thrillers of the
year, with intelligent script writing, plot control and motivation. Well
worth a nod towards at the cinema.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This one left me a bit cold.  Director Curtis Hanson's acclaimed
adaptation of James Ellroy's neo-noir novel is overripe with all sorts
of wonderfully sordid stuff:  dirty cops, corrupt politicians, drug
smuggling, sex scandals, sleazy journalists, racism, murder, and, last
but not least, high-priced hookers surgically altered to look like movie
stars.  Fabulous art direction, a handsome cast, and a level of violence
that actually shocks (for a change) are the stronger selling points.
The overly-complicated script, however, ultimately short changes the
characters.  Nearly every incident relates, in some way, to the bigger
mystery.  And, with precious few asides-- chances for the characters to
simply *be*-- individual scenes become difficult to appreciate as
anything other than pieces to the larger puzzle.  (As in THE GAME, your
brain is busy working ahead.  And even *then* some things don't add up.
Such as a sudden outburst of sexual aggression from one of the main 
characters.)  Admittedly, part of the problem is in front of the camera.
Two of the three leads are non-stars:  Guy Pearce (PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF
THE DESERT) and Russell Crowe (VIRTUOSITY, THE QUICK AND THE DEAD).
They're very good, but neither commands the screen to the extent that
you can't take your eyes off of them.  Same goes for Kevin Spacey, who
we *know* can muster more dramatic weight than he does here.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: 
Kevin Spacey, Russell Crowe, Kim Basinger, Guy Pearce, James Cromwell,
David Strathaim, and Danny DeVito
Ingredients: 1950s Los Angeles; femme fatale; ambitious but nave
detective; corruption; big complicated city; politics; would be actors
and actresses lured by tinsel town only to become hookers; darkness,
mazes and layers of events left unresolved until the end
Synopsis:
This noir drama portrays the coming of age of two opposing young cops in
1950s Los Angeles (a place where corruption in the law enforcement
system is the rule rather than the exception). Australian actor Guy
Pearce plays navely honest young L.A. policeman Ed Exley who is
ambitious for advancement, while fellow Australian Russell Crowe plays
his moral and physical opposite, Bud White, a complex macho cop who does
what he is told (which in 1950s L.A. means turning a blind eye to
racism, planting evidence, and police brutality). Scrawny Exley is
politically motivated but idealistic about the treatment of suspects and
wants to buck the system, while White follows orders because he wants to
see criminals physically abused since his mother was beaten and murdered
by his father when he was a child. Kevin Spacey plays a third
protagonist, jaded celebrity cop Jack Vincennes, who advises a schmaltzy
TV show called Badge of Honor.' On the take, Vincennes has forgotten
the idealism which had originally caused him to join the force.
The movie's first big event features a police brutality scene against
Mexican-Americans in order to showcase the corruption of the era, the
personalities of the three cops, and how they despise each other.  In
the meantime, mobsters are being murdered, and not long afterwards a
retired cop and five victims are massacred at the Nite Owl Caf. The
murder is solved, and the apparent perpetrators are gunned down by the
police. Over time and for separate reasons each of the three
protagonists is drawn by events in their own lives to reinvestigate
different aspects of the supposedly solved' case. The main mob boss
Mickey Cohen is in prison. So who could be responsible for the recent
spate of murders of mobsters and retired corrupt cops in California and
why? The answer changes both Exley and White. 
Other subplots involve a missing stash of heroin, a sleazy tabloid
editor who pays and gets paid to set people up to commit crimes and
subsequently take the fall, and the rivalry between two cops for the
affections of a beautiful celebrity lookalike hooker (Kim Basinger).
L.A. Confidential is the Warner Brothers movie adaptation of author
James Ellroy's book. 
Opinion:
Be careful you don't pause in the middle of the movie to go to the
drinking fountain. If you miss just one small word of the last scene
where Exley explains the situation, this movie is so intricate you might
lose your place.
The story is good and rich with overlapping themes, characters, and plot
strands that seem unrelated at first but tie together somewhat
successfully by the movie's end. In addition characters change
orientation from more corrupt to less or from less corrupt to more,
depending on the character and his stomach for the events that unfold.
In other words this Warner Brothers movie adaptation of James Ellroy's
novel is just as deep and engrossing as the book. 
In terms of action, all the gunfights are good, including the big battle
at the end. But there's a definite snag in the movie's pace after the
Nite Owl case is solved when it seems like characters are not strongly
motivated to do anything until the Nite Owl case starts being
reinvestigated. A subplot about heroin remains confusing even after the
movie ends.
All of the actors and actresses in this film did an absolutely marvelous
job in fleshing out their onscreen characters. Russell Crow shines as
the macho cop.

Author
Brandon Stahl
It is an understood passion and an understood calm.  Bud White walks into
the home of Lynn Bracken, a prostitute "cut to look like Veronica Lake." 
He's one of L.A.'s finest investigating the murder of fellow cop, and one
of the leads takes him to her home.  It's understood that he is quiet
thunder, a guy who's calm voice is more powerful than his arms.  It's
understood that she's supposed to be beautiful, but underneath her face is pain
and scraped out lines that say her life could have been so much more.  You
know without having to be told.  "You're the first guy who hasn't told me
I look like Veronicca Lake in under a minute," she says.
"You look ten times better."  He says it without thinking. Like he knows
without her having to say anything.  White's face doesn't turn, it doesn't
blush.  You see his eyes, and you believe him.  It's a perfect moment in
a near perfect movie.
L.A. Confidential is the best movie of the year.  It is grace and poetry;
a richly layered work of pure entertainment.  It is a portrait of police
and morality as it works it's way through characters that are so real on
screen that you believe that they might have a soul.  In a phrase, it is
everything. It is funny, it is exciting, has enough action and adventure and
mystery and grace and suspense.  It is the pinnacle of a movie, a
complete work, a flawless film.  
It's hard to tell you about the plot, because it's about so much more
than plot.  Besides, there's too much to describe. Sure, it's about police
and searching for corruption and who fights for the right reasons and the
definition of justice.  But it's also about what you feel when you look into
the eyes of the characters in the film.  Director Curtis Hanson has
perfectly framed each character, letting you see into them, rooting for them
one moment, doubting them the next.  The actors work with their lines, but
in this movie their most important weapon is their eyes.  You can tell what
each person is feeling just by looking into their eyes for one moment.  
Russell Crowe plays Bud White, a muscle cop with a beef for wife beaters.
 His movements are fierce.  When he strikes, you jump, when he's calm,
you know it won't be for long.  His intensity oozes out of the screen.  You
follow his character through the movie afraid of him, but in sympathy of
him, because you know how good his heart is.  He's looking for a way to
solve crimes, you're just never sure how he's going to do it.  
His counter is Ed Exley, played with a chisselled face by Guy Pierce. 
You feel for him, for his character, because of all the cops in the movie
he's the one that's actually trying to do the right thing by going by the
book.  You know that he must face the reality of breaking the book, and you
love the way he gets there.  
I've seen L.A Confidential  twice, immediately after it was over, I
wanted to hit the rewind button and watch it again.  I didn't want the theater
experience to end.  It's been a long time since I actually experienced a
movie, feeling like I got something after I walked out.  That's why I love
movies; the great ones can be too rich and powerful to describe.  Watch
L.A. Confidential:  after you leave the theater, you feel like you just
watched a classic movie.  That's why LA Confidential stands as the best movie
of the year.
L.A. Confidential (**** out of four) Directed by Curtis Hanson. Starring
Russell Crowe, Guy Pierce, Kevin Spacey, James Cromwell, and Kim Basinger.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
L.A. Confidential", a review by Ed Johnson-Ott. 
for more reviews, visit www.nuvo-online and click on films.
In "L.A. Confidential", James Ellroy's novel of police corruption in 
1950's Hollywood becomes a powerful, stylish film with dazzling acting 
from an exceptional cast. Gorgeous art direction highlights the lurid 
pulp tone of this complex, violent tale. "L.A. Confidential" is a rarity, 
a major Hollywood film with smart acting, dialogue and production values 
that actually works from beginning to end.
The noir thriller about rogue cops takes place in 1953, when Los Angeles 
still seemed glamorous and magical, as opposed to now, where it is simply 
the worst city on Earth. A major mob boss goes to jail, prompting a 
feeding frenzy as bad guys scramble for his turf. Meanwhile, a corrupt 
officer is one of the victims of a grisly coffee shop murder, triggering 
a massive police investigation. Against this background, we meet Bud 
White (Russell Crowe), an attack dog cop with a unique personal moral 
code; Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey), a slick operator who collaborates 
with a scandal magazine to insure high-profile arrests; and Ed Exley (Guy 
Pearce), a self-righteous prig who knows how to work departmental 
politics to further his own agenda.
The art direction of "L.A. Confidential" is spectacular, perfectly 
recreating a picture-postcard Hollywood. Director Curtis Hanson uses the 
sets masterfully, layering realistic bits of detail over the splashy 
backdrops to simultaneously accentuate and offset the sense of glamour.
"L.A. Confidential" features near-flawless acting from its large ensemble 
cast. Russell Crowe ("Romper Stomper", "Virtuosity") gives an Oscar-
caliber performance as Bud White, a great bull of a man who has learned 
to slug, rather than think his way through situations. Initially, White 
seems to be a simple thug, but there's far more to him than meets the eye.
Guy Pearce ("Priscilla, Queen Of The Desert") is striking as the 
sanctimonious Ed Exley. His most impressive moment comes during an 
interrogation scene, where his manipulative skills while grilling a trio 
of suspects is both repellent and mesmerizing.
As Jack Vincennes, star-struck technical advisor for a "Dragnet"-style TV 
series, Kevin Spacey ("The Usual Suspects") demonstrates why he is one of 
the most respected actors anywhere. Spacey has a great face, and he uses 
his craggy features to convey just what happens when a man trades his 
morals for the spotlight. 
Kim Basinger is also strong in her best role in years, as a high-priced 
call girl who becomes involved with White. Basinger does fine work adding 
nuance to a character who is basically a live-action Jessica Rabbit.
Surprisingly, the film's only shaky performance comes from veteran actor 
James Cromwell ("Babe") as Capt. Dudley Smith. Cromwell plays his 
character well, but inexplicably jumps back and forth between American 
and Irish accents. In the future, James, pick a country and stick with it.
With nods to "Pulp Fiction" and "Chinatown", "L.A. Confidential" is 
complicated, but never muddy. The complex tale is told in a 
straightforward fashion, resulting in an utterly engrossing piece of 
filmmaking. The movie was a sensation at the Cannes Film Festival and 
come next March, should draw a lot of attention at the Academy Awards as 
well.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: La Confidential
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 and a half stars
Curtis Hanson, the director of River Wild and The Hand That Rocks the
Cradle, now features two of Australia's finest actors in his latest film
LA Confidential.  Bursting of class and realism, the film is set in "The
City of Angels", Los Angeles, in the chaotic 1950's.  But all is not
well in paradise - as an apparently gleaming city is corrupted with mass
murdering, drug dealing and high-class porn - all types of organized
crime.  The law enforcement's aren't much help either, as the image of
fat cops accepting pay offs is spreading quickly whilst high ranking
authorities and the corruption they deal in is rotting away the
structures of society.
Although set long after the days of Al Capone and The Untouchables,
little has changed in both the city and the situation of the film.  Cops
are either crooked or abnormally honest, so it's clear to see what sorts
of characters are going to develop from the slick opening scenes of the
film.  But the mechanics of the film, the real oomph, is hidden behind
twists and developments in the tricky and often very involving plot.
The two most intriguing characters, Ed Exley and Bud White, are played
by Aussie sensations Guy Pearce and Russel Crowe who successfully give
the "good cop bad cop" routine a much needed polishing and end up
looking simply sensational as two very different screen detectives.
Exley, a by-the-book and very noble officer, is not afraid to conceal
the truth - even if that means ratting on one of his colleagues.  On the
other side of the spectrum, Bud White is a brutal and relentless member
of the force who will stop at nothing to make sure that justice is
served.  With a particular grudge against women bashers; White becomes
quickly known as someone to keep friendly with, although he serves his
fellow officers with respect and perhaps even admiration.  Along with
Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey), the celebrity cop who never forgets to
bring a camera on stake outs, Exley and White quickly become involved in
a web of murder, blackmail, deceit and intrigue.  But as the plot
thickens, and the search to find the "man that gets away with it"
continues, Exley and White eventually realize that the only way to
uncover the mystery is to work as a team.
LA Confidential, a movie of class and quality, has added itself
successfully to this year's most impressive Hollywood line up.  I should
be said that some people may not find this film to be as special as I
did - but everyone can admire the way LA Confidential steers clear of
main stream ideas and characters and presents us with intriguing
situations and personalities.
In its worst moments, the more subtle viewer will notice LA
Confidential's excessive use of violence to demonstrate the era it's set
in, but in its best moments the word "excellence" is taken to new
standards.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback
