Title
Review for Vor (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

THIEF, THE (VOR) ( director: Pavel Chukhrai; cast: Sanya-6-years-old
(Misha Philipchuk), Toljan (Vladimir Mashkov), Katya (Yekaterina
Rednikova), the 12-year-old Sanya (Dima Shigarev), Amalya Mordvinova
(doctor's wife), 1997-Russian)
Certain people just never have any luck. Katya (Yekaterina) is such a
person.  Katya's husband died on the front during WW11 and this
attractive young lady, is left with a child, Sanya (Misha), to raise on
her own. It is now 1952 and she boards a train with her 6-year-old
Sanya, and a handsome soldier flirts with her, and she instinctively
takes up with him, happy to have someone strong take care of her. The
film is narrated by the child who is now an adult, speaking in a
voiceover, telling about how that event on the train, when the soldier,
Toljan (Mashkov), acted as a father to him, was the most momentous time
of his life, that irrevocably changed it, eventually even stealing away
the dreams and visions he once had.That the soldier turned out, not only
to be an army deserter, but a thief, who steals everything he can, even
his mother's heart, is the basis for him telling his sad and ponderous
story. (Can a Russian film be anything but ponderous?)
The strength of this symbolical film, is in the way the director Pavel
Chukhrai, is able to explicitly show the harshness of the Stalin years
as it infected the daily life of its citizens.The thief himself has a
tattoo of Stalin on his chest, which he uses to impress those who look
at his strong body.
Katya (the symbol of mother Russia) slowly begins to see how rotten he
is, despite his disarming smoothness and beguiling charm he could lay on
at the drop of a hat. When in the boarding house, where they get a room,
under the false pretense that they are a family, he invites all the
boarders to the circus, and while they are there, he sneaks back to the
house and robs them. Katya followed him home from the circus and cursed
her fate when seeing what he was up to, but she fell in love with the
rascal and made the choice of  running away to the next town with him
anyway, in the hopes he could be a good father to her son and provide
for the family.
Sanya would not call him father, only uncle, and found it difficult to
adjust to the close attention the mother was paying to Toljan, that once
went exclusively to him. He has constant haunting visions that his real
father was watching him, wanting him to be loyal only to him.
Toljan's way of introducing him into manhood, is to have the kid strike
back at the boys who beat him. The threat of giving the strap to Sanya,
makes the boy pee in his pants. Sanya is always peeing in his pants when
he is frightened, which the shrewd Toljan acts upon, to gain the
confidence of the kid who instinctively didn't like him, by reassuring
him it is just fine to be afraid, telling him that he will eventually
grow out of it. The kid is so hungry for real fatherly affection, that
this mock affection is enough for him to let his guard down against the
professional con man, who epitomizes the evil of the Stalin years.
The weakness of the film, is that it is really not drama, but soap
opera, that is convincingly done through the powerful persona that
Mashkov, a Russian stage actor and romantic star of cinema, is able to
evoke from his strong performance, who is cruel and capable of being
loved at the same time. But the story seems contrived, it just flows too
neatly together without having an energy of its own. So everything must
fit together: Toljan must get arrested as a deserter, Katya is left
alone and must die, and Sanya must go to an orphanage; and, when Sanya
recognizes Toljan, at last, as his new father, who left him only a gun
when he went to prison, he keeps the gun, trying to decide if he should
go against his own nature and become like Toljan.
He runs into Toljan accidently, after 7 years of not seeing him, and
when Toljan doesn't even remember him, or mistakeningly thinks that he
is the son he fathered with some woman named Katya, the 12-year-old  boy
is completely disillusioned, especially seeing that Toljan is still
working his old con game and, that, Sanya in one desperate moment of his
life betrayed his real father and called Toljan father, has made him to
stop believing in anything anymore, no more dreams, hopes, illusions; he
is all alone in the world, there is only nothing, nothing to believe in,
as he uses the only present he got from his new father, a gun, on his
new father, to wipe out all his memories.
The story is just too pat to be that effective, except as a curious look
at what the Russians themselves thought of Stalin and how they
functioned under his regime during the '50s. The symbolism was too heavy
handed to be fully believed as a viable panacea for its corrupt past,
suggesting that the only way for the country to be free, is for the son,
who is the future of the country, to kill the corrupt father who
betrayed his family (country).
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   It may not be better after all to have loved and lost than
never to have loved at all.  The stunning Russian movie,
"The Thief," swept the 1997 NIKA Awards (that's the
Russian Oscars) and was the nominee of that country for a
1997 American Oscar.  In it a young man recalls a series of
incidents which occurred when he was six years old, an
episode which transformed his existence and would leave him
a lifetime of emotional scars.  Set amid a backdrop of Russian
towns shortly after World War 2 during the regime of Josef
Stalin, "The Thief" focuses tightly on three people--an
adorably expressive six year old boy, Sanya (Misha
Philipchuk), his beautiful young mother Katya (Ekaterina
Rednikova) and a dashing stranger who comes between
them, Tolyan (Vladirimir Mashkov).
   As a result of the war, twenty million Russian died while
many who survived on the home front had to make do leading
hardscrabble lives without a breadwinner in the home.  Katya
and Sanya are two such unfortunates, essentially homeless
people who aimlessly ride the rails in 1952, just one year
before Stalin's death.  When a charismatic soldier, Tolyan,
appears as a seatmate, Katya is immediately captivated by
his looks and charm while seeing him as well as a future
provider for her and her six-year-old child.  For his part
Sanya, who has no memory of a father who died before he
was born, at first resents the attention the stranger draws
from his mom but shortly grows to idolize this substitute dad. 
Save for a single flaw, Tolyan is the ideal lover and father. 
He teaches the boy how to fight while presenting the young
woman with jewelry, a place to stay, and an outlet for her
considerable passion.  But the title character is a con artist--a
thief who uses his ersatz family as a front to gain entry to
other people's apartments in order to rob them blind.
    "The Thief" is in the tradition of Jan Sverak's glorious 1996
movie "Kolya," about a bachelor who finds himself suddenly
entrusted with the care of a precocious five-year-old boy and
matures under the process.  In the case of the Russian
movie, the title character seems to change not at all while the
impressionable blond boy takes in and is recast by everything
that passes his line of vision and then some.  But it is Katya
who is put to the test, and director Pavel Chukhrai achingly
evokes the conflict which torments her.  She unearths her
lover's true profession and is determined to leave the
scoundrel, but finds that she is as unable to uproot herself as
Samuel Beckett's iconic characters, Vladimir and Estragon.  
   Beautifully photographed by Vladimir Klimov and utilizing
Victor Petrov's strikingly authentic set to resemble a railway
car of the 1950s, "The Thief" provides us with a broad sweep
of Russian everymen as well as its principal performers.  The
residents of the communal apartments are a motley crew of
plump old landlady types, attractive ladies who might have
come out of an American movie of the 40's, and mustachioed
caricatures of men. Most possess so little opportunity for
entertainment that they glory in a performance of the circus or
in a concert of two silly-looking vocalists backed up by a small
band.  All the action of "The Thief" leads to an inevitable,
unhappy payoff, one which sensitive viewers in the audience
might wish had never occurred.  
   The Black Sea resort area in which Russian workers were
given free vacations by the state compares favorably to petit
bourgeois places in American and Europe, the small towns
with their decaying monuments reflecting a culture whose
entire budget seems to have gone into the war effort.
   The picture is told from the point of view of young Sanya
who is played by the then eight-year-old Misha Philipchuk,
who was chosen in an open cast call from his school.  He's
the sort of kid everyone wishes he had, but beware!  Cross
him, and you'd better watch your back.  A lovely lovely
picture.

Author
Seth Bookey
Vor (also known as The Thief, Russian with English subtitles,1997)
Seen on 15 August 1998 for $8.75 with Linda at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas
Pavel Chukhrai has written and directed not only one of the best Russian
films to come our way in a long time, but probably one of the best movies
of this year. 
In a pretitle sequence, we learn from the narrator that he was born on the
roadside in 1946, his father having died in the last year of the war
against the Nazis. Six years later, Sanya (Misha Philipchuk) and his
mother (Katya, played by Yekaterina Rednikova) are on a train and meet
Toljan (Vladimir Mashkov), a tall, brawny soldier. Toljan exudes a
charismatic sexual appeal and by the time the train ride ends, he has
bedded Katya and Sanya is told to call him Daddy. 
Using his uniform as credentials, he is able to get a room in Baba Tanya's
apartment, where several other families also live. Katya is happy but
Sanya is both mesmerized and terrorized by the brutish man who is only
nice to him when he is corrupting his young mind, telling him how to take
what he wants and not put up with guff from anyone. His tattoos--a tiger
on the back of his shoulder and Josef Stalin on his chest--are meant to be
warning signs. He even tells impressionable Sanya that Stalin is his
father, and that it's a secret. 
Katya soon has her suspicions, that he is seeing someone behind her back; 
she is shocked to discover he is stealing from their fellow tenants. She
is shocked but follows him anyway, and they travel all over Russia, as
Toljan steals from friends and neighbors and then sneaks off into the
night onto trains.  Toljan winds up imprisoned, however, and sent away for
years in Siberia, on a completely unrelated charge, and Katya remains
faithful to this lout who clearly doesn't care if she follows him or not. 
He is clearly indifferent and unrepentent. He likes the life and "work" he
has chosen for himself, and sees no reason to change, despite Katya's
pleas. Throughout all of this, Sanya sees the spectre of his father, the
one he never met. 
The performances by Philipchuk and Mashkov are outstanding, as the
wide-eyed six-year-old and the thief, respectively. Together they have an
undeniable chemistry that is essentially the heart of the movie. 
Now, put into the larger historical context, it makes even more sense why
Katya is following Toljan all over Russia. Katya is Mother Russia, her son
is the future, and Toljan is every tyrant she has ever accepted
unquestioningly as her leader--the most deadly one of all having been
Josef Stalin. Like Toljan, Stalin stole from the people who trusted him
and liked him. Betrayal of the worst kind. 
Director Chukhrai bravely explores the psyche of a people who have never
really fully faced up to the brutalities of their past, and the leaders
whom they chose to perpetrate the worst crimes against them. His use of
close-up is especially effective in showing the mesmerer and the
mesmerized.
Also worthy of note is Dima Shigarev, the 12-year-old Sanya, who is
wide-eyed but clearly world weary, having kept up the vigil for the man
who betrayed them, closely guarding a firearm and a color photo of Josef
Stalin, even when Krushchev was firmly in power. Shigarev's face is very
expressive, and really enhances the conclusion of the movie. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
