Title
Review for Sora no daikaijű Radon (1956)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jim Mann
     RODAN was Toho's second entry into the monster movie genre,
following quickly on the heals of their successful Godzilla.  While not
as successful, either artistically or financially, as GODZILLA, it
remains a good movie, and one of the better monster movies.
     The movie starts out (after the obligatory prologue, showing
H-bombs blowing up Pacific islands), with a mine cave in.  In the mine,
a worker is mysteriously killed. It turns out that a giant insect is
loose in the mines.  However, what has really been resurrected is far
worse: one worker is trapped in the mines and stumbles onto two giant
eggs. As he watches, one hatches, and the monster that emerges is so
large that it easily feeds on the giant insects. The monster, of
course, is Rodan, a giant Pteranadon.
     Rodan destroys the countryside not by trampling buildings (though
he does a little of that) but simply by flying over it. The huge
creature, flying at supersonic speed, generates typhooon force winds.
Worse yet for the humans: there is not one Rodan but two.
     There are some good special effects (at least for the day). The
scenes in which Rodan descends upon the city and is confronted by the
military are very good. And the climax at the volcano is spectacular.
     The sets are also good. The details around the mine, for example,
are nicely handled. They give a good feel for the area, and thus make
the whole film a bit more realistic.  The photography is also nice: I
believe that this is Toho's first color effort.
     The biggest negative in the film is the way the whole thing takes
a while to get going. The giant insect/mine disaster subplot seems to
drag, and it's not until Rodan shows up that the film really begins to
move.
     By the way, the costume used for Rodan in this film is reasonably
realistic. Right after watching this movie, my daughter and I watched
the second movie Rodan appeared in: GHIDRAH, THE THREE-HEADED MONSTER.
The costume in their is much worse. (Of course, the Godzilla costume in
that movie is also much worse than that used in most of the previous
"Godzilla" films.) The eyes, in particular, look phony in the latter
film.
     In summary, this is a good film. It is one of the better films of
its genre, and ranks as one of the top 5 monster films from Toho (along
with GODZILLA, GODZILLA RAIDS AGAIN, GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA (1964), and
MOTHRA).
