Title
Review for Fast Times at Ridgemont High (1982)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Shane Burridge
Fast Times at Ridgemont High (1982) 92m.
In NEVER BEEN KISSED, Drew Barrymore played a writer posing as a student in 
high school to research a story.  In real life, 22-year old Cameron Crowe 
(later a writer-director himself) spent a year ‘undercover' in a San Diego 
high school doing the same thing.  The resulting book and film, FAST TIMES, 
could easily have been written without recourse to such methods (maybe 
Cameron was just feeling nostalgic) but it's still one of the best of an 
undernourished genre.  Besides Crowe, you also have director Amy Heckerling 
and the quality cast to thank, several of whom went on to establish durable 
screen careers (You don't usually find an ensemble like Sean Penn, Phoebe 
Cates, Jennifer Jason Leigh and Judge Rheinhold in most teen campus flicks).
Ostensibly a comedy, FAST TIMES grounds itself in reality and avoids the 
hi-jinks route that cripples many of its not-so-smart imitators.  If it is 
the intention of Crowe's script to hold a mirror up to contemporary high 
school students and show us their lives, then the absence of a contrived 
storyline is a good decision.  It's the lack of plot that makes this film 
repeatable viewing – if anything, FAST TIME improves a second time around 
because its fluctuating tone doesn't subvert your expectations.  The diverse 
characters wend their way through a collage of set pieces, retaining 
credibility  without coming across as stereotypes.  Even the film's most 
overt character, Sean Penn's spaced-out surfer dude Jeff Spicoli, seems 
naturally drawn (he pretty much established the archetype with this 
performance).  His dialogues with the dogmatic History teacher Mr Hand (Ray 
Walston) are the film's most enjoyable moments, leaving Jennifer Jason 
Leigh's character to carry the burden of FAST TIMES' downbeat side.  We 
watch Leigh go through one miserable sexual/romantic encounter after 
another, but at least her advice from the more experienced Cates is 
juxtaposed with Brian Backer's coaching from Robert Romanus to some humorous 
effect (after being told to use Led Zeppelin for make-out music, Backer 
plays the ominous, booming  Zep track ‘Kashmir' on his car stereo).  
Surprisingly, the frequent discussions about sex are more blunt and crude 
when coming from the girls.  That doesn't mean these scenes are used for 
cheap laughs: FAST TIMES works well because we have the sense that, like 
Crowe, we are listening in.
FAST TIMES seemed worthy of attention in the early 80s because it hit the 
screen at about the time it looked like there was going to be a new wave of 
female directors (i.e. Susan Seidelman, Penelope Spheeris, and Martha 
Coolidge).  This didn't really happen, but the film seems to have made an 
impression on many viewers (although the main memory of anyone I've ever 
spoken to seems to be of Cates shedding her bikini top).  Nowadays the 
film's popularity is assured by fans who saw the film in cinemas when they 
were in high school themselves and have since claimed it as their 80s 
photograph album.  Even a moment as simple as Judge Rheinhold bopping to the 
radio while washing his car seems to be a perfectly-captured snapshot.  The 
great soundtrack is a bonus – though curiously the music itself doesn't date 
the film as much as its references to the likes of Pat Benatar and Cheap 
Trick.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.

Author
James Brundage
What, you ask, is this movie of movies? This one which you've heard about?
It's an eighties thing, with not much appeal for the modern troupe because
its slower paced, less funny, than what you might see today. But, like a lot
of eighties movies, it holds its own merit. This adaptation of the book by
Cameron Crowe (don't know who he is? I'll give you a hint. He wrote and
directed the famous line "Did you know the human brain weighs eight pounds?"
That's right, the maker of Jerry Maguire and Singles) is a coming-of-age
drama about a young girl making the choice all of us make, sex or a
relationship.
Sure, we tell ourselves that both can exist, and they can, but there is the
line that she draws: if she wants to sleep around or if she wants to have
something to hold onto. And the movie, in a nutshell, is about that. It
follows her and her friends during their last year in High School in the
small town of Ridgemont. Where each one of them ends up with their troubles,
ranging from no girlfriend to an abortion to adultery.
It sounds serious, right?
The movie has its serious moments, but it has its funny moments too: from
two girls practicing blow jobs on a carat at a lunch table to a guy cruising
for chicks dressed in a pirate cap. The movie is sublimely funny. And
interesting. It's very sad, in my mind, that those things are so rarely seen
in the 90's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        It's January 1997 and, believe it or not, I just saw Fast 
Times at Ridgemont High for the first time. Like many other 
80's favorites that people have been pleading for me to watch and 
review, it didn't live up to its overinflated hype, but it was still 
entertaining, and captured the essence of the early 80's, from the 
primitive video games to fashions and slang. One thing director 
Amy Heckerling always manages to do well in these aimless teen 
comedies (e.g. CLUELESS) is integrate what is current-at-the-
moment clothes and dialect. This may tend to date her movies, 
but it also serves as an accessible time capsule to that time.
        The movie, based on Cameron Crowe's supposedly factual 
book, centers around a group of high school kids, most of which 
work at the mall. Judge Reinhold takes pride in his burger-flipping 
job, a very young-looking Jennifer Jason Leigh and Phoebe Cates 
work at a dine-in pizza parlor, and dorky Brian Backer takes movie 
tickets while his slimeball friend Robert Romanus scalps concert 
tickets. The unemployed characters are also seen around the mall, 
with Sean Penn's pothead character Jeff Spicoli attempting to get 
service sans shirt in Reinhold's burger joint and beefy football player 
Forrest Whitaker shoving quarter after quarter into Space Invaders 
and Pac-Man.
        There are plenty of in-school scenes featuring two teachers 
on opposite sides of the spectrum. Vincent Schiavelli is the nervous, 
outgoing type who wants all the kids to like him and Ray Walston is 
the crusty old fart who runs his class like a military outfit. Walston's 
main problem is braindead Spicoli (undoubtedly the inspiration for 
the BILL & TED movies), who disrupts class on a regular basis and 
even has a pizza delivered to the classroom one day.
        In the Heckerling tradition, there's not much of a plot, just 
a series of loosely related scenes, most of which involve sex. Cates 
schools Leigh on a certain sexual technique, Backer tries to work up 
the courage to ask Leigh out, Reinhold is walked in on by Cates 
during an intimate personal moment, Penn trashes Whitaker's car, 
and so on. These anecdotal-type scenes work as a whole and manage 
to be almost poignant, especially in its telling of Leigh's disastrous 
history with men and boys.
        Cameron Crowe, who has recently hit it big with the 
wonderful JERRY MAGUIRE, knows how people act and interact, 
and scripts it well. The ensemble cast acts it well, particularly Penn 
and Leigh. FAST TIMES is a quintessentially 80's movie, which 
means it includes sex and nudity. Leigh and Cates disrobed because 
everyone had to in order to make it big in the 80's. Nudity is a rare 
commodity these days, and this movie is still cut to shreds when 
aired on TV, so splurge for the fifty-cent video rental, especially if 
you're interested in seeing Phoebe Cates' breasts.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!
