Title
Review for 20 Dates (1998)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Ninety percent of Americans over the age of thirty-five are
married or have been joined in matrimony at one time, and
virtually one hundred percent of us have dated.  This could
mean only one thing: we're all searching for romantic love. 
The movies have undoubtedly influenced us to do so with
their glorified portrayals of passion and high emotion, all
backed up by soaring music and exalted sunsets.  Are
romantic relationship and our attempts to find them really the
way the moving pictures would have us believe?  Of course
not; or, more accurately, not until now.  To show us what
dating is really like, Myles Berkowitz, a first time helmer, has
written and directed a remarkably whimsical feature called
"20 Dates," a film with the tagline "So real you're think it's
fiction."  If we take what he claims at face value (allowing for
some invention to give the story a narrative feel), "20 Dates"
captures on film its director's actual foray into the Los
Angeles dating game, featuring his genuine agent, Richard
Arlook, in the role of the agent in the picture, and Elie
Samaha, one of the actual producers, in the role of the
producer in this story.  This casting of real people as though
they were fictional characters in a bizarre and often hilarious
documentary with the feel of a fable gives Mr. Berkowitz's
movie a Pirandellian aura, a fluidity between what's actual
and what's parable.
   Berkowitz is a decent-looking guy in his early thirties who
had been married and divorced and has taken the plunge
anew into the dating game.  Anyone who has experienced
this knows how ambivalent the situation can be, as a guy
leaves what he thought was a secure relationship and is
thrust back into the uncertainty of the romantic rat race. 
Since Berkowitz's producer has put up the money to make
the movie, he insists that his star actually go out with twenty
women, and makes his requirements known in no uncertain
terms each time he gets to speak his mind during the 88-
minute film.  (One hundred thirty hours of film were edited
down, making the editor, in effect, a co-author of the script.)  
   In pursuing love, Berkowitz receives invaluable advice from
Robert McKee, who appears from time to time holding court
in an empty movie theater about the difference between
screen fiction and real-life actuality.  McKee, who has written
teleplays and has adapted plays for the screen, is celebrated
on the lecture circuit, where he discusses the structure of
screenplays.  In this case, he instructs Berkowitz about the
difference between men and women--the old Mars-Venus
dichotomy.  "Men are interested in the physical, and women
are interested in the fantasy, the phantom, or 
metaphysical...so the chance that true love can occur
between two people searching for such wildly different things
is slim to none."  Though the director ultimately proves the
adviser at least partially wrong, he experiences more misses
than hits when escorting his usually gorgeous women to class
restaurants, beachfront picnics, informal cafes, and in one
case even partakes with a outdoorsy type in a hazardous
bungee jump.
   He does not always inform his women of his intent to film
their meetings.  In a few cases he uses a hidden camera to
capture the dates on film, planting the camera behind potted
plants in restaurants and carrying a hidden microphone on his
person.  For such violations of privacy he is the subject of
two lawsuits and even allegedly gets stabbed in the hand by
an incensed woman.  An intrusive camera crew muddles his
scheme by planting the camera within two feet of one date's
face, and in at least one instance his female companion
excuses herself to go to the lavatory and simply disappears. 
Since his credit card is maxed out, he suffers an
embarrassment for having only $56 in his pocket while his
date orders three pounds of a $20-a-pound lobster.  In
another situation Caren, one of Berkowitz's friends, is
captured on film with a stiff young man who blunders horribly:
"At least you're a woman, and not my ex-wife.  That's a good
start."  
   Though his producer continually insists that he show sex in
the movie, Berkowitz coyly drops the blinds in the one
instance in that he has a sure thing, despite the bankroller's
threat (probably a fiction), "I want sex in this movie, or I
swear to God, you're gonna wish you were living in Timbuktu
cause if you're somewhere that I can find you, I'm gonna
break both of your legs."
   Perhaps by studying footage of his dates, which are mostly
disasters, Myles Berkowitz gets to realize his mistakes. At
any rate, the whole episode is worthwhile, because in
February of 1999 he will get to release an entertaining film
that moves ahead at a rapid pace and which includes clips
from popular movies like "Sleepless in Seattle," "When Harry
Met Sally," "Singing in the Rain," and "Titanic."  More
important he has actually met the love of his life, a classy
and comely woman who is studying interior decoration at
U.C.L.A. He found his dream in a posh decorator store, and
discovers that even without a romantic soundtrack to
dramatize their mutual feelings, the high intensity of that first
shared clasp of the hands is quite enough.
   Early on, Berkowitz tells us that he has just two failings: his
personal life and his professional career.  By the conclusion
of the movie, Myles has apparently remedied both.

Author
Evan A. Reidell

(Later on in this writing, I've done the very things I hate about most
movie reviews: I merely give away all the good bits that I can remember,
retell the plot points.  Yet I really do like to read such spoiler'd
reviews of movies myself, especially if I might never go see the movie.
So, this "review" will be un-spoiled for a while, and then chock full of
spoilers.)
A filmmaker, decent looking fellow and charming though a bit of an
insensitive jerk, tries to record twenty of his dates on film with his
small film crew.  This is no easy task, not at all.  There is a lot of
wit and comedy, some magic romance, and also some very uncomfortable
situations.  Watching "candid camera" footage of unsuspecting dates,
real women getting their feelings hurt, turns the whole audience into
uneasy co-conspirators.
Imagine if Man Bites Dog was _not_ a fictionalized comedy, but a real
documentary of a charming serial killer doing actual murders.  Somebody
would surely get arrested.  Such a film would never be accepted by the
public, or seen, even.
It almost feels like this film, "20 DATES", won't make it to a wide
release.  Because they don't have permission from so many people for
having secretly filmed them.  Or because of all the queasy uneasiness,
the social incorrectness, a happy-ending that feels a little
unnatural...  This is almost a kind of social snuff film.  Many women
will probably hate it.  But it is also a VERY FUNNY MOVIE!!!
It is done in a documentary style that is 98% believable, as in "this
really happened, this is how it happened on that day" (but at some
points I feel he has taken some liberties with the "truth" --- as well
he should have, it's his movie!!)...
It is very well edited.  There is a lot of great comedy, and I recommend
that people see it, because I want the world to be a place where a punk
with a camera and an idea can just make a movie, god damnit, and have it
get out there and be seen by people...  (No-budget/shoestring-budget
cinema, think of recent successful examples of El Mariachi, pi...)
(and why have I done this? Is this a review or a spoiler?)
(After seeing a film, I like to reread spoiler'd stuff like this,
to remind myself of the events I saw ---
later on you can read these bits and relive the film...)
If you're a woman who ever thinks "Men are such jerks"
here's a film that can (reinforce/bolster) your opinion.
"Most contemporary love stories are about longing" says Robert McKee,
screenplay-seminar (demigod/scoundrel) as he describes Sleepless in
Seattle as a "boy meets girl", "boy meets girl", "boy meets girl" movie.
Myles: "You don't know what your type is, but you know that I'm not it?"
"Can I just take a look around your apartment?" he says,
three minutes after all the cameras and lights have already
raped the room...
Myles asks Stephanie if he can get a discount on some clothes.  Over and
over again?!  It's getting late, says Stephanie.  "Stephanie excused
herself, and I never saw her again."
"Do you think that women find me offensive?"  he asks a friend, 
who candidly responds "I honestly wouldn't narrow it to a gender thing"...
The truth of having to worry about the finances of a date
when we know that our team has $56 (and no more room on the credit cards)
and the "date" orders 3 pounds of $20-a-pound lobster...
What's it like to be single and dating in L.A.?  "You're like a cinder
in hell, there's flames and sparks all around you and nobody notices or
cares, you're a tiny litle speck in a really really evil place"...
He has a date with a vegetarian,
gets kicked out of all the restaurants because of the camera and lights,
(almost the way David Letterman's cameramen were ungracefully shoved out 
of the G.E. building).  She had a real rotten time...
Moments at which the Candid Camera is revealed to a woman with whom the
date was going really well, who then feels betrayed and is very displeased...
because he's hurting the feelings of a real human being,
it's like a social snuff film...
"You think that's funny?"  says one date, and maybe she's right...  do we
think it's funny????  we're all guilty accomplices as we watch this movie...
Lawyers get invoved several times as various women sue Miles.
"Now I was being sued..." he says, and we sure believe it!!
Some dangerous sexism:
"she seemed to get real friendly after some drinks"...
"Women come and go, but movies are around forever..."
Robert McKee, screenplay-seminar (ubermensch/sleazebag): "Men are
interested in the physical, and women are interested in the fantasy, the
phantom, or metaphysical...  so the chance that true love can occur
between two people searching for such wildly different things is slim to
none".
Caren, a good-looking friend of Myles, goes on a date with a guy who makes
some horrific blunders...  "At least you're a woman, and not my ex-wife,
that's a good start..."  "We're also missing Friends and Seinfeld" he says...
A probably-arranged shot of M. Berkowitz's script sitting alone
and abandoned on a different shelf than all the other scripts
He bungee-jumps, terrified.  "I hope you fuckin got that shot"
are his first words when he comes to rest.
Stalking Elisabeth in the mall with the camera.
  Friend: He's an actor, a big star, you've ever seen him?
  Elisabeth: No...
  Myles: "Oh, you don't watch porno movies?"  (good on-the-spot joke!)
We never get to see ELIE, 
but learn a lot about him from the secret audiotapings...
Elie is almost a caricature of a sleazy Hollywood producer...
but we know he's real.  He has ponied up $60,000 to get this film made.
(Thank you, Elie.) He sounds like he really wants to be a porn producer.
"I want a fucking happy fucking ending..."
"... or you're gonna come up with some fucking piece of fucking crap, 
rated ___P fucking G___ ..."
"I want sex in this movie, or I swear to God, you're gonna wish you were
living in Timbuktu cause if you're somewhere that I can find you, I'm
gonna break both of your fucking legs..."
He seems to have access to a miniharem of models and bad actresses,
Why am I envisioning Ivan Nagy (Heidi Fleiss: Hollywood Madam)
but seedy, less charming, and fatter...
"Every date hates his guts??"
says his pregnant EX-WIFE with a giddy and gleeful smile on her face...
We learn more about Myles from his ex-wife, who is
all too happy to spill all the rotten beans she can come up with...
 "He needs to shut every door in the house when he goes to the bathroom..."
 "He tells me to "shh" during sex!  Can you imagine that?"
He gets into a real loud fight with his ex-wife,
they are arguing over who left who first.
Later, he gets one of his dates to admit
that in her most recent relationship, "I was the one that left him"
and like VH1 POP-UP videos, we see Myles thinking "Finally!"
Myles and company partycrash a wedding, stalking pretty women with the
camera.  It's sort of amusing, but we know it's so wrong?  "I'm a friend
of the groom", he lies to one woman he has cornered.  "Oh really, I'm
the groom's sister, how come I don't know you?" she responds... "Would you
go ever out on a date with me?" he asks. "Perhaps...  cause you're a friend
of my brother's..." she replies.
"She didn't work at six jobs, 
she wasn't some kind of __IMMIGRANT__" Myles says uglily.
Myles with a kid, on the beach, trying to get the kid to say "Hi" to
women passing by, creates some very amusing moments: The kid finally
says "Hi!" --- to an old man jogging by!!  or waits until women have
already gone by to say "Hi!"  (Empty threats to the kid we understand
are phony and intended mainly to amuse.)
I get to thinking, 
Gee, this guy is actually able to find twenty attractive women 
that are available and willing to go out on a date with him,
that right there is WONDERFUL!
A shot of our soundman Greg getting spanked in a fetish bar.
He is "Wanting to record the precise moment when two real people were
falling in love..."  and he actually does get to do so!!
Myles: Am I better looking than him?  [her other boyfriend]
Elisabeth: That's not a fair question...
Myles: That means __I'm__ better looking!!!
Cute Stunt where he trips on the curb,
and then gets to hold Elisabeth's hand!!!
More comedy:
"Neither one of us wanted to be the one who let go first", and we see Myles
trying to eat a muffin all the while not letting go of her hand...
Myles needs more dates to get up to 20.  A young intern suggests a
friend of hers.  "She's a total babe, lips, tits, everything, she
looks just like Jessica Rabbit, just like Jessica Rabbit". (Elisabeth
gets very uncomfortable and leaves the room).  Turns out the girl that
the intern is talking about is your average-looking twenty year old.
"Did you ever see "Who Framed Roger Rabbit?" Myles asks the intern.
"Actually, No, I never saw it..."
Offbeat oddball moments:
Myles instructing a child to "Walk on the other side of the flag!!"
Interviewing a five-year-old kid ("Some Kid") eating ice cream...
  "The kid was right.  But what the hell does she know about 
   real life, anyway??"
French-bashing.  "Everybody finds the French annoying"...
Feminist Ballerina who (supposedly?) stabs him in his hand with a fork.
I say supposedly because it's possible that he just wrapped his hand in
a fake bandage just to make the joke...  and if she had stabbed him,
surely they would have shown it??!!
Sound man shown eavesdropping on the shots...
it's always great to see the sound man laughing!!
"It's very hard to keep dating when you have a girlfriend..."
He brings one woman back to his apartment to protect her from her abusive
boyfriend.   At this point, Elisabeth is his live-in girlfriend.
"You didn't tell me you had a girlfriend!" says the date. 
When he says "Elisabeth is just a friend" right in front of Elisabeth,
she gets __nonemotionally upset/outraged/tearful__ and runs away...
Perhaps the film makes its point --- dates are this horrible
uneasy social fumbling ordeal that rarely works out well...
the odds are 1 in 20, right!?!?!
Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer was fiction;
Man Bites Dog, fictionalized (and had the camera crew aspect)
but if we were watching an actual snuff film, could we feel good about it?
How dare I compare murder to dating?  Watch the movie, maybe you'll see
the connection I did!
Because of the nature of the film, I was expecting to see one last
moment of "something" after all the credits have rolled --- cause it's
that kind of movie.  But such a moment never came.
Are Myles and Elisabeth still together, right now?  (Nov 25 1998)

Author
Frankie Paiva
There are so many people that live their lives wanting to become a filmmaker or
do something in the film related business. Every year they enter our nation's
film schools with the high hopes that they too may one day make a movie that
will be loved and adored by millions, then make a billion dollars, earn
themselves a lifelong career, and start dating a supermodel. But seriously, how
often does this type of thing really happen? 20 Dates is supposed to be a movie
about a guy that goes on twenty different dates in LA and secretly films them
to show what real life dating is like. However, I actually found the film to be
much more of the man's quest to make his first ever Hollywood movie.
Myles Berkowitz is an aspiring filmmaker who's come up with a brilliant idea.
He's going to film 20 dates with 20 different women to see what dating and love
is really like, instead of what we are usually shown in the movies. His first
problem is funding, on what are supposedly secretly taped conversations Myles
and Elie Samaha, who's forking over the $60,000 to make the picture will only
do it if he can hire actresses to go out with him. Myles sees this as trying to
kill his artistic vision, but he's the producer so sooner or later he will have
to agree.
As the film (and a restraining order from a woman who didn't want to be filmed)
go by Elie wants more nudity and more sex in the film and refuses to fund it
unless Tia Carrere is in the picture. This troubles Myles because he's just
met, Elizabeth, he's crazy for her and she seems to be marraige material. So
Myles faces a choice, should he finish the dates and start his movie career, or
should he stay with possibly the only woman that he will ever truly love?
Yawn...
For trying to be edgy and interesting, and being unlike regular love stories,
this film certainly is what's it's trying not to be. None of the dates Myles
takes out are all that interesting and as for Myles himself, he's so god dang
self-involved that I hated him at about the 10 minute point. An interesting
concept with a bad result, 20 Dates gets * 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: Strong language, brief images of strippers in strip clubs, and
lots of talk about putting sex and nudity into the picture make up the most
worrysome content. Good Age: 14 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Jamey Hughton
David E. Kelley, it seems, has yet to find a comfortable niche in the
Hollywood film industry. Kelley (the creator of Ally McBeal and The
Practice) tried his luck earlier this year with Lake Placid, a crocodile
comedy that apparently didn't contain enough wit (or was that too much
wit?). Now, the writer has concocted an imaginary Alaskan town to bring
us the hockey-oriented Mystery, Alaska.
Citizens of Mystery celebrate the Canadian pastime of ice hockey like a
religion. The town sheriff, Jon Biebe (Russell Crowe), leads the local
11-man squad out every Saturday for a league game on a nearby pond.
Everyone is excited when the latest Sports Illustrated issue appears,
containing a three-page article about the dedication to the sport in the
small town. The writer of the article, former Mystery resident Charles
Danner (Hank Azaria), comes calling soon after with an interesting
proposition. It seems NHL executives read the story and thought it would
be great publicity to send the New York Rangers up to Alaska for an
exhibition game. Everyone is Mystery is soon overcome with anxiety, as
they try and prep the town for the Rangers' arrival in a mere 32 days.
Kelley always populates his projects with humorous personalities, and
here he sticks with tradition. The mayor (Colm Meaney) doesn't want to
be embarrassed by this `publicity stunt'. He should be more concerned
about his wife (Lolita Davidovich), who is having a heated affair with a
careless player named, appropriately, Skank (Ron Eldard). Skank seems to
be setting his sights on a different female target every night (as he
puts it, `I play hockey and fornicate. Those are the two funnest things
to do in cold weather'). Meanwhile, Biebe's wife Donna (Mary McCormick)
seems to be eyeing recent returnee and old high school flame Danner.
Burt Reynolds plays Judge Burns, a former hockey coach and big fat
grouch extrordinaire.
This is certainly not one of Kelley's better outings. His screenplay
(which he co-wrote with Sean O'Byrne) stumbles terribly out of the gate,
jumbled with plot details and unsure of what direction to eventually
take. Luckily, he begins an admirable recovery during the days leading
up to the big game, with some surprisingly effective dramatics that
almost caught me off guard. More recognition should go to director Jay
Roach (of Austin Powers' fame), who paints an enjoyable portrait of a
small town about to be placed in the spotlight.
Mystery, Alaska is entirely predictable from the first frame on - and
yet, even as the inevitable rolls around, it remains in good fun. The
film is a bit too profane than perhaps needed, but that's only when it
sidesteps it's generally pleasant and good-natured appeal. The plot is
basically an underdog story like The Mighty Ducks, only for adults. And
despite one or two obvious caricatures, these Alaskans have a certain
charm.
The caricatures are Azaria and Reynold's characters (with the latter
saving his obvious existence with convincing gruffness), but the rest of
the cast is rock solid. Crowe, who displayed wonderful intensity in L.A.
Confidential, gives Jon Biebe the everyman quality that any lead
requires. Colm Meaney and Maury Chaykin are both terrific in supporting
roles, and one Mystery team player caught my eye: the big, likable oaf
Tree (a perfectly cast Kevin Durand). With his effortless charm and
persistence, Durand owns a few of the best scenes in the movie.
Regular sports movies' clichés abound in the last thirty minutes, but a
few unexpected cameo appearances help quite a bit. As I mentioned
before, every second of film can probably be predicted beforehand. Will
the former coach step forward and guide the underdog team to a win? Will
the star player escape a prison charge in time to play the game? Well,
duh. Mystery, Alaska is funny and entertaining enough to adequately fill
a two-hour time slot - unless, of course, you absolutely despise
everything involving David E. Kelley and the game of hockey. But then,
why would you even go?
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
         MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton
         http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
http://MovieThing.com/members/movies/MovieViews
Comments Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Greg King
20 DATES (M).  
(Fox Searchlight/Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Myles Berkowitz
Stars: Myles Berkowitz, Robert McKee, Richard Arlook, Tia Carrere
Running time: 88 minutes.
In 1996, Aussie film maker Robert Gibson exposed his personal 
life and failed relationships to 
excruciatingly painful scrutiny with his video diary Video Fool For Love. 
 First time film maker Myles Berkowitz attempts something similar,
albeit it on a grander and less intimate scale, in this mock
documentary recording his often embarrassing search for true love.
Thankfully, 20 Dates lacks the self- indulgent and voyeuristic
excesses of Gibson's film, although it, too, has its flaws.
In 20 Dates Berkowitz deliberately offers a contrast to the
glamorous version of love as depicted in numerous light weight
Hollywood romantic comedies.  Combining the two greatest disasters of
his life thus far - his professional career and his personal life -
the ambitious Berkowitz sets out to make a low budget film about being
single and dateless in contemporary Los Angeles.
 We've seen this sort of stuff 
before - the central premise of being desperate and dateless in LA also 
sounds vaguely similar to the broad 
plot of Steve Martin's LA Story.  
Berkowitz optimistically hopes to find the perfect woman
within 20 dates.  Berkowitz has his own camera man and sound recorder
follow him on a series of dates, documenting his sometimes clumsy
journey through this minefield of modern dating rituals.  Of course,
the intrusive camera crew is not exactly conducive to creating
intimate moments, but it does make for some awkward and hilarious
experiences.  Not every one appreciates being the subject of
Berkowitz's film, and a succession of law suits and restraining orders
quickly follow.  Complications develop when he meets Elisabeth, a
sales clerk and interior decorating student.  A genuine relationship
develops between the pair, which is threatened by Berkowitz's need to
date other women in order to finish his film.
This mock documentary also takes a swipe at the Hollywood
studio system, as Myles desperately tries to remain true to his
project and not compromise his artistic vision.  He becomes involved
with a dodgy and volatile producer and financier who tries to convince
him to inject more sex into his film.  Noted lecturer and film
theorist Robert McKee also advises Myles to turn his film into the
ultimate classic love story, full of longing and romantic possibility.
Some moments work wonderfully in this occasionally hilarious
film, but other moments misfire badly.  Technically, the film is
cleverly assembled, as Berkowitz uses a variety of film stock and
formats to add to the rawness and documentary-like realism.  It is
sometimes easy to believe that 20 Dates is cinema verite at its best.
But the rigid structure of the film ultimately suggests that
Berkowitz's approach is somewhat less spontaneous and unscripted than
he would have us believe.
Berkowitz comes across as a poor man's, west coast Woody
Allen, albeit without the thoroughly cynical view on relationships,
the neurosis, or the snappy string of clever one-liners.  Michael
Moore (Roger And Me, etc) does this sort of smart arse, acerbic
documentary much better.  20 Dates works up to a point, but then the
whole artifice becomes a little tedious.  
** 
greg king
http://www.netau.com.au/gregking

Author
Ross Anthony
Wow, what a wild ride! Myles, a filmmaker, is recently divorced. In a way in
which Woody Allen might simultaneously host and be tape in The World's
Funniest Videos, Myles sets out to fall in love or make a movie -- which
ever comes first!
Inconveniently, they both happen. Myles convinces vile producer Elie to fund
this project to film, via hidden camera, 20 of his (Myles') dates whilst he
searches for love in LA.
One of Myles' dates wants to go bunji-jumping. So shivering Myles is
"forced" to jump off a bridge -- or risk embarrassing himself as a coward in
his own film. He finally jumps, then looking up at the camera, he curses,
"You better have f'ing got that!"
Much of the film documents Myles' oft failed, yet seldom dull attempts to
secure a date with an unsuspecting female. In one scene, Myles approaches a
woman in the grocery store. He leads in, "Oh, I see you're shopping in the
fat-free isle..." "Yes, they've got some good stuff here," she replies
friendly enough. "Well, we're having a fat-free party, if you'd like to join
us," Myles scams. "I don't think my boyfriend would like that." The woman
reveals. Undeterred, Myles replies "Why? He doesn't like fat-free?"
20 Dates is the result of over 140 hours of video tape humorously edited
down to 120 minutes, then bumped up to 35 mm film. The picture quality is
lacking of course, and visually gives you the odd sensation that you're
watching TV in a theater. I was never quite sure, what was real, staged, or
just clever editing. In the end, the unabashed humor pushed me over the
edge, I took the bate and roared in isle. This is one to put on your "to
rent" video list.
Starring and Directed by Myles Berkowitz. Rated R. 88 minutes.
Produced by Elie Samaha, Mark McGarry and Jason Villard at Phoenician
Films/Fox Searchlight
Grade..........................B+/A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Good-looking Myles Berkowitz has two problems that he wants to turn into
an opportunity.  Facing the failure of his personal life (having been
recently divorced) and his professional life as a filmmaker (having
never made a movie), he wants to make a documentary of his quest to find
love in LA.  He proposes to call his first picture 20 DATES because that
is precisely how many women he promises to date in the movie.
The movie is actually a mock documentary, but it was realistic enough to
fool some of the critics at our press screening.  (There are some
advantages to films without press kits.)  The movie written and directed
by and starring Myles Berkowitz, does not have the sharp writing of the
wonderfully inventive WAITING FOR GUFFMAN, another mock documentary.
Nevertheless, 20 DATES is pure, unadulterated fun, and a perfect date
movie.  Well, probably not a "first" date movie.
As seems somehow appropriate, 20 DATES uses movie romance as its
benchmark for true love.  Even if Myles ultimately concludes that "Love,
real love, is like a really great movie," along the way he uses
delightful clips from classic movies to poke fun at celluloid romance.
He argues that real life isn't like the movies, which usually end with
the man and the woman running toward each other for the big kiss, while
the music comes up.  ("Women come and go, but a movie lasts forever,
especially if it goes to video," points out one of Myles acquaintances.)
The plot has Myles getting $60,000 from a foul-mouthed financial backer
who is never seen.  Like some exposé on "60 Minutes," we hear the backer
scream obscenities about how he wants the movie done, which Myles
rejects for artistic reasons.  The backer wants him to use actresses
rather than real people and wants Myles and his dates to have sex on
camera.  While the backer speaks, we see the outside of some sleazy
building as his words are shown below it in subtitles.
Myles likes to add cartoonish graphics for humor.  As Myles plods
through his dates, we see graphics like checkmarks and question marks
superimposed on the screen, representing his thinking on how each date
is progressing.
The best use of graphics occurs when he pokes fun at the waste of money
in most motion pictures.  Using stick figures in a bar graph, he likens
the money spent on most pictures to the size of the combined United
States and Russian armies.  In contrast, he says that his film would
have had only enough cash to hire a single French soldier who would
immediately surrender.
Although handsome and well dressed, except for his proclivity to mix red
and green, Myles manages to turn most dates off in subtle ways.  While
dining out, he complains, for example, about the foods on the menu that
would give him diarrhea.  Between the dates are interspersed interviews
with his friends, who give testament as to how annoying Myles can be.
Myles is full of hints on how to meet single women.  We learn that the
supermarket is full of them.  And if all else fails, borrow a
good-looking child and hang out at the beach..
Will Myles finish the entire 20-date course?  And will he find love and
happiness along the way?  These are the key questions in this breezy
movie that goes down as easy as the ubiquitous wine that Myles uses with
little success to loosen up his prey.
20 DATES runs 1:32.  It is rated R for profanity and mature themes and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
It's one thing for first-time independent directors to make their feature
debuts with movies about struggling filmmakers, and it's quite another
thing entirely to engage in the singular act of self-indulgence that Myles
Berkowitz pulls off in _20_Dates_.  Instead of making a thinly veiled
fiction film about himself, he has unabashedly made a film about himself.
And, in an added twist, the film he has made traces the making of the film
he has made (got that?).
By that description, _20_Dates_ sounds like an exercise in cinematic
masturbation--and, to a certain extent, it _is_--but it doesn't feel that
way.  That's because Berkowitz has an interesting story to tell.  Bored
with the movies' unrealistic view of love and frustrated with his
nonexistent film career _and_ love life, he came up with a high-concept
idea: make a movie about his own quest for true love.  A camera would
follow him on twenty dates (hence the title), and if he somehow fell in
love during the course of these dates, not only would he have found love,
he would have also captured on film the exact, true moment where people
fall for each other--which, he felt, had never been captured in a Hollywood
film.  But if love never comes, at least he would have his movie.
Because it details real-life events, _20_Dates_ can be considered a
documentary, but it isn't entirely one.  The film is peppered by
Berkowitz's own narration, in which he makes wry comments and observations
on the events in retrospect, and, I suspect, he's also taken certain
dramatic liberties with some situations (most notably, the downward
fortunes of his producer, Elie Samaha).  But 100% true or not, the film is
quite funny and never less than amusing, due mostly to Berkowitz himself.
He is an entertaining, engaging host, with a charmingly self-effacing
attitude about him.
So as one watches _20_Dates_, one hopes that he will find success--in his
career and in love.  Does he?  Fox Searchlight's theatrical release of
_20_Dates_ answers the former question, but as for the latter?  You'll just
have to sit through the film's fun, if ultralightweight, 88 minutes to find
out.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Dustin Putman
"20 Dates" is an often funny, always engaging romantic comedy filmed in a 
documentary format concerning the plight of first-time director Myles 
Berkowitz to find that special someone by going on twenty dates with twenty 
different women. Berkowitz proves to be a likable protagonist, and the 
unexpectedly close relationship that evolves between an aspiring interior 
designer named Elisabeth and he may be one of the most involving, 
warm-hearted romances on film in 1999. Sultry actress Tia Carrere ("Wayne's 
World") briefly appears as Berkowitz's final "date."
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Murali Krishnan
Myles Berkowitz thought it would be interesting to combine his two biggest
failures--his professional life and his personal life. Being a recently
divorced, failed filmmaker, his idea is to make a documentary about finding
love by filming himself going on dates with women. Just meeting women is
difficult for Berkowitz, but he must also persuade them to allow him to put
the date under the microscope of the camera. It is hard to kindle romance
when followed by a film crew. He must wrestle with his financier who
believes that Berkowitz' approach is too boring and that there must be more
prurient and marketable items in the final product. Another big obstacle is
that he is taking both the dates and his film very seriously. He must deal
with the issue that if he is successful at finding love along the way, would
it be possible to attend the remaining dates with other women?
The concept of portraying real romance in a documentary is a very compelling
one because of the way it would compare with the view of romance that is
usually depicted in film. It is Berkowitz' intention that the film takes
both a serious and comic look at this concept. He mostly fails at the
former, but succeeds at the latter. It is hard to imagine that anyone who is
taking a date seriously would consent to allowing two extra people along to
handle the camera and sound recording. This makes any serious exploration
doomed to failure, and it usually also gives the women an unflattering
opinion of Berkowitz.
It seems that Berkowitz has kept the film from becoming a muddled mess by
staging much of what is portrayed. The surreptitiously recorded discussions
with Elie, the film's funder, are quite funny, but not believable. Among
many other questions, if Elie is opposed to the concept of the film to begin
with, why is he so insistent that Berkowitz attend exactly 20 dates? The
interaction between Berkowitz and strangers on the street all seem real and
are often entertaining. The interaction with some of the women he actually
dates sometimes seem scripted. How is it that some of the women can react
negatively to Berkowitz, even threaten to sue him for taping them, yet
apparently allow him to use the footage in the final film? If Berkowitz had
been up front and admitted that some of the film was dramatized for the sake
of comedy, it would have been easy to forgive, because much of the film was
entertaining. Instead, there are too many inconsistencies to ignore, and the
viewer might feel cheated for taking it seriously. However, the film can be
rather entertaining if not taken seriously and viewed for its comedy.
Recommended. The most annoying aspect of the film is the implication that
all the events were real, when there are too many parts that appear staged.
Berkowitz himself is a rather uninteresting person, but his interaction with
seemingly random people is entertaining and sometimes hilarious.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
