Title
Review for Visions of Murder (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
When someone makes a trailer for a movie, and when the
product looks less attractive than its advertisement, people
usually feel cheated. But the author of this review didn't
feel that angry after having similar experience with VISIONS
OF MURDER, 1993 television thriller by Michael Ray Rhodes.
The national video distributor in my country was extremely
creative in editing various clips from the film and using
appropriate music, thus making VISIONS OF MURDER look like
an exciting blend of supernatural horror and psychological
thriller. Of course, in reality, VISIONS OF MURDER was
nothing more than conventional product of American TV
industry.
The heroine of the film is Jesse Newman (played by Barbara
Eden), ambitious psychologist that takes a new patient,
Gloria Hager (played by Anita Finlay). The young woman tells
about spousal abuse and leaves the office. Soon after that,
the therapist begins having visions and hallucinations that
involve Gloria. Those visions culminate with the vision of
Gloria's body being dumped into the sea by her husband.
Jesse Newman reports it to the police, but soon she becomes
the prime suspect in the murder investigation.
Of course, the standards of American TV movies are lower
than the standards of Hollywood feature films. But that
shouldn't be the excuse for poor quality, especially in
psychological thrillers that, like this one, don't require
big budgets to be attractive. What makes those film good are
the script, the direction and actors. VISIONS OF MURDERS
fails in all of that. The plot is turning into sentimental
overkill at the end. The direction is wooden. The characters
are uninteresting and are played by disinterested actors.
Barbara Eden practically destroys her character, but the
worst disappointment is in the form of Terry O'Quinn, who
sleepwalks through the role very similar to the one he had
brilliantly played in THE STEPFATHER. This film is
interesting only as an example how bad movies could be sold
to unsuspecting audience.
Review written on September 11th 1999
