Title
Review for Booye kafoor, atre yas (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Bahman Farmanara's SMELL OF CAMPHOR, FRAGRANCE OF JASMINE, tells the 
story of an aging filmmaker, Bahman Farjami (Bahman Farmanara), who for 
20 years has been forbidden by the Iranian government from making films.  
Described by some as an Iranian Woody Allen, Farmanara is more of a 
poignantly tragic comedian.  When Farjami confronts life's insults, from 
a doctor who wants him to eat only things that taste bad to his own 
grave plot being sold before he take up residence, his reaction is 
palpable injury, shown more in the scowl on his face than in his words.  
Farmanara gives the story's best line, "Abstinence is the best diet," 
not to himself, but to a minor character, Farjami's doctor.  With its 
references to Poe and Dickens, this slice of the end of a man's life 
strikes universal themes.  As you might guess, the film has certain 
autobiographical elements in that Farmanara was himself kept for 20 
years from making films.
SMELL OF CAMPHOR, FRAGRANCE OF JASMINE runs 1:33.  The film is in 
Persian with English subtitles.  It is not rated but might be PG for 
mature themes.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Young people believe that they're immortal.  They can
barely think of tomorrow must less the idea of their own
death.  Since sixty-five percent of the citizens of Iran--the
land which forms the backdrop of Bahman Farmanara's first
film in 22 years--are under the age of twenty-five, not too
many Farsi-speaking folks are much concerned about their
mortality.  But Mr. Farmanara--who has not only scripted and
directed "Smell of Camphor, Fragrance of Jasmine" but
appears in virtually every scene of this highly personal work--
certainly is...boy is he ever.  That's about all he thinks about,
dreams of, wonders about.  Why?  He's only fifty-five years
old, but his health is rotten.  He has had a couple of heart
attacks, he has a pot belly, he smokes like a fiend, and he
tosses out his physician's health plan as soon as he exits the
man's office.
   So aside from the fact that "Smell of Camphor" is about the
writer-director's thoughts of his own demise, what
recommends this film to us?  Not really a heck of a lot,
because Bahman Farjami, as Farmanara's alter ego is called
in the story, acts out a plot that is second-string Ingmar
Bergman.  Where the great Swedish director in "The Seventh
Seal" deals allegorically and agonizingly with the metaphysics
of man's relationship to God and his encounters with the idea
of death, the Iranian director--out of shape presumably
because he has been away from the camera for two
decades--deals in a fairly shallow manner with his anticipated
parting from the planet.  Where in "Wild Strawberries"
Bergman deals with the subject of man's isolation and uses a
journey as the plot structure, Farmanara's trip by train across
the Iranian countryside pops up suddenly, now and then, as
though the film's editor were having some fun with the
splicing machine.  As for isolation, true enough, Bahman
Farjami has lost his wife some years back and is still in
mourning, but his loneliness is not of the existential sort
favored by Bergman in the far more resonant film.
   Perhaps we're being unfair to compare the two: after all
nowhere does Farmanara state that he has been influenced
by the Swede.  Taken on its own, however, "Smell of
Camphor" is so talky, so lacking in humor (save for a single
gag made by a white-haired funeral director with a neatly
trimmed beard) that the gloom-and-doom inclination of the
writer serves little transcendent effect.
   Death and its foreboding are everywhere.  Farjami's mother
sits in a wheelchair staring into space, a tear flowing lightly
down her right eye, as this victim of Alzheimer's is read a
story by her son--whom she does not recognize or react to. 
Farjami's visits to his wife's grave upsets him, as he
discovers that someone is already buried next to the woman
in the plot which Farjami purchased for himself.  Searching
for a lost son-in-law, Farjami questions the mortician in a
hospital who informs him that he has only two corpses on ice,
one being that of a 15-year-old girl who has committed
suicide.  "Only the young have the courage to kill themselves:
the old hold on to life with both arms," informs an associate,
who does not elaborate.
   The film is divided self-consciously into three acts as
though this were a photographed play, but a drama in which
too much of the action is of the inner variety--a meditation by
a morose fellow who cracks a smile (without showing his
teeth) once during the entire 93-minute drama.  From time to
time the editor slips in a serialized passage from a holy man
who intones the way that the Koran specifies one should deal
with a corpse.  Early on, Farjami picks up a sullen woman
who relates that she is running away from her abusive
husband and who deposits an unusual gift for the driver on
the back seat when she leaves. There is even a segment
devoted to pointlessly abstract political talk by (I believe)
Katami, the supposedly liberal president who was recently
elected and who has just a modicum of power--but enough,
presumably, to allow "Smell of Camphor" to pass censorship
even though it does not deal with little children.  
   There is little substantive symbolism in this effort, though
the camphor in the title refers to death and the jasmine
alludes to youth--in whose custody lies hope for the future. 
The picture, which was picked up by the New York Film
Festival, is in the Farsi language with English subtitles.
Not Rated.  Running time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
