Title
Review for Doom Generation, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DOOM GENERATION, THE (director/writer/editor: Gregg Araki;
cinematographer: Jim Fealy; cast: James Duval (Jordan White ), Rose
McGowan (Amy Blue), Johnathon Schaech (Xavier Red), Cress Williams
(Peanut), Parker Posey (Brandi), Heidi Fleiss (Herself), Margaret Cho
(Clerk's wife), 1995)
Gregg Araki (The Living End/Totally F***ed Up) professes in the opening
credits that this is a movie about heterosexuals, as opposed to his
other films about queers. But that is really a dubious distinction, as
the sex is mindless, violent, and bawdry. Many of the visuals displayed
homo-erotic actions, and the film is about as romantic as a stool
sample.
This is a road movie about three Los Angeles misfits: a teenage druggie
couple, the wiseacre Amy (Rose) and the dim-witted Jordan (Duval), who
take a violent drifter, Xavier (Schaech), along with them for a ride
into teenage hell. It is an offensive film, made to parody other
Hollywood teenager films, by taking digs at do-gooders, the moral
majority, the right-wing, the fundamentalist religions, and pop culture.
But the film is so vacuous and poorly thought out, that it comes off as
strictly an in-your-face stylized film, without coming up to breathe
fresh air or manage to say anything worthwhile. The parody seems so cold
and distant, and it comes from lowlifes who have peanuts for brains,
which makes their attempts at black comedy seem futile. It was difficult
to be amused by a film that was so childish, its dialogue so banal, and
its whole purpose tied to being shocking.
The enjoyment from the film, for those who get their jollies from
watching something that is this gross and sexually hideous, is the
flaunting of morality and the depravity in the violence. Xavier explains
his tattoo of Jesus on his dick, by telling Amy, he put it there, so
people could say, I've got Jesus inside me. The three form a menage a
trois, with Xavier
bringing new insights to sex, by having Amy stick her finger up his
shithole, which she then gleefully gets the drugged out Jordan to
experience.
The first heavy action scene opens inside a fast-food emporium, where
Amy and Jordan are facing the Korean proprietor's shotgun when they
don't have the $6.66 to pay their food tab. Xavier comes along, wrestles
with the gunman and blasts his head off in the tussle. Besides spewing
out green slime and still talking, the severed head rolls on the floor.
The owner's wife (Margaret Cho) in a suicidal ritual, disembowels her
children and commits suicide.
On-the-run, the three are wanted by the police, but are oblivious of any
sense of guilt or awareness of that they are doing. There is a running
gag about 666 and about religious or do-gooder slogans in every store;
one store has this slogan --Up with hope -- Down with dope.
The film has a running theme, that everytime the trio stops at a
fast-food place, someone recognizes Amy as someone who broke their heart
and swear to get even with her unless she comes with them. It ends up
that every stop they make, ends up in a homicide. I guess this is
supposed to mean that these three have bad karma.
After seeing all the mayhem, absorbing the teens in action, watching how
retarded and alienated they are, the film felt as healthy as a diet of
fast-food, crystal meth (speed), and shotguns. It failed to show the
L.A. underground kids it made as stars of the film, as anything but
cartoon characters. In some perverse way, I would recommend this as a
blind date movie in a drive-in, for those young guys who want to see how
their dates will react to all the grossness onscreen. For others, who
might be taken with teenager films, but in a healthier and more comical
way, stick with someone committed to making bad films about teens, such
as Ray Steckler. All his flicks are funnier than this one. His Wild
Guitar (62) is a classic in schlock art.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Bryant Frazer
Written, Edited, and Directed by Gregg Araki
Starring James Duval, Rose McGowan, and Jonathon Schaech
U.S.A., 1995
     The opening credit refers to this as "A Heterosexual Movie by
Gregg Araki," and while fans may recognize the cynicism, this certainly
qualifies as the director's most het-friendly movie to date. Set pieces
at convenience stores, cheap motels, and in the wide-open American
spaces will be familiar to straight audiences of all backgrounds.
Cameos by the likes of Perry Farrell, Parker Posey and Heidi Fleiss
will delight hipsters, and the soundtrack is straight out of a
Lollapalooza show. As Amy Blue, Rose McGowan's breasts are showcased in
the great Hollywood tradition, while the ass shots of her male co-stars
are kept to a minimum.  And when Jonathon Schaech, as Xavier Red,
starts licking his own semen off his hand after masturbating, well,
whoops, I guess he's just kind of weird.
     Actually, he's just kind of a classical bad influence on our
teenage heroes, the kind that Jordan White's mother probably warned him
about once upon a time. Jordan (James Duval) and Amy are teenage
lovers, and they've been together for about three months, which makes
it a serious relationship. Amy spends most of the movie hopped up on
crystal meth, so she doesn't eat much, while Jordan is the kind of kid
who favors chili dogs from the corner 7-11. Jordan's meek but sincere,
affectionate but whiny, while Amy is an assertive loudmouth who takes
refuge in a flamboyant vocabulary of four-letter words and much
eye-rolling. The two of them are confused innocents, the kind who make
doe eyes at one another and mutter sweet nothings like "You're the
bright red cherry on top of my sundae," and "I hope we both die
simultaneously." And when Jordan breaks off a love-making session in
Amy's car, confessing that he's afraid of catching AIDS, she wails up
at him plaintively, "But we're both virgins!"
     That will change soon enough, as will their status as
innocents.  The transformation is helped along by Xavier's entrance,
when Amy and Jordan help him escape bloodied but mostly unharmed by a
knife fight.  Jordan's affable as usual, but the newcomer grates on
Amy's nerves so much that she ejects him from the car. It's no good,
though, because Xavier's back in their lives when he saves them from
certain doom at a convenience store.  There's a lot of splattered
blood, and even a decapitation, but the violence here is played
strictly for laughs, and Amy and Jordan escape into a garish night of
primary colors that deliberately recalls Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN
KILLERS.
     At this point, Araki's still playing the young punk filmmaker,
and THE DOOM GENERATION is loud and snotty, with a cruel, icy sense of
humor.  But soon, the film begins to explore the relationship between
Amy and Jordan, and Xavier is developed as a sexual catalyst, and even
a liberating element. In one shot, Jordan's sitting on the floor next
to the bed, and Xavier's head is dangling over his shoulder.  "How long
have you and Princess Leia been a happy little couple?" he asks, and if
Jordan doesn't realize it's a challenge, we do. Xavier watches from the
shadows as Amy and Jordan make love, and a little later, when he's
seduced Amy himself, Jordan will watch through a window and take a long
walk before returning.  And when Amy tries to justify sleeping with
Xavier in the context of her continuing relationship with Jordan,
Jordan just looks at her and says, "Whatever, Amy," without a hint of
sarcasm or bitterness.
     The biggest surprise in THE DOOM GENERATION is how seriously
Araki starts to take these kids, who seem at first to have been set up
as easy targets for his skewering of American youth, red, white, and
blue. There's a lot of sex, but none of it is played for comedy, and
all of it has its place in giving voice to the muted emotional
relationships between the three kids. Anyone who's familiar with
Araki's M.O. will be hip to Xavier's game, but it's very intriguing to
watch as the tough, knowing Xavier works his way ever closer to Jordan,
using Amy as a pretext. And when Xavier finally does make his move, the
picture positively swoons, with quick cuts, gentle lighting, and
flesh-on-flesh dissolves. It's as though Araki (who also edited the
film) spent most of his time in post-production working on just the
last fifteen minutes of the movie.
     But everything in THE DOOM GENERATION is just about right, and
to my eyes, it makes a lot of what has passed for great filmmaking
lately look mighty tired. Araki's kids are disenfranchised, lonely, and
desperate to put on hip airs, but they connect as human beings in a way
that Larry Clark's KIDS never do. Their post-adolescent sexual longings
make Gus Van Sant's TO DIE FOR look like cheap soap opera. And stuff
like REALITY BITES and NATURAL BORN KILLERS is revealed as the
self-conscious sham that it is. Doritos and chili dogs are part of the
landscape, but Araki's mining a far more significant vein of our pop
culture, and one suspects that no matter how thick the satire is laid
on, Araki's got a lot of all three of these kids in him.
     Caveat: You can't expect the guy who made THE LIVING END to be
happy cobbling together a slice-of-life teen comedy about life on the
run or even just how great it is to let go of our sexual inhibitions,
and indeed he doesn't. I'd hate to spoil the ending for anybody, but
I'd be remiss in my duties if I didn't note that it's far from pretty.
I have a lot of respect for what Araki's doing, but I do find myself
wishing he had looked a little harder to find a way out. These kids pay
a heavy price for discovering themselves, and Araki demonstrates that
he's a master manipulator of hearts, minds, and guts when his road
movie centerpunches its audience across the median and into the
oncoming traffic. There are folks who will no doubt love the movie for
being such a wrenching experience, and probably even more who will
never forgive it.

Author
Will FitzHugh
This is billed 'A Heterosexual Film by Gregg Araki' who I gather has made
some low-budget homosexual films which I haven't seen.  This one is a charming
coming-of-age piece.  At least charming when compared to any other movie that
features blood-splattered convenience store robberies, motel-room sex and
various psychotic characters met in cheesy retail stores.  The main characters,
Jordan and Amy, are two love-struck punkers ('three months' Jordan says
reverently when asked how long they've been going out) who get caught up in
a whirlwind escape from the law after they meet up with Xavier, a slightly
twisted guy who gets them out of tight spots by blowing people away.  One
bit of sample dialog should give you the flavor:

You get the idea.  Kind of like a John Hughes movie but with sex, violence and
bad language.  Everything's very stilted.  I assume it's on purpose.  As David
St. Hubbins said, it's a fine line between stupid and clever, but this film
refuses to accept that and blurs them together entirely.  Heidi Fleiss has a
cameo.  Araki pays homage to 'Easy Rider' by having our gang brutalized by
redneck nazis at the end.  Good double bill with 'Half Cocked' if they ever
come out on video.
I saw this movie alone but it could be good for a date if you want to test
his/her reaction to things generally considered vile.  Might as well initiate
the discussion of bodily fluids as soon as possible in a relationship.  You're
gonna have to deal with them anyway, right?

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Review- Early on in Greg Arraki's The Doom Generation, one of the 
characters spys on a couple having sex. He masturbates, and when he is 
finished, he licks the fluid off of his hand. Perhaps the most disgusting 
and repulsive scene in recent memory, the scene wouldnt be so bad if it 
actually had a purpose. It didn't. It was only an attempt by Arraki to 
gross the audience out. I guess he got what he wanted, but I sure didn't 
get what I wanted.
Duval and McGowan play Jordan and Amy, young lovers who go on a road trip.
 They stop at a convenience store and are held up by the store clerk 
(don't ask}. A drifter named Xavier tries to save them, and ends up 
blowing off the head of the clerk. The head flies off of the screen, then 
we see it land in what appears to be a shopping cart full of food. Then 
Arraki gives us the pleasure of seeing the clerk's headless body with 
gobs of blood spurting out of his neck. Then we get to see the head, yes 
the head, still screaming. Well now, here we got two of the most 
disgusting scenes I have ever scene in a movie since I Spit On Your Grave.
 I have the feeling that if Arraki had directed The Hitcher, he would 
have shown us the scene where the girls body is snapped in half. I don't 
even want to imagine what would've happened had he directed Seven.
After the killing they take Xavier along with them. Then Xavier 
masturbates while watching Jordan and Amy have sex. Then Xavier seduces 
Amy and they have sex. Then some guy waith a mask on comes looking for 
Amy. Then they kill someone else in a scene just as disgusting as the 
other two I mentioned.. Jordan and Amy have sex again. Then Jordan 
masturbates while watching Xavier and Amy have sex. Then they all three 
have sex together. Then I just kneeled down and prayed that this 
nightmare of a film watching experience would end. 
The actors in this movie are beyond incompetent. They don't show any 
talent whatsoever. Their performances are the level of a bad junior high 
school play. Even a cameo by the talented Parker Posey is ruined by 
horiible dialogue and a scene that makes no sense whatsoever. The only 
reason Arraki gave us that scene was to gross us out one more time.Greg 
Arraki throws one gratuitous and disgusting scene after another upon the 
audience, and I hope he never gets the chance to direct a movie ever 
again. 
Theatrical Release 1995. Reviewed on video in 1996. 

Author
Christopher Null
     Good Lord, how did this film ever get made?  As Gregg Araki's fifth
feature, you'd figure he'd have learned *something* about movie making by
now.  Looks like I'm wrong again.
     THE DOOM GENERATION, hands-down one of the most horrid examples of
filmmaking I've seen in ages, is a brain-dead, post-modern love story. 
The plot (what there is of it) tells the moronic tale of Amy Blue (Rose
McGowan), her boyfriend Jordan White (James Duval), and some guy they pick
up called Xavier Red (Johnathon Schaech).  (Did you catch on to that
ultra-clever color motif?)  Altogether, these three embark on a
nonsensical spree of sex, killing/mangling people, and then eating...and
then repeating the cycle four or five times.
     Along the way, Amy uses a wider variety of vulgar insults than I'd
ever conceived of.  Jordan pretty much just stands around, with Duval
perfectly cast in the part of an idiot zombie teenager that makes you
cringe just to look at him.  I still can't figure out what Xavier's role
was supposed to be all about, but I'm guessing Araki's "666," skull &
crossbones, and Apocalypse references are supposed to indicate that
Xavier's the devil.  Oooooh, scary.  If that was supposed to be a social
or cultural statement, please pinch me.
     Araki should, however, be thanked for the one distraction that keeps
you from having to think too hard about the garbage on the screen:  cameos
galore!  From Margaret Cho to ex-Brady Buncher Christopher Knight to
Married With Children's Amanda Bearse to Hollywood Madam Heidi Fleiss,
there's enough washed-up stars and wannabes to dam a river with.  It's
cute, but I think Jon Waters squeezed the last ounce of life out of this
stunt years ago.
     I could go on about the poor or inappropriate lighting, cutesy
direction, horrid dialogue, and overall silly atmosphere this film
creates, but why bother?  I think I've pretty much made my opinion clear
by now.  There's absolutely no reason to see the movie, and I'd rather
watch the Weather Channel for two hours than sit through it again.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Gregg Araki
Starring: Rose McGowan, James Duval, Jonathan Schaech, Dustin Ngoyen,
Margaret Cho, Skinny Puppy, Christopher Knight, Nicky Katt, Perry Farrell,
Amanda Bearse, Parker Posey, Heidi Fleiss
The above is dialogue from this film, taken almost completely in context,
and not jazzed up a bit to make it more inept than it is.  It is spoken
between two of the protagonists somewhere in the film, and basically serves
as a perfect example of what this film is about, especially if you realize
that this exchange is meant to be taken seriously.  Mr. Gregg
"I'm-having-a-mid-life-crisis" Araki, the writer and director of this film,
wants to show how important teenagers are, and wants to show how they feel
in such a horrible, horrible world.  And how does he show it?  By really
cheap surrealism, and moronic exchanges like this.
Oh, and it gets better.  A similar bit of dialogue is said in the middle
of, oh I dunno, the fiftieth sex scene in this film (I'm not counting the
several masturbation scenes).  In it, one of the protagonists is humping
away on top of another, and he says to her something along the lines of "Do
you ever wonder what life is all about?"  Sorry, man: foreplay takes place
BEFORE the act of coitus.  Of course, what do you expect: the film was
written and directed by a guy who can't even spell his first name right
(yes, I know it's a cheap joke, but it had to be done).
"The Doom Generation" is advertised as a road trip movie about people who
go around killing others who attack them, and also as another "Teen Angst"
film (one of the slogans is "Teen is a Four-Letter Word" - hardy har har). 
It's a film about two angsty teens - Amy Blue (Rose MacGowan, who would
later play the buxom Tatum in "Scream") and Jordon White (James Duval, who
would go on to play Randy Quaid's son in "Independence Day") - who pick up
an angsty homicidal maniac, Xavier Red (Jonathan Schaech, who would go on
to play the angsty lead guitarist in "That Thing You Do!" - and by the way,
do you get the symbolism?  Red, white, and blue?  Huh?  Huh?), and go on a
road trip where three things happen, in no order: 1) they have sex; 2) they
run into weird people; 3) they kill them.
The film is basically a remix of a bunch of other far superior films. 
Gregg Araki obviously has seen such films as "Easy Rider," "Natural Born
Killers," and "Kalifornia," and tries to borrow elements from all these
films and make something which is like a pop culture reference guide.  But
what he forgets is these films either represented something that this film
does not, or that they dug deep into their subjects and brought something
out of them to make them deeper.  "The Doom Generation" doesn't want to do
this; it just wants to show everything in a surreal manner for the sole
reason that Araki does not want to deal with them on any kind of real
level.  He wants to show everything in a weird manner, and forgets what the
scenes are supposed to be about.
Here's one scene, an earlier scene in the film: Amy and Jordan go into a
Quick-E Mart type place to get food and other stuff.  Amy is smoking, and
the clerk, an Asian man mind you (I love how racist this film is, I really
do), tells her to put it out.  She tells him to fuck off or something to
that note.  He points a shotgun at her, and she puts it out reluctantly. 
Jordan makes two hot dogs, and takes them to the counter.  The cash
register rings up "6.66" (oh, and this symbolism doesn't stop here). 
Jordan checks for his wallet but it's really in the car.  He asks Amy for
it, but she left her wallet in the car as well.  The clerk brings out his
shotgun again and asks for the money.  They say they don't have it.  He
gets ready to kill them, but then Xavier, who they ditched in the middle of
nowhere a scene before, pops out of nowhere, fights with the clerk, and
ends with him blowing the clerk's head clean off (clean wound, mind you). 
The head is shown flying through the air, and lands in a fryer, where it
begins to scream.
I don't really object to this kind of sick violence, but this scene is in
the film for one reason and one reason only: to gross you out.  Araki
thinks that if he takes everything to the extreme, he'll make some kind of
art.  Wrong.  It takes a kind of resistance to make gore art.  When George
Romero made "Dawn of the Dead," a very gory flick even for today, he had
control over everything and still was able to make everything sick.  Same
goes for Peter Jackson's disgustingly gory "Dead Alive," which features a
30 minute long fest of blood, guts, dismemberments, flesh chewing, and
other assorted stuff, all ending with a guy with a lawn mower strapped to
his body, taking out all sorts of zombies.  It was sick, but it was also
satirical, and controled.
A scene like this has no purpose in the film, and it sticks out from
everything else that happens.  Here's a couple other scenes: Jordan and Amy
have sex in a bath tub and Xavier watches, masturbates, and then licks the
semen from his hand; Xavier and Amy have sex and Jordan watches from the
window, masturbates, and falls backwards; a man attacks the trio, and is
stabbed in the crotch by a giant sword (put there just so this could
happen); a fast food employee stalks the trio, and his arm is shot off by
Xavier; and various other annoyances.
Also, look for about a million camoes from a wide assortment of people, who
probably didn't really know what they were getting into when they signed up
to do it (just like Peter O'Toole, Helen Mirren, Malcolm MacDowell, and
John Gielgud probably didn't when they signed to be in "Caligula").  People
such as indie actors Parker Posey and Nicky Katt, alternative rock stars
Skinny Puppy and Perry Farrel, Hollywood Madam Heidi Fleiss, Christopher
"Peter Brady" McKnight, Amanda Bearse, and Margaret Cho all grace the
screen for a matter of seconds, then disappear so that we can return to the
annoying main plot line.  Why are they here?  So that we can all point to
them and say "Hey, look it's (fill in the blank)!  Wow!"  Gimme a break.
The film's meaning is pretty easy to detect: that, you know, teens are so
precious, and the world is such a horrible place, that when the two
entities collide, there's a giant explosion of horrific violence. 
Otherwise defined as "teen angst," or the belief that being a teenager is a
horrible thing and that the world is too bad for you.  Look, I'm 19 years
old.  I went through a very brief teen angst thing which curiously lasted
about as long as my taste in Nirvana did.  I've since moved on to "I don't
really know what to do with my life" phase, but the teen angst phase is
something which is so annoyingly sophomoric and ignorant that any film that
thinks they're dealing with it on any kind of serious level is just beating
the wrong horse.
Part of being a teen is experimenting, and testing the waters.  It's not
whining about how awful parents are, and purposely feeling dispondent. 
This is what the characters in this film do, and the film wants to show how
they're these great people who are being punished by the world because
they're teenagers, and how they try to defend themselves but can't totally
overcome them.  It's not their fault they kill people; it's the world's! 
What they really need is a reality check.  The world IS a bad place, and
teenagers can be easily harmed because they are experimenting.  But part of
it is taking everything that happens to you and learning from it.  The film
thinks that teenagers are basically doomed, and there's nothing they can do
about it.  Hence the title.
Not only does it have bad fallacy, but it can't even express this in an
intelligent and coherent manner.  Everything's overly surreal, and all we
get are scenes of graphic violence and graphic sex.  How does Xavier
licking semen off his hand express teen angst?  How does a talking
decapitated head show that teens are dispondent because the world makes
them this way?  And why does the film constantly go back to the teen angst
issue of the film?  If Araki had any kind of competence in writing or
direction, he'd show them for what they really are.  And if he didn't want
the satirical approach, he'd show the real problems with the world.
And if you still don't think that "The Doom Generation" is incompetent on
every single possible level it could be, take the acting.  Rose MacGowan is
HORRIBLE.  Yes, she proved herself talented in "Scream," but she's so bad
in "The Doom Generation" that if I had not seen her in "Scream," I would
have christened her one of the worst actresses working in films today.  Her
entire performance is one-note (bitchy), and the one scene where she cries
over a dead animal is so forced that it's laughable.
Equally bad is Jonathan Schaech, who wants to be the slacker serial killer:
someone who doesn't have any remorse because emotions cause some kind of
strain.  His performance is annoying as hell, and granted, he was better in
"That Thing You Do!"
And then there's James Duval.  Let's just say he makes Keanu Reeves look
like Brando.  He has the same kind of slacker stuttering, only much much
much worse, and every line he says is so bad that I have now deemed him
"Least Talented Actor in the World."  I have seen lots of bad actors, but
James Duval has got to be the worst.  Or at least somewhere up there.
Here's another example of a bad scene, if you're still not convinced: the
film opens up in a club where they're playing Nine Inch Nail's most banal
song, "Heresy" (example of the lines: "God is Dead/and no one cares/if
there is a hell/I'll see you there"), and as the song plays, and red strobe
lights show the patrons dancing, the film pans over to Amy, just standing
there, looking dispondent.  The film closes in on her, she looks right at
the camera and says "Fuck."  No explanation of this should be necessary.
And finally, a note to Gregg: grow up.  Really.  Move out of your parent's
basement, read something other than Salinger, and get a day job.  And don't
quit it.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Brundage
Earlier in my many diatribes about the world of celluloid, I have described
my paradigm for grading a film.  The more fodder to which it provides me in
the form of raw insults, one-liners, and pot shots that need to be taken,
then a critic's level of verbosity is directly related to the cinematic
quality of the film.  The higher up the quality ladder a film goes, the more
a critic is forced to resort to oftentimes clichéd praises, such as `great
acting' or the ever-dreadful `best film of the year.'  High enough up into
the quality stratosphere, and the greatest of films initially provide almost
no response.  They're pondered over.  Introductory paragraphs are mulled
over for hours, and philosophical diatribes that earn us insults such as
`elitist prick' ensue.
In case you haven't yet caught on by the ironic tone of that BS introductory
paragraph, I really liked The Doom Generation.  In fact, it was good enough
that the initial response provoked was a sensory overload, and a mere two
words escaping my lips: `Fucked up.'  In the two years since initially
watching this masterpiece of perversion and post-apocalyptical philosophy, I
have come up with other descriptors.  Ironic.  Incredible.  Intelligent.
Sardonic.  Satirical.  Irreverent.  Beautiful.  Homoerotic.  Pensive.  In
fact, this is one of those movies where I can make up an adjective for each
letter of the alphabet to describe The Doom Generation.
Sadly, two of those adjectives happen to be `subversive' and `underground,'
resulting in a generalized lack of awareness as to what The Doom Generation
is.
The Doom Generation, put as simply as possible, is a near-apocalyptic
joyride through the netherworld of Los Angeles that takes pot shots on all
that America considers Holy and makes any ardent lover of cult films want
to bow to director Gregg Araki's greatness.
It starts off at a techno party in the land of wherever, LA, America.
Lights flash, Nine Inch Nails blares, and we are greeted with a title card
that says `A Completely Heterosexual Movie by Gregg Araki.'  Then Amy Blue
(Rose McGowan, whose largest parts have been the female lead in Jawbreaker
and playing Tatum in Scream) says, `fuck.'  Like everyone else in LA, she's
in post-riot mode.  Confused, thinking the end time is nigh but not wanting
to put it into religious terminology, and in a quasi-steady relationship
with Jordan White (James Duval).  Having gone out for a really long time (a
month), Blue and White are about to consummate their relationship in a
really cheap car when Xavier Red (Johnathon Schaech) gets into a fight right
outside, begins stabbing people, and ends up being let inside of their car.
Red, White, and Blue grab a hotel room for the night, Amy keeps being
mistaken for everyone's former girlfriend, and Red and White keep sleeping
with Blue as a way to deal with their homoerotic potential.
If you think it's crazy now, wait until the end of the movie.
One of the few films where complete and utter absurdity doesn't hurt the
plot, The Doom Generation careens down LA freeways with the top down and its
middle finger extended.  If you're able to stand a film that knows no
boundaries, then The Doom Generation is for you.  You will find pearl after
pearl of anarchistic wisdom within Gregg Araki's vision, and laugh after
laugh at the prevalence of bizarre experiences (and the number 666).  But if
you're a conservative who has somehow made it past my mentions of gay sex,
satanic imagery, metal, and a satirizing of American values, than by all
means stay away.  Lock up your children.  Find out if any relatives of Joe
McCarthy are currently in the Senate.  Otherwise, enjoy.
Director: Gregg Araki
Producer: Gregg Araki, Andrea Sperling
Writer: Gregg Araki
Starring: Rose McGowan, James Duvall, Johnathon Schaech
In order to hear about some more messed up movies, join James' mailing list:
http://filmcritic2000.listbot.com/
Short Stuff, reviews of Short Films and Hypermedia:
http://www.othercinema.com/~jbrundage/
