Title
Review for Conan the Barbarian (1982)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Disparity between popular and critically acclaimed movies
isn't something that should catch any reviewer by surprise.
On the other hand, sometimes things get a little bit
personal. In my case, I was puzzled by the low rating of a
movie I consider one of my favourite masterpieces of seventh
art. CONAN THE BARBARIAN by John Millius is, in humble
opinion of this author, one of the top ten motion pictures
ever made. However, whenever I mention that movie to the
average moviegoer, they show either disdain, ignorance or
indifference.
Unenviable status of CONAN THE BARBARIAN among movie lovers
puzzled me for years. At the beginning I was close to the
conclusion that I had been trying to find artistic
justification for my ultimate "guilty pleasure". However,
years passed and my movie taste developed enough for me to
distinguish true art from commercial trash, but my affection
for CONAN stayed the same. Finally, I was beginning to make
my own pet theory about Millius' masterpiece and that theory
can be summed up in a phrase "wrong time".
However, it looked like a good time for Dino de Laurentiis,
Italian movie producer who saw mega-success of Donner's
SUPERMAN as an impulse to start making his own movie
adaptations of popular comic books. His previous attempt in
that direction, FLASH GORDON, was successful despite being
chewed by critics, then allergic to 1970s camp.
Unfortunately, when De Laurentiis decided to make another
comic book adaptation he chose the wrong hero.
Unlike squeaky clean characters of Superman, Flash Gordon or
even Buck Rogers, Conan the Barbarian actually didn't belong
to G-rated world of simple morality virtues of late 1930s
and early 1940s. His character was indeed invented in 1930s,
but the dark imagination of tragically deceased author
Robert E. Howard (1906- 1936) kept Conan outside pulp
fiction mainstream. It was only in 1960s when, thanks to L.
Sprague de Camp and other authors, Conan was rediscovered
and later served as some kind of adult alternative to
Tolkien-inspired stereotypes in fantasy genre. However,
Conan reached the peak of its popularity in the media of
comic books, using the new standards of depictions of sex
and violence in order to make his character popular among
male teeenagers.
De Laurentiis knew that the campy and ironic approach
towards Conan's character wouldn't work. So, he needed some
real 1970s author to deal with 1970s phenomenon. The choice
fell on John Millius, one of the biggest names in so-called
"New Hollywood" of 1970s. Millius was perfect, because the
vision of Conan as lonely but free character in amoral world
was in line with Millius' own individualistic and
libertarian views.
According to many Conan purists, the plot is inconsistent
with the "canon" of Conan novels and comic books. In other
way, it uses many of Conan stories in order to make the
story both original and faithful to the works of Robert E.
Howard.  The story begins in time of Conan, some 12000 years
B.C. when the continents of Africa, Europe and Asia were
single land mass, and when many ancient but corrupt
civilizations shared the space with barbarian tribes. One of
such tribes becomes target of a raiders led by evil sorceror
and demigod Thulsa Doom (Jones) who kill all the adults and
take children into slavery. One of those children is Conan
who, thanks to years of hard work, grows up to be muscular
and extremely strong slave. Such qualities later lead him to
the career of gladiator, and, after earning freedom from his
master, he begins his personal crusade for revenge. The
quest leads him to the city of Zamora where he strikes
friendship with thieves Subotai (Lopez) and beautiful
Valeria (Bergman). After succesfully stealing jewels from
the Temple of Snake, they are approached by old King Osric
(Von Sydow), whose own daughter (Quenessen) became the
follower of Thulsa Dooom, now the leader of growing and
dangerous cult on the way to global domination. Conan
accepts the offer to return the Princess to King, although
his friends doubt his real motives.
>From the perspective of an average moviegoer, who expected
some escapist mind- blowing adventure, CONAN THE BARBARIAN
might have been a disappointment or mediocre piece of work.
Instead of an adventure, the movie is an epic story where
the plot and characters tend to be more important than the
visual and other attractions. However, the movie doesn't
lack those attractions - there are fewer action sequences
than in an average action/average movie, but they are
beautifully shot and choreographed. Also, the movie authors
paid great attention towards detail, in a quantities
unpreccedented from von Stroheim's time. Although the world
of Conan is fictious, the Millius cleverly portrayed it as
mythical vision of Bronze/Iron Age Europe, using many actual
historic details of that, in Hollywood movies generally
ignored, time period. Amounts of blood, gore, sex and nudity
that may be gratuitous in any other film , here,
paradoxically, give great deal of historical realism to the
film that is basically a mythical fantasy. But the biggest
attraction of all is Basil Poledouris' musical score, so
beautiful and perfect, that even some of the biggest critics
consider it one of the best in history of cinema.
The acting attractions are very few, but there are some
wonderful parts. CONAN THE BARBARIAN is now mostly
remembered as Arnold Schwarzenegger's first major movie
role, that later catapulted his career. Although the future
star received one of first "Razzie" anti-awards for his
performances, I must say that his role in CONAN is perhaps
the best in his career. He didn't just worked hard to make
his character as physically identical to Conan as possible,
but emotionally as well. His role is quite serious, and
lacks one-liners that would later become Schwarzenegger's
trademark. Schwarzenegger's acting partners in this movie
weren't that lucky in their later career. James Earl Jones
was probably most successful of them all, and it's thrilling
to see him here in atypical but brilliant portrayal of the
ultimate bad guy. Apart from Max von Sydow, almost everyone
else - Gerry Lopez,  Sandahl Bergman and Valerie Quenessen -
sailed to oblivion, although their parts were adequate at
worst.
Apart from the major misunderstanding between the commercial
audience and artistically ambitious movie creators, CONAN
THE BARBARIAN suffers from another, more serious problems in
his approach towards viewers. Some critics are prone to
appraise this film not on its artistic merit, but on its,
sometimes questionable, ideology. Screenplay was written by
Oliver Stone in his best screeenwriting years, but also in a
period before his attempts to become cinematic conscience of
America, and for some, his referrences to Nietzsche
philosophy are enough to brand the screenplay fascistoid.
Portrayal of Thulsa Doom's cult in a movie might be
interpreted as influenced by Nietzsche's unflattering views
on Christianity, thus making movie more anti-Christian than
some more harmless but more hyped cases (like LAST
TEMPTATION OF CHRIST, for example). However, John Millius
was definitely more involved in the screenplay, and
political overtones were lost or hidden behind Millius' own
individualistic philosophy. Anyway, even if the movie does
have some hidden "message", that message wouldn't prevent
mature viewer to enjoy in a cinematic masterpiece that is
very rare to find these days.

Author
Robert B. Marks
  Retrospective: Conan the Barbarian (1982) - By Robert B. Marks
     I wish Hollywood still made films like _Conan the
Barbarian_.  Based loosely on the stories by Robert E. Howard,
this film is an excellent example of the film-maker's art.
     Interestingly enough, the majority of the material for
_Conan the Barbarian_ does not come from the Conan stories at
all, but rather from Robert E. Howard's King Kull tales. 
However, this material is well used to create what should soon be
a classic fantasy film.
     The film begins with a young Conan receiving instruction
about "the riddle of steel" from his father.  The village is then
attacked by Thulsa Doom (James Earl Jones), and Conan is taken
into slavery.  He grows up as a slave, becomes a gladiator, is
taken to the east to learn the arts of war, and is then freed by
his master.  The now adult Conan (Arnold Schwarzenegger) begins
to wander the world in search of revenge.  In his travels he
encounters and falls in love with the lovely Valeria (Sandahl
Bergman) and becomes close friends with the archer Subotai (Gerry
Lopez) and an eccentric wizard (Mako; also the narrator).
     Where this sort of plot would usually lead to a rather dull,
unoriginal film, John Milius' direction turns it into a very high
quality tale.  The characters are well acted and generally do
intelligent things (for example, when Conan is preparing for a
battle, he puts on armour).  The story is told more with images
and music than dialogue, and Basil Poledouris' incredible score
helps create an unforgettable movie.  James Earl Jones is perhaps
the great star of the cast; his Thulsa Doom is both hypnotic and
believable.
     Also, unlike most fantasy films, _Conan the Barbarian_ is a
very intelligent film that keeps the viewer thinking long after
it has ended.  The riddle of steel is a mystery which rightfully
remains unsolved, and one is left realizing that, while evil,
Thulsa Doom always speaks the truth.  Towards the end, he tells
Conan: "Without me, you will have never been", revealing an
essential fact about great men: they are made by their enemies.
     It is not, however, a film for children or young teenagers. 
The violence is generally graphic and explosively bloody, and
there are several scenes of nudity.  Also, the younger audience
probably wouldn't fully understand all that there is to _Conan_;
unlike too many of its successors, this film is very subtle.
     Unfortunately, the film does not actually depict Robert E.
Howard's Conan.  The chronology of the character is wrong, and
the mercenary and vulgar Conan is changed into a quiet and
introspective one.  Valeria also bears little resemblance to the
character that appears in _Red Nails_, and Thulsa Doom does not
come from the Conan stories at all; he comes from the era of King
Kull (some 20,000 or so years earlier).
     However, all in all _Conan the Barbarian_ is a film which
set a new standard for fantasy in Hollywood; a standard which is
rarely met.  Between memorable images, an incredible score, and a
well-told story, it is worthy of becoming a classic.
     So, the final score: 4.5/5; it would have gotten 5/5 if
Conan had actually borne some resemblance to what Robert E.
Howard wrote, but that's Hollywood for you...
