Title
Review for "Riget II" (1997) (mini)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dan Reed
CHECKING BACK INTO THE KINGDOM : NOTES ON PART 2
Last night I went to see THE KINGDOM PART 2, one of the closing night
features of the New York Film Festival. Not unexpectedly both screenings
were sold out well ahead of time, and on arriving at Walter Reade
Theatre I noticed several people holding small hand lettered signs
looking for spare tickets. Despite program notes indicating the new
series could be viewed as a stand-alone feature,
it's my opinion that it would be a bit difficult to enjoy this one on as
many levels without being familiar with the first four episodes. The
following review contains no major spoilers as I hate reviewers that
tell you the whole story in synoptic detail. 
More like the second season of a TV show than a sequel, K2 begins with
the same spooky introduction seen in the original and opens with episode
5 picking up the story only days after the events of the previous
installment. I found the overall tone of this season much lighter than
the first, at times it ventured close to realms of self parody and
slapstick. The creepy stingers that climaxed the original episodes have
been replaced with more of a cliff hanger ambiance here. The photography
is just as grainy as before, looking practically solarized in places.
One frequently employed bit of visual shorthand is a sort of nightscope
type perspective that represents the POV of the hospital's "evil force",
a bit cliched perhaps but nonetheless effective here. 
While previously the nature of the malevolent force was explained in
terms of a sinister ghost story (a young girl named Mary had haunted the
hospital because of her violent death and lack of proper burial, with
her victimizer Dr Aage Kruger reaching into the physical world via his
relationship with Judith, seen giving birth to their "child" at the end
of Part 4 ), the spectre haunting the Kingdom this time is even more
diabolical. It seems that Satan himself may have taken an interest in
the Kingdom. 
Much of the focus here is on the dichotomy between good and evil that
exists in a high stress environment like the Kingdom. While ghosts and
worse continue to flourish here, most of the evil is perpetrated by all
too human forces. As the two Down's Syndrome Dishwashers point out :
silliness (and bad judgment) can open the door to evil. The ghostly
ambulance that figured so prominently in the original has been taken
over for gambling purposes. (the modern equivalent of Roman Chariot
races according to one character). A driver known as Falcon performs a
nightly "chicken run" in an all too corporeal ambulance against oncoming
traffic giving jaded hospital personnel something to wager on. The
spectral becomes the speculative, good characters turn evil, and what
seems like a monster makes the greatest sacrifice in the name of love.
While all the story threads are picked up and continued forward, nothing
turns out exactly as you might expect. 
All of the original characters return, with many of the minor roles from
the first series greatly expanded here, and a few intersting new ones
thrown in for proper measure. 
In particular is the triangle between the three featured interns ; Mogge
(Peter Mygind) the son of Dr. Moesgaard (Holger Juul Hansen) the
Administrative head of the Kingdom. Mogge is still the same
self-interested bastard he seemed to be in Eps 1-4 (where he stole a
human head in order to impress a female colleague) ; Sanne (Louise
Fribo), the young woman unable to view real surgery but still
fascinated by splatter films; and Christian (Ole Boisen) an innocent
corrupted by his desire to alter Sanne's mundane impression of him. 
Also playing a larger role this time is the Director General (Henning
Jensen), the business head of the Kingdom, whose efforts to maximize the
hospital's profit potential conflicts with the Consultants' (the Secret
Lodge's) desire to retain the status quo. 
Stig Helmer (Ernst-Hugo Jaregard) makes a dynamic return from Haiti
(with the Zombie formula) ready to continue to do ANYTHING to save
himself from legal complications resulting from his botched brain
surgery on Mona. His tirades against the "Danish scum!" continue as the
pressure on him mounts. However a secondary concern regarding his own
mortality dominates his thoughts as he becomes scatologically obsessed
thanks to Dr. Moesgaard's joking advice. 
Dr. Rigmor (Ghita Norby) (betrayed by Helmer in Episode 4, because of
his flight to Haiti), seems to have recovered from her anger (if you
recall she was shooting rats in the basement when last we saw her). But
a new fascination with predatory animals only hints at the true nature
of her feelings toward Stig. 
Dr. Moesgaard, stressed out from the failure of his "Operation Sunshine"
and the bizarre events of the first four episodes, seeks counseling from
an unlikely source in the hospital. A task made difficult by the
doctor's what you see is what you get personality. Moesgaard's
re-awakened interest in erotica (part of his therapy) leads to one of
the series' most amusing sequences. Lars von Trier's satire on group
therapy here seems a bit dated, but perhaps Denmark is only just now
catching up to the West in this area. 
Dr. Krogen (Soren Pilmark, the 'Anthony Edwards'of this spooky 'ER')
tries to maintain his promise to "love Judith's child as if it were his
own", while plotting to remain in control of Helmer's fate. Of all the
characters Krogen goes through the biggest personality changes. 
Mrs. Drusse (Kirsten Rolffes) is still very much in tune with the
spiritual side of the Kingdom. Ready to be discharged from the hospital
at the start of Part 5 she has reservations about leaving sensing that
her job is not yet over (despite having sent Mary peacefully to the
other side in Part 4). She is soon given reason to stay. Bulder (Jens
Okking, my second favorite character/actor) continues to be an unwilling
ally in his mum's psychic endeavors. 
Dr. Bondo (Baard Owe) still carrying the malignant tumor inside him gets
the respect of his class via his somewhat mystical approach to science.
Meanwhile as his condition continues to worsen he discovers that DNA may
not mean as much to fate as he suspected when another person on the
hospital staff is revealed to be his half-brother. 
Udo Keir who has certainly played a wide variety of oddball roles in his
films gets what will quite likely be the weird high watermark of his
career as the bizarre baby whose birth climaxed the first series.
Amazingly Lars von Trier picks up this thread without cheating any of
the obvious expectations derived from watching the closing moments of
Part 4. 
If you saw the first series you WILL want to see this one, and I'm sure
you'll enjoy it. Despite the more humorous tone of this time out, you
don't get the sense of creative stagnation evident in the second season
of TWIN PEAKS (a show frequently used as niche reference to describe the
tone of THE KINGDOM). All the varied threads have a logical dramatic
path, helping to embellish the overall mythos of the series rather than
repeat it. Lars von Trier does not appear again at the end of the fourth
episode, but he does manage to pull one unexpected trick on fans of this
series, which I won't give away, except to say it was something that
didn't seem to bother anyone at the packed screening I attended. 
The running time listed in the Festival program at 249 minutes was
actually closer to five hours even. There was an OCTOBER FILMS logo at
the start of the screening which leads me to suspect that this film will
be playing in many of the same venues as the first within a few months
time.

Author
Richard Scheib
Denmark. 1997. Directors - Morton Arnfred & Lars von Trier, Teleplay - 
von Trier, Tumas Gislason & Niels Vorsel, Photography - Erik Kress, 
Music - Joachim Holbeck, Special Effects - Lars Holding Andersen & 
Arnette Rolfshoj, Makeup Effects - Kim & Lis Olsson, Production Design - 
Jette Lehmann & Mans Cmr. Lindholm. Production Company - DH TV/Danish 
Broadcasting Corporation/Zentropa Entertainment.
Ernst Hugo Jaregard (Dr Stig Helmer), Holger Juul Hansen (Dr Einar 
Moesgaard), Kirsten Rolffes (Sigrid Drusse), Soren Pilmark (Kroshoj), 
Peter Mygind (Mogge Moesgaard), Birgitte Raaberg (Judith), Ghita Norby 
(Rigmor), Udo Kier (Little Brother/Dr Aage Krueger), Jens Okking (Bulder 
Drusse), Erik Wedersoe (Ole), Ole Boisen (Christian), Louise Fribo 
(Sanne), Baard Owe (Professor Bondo), Vita Jensen & Morten Rotne-Leffers 
(Dishwashers), Henning Jensen (Bob), Birthe Neumann (Mrs Svendsen)
Plot: At The Kingdom hospital in Copenhagen, Stig Helmer returns from 
Haiti with a potion with which he intends to turn his rival Kroshoj into 
a zombie but this goes astray and Stig must find and revive Kroshoj's 
corpse before he is arrested for murder. Meanwhile Judith, having been 
impregnated by the ghost of Dr Aage Krueger, has given birth to a freak 
baby which has an adult's head, a giant elongated body and a soul that 
is half-human, half-Devil, and is now wanted by Aage Krueger who is in 
reality Satan.
The 1994 Danish four-part tv mini-series `The Kingdom' was given a 
cinematic release in arthouse theatres in English-speaking countries 
where it was split into two two and-a-half hour parts. There the name of 
co-director Lars von Trier, then riding high on the success of 1991's 
Cannes hit `Zentropa' aka `Europa', was sufficient to carry it to 
audiences. The result was a delightfully eccentric piece of black comedy 
that suggested a head-on collision between `Twin Peaks' and `ER'. The 
series however was left unfinished, ending on the cliffhanger of the 
birth of the ghost-impregnated baby and a `to be continued' credit. But 
true to their word von Trier, co-director Morton Arnfred and the entire 
cast return here three years later to continue the saga, which once 
again aired as a four-part mini-series in Denmark and has elsewhere been 
released as a theatrical two-parter.
However `The Kingdom II', although not unenjoyable, is a relative 
disappointment over its predecessor. There is a certain ricketiness to 
the story. It comes with the distinct sense that von Trier and Arnfred 
are not so much continuing a story that is waiting to be completed than 
they are fairly much making the saga up as they go along. Many aspects 
of the original have undergone noticeable changes. The character of Dr 
Aage Krueger (played by Udo Kier) goes from the shadowy figure of a 
doctor who killed a young girl in the first mini-series to now become 
The Devil himself; the ghost ambulance from the first mini-series is now 
unconvincingly passed off as being a group of med students conducting 
daredevil bets. And the pivotal character of Mary, the ghost of the 
little girl that haunted the hospital in the first mini-series, is 
almost entirely dropped from the sequel bar a token dream appearance. 
Further the tone of the second series seems to have changed somewhat - 
with the sidelining of the character of Mary and the sequel's principal 
concentration on the more mundane fates of the various lead characters, 
the series loses much of the eerie sense of otherworldliness that 
hovered over the first series. Although there is some substitute in the 
bizarre scenes with Udo Kier playing a baby that has an adult head and a 
twelve-foot tall elongated body, wailing to his mother and cooingly 
dreaming of the future they might lead together.
This series at times feels overly long but it is largely carried by its 
sense of black comedy. Chief among which is Ernst Hugo Jaregard's 
hilarious performance once again as the conniving, disgruntled Swedish 
surgeon. There are some highly amusing scenes in his ongoing battles to 
avoid bailiffs or in mixing up which coffee cup he has placed a voodoo 
potion in during a staff conference or his plans to zombify his rival 
which keep going wrong. Birthe Neumann has an extremely funny part as an 
overly efficient secretary, who, after the decision that costs must be 
kept down by buying low denomination stamps, pops up to ask whereabouts 
on a letter entirely covered by stamps she is meant to place the 
address. Although the most hysterical sequence in the entire film is the 
character of a Jamaican faith healer who wanders in to heal a concussed 
Kirsten Rolffes and removes a large clump of bloody tissue from the back 
of her head and eats it, noting "It's the next best substitute since 
they took the Vitamin C out of Danish beer."
The biggest downside to the sequel is the end credit `to be continued' 
and the realization that one has sat through another five hours with no 
end in sight and that this means another three years and another five 
hours to wait for the saga to be wrapped up, if that.
Reviewed at the 1998 Wellington International Film Festival
Copyright Richard Scheib 1998

