Title
Review for Elevator, The (2001) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
THE ELEVATOR (2001)
Rated TV-PG; running time 48 minutes
Genre: Drama
Article about the movie:
   http://www.southend.wayne.edu/days/9800/front.htm
Written by: Gail Parrish
   (winner of the "2001 Dreambuilder Celebration Scribe" award)
Directed by: Jim Friedman
Cast: Christopher B. Duncan, Greg Lauren, Elizabeth Berkley,
Leslie McCurdy, Matthew Jaeger, Michael R. Hays, Jill Courtney Chenault,
Vincent Clark, Council Cargle, Michael "Melik" Brown, James Bonadio,
Stephanie Massacki, Emily E. Podleski
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamselevator.html
For a neat "six degrees of separation" connection I almost had with this
movie, check out ">http://www.3blackchicks.com/elevator6degrees.html> -
then come back and read the rest of this review.  I'll wait.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Charles Baxter (Bruce) is a White, highly-paid power attorney
representing Rich White Guy Robert Jessip (Michael R. Hays), a racist
tyrant who wants to put a plant in a Black community that's taken for
granted because it doesn't have much power to fight against the likes of
Jessip.  Charles' wife Celeste (Elizabeth Berkley) thinks he's sold his
ethics to the highest bidder, and appeals to Charles' colleague Carter
(Matthew Jaeger) for help in showing Charles the way back to the
idealistic law student he used to be.
Meanwhile, on the other side of town...Bruce (Christopher B. Duncan), a
Black janitor, is haunted by demons in his past, and is set to go off
Any Minute Now.  His wife Cheryl (Leslie McCurdy) fears the consequences
of his actions, for their sake as well as for the future of their son
(Vincent Clark).
Charles and Bruce step into an elevator at the courthouse, and THE
ELEVATOR breaks down just before Charles is set to give his closing
arguments - and Charles is confronted with that which makes Bruce such
an Angry Black Man.  What do Bruce and Charles - two men as different as
Night and Day - have in common?  Hmmm...
The Upshot:
Let me say this right now: you have to ignore some Basic Rules Of
Civilized Living while watching this short film.  For instance, you must
forget the reality that cellphones just do not work in elevators;
really, when was the last time you got into a lift, and could talk
without that dreaded "signal lost" message popping up?  Yet, Charles and
Carter have no trouble freely conversing on their cells.  Uh huh.  And
while you're ignoring the Law Of Broken Connections, you might as well
let your Disbelief stay Suspended up there when watching: Carter "tell"
the Judge (Council Cargle) to Talk To The Hand (and doesn't get his
little butt whupped!)...and the strange lack of any outside concern (or
rescue workers) for the broken elevator...and the
ObBlack-Female-Neck-Twisting done by Jill Courtney Chenault; very
out-of-place, considering she played the supposedly-professional
Prosecuting Attorney...and especially any scenery chewed up by the
wildly overacting Michael R. Hays (as fat cat Robert Jessip),
desperately trying to pad each of his 15 Minutes Of Fame with some of
the most ridiculous stuntacting I've seen in awhile.
But these are all minor inconveniences when weighed against the
near-brilliance shown by the two leads, Christopher B. Duncan as Bruce
[the Black Man so Angry, he doesn't have a last name!], and Greg Lauren
as Charles "Goldie" Baxter [hey, he has three names...probably stole one
from Bruce...]  Duncan and Lauren's performances were strong enough to
overcome the niggling issues I'd normally be obsessed with, in a lesser
movie (and truthfully, considering the time and budget limitations
Friedman found himself under, the cast and crew did an admirable job).
I kept having Superman moments when watching Lauren - who bears a
striking resemblance to a young Christopher Reeves - but his acting was
solid, and given the storyline, quite believable.  And Duncan kept me in
mind of Lawrence Fishburne; though Duncan's scowl often threatened to be
his only means of facial expression, the forcefulness of his character's
convictions, and the interesting interaction between these two actors,
was quite exciting to see.
Of the supporting cast, Leslie McCurdy as Bruce's wife Cheryl, wasn't
given much to do - but her tender scene with Bruce was nicely
understated, and vital in providing some insight into where Bruce was
coming from; and as Charles' wife Celeste, Elizabeth Berkley stayed just
on this side of cloying; she threatened to cross into "irritant"
territory, but avoided the hazards inherent in having such a short
amount of time to blend "activist" and "shrew" into a cognitive whole.
Credit must certainly given to writer Gail Parrish for writing her
script in a way which allowed Bruce's story to unfold as it did, leaving
us, like Goldie, to discover the truth rather than be hit upside the
head with it.  And though flashbacks were used a bit more than I
might've liked (not to mention the...interesting...costuming choices),
credit, too, goes to director Jim Friedman for creating an almost
claustrophobic feeling between the two men - and by extension, this
black and white society in which we live.  Taken as a microcosm of the
Issues we in America have with separating past from present, personal
from institutional, and guilt from responsibility, THE ELEVATOR is well
worth watching - and discussing afterwards.
On his TIME SLOT cable show, in response to my statement that racism is
a learned condition, Melik (host of TIME SLOT, and, yes, that Melik: the
"Reporter" listed in the credits above.  Watch for his performance, in
"Elevator" y'all; and if you haven't already, check out my 6 Degrees
tale.  But I digress.)...uh, Melik once asked me if racism can then be
unlearned.  I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that
movies like THE ELEVATOR, "prove" that racism, like all forms of
ignorance, can indeed be unlearned.  Maybe not as tidily, in an hour or
less.  But I gotta believe it can be.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
A good premise at base by writer Gail Parrish (despite problems in
execution of that premise), and solid performances by Christopher B.
Duncan and Greg Lauren, lift THE ELEVATOR to laudable heights.
THE ELEVATOR (rating: greenlight):
I still wish I'd had the chance to review my son in it, though.
