Title
Review for Disappearance of Garcia Lorca, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
Wars are terrible but civil wars are even worse . . . brother
against brother.  I remember well the circumstances of the Spanish
Civil War in 1936 when Generalissimo Francisco Franco lead a revolt
against the duly elected democratic government. Large amounts of
armaments and planes were given to the rebels by Hitler and
Mussolini.  The term "The Fifth Column" (which took on the meaning
of "traitor")  came from that war.    While the Soviet Union sent
meager help to the Republic of Spain and while many young people
from all around the world enlisted in the International Brigade to
fight for the Republic; and while Americans volunteered and formed
The Lincoln Brigade, the United States, under President Franklin
Delano Roosevelt chose to continue our anti-Communist foreign policy
(pretty much as we still do . . . witness Cuba) regardless of whose
bed we had to sleep in.  "We" were neutral; that meant we would not
sell to either side.    That meant a democratic government, a
coalition of many parties, would be overthrown.
Many, but not enough, people saw that war as the prelude to World
War II. This was where the German and Italian military could engage
in real maneuvers, gaining experience for the invasions of Europe
that were soon to follow.
There, in the city of Granada in Spain, was where the poet Garcia
Lorca tried with his words to enlighten and rally the people against
the Franco dictatorship. It was his words that the fascist
government feared and so they finally stopped him from speaking.
In this dramatic and powerful film, Lorca (Andy Garcia)
"disappears," taken in custody never to be seen again.   Ricardo
(Esai Morales) was a mere 14-years- old when he first met Garcia
Lorca at a performance of a play by the poet. Lorca became his idol.
When Ricardo's family moved to Puerto Rico, Ricardo became a
journalist whose mission was to return to Spain and find out exactly
who killed Lorca.    The book he is writing about that event needs
an ending.
Warned that the fascist government would harass him, or worse, if he
goes back to Spain, as they had years ago beaten his father, he
nevertheless is driven to return and solve the mystery of Garcia
Lorca's last moments.
This is a fascinating film that shows the sinister government at
work, routing people from their homes, arresting them and beating
them.    Unfortunately, it is still going on in too many countries
around the world.    Because people being what they are, trusted
friends turn out to be  unworthy.   Friends spy on and reveal the
whereabouts of those "wanted" by the government.
Many are the sub-stories, and love interest, that are scattered
throughout the film.   This production boasts a marvelous cast who
help make it a must-see film.   In addition to the gripping
performances of those already mentioned, there is Maria Eugencia
(Marcela Walerstien) who loves Ricardo;  the taxi driver, (Giancarlo
Giannini); Lozano (Edward James Olmos);  Colonel Aguirre (Jeroen
Krabbe);  Centeno (Miguel Ferrer); Gabino, the bullfighter, (Emilio
Munoz) who knows something about Lorca's last moments.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The great Spanish poet Federico Garcia Lorca died in the Spanish
Civil War.  That much is much is known.  THE DISAPPEARANCE OF GARCIA
LORCA is a fictional tale, based on two books by Ian Gibson, that
postulates what might have happened, but, as the opening credits admit,
the exact circumstances of his death remain an enigma.
     Andy Garcia, filmed with heavy backlighting and in a warm golden
haze, plays the poet Lorca as a kind of literary saint.  With his suits
as white as clerical robes and with his words read with the force of
gospels, Garcia gives a moving performance, although Garcia always
appears to be playing himself as much as any character.  If you've
recently seen him in HOODLUM, you have to remind yourself that he has
changed roles and is now the good guy and not the bad.
     Juan Ruiz-Anchia's cinematography and Gil Parrondo's sets for this
Granada-based film are gorgeous.  The white stone of the buildings are
set off by blowing leaves of orange and gold, and the picturesque
Alhambra lies majestically in the background.  All the while, Mark
McKenzie's Spanish music puts you in a dreamy mood.
     The story is told in flashback by Ricardo, played a bit too
earnestly by Esai Morales.  Ricardo leaves his new home in Puerto Rico
in 1954 to return home to Spain.  Writing a book on his beloved Lorca,
whom he met briefly when Ricardo was 14, he goes back to find the truth
about Lorca's death and to tie up loose ends in his own life.
     Although the countryside looks placid, it isn't.  Big goons follow
Ricardo everywhere.  And like most stories of this kind, he ignores
numerous warnings to leave and seems not to notice people tailing him
until it is almost too late.
     The story follows a picture puzzle approach with Ricardo trying to
figure out where each piece goes.  Along the way, he meets a string of
characters in a story that suffers from being too disconnected.  First
a character will seem a villain, and then it will be revealed that not
he but someone else should be blamed for past misdeeds.  Edward James
Olmos shows up, for example, as Roberto Lozano, the man who arranged
for Lorca to be arrested and put in jail.  Roberto, now a publisher of
the definitive collection of Lorca's writings, claims he was just
protecting Lorca.
     The script by Neil Cohen, Juan Antonio Ramos and Marcos Zurinaga
is alive with vivid imagery when reading directly from Lorca's poetry
-- the best being his "...  at five in the afternoon" poem.  In
contrast, the rest of the flat dialog has little resonance.  Typical of
the pedestrian lines is the warning of Colonel Aguirre (Jeroen Krabbe).
"Ricardo, watch yourself," he says in a line straight out of a B-movie.
"One doesn't ask certain questions."
     After a series of increasing predictable plot twists, the
exceedingly handsome picture makes one last switcheroo.  For my money,
I'd rather have junked the story and let Andy Garcia spend the time
reading Lorca's works.  He did it with such flourish and panache that
it would have been easy to stay for two hours of it.  Sadly, these
recitations make up less than ten minutes of THE DISAPPEARANCE OF
GARCIA LORCA.  Like the Cheshire cat, the story should have disappeared
leaving only the poetry.
     THE DISAPPEARANCE OF GARCIA LORCA runs 1:54.  The film is in
English.  It is rated R for violence, profanity, sex, and nudity.  The
film would be fine for most teenagers.  Although the narrative is too
confusing, the poetry and the images are enough for me to recommend the
film and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
