Title
Review for Charlie's Angels (2000)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by McG.
Cast: Drew Barrymore, Cameron Diaz, Lucy Liu, Bill Murray, Sam Rockwell, 
Kelly Lynch, Crispin Glover, Tim Curry, Luke Wilson, Tom Green, Matt LeBlanc, 
LL Cool J.
2000 - 98 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for violence, profanity, and sexual innuendo).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 4, 2000.
After months of alleged production delays, casting and script problems, and 
endless rumors of on-set arguments, "Charlie's Angels," a big-screen 
adaptation of the cult '76-'81 television series (starring Jaclyn Smith and 
Farrah Fawcett, among others), seemed doomed for catastrophic failure. After 
all, when was the last time we saw a TV-show-turned-feature-film that was 
worthwhile, particularly when the budget was an overblown $90-million? 
Moreover, the terrible teaser trailer, with the three lead actresses 
performing their martial arts moves in front of a fiery background, was not 
exactly cause to break out the champagne glasses.
Imagine, then, the delightful surprise of watching the finished product and 
gradually realizing that I haven't had this much fun at the movies all year. 
In a nutshell, "Charlie's Angels" is an unequivocal success--a highly 
entertaining, funny, exciting, no-holds-barred, bubblegum triumph of the way 
to make a great action-comedy, as well as a rambunctious female empowerment 
fantasy.
Tough-girl Dylan (Drew Barrymore), sexy sweetheart Natalie (Cameron Diaz), 
and ultra-intelligent Alex (Lucy Liu) are Charlie's Angels: a trio of strong 
young women who work for mystery millionaire Charlie (voiced by John Forsythe 
and never seen) and his personal assistant Bosley (Bill Murray) to keep the 
world safe from nasty villains and megalomaniacs. Their latest mission is to 
rescue an electronics genius by the name of Knox (Sam Rockwell), who has been 
kidnapped by wealthy thief Roger Corwin (Tim Curry) and his silent henchman 
(Crispin Glover).
A comedic rendition of the countless James Bond flicks--only twenty times 
more fun and original--"Charlie's Angels" is not so much about its thin 
storyline as it is about the refreshingly lightweight style which feature 
film debut director McG (whose previous credits include several music videos) 
evokes. From the stunning opening sequence that begins on an airplane and 
ends on a sailboat, to the climax set around an ancient castle alongside the 
California coast, director McG clearly knows exactly how to balance all of 
his various genres, including action, comedy, and romance, for optimum 
effect. The movie is far-fetched, yet so shamelessly tongue-in-cheek as to 
never seem anything less than innocently believable.
If there was ever any on-set strife between the cast members, you won't find 
any signs of it here. Each actor finds just the perfect tone for their 
character, and they all elicit an overwhelming joy of performing. 
Actress-producer Drew Barrymore (1999's "Never Been Kissed") has found in her 
character of Dylan a chance to show off her comic flair to a greater effect 
than she ever has before. Cameron Diaz (1999's "Being John Malkovich"), as 
Natalie, is hilariously klutzy, yet smart, and has a smile so warm and 
beautiful that she sells every moment she appears here. Rounding out the 
angels is Lucy Liu (2000's "Shanghai Noon"), as streetwise Alex, who provides 
a welcome contrast to her tonally sunnier costars, and equips herself in her 
kung-fu-style action sequences quite nicely. Together, Barrymore, Diaz, and 
Liu are charismatic joys who obviously had just as much fun making the film 
as it is to watch it.
Adding an extra amount of amusement to the proceedings is the constant stream 
of costume changes the actresses goes through, as they head undercover posing 
in different disguises. There is particular entertainment to be had in a 
sequence in which Barrymore and Diaz crossdress, while the leather-clad, 
whip-striking Liu poses as a dominatrix-cum-efficiency-expert and bewitches 
every student in the class.
The supporting cast is appropriately over-the-top, and all the more enjoyable 
because of it. Bill Murray (1998's "Rushmore") returns to his purely jokey 
roots with Bosley, and makes a big impression with a not-so-large role. Sam 
Rockwell (1999's "The Green Mile") is lively and magnetic as the kidnapped 
Knox; Tim Curry is at his slimy best as Roger Corwin; and Tom Green (2000's 
"Road Trip"), Matt LeBlanc (TV's "Friends"), and Luke Wilson (1999's "Blue 
Streak") are effective as the gals' love interests.
Special notice must be made to Crispin Glover (2000's "Nurse Betty"), whose 
brooding role as The Thin Man is one of the most memorably nasty and 
appropriately animated villains to come around in years. Watch Glover 
closely; he doesn't have one line of dialogue throughout, but simply by the 
drifty way in which he carries himself and smokes his cigarettes, as if he 
were a famed magician performing his most popular trick, does he create a 
wholly fresh and despicably enjoyable character.
With sunny, attractive cinematography; fast-paced editing; a sharply clever 
screenplay by Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon, and John August; a standout soundtrack 
that wittily includes innumerable songs featuring the word, "angel," in them, 
as well as a nice mixture of music from the '70s, '80s, '90s, and the present 
day; and awesome stunts not matched since last summer's "Mission: Impossible 
2," "Charlie's Angels" is a film that is unquestionably better than it has 
any right to be. The movie makes no halfhearted effort to be anything more 
than a happily diverting popcorn film, and by doing so, exceeds the viewer's 
highest expectations. By being unpretentious in the extreme, it is the most 
invigorating thing that has happened to the action genre in the last decade. 
"Charlie's Angels" is F-U-N, the type of movie the term, 'rollicking good 
time,' was invented for.

Author
Steve Rhodes
They're back!  Those three fearsome crime fighters who work for 
anonymous millionaire Charlie Townsend (voice of John Forsythe), a.k.a. 
Charlie's Angels, are back in their big screen debut.  Perfectly cast 
with Cameron Diaz as Natalie, Drew Barrymore as Dylan, Lucy Liu as Alex, 
and Bill Murray as Charlie's faithful lieutenant, Bosley, the movie 
takes us on a high-energy ride that is pure campy fun.
In his feature film debut, music video director McG doesn't have a clue 
as to how to tell a story, and all of the writers attached to the 
project, which include, but are probably not limited to, Ryan Rowe, Ed 
Solomon and John August, are not much help.  But this is a film in which 
you just kick back and enjoy some high kicking gals wallop everything in 
sight.  Borrowing liberally from many other films, CHARLIE'S ANGELS 
steals the most from THE MATRIX.  In fact, it probably has more slow 
motion martial arts action than will be in all three MATRIX pictures 
combined.  Cheung-Yan Yuen deserves a special mention for his 
supervising of the film's over-the-top martial arts special effects.  
Even if a bit repetitive, they are the second best part of the movie.
What really makes the show shine are the three female leads, who are 
convincingly tough, smart and, most of all, funny.  The actresses appear 
to be having a ball, and we vicariously share in their romp.  (Yes, 
there were reports of tension on the set, but the movie shows none of 
these rumored difficulties.)
As in the James Bond movies, sexual innuendo and humorously revealing 
costumes provide much of the story's merriment.  "Hey, I signed those 
release papers, so you can just stick things in my slot," Natalie, with 
an exuberant and sweetly innocent smile, tells her UPS delivery man.  
Later, in one of the film's best sequences, she cheerfully talks to her 
would-be boyfriend, a bartender named Pete (Luke Wilson), on her cell 
phone while fighting for her life.  He offers to call her back, but he 
remains clueless as to his intended love's real occupation.
All of the boyfriends serve as straight men to showcase the women's 
their comedic skills.  Matt LeBlanc plays an actor on a set, and Alex 
comes on location to cook for him.  A truly awful cook, Alex's worst 
specialty is her "Chinese Fighter Muffins," which can be deadly.   
The weirdest and least successful of the boyfriends is played by Tom 
Green, who was hilarious in ROAD TRIP.  This time he is an out-to-lunch 
fisherman who refers to himself as The Chad and drives his boat like a 
little old lady.
The movie gets a lot of comedic mileage from Joseph G. Aulisi's costumes 
alone.  The angels go from German yodelers in short skirts to massage 
parlor geishas.  The best, however, has Alex dressed like a dominatrix 
and the other two dressed in drag.  In the latter outfit, Alex is an 
efficiency expert from Hell, who comes to a software company to lecture 
a room full of nerdy engineers dressed in geeky white shirts.  As she 
pounds the table with her black riding stick, row after row of software 
programmers jump straight up in the air in a scene reminiscent of PINK 
FLOYD THE WALL.
Our 3 action heroes are not above providing each other a lot of girlish 
advice such as "flip your hair" to attract the opposite sex.  It works, 
by the way, but I suspect that having Cameron Diaz's face is the real 
key to its success.
So is there a story?  Yes, but it is so inconsequential and contrived 
that there's little point in discussing it.  This much I will reveal.  
The producers clearly think, correctly, that the movie will make a 
bundle so they've made sure that they end it in such a way as to make a 
sequel possible.  All we have to do is ask by buying lots of tickets.  
My guess is that we will.  CHARLIE'S ANGELS is far from a great movie, 
but it is entertaining and fun, which is more than I can say about most 
recent movies.
CHARLIE'S ANGELS runs 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for action violence, 
innuendo and some sensuality and would be acceptable for kids around 11 
and older.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, said that he really liked it and gave ***.  He 
mentioned how much it borrowed from THE MATRIX.  Overall, he liked the 
martial arts but wished that it would have had a little more story.  
(Don't we all.)
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Steve Kong
I don't remember watching the TV series Charlie's Angels, given that the 
show premiered when I was about a year old, I guess that's why.  Now, 
Charlie's Angels is a big screen movie starring big name stars that I 
recognize.  How's the movie?
Remember this summer's Mission: Impossible 2?  Great film, but it lacked a 
sort of fun to it.  I loved M:I-2 since John Woo directed it, but the movie 
did take itself a little too seriously.  Imagine Charlie's Angels as M:I-2 
with the seriousness taken out and a lot of fun added in.
Three angels, absolutely gorgeous angels might I add, work for a man 
they've never seen, his name is Charlie.  These angels, Natalie (Cameron 
Diaz), Dylan (Drew Barrymore), and Alex (Lucy Liu), are trained to do 
everything.  Charlie guides them along via a proxy, Bosley (Bill 
Murray).  The opening sequence of the film sets the tone for the rest of 
the film, it takes place on an airliner and it is explosive.
The plot for Charlie's Angels is quite thin, something to do about a 
kidnapping, a satellite, voice recognition, and plain old revenge.  But, 
that doesn't matter because the film is more about mindless fun and action, 
oh and lots of cleavage.  And it delivers on all counts of this.  Complete 
with mind-bending computer enhanced and ever so fake looking martial arts, 
explosions, car chases, helicopters, and did I mention explosions, 
Charlie's Angels is a summer film trapped in a fall release date.
There's not much I can say about the film.  It's mindless and it's 
fun.  The actresses are great in their roles and all of them savor 
it.  Diaz steals every scene she's in.  Barrymore is wonderful.  And Liu is 
great.  Murray does some great scenes in the movie in which he improvises 
and these scenes are laugh out loud funny.
The director, Joseph McGinty Nichol (credited on the film as McG), knows 
how to put together a wham-bang film.  He uses slow motion well, as if he's 
studied John Woo's film with great care.  He puts together action sequences 
that will satisfy any adrenaline junky.    Kudos to McG for putting 
together such a fun movie.
Well, like I said before, there is not much I can say about this film but 
Don't Miss it.  This is a Don't Miss film, catch it in the theatres.  It's 
nice to have a post-summer adrenaline rush type film like this in late fall.

Author
Homer Yen
Incredibly, Hollywood has the courage to create yet
again another feature-length film based on a classic
TV show.  You may remember a recent handful of similar
attempts that have made disastrous transitions from
the small screen to the silver screen.  These
forgettable projects included "The Avengers," "The Mod
Squad," and "Shaft."  Received poorly by audiences and
critics alike, all were money-losing debacles.  
This time around, the latest attempt is the
resurrection of "Charlie's Angels," the jiggly and
feathery-haired 70's detective show.  Would this
update suffer the same fate as those other fiascoes? 
The project certainly had many studio executives
scratching their heads in doubt as the film underwent
massive rewrites and last-minute reshoots.  Gossip
also surfaced that there were severe creative
differences among the stars, and in particular,
between Lucy Liu (who plays Alex, the techno-whiz
Angel) and Bill Murray (who plays Bosley, Charlie's
avuncular assistant).  Meanwhile, production costs
skyrocketed to $90 million while people began to
wonder about the viability of a film that was taken
from a show that had scripts that were so light. 
Original Angel, Kate Jackson, once mused that "it
would take a week to get to the floor if you dropped
it from the ceiling."
Happily, reports of its demise are greatly
exaggerated.  The new "Charlie's Angels," as it turns
out, is an unabashed romp.  It's a fine mix of action,
camp and self-parody.  I'm surprised to say this, but
this is the most fun that I've had at the movies in
weeks!
If you've seen the television show, then you're
familiar with the setup.  Three beautiful women (Drew
Barrymore, Cameron Diaz, and Lucy Liu) work together
as an elite trio of detectives who receive their
assignment over speakerphone from the disembodied
voice of Charlie (spoken, as in the original show, by
Baritone-voiced John Forsythe).  Of course, they're
still glamorous and great to look at.  But these new
Angels have powered up.  They aren't shy about
employing their saucy feminine wiles.  Their
impressive skill sets range widely from speaking
Japanese to Indy Car racing.  And, thanks to
Matrix-like effects, they can really kick some butt.
Their latest case involves thwarting a scheme that
threatens to end privacy.  The film's elements borrow
heavily from any number of James Bond films.  There
are high-tech gadgets, a notable henchman (a silent,
sword-wielding, thin man played by Crispin Glover), a
host of enjoyable action sequences and a final
showdown at the villain's stronghold.  
While the plot is serviceable, the film is more about
flash, style, and good-looking babes.  The filmmakers
know that this isn't matter to be taken seriously. 
Consequently, they have great fun with this film. 
Guest stars include comedic lightweights Luke Wilson,
Matthew Perry and Tom Green as the Angels' love
interests.  Diaz energetically wiggles her booty while
dancing on Soul Train as Sir Mix-A-Lot's anthem, "I
Like Big Butts," plays in the background.  Barrymore
enjoys a victory moonwalk after dispatching a group of
thugs.  Liu dons a dominatrix outfit as she trains a
group of gawking, bespectacled engineers.  What's not
to like?  Completely watchable, this is the kind of
playful material that attracts people to magazines
like Maxim or FHM.  For this Maxim-reading guy,
"Charlie's Angels" was more entertaining than I ever
thought possible.


Author
Susan Granger
  Their mission? To have fun and entertain you. Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore and Lucy Liu are covert investigators working for Bosley, played by Bill Murray. They're assigned to foil an elaborate murder-revenge scheme that could destroy individual privacy worldwide. A technology mogul (Sam Rockwell) has been kidnapped, along with his voice-recognition software. The prime suspect (Tim Curry) owns the world's largest telecommunications satellite network. So much for plot. The fun is in the goofy action adventure as the sexy trio jumps out of planes, masters high-tech gadgetry, kicks, punches, and cavorts, while donning various disguises, under the direction of McG, whose previous experience was in fast-paced music videos/commercials - and it shows. In this riff on the old action/comedy TV series, writers Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon and John August put the emphasis on bright, bouncy, clever and, most of all, empowered contemporary women, not on weaponry. Actually, only the evil!
 guys, like Crispin Glover, use guns. Credit Chinese martial arts master Cheung-Yan Yuen ("The Matrix") for training the Angels. It's great when Drew takes out thugs while tied to a chair with her hands bound and when Cameron chats on a cellphone while battling baddies! Tom Green adds little as "The Chad," but he's Drew's real-life fiance, as well as her on-screen beau, and she not only stars but produces. Luke Wilson and Matt LeBlanc play the other Angels'  dumb boy-friends, and John Forsythe still voices Charlie. Too bad there's so little of Bill Murray, that the plot's so convoluted, and that many of the hokey '70s jokes fall flat on the youthful audience. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Charlie's Angels" is a sleek, sassy, sexy 7. It's packed chock full of jiggles and giggles as the babes kick butt.

Author
Jon Popick
Say what you will about Hollywood churning out films based on old
television series, but Charlie's Angels might be the best female-led
chop-socky action flick to be produced in this country.  Not only is it
funny, but Angels' action sequences are just as good as any blockbuster
released this past summer.  And the whole package is covered with a
thick layer of cheese, which is a good thing, considering that a film
like this should be taken as seriously as a sequel to Battlefield Earth.
For those of you not old enough to remember the television show (I'm one
of them), Angels was about three sexy secret agents who worked for the
Charles Townsend Detective Agency.  The Angels (and viewers) never saw
Charlie, but he assigned their cases via phone calls to an intermediary
named Bosley, portrayed here by Bill Murray (Hamlet).  Cases were neatly
wrapped up each week, and the pistol-wielding Angels were always sure to
find themselves in another precarious predicament in exactly seven days'
time.
Here, the pistol-less Angels are played by Cameron Diaz (Any Given
Sunday), Drew Barrymore (Never Been Kissed) and Lucy Liu (Shanghai
Noon), who play, respectively, the brain, the muscle and the daredevil
of the outfit.  They're a giggly group of girls (think Powerpuff) who,
for some reason, are forced to assume secret identities to blend into
society.  Angels' opening credits show clips of each of the character's
childhood before launching into a hysterical montage of all things 70s.
The film's first big action sequence takes place on an airplane, where a
character played by LL Cool J (In Too Deep) discovers that a fellow
passenger has a bomb on board.  He grabs the terrorist and leaps out of
the plane's emergency exit, plummeting toward the choppy water below. We
later learn that the Cool J character is really Dylan (Barrymore) in a
latex mask and a voice alteration chip (a la Mission: Impossible). For
some strange reason, the film doesn't address how the petite Barrymore
is able to pass for the built Cool J, as if there wasn't much difference
between their body types.
Angels' story isn't anything to write home about.  The nerdy creator of
cutting-edge voice-recognition software (Sam Rockwell, The Green Mile)
has been kidnapped, and his partner (Kelly Lynch, Mr. Magoo) seems to
think that a maniacal satellite tycoon (Tim Curry) may be involved.  The
Angels take the case with their usual gusto, but quickly find out that
the assignment may be a little trickier than they thought.
The Angels have several run-ins with a nameless character played by
Crispin Glover (Nurse Betty), who has no lines, wields a cane like a
Bond baddie and fights like Carrie-Anne Moss in The Matrix.  Their
battles include many gravity-defying kicks, which look surprisingly
believable from Liu and Diaz (but not Barrymore).  Strangely, Liu has
landed in two of the best American action films of 2000 (this and
Shanghai Noon), but Diaz really steals the show as the gangly Natalie.
Barrymore does double duty as star and producer.
Angels is the feature film debut for McG, who has directed a bunch of
popular music videos and award-winning commercials.  He paces the film
well and adds a good mix of period music and modern rock, as well as the
obligatory hipped-up version of the original theme song.  The best part
about the film is that it never takes itself too seriously (they mock
television-series-turned-feature-films in one scene) and, as a result,
it looks like everybody had a blast making the movie (the closing
credits include some funny outtakes).
1:34 - PG-13 for adult language and violence

Author
Dustin Putman
After months of alleged production delays, casting and script problems, and 
endless rumors of on-set arguments, "Charlie's Angels," a big-screen 
adaptation of the cult '76-'81 television series (starring Jaclyn Smith and 
Farrah Fawcett, among others), seemed doomed for catastrophic failure. After 
all, when was the last time we saw a TV-show-turned-feature-film that was 
worthwhile, particularly when the budget was an overblown $90-million? 
Moreover, the terrible teaser trailer, with the three lead actresses 
performing their martial arts moves in front of a fiery background, was not 
exactly cause to break out the champagne glasses.
Imagine, then, the delightful surprise of watching the finished product and 
gradually realizing that I haven't had this much fun at the movies all year. 
In a nutshell, "Charlie's Angels" is an unequivocal success--a highly 
entertaining, funny, exciting, no-holds-barred, bubblegum triumph of the way 
to make a great action-comedy, as well as a rambunctious female empowerment 
fantasy.
Tough-girl Dylan (Drew Barrymore), sexy sweetheart Natalie (Cameron Diaz), 
and ultra-intelligent Alex (Lucy Liu) are Charlie's Angels: a trio of strong 
young women who work for mystery millionaire Charlie (voiced by John Forsythe 
and never seen) and his personal assistant Bosley (Bill Murray) to keep the 
world safe from nasty villains and megalomaniacs. Their latest mission is to 
rescue an electronics genius by the name of Knox (Sam Rockwell), who has been 
kidnapped by wealthy thief Roger Corwin (Tim Curry) and his silent henchman 
(Crispin Glover).
A comedic rendition of the countless James Bond flicks--only twenty times 
more fun and original--"Charlie's Angels" is not so much about its thin 
storyline as it is about the refreshingly lightweight style which feature 
film debut director McG (whose previous credits include several music videos) 
evokes. From the stunning opening sequence that begins on an airplane and 
ends on a sailboat, to the climax set around an ancient castle alongside the 
California coast, director McG clearly knows exactly how to balance all of 
his various genres, including action, comedy, and romance, for optimum 
effect. The movie is far-fetched, yet so shamelessly tongue-in-cheek as to 
never seem anything less than innocently believable.
If there was ever any on-set strife between the cast members, you won't find 
any signs of it here. Each actor finds just the perfect tone for their 
character, and they all elicit an overwhelming joy of performing. 
Actress-producer Drew Barrymore (1999's "Never Been Kissed") has found in her 
character of Dylan a chance to show off her comic flair to a greater effect 
than she ever has before. Cameron Diaz (1999's "Being John Malkovich"), as 
Natalie, is hilariously klutzy, yet smart, and has a smile so warm and 
beautiful that she sells every moment she appears here. Rounding out the 
angels is Lucy Liu (2000's "Shanghai Noon"), as streetwise Alex, who provides 
a welcome contrast to her tonally sunnier costars, and equips herself in her 
kung-fu-style action sequences quite nicely. Together, Barrymore, Diaz, and 
Liu are charismatic joys who obviously had just as much fun making the film 
as it is to watch it.
Adding an extra amount of amusement to the proceedings is the constant stream 
of costume changes the actresses goes through, as they head undercover posing 
in different disguises. There is particular entertainment to be had in a 
sequence in which Barrymore and Diaz crossdress, while the leather-clad, 
whip-striking Liu poses as a dominatrix-cum-efficiency-expert and bewitches 
every student in the class.
The supporting cast is appropriately over-the-top, and all the more enjoyable 
because of it. Bill Murray (1998's "Rushmore") returns to his purely jokey 
roots with Bosley, and makes a big impression with a not-so-large role. Sam 
Rockwell (1999's "The Green Mile") is lively and magnetic as the kidnapped 
Knox; Tim Curry is at his slimy best as Roger Corwin; and Tom Green (2000's 
"Road Trip"), Matt LeBlanc (TV's "Friends"), and Luke Wilson (1999's "Blue 
Streak") are effective as the gals' love interests.
Special notice must be made to Crispin Glover (2000's "Nurse Betty"), whose 
brooding role as The Thin Man is one of the most memorably nasty and 
appropriately animated villains to come around in years. Watch Glover 
closely; he doesn't have one line of dialogue throughout, but simply by the 
drifty way in which he carries himself and smokes his cigarettes, as if he 
were a famed magician performing his most popular trick, does he create a 
wholly fresh and despicably enjoyable character.
With sunny, attractive cinematography; fast-paced editing; a sharply clever 
screenplay by Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon, and John August; a standout soundtrack 
that wittily includes innumerable songs featuring the word, "angel," in them, 
as well as a nice mixture of music from the '70s, '80s, '90s, and the present 
day; and awesome stunts not matched since last summer's "Mission: Impossible 
2," "Charlie's Angels" is a film that is unquestionably better than it has 
any right to be. The movie makes no halfhearted effort to be anything more 
than a happily diverting popcorn film, and by doing so, exceeds the viewer's 
highest expectations. By being unpretentious in the extreme, it is the most 
invigorating thing that has happened to the action genre in the last decade. 
"Charlie's Angels" is F-U-N, the type of movie the term, 'rollicking good 
time,' was invented for.
How Does It Look?
Presented in its original anamorphic widescreen theatrical aspect ratio of 
2:35:1, the picture quality on "Charlie's Angels" is a godsend. Filmed in 
brightly-chosen colors and hues, the clarity of the picture jumps off the 
screen from the first frame to the last. There are no artifacts, zero grain, 
nonexistent shimmering, and no bleeding of the colors. The treatment this 
"Special Edition" DVD got is, in one word, beautiful. Reference quality work.
How Does It Sound?
In the audio department, you case choose from English 5.1 (Dolby Digital), 
2-Channel (Dolby Digital), or a French track. Whichever way you play it, you 
will not be disappointed. Filled to the breaking point with music and action, 
you are sure to get a lot of groundbreaking play from your speakers. Dialogue 
is consistently clear, as well, making this DVD's audio treatment wonderfully 
alive.
Special Features?
Columbia Pictures didn't title the "Charlie's Angels" DVD a "special edition" 
for nothing. With so many bonus attractions, it's admittedly difficult to 
decide what to explore first. I began with the Screen-Specific Audio 
Commentary By Director McG and Cinematographer Russell Carpenter. McG and 
Carpenter are obviously good friends who got along very well, and had a lot 
of fun, while making this motion picture. Their enthusiasm for the finished 
product, and everything that went into its making, definitely shows through 
on this fast-paced and entertaining track that has no empty space, nor does 
it ever grow boring. Behind-the-scenes stories and talk of the actors make up 
much of their discussion, as do their intentions for what they were trying to 
make (a FUN movie).
Also found within are no less than six Making-Of Featurettes, each running 
between 2 1/2 and 8 minutes in length. "Getting G'd Up" is a heartfelt, if 
too brief, tribute to the joyful personality and talent of director McG. "The 
Master and the Angels" shows the kung-fu-style training that stars Drew 
Barrymore, Cameron Diaz, and Lucy Liu went through to prepare for their 
physically demanding roles. This is perhaps the most intriguing of the 
featurettes, as it gives a glimpse into the tough stuff that the stars went 
through to prepare for their roles. Most entertaining is a look at Barrymore 
screaming in agony after doing an umpteenth stomach crunch. "Welcome to Angel 
World" details the production design and set decoration of the film, while "
Angelic Effects" takes a fascinating look at how all of the visual effects in 
the movie were brought to cinematic life. Major work was done on a blue 
screen, to be sure, but it was surprising to see that much of it was actually 
filmed (such as the girls, albeit stunt doubles) jumping off a cliff as the 
castle behind them explodes. "Angelic Attire: Dressing Cameron, Drew, and Lucy
" is a relatively fluffy, brief piece that shows you how each of the actress' 
costumes were chosen, based on the realities of the characters they were 
playing. Finally, "Wired Angels" is a shot-for-shot replay of the fight scene 
between the three angels and Crispin Glover's Thin Man, but with all of the 
wires still prominently featured.
The special features aren't over quite yet, as there are three Deleted and 
Extended Scenes, preceded by an explanation from director McG on why they 
were excised. While none of the scenes are outright bad, it is easy to see 
why they were cut out, as they prove to not be vital to the film's tone or 
tight pacing. The bathroom scene, however, should be noted for being an exact 
replica of the bathroom in Stanley Kubrick's 1980 masterpiece, "The Shining."
There is an Outtakes and Bloopers section that is a mere repeat of the 
outtakes shown during the end credits of the film. There are also 2 Music 
Videos, for Destiny's Child's snappy "Independent Women Part 1" and Apollo 
Four Forty's "Charlie's Angels 2000," Talent Files, Production Notes on the 
inside booklet of the disc's box, and Theatrical Trailers. The trailers 
include the teaser and the full trailer for "Charlie's Angels," as well as 
trailers for "My Best Friend's Wedding," "Vertical Limit," "Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon," and two upcoming features: "The Adventures of Joe Dirt," with 
David Spade, and this summer's "Final Fantasy."
The Animated Menus boast great, dynamic showmanship, and like the film 
itself, are full of energy and originality.
The Bottom Line
"Charlie's Angels" remains the most entertaining film I saw last year, and 
with this "Collector's Edition" DVD, it is a must-buy for all fans of the 
format and the movie. And as I have heard mentioned before, if you didn't 
like the movie, then you simply didn't "get" it. While I'm certainly open to 
all opinions and criticisms, it is honestly difficult to believe that anyone 
could watch "Charlie's Angels," and not find it 100% fun.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.dvdmix.net

Author
Chad Polenz
In effort to describe and analyze "Charlie's Angels" you'll probably see me 
make comparisons to a lot of trashy subjects from a Jerry Bruckheimer movie 
to "Weekend At Bernie's" and I'm sure the phrase "Did a bunch of kids make 
this movie?" will be used. Yes, "Charlie's Angels" the fall 2000 action flick 
starring three hot chicks and promising a lot of action is exactly what you'd 
expect it to be - mindless as it could be but it's as much fun as you can 
have at the movies. 
Recently, my friend and fellow film critic Ian Waldron-Mantagi pointed out 
something to me that I should have known for years: what makes bad movies bad 
is that they're inconsistent. Roger Ebert's basic philosophy of film 
criticism (known as "Ebert's Law") is: a film is not what it's about, but how 
it is about it. "Charlie's Angels" is the first big budget blockbuster movie 
I can think of that plays by these rules and succeeds without even trying. 
Yes, the premise is pretty stupid and there's a lot of stuff you could rip it 
to shreds over, BUT it is consistent in everything it does. It's a movie that 
realizes the only way to pull off this material is to be as campy, 
lighthearted and tongue-in-cheek as possible and does just that. You don't 
honestly believe FOR A SECOND that we're supposed to take this seriously do 
you? 
Drew Barrymore, Cameron Diaz and Lucy Liu star as Dylan, Natalie and Alex 
(respectively) - the sexy private eyes who work for Charles Townsend, a 
multi-millionaire who communicates only via speakerphone and has never 
actually met his employees. They've got all the cool gadgets just like James 
Bond and have "normal" lives outside of work as if they were comic book 
superheroes (which they pretty much believe they are). Bill Murray plays 
Bosley, their pimp of sorts who mostly just tells them to hurry up while the 
Angels do most of the work. 
The plot, if you're interested, involves the Angels being hired by a 
communications magnate to first rescue the kidnapped CEO, then break into the 
rival company's uber-secure headquarters and then to have the tables turned 
on them. Ok, if you're mad I spoiled the story don't be, it's really 
irrelevant. "Charlie's Angels" the movie is not about story, it's not about 
the characters and it's certainly not about theme or anything of any real 
artistic value. It's about being wild and crazy and funny without 
limitations. 
There's no point for me to breakdown how the screenplay works. You want an 
exciting story with chases, fights and explosions and you get those. This is 
a PG-13 movie made for the sake of being a PG-13 movie, one might even call 
it a family movie. Yes, there's a lot of cleavage and sexiness but it's not 
lurid or sleazy. These butt-kicking chicks aren't total bimbos, and they 
aren't symbols for feminism either. It's as if they're little kids playing 
pretend in the backyard and that's the attitude the screenplay has throughout 
the entire movie so that even with the Angels walk into a house and it 
explodes or have a thousand bullets shot at them they're able to just pick 
themselves up, dust themselves off and continue on as if nothing happened. 
This is a chance for Barrymore, Diaz and Liu to try their hand at being 
Jackie Chan (without doing their own stunts though). It's a chance for the 
producers and director to take a crack at the latest technology and see what 
kind of eye candy they can come up with so that even the blatant 
copyright-infringement-lawsuit-inspiring rip-offs of "The Matrix" are in such 
good humor you just keep laughing instead of rolling your eyes. 
Critics who hate this movie say the stars look bored, I say they're just 
deadpanning lines which are so unbelievable silly the best actor in the world 
couldn't make them seem remotely serious. There's a scene near the end 
where's there's a WWF-style orgy of violence going on and in one scene 
Barrymore's character is tied to a chair about to get beaten up by about six 
guys. She tells them to stop and retreat and tells them what she's going to 
do to them. They laugh that such an impossible task could be pulled off in 
such in an impossible situation but it does happen. That's when you realize 
the movie's a success - so far-fetched, so over-the-top and so cheesy it's 
not stupid, it's hilarious. 
When "Charlie's Angels" arrives on video I hope they put it with the comedies 
not the action movies. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Ross Anthony
Boy, this was a fun movie! Aside from a small lull in the third act, 
"Charlie's Angels" are simply devilishly hilarious. Don't be duped into 
thinking that "Bikinis and Karate" are all they have to offer. 
I've also heard folks say, "It was stupid!" But, me thinks, they missed 
the point. Of course it's stupid! The filmmakers are having fun, poking 
fun, with fun music and fun action. And the plot isn't even half-bad 
(1/8 bad maybe, but 1/2 -- nahhh). Anyway, the first half of this film 
rocks, glides, boogies, in such unique style that I didn't even care 
about the plot. Actually, when the film begins tending a bit too closely 
to its detective story - that's when things slow down. 
But, the beauty is in the ridiculous. As Weird Al says, "Dare to be 
stupid." 
Opening off the clouds of the Columbia logo through the window of a 
plane, Drew Barrymore, cleverly disguised as LL Cool J, commands a 
powerful action sequence that grabs you from your seat and tosses you 
into a way-jamming, rip-roaring 10 minute, opening which I feared the 
film could never match on an excitement level. But I was wrong. 
Tom Green's a cappella tormenting vocalization of, "Just call me Angel 
of the morning" eases us back into a gentler pace. The movie's tempo is 
set from there. 
"The Matrix" meets Maxwell Smart or Smart Jack or Jack Benny or Benny 
Hill. High-tech cool action gets double-dipped in humor and then 
impacted with the tongue tightly into the cheek. 
All three angels dress in undercover kimonos as the track rocks out 
"Turning Japanese ... I really think so" or playing the tuba and 
accordion dressed as Swedish barmaids. Barbie must have been envious. 
Lucy Liu massages a suspect. He sighs, "You're very good with your 
hands, I could use somebody like you on my staff." She retorts, "My 
hands aren't going anywhere near your staff." You can expect more of 
this risque double entendre. 
Later to the tune of Heart's "Barracuda" black-leather-clad Lucy Liu 
struts into a computer corporation where everyone is dressed in white. 
This wonderful contrast displays the film's bold and ballsy breakout 
attitude. 
Cleavage touting Drew exhales, "I love cars" as she licks the steering 
wheel. It's ridiculous on purpose! Don't take it seriously folks, you'll 
miss out. Cameron Diaz talks to her current boyfriend on the cell as she 
trades kicks with the enemy. The enemy breaks her phone, an appalled 
Diaz cries, "Hey, I really like that guy!" 
All act well (save for the Tom Green reprise), Sam Rockwell giving a 
great performance as Knox, the computer genius. Ten story high kudos are 
due to director McG for having the guts and charisma to put together a 
truly invigorating mix of satire and action. I loved it. 
"Charlie's Angels" is an Indy car race that breaks from the circle. 
Charlie's Angels. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore, Lucy Liu, Bill Murray, Tim 
Curry, Crispin Glover, Kelly Lynch, Luke Wilson, Sam Rockwell. 
*  Directed By Mcg. 
*  Written By Ryan Rowe & Ed Solomon and John August 
*  Produced By Leonard Goldberg, Drew Barrymore, Nancy Juvonen At 
Columbia. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Robin Clifford
We've had "Sgt. Bilko," "The Addams Family," "McHale's Navy," "The Mod
Squad" and "The Fugitive," all TV shows that became the concept fodder for
movies decades later. This hit or miss proposition has produced such
ridiculous dreck as "Bilko" and "McHale" and well-made big screen
adaptations like "The Fugitive." Columbia Pictures gets on the remake wagon
with the reprise of the 1970's TV babe fest, "Charlie's Angels," with the
update starring Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore and Lucy Liu as Charlie's
girls and Bill Murray as the ever loyal lieutenant, Bosley.
The draw for the new, big screen rendition of "Charlie's Angels" is the
built in attraction for the ready-made audience of fans of the TV show.
That and, of course, the showcase for some of Hollywood's hottest female
properties. Just about everyone who sees the movie will know about the
show, its faceless narrator (once again, voiced by John Forsythe) and its
bevy of beautiful, brilliant and bodacious babes. The Angels are three
talented and athletic private eyes working for their mysterious boss and
solving all kinds of complicated crimes and their latest case is no
different.
Eric Knox (Sam Rockwell) is a handsome genius and founder of Knox
Technologies. He has designed a voice-identification software program that
is more accurate than fingerprinting. But, in the wrong hands, it could
prove a worldwide disaster. When the scientist is kidnapped, Knox president
Vivian Wood (Kelly Lynch) turns to the one man - and three women - who can
break the case, Charlie and his Angels.
Natalie (Diaz), Dylan (Barrymore) and Alex (Liu) jump on the case and begin
their investigation with Roger Corwin (Tim Curry). Corwin heads Red Star
Systems, the world's largest telecommunications satellite network, and is
the arch business rival to Knox. The corporate honcho is the Angels' prime
suspect and the team works, first, to free Knox from his kidnappers, then
foil Corwin's plans to steal and use the advanced technology for his own
greedy purposes. But, after they save their client, they discover that all
is not as it seems and the identity of the real bad guy takes a sudden
twist, putting the lives of the Angels, and Charlie, in grave danger.
The screenplay for the new "Charlie's Angels" doesn't make any real attempt
to update the original material of the TV show. Instead, the writers (Ryan
Rowe, Ed Solomon and John August) give the story a 70's retro feel that
captures the mood of the series. This is a help as the players in the film
can anchor their perfs to the simple action/T&A template of the show
without having to break new creative ground. As such, the concentration is
on the usual flash and fire coupled with choreographed fights and
Matrix-style special F/X.
No one in the cast is going to earn any Oscars or Golden Globe awards for
"Charlie's Angels," but the actors seem to be having some fun. Cameron Diaz
is almost gleeful in her portrayal of the ditzy, yet competent, Natalie.
She has all of the action and Kung Fu moves down while putting a comic spin
on her character. Diaz gets mileage out of scenes like her rescue of Bosley
from a prison at the same time a new boyfriend (Luke Wilson) gives her a
call. It's absurdist but, because of Diaz, it works.
Barrymore is cute as a button as Dylan and she, too, has good fun,
especially when she takes down five of the bad guy's henchmen while tied to
a chair. Lucy Liu, whom I usually find annoying as an actor, fits the
action bill well as the tough as nails Alex. Bill Murray doesn't get to do
too much as Bosley - kind of like in the TV show. Supporting cast is good,
though mostly underutilized. Tim Curry is wasted as a maguffin used to
distract the viewer from the real bad guys. Sam Rockwell gets to put an arc
on his perf as Eric Knox, shifting gears along the way as the nature of his
character changes. Crispin Glover gives his henchman, called the Thin Man,
a silent, chain smoking twist that makes him seem like he's right out of a
low budget James Bond flick. Kelly Lynch, Matt LeBlanc, Tom Green and LL
Cool J are given little to do except appear on the screen.
Tech credits are solid as first-time director, named McG, puts his music
video imprint on the film. Fast editing, rapid-fire camera (by Russell
Carpenter) and slick production values make this a quickly paced bit of
movie fluff. I have to say, though, that the 92-minute run time feels long.
A short film by today's standards, it could have used some judicious
editing. Things run out of steam well before the end of "Charlie's Angels,"
but that doesn't stop the filmmakers from setting us up for the sequel(s)
just before the end credits.
Looks are more important than the plot line of "Charlie's Angels" and I
guess that's how it should be. Teenage girls are the target audience and
the likable action figures rep'd by the three Angels are decent enough role
models. The sexy outfits they get to strut around in should be sufficient
draw for the boyfriends, too. This is not meant for the more discerning
viewer, though. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        It's a fact: teenage girls are just as obsessed with female breasts
as teenage boys, and Drew Barrymore has a huge following of teenage girls.
It makes perfect sense, therefore, that as the co-producer and shrewd
marketing force behind "Charlie's Angels," Barrymore would insist that the
film feature, first and foremost, her breasts.  Better yet, Barrymore has
employed the talents of Cameron Diaz and Lucy Liu and since her co-stars
have breasts too, the pulchritude on parade here is disturbingly unreal.
        Now this a PG-13 rated film so we're not talking full-frontal
nudity or, to be fair, even casual toplessness.  But "Charlie's Angels," a
post-feminist update of the cheesy '70's TV show about three crime-fighting
babes employed by a speakerphone, is one sexual tease-a-thon from start to
finish.  Hardly a minute goes by in which one of our heroines doesn't flash
some thigh, unbutton her shirt, or waggle her bum at the camera.  The T&A
in this film is truly amazing, as if Russ Meyer served as creative
consultant.  I lost count of how many times an Angel shakes out her hair in
slow-mo like a Keeshond wicking rainwater from its pelt.
        The sexual innuendo and double entendres don't come as thick and
fast as in, say, a James Bond movie, but they're there all right.  "You
should be on my staff" an appreciative Tim Curry tells Liu's character,
who's working undercover as a masseuse.  "My hands are going nowhere near
your staff" is Liu's sly response.
        There's a scene in the film in which Barrymore hangs from a window
wrapped in nothing but a bed sheet.  The squeals of delight when the sheet
rips and Barrymore--or more likely her stunt double--plunges (safely, of
course) to the ground below confirm what the largely 13-year-old audience
had come to see.  Likewise the scene in which the Angels emerge from the
surf in their skin-tight scuba gear.  Now Diaz already has her suit
unbuttoned to the naval when she sashays up on the beach but she unbuttons
it some more.  And when all three actresses peel out of their wetsuits
tastefully (?) shot from behind, well... the Q102-loving crowd went wild.
        If you can take your eyes off the naughty bits for a moment you'll
notice that "Charlie's Angels" is actually better than this summer's
overhyped "Mission: Impossible 2" because it doesn't take itself too
seriously.  Like that Tom Cruise vehicle its plot is rather silly, although
"Charlie's Angels" only features the one rubber mask removal.  "Charlie's
Angels" is fast moving, slickly edited, and features a pulse-pounding
score.  It never flags for a minute.  Many of the action sequences are
sensational--Barrymore, Diaz, and Liu have clearly trained with the best.
One of the best fight sequences comes early in the film in which the Angels
face off with a thin henchman, played by Crispin Glover (oddly absent from
the screen since 1996's "The People vs. Larry Flynt").  It's kinetic,
balletic, a sort of "Bodacious Ta-Ta's" meets "The Matrix" by way of John
Woo!  Diaz leaps through the air, appears to hang there for several
digitally-enhanced seconds as she bicycles her long, sinuous legs into
position and delivers a stunning blow to the bad guy's chest--KERBLAM!!
Talk about being touched by an Angel.
        The film is competently directed by a first timer with the
mysterious moniker of McG.  It will come as no surprise to anyone that Mr.
McG's claim to fame is as a former rock video director; watch for an
association with producer Jerry Bruckheimer Real Soon Now.
        Barrymore plays Dylan--she has killer red hair.  Diaz plays
Natalie--she's effervescent, loves to dance, and has a killer smile.  Liu
plays Alex, she of the killer freckles.  All three are stunning in that way
that destroys our young girls' self-image.  Bill Murray plays the comic
interest, Bosley, and he's funny yet woefully underutilized.  The villain,
a voice-recognition software mogul called Knox, is played by Sam Rockwell
but he's just not very villainous.  More menacing is his henchwoman, played
by Kelly Lynch.  Bonus breasts!  Killer.  There are more costume changes in
"Charlie's Angels" than in an entire season of "Are You Being Served?"
        From its well-crafted Bond-ian opening sequence, "Charlie's Angels"
is, for the most part, a fast and fun-filled 90-minute entertainment.  And
if you think "Baywatch" provides good role models for your teenage
daughter(s), then you shouldn't have the slightest problem with it.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christopher Null
The spy game is up.  You can thank Charlie's Angels -- the movie -- for
that.
When did banality and pandering become okay?  Just steal from Hong Kong,
The Matrix, and a kitschy TV show from the mid-1970s and that's a
movie?  Charlie's Angels is one of the worst examples of action film
homogeneity and shameless duplicity in any film I've seen in ages.
Charlie's Angels is dumb.  Just plain dumb.  As we all know, three of
the hottest females on the planet -- Drew Barrymore, Cameron Diaz, and
Lucy Liu -- are three super-agents working for the mysterious
millionaire named Charlie.  They all drive fast cars, look
oh-so-fabulous even in the morning, and don't seem to get a scratch even
when fighting armed men, having buildings explode ten feet in front of
them, or flying through the air in Matrix slow-motion.  And while the
entourage spends 90 minutes romping around in cleavage-busting wetsuits,
cleavage-busting waitress uniforms, and cleavage-busting wet t-shirts,
they scarcely succeed in resembling so much as a group of annoying,
drunk sorority girls, the kind who hit on everybody at a party.
The actual plot revolves around the ridiculous story of a millionaire
computer engineer -- the great Sam Rockwell -- who gets kidnapped by a
mysterious rival computer company.  Of course, the rival wants control
of his new personal identification system, which involves such
latter-day buzzwords as GPS, cellular tracking, and even mainframe.  The
amazing Crispin Glover lends his acting chops as a crazed henchmen
involved in all the nasty things that happen to the Angels -- like
battling each of them in many round-robin Matrix rip-off (again) fight
sequences and harboring a strange attraction to sliced-off locks of the
Angels' hair.  The coup de grace is Bill Murray as Bosley, serving as
Charlie's manservant, or, more to the point, the Angels' pimp.
The rest of the movie comprises a revenge arc, enough costume changes to
fill three productions of Les Miserables, carbon-copy fight sequences
that would lend credible evidence to a Jackie Chan and the Wachowski
brothers lawsuit for intellectual property theft, and the strange
transformation of Sam Rockwell into Mickey Rourke's long-lost brother.
Charlie's Angels starts off with a bang and ends up being a soggy
burrito left out overnight.  Nothing is difficult, plausible, or
believable in any of the Angels' actions.  It feels like The Matrix,
Mission: Impossible 2, and Cleopatra Jones and the Casino of Gold all
rolled into one.  Diaz is a knucklehead.  Barrymore is the "dangerous
one," mean and tough and about as believable as Katie Holmes in the
role.  Liu is just... Lucy Liu, looking good in a skin-tight black
leather suit.
The list of movies from which Charlie's Angels is directly lifted is
equally astonishing.  The writers apparently ran the copier all night
stealing scenes from Armageddon, Lethal Weapon II, all of Jackie Chan's
movies, The Great Escape, Saturday Night Fever, Revenge of the Nerds,
Payback, Darkman, Dr. No, The Matrix (as mentioned), and even TV's
Friends.  It's a shame, too, because one of the many screenwriters, John
August, was at the helm of last year's favorite, Go.  Then again, what
can you expect from a director known solely as "McG."
There is no camp value in the film, no interesting main characters, no
invigorating action scenes, no reason at all to waste your time except
to ogle the hot chicks and enjoy the performances of a few supporting
players.  Note to Hollywood: Next time, let's leave the TV shows on the
TV.
Director: McG
Producers: Leonard Goldberg, Drew Barrymore, Nancy Juvonen
Starring: Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore, Lucy Liu, Bill Murray, Sam
Rockwell, Luke Wilson, Crispin Glover
Writers: Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon, John August
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/charliesangels/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Charlie's Angels (2000)
Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore, Lucy Liu, Bill Murray, Sam Rockwell, Tim
Curry, Kelly Lynch, Crispin Glover, Matt LeBlanc, LL Cool J, Tom Green,
Luke Wilson, John Forsythe. Screenplay by Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon, John
August, based on the television series created by Ivan Goff, Ben
Roberts. Directed by McG. 98 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
At the press junket for "Charlie's Angels," director McG (pronounced
McGee), a music video and commercial veteran, explained his approach
towards his feature film debut. "We wanted to make a big, colorful,
exciting, larger-than-life sort of film that feels like you shook up a
bottle of champagne and just splashed it over a bunch of celluloid," he
said. "The goal was to take the comedy and turn it to 11, take the
action and turn it to 11, take the sexiness and turn it to 11 and just
max out this film'"
McG achieved his goal. The big screen adaptation of the hit TV action
series from the '70s certainly reflects the unbridled enthusiasm of his
mission statement. From beginning to end, it cheerfully assaults the
viewer with every imaginable cinematic gimmick, punctuated by snippets
of no less than 39 pop songs. "Charlie's Angels" isn't just a
high-octane version of the original. It's also a 98-minute music video,
a slapstick comedy, a special effects showcase, a stunt spectacular, a
James Bond knock-off, a chop-socky fight movie and a paean to the '60s
"Batman" TV show's camp sensibilities.
In short, the film is a mess. More often than not, it's a surprisingly
fun mess, however, even though McG's inexperience with long-form
productions becomes more and more obvious as the story barrels forward
with all the finesse of a dozen Superballs ricocheting in a small
closet. I left "Charlie's Angels" entertained, but exhausted.
The plot, such as it is, goes as follows. Natalie (Cameron Diaz), Dylan
(Drew Barrymore) and Alex (Lucy Liu) are the latest batch of ex-cops
working for the Townsend Detective Agency, where they receive their
assignments by phone from the always-unseen Charlie (voiced by John
Forsythe, the only returning member of the original cast). Aided by
their faithful right-hand man, Bosley (Bill Murray), the Angels set out
to retrieve kidnapped software genius Eric Knox (Sam Rockwell) and keep
his cutting-edge voice-recognition technology from falling into evil
hands. Along the way, they must deal with imperious a top-level Knox
exec Vivian Wood (Kelly Lynch), corporate competitor Roger Corwin (Tim
Curry, as smarmy as ever) and the Thin Man (Crispin Glover), an
extremely dangerous goon with a hair fetish.
Of course, the storyline is just a contrivance to allow the women to do
battle with bad guys while wearing various exotic costumes (two of the
Angels dress up in drag and, as a man, Drew Barrymore is a dead ringer
for James Spader). Incidentally, even though their enemies are heavily
armed, the Angels do not carry guns, proving definitively that Charlie's
last name is not Heston.
The film starts off with a bang-up James Bond style set piece, as the
camera seamlessly glides through the clouds into a passing luxury
airliner, where LL Cool J is dealing with a nut case. Abruptly, LL opens
the emergency exit, throws the man out and leaps after him, leading into
a skydiving sequence. The pair ends up in a speedboat, where we finally
meet the Angels.
As with the TV series, each Angel, while smart as a whip and
multitalented, can be summed up in one word. Drew Barrymore (who
co-produces the film) is the sexy one, Cameron Diaz is the giddy one and
Lucy Liu is the devilish one. The three actors are clearly having a
wonderful time with their roles and each is afforded showcase moments.
Liu gets to play dominatrix in an efficiency expert scene, Diaz shakes
her small, but shapely booty to the tune of "Baby Got Back" in a comic
bit on the set of "Soul Train," and Barrymore plays seductress with a
limo driver in a revealing scene that makes it clear why David Letterman
smiled so widely when she danced on his desk and flashed him.
A lot of "Charlie's Angels" works. The camaraderie between the women is
winning, some of the stunts are spectacular and a fair percent of the
jokes are actually funny (check out the slow-motion-hair-flipping
instructions during a party scene). I particularly enjoyed the frequent
use of rear screen projection, a clever nod to the cut rate filming
techniques employed by the original series.
What doesn't work is most of Bill Murray's shtick, the
less-than-graceful "Matrix" style wire work during the martial arts
segments, McG's uneven, needlessly rapid editing style and his
insistence on framing every shot as if it was the highlight of a music
video. Flinging everything but the kitchen sink at the viewer may work
in a three-minute MTV clip, but stretched over the length of a film, it
grows old fast. Even in an amusing trifle like "Charlie's Angels,"
things like consistency of tone still matter. Next time, McG, try
turning it down to 9 every once in a while.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Charlie's_Angels_ (PG-13) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
It's easy to dismiss _Charlie's_Angels_ as mindless trash--but to do so
is to not understand the joke.  Make no mistake, this big screen revamp
of the small screen "jiggle" action-adventure series _is_ every bit the
slab of cinematic junk food it appears to be; the twist is that director
McG, producer-star Drew Barrymore, and co-stars Cameron Diaz and Lucy Liu
set out to make it that way.  That said, getting the joke does not
necessarily entail complete enjoyment of the picture, which grows equal
parts fun and frustrating.
_Charlie's_Angels_ is a high-energy production, and it's impossible to
not get occasionally caught up in the infectious atmosphere of
over-the-top action-adventure and self-aware, campy humor.  The bouncy
tone is set by the curtain-raising action sequence, which is as
preposterously exciting as any Bond opener; and its terrific main titles,
which are a wonderfully cheesy homage to the original Aaron Spelling TV
series (and the rest of its action ilk in the '70s).  Called on to
provide the charm to carry the film the rest of the way are Diaz,
Barrymore, and Liu as Natalie, Dylan, and Alex, respectively--"an elite
crimefighting group" in the employ of the never-seen but always-heard
millionaire Charlie (once again voiced by John Forsythe).
Alas, if only high spirits and the right attitude were enough to make a
feature film.  There is the matter of a little thing called a script, and
the one by a reported 17 writers (the only ones receiving screen credit
are Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon, and John August) feels as cobbled together as
the crew that created it.  The Angels, with Charlie's bumbling go-between
Bosley (Bill Murray, sadly wasted) by their side as usual, are hired to
solve the kidnapping of a computer tycoon (Sam Rockwell); its rather
speedy resolution opens up a set of unforeseen problems.  That, in a
nutshell, is _Charlie's_Angels_' story.
But it's not what the film is _about_.  That designation goes to the
assorted set pieces hung onto the clothesline of plot to either wring
laughs from the audience or viscerally excite them.  Given that the three
leads all have experience in comedy and are action neophytes, it's
surprising that _Charlie's_Angels_ is more successful in the latter area.
 For this, the trio and especially McG owe a large debt to fight
choreographer Yuen Cheung-Yan (brother of _Matrix_ and
_Crouching_Tiger,_Hidden_Dragon_ action maestro Yuen Woo-Ping).  The Hong
Kong brand of wire-enhanced martial arts (a major deviation from the TV
series, for staunch gun opposer Barrymore nixed the use of any firearms
in the film) works especially well in the over-the-top context, and the
stars are all game--in particular Diaz, who is given a large share of
non-wire fight scenes and more than holds her own.
Then again, Diaz is the clear standout in all areas of the film. 
Barrymore and Liu clearly enjoy themselves and amply fill the sexiness
requirement, but only Diaz is given much of anything to do.  Her Natalie,
a hopeless dork with ridiculous delusions of coolness, is the only Angel
that develops into a real character (all we glean from the others: Alex
is brainy; Dylan is... well, she looks good, doesn't she?).  Her comic
scenes, especially those with Luke Wilson (as the requisite love
interest), are the most memorable in the film.
In fact, Diaz's comic scenes are the only ones that fully work, which
points up the film's key problem: not knowing when to stop with the
comedy.  Her gags are extreme, but they don't push too far; the same
can't be said for a lot of others.  For example, a great sight gag
involving Alex's boyfriend's (Matt LeBlanc) bullet-riddled trailer home
that's just outlandish enough is ruined by a needless extra step.  I can
understand McG and the army of scribes' perceived need to go all out, but
a bit of moderation would have gone a longer way in a film that's already
outrageous by basic concept alone.
So with the smiles the film provide come about as many groans,
eventually overtaking the latter as it wears on.  The joke behind
_Charlie's_Angels_ is indeed an amusing one, but it simply grows old more
quickly than it should.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by McG. Screenplay by Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon and John August,
based on the television series created by Ivan Goff and Ben Roberts.
Starring Drew Barrymore, Cameron Diaz, Lucy Liu. Running time: 103
minutes. Rated PG by the MFCB. Reviewed on November 18th, 2000.
Let's be clear up front: "Charlie's Angels" is not intended to be a 
serious movie. It is corny purely by design. The tone is set right off the
bat: an airliner's in-flight film is "T.J. Hooker: The Movie", provoking a
groan of "not another movie based on an old TV series" from one of the
characters. This may come as a surprise to those expecting the film
version to resemble the original 1976-1981 TV series. Being young enough
that my memories of the programme are exceedingly dim, I had no such
preconceptions, and no problem with this kind of reinvention.
All that said, though, even taken on its own merits, "Charlie's Angels" is
not without flaws. The problem is that, in taking such a kitschy tact with
the material, the filmmakers simply have not gone far enough. For camp to
succeed, it must be embraced wholeheartedly. And while "Charlie's
Angels" certainly has all the trappings of cheesy celluloid, there is a
serious vein running throughout that rather spoils the whole thing.
The main offender is the plot, which could have been lifted, for all
intents and purposes, out of any given espionage movie. As with the TV
series, "Charlie's Angels" is about three spunky female detectives. The
"Angels" this time around are feisty Dylan (Drew Barrymore), klutzy
Natalie (Cameron Diaz), and well-bred Alex (Lucy Liu). They work for
Charles Townsend (voice, as before, by John Forsythe), a reclusive
millionaire who is heard but never seen, working through an intermediary,
Bosley (Bill Murray).
The Angels' case this time around involves the abduction of computer whiz
Eric Knox (Sam Townsend) and the theft of top-secret voice identification
software he was developing. Knox's business partner Vivian Wood (Kelly
Lynch) believes the culprit is Roger Corwin (Tim Curry), who recently
failed in a buyout attempt of Knox's company. Wood thinks Corwin plans to
use the voice identification code together with his own global satellite
network to create a system able to track down any person, anywhere in the
world.
Sounds pretty typical, doesn't it? For "Charlie's Angels" to truly 
succeed, it needed something grandiose and outlandish: a story more 
appropriately gauche to match the film's overall tenor. Instead, the
script (credited to Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon and John August, but in fact
massaged by several other writers as well) makes the movie appear uneven,
as though there were different trains of thought running through the
production process. This may well be the case: beyond the opening hook,
most of the script was put together during filming, rarely a strategy
which leads to a cohesive product.
And although the writers do throw in a few twists and turns, they are
still the kind of thing one expects from this genre (one in particular is
quite reminiscent of the most recent Bond flick, "The World Is Not
Enough"). The script, for the most part, plays within the bounds and
conventions of the genre rather than taking them and turning them on their
head. It is a disappointing and lacklustre direction to take.
The visuals, fortunately, are nowhere near as stale. "Charlie's Angels" is
a first-time effort from music video helmer McG (aka Joseph McGinty
Nichol). He proves himself a competent helmer, keeping the action scenes
alive and interesting, and showcasing the three principals well. McG does
a particularly good job filming the "Matrix"-like acrobatics of the Angels
and their opponents. The whole gravity-defying concept is taken just far
enough without becoming completely absurd (another important ingredient to
good camp, of course, is knowing how much is too much).
Amongst the stars, it is the always enjoyable Drew Barrymore (also serving
as co-producer) who does the best job, investing Dylan with just the right
amount of tongue-in-cheek humor. (Check out that moonwalk, though... oy!)
Diaz does a reasonable job as well, but her laughs mostly come as a result
of (her ignorance of) her overt clumsiness, which makes for a limited
repertoire of jokes. Liu is a little too straight-laced as Alex, never
quite finding the right note to complement her co-stars. On the other
hand, though, she does the best job with the action sequences.
What is troubling about Alex, Dylan and Natalie, though, is that the movie
satisfies itself with defining them mostly through their interactions with
men. Except for Wood, all the other characters are male. All three Angels
even have subplots about their love lives, constituting virtually the only
depiction of them outside their jobs. Worse, just one of these arcs is
executed well, featuring Barrymore and her real-life beau, outlandish
comedian Tom Green. Liu is saddled with Matt LeBlanc, who basically
reprises his Joey Tribbiani role from TV's "Friends" (his character is
even an actor), while Diaz's interactions with Luke Wilson are charming in
places, but don't really go anywhere.
"Charlie's Angels" also criminally wastes two of its highest-profile
actors. Bill Murray is entirely out of place as Bosley, given no material
to suit his skills. Tim Curry is similarly mishandled, which is
particularly unfortunate since -- despite the fact that he has been
largely typecast as a villain in recent years -- he has demonstrated
considerable comedic talent in the past ("Clue" and of course "The Rocky
Horror Picture Show" to cite but two examples).
The lone standout amongst the supporting cast is Crispin Glover, who plays
a creepy trichophiliac assassin. Glover's silent Thin Man is perfectly in
keeping with the tone of the film, and is reminiscent of similarly goofy
yet memorable villains as "Goldfinger"'s Oddjob and "Moonraker"'s Jaws.
In the end, "Charlie's Angels" is a bog-standard action movie crossed
uncomfortably with an entertaining cheesy comedy. The result is reasonably
diverting (and certainly deserves praise for featuring no less than three
aggressive, proactive female heroes), but bears the scars of its troubled
production. The inevitable sequel has the potential to be a real gem --
assuming that next time, they remember to write the script first.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/CharliesAngels.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Scott Renshaw
CHARLIE'S ANGELS
(Columbia)
Starring:  Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore, Lucy Liu, Bill Murray, Sam
Rockwell, Tim Curry, Crispin Glover, Kelly Lynch, Luke Wilson.
Screenplay:  Ryan Rowe & Ed Solomon and John August.
Producers:  Drew Barrymore, Nancy Juvonen and Leonard Goldberg.
Director:  McG.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, violence, adult humor)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     CHARLIE'S ANGELS is the sort of marvelously out-of-control Hollywood
contraption that can turn any critic into Joe Bob Briggs. Let's tally up
the contents: Bill Murray in a sumo fat-suit. Cameron Diaz's cleavage. 
Beyond-the-valley-of-THE MATRIX martial arts wire work. Drew Barrymore's
cleavage. Big-ass explosions. Crispin Glover as a mute assassin with
sculpted eyebrows and a fetish for clumps of torn-out hair. More of Drew
Barrymore's cleavage. Tom Green extended cameo. Matt LeBlanc extended
cameo. Cameron Diaz in a white Lycra bodysuit. Lucy Liu playing corporate
trainer/dominatrix. Every cheesy song ever recorded between 1974 and 1984
with the word "angel" in the title. And one pygmy nuthatch.
     By any reasonable filmmaking standard, CHARLIE'S ANGELS is a mess, a
bizarre attempt to mix '70s cheesecake with '00s computer-enhanced James
Bond-ian action. It's infuriating not to be able to shred it to ribbons
for being the geek-boy wet dream it clearly was meant to be, but there's
just too much wild amusement here to dismiss. Welcome to a world where a
trio of brilliant, kung fu fightin', babealicious private detectives --
Natalie (Diaz), Dylan (Barrymore) and Alex (Liu) -- do the bidding of
anonymous, never seen benefactor Charles Townsend. They have been hired to
find out who was behind the kidnapping of software genius Eric Knox (Sam
Rockwell), and their mission (ostensibly) is to retrieve Knox and his
cutting-edge voice-recognition technology from competitor Roger Corwin
(Tim Curry). In fact, their mission is to induce endocrine overload in
viewers who can't get enough of hot chicks doing spinning kicks through
the air while wearing curve-hugging clothing.
     There's no point getting too cerebral about CHARLIE'S ANGELS. In
fact, if you do decide to see it, it would be wise to check under your
seat as you leave to make sure your mind hasn't leaked out of your ear
into a puddle on the floor. Sure, there are the requisite self-aware
nudges to show that it knows not to be taken seriously -- a reference to
T. J. HOOKER: THE MOVIE, a gag about overwrought action film acting, etc. 
-- but it still keeps up a frantic pace so you won't notice how awkwardly
made it is. Certain action sequences are chopped short, character-building
sub-plots stall the film in place and the tone shifts abruptly from moment
to moment. Whatever 21st century spin the folks involved might want to put
on this version of CHARLIE'S ANGELS, it's still all about the T&A --
whether it stands for technique & attitude, or bears the cruder, more
common meaning.
     But damned if it still isn't more fun than MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE 2, or
THE WORLD IS NOT ENOUGH, or virtually any other recent high-tech caper
you'd care to name. Part of it is how unabashedly over-the-top it all is,
from the physics-defying fight sequences to the megaton explosions. Part
of it is the way the comic relief actually provides comedy, including Bill
Murrays' inimitable Bill Murray-ness and Cameron Diaz getting into her
ditzy side. Part of it is the strange appeal of watching a film that lets
women be the James Bonds (including the unapologetic casual sex), and
comes up with better villains than the Bond series has had for some time
(dig that Crispin Glover!). And yes, a whole lot of it is how it pulls off
the neat trick of sending up the series' hair-flipping jiggle appeal while
still taking advantage of it.
     Do all the pieces of CHARLIE'S ANGELS add up to slick movie-making? 
No. In fact, rookie feature film director McG clearly has a lot to learn
about elements beyond slow-motion and near-subliminal edits. He does,
however, have a game cast, a competent script, some awesome fight 
choreography and a willingness to turn anything into a joke. This ain't
art, but it ain't the kind of tediously predictable big-budget garbage you
usually find at your multiplex, either. This is movie-making heavy on the
Drew Barrymore-hangin'-out-a-window-while-nekkid-fu. Scott says check it
out.

Author
Laura Clifford
With so many big screen adaptations of old television shows falling flat,
the "Charlie's Angels" project sounded dubious except for one important
factor - Drew Barrymore.  Barrymore is a likeable young actress and a
proven producer ("Never Been Kissed") and she succeeds once again
with this project.
Written by Ryan Rowe ("Tapeheads"), Ed Solomon ("Men In Black") and
John August ("Go"), this "Charlie's Angels" keeps the TV show basics intact
while tweaking it with good-natured tongues in cheeks.  The film kicks
off parodying "Mission Impossible 2" in as high-flying a manner as any
Bond opening, while getting a joke in at the expense of "T.J. Hooker:  
the Movie."  Then we're introduced to the three angels as widely different 
children.  Natalie's (Cameron Diaz) a brace wearing, girlie girl who loves 
Soul Train.  Alex (Lucy Liu) is a silver-spooned equestrian.  Dylan 
(Barrymore) is a smoking-in-the-girls'-room rebellious orphanned teen.
Back in current times, the three are assembled by Bosley (Bill Murray) to
get their assignment from Charlie (uncreditted voice of John Forsythe,
the original Charlie).  Eric Knox (Sam Rockwell, "Galaxy Quest"), a 
nerdy software magnate, has been kidnapped.  His partner Vivian Wood (Kelly
Lynch, "Drugstore Cowboy"), fingers Roger Corwin (Tim Curry) as an enemy
while the Angels identify a slick flunky in the kidnapping tape as the
Thin Man (Crispen Glover, "Nurse Betty").  They then begin their pursuit
of the bad guy(s) masquerading as beautiful party women, belly dancers,
Bavarian yodellers and office efficiency experts.  They also all pursue
romance - Natalie with bartender Pete (Luke Wilson, a Barrymore ex and
former costar "Home Fries"), Alex with action star Jason (Matt LeBlanc,
TV's "Friends") and Dylan with Knox himself (while flirting with Chad,
Barrymore's new husband Tom Green) - while maintaining their covers.
The story is lightweight, but features plenty of action (all Matrix style
and well exaggerated) and lots of goofy humor (slo-mo shots of hair being
'flipped').  Only Alex' romance with LeBlanc and Barrymore's indulgent
inclusion of Tom Green bog the film down.
Acting is fun all around with Diaz shining brightest as the excessively
cheerful, completely ditzy Natalie.  Liu struts her femme fatale stuff.
Barrymore keeps her costars more front-and-center, yet still makes her
own mark playing a woman scorned.  Sam Rockwell hits broad comedic high
notes in two very different modes while the ever reliable Murray settles
for slapstick (and a great prison parody sequence).  Tim Curry is
underutilized, but fine while he's on screen.  Crispen Glover resembles
a deranged Steed from "The Avengers."
Costume and art direction harkens back to the mod 70's time period while 
still being current while effects are sometimes given a little appropriate
cheese factor.  The soundtrack is stuffed with everything from oldies 
from Jimi Hendrix to more recent tunes from Pizzicato Five.  "Charlie's 
Angels" may seem a tad overlong at 92 minutes, but it mostly flies across 
the screen with good-natured giddiness.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
A first time movie director. Nasty rumors of infighting on the set. No
original "Angels" making cameos in the film. What were we to expect? A
disaster, to be sure. A mini-WATERWORLD, if anything. A film that we could
look back at the end of the year and say, "Boy, we saw that dirtball coming
down the aisle months ago, didn't we?" and pat ourselves on the back. But
color me surprised, impressed and above all, entertained...as the angels,
charlie and everyone else involved in this production somehow managed to
take whatever nasty rumors surrounded the film and turn them all into a
harmless hour and a half of fun, fun and another little thing called fun!
Women superheroes? You bet!
PLOT:
Oh, it's that same ol' story. Three smart, tough, sexy women prone to
kickin' ass and solving McGyver-type problems are given yet another
dangerous assignment from their boss, a multimillionaire gentleman whom
they've never met, and proceed to solve problems, kick ass and juggle bad
guys through umpteenth costume changes. Fun is had by all.
CRITIQUE:
A friggin' blast! This movie is a campy, kitshy, funny, action-packed,
bubblegum romp in the sand with three beautiful, sexy, smart women all
playing like they know they're in on one of the funnest movies of the year!
Kick arse soundtrack. Ultra-slick directing. Fun cameos. Cool dance
sequences. Awesome stunts. A cutesy story that doesn't amount to anything
more than a cartoon playing out like a comic book, but you know it's all
good because you're sittin' in your seat, chewing on that popcorn, letting
that butter drip down the side of your mouth and into the pile of cheese
topping off your nachos, and the film just gives you more cheese and more
fun and more kickin' arse, and you eventually realize that the film is just
a heapin' helping of movie fun and if you ain't on their side, then you
ain't in on one of the funkiest rides of the year. Slap Crispen Glover in
there as the ultra-sleek bad guy smokin' like a bad guy should. Sam
Rockwell, confirming his abilities as a solid quirky character actor, and
even Matt LeBlanc, walking around with his tongue firmly planted in his
cheek and getting jiggy with everything that boogies in this movie, and God
knows...it all boogies! Phew.
But honestly, folks, if you're looking for a quick, easy, fun ride for the
evening...something to take your mind of that darn boss back at the
workplace, or that better half of yours who just keeps nagging you about
this and that, grind your gears into neutral, sit back, relax and have
yourself a nice, cool tall one on the Angels and McG. It's been a while
since I've seen a movie have so much fun with itself, but this one is ripe
for the season. It takes girl power, tosses in some Jimmy Bond, a little
Mission Impossible spy mumbo-jumbo, three hot babes kickin' Matrix-type
arse, a rockin' soundtrack, cool cars, a cold-cocking start, some fun credit
outtakes, inside jokes left and right, and makes it all feel sooooo good.
And the girls honestly seem to be having a great time here. Lucy Liu, rock
solid as the most well-rounded angel of them all, smart as a whip, sexy as a
vamp and tough as nails. Diaz, cute as a button, reminding everyone why we
all fell in love with her in THE MASK, and Drew Barrymore, one girl who
should be doubly commended for taking part in the production side of this
fluffy gem as well. One small disappointment was the lack of Bill Murray's
classic scene stealing moments, but surely something to look forward to in
CA2. I've probably over-sold this movie by now, but to be honest, I had a
great time. I guess it's just been a while since I've seen something that
offered such unadulterated enjoyment...and cleavage :)
But if you expect to take this movie seriously, stop right now and don't
bother seeing it. This film is not made for you. It's made for people who
are looking for a punch-across-the-face kinda time, mixed in with a quick
Tequila pick-me-up and a nice, thick, gooey wad o' cheese. If you're that
person, stand in line right now, ask for one ticket for the Angels, and
prepare yourself to be taken through the fun side of the world of make
believe. The Angels...they are deliverin'!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
One of the cuter in-jokes in this film comes by the way of an E.T. poster
slapped against the wall of a playroom in which two young boys meet Drew
Barrymore's character. Of course, Drew will probably always be best
remembered for her part of Gertie in that film.
If you don't recognize actor Sam Rockwell from his previous roles, allow me
to remind you. He plays the nerdy millionaire geek in this film. And last
year, he played the alternate member of the GALAXY QUEST crew (the guy who
always thought he was doomed) and maniac mouse-killer jailbird "Wild Bill"
in THE GREEN MILE.
On top of acting in and producing this film, Drew Barrymore also managed to
slip both her current (Tom Green) and ex-boyfriend (Luke Wilson) into the
activities. Both men have cameo roles.
There were three writers credited with the screenplay of this movie: Ryan
Rowe, Ed Solomon and John August. The latter gentleman is also the man
behind the screenplay for GO.
Director McG's full name is Joseph McGinty Mitchell.
