Title
Review for Crossing Delancey (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
The Invisible Man
     Well, I was looking forward to seeing CROSSING DELANCEY since everyone I
know who saw it said they'd liked it.  Supposedly, it was about how one falls
in love despite rather than because of how you think it ought to be.  Well,
that's what MOONSTRUCK was about or at least what one of Nicholas Cage's
speeches in MOONSTRUCK was about, and a good little speech it was, too.  But
CROSSING DELANCEY was not really about that at all.  It was really about how
deep down inside, every fish knows they really need a bicycle.
     Okay, so here I am expecting to like this film and it starts out with Amy
Irving's character Izzy (hmmm, a unisex name) in her exciting New York singles
life with her literary crowd and her occasional overnight lay, with this old
Jewish grandmother whom she loves but who doesn't really understand who she is.
And Bubba (Yiddish affectionate term for grandma) arranges for Izzy to meet this
nice Jewish man who sells pickles.  (Hmmm, pickles.)  I already know the plot.
She's going to end up with the pickle man so what I want to see is how the film
will pull it off.   All the film has to do now is to get me to like this pickle
guy and consider him superior to the literary types she hangs with.
     Well, there are already things about the lit folks not to like.  The usual
faults: vanity, pretentiousness, manipulativeness, superficiality.  They just
know how to phrase things in an interesting manner.  So we're halfway there.
And we've got to overcome outdatedness, religiousness (which is, after all,
outdated), drabness, uncoolness on Sam the pickle man's side.  He has to become
"substance" in contrast to the other folks "style."   Well, his drabness can be
shown to be self-assurance, i.e., he has no need to dramatize himself.  His
outdatedness can actually be respect for those outdated others in his
community, e.g., he allows the matchmaker to believe that it was she who
brought them together when actually he'd noticed Izzy two years earlier.  His
straight-forwardness is contrasted to the manipulations of the lit crowd and 
Izzy herself in her embodyment of their values.
     But, for me any way, I never experience Sam as attractive.  If only he
would let slip that he could phrase things in an interesting manner too if he
felt like it.  In the Italian version, Nicholas Cage's character has an
outrageousness and an energy which is attractive but Sam is just too G-rated to
be exciting without some unique characteristic to make him stand out.  But
that's part of the message of this film.  Bubba admits the man she'd married
wasn't special, just persistent but that showed how much he loved her and that
that was the basis of her marriage's (and therefore all marriage's) success.
Attractiveness is just style, persistence is substance.
     And what does Sam see in Izzy?  His first attraction is to her looks.  And
all that he gets to see of her in the following several scenes is how good she
looks and how badly she treats him.  So Sam gets to chase style and ignore
substance.  Well, he's got enough substance for both of them.  So I'm left
feeling that, since her life is incomplete without a man (and we are
continuously and subtly shown evidence that this is so, only she's too modern
to admit it to herself) and Sam is a nice man (since he puts up with her
mistreatment of him) she is right to end up with him.  She doesn't understand
why she is attracted to him and acts as if she is drawn to him against her
will.  I don't understand why she is attracted to him either and experienced
the "against her will" part not as a surrender to a deeper self within her, but
as a surrender to the traditional solution for what every women really needs.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Well-above-average comedy/drama
     reminiscent of MOONSTRUCK but set in the Jewish community of
     Manhattan.  Some nice characterizations in this story of a
     33-year-old career woman's relationships with two men.
     Rating: +2.
     It has been a good long while since my wife and I have found ourselves
to be the youngest people in an audience, but we did with CROSSING DELANCY
and that in itself is a testimonial that the filmmaker must be doing
something right.  And she is.  Joan Micklin Silver has directed a warm,
human sort of comedy that is at least comparable to MOONSTRUCK and at least
in some ways better.
     Isabelle Grossman (played by Amy Irving) is 33 and has a fulfilling
career.  Working in a very literary bookstore.  She arranges for public
readings by very good authors, she runs book discussion groups, she lies to
her grandmother that she does not mind being single, and she knows many
important people in the publishing field.  Working hard at her job, it is
late at night before she gets back to her big, empty apartment.  Knowing
many major literary figures, perhaps some day she will have a lasting
relationship with one or perhaps even marry one.  Her closest relative, her
grandmother, calls in a matchmaker for Isabelle, much to Isabelle's
embarrassment.  And who does the matchmaker suggest?  A pickle salesman, Sam
Posner (played by Peter Riegart of ANIMAL HOUSE and LOCAL HERO).  Well, he
is sort of a nice guy, he has a good sense of humor, he obviously would like
very much to get to know Isabelle, he even can make sound romantic his
reasons for letting a matchmaker bring him together with Isabelle.  But he
is just a pickle salesman after all, and Isabelle really has her eye on a
tall, handsome Dutch author, Anton Maes (played by Jeroen Krabbe).  Deep
down, Isabelle knows that Maes will never have time for her and that he
really is not as great a writer as many think him to be.  But he certainly
seems like a better catch than a pickle salesman.  If only she can find a
good way to brush off Sam without feeling too guilty.
     Based on the 1985 play by Susan Sandler has a terrific character
portraits.  Bubbie (i.e., Grandmother) Kantor (played by Reizl Bozyk) is a
wonderful combination of endearing and exasperating.  The matchmaker (played
by Sylvia Miles) fits the stereotype of the pushy, obnoxious matchmaker, but
then what sort of person becomes a matchmaker anyway?  Isabelle herself is a
little flat as a character and it takes her a long time to realize what the
audience knew long before.
     CROSSING DELANCY has some totally superfluous revealing clothing and
explicit sexual language, but the MPAA double-crossed the film and still
gave it a PG.  Do not confuse it with a children's film.  Rate it +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Soukup
     Joan Micklin Silver's CROSSING DELANCY is a gem that should be cherished
by filmgoers.  One doesn't want to overpraise a film like this because it
deserves to be enjoyed as one would a light dessert.  It is not a heavy
cinematic feast, but a delightful romantic truffle.
     Isabelle (Amy Irving) is a modern career woman of thirty-three living in
Manhattan.  She is fulfilled by her work, has terrific friends but is
unattached romantically.  However, she is not "holding her breath" waiting for
"Mr. Right"; she is perfectly comfortable without a man in her life.  Her
grandmother (Reizl Bozyk) has other ideas.  She hires a marriage broker (Sylvia
Miles) to find a husband for Issy.  What ensues is a clash between Issy's
modern way of life and the traditional values of her grandmother.
     Micklin Silver has pitched the film perfectly.  It is sweet and
sentimental without being saccharine; it is wise and funny without being
preachy or silly.  Each scene is packed with wit and warmth.  These characters
seem real.  The humor is the humor of everyday life and not contrived sitcom
shenanigans.  Susan Sandler is credited with the wondrous screenplay.
     The acting is exceptional.  Irving is perfect in the lead but the show
stealers are Bozyk as her grandmother and Miles as the marriage broker.  Miles
literally chews the scenery and is hilarious.  Look for these two when the
year-end award nominations are announced.

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Previous reviews had "Delancey" misspelled--the fault is mine.  -Editor]
     Sometimes I come into a review wondering what the hell I'm going to say
about it except for "Gee, I really enjoyed this film."  Romantic comedies are
like that; naming the genre pretty much describes what's going to happen in the
movie.  You're left with grading the dialogue, the performances and the
characters.  Well, they're all very good here.  As to laughter generated, it
was quality over quantity -- you really *like* the characters in this film, you
want the two principles (Amy Irving, Peter Riegert) to get together by the end
of the film (unless you're a cad or a vixen), and so there's a lot of
understanding chuckles here, along with a decent number of healthy guffaws.  
     Very brief plot synopsis (it's a very small plot): Amy Irving works in a
very influential bookstore in Manhattan.  She is happy at her job, where she
has gotten to know many of the literary talents of our day.  She likes her
friends and her apartment.  She doesn't have a boyfriend, but so what?
Besides, there's this famous devil-may-care poet in the area....  On weekends,
however, she heads to Delancy Street, a predominantly Jewish neighborhood where
her grandmother lives.  Her grandmother loves her, but fails to recognize her
granddaughter's accomplishments in the face of what is, to her, a major failure
in Irving's character's life: no husband.  She sets up an appointment with a
matchmaker, who knows of a pickle vendor (Riegert) who is interested in her...
and away we go.
     The character actors are all very good: I particularly liked the actress
playing the grandmother, the pair who are the help at the bookstore, and the
fellow who plays Irving's married friend who sleeps in her apartment when his
wife and he have an argument.  Irving herself is fine, if a little low-key
compared to everyone else -- but then, she is the foil for almost everyone else
in the movie.  No, scratch that -- Riegert is her foil, and he does a wonderful
job of it.  I've enjoyed his work for a long time, but he only seems to do
about a film every couple of years.  Here he has been cast perfectly, and has
great lines to boot.  The audience I saw the film with were literally
applauding for him to get the girl (I was greatly entertained when an elderly
lady sitting near me, watching the poet trying to make time with Irving,
muttered "Schmuck" at him).
     This is probably being compared to MOONSTRUCK quite a bit -- both are
romantic comedies dealing with ethnic neighborhoods in Manhattan.  If you want
a difference, though, here it is (I like both films a lot):  MOONSTRUCK
contained characters who were more on the edge, with a slightly bizarre edge,
and it seemed to present most of the behavior through fairly sardonic eyes.
CROSSING DELANCEY has more realistic characters -- odd at times, but still
eccentric instead of gonzo -- and while it also gets its humor from the
interaction of the characters, it's less fractious and more sympathetic comedy.
     If I hadn't seen MANON OF THE SPRING a couple of months ago, I'd say that
this is the best film I've seen since July.  Gentle humor, but no less strong
because of it's mild nature.
