Title
Review for Promesse, La (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LA PROMESSE (THE PROMISE) (Belgium, France, Luxembourg) (1996) ***  Written
& directed by Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne. Photography, Alain Marcoen &
Benoit Dervaux. Editing, Marie-Helene Dozo. Art direction, Igor Gabriel.
Music, Jean-Marie Billy and Denis M'Punga. Produced by Luc Dardenne and
Hassen Daldoul.  Cast: Jeremie Renier (Igor), Olivier Gourmet (Roger),
Assita Ouedraogo (Assita) and Rasmane Ouedraogo (Amidou).  in French with
subtitles.  A New Yorker release. 94 min. Not rated.
Those whose Latin extends beyond  "E Pluribus Unum" might just remember
"homo homini lupus" (man is a wolf to man). That's what the first part of
"La Promesse" tells us. But it is followed by " homo homini agnus" (man is
a lamb to man). At least that's my reading of the third feature by the
Belgian Dardenne brothers.
The movie, premiered in a parallel section of the 1996 Cannes Festival, has
been highly praised by American reviewers. It is mostly  set in or near the
city of Liege (Belgium). It is essentially a two plus two character drama.
The first duo consists of young Igor and his father Roger. Igor is 15 -- as
per information I gleaned in various documents. (The film proper is rather
frustratingly vague about times, places and other factual information). The
boy, already a heavy smoker and beer guzzler, but still a virgin, is
something of a Peeping Tom, works in a gas station as an apprentice
mechanic. He swipes the customers' wallets and shows up at the station
fitfully --which results in his dismissal.
Igor is his father's main helper in an illegal operation of  illegal
immigrant workers, African, Eastern European, Korean, etc., whom the ring,
for a high price, spirits into Belgium hidden inside automobiles carries on
car-transport vehicles. Then Roger, charging outrageously again, gets the
immigrants fake papers and houses them  in stinking, disgusting hovels
within decrepit buildings.
The traffickers know no decency. When, for example, there is political
pressure on the gang, the operators sacrifice some of the aliens by
pretending they'll be sent to America (after due payment), but betray them
to the authorities.
The story then focuses on an African couple (Amidou and Assita) and their
baby. Amidou, working for Roger, falls off a scaffolding and dies, but not
before exacting from Igor the promise that he will watch over Assita and
her child.  Since the body would cause an investigation, father and son
dispose of it by burial in concrete.
(It was unclear to me whether or not Amidou might have survived if taken to
a hospital -- which Roger refused to do as unsafe for his business. So
Amidou's death, may have to a killing by omission).
The man's death is not revealed to his wife. She is told instead that
Amidou had disappeared, run off perhaps to avoid paying debts. Roger now
tries to get rid of Assita by sending her to nearby Cologne (Germany) where
he would arrange for the woman to work as a prostitute.
About 40 minutes into the movie, Igor begins to feel pangs of guilt that
keep increasing.  He defies his father and attempts to come to the woman's
help. The process of a rising conscience and consciousness takes up the
rest of the film. It is intermingled with some local touches of racism and
xenophobia.
The entire process is filmed like a documentary, with a constantly mobile,
moving  and often handheld camera. There is obviously a desire by the
filmmakers to keep a realistic look and tone, which is understandable and
adds power to the movie.  This technique is valid in principle. It
distances the work from the smooth and slick Hollywood-type films. But it
often goes overboard and could induce fatigue in the viewers.  A modicum of
using the Steadycam system might have helped. ( This gyroscope-like method,
introduced in the mid-70s, puts a special harness on the operator and
allows moving the machine without jiggling).
The episodes are done with naturalness, economical dialogue and no
traditional  verbal elaboration. The burden is on telling details, on
implications and on the facial expressions of the performers.  Roger, and
above all Igor, acquit themselves nicely, with the latter's gradual
transformation following a credible development.
"La Promesse" is as far as one can go from commercial movies. It is
well-meaning but also well-handled, never showing any traces of glop,
sentimentalizing or romanticizing. Among its virtues is that if you imagine
that this subject had been filmed in routine ways, it might have made of
Assita a colorful --perhaps even wise -- character. Here, she is rather
attractive but, like her drab surroundings, a sad figure. In a good touch,
to find out if her husband is alive or dead, she consults the entrails of a
chicken and later is taken by an older African lady to a  witch doctor.
Both Assita and Amidou come from Burkina Faso (the former Upper Volta), a
small, poor country where, surprisingly, there is Africa's greatest ferment
of movie-making, partly encouraged by the regular Pan African festivals in
Ouagadougou, the capital. Director Idrissa Ouedraogo, a winner of major
awards (e.g. at Cannes) is widely known internationally.
Their real family names of Assita and Amidou are also Ouedraogo. It must be
Burkina Faso's equivalent of Smith or Jones or else Idrissa's dozens of
relatives have made it in cinema. A year or two ago, when Idrissa's latest
film was shown at the Cannes Festival, the credits had such an unending
list of Ouedraogos that at the press screening the critics kept bursting
into laughter exponentially.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The movie poster for LA PROMESSE has a teenage boy with a vacant
expression zipping along on his small motorbike through the streets of
Antwerp.  As the air rushes through his hair, he seems oblivious to the
world.  This poster provides an apt metaphor to this meaningless
pseudo-expose of the plight of immigrant workers.
     Jeremie Renier plays the central character, Igor, the
fifteen-year-old from the poster.  Expressionless until almost the end,
his long repressed emotions burst through briefly and as falsely as the
rest of his otherwise stoic performance.
     The simple but excruciatingly slow story concerns Igor, a petty
thief, and his lumbering father, Roger (Olivier Gourmet), a bigtime
crook.  Roger (Olivier Gourmet), with the help of his son, smuggles
illegal immigrants into Belgium for a fee.  Once there, he treats them
badly and rents them substandard housing.  Olivier Gourmet plays his
part as an uncaring bumpkin.  He has such little passion that he almost
lacks any humanity.
     The story revolves around the accidental death of one of their
illegal workers, Amidou (Rasmane Ouedraogo), from Bugina Faso in
Africa.  Roger forces Igor to help bury the body.  This supercilious
story's little drama revolves around whether Amidou's wife, Assita
(Assita Ouedraogo), will discover that her husband is not just missing
but dead and whether Igor will ever come to terms with his repressed
guilt.  Assita Ouedraogo, who expresses most of the show's emotions,
confines these to outbursts of ranting and raving.
     Much is made of the father's relationship with his son, but their
chemistry has the same false ring as the rest of the production.  In
one sequence the father discovers that his son is a virgin.  This is
followed by an obligatory scene of the father's hustling him off to a
bar where a woman in a low-cut dress laughs at Igor's every word.
     This pretentious film, dripping with pathos and big messages, is
the overly serious type most critics love.  With his unsteady handheld
camera Alain Marcoen films it in a blur of pans, extreme close-ups,
backs of people's heads and all the artistically gritty shots possible.
Marie-Helene Dozo's choppy editing also serves to make the viewer feel
unwelcome.  Although the attempt is for a film with a documentary feel,
the result is amateurish and uneven.   Written and directed by the
brothers Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne, it was a big hit at Cannes, if
one believes the press kit.  That does not mean the directors have
produced a compelling narrative.  LA PROMESSE wants to be gut-wrenching
and inviting, but actually is cold and uninvolving.
     LA PROMESSE runs 1:33.  It is in French with English subtitles.
Although unrated, its little violence and profanity would probably get
it a PG-13, but this is a mature movie, appropriate only for teenagers
and older.  I found little in the show that felt honest so I give it
thumbs down and * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

PROMESSE, LA (director/writer: Jean-Pierre Dardenne/Luc Dardenne;
screenwriter: Luc Dardenne; cinematographer: Alain Marcoen; cast:
Jérémie Renier (Igor), Olivier Gourmet (Roger), Assita Ouedraogo
(Assita), Rasmane Ouedraogo (Amidou), 1996-Belgium/France)
This is a grim morality tale that can't help putting you in someone
else's shoes, wondering what you would do if you were in the same
situation. It is also a "coming-of-age" film, testing a youngster'
mettle to rise above his dire circumstances. It is seen through the
troubled eyes of a slender 15-year-old blond, living in Liege, Belgium,
named Igor (Renier). He has lost his childlike innocence, already being
a petty crook and a breaker of the law, but is still sexually innocent.
He is living with and helping out his single-parent father by doing the
dirty work his father is counting on him to do that keeps his unsavory
business going. His father, who insists Igor call him by his Christian
name, Roger (Gourmet), has a construction business where he employs
illegal immigrants, and exploits and traffics in them. They come from
all over the world but mostly from Bosnia and Africa. His love for his
son is so twisted and wrongly placed, even if it is some form of love
that he offers, that it still results in his son being raised by a
monster: keeping him out of school, at a distance from his regular teen
friends, allowing him to smoke cigarettes freely, even tattooing him
with the same tattoo he has; and, the worst thing he does, is corrupt
him with a false set of values, while having the audacity to tell him
that he is doing all these illicit things for his sake.
On the day that the government inspectors appear at the work site, the
illegals are told to hide from the inspectors. One of the illegals,
Amidou (Rasmane), from Burkina Faso, falls from a scaffold and needs to
be rushed to the hospital. Igor drags him out of the inspector's sight,
but not before Amidou makes him promise that if he dies he will look
after his wife and baby. When Roger finishes showing the inspectors
around and discovers Amidou is severely injured, he refuses to take him
to the hospital afraid that he doesn't know what to tell the hospital
has happened without arousing their suspicions. Instead, he does the
most savage thing he could possibly do, he gets Igor, who is becoming
very squeamish at this point, to help him bury Amidou in concrete, even
if he is aware that Amidou is still barely alive.
How cruel can people be to others! ...  As for Roger there was no
question about it, his generosity did not include those outside of his
small circle; and, immigrants and especially black ones were barely even
human to him. But something has happened to the kid. He has developed a
sense of guilt, knowing full-well he has done something wrong, and he
also knows that he is trapped, he has to make a decision one way or the
other, either be with his father or help the widow. Whichever way he
goes, there will be a price to pay for him, he will not be able to
satisfy both parties. Going with his father is morally wrong, but
perhaps easier for him and a more understandable choice, considering
that his other choice is with a people he knows nothing about. But the
other choice he understands is the right one, and he wrestles with his
conscience as he tries to help the widow without hurting his father.
LA PROMESSE has the harsh reality to it that a documentary might have,
and considering that the sibling film directors are acclaimed
documentary directors for over two decades, it is easy to see that even
though this story is fictionalized it, neverthess, is filmed in the
manner of the very real experiences that the filmmakers have noted going
on in modern Europe. The illegals, on the bottom end of the totem pole,
with no legal right granted them to be where they are, are at the mercy
of such heartless and bigoted people as these who swoon down upon them
as vultures.
The three main characters of the story are cast perfectly. Igor
indicates by his facial expressions that he wants to be a kid again but
can't, as he learns how to face up to the different situations that keep
popping up in his life. When we first meet him he is seen as a slick
liar and petty thief, swiping a woman's wallet, and then we see him as
he gradually changes and develops an empathy for the widow of the
immigrant, maybe, even thinking of her as the mother he doesn't have but
certainly needs. He watches with a warm scrutiny as she fiercely tries
to protect her child from all the outside evils.
The film could have been done from the father's point of view instead of
the son's; and, even more interestingly, from Assita's (the widow) way
of seeing things, and the film would have still had a tremendous impact.
She has a regality about her that is peerless, even when she is
searching for the truth about her husband's disappearance, not satisfied
with the stories Roger and Igor are telling her. When she is left
stranded under a trestle and two Belgians piss on her, as they are
perched above her, we see in her anger and frustration, that she is lost
in a country of white people she does not understand. But there is an
unmistakable presence she has, that clearly shows the nobility of her
character, especially when contrasted with all those around her whose
minds are so blemished.
Roger is one of the slimiest guys you could ever meet, someone who tries
to pretend he is good but it so obviously not, that it is written all
over him what he really is. But the character he has is fitting for the
person he is. There is room for us to see in him what makes him act the
way he does, that he is not that far removed from the consciousness' of
the ordinary man in the street, except for his utter lack of decorum and
any sort of social conscience. From his point of view, we could see that
he is only looking out for number one, thinking, that if he doesn't, who
else will. An argument you will frequently hear from the man in the
street, as he tries to rationalize his vices.
To further contrast the differing white and black cultures, we see how
the Western medical profession treatment of her differs from the one she
intuitively trusts, as she goes to a witch doctor. Igor's guilt-ridden
help, results in Assita being taken to a hospital to find out why her
baby is so sick. But they can't see anything wrong. So she consults an
African spiritualist. He determines that she can save the baby by going
to see relatives in Italy, that there is nothing that she can accomplish
here, the baby is telling her to leave.
When the young Igor can't live with his father's cruel dishonesty
anymore, one of the more powerful confrontational scenes imaginable
takes place between a father and son, as the son removes the mental
shackles he has worn all his life and places real chains on his father.
He walks out on him, choosing to help Assita get out of the country,
rather than remain with his father. In a strange way, without him or her
being conscious of it, she became his surrogate mother.
This powerful tale is unflinchingly honest and moving. It casts a dark
shadow over a civilized country's technological prowess in the world,
and questions its humanity and moral perspectives. It does so in a most
tangible way, in a way that should be a disturbing reminder of how
complex the problem of immigration is, in a film that is piercingly on
target as a challenge for the European countrys to keep their "promise"
to the immigrants and to see how corrupt their system is and how it
doesn't really stop these powerless people from being exploited.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Belgium/France, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 5/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Jeremie Renier, Olivier Gourmet, Assita Ouedraogo, 
      Rasmane Ouedraogo
Directors: Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne
Producers: Hassen Daldoul, Luc Dardenne
Screenplay: Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne
Cinematography: Alain Marcoen
Music: Jean-Marie Billy, Denis M'Punga
U.S. Distributor: New Yorker Films
In French with English subtitles
     LA PROMESSE, a rare import from Belgium, indicates how grim the 
mood of a film can become when there's almost no comic relief.  
Excepting one or two moments of gallows humor, there's little to break 
the relentlessly bleak tone.  Fortunately, the script is written with 
such intelligence and the characters are developed so believably that, 
irrespective of the downbeat approach (or, perhaps, because of it), it's 
difficult not to be moved by the plight of 15-year old Igor (an unforced 
performance by newcomer Jeremie Renier), who is trapped into choosing 
between his father, Roger (Olivier Gourmet), and the demands of his 
conscience.
     When the film opens, Igor is already wise beyond his years.  He's 
an active participant in his father's shady, "immigration service" 
business.  Roger is one of those crooks who makes his money by preying 
on the desperation of others.  For exorbitant fees, he smuggles illegal 
immigrants into Belgium, forges false work permits for them, and sets 
them up in slum-like apartments (for which he charges unreasonably high 
rents).  Many of the immigrants also work at Roger's construction site, 
where they are paid a pittance for hard, occasionally-dangerous work.  
Igor, who also works as an apprentice at a garage, serves as his 
father's assistant, and has learned to lie, cheat, and steal just as 
well as his old man.  
     In addition to being a criminal, Roger is also a bully.  When his 
son does something to displease him, he beats him mercilessly.  Despite 
all that, there's little doubt that he loves Igor, although he's unable 
to express his affection effectively.  In addition, he has trained 
himself to objectify the men and women he smuggles into the country, 
adopting the same basic philosophy as the Belgian police:  "Illegals 
don't exist."  To Roger, the immigrants are a less-than-human source of 
income, and that is a philosophy he attempts to pass on.  (This reminded 
me of a subplot in John Singleton's ROSEWOOD in which a father taught 
racism to his son.)  Dad's lessons are leaving an impression upon Igor 
until an event occurs that forces him to re-evaluate what he has 
learned.
     One of Roger's workers, Amidou (Rasmane Ouedraogo), falls from a 
scaffold and is critically injured.  As he lies dying, he extracts a 
promise from Igor to care for his wife, Assita (played with quiet 
dignity by Assita Ouedraogo), and infant boy, both newly arrived from 
Bugina Faso.  Rather than taking Amidou to a hospital (where all sorts 
of difficult questions would arise), Roger elects to let the man bleed 
to death, then buries him under a thick layer of cement.  He encourages 
Igor to forget the incident, but the boy cannot, and his attempts to 
honor his promise to the dying Amidou generate friction between himself 
and his father.  Worse still, Assita is often a grudging, if not openly 
unwilling, recipient of Igor's aid.
     Essentially, LA PROMESSE is a variation of that motion picture 
staple, the "coming of age" story.  The difference here, however, is 
that the choices faced by Igor are more complex than is the norm.  
Becoming an adult does not mean, as his father asserts, learning how to 
drive and "getting laid" -- it means assessing the value of his word and 
heeding the call of his conscience, regardless of the price.  No matter 
what Igor does, he will betray someone -- the crux of the matter for him 
is determining which betrayal he can live with.  Although LA PROMESSE 
presents a resolution, it makes it clear that there are no easy answers 
for Igor or for us.  
     As directed by brothers Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne (who have been 
making documentaries in their native country for more than two decades), 
LA PROMESSE has a "you are there" style that favors a cinema verite 
approach to polished photography.  In concert with a quartet of natural 
performances and a persuasive, insightful script, this method results in 
a film that one could easily accept as non-fiction.  Indeed, while this 
particular story is an invention of the writer/directors, a host of 
universal truths can be found just beneath the surface.
     LA PROMESSE is designed to challenge an audience.  There are 
numerous instances throughout when viewers will find themselves 
wondering what they would do in similar circumstances.  On each of these 
occasions, the directors proceed in a logical, intelligent manner, and 
rarely stray into melodrama (although there are a few minor slips here 
and there).  Despite being a low-key production, LA PROMESSE speaks 
volumes about how we treat other human beings and what it means to truly 
grow up.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Jun Yan
        In some way this very little publicized (at least here in the
States) Belgian film reminded me of an American film a couple of years ago
named "Fresh."  They both follow a boy's journey through a world that's
falling apart and in which they grow up too fast.  
        As the film opens, it makes no secret that our central character
Igor, about 14 years old, is a ruthless little thief.  It also explains to
us why -- he lives with his father Roger, a scumbag in the business of
smuggling illegal immigrants into Europe.  In Igor's world, all the adults
are thugs, low-lives who lie, steal, rob, cheat, betray and bribe whenever
necessary.  Morality is merely inexistent.  One cannot help blending in
with his world.         
        Assita and her baby are newly arrival from Bugina Faso, Africa to
unite with her husband, who work illegally in Belgium for minimal income,
live in the dumpester apartment provided by the blood-sucking Roger.  Soon
there is a hardly detectable affection developing between Igor and Assita.
One day in a frentic rush to escape the inspection from the Labor
Department, Assita's husband fell from the building while working for
Roger and bled to death because Roger refuses to take him to a hospital.
Before he dies, Assita's husband asks Igor to take care of his wife and
baby.  Igor makes the promise, thus the title.  
        The promise, it turns out, is not so easy to carry out.  Assita
grows more suspicious everyday about disappeared husband.  Roger tries
every way possible to cover up his track and forbid Igor's attempt to help
her.  As conscience begins to awaken within Igor, conflicts with his
father becomes inevitable.  The film makes it clear that it's hard to do
the right thing and it doesn't get any easier as you try to carry it on.  
        When Roger finally decides to get rid of Assita by selling her
into prostitution, Igor faces the ultimate choice: to do the right thing
and split with his only family in the world, or to stand aside and salvage
his relationship with his father.  Keep in mind that he is still merely a
child with a heavy moral burden on his heart.  Meanwhile, the deceived
Assita is still pressing the burning question "Where is my husband?"  
        The film is about how morality and conscience emerges in a young
mind that has never been exposed to such concept.  The uncompromising
script makes the situation every bit difficult as it could be for our
young man Igor.  Roger, the disgusting scumbag is also the only person in
the world that cares about him and vice versa.  From the obvious
affection, sometimes shown in his own way, we suspect Roger needs Igor
even more badly than his son's need for him, for Igor is the only human
connection he has and the only one he does not have to use and deceive.  
The relationship between this pair of father and son is peculiar as well
as familiar to us, which makes Igor's dilemma feel closer to the
audience. 
        Luc and Jean-Pierre Dardenne brought their years of experience in 
documentary filmmaking into this dramatic story.  The dialogues are cut
to a minimum as well as the display of emotions.  Every actor except
Jeremie Renier was given very little close shots to their faces.  Even the
extremely intense final confrontation is handled in a flat, almost
monotonous manner.  Soon I felt I was putting myself in the characters'
positions and empathize with them.  The motivations, conflicts, choices
and feelings are so real, almost as real as the dirty slum and the illegal
immigrants living in it.  
        Renier is required to carry this film on his slim shoulders.  With
the camera constantly staring at his face, he has to walk the fine line
between over-acting and being obscurity.  There is nothing in his
performance that struck me as unnatural; and we feel the pain with him as
he torn between his conscience and father, the dark secret he cannot tell
and Assita's trusting face.  As usual, it is harder to hold back than to
be over-the-top.  Oliver Gourmet is absolutely the most realistic rogue
who is uncompromisingly repulsive from his appearance to his actions, yet
never a simplistic villain.  A good villain makes the audience feel
threatened and intimidated, because he is real (I said "he" because a
realistic female villain has yet to come to my mind) and reminds us of the
ones we meet and know in real life.  Without the verbal showdown, Roger in
some way resembles Dwight Yokam's Doyle in "Sling Blade" because they feel
"real."  Even though his muttering and frozen expression are the other end
of the spectrum, I feel the same chill as I had watching Doyle.  Assita
Ouedrago, who already made 3 films in her country Bugina Faso, was not
given enough close attention from the directors to dig her role, but I
just love the conviction she displays when she slaughters a chicken and
reads her husband's whereabout from the chicken's gut.  Everyone else
looks like they are dragged right from the streets.  
        As Assita, holding her baby, and Igor wandering through the cold,
dark streets, it feels like a world sinking and falling.  In a time more 
sociatal decay  is blamed on juvenile delinquents and harsher punishments
are demanded on younger criminals, the film questions how children can
develop sense of morality, conscience, and value in a corrupt world like
this.  It's also one person's inner journey of struggling to do the right 
thing, however hard it is.  It is nail-biting drama as well as a slice of 
true life.  I give it a B+.  Well done. 

Author
Louis Proyect
When we first meet Igor (Jeremie Renier), a teen-aged garage mechanic,
he is stealing the wallet of an elderly woman whose car he is
servicing. That act would seem to define the essential immorality of
"La Promesse's" central character.
Next we see him join his father Roger (Olivier Gourmet) in a van
filled with undocumented workers, mostly from Eastern Europe and
Africa, who have come to Belgium to escape economic oppression. What
awaits them at Roger's warren of ramshackle buildings is only a tiny
step upward. As they stand forlornly outside the buildings--their new
homes--they complain about the smell of shit. They will rent dismal
rooms there and work for a pittance repairing the buildings. To make
sure that they will bend to his will, Roger orders Igor to collect
their passports.
The relationship between father and son is like the kind Dickens wrote
about in Oliver Twist. Roger, a Fagin like character, is both bullying
and affectionate to his son. He bonds with him by tattooing his arm,
using the crude sort of needle-pen and ink that you find in prisons.
Although there is no explicit mention of Roger having a criminal past,
he strikes you as a criminal type. He is constantly ripping off his
workers and tenants and seems ready to use violence to achieve his
aims at the drop of a hat. By all appearances, Igor is destined to
turn out like his father.
One day the immigration police make a surprise raid and the workmen
flee in all directions. In the ensuing panic, Hamidu (Rasmane
Ouedraogo), who is from Burkina Faso, falls from a third floor
scaffold. As he lies on the ground severely injured, he whispers to
Igor that he must watch over his wife Assita (Assita Ouedraogo) and
their baby, who have just arrived with the latest batch of "illegals."
"Promise me," he says. Before Igor has a chance to answer him, his
father arrives and makes a decision that will divide him
psychologically and morally from his son. If they bring Hamidu to the
hospital, they will invite an investigation by the cops. So they put
some planks over the injured man to keep him from view and allow him
to die. After he dies, they drag him into a shed and pour concrete
over his body.
Igor is assigned the task to lie to the dead man's wife that he has
fled town because of gambling debts. She answers emphatically that he
will return, because he is her husband. In the course of their
conversation, the youth takes note of the coldness of the room and
tells her that he will bring a gas heater. For some reason, he views
the African woman and her infant as fellow human beings. Whether it is
because of the "promesse" her dead husband demanded from him, or some
shred of humanity that his father has not managed to rip out, he
begins to bond with her. For the remainder of the film, he does
everything he can to protect the woman and her baby, even when she
rejects his protection. She finds it difficult to distinguish the boy
from his heartless father.
One can understand her wariness of whites. In one scene, she waits
under a bridge for Igor, with her baby in her arms. Suddenly she feels
a stream of liquid on her head. Two motorcyclists have begun pissing
on her. After she screams at them, they get on their bikes and ride
over her bags. A carving of a deity is destroyed in the process. Igor
takes her and the child to the garage where he begins repairing it,
only to be confronted by his father who demands that he turn the woman
over to him. He has made plans to sell her into prostitution.
Although Belgium does not evoke images of racism, economic tensions
are turning it into a simmering cauldron of hatred according to a
March 5, 1998 USA Today article filed by Marco R. della Cava from
Antwerp, Belgium:
"Living in fear because of one's skin color would appear to be  the
dirty little secret of a quiet country best known for chocolates,
diamonds and the EU's headquarters. Except this is no secret. 
"Belgium is home to the most racist people in Europe, tops among  a
15-nation populace of 370 million who are increasingly tense  over
joblessness and immigration, according to the EU poll released  in
1997. 
"In the poll, European citizens were posed the following question:
'Some people feel they are not at all racist. Others feel they  are
very racist. Would you look at this card and give me the number  that
shows your own feelings about this?'
"Belgians were the most open about their racist feelings, with  22%
saying they considered themselves 'very racist.' They were followed by
the French (16%) and Austrians (14%). Least racist  were the Swedes
(2%). Among all Europeans, just 9% rated themselves  as 'very racist'
and another 24% said they were 'quite racist.' 
"The poll's companion analysis indicates that those polled explained
their racist tendencies by linking top concerns -- unemployment,
crime and drug abuse -- to the growing legions of economic and
political refugees banging on Europe's door. 
"Whatever the reasons, Europe is being prodded to quickly address  its
increasing ethnic dilution. Liberal voices urge education  and
employment, while far-right groups echo the slogan of Antwerp's
popular political party Vlaams Blok: 'Eigen volk eerst,'  'Our People
First.'"
I strongly recommend "La Promesse" as a powerful human story that
dramatizes one of Europe's most urgent social problems. It is written
and directed by Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne. It was released in
American theaters in 1996 and is now available in video.
Marxist discussion is at: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html
