Title
Review for Detroit 9000 (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Detroit 9000" is an energetic movie with animated chase
scenes, sharp (if occasionally stilted) dialogue, and an earnest
cast of performers who appear to take this fun movie
seriously.  lt's difficult to call this exhibit of a 1973 film a
revival since it was barely seen when first introduced and then
disappeared from the screens without so much as going to
the obligatory tape. Initially hitting the theaters at a time that
African-Americans were aggressively asserting their rights and
calling for black pride, "Detroit 9000" was an entry into the
black film explosion of the 70s, the so-called blaxploitation
market that introduced Pam Grier, Isaac Hayes and Richard
Roundtree to movie audiences of all races.  "Detroit 9000" is
back to dovetail with the release of a new volume by Rolling
Thunder Books called "What It Is...What It Was! in which
authors Gerald Martinez, Diana Martinez and Andres Chavez
explain and illustrate the slick black heroes and funky
fashions of the time.  The book features reflections by
Quentin Tarantino and Samuel Jackson, who discuss what
the blaxploitation films mean to them and to film buffs.
   The standard under which all such films might be compared
is "Sweet Sweetback's Baad Asssss Song," which Melvin Van
Peebles introduced two years earlier.  Produced, directed,
finances, written, scored and starred in by Van Peebles,
"Sweetback"'s title character is a superstud who runs
perpetually from the police and, despite his criminal
background, gets the audience to root for him against the
cops.  While Van Peebles protests the racism of the police
forces, his own ideology was reverse-racist.  He joined the
crowd in calling cops "pigs," the whites "honkies," and the
white-controlled establishment hopelessly corrupt.
   By contrast "Detroit 9000" does not take racial sides. 
Orville Hampton's screenplay is balanced and integrated,
highlighting jerks and heroes on both sides of the racial
spectrum.  Designed to appeal to a broad spectrum of the
movie public, "Detroit 9000" is flawed by its very good nature:
in trying to offend nobody, it lacks the edginess and strong
point of view of the Van Peebles drama. The positive side of
this blemish is that its heroes, both black and white, are
sympathetic characters that we root for.  In part a whodunnit,
"Detroit 9000" is at base a whydunnit, headlining a white cop
who seems to be selling stolen jewelry for his own enrichment
but who may actually be heroically setting up a smuggler for a
big bust.
  In a well-orchestrated jewel robbery, ski-masked thieves
break into a social club that has invited rich constituents of
Congressman Aubrey Hale Clayton (Rudy Challenger) to
contribute jewelry to his campaign for Michigan governor.  Are
the robbers white or black?  The racial feature is important
because the politician believes that the heist was perpetrated
by whites determined to put a damper on a black candidate's
campaign.  Lt. Danny Bassett (Alex Rocco), a white cop with
a spectacular record, is assigned to head the investigation. 
Though Bassett prefers to work alone, he is assigned a smart
black partner, Sgt. Jesse Williams (Hari Rhodes), a scheme
which only adds to Bassett's problems: he is raging mad
about being passed over for a promotion and is in great need
of money to support his seriously ill wife.  The investigation
centers on a high-class brothel which is patronized by
Bassett, who is apparently held in sincere esteem by some of
the lovely women who work there.  A hacked-up corpse
complicates the issues, with a great deal riding on whether
the dead body is white or black.  
   "Detroit 9000" parades a cross-section of characters across
the screen including a corrupt politician, a lascivious reverend
(Scatman Crothers), a hooker who has long been fond of
Jesse Williams (Vonette McGee), the hooker's sugar-man
(Herbert Jefferson, Jr.) and Danny's mentally disturbed wife.
In one overblown scene seething with racist epithets, the
wheelchair-bound Mrs. Bassett rails against the "black faces"
she finds all about her in the public hospital and refuses to be
put in a better facility because that one is filled with "bohunks
and polacks."  Aside from this tantrum there is little racist
rhetoric in a movie designed to illustrate the old saw, "There
are good and bad of all races."  To insure that the less verbal
members of the audience understand this, director Arthur
Marks fills the screen with stirring chase scenes, a pulpy
panoply of shootouts in which nobody just dies: all pass from
the scene with a maximum of bodily spasms.
