Title
Review for Dead Again (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Kenneth Branagh
Writer: Scott Frank
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson, Derek Jacobi, Andy Garcia, Hanna
Schygulla, Wayne Knight, Robin Williams, Campbell Scott, Christine
Ebersole, Miriam Margolyes, Obba Babatundé, Patrick Doyle
"Dead Again" is a prime example of a film that is filled to the brim with
energy, bravaura, and unbridled passion, a film that speaks only in broad
strokes and leaves one feeling completely satisfied by its wild conclusion.
 Films like this are seldom made today, but used to flourish in the past,
and that's why this film feels like a huge breath of fresh air: it's one of
those old fashioned suspense classics that Alfred Hitchcock used to make
that plows ahead with a wonderfully melodramatic story that anyone can
enjoy, and never apologises for any of it.
Of course, this is no surprise because it's by
director/actor/all-around-Shakespeare-guy Kenneth Branagh, one of the most
energetic and visual directors working today, the guy who can take a
four-hour completely-by-the-book adaptation of "Hamlet" and make it fly by
in what seems like a regular film.  But that it's a sophomore effort is
even more amazing.  Right away, Branagh introduced himself as a director
who is completely confident in what he's doing, and surprisingly just as
competent.  "Dead Again" may be his homage to Hitchcock and perhaps even
Welles, but it has Branagh written all over it.
The story is one that Hitchcock probably would have loved to have made but
died before he ever got around to it.  It deals with past lives, past
loves, and a kind of psychic energy that allows wrongs to resurface, either
to be corrected or made worse.  The film deals with a modern-day L.A.
detective, Mike Church (Branagh himself, this time equipped with a killer
American accent), who is hired by his old church (ha ha) to find out the
past of a woman (Branagh's then-wife, Emma Thompson, also equipped with an
American accent) who has come to them in a state of amnesia, the only clue
to her past being that she has nightmares every night and wakes up
screaming.  Branagh attempts to help her out, all the while falling in love
with her.
His investigation leads him to meet a hypnotist named Franklyn Madison
(Derek Jacobi, one of the best living Shakesperean actors), who offers his
help in finding out her past, and ends up discovering a past life, where
she was Margaret Strauss, the wife of a composer named Roman Strauss, who
was found guilty of killing her with a pair of scissors, and put to death. 
The film ends up juxtaposing back and forth between the present and the
past, the latter being shown in black and white, and featuring Branagh and
Thompson as the ill-fated couple.  We learn of a bit of dysfunction within
their marriage: Thompson becomes ever tired of his long-time servants, a
woman and her son, who helped Roman escape from the Germans during World
War II; and Roman begins to suspect Margaret of longing for another man, a
detective named Gray Baker (Andy Garcia).
The film continues on this path just like a good old Hitch film,
introducing numerous twists that are not only shocking, but plausible as
well (if you can swallow all of the past lives stuff), including one twist
that is so clever that you just have to give it a good laugh.  The past
eventually catches up to the present, and all of the loose ends are fought
over in the wonderfully theatrical conclusion, a sequence that any fan of
suspense will take great delight in.
Although told seriously, Branagh allows lots of humor to pour in, himself
giving a wonderfully cool and laid-back performance that causes the viewer
to easily like him.  He even gives roles out to Robin Williams and Wayne
Knight (who used to be Newman, if you didn't know that already), both who
give a healthy amount of support to the big picture.  This is, after all, a
Hitchcockian film, and the one thing that Hitchcock films weren't is
unhumorous.  He allowed tons of humor to flow in, to make the audience
relax a bit, then he would hit them with the suspense.  Branagh has this
down cold.
's almost bizarre to see a film that is this confident in everything it
does since most films today often pussy foot around and try and make up for
things that it does.  "Dead Again" is a film that just wants to be heard. 
The first thing we see in this film is a newspaper with the huge headline
"MURDER," and the last thing we see is two people in a passionate embrace. 
Branagh is so confident in everything he does from start to finish that
multiple viewings often result in discovering many little things that are
almost impossible to notice the first time because you're so wrapped up in
the story.  Even the bit twist towards the end is carefully backed up if
you examine all the acting and all the little things that go into it.  It's
confidence like this that makes for great movies, that makes you forget
about many of the little problems this film may have, and for the entire
run of the film just manages to pull you into the movie, make you laugh,
scare you a little bit, and then dump you right back into your seat with a
big grin on your face.  If only all movies were as wonderfully exuberant as
this one.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When a little-known filmmaker has a film that makes it really big, it
is interesting to see what he or she does with that success.  What is the
next film like?  When suddenly a filmmaker is respected and has a little
more freedom, what does s/he do for an encore?  A little-known George Lucas
had a big hit with AMERICAN GRAFFITI; his next project was to bring comic-
book space opera in a way that did not suffer in the transition.  That was a
success.  Spike Lee's first post-success project was the disappointing
SCHOOL DAZE.  Kenneth Branagh, the director and star of the very successful
HENRY V, has returned with a very stylish mystery and supernatural thriller
with a dream cast.  Branagh stars with his somewhat less well known wife,
Emma Thompson.  But also on hand in smaller roles are Derek Jacobi, Andy
Garcia, Robin Williams, and European actress Hanna Schygulla (of THE
MARRIAGE OF MARIA BRAUN and BERLIN ALEXANDERPLATZ).  This is an oddly
matched collected of actors and the screenplay hardly gives them all a
chance to make contributions commensurate with their talents.
     A nameless, voiceless woman (played by Thompson) shows up at a church
school.  She has been given sanctuary for a few days, but when she starts
having screaming nightmares, the school asks a detective who is a former
student (played by Branagh) to help find out who the woman really is.  The
search is heading nowhere when Franklyn Madson shows up.  (Madson played by
Jacobi) is a furniture dealer with a talent for hypnotism.  He offers his
services to put the mystery woman in a trance and help her to remember her
previous life.  And what she remembers is indeed a previous life, a life in
which she was someone else.  It was a life that concluded in a famous murder
case of 1949.  What is more, there are indications that her detective friend
may be a reincarnation who was also involved in the same murder.  In the
past lives a composer and his wife (also played by Branagh and Thompson)
have marriage problems that end in the wife murdered and the husband
executed.  At this point, the uncertainties start to pile up.  The
reincarnation may or may not be authentic.  Roman Strauss, the composer, may
or may not have been the murderer.  And, most disturbing, the events may or
may not be fated to happen again, or perhaps the murder will go in the other
direction as a sort of karmic revenge.  The film has a  complex plot and
leaves unanswered the biggest question: does the film really make sense or
not?  Does the ending really explain all we have seen?  Like JACOB'S LADDER,
most of what you can get out of this film you get thinking about it
afterwards.
     The photography is stylishly done, particularly in the scenes set in
1949.  They are done in monochrome, but the blacks and whites are just
slightly tinted.  At least that is the style element easy to identify.  And
the credits intercut with newspaper clippings about the murder opens the
film with a feel almost like that of MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS.
     Oh, one more thing.  The best touch in this film is the product
placement.  This film *does* have a product placement.  And as it happens it
is the best product placement you will see in a film this year.  It kind of
makes up for all the bad product placements we have had this summer.
     Overall the production values and the acting talent are better than the
story.  And the story is better than it seems at the end of the film.  I
would still give DEAD AGAIN only a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  With this
cast it should have been better.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Emma Thompson, Derek Jacobi, Andy Garcia,
Wayne Knight, Robin Williams.
Dead Again has one of the best endings to a film I have ever seen.
Period.  It ranks up there with CITIZEN KANE, THE USUAL SUSPECTS, and
other films with surprise endings.  However, while the resolution is
surprising, the denouement is so well done that you may find yourself
watching it over and over again.  Director Kenneth Branagh, with his
second feature, has proven that he is very capable of directing many
different types of films, and at the same time, starring in them.  No
other director that I know of has starred in his own films, given
credible performances, and at the same time, created a masterful work.
Dead Again has a very refreshingly original plot which allows the film
to combine the style of the 40s with the frantic, quick-paced action
of the 90s.  The film noir moments are filmed using black and white,
not only for effect, but to give the viewers a little clarity.  Both
actors, Emma Thompson and Kenneth Branagh, have dual roles and the
color/no color contrast allows viewers to distinguish which time
period the events are taking place in.  The only problem with the film
is the beginning which starts in the past, and then shifts to the
present.  It was a little confusing trying to figure out that Branagh
was playing two roles.  Fortunately, once the film gets on its feet,
it never stops its relentless adrenaline-pumping run.
Most of the film takes place in the present day, with Kenneth Branagh
portraying Mike Church, a private detective.  He is asked to
investigate the mysterious circumstances surrounding one Amanda
"Grace" Sharp (Emma Thompson).  Sharp won't talk, and she is paranoid
that someone is trying to kill her.  She locks the door to her room
and puts a chair under the door handle for added protection.  But what
makes her think she is being stalked is one of the essential pieces of
information Church must deal with.  She has been having nightmares
about a man on death row who stabs her to death with a pair of shears
which he stole after his final haircut.  Church suggests that she go
to a hypnotist who can help her.  Franklyn Madison (Derek Jacobi) is
only a part-time hypnotist, but a hypnotist nonetheless.  He considers
that her problem may be something in her past, perhaps in a past life.
Church, being the logical and sensible man that he is, thinks that
Madison is crazy.  Madison puts Sharp under, and she begins to tell
the story of a married couple: Roman and Margaret Strauss (Branagh and
Thompson).
I will tread lightly because most of the film hereafter is mysterious
in its unfolding, and I may not reveal anything at all.  I will say
that the rest of the plot consists of surprises, plot twists, and
uncertainty.  The revelation of the Strauss' life begins to uncover
events which may have led to Sharp's paranoia.  This story begins to
clarify why Sharp is so nervous, but suddenly twists arrive in the
plot, and nothing is as it seems.  Is someone actually trying to kill
her?  At the hands of a lesser director, nothing would have made
sense.  Branagh, being his second major film, is a powerful director,
with traces of Hitchcock in his film.  We may even have our next
Hitchcock in Branagh.  Unfortunately, Branagh has strayed from
mainstream films, choosing to direct the brilliant HAMLET, a film most
people tried to stay away from.
Watching Dead Again, I began to realize how much detail is involved in
Branagh's work.  The music is perfect (and won a Golden Globe
nomination) and sets the right mood for the different time periods.
Composed by Patrick Doyle, who also appears in the film in both
timelines, the eerily enchanting score enhances the mystery as well as
the tone.  The ending is the best moment of the film.  Many directors
don't know how to end a film, or it isn't consistent with the rest of
the picture.  Branagh uses slow motion to enhance the final showdown,
a film technique which, if used appropriately, can strengthen the
suspense and climax.  Dead Again is one of the few films which end
with the climax, instead of a resolution.  In my opinion, most
resolutions are slow and distasteful.  Sometimes a film will call for
one, but after the climax, most audience members don't care what
happens.  Branagh wisely ends this film once the high point of the
film is finished, leaving a sense of pleasure, instead of a sense of
boredom.
Most of the praise should go to the director, but without the actors,
there is no director.  Kenneth Branagh is one of the only directors
who can star in a film and direct it at the same time, creating a
masterpiece (this does not include Mel Gibson).  As an actor, Branagh
is terrific.  His dual role is handled extremely well, and without
revealing too much, his portrayal of Mike Church has some hints as to
the ending of the film.  Certainly, only Branagh would be able to
handle this kind of role while directing.  Emma Thompson fairs better
than Branagh, because she has a more complex role to play.  Thompson
maintains her nervous, but paradoxally trusting, character throughout
the film.  In her dual role, she does the same thing Branagh does,
revealing small clues as to who is who and what is what.  Derek Jacobi
has a tough job, trying to rise to the level of the two leads.
Surprisingly, he does so, and gives one of his best performances I
have seen him give.  Andy Garcia gives a good performance in his
smaller role.  Unfortunately, Garcia's role is a little too small, and
his performance isn't as memorable as the rest of the cast.  Also
worthy of note is Wayne Knight (from SEINFELD), and Robin Williams,
toned down from his normal frantic self.
Dead Again is rated R for violence and language.  The screenplay,
written by Scott Frank, is very intelligent and witty.  The plot
twists are amazingly detailed and impressive, and I wonder how the
Academy forgot to nominate this screenplay.  Maybe it was too original
for their tastes (and SILENCE OF THE LAMBS was out that year).  The
cinematography, done by Matthew F. Leonetti, is quite impressive,
especially his management of both time lines.  Dead Again is a
masterful piece of filmmaking with impressive sets, great acting, and
some of the best direction of a film of this genre.  Snubbed by the
Academy, this film exhibits Branagh's multiple talents, and the ending
is pure cinema.  Films these days aren't made like this anymore.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Desiree Sy
     DEAD AGAIN is a stylishly executed thriller that doesn't take
itself too seriously.  The plot of the movie is a double mystery: who
murdered the beautiful concert pianist Margaret Strauss in 1945, and
what is the identity of the amnesiac woman who looks just like her in
1991?  As the title implies, murder could occur  more than once.  
     Both roles are played by Emma Thompson, just as the double roles of
Margaret's husband, conductor Roman Strauss -- who was convicted and
executed for the murder -- and the investigator Mike Church are played
by her husband, Kenneth Branagh.  
     The interior plot of the Strausses is filmed in black and white,
and pays homage to the large, lavish genre of black and white films of
the 40s.  Roman and Margaret live in a large, lavish mansion, wear
beautiful clothes, attend large, lavish parties, and even have
beautifully overblown arguments.  
     The major plot of Mike Church and the amnesiac, though in colour
and contemporary, also pays homage to various types of film.  From the
running chases down sidewalks and over fences to the rain-drenched
dancing on a roof, DEAD AGAIN echoes faintly with the romance of other
films.  DEAD AGAIN manages to poke gentle fun at Hitchcock (the murder
implement is a valuable antique pair of scissors), art (the decoration
of the woman's apartment provides a very funny set of clues to her
identity), and even I, CLAUDIUS and PHANTOM OF THE OPERA.
     Robin Williams and Derek Jacobi in supporting roles as the lunatic
ex-psychiatrist who counsels Mike, and the slightly dishonest 
hypnotist-cum-antiquarian who regresses the woman hypnotically into her
past life both steal scenes shamelessly.
     Branagh and Thompson give performances that are very enjoyable to
watch -- and that they clearly enjoyed giving.  (Branagh's American
accent sounds surprisingly like Mandy Patinkin's voice) Although I found
the ending slightly disappointing, the film is well-plotted, and has one
deft twist mid-movie.
     To say more is give away plot details.  If you're in the mood for a
slick but gentle thriller (or if you're a Branagh fan -- as I am), I'd
recommend DEAD AGAIN strongly.
