Title
Review for Knock Off (1998)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Knock Off  (1998)
Jean-Claude Van Damme, Rob Schneider, Paul Sorvino, Lela Rochon, Michael 
Wong. Directed by Tsui Hark. 90 minutes.
Rated R, 0 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
When the preview audience for "Knock Off" exited the theater, they were 
more demonstrative than any movie audience I have ever seen. Friends were 
taking turns trying to come up with the rudest possible one-liner to 
describe the movie. One young man held his arms above his head, making 
violent thumbs-down gestures with both hands while shouting, "Sucks! 
Sucks!" over and over. Most of the crowd simply walked out briskly, 
shaking their heads and loudly discussing how amazingly bad the film was. 
These people renewed my faith in humanity.
This piece will be relatively brief, because it seems foolish to spend 
more time writing the review for "Knock Off" than the authors spent 
writing the script. To put it as simply as possible, the film is, honest 
to God, one of the worst movies I have ever seen. So bad that it left me 
mesmerized; transfixed in some quasi-hypnotic state of disbelief.
While hyping the film to Entertainment Weekly, Jean-Claude Van Damme told 
interviewers that his cocaine addiction was at its worst during the 
filming of "Knock Off." It shows. While his body remains muscular, Van 
Damme's face looks pallid and his expression dazed. He sweats a lot 
during scenes where he is just standing around talking. He looks like a 
heart-attack waiting to happen. School administrators could radically cut 
down on student drug use simply by forcing the kids to watch this film. 
Of course, that could land the school in court, because making students 
sit through "Knock Off" would probably be ruled as corporal punishment.
Set in Hong Kong just prior to its return to Chinese rule, the story 
involves miniature explosives, cut-rate imitations of designer jeans, CIA 
agents, lots of mobsters chasing each other around and loads of 
explosions. The specifics don't matter - they certainly didn't to the 
filmmakers. "Knock Off" is merely a long series of horribly filmed stunts,
 punctuated by poorly delivered one-liners and incomprehensible plot 
mechanics.
It begins with Van Damme huffing and puffing while pulling Rob Schneider 
in a rickshaw race, while Schneider whips him with a dead eel and shouts 
"move that beautiful ass!" Why? I have no idea. Toy dolls blow up in the 
waters near the harbor. Paul Sorvino and Lela Rochon show up to snarl and 
chase everyone around. A grossly obese mobster spews threats. Cars, boats 
and giant Buddha's explode. Van Damme's stunt double fights dozens of men,
 while Schneider makes a vain attempt at being an action hero and wormy 
smart-ass at the same time. And Van Damme, bless his heart, tries to act 
in a performance so wooden that it makes Ben Stein look animated by 
comparison.
Meanwhile, director Tsui Hark uses a dizzying array of camera tricks to 
try and hide the movie's myriad flaws. He sends the lens zooming up the 
barrel of a gun to focus on the shooter. His cameras swoop, swirl, twist 
and turn, especially during the action scenes. In fact, Hark shoots the 
action scenes using so many close-ups that he actually mutes any impact 
or sense of excitement the scenes might have had. The whole thing plays 
like a substandard episode of the "Power Rangers," except the Rangers are 
better actors.
Here's hoping Jean-Claude Van Damme succeeds in keeping off cocaine. 
Here's hoping Rob Schneider goes back to doing straight comedy. And 
finally, here's hoping you have the common sense to stay as far away from 
"Knock Off" as possible.  

Author
Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
1 star
The films of Jean-Claude Van Damme are not exactly listed on the AFI's
top 100, but they sure have provided us with a few chuckles and hoots.
John Woo's 1993 piece Hard Target built at least a couple of genuinely
entertaining scenes, and even 1998's Legionnaire had too much energy and
atmosphere to be ridden off completely.  But even Van Damme - a veteran
of bad movies - deserves better than Knock Off.  Writer Steven De Souza
gave Beverly Hills Cop III charm and excitement, but none of that is on
show here.  Knock Off bumbles and fumbles its way through a messy plot,
advancing from each dreary subplot to the next with no hint of a
coherent storyboard.   It's almost as if director Hark Tsui's plan was
to baffle viewers so he could disguise the film's paper-thin scripting.
Granted, there are some nice touches.  The editing and camera work is
sometimes stylish (especially in the first half), and the screen absorbs
Van Damme's lively presence with appropriate egotistical flair.  But the
visual novelties of Knock Off quickly wear thin, leaving virtually
nothing to counterbalance.  To make matters worse, the few scenes in
which Knock Off succeeds on a visual level are derivative, and serve no
relevance to the central story.  A well-staged chase scene through the
streets of Hong Kong is pretty much pointless, as is a Jackie Chan like
idea to position Van Damme amongst a building full of attacking Asians.
Marcus Ray (Jean-Claude Van Damme), a tough but friendly meathead, works
as a sales representative for a jeans company in Hong Kong.  His partner
is Tommy Hendricks (Rob Schneider), who is a loud mouth wimp.  Through
one of the film's flimsy plot connections, these two suddenly find
themselves in the midst of a worldwide conspiracy.  This conspiracy
involves the use of micro bombs the size of watch batteries (which, for
some strange reason, produce green flames).  Ray and Hendricks risk
their lives to stop the possible worldwide distribution of these new
devastating gadgets.
There's nothing direly wrong with Van Damme as an actor; his energetic
roles are entirely welcome in a film of this nature.  But his dialogue,
of course, suffers from intoxicatingly simplistic formation, to the
point where he becomes little more than a walking talking joke.  And he
isn't the only one.  Rob Schneider is given the tough job of providing
comic relief with only one or two one-liners that are actually funny.
Chris Tucker provided a nice bit of playful acting in Rush Hour, as did
Steve Buscemi in Armageddon.  Whereas those performers had punchy
dialogue aiding them, Schneider is witless and unfunny - he's just plain
irritating.
Just when action films appeared to be heading in the right direction,
along comes Knock Off, the dumbest film this side of Species 2.  Sure -
many bad movies are entertaining pieces of cinematic fluff - but this is
not one of them.  Irritating and silly, Knock Off is the kind of movie
that gives bad movies a bad name.


Author
David Nusair
Starring Jean-Claude Van Damme, Rob Schneider, Lela Rochon, Paul Sorvino 
"Knock Off" is exactly that: a cheap knock off of an action movie.  It's
also the worst movie I have seen thus far this year.  I figured it would
be at least a couple of months before I saw the worst film of 1998, but
alas, it has already been found.
Jean-Claude Van Damme stars as (I think) a designer jeans executive who
discovers his half-brother has been supplying him with cheaper goods.  Rob
Schneider plays Van Damme's partner, and Rochon plays ... actually, I have
no idea who Rochon was supposed to be.  She just sort of popped up halfway
through without an explanation as to why she was there.  Many things are
not explained in this film, but I do know that for some bizarre reason,
Van Damme seemed to be doing a Jackie Chan impression throughout the
flick.  Where Chan comes off as endearing in his "normal guy" character
seen in many of his films, Van Damme just comes off as a wimp.  We're
never given any clear explanation as to the basis for many of his actions.
To be more clear:  I did not even know who he was supposed to be until
about an hour into the movie, and even then, it was not made too clear.
The film has been directed in the style of some strange film experiment
gone horribly wrong.  Tsui Hark (who directed Van Damme's last movie, the
bad, but not nearly as bad as this, "Double Team") never lets the camera
rest for a second, and that's no exaggeration.  We are even treated to a
five second shot from the point of view of Van Damme's foot entering a
shoe.  Fabulous!  Seriously, though, I have no problem with directors who
want to play around with film conventions, as long as they don't get
carried away.  For example, look at Sam Raimi.  "Army of Darkness", one of
his best movies, features some of the most inventive camera work I have
ever seen, but Raimi never lets the special effects get in the way of
story.  That's a concept that Tsui can't seem to grasp.  The special
effects and outrageous camera angles *rule* "Knock Off" to the point where
the audience doesn't have a clue as to what's happening any more.
Another problem with the film is that it looks cheap.  The film stock used
is of such low caliber that I thought I was watching one of those Chinese
films shown really late at night.  And for some inexplicable reason,
everyone's voice seems to have been dubbed.  Even the stars.  And even the
special effects, seemingly the only aspect of the film the director
actually cared about, are inconsistent.  For example, there is a scene in
which Van Damme drives a car out of a window.  The car slams into the
ground, and the left wheel is completely destroyed.  Seconds later, the
car drives off at full speed.  Hey, I have no problem suspending my
disbelief in an action movie, but a line must be drawn somewhere.
Finally, the acting.  Nobody gives a good performance in this film.  Van
Damme, an actor I usually like, is way off the mark playing "everyman". 
And Schneider, here to provide comic relief I assume, is totally unfunny
and over acts his way through every scene.  Even the usually solid Paul
Sorvino gives a terribly over-the-top performance as... Once again, I have
no idea who he was supposed to be.
In case I haven't yet made it clear enough, "Knock Off" is the worst movie
of Van Damme's career and possibly the worst movie of the decade.  And
it's not even one of those movies that's so bad it's funny.  It's too
inept to be funny.  There are no redeeming factors in "Knock Off" and I
seriously hope that every print of this film is burned to a crisp and that
somehow my memory of watching the film can be erased.
-- 
David Nusair                                      dnusair@chat.carleton.ca
Come visit my "Reel Film Reviews" site! "http://chat.carleton.ca/~dnusair" 

Author
Matt Williams
Jean Claude Van Damme's recent string of films haven't been too
inspiring, and Knock Off doesn't do anything to change the trend.
Van Damme stars this time as Marcus Ray, of all things, a designer jeans
rep.  Yes, you read that right.  He, and partner Tommy Hendricks (Rob
Schneider), rule the Hong Kong offices of V6 designer jeans...jeans so
strong that an elephant can't tear them apart. That is, unless they're
cheap knock-offs.
And knock-offs also happen to be a specialty of Marcus'.  His adopted
brother has his fingers into nearly all the counterfeiting operations in
Hong Kong.  When the latest shipment of V6 jeans is discovered to be
mostly phonies, that attracts corporate attention, in the person of
Karan Leigh (Lela Rochon).
But the knock-offs are attracting other attention as well.  It seems
that the omni-powerful Russian mafia are using them as part of an
elaborate global terrorism scheme.  This has attracted the attention of
not only the Hong Kong police, represented by Lt. Han (Michael Wong),
but also the C.I.A., with a team led by Harry Johannson (Paul Sorvino).
The best thing Knock Off has going for it is its sense of style.  With
grainy, blurry footage, camera sweeps that pass through objects,
unlikely angles, and various film speeds, director Tsui Hark at least
attempts to give the film a different visual style.  Unfortunately, most
of the time it is merely annoying. Perhaps a subtler approach that
didn't scream, "Look at me!  I'm being innovative!" might have worked
better.
But anything would have worked better than this script.  At first I
wasn't sure if it was horrendous dialogue, or just the expectedly bad
acting from Van Damme and Schneider.  But once other actors started
spouting the same pained delivery, I was getting suspicions.  But by the
time the ludicrous plot started pouring forth, I was sure.  This is one
stinker of a script.
For all it's double-crosses, deceptions and counterdeceptions, Knock Off
can't shake the slightly silly feeling at its core.  You haven't seen
ridiculous until you see the CIA's computer simulation of global
terrorism (involving a very tiny globe, and a sinister, cackling agent
that looks like he stepped off the pages of Spy vs. Spy).
The action scenes, are bearable, though, since they were filmed in
blurr-o-vision, prolonged viewing will likely cause headaches.  Again,
the film does try to be original.  It packs in such elements as an
illegal charity rickshaw race, a giant exploding Buddha, and a cargo
ship with ever-changing terrain.
Still, for all its novelty, Knock Off falls apart as easily as a
counterfeit sneaker.  Keep looking for the real thing, you won't find it
here.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: September 4, 1998
Starring: Jean-Claude Van Damme, Rob Schneider, Lela Rochon, Michael
Wong, Paul Sorvino, Glen Chin
Directed by: Hark Tsui
Distributed by: Sony Pictures Entertainment / TriStar Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (continuous violence, brief language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/knockoff.htm
If you were to watch all of Jean-Claude Van Damme's movies and assign a
value to each of them based on campiness, plotting those points on a
graph would reveal a decidedly downward trend. One might think, though,
that Van Damme would eventually sign on a good movie, and that the graph
would finally bottom out before heading upward again. But, if one
thought that, one would be wrong. KNOCK OFF, the latest feature from the
infamous martial arts expert, is so void of any redeeming qualities that
it becomes questionable as to why it was even made. Even long-time fans
of Van Damme's work will be disappointed by this one. 
As always, with this sort of feature, the writer/director team attempts
to cover up for the lack of substance by creating a plot that's overly
complicated and rarely to the point. In KNOCK OFF, Van Damme plays
Marcus Ray, a fashion designer working for V-Six Jeans Company in Hong
Kong. He, along with his business partner Tommy Hendricks (Rob
Schneider), happen upon some local mafioso who are in the business of
making knock-off jeans and slipping them into the shipping manifest.
There's one catch, though: the knock-off jeans are loaded with the
ultra-high-tech nanobombs - tiny devices which contain the explosive
power of a half-stick of dynamite but look like buttons. Bring in the
Russians (apparently they developed the bombs) and the CIA (they're out
to stop the Russians) and you've got a full-scale action movie on your
hands. 
That's about the one thing that works for KNOCK OFF: the action.
Unfortunately, it's so overdone and trite by now - Van Damme is only
following in a trend that was initiated and mastered by Jackie Chan -
that it's not even worth it. This is a far cry from the explosive
mixture of martial arts and guns that was so popular in UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER. Van Damme never was very good on-screen, and now his longevity
is beginning to show it. Unlike Arnold Schwarzenegger, who's managed to
turn out an enjoyable feature once in a while, Van Damme has not matured
to any level of watchability in recent years. 
Rob Schneider is thrown in for comedy, but his ability to deliver the
sidelong, snappy one-liners is hampered by the poorly written script.
It's hard to believe that this piece of writing comes from the same man
(Steven De Souza) who wrote DIE HARD. De Souza makes unnecessary
melodrama out of Hong Kong's change from a British colony to a Chinese
protectorate, and this only emphasizes the lack of substance. Unlike
another recent failure, THE AVENGERS, excuses cannot be made for the
cast and crew involved here; Director Hark Tsui has not made an American
film prior to this and Van Damme's movies have never received critical
praise in this decade. Hopefully Hollywood dollars will now be spent on
making more realistic and enjoyable movies after the sure box office
failings of this picture, for word of mouth will spread fast and it will
not be good.
FINAL AWARD FOR "KNOCK OFF": 1.0 star - a poor movie.

Author
Greg King
Like the recent Chinese Box, most of the action in Knock Off
takes place against the background of the hand-over of Hong Kong to
China after a century of British rule.  However, the lack of immediacy
here doesn't seem to matter too much with this tired, unconvincing and
rudimentary plot.  Rather than a poignant love story set against a
backdrop of the clash between cultures, Knock Offis a mindless and
unconvincing B-grade spy thriller that offers fading action star Jean
Claude Van Damme one final opportunity to salvage his career from the
scrap heap.
Van Damme's status as an action hero reached its pinnacle with
Time Copand the Die Hardclone Sudden Death.  Since then it's been
largely downhill, with a series of increasingly dull, mindless and
gratuitously violent action films.  The muscles from Brussels has
placed his career in the hands of a number of influential Hong Kong
action directors (John Woo, Ringo Lam, and Tsui Hark, but they have
been unable to reverse his declining box office fortunes.
In Knock Off, Van Damme plays Marcus Ray, an exporter and
wholesaler for an American jeans company, based in Hong Kong.  He and
his partner Tommy (Rob Schneider, from Judge Dredd, etc) accidentally
find themselves mixed up in a terrorist scheme to smuggle small but
very lethal bombs into the US.  Sinister forces are planting the
bombs, which burst into green flame, inside toys, clothes and other
consumer goods and shipping them to America.  Ray finds himself up
against the CIA, the Triads and the Hong Kong police as he tries to
unravel the complicated international plot.
This below par effort has been written by Steven E De Souza,
who has previously written some of Hollywood's best action thrillers
of the past decade - Die Hard, and Die Hard 2, etc.  There's plenty of
action scenes, but the film is undermined by Tsui Hark's cold,
clinical choreography and visual flourishes.  Hark, who previously
directed our hero in the ludicrous Double Team, brings his own
distinctive style to the film.  He uses close-ups, a constantly moving
camera, and lots of unusual angles to bring an illusion of kinetic
energy to the material.  Unfortunately, his unnecessarily flamboyant
visual style somehow removes any genuine sense of excitement and
suspense.
Van Damme's performance is more wooden and unconvincing than
ever, and he seems uncomfortable with the more comic elements of the
script.  Even Schneider's desperate attempts to breathe some humour
into proceedings with a series of throw away one liners fall flat.
Knock Offis a disappointing and muddled actioner that marks a
new low in Van Damme's declining career.  At this rate, Van Damme will
join the ranks of those other faded action stars whose films now
regularly disappear straight on to video (Dolph Lundgren, Rutger
Hauer, etc).

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Dear God, this is a fantastically bad film!  Regardless of what I say
about Knock Off, you can't grasp its awfulness from my words.  You have
to see it and experience it for yourself.  Here's the kicker, though --
I suggest that you do so.  Yes, this is a bad film -- easily one of the
most incompetent films of the year -- but it has a certain misguided
charm that makes it a unique kind of disaster to endure.  In fact, I
enjoyed myself for most of its brief running time, despite the dreadful
acting and a completely incomprehensible story.  
Don't get me wrong:  I'm not excusing Knock Off.  It reaches an
unacceptable level of badness; it's so incoherent that I wonder if it
was hacked up worse than The Avengers was.  It also features some truly
terrible performances from Lela Rochon, Michael Wong, Paul Sorvino, and
-- of course -- Jean-Claude Van Damme.  It does, however, have the
entertaining presence of Rob Schneider, and the excessively inventive
and pretentious direction of Tsui Hark.  As I watched it, I occasionally
wondered if it was aware of its own awfulness.  Now, in retrospect, it
seems clear that it wasn't, but it's still a fascinating kind of mess.
I don't like writing plot descriptions (it is, by far, the most boring
part of writing a review), but, in this case, I'm off the hook:  there
is no way I could write an accurate synopsis for Knock Off.  For the
sake of comparison, I had no trouble understanding The Usual Suspects
during my first viewing.  I paid closer attention to Knock Off, and the
only thing I am able to say about it is that Van Damme plays a dude
named Ray, and is accused by the CIA (I think) of selling knock off
products (knock off products are, of course, products that look like
name-brand materials but are generic and cheap).
I don't know what any of this has to do with martial arts, but there
are lots of martial arts in the film.  Ray is good at martial arts, so
when he has to beat up bad guys, there's no problem.  Rob Schneider
plays his sidekick, although I had no idea who he really was by the end
of the film.  Lela Rochon is just some woman who accuses them of stuff,
while Paul Sorvino is both the good guy and the bad guy at once!  In
fact, every character goes through so many shifts from good to bad that
the end provides absolutely no insight into what any of them really do. 
In that order, Knock Off is completely incoherent and makes absolutely
no sense.
But what a strange mess it is.  It was written by Stephen E. De Souza,
who also wrote Die Hard and 48 Hours.  Can this be the same man?  I
don't see how, unless, of course, huge chunks of the film have been
removed for the sake of running time.  Knock Off seems to have an
interesting premise (as far as action films go), but there's no
semblance here.  For instance, Van Damme is introduced, and then seconds
later he's running a chariot race through the streets of Hong Kong. 
Why?  Who knows.  What are the implications of this?  I have no idea.
Most action films abandon depth in favor of action, and this is
normally a problem.  Knock Off, however, is the first film that I would
have preferred to see with all of the talky sequences cut.  The acting
is embarrassingly bad:  Rochon, in particular, delivers each of her
lines with stiff and talentless insincerity.  Sorvino, in addition,
deserves better than this.  Van Damme is bad, but he's charming in that
bad way, and so I can't say that he's hard to watch (although I rarely
understood what he was saying).  The only exception is Rob Schneider,
who is actually quite funny a lot of the time.
Tsui utilizes so many tricks that he makes John Woo look tame by
comparison.  They're all pointless gimmicks though, such as shots of the
inner-workings of a knock off running shoe.  But his action scenes are
never boring:  one particular piece inside of a fruit factory (a fruit
factory?) is well-choreographed.  Lots of the scenes are pitched well to
comedy, such as our heroes' first encounter with the Rochon character. 
But did Tsui know that his film is beyond ludicrous?  I hope he did, for
the alternative is a frightening thought.
Knock Off has the feel of a truly terrible exercise in camp mania.  If
it were boring, I'd give it zero stars.  But it's not boring:  it's loud
and excessive and completely incoherent.  It's also funny, even when it
isn't meaning to be funny.  A bad film that succeeds as entertainment
doesn't deserve to be fully lambasted.  I recognize Knock Off for its
irrefutable badness, but I can't deny it's zany, useless charm.  Oh, I
know, they're just action scenes looking desperately for a real story,
but they're fun action scenes amongst a crowd of laughably inane
concepts.  It's fun to admire the awfulness of a film like this, but
that doesn't excuse the fact that it is, indeed, awful.

Author
James Sanford
    A "knock-off" is generally defined as a cheaply produced imitation of a
genuine article, like those watches they sell on the streets of New York
that carry the brand name "Rolax." True to its title, "Knock Off" is a
low-budget substitute for a real action thriller, but its sense of style
manages to make it look several degrees hotter than it actually is.
Although one of the cardinal rules of moviegoing in the 1990s says that
anything starring Eurotrashy Jean-Claude Van Damme is sure to be more toxic
than a bushel of Mexican strawberries, "the Muscles from Brussels" is
surprisingly easy to take this time around, perhaps because director Tsui
Hark keeps him on the run for most of "Knock Off's" running time and keeps
Van Damme's dialogue to the bare minimum. Oftentimes, the star simply grunts
and sighs to express himself, and in times of emotional distress, Hark has
Van Damme dramatically tear off his shirt or pull down his pants in lieu of
baring his soul.
 "Knock Off" is set in 1997 Hong Kong on the eve of the British
colony's return to Chinese rule, although the political backdrop turns out
to have almost nothing to do with what little plot there is. Van Damme plays
Ray, "the king of the knock-offs," who's tired of living it up as a result
of peddling downmarket junk to unwary consumers; he wants to go legit. "I
want to go out with my reputation intact," Ray tells an associate. "I always
made a quality piece of crap." That's a lot more than Van Damme can claim,
given such blotches on his resume as "Sudden Death" and "Streetfighter," but
we digress.
 Ray has teamed up with American entrepreneur Tommy (Rob Schneider),
but after they witness a brutal murder while participating in a rickshaw
race, the would-be businessmen are drawn into a top-secret plot involving
Russian agents who want to plant micro-bombs inside counterfeit designer
jeans. The explosives can be activated by remote control, making for a truly
killer outfit.
 Oh yeah, someone named Karen (Lela Rochon) enters the picture and
makes things tougher for all concerned, since her entrance requires Ray to
ask her, "Oo duh ell ah yu?" a question that takes longer to translate than
it does to answer.
Much of Steven E. De Souza's script, in fact, sounds like it was run through
one of those erratic language translation programs a few times before the
cast got ahold of it. "If he knew it was a nanobomb, he wouldn't be carrying
it around like a cough drop" is one of the more memorable lines of dialogue.
 Though "Knock Off" features plenty of explosions - which come in
every color of the rainbow - it's Arthur Wong's endlessly creative
cinematography, incorporating what must be every kind of special lens known
to man, that gives this utter absurdity some class. You want
double-exposures, rack-focus, high-speed zooms, wide-angle shots? They're
all here, and they give this Chinese junk a touch of class.
James Sanford

Author
Homer Yen
"Consistency" - I think that this is a word that doesn't exist in the
vocabulary of Director Tsui Hark.  His Honk Kong action offering,
starring Jean-Claude Van Damme, is a muddled mess that pushes you from
one action sequence to another without really taking the time to
properly set it up.  But at least when you buy the ticket, you pretty
much have a good idea of what's in store for you.  After all, it's a
film that takes place in Hong Kong, has a Hong Kong director at the
helm, and stars Van Damme.  Yes, you'll see plenty of fight scenes and
gunshots galore, but don't expect anything more than that.
The storyline involves a smuggling ring that is trying to smuggle small,
sophisticated bombs into the U.S.  With the explosive power of a half a
stick of dynamite, these little technological marvels are so small that
they could be hidden inside a watch, a small radio, or even inside a
button.   If these bombs make their way into the U.S., the ringleaders
could blackmail the government into an exorbitant monthly payment.  The
CIA follows several leads that point them to Marcus Ray (Van Damme).
>From there, it's a convoluted series of sequences that tells very little
story but allows lots of time for Van Damme to run, kick, punch and to
try to figure out why everyone is after him.  
But Marcus Ray isn't the only one that's trying to make sense out of
what's going on.  The audience can easily get lost as well.  We run into
a plethora of other characters such as Tommy (Rob Schneider), who may be
more than just Ray's partner.  There's also Karan (Lela Rochon), a
supposed executive that wants to talk to Marcus about his business.
Also on the case is a handful of other cops, including Paul Sorvino (a
very respectable actor), who must have lost a bet to want to take a role
in this film.  
Some of the action sequences were kind of nifty, like the cat and mouse
chase aboard a freighter while gigantic cargo crates shifted back and
forth threatening to crush people.  Yes, some neat ideas, but all are
squandered.  The "Speed Racer"-like dialogue (sentences that
incomprehensibly spew out), and the epileptic manner of editing, which
is done at breakneck speed, easily earns this film the title of "most
highly disorganized effort of the summer."

Author
Michael Dequina
Renowned Hong Kong action director Tsui Hark first teamed with Jean-Claude
Van Damme on the action star's 1997 pairing with Dennis Rodman,
_Double_Team_, and managed to make what initially appeared to be a disaster
into a slick, stylish, and somewhat diverting action timekiller.  Tsui
continues to energetically pile on the visual razzle dazzle in his latest
collaboration with the Muscles from Brussels, _Knock_Off_, but this time
around, style neither save a script that is at best ridiculous, and at
worst incomprehensible; nor hide a host of truly lousy performances.
Writer Steven E. DeSouza's fairly straightforward plotline isn't as
outre as _Double_Team_'s strange yarn involving a secret think tank/prison,
but it makes about as much sense, which is little.  Van Damme plays Marcus
Ray, a Hong Kong-based sales rep for a jeans company (!) who stumbles upon
a Russian terrorist scheme to implant powerful microchip-sized bombs in HK
product exports to the U.S.--dolls, electronic equipment, and, yes, jeans.
It's all part of some type of ransom scheme, but all I remember is--and I
kid you not--graphics on a CIA computer screen showing a map of the world,
bombs detonating, and an hat-wearing figure on the other side of the world
bursting out into laughter...
...which is what the crowd at the showing I attended spontaneously did
throughout _Knock_Off_.  While all of Van Damme's films have its share of
unintentional laughs, mostly due to the stiff acting "skills" of the
physically agile Van Damme, _Knock_Off_ delivers more than usual (though
not as many as Van Damme's embarrassing directorial effort, 1996's
_The_Quest_).  A lot of the laughs are earned by some particularly painful
lines by DeSouza: "I smoked that badass like a Roman candle!" and
"Entrepreneurship, babycakes!" standing out among my favorites.  But it is
indeed the pathetic performances that provide the bulk of _Knock_Off_'s
laughs.  Van Damme is true to laughable form, perhaps even worse than
usual.  Early scenes actually _require_ him to make funny with
co-star Rob Schneider (improbably cast as a deep cover CIA agent posing as
Marcus's business partner), and the sight and sound of the
still-heavily-accented Van Damme haplessly trying to drop punchlines is
hilarious in the wrong way.  Even typically good actors are not immune to
the bad acting bug.  Paul Sorvino is unconvincing and terribly overwrought
as Schneider's CIA superior; and Lela Rochon, playing an investigator for
the jeans company, spends the entire movie in perpetual snarl mode.  In
Rochon's defense, though, her role requires her to do little more than
display her toned legs, exquisite bone structure, and perky bosoms, the
latter coming in handy for one key scene where she must fish for microbombs
stuck in her ample cleavage.
Tsui picks up where he left off visually in _Double_Team_, juicing up
the proceedings with inventive camera work.  Here, though, Tsui's visual
razzle dazzle borders on over kill, coming off as desperate attempts to
shield the inanity of the entire enterprise.  For each nifty trick Tsui
pulls off, such as a  recurring visual theme that has the camera literally
going through the circuitry of electronic devices, there are others that
are completely superfluous.  This is especially disconcerting when the
trick in question could be clever when used in the right context.  For
instance, one scene early on has Marcus putting his hand in a box.  As he
puts his hand in, the same action is shown from an overhead camera angle in
a rectangle at the corner of the screen.  It's undoubtedly an interesting
visual, but it would have been nice if its use actually amounted to something.
The test of a Van Damme movie boils down to the action sequences, but
surprisingly, those in _Knock_Off_ leave much to be desired.  Tsui does
what he can to make something of them, employing freeze frames, blurred
motion, and unconventional camera angles, but there is nothing
fundamentally special about the fairly generic chase and fight sequences
written by DeSouza.  There isn't anything as preposterously amusing as the
climactic tiger/land mine fight in _Double_Team_, let alone anything
remotely close to Tsui's legendary Hong Kong works (but that's a given
going in).
If Tsui has any hope of approaching his countryman John Woo's stateside
success, he would do best to break free from Van Damme... before it's too
late.  If he continues his involvement with B-grade movies such as
_Knock_Off_, the respect he has from HK action fans will continue to
diminish... that is, if it hasn't already disappeared entirely after this
fiasco.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
David Sunga
Starring: 
Jean-Claude Van Damme, Rob Schneider, Lela Rochon, Michael Wong, Paul
Sorvino, Carmen Lee, Glen Chin
Synopsis: 
In this Hong Kong comedy Marcus (Van Damme) and his buddy Tommy
(comedian Rob Schneider) are wheeler dealers in freewheeling Hong Kong.
They are V 6 company representatives running a factory for producing V 6
designer jeans for export to the United States, but in KNOCK OFF Hong
Kong is notorious for fake designer goods called knock offs.
One day the boys get a visit from V 6 investigator Karan Leigh (Lela
Rochon), accusing them of producing cheap knock offs instead of the real
jeans. Of course, this being an action comedy, this means that some
anonymous terroristic bad guys are responsible for making the fake jeans
and trying to hide microbombs inside them in a bid for world domination.
Enter the CIA, the Russian Mafia, Hong Kong mobsters, Hong Kong cops Lt.
Han and Ling Ho (Michael Wong and Carmen Lee), and of course, the
high-kicking Jean-Claude Van Damme.
Opinion:
For H.K. movie fans, KNOCK OFF features popular New York born Hong Kong
actor Michael Fitzgerald Wong, and model-turned-actress Carmen Lee. But
the main characters are Belgian kickboxer Jean-Claude Van Damme and
comedian Rob Schneider from TV's MEN BEHAVING BADLY. In this case,
teaming up a martial artist with a comedian for a buddy action comedy is
a good idea, since it takes half of the acting burden off of the martial
artist. Schneider is not a kung fu man or action star, and Van Damme is
better known for slow motion spin kicks, but luckily director Tsui Hark
and his team use judicious cuts and film speed to keep the action up
front and flowing.
Surprisingly, WAITING TO EXHALE actress Lela Rochon, playing company
investigator Karan Leigh, gets to do a decent amount of action work,
kung fu kicks, and machine gun shooting. As an action gal, Rochon
actually does well enough to get my fan vote as the next Bond girl or
Foxy Brown sequel heroine. 
Teaming such an athletic cast of legitimately good actors with DIE HARD
scriptwriter Steven E. de Souza, you'd think KNOCK OFF would be a great
movie. But the bad news is, the plot is somewhat of a disappointment,
the dubbing is evident, and people chase each other around the city
without dramatic tension or character sympathy. If a building blows up,
it doesn't mean anything unless the building is somehow important to the
plot. Or if a character gets chased or bombed, the character should be
someone of significance to the movie, not a stranger. But in Knock Off,
a lot of action goes on without any particular meaning. For example, the
1997 Hong Kong handover is extraneously thrown in, but doesn't have any
significance to the movie.
In Knock OFF not as much attention is paid to the plot as to the
scene-by-scene choreography. When Marcus informs the police so they can
make a big raid on the big Russian Mafia boat, only one lieutenant shows
up to make the raid. Why? Carmen Lee plays another cop who is introduced
early in the movie, but fades away, so we never find out about her
personality or adventures, either. 
Despite plot holes and characters the audience doesn't get to know or
care about, watching cops run around can still mildly entertain. But I'd
wait for the video unless you're a big fan of one of the stars or
choreography.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Once upon a time Jean-Claude Van Damme was a decent action hero. The
Muscles from Brussels bursted into the Hollywood market with mindless
adventure films, boasting his spectacular martial-arts ability. Some of
these excursions were fun. But now it seems like watching a Van Damme
movie has become a painful chore, with no rewards but the virtually
guaranteed helping of mind-numbing action. And when the action goes
sour, what is there left to enjoy?
I'll explain. Knock Off is about a pair of counterfeit jeans salesmen
working out of an office in Hong Kong. Marcus Ray (Van Damme), a
babe-magnet and stylish dresser, heads up the company with an annoying
weasel of a partner (Rob Schneider). They become part of a plot
involving microbombs implanted in counterfeit jeans, seemingly by a mole
in the business. I'm going to reveal about everything in the next
paragraph, so if you want a review devoid of spoilers, skip onto the
next one. I'm not quite sure who gives a crap, but I'll issue a warning
anyhow.
Tommy is really working with the CIA. His boss (a very hammy and flat
Paul Sorvino) is the mole, and he wants to cause carnage with these tiny
but immensely powerful super weapons. He even stoops so low to put them
into children's toys. If you thought this plot outline sounded
intriguing, then you probably will enjoy Knock Off. If you think that
this ridiculous set-up couldn't even fill five minutes of screen time
without causing you to roll over laughing, this might not be your cup of
tea.
Knock Off sucks. It stoops to ridiculous levels that most individuals
could only conjure up in horrific nightmares. It amazes me how far these
producers will go to sell something, simply because Van Damme is the
star. The plot is pathetic garbage strung together by inane action
sequences that will baffle your mind, the performances are so wooden you
could use them to row a canoe, and the action itself is an absolute
catastrophe. Director Tsui Hark (who teamed with Van Damme in the
superior, but still lame-brained Double Team) is at the helm, and he
would rather attempt to dazzle us with fantastic camera angles than
engage us with the plot. I suppose I enjoyed some of the camera work,
but the incessant desperation of it all made me rather nauseous. The
picture freezes in the middle of an action sequence, speeds are altered
consistently, and the camera tricks mostly apply to traveling up gun
barrels as the weapons are fired. It all sounds very cool. Trust me, it
isn't.
As much as it scars me to say this (har, har), Van Damme is terrible.
Sure, he does lots of fancy kickboxing moves and dodges giant crates
with the greatest of ease. He looks like he's doing a bad impersonation
of Jackie Chan, and his performance is stiff and tired. I hate to say
it, but perhaps it's time for Mr. Van Damme to give up his day job.
It's really a test of endurance watching Knock Off. I suppose there's
some enjoyment derived from Schneider's character, who is extremely
annoying, but provides the film's better moments. And what is the
beautiful Lela Rochon doing in this movie? Hopefully she grabbed her
paycheck and then fled the premises like an Olympic sprinter. Knock Off
doesn't even stand strong as a mindless but entertaining action film,
like a handful of Van Damme's others. No, this movie is an embarrassment
to the entire action genre of modern filmmaking. And considering how low
Hollywood has stooped as of late in that department, that is certainly
not saying much.
Note to self: Avoid Universal Soldier 2: The Return upon release in
August 99.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
David E. Smith
Knock-Off (1998) - Jean-Claude Van Damme, Rob Schneider, Lela Rochon, Paul
Sorvino
   What do you get when you bring together sometimes-memorable action
   star Jean-Claude Van Damme, former "Saturday Night Live" comic genius
   Rob Schneider and the lovely Lela Rochon?
   I'm not sure either, but that particular chaotic mishmash is in
   theaters everywhere under the oddly appropriate title "Knock-Off."
   There is something vaguely resembling a plot, but it's so convoluted
   that any attempt to summarize it would only lead to even more
   confusion. Schneider and Rochon are CIA agents investigating a flood
   of such fine products as "Pumma" sneakers and other cheap copies, or
   knock-offs.
   Van Damme's character figures in there somehow, and so do the Russians
   in a cliched attempted to take over the world. As this film is
   nominally set in 1997, during the return of Hong Kong to China, this
   is just one of many things that utterly defy logic.
   Why would the CIA have people in Hong Kong, investigating a small ring
   of petty thieves?
   The actors certainly don't do much to make the audience care. Van
   Damme seems only to be there to crack heads in, showing remarkably
   little personality. Rochon is treated a bit better in her
   action-intense role, but is also stifled in the acting department.
   Schneider manages to show off a bit of his comic talent, whipping out
   the occasional witty one-liner, but that's just not enough to save
   this movie.
   So we're left with gratuitous violence, and at least a noble effort is
   made. Famous Hong Kong director Tsui Hark does the best with what he
   has to work with, using all the tricks that made him famous -
   slow-motion, stop-motion, dizzying camera angles and the occasional
   blur. "Knock-Off" ends up looking like a good Hong Kong film, just
   waiting for Jackie Chan or Chow Yun-Fat to show up.
   They don't show up, of course. All three of the leads do their best,
   and should at least be credited for the effort, no matter how far
   short it may fall of the goal.
   In the end, "Knock-Off" is itself just a knock-off of all the good
   films you could be watching instead. Save the 5 bucks and go rent
   "Hard Boiled" or most any Jackie Chan flick. That way you'll be sure
   of getting the real thing.

Author
David Butterworth
        Jean-Claude Van Damme movies tend to be, if nothing else, a lot of
mindless fun.  His latest film, "Knock Off," skips on the fun part leaving
a wildly incoherent exercise that is, well, simply mindless.
        You can't really blame Van Damme.  No one, I suspect, has ever
expected "the muscles from Brussels" to contribute a heartfelt performance
brimming with introspection and delicate shades of gray.  And even his
sidekick co-star, "Saturday Night Live" alumnus Rob "makin' copies"
Schneider, does what's expected of him, although neither appear to want the
role of straight man.
        No, the problem with the film is its direction.  The first five
minutes of the film are incomprehensible ... and it goes downhill from
there!  Five hundred characters, it seems, are introduced within the first
fifteen minutes.  Van Damme doesn't land his first kick until after
thirty--too late for most action fans--and by the time the hour mark has
rolled around, your jaw will be on your cup holder and you'll be wondering
why you elected to spend seven dollars on this mess.
        Director Hark Tsui, whose previous film was the Van Damme/Dennis
Rodman teamed "Double Team," films at such a frenetic pace that it's hard
to know what's going on, who's on whose side, and what the point of all
this is.
        Faster than you can yell "fruit stand!" we're watching a crazed
rickshaw race with Schneider being bounced along by an energetic Van Damme.
When Schneider starts whacking Van Damme in the behind with a four-foot eel
while enthusing "move your beautiful big ass," the movie takes an
unprecedented turn to the bizarre.
        Every now and again "Knock Off" will deliver some truly ingenious
directorial flourishes--inventive camera shots and angles, wild rides down
gun silencers and from the tops of buildings to the sprawling street below,
revealing cut-ins within the frame--but they all happen too quickly, and
within such a furious frame of reference, that they're wasted.  If only
Hark could have slowed things down just for a minute.
        If you're interested in the plot, you're better off reading a
capsule review than trying to extract any meaning from the on-screen
shenanigans: "Jean-Claude Van Damme plays a shady bluejeans manufacturer
who uncovers a Russian Mafia plot to terrorize the world with "nanobombs"
hidden in Cabbage Patch knock-offs.  Maybe.  With Paul Sorvino."  A more
accurate summary would be "Jean-Claude Van Damme bums around Hong Kong
failing to avoid large, blatant Coca-Cola product placements."
        The fact that the film is staged during Hong Kong's last days under
British rule gets some lip service but doesn't figure in at all.
        Perhaps "Knock Off"'s most intriguing credit is that Ron and
Russell Mael composed the frenzied music score.  Some of you might remember
the Mael brothers as the '80s synth pop duo Sparks; their contributions
here are as confused as the accompanying action--"Kimono My House" indeed!
        Like the cheap jeans and "Pumma" sneakers manufactured in Hong
Kong, Van Damme's latest is a real phony.

Author
Jamie Peck
KNOCK OFF
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The backdrop is 1997 Hong Kong, right around the time the country's 
British rule was handed over to China. Van Damme plays Marcus Ray, a 
swarthy designer jeans rep (aren't you just loving this already?) with 
connections to the counterfeit underground, a market that's being 
retooled by an international smuggling ring - they're installing tiny 
"nanobombs" in the front waist buttons! (Please hold all jokes about 
exploding crotches.) Covert CIA agents, turncoat sales executives, 
former KGB thugs and the Russian mafia all somehow figure into "Knock 
Off" as well, but the plot is best described as incomprehensible, 
annoying sound and fury. In fact, if not for the generously wordy 
production notes, a summary of the film's set-up would be downright 
impossible. 
Director Tsui Hark, who previously worked with Van Damme on "Double 
Team," fills "Knock Off" with visual gimmicks that serve only as empty 
distractions. Like a watered-down version of this summer's "Snake Eyes," 
the camera knows no boundaries, traveling through newspapers, telephone 
lines, computers and rifle scopes as if they weren't solid objects; one 
weird shot appears to wander inside a shoe and emerge from a pool table 
pocket. Completely unacceptable action sequences only add to the 
maddening confusion, especially a horrible boat chase that opens the 
film on two left feet. "Knock Off" employs slow-motion, fast-forwards 
and freeze-frames to give its various battles and fight scenes an 
outlandish energy, but all of this flashy excess is completely 
unsynchronized. 
"Knock Off" wouldn't have been so painful to sit through had it at least 
been diverting in the way that only terrible movies can be, but no such 
luck. It's a straight-faced disaster, unbearably squandering a 
potentially juicy filmmaking style and wasting a fine supporting cast 
(Rob Schneider, Lela Rochon and Paul Sorvino), generally making its 
90-minute running time feel like an eternity. Perhaps "Knock Off" 
reaches its intolerably absurdist zenith not long after it starts, when, 
for no discernable reason, Van Damme carts sidekick Schneider around the 
crowded streets of Hong Kong in a rickshaw race. The latter grabs an eel 
from a nearby food stand and begins pelting the former with it, 
screaming, "Move that big, beautiful ass of yours!" If you know what's 
good for you, you'll do the same.

Author
Steve Kong
Just two weeks ago after I saw The Avengers, I walked out of the theatre
thinking, "Could there be any worse film than this?" After seeing
Jean-Claude Van Damme's Knock Off, a little voice in the back of my head is
screaming "Yes!"
The opening to the film is a mish-mash of non-adrenaline-pumping action. It
introduces us to the slim story line of the film There are bad guys,
Russians of course, who have miniaturized explosives to the point that they
are the size of watch batteries. The bad guys plan to put these mini-bombs
into everything, including pants, dolls, and radios. The bad guys want to
blow up the world unless the world is willing to pay to live.
The reason I went to see Knock Off was not for Van Damme, who is a complete
dolt, but because of the director Tsui Hark. Hark, who worked with John Woo
in Hong Kong, is the epitome of a Woo-knock-off. I wanted to see if Hark's
work has gotten any better than some of the stuff he's been putting out in
Hong Kong and his debut American film, Double Team. Has he gotten any
better? No. Hark continues to be a sub-par Woo-wannabe. And with this
second American film he still has one big thing working against him The
Jean-Claude Van Damme Curse.
I don't understand why some of the big Hong Kong directors making their
move to America have to be cursed with making their debut film with this
dolt Van Damme. First, John Woo made the mediocre Hard Target with Van
Damme. Then Ringo Lam made Maximum Risk. Now it's Tsui Hark, who didn't
learn with Double Team, trying again with Knock Off. Woo got off OK, but he
had to work hard to regain his status as a master filmmaker (following Hard
Target were the better Broken Arrow and Face/Off). Lam made a good effort
with Maximum Risk and has yet to come out with another film. What Hark
lacks, that both Woo and Lam have, is talent. Hark's direction in Knock Off
is hideous.
I would write about acting but there is none to be seen in Knock Off. Van
Damme can't and will probably never learn how to act. Van Damme makes me
miss Steven Seagal. Who surprised me in Knock Off was Paul Sorvino. What's
an actor like Sorvino doing in a movie like Knock Off? I guess every actor
has bills to pay. Rob Schneider is biting-aluminum-annoying in Knock Off.
Every time he was onscreen, I wanted a bad guy to take out Schneider's
character.
Knock Off shows that an action picture can be boring. I was constantly
looking at my watch during the film and felt sleepy 20 minutes into the
film. Call the ambulance; I think this film is dead. If you take anything
away from reading this review, take this message Skip Knock Off! Skip Knock
Off!
