Title
Review for Kanzo Sensei (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David Dalgleish
Starring Akira Emoto, Kumiko Aso, Juro Kara, Masanori Sera, Jacques
Gamblin, Keiko Matsuzaka;
Directed by Shohei Imamura;
Written by Imamura and Daisuke Tengan, from a novel by Ango Sakaguchi;
Cinematography by Shigeru Komatsubara
        DR. AKAGI--a farcical tragedy about (in no particular order) a blue
whale, grave-robbing, a nuclear bomb, hepatitis, a Dutch spy, a morphine
addict, a microscope, an arc lamp, a bayonet-wielding granny, and the fate
of virgin boys in battle--is reputedly the final film by the great Japanese
director Shohei Imamura.  If so, he goes out with a bang--not that a
whimper was ever likely.  It is not his definitive work, but it is
representative of his vision of human life as anarchic, fertile, harsh,
communal, bawdy, and, above all, resilient.
        World War II is nearing its end.  The small Japanese town of Hibi
is not what you would call strategically important, and it experiences the
war at a distance, in radio broadcasts and air-raid sirens.  But the
psychic stresses the community feels are no less painful, and the people of
Hibi mostly cope by means of the usual opiates--sex, drugs, alcohol--but
while the opiates are usual, the people are not, including a drunken
priest, a cynical morphine-addicted doctor, a
prostitute-turned-doctor's-assistant (latest in a long line of pragmatic,
carnal, emotive Imamura heroines), and so on.  They are vividly portrayed,
in the round, and the anguished sense that they use their vices as
desperate survival strategies, as ways of both coping with and escaping
from war-time reality, is moving.
        Then there is Dr. Akagi, who stands apart.  Our first sight of him
is revealing.  He is running, as he often does, from one patient's home to
the next.  He is immaculate and comic in a pristine white suit and shirt,
knee-length black stockings and bow-tie, legs pumping furiously as a jaunty
jazz theme plays on the soundtrack.  The mock pomposity of this first
impression is apt: there is something both absurd and admirable about
Akagi, in his futile devotion and his fruitless heroics.
        A middle-aged widower with a son serving in the army, he is
unsparing of himself in his attention to his patients, but he also
diagnoses all of them with hepatitis, and is affectionately mocked as a
charlatan and "Dr. Liver."  Nevertheless, he is beloved.  He never seems to
heal anyone, but he persists: if he did not, he might have to think about
his son, his wife, the war, things for which there is no diagnosis, no
prescription.
        He is fond of telling anyone who will listen that hepatitis will be
the next epidemic to sweep Japan, if preventive measures are not taken.  It
soon becomes clear that while Akagi truly believes he is talking about
swollen livers, what the film is talking about is something else.
Hepatitis is what happens when the body can no longer process its toxins
properly, and, metaphorically, that is what is happening to Japan:
destructive energies are not being contained, but are running rampant
through the country, manifest as participation in the war.  Every patient
whom we see Akagi treat is treated for hepatitis (except, significantly,
his one foreign patient), but what he is really trying--and failing--to
treat is the underlying sickness of Japanese society.
        When the nuclear bombs fall, in the end, as they must, it is the
ultimate symptom of the sickness.  The bomb may be dropped by America, but
the blame, in DR. AKAGI, must be shouldered by Japan: the nuclear attack is
the fatal consequence of the disease of war, the disease Japan refused to
treat.  It is a harsh message, and beneath the vital profuse energy that
fuels the film, there is anger and sadness: anger that no one cured the
sickness, sadness because maybe it couldn't be cured anyway.
        DR. AKAGI is a busy movie: there's a lot going on, a lot of people,
a lot of plots.  It tries, with considerable gusto, to bring life to each
character, each story, but it takes on too much.  It is crammed full of
life, only to become something of a mess.  Perhaps that is the necessary
price of any attempt to show life as chaotic and haphazard, but in DR.
AKAGI the disordered shapelessness of the film almost cripples its central
thrust.
        Then there is the ending, which, despite its uneven execution, is
laudable for its audacity, and memorable.  While his earlier (and better)
BLACK RAIN was an unusually sober and gravely respectful look at the
aftermath of the nuclear bombing, Imamura here frames a response to the
bombing that is characteristic of his work as a whole.  He provokes a sense
both of pathos and preposterousness, as his characters look upon the rising
mushroom cloud and discuss it in terms that are utterly banal and wildly
inappropriate.  He strives to wed the sublime to the ridiculous, but some
risible special effects disrupt the complex discordance of tone, the
attempt to shape the conflicted impulses of the film into something great.
It is an attempt that fails, but not by much.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DR. AKAGI (KANZO SENSEI) (director/writer: Shohei Imamura; screenwriter:
Daisuke Tengan/based on the book "Dr. Liver" by Ango Sakaguchi;
cinematographer: Shigeru Komatsubara; cast: Akira Emoto (Dr. Akagi),
Kumiko Aso (Sonoko), Jyuro Kara (Umemoto, a monk), Jacques Gamblin
(Piet), Masanori Sera (Toriumi), Keiko Matzuzaka (Sonoko's mother), Misa
Shimizu (Gin), 1998-Jap.)
It is always fascinating when a great foreign director takes a look at
his own country in a way that outsiders can't really see it. That is
what the almost 73-year-old Shohei Imamura (BLACK RAIN/Vengeance Is
Mine/The Insect Woman/The Pornographers/The Eel) does here, in his final
film, after a long and illustrious career, one in which he started out
as an assistant to the great director Yasujiro Ozu. This is a
comedy/drama about the last days of WW11, that is shot inside a
resisting Japan, trying to hold back their inevitable defeat and staying
the course under orders from their totalitarian regime. The story takes
place in the small backwater seacoast town of Hibi, where those who wish
to forget the war might go to the town's red light district, or drown
their sorrows with alcohol, or drugs. Dr. Akagi (Akira Emoto) is
something of local joke and comical figure in town, called by most Dr.
Liver because he diagnosis's all his patience as having hepatitis, and
is always seen in his immaculate white suit, straw hat, bow tie, and
knickers running around town tending to his patients. They treat
him-even if they kid him a bit-as a local treasure. He seems to have
their best interest at heart and he cures them of their ills, and they
know this, but the ones in charge don't seem to care and treat him as if
he were a quack.
Imamura, whose own father was a doctor, based this film on a short novel
by Ango Sakaguchi, yet Imamura and his son, who collaborated on the
script under the pseudonym
Daisuke Tengan, have, supposedly, retained only the title character and
invented everything else. I have not read the book to confirm this but
this is what the director said in an interview that was reported by a
film 'zine.
What struck me as rather odd for the moment, until I thought further
about it, was the film's opening, as the first words spoken are English
that come from American bomber pilots flying over Okayama, an island
village next to the doctor's hometown of Hibi, with a POW camp and a
factory. This seems to indicate the influence America and its film
industry has had on this quintessential Japanese director and the need
he has to show that the world is not necessarily a homogenous place,
that all nations are influenced by each other. He will even have his
good doctor, at one point of the story, converse in German with a Dutch
POW, Piet (Jacques Gamblin), accused of being a spy. It sets the table
for the film's major theme, that war comes about when people can't trust
each other anymore and that they let their governments take charge of
their thinking process. This is what happened to Japan. Therefore how
could you blame the American pilots who are now carrying out their
mission to end the war, even if they are doing something as terrible as
bombing a civilian population. It is a rather odd philosophical opinion
for one to have, especially for one who was himself getting bombed
during the war (Imamura was a teen at the time of the war).
In a more prosaic meaning for the film's opening, the bombing interrupts
the sexual act of the local prostitute Sonoko (Kumiko Aso) with her
boyfriend, who is paying her for sex by embezzling funds from city hall,
where he is an accountant. His mother, disheartened by this
relationship, will accept Dr. Akagi's advice and seek the advice of the
local priest, Umemoto (Jyuro Kara), on what to do. He is a drunk,
unhappily living with his third wife, and demands sake for his services,
but gets pickled cucumbers instead. No one in this film will get exactly
what they want.
This is a chaotic story that covers more topics than you could shake a
stick at. They range from some more or less minor concerns, such as
whale fishing, prostitution, bureaucracy, power trips, small-town
superstitions (a virgin will be more likely to get shot in war than an
experienced man), small-town prejudices (a prostitute is not good enough
for my son), POW's being tortured, Japan's attitudes towards foreigners,
and grave desecration (Dr. Akagi will need a liver for his research).
The big themes are reserved for what role society has in providing
medical research into the cause and identification of hepatitis, the
finding of love in one's life, the nuclear bomb, and finding out what
causes a war.
This Imamura film is not by any means his definitive one, but it shows
enough of his lifetime concerns to be an interesting one for him to make
his swan song in. What it suffers from is that the combination of comedy
and serious drama have too many awkward and slow moments, that show many
reactions to what the director visibly feels and makes them look as if
they were predictably put into the cluttered story and don't have a
breath of their own. To see how great a director he is, is to contrast
those tepid scenes with some of the scenes that have his magical hand in
it and see how simple and moving they were. The last scene of the film
is the work of a master, as the cloud-like nuclear bomb is viewed by the
middle-aged widower, Dr. Akagi, who is bereaved, having recently learned
that his doctor son serving in Manchuria (probably involved in immoral
research on live subjects captured by the Japanese) had been killed.
With Akagi, accepting him as a great man not a quack, is his young
assistant, Sonoko, a former prostitute, taken on by him as a favor to
those who want to save her from being a prostitute. She has fallen in
love with the older man because she thinks he is great person and is
ready to let him have sex with her for free, as she recalls her mother's
(Keiko) advice who trained her to be a whore, "don't give a man a
freebie unless he is your true love." The two are returning from a
medical call made to one of the remote islands and she has just missed
catching a whale, tipping over the small boat, but, nonetheless, feels
exhilarated and shows off her nude body to the modest doctor, and in the
background appears the nuclear bomb, something that they don't recognize
for what it is, at first, as it looks godly and spectacularly
magnificent, as if it could temporarily solve all the problems that
plagued the world and end all worldly conflict. There is no moral
judgment that this is an American bomb, as it seems the philosophy here
is, that when you live by the sword you must expect to die that way. The
better choice for his country would have been one of practising a more
loving nature, something that seems obvious, but what is also obvious is
that the world has not learned that simple lesson and continues to rely
on military might to fight its battles. Behind Imamura's kindly doctor
alter ego, there is a despondency that the sickness of his country
couldn't be cured and so much needless suffering for his people and the
world had to take place.
Dr. Akagi is fighting a single-handed battle in war time Japan to alert
the country that hepatitis is a contagious disease and it is destroying
the liver so that it can no longer process toxins and therefore it is
destroying the body. He treats his victims with glucose, which the local
army POW commmandant says is being misused by him. What Imamura is also
pointing out, is that this disease is symptomatic to what is happening
in Japan: it is destroying the country because the problem is being
ignored and the disease and the war are similar in nature, they are
rapidly spreading unchecked across the country.
To enlist his help in the battle against hepatitis, the doctor is only
able to muster the support of those with weaknesses in their character,
who are not esteemed members of the community, but in their hearts are
good people and when given a chance, will try to work through their
problems. These people are the drunken monk, the morphine addicted
surgeon (Sera), the Dutch fugitive from the POW camp, and the somewhat
ex-prostitute Sonoko (she still plies her trade when convenient).
In one conversation between Akagi and Sonoko, the beauty of their
characters is magnified, as the deadly bacteria is viewed under the
microscope and Sonoko on seeing it, exclaims how beautiful it is:
Sonoko: "Are there men and women bacteria?" Akagi: "Neither male nor
female, just perpetual reproductive motion." Sonoko: "No
prostitution?"Akagi: "That doesn't exist in nature. Everyone copulates
freely. Only humans value chastity. Still, prostitution is bad, since
you were born among humans." Sonoko: "Better off being bacteria. More
fun."
The big events of the film center around Dr. Akagi getting a microscope,
and a liver and movie equipment with a powerful arc light needed to view
the bacteria from a patient of his who dies; and, by him going to Tokyo
and enlisting and getting support for his project from his educated and
prominent colleagues. The praise and applause he receives for his
efforts at a reception, is enough to make anyone filled with pride, and
that euphoric rush, allowing the doctor to forget for once that his
patients come first, its prideful affect on him is seen on his return
and makes him realize he can't let such pride rule his life. He sees
this when he fails to immediately respond to an old lady with a heart
attack, instead he is busy working at his microscope, and she dies the
next day.
Things really come to a summit on his return from Tokyo, when he finds
that the army is looking for the escaped POW. Sonoko tells him that she
hid him in the house and the doctor without hesitating, he is willing to
help any human being in trouble, operates on the tortured fugitive with
the help of his oddball friends. One good turn leads to another, as the
Dutchman in civilian life was an expert in cameras and gets the
microscope needed for the hepatitis research to work properly.
When the army recaptures him, and they take the doctor's equipment, he
realizes that he he can't stop what seems to be destined. That the war
and the disease cannot be cured, as of now.
This film might not be a masterpiece (which I don't think it is) but it
is clearly a film by a great man, a man who sees the contradictions in
life in an amusing and contentiously cynical way, someone who can put
the virtuous doctor in the same boat with the whore, and not be bothered
by any moral judgments about who the better person is, because to him
they are both beautiful. And in the same breath, he can understand all
those in Japan who served their emperor, even the POW commandant, whom
he views as not that different from Dr. Akagi in his allegiance to
authority. They both have connections to the rulers of the country and
use this influence when it suits their purposes. A strange farcical
comedy results, that is often brilliant and at other times too messy to
follow in all the cloudy trails it leads to.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Kino International 
 Director:  Shohei Imamura
 Writer:  Shohei Imamura, Daisuke Tengan
 Cast: Akira Emoto, Kumiko Aso, Juro Kara, Masanori Sera,
Jacques Gamblin, Keiko Matsuzaka, Misa Shimizu, Yukiya
Kitamura, Masato Yamada, Tomoro Taguchi, Masato Ibu
    If you were seriously ill, there are two physicians you'd do
well to avoid: Patch Adams and Agaki Fuu.  Yet the two
doctors introduced to the movie public in 1998--the first by
director Tom Shadyac, the latter by the great Shohei
Imamura--are both treated as heroes.  And they are indeed, if
you discount their ability to heal.  In "Patch Adams,"
considered by one critic to be the most vulgarly sentimental
film by a major Hollywood studio since "Love Story" was
offered in 1970, not one foot of film displayed the title
character's actually treating an illness.  "Dr. Akagi," by
contrast, is brimming with shots of injections, incisions, and
research with a microscope, but because its title figure
administers to his patients as though they all had hepatitis,
he is not likely to cure his sufferers--except perhaps
metaphorically.  The American doctor who to this day heads
an institute in Virginia that treats patients at no charge and
the Japanese practitioner whose career spanned the years of
World War II have two things in common: One, they made
people laugh, although Akagi's public rather snickered as he
ran by and called him a quack.  Two, they were more
compassionate, more accepting of human frailty, than the
general population.  Though the characters in the Robin
Williams movie are not explored in any particular depth, those
in the Japanese account are surveyed perceptively.  By doing
this, director Imamura is able to show his audience what it
means to accept humanity in all its measure.
   Dr. Akagi (Akira Emoto) is a physician in a Japanese
seaside community concerned with what he sees as an
epidemic of hepatitis during the final months of World War II. 
He is nicknamed Dr. Liver by those who consider him a
quack.  By many definitions of that term he fits the bill by
misdiagnosing most of his patients' illnesses.  The 72-year
old director, Shohei Imamura (whose father was a doctor), is
far more attentive to Akagi's goodness, his benevolence and
acceptance of the human condition.  Accommodating Ango
Sakaguchi's novel to the screen, Imamura presents Akagi as
a man who literally runs from one emergency appointment to
another, in one case leaping from his office to an island he
had never heard of at the plea of a dying man's frantic
daughter.  His assistants are a motley crew, particularly a
surgeon who is addicted to morphine, Toriumi (Masanori
Sera); a priest with a taste for the bottle, Unemoto (Juro
Kara); an escaped prisoner of war from the Netherlands, Piet
(Jacques Gamblin); and most startling, a hooker whose
mother had groomed her for the profession, Sonoko (Kumiko
Aso).  The dissolute members of his team agree to give up
their vices, but people being what they are, they cannot. 
When Sonoko is asked to stop selling herself altogether, she
replies that she sees men "hardly ever."  For his part Toriumi
swears that his relationship with morphine is that "I hardly
use it anymore."
   Imamura, whose recent works include a story about a
paroled wife-killer whose obsessive relationship to his pet eel
is not wholly explained, is not too concerned with analyzing
the psychological bases of his people's demands.  We do
know that Akagi has intermittent nightmares that his son, a
doctor at the front, is performing dire medical experiments on
live subjects who have been captured by the Japanese army. 
This small clue is, however, the key to an understanding of
the film's metaphor.  Akagi appears distressed by what he
considers his son's immorality and, by extension, the
indecency of the Japanese fighting machine and of war itself. 
Humankind's addiction to conflict is like liver disease: an
epidemic that spreads indiscriminately, a moral sickness
which never goes away.  If Akagi has no cure for hepatitis,
the world has no corrective for war.  While the good doctor
believes in what he considers the Japanese cause--to free
Asia from Western colonialism--he nonetheless fumes at the
runaway nationalism that has led to armed combat.  Toriumi,
the drug addicted surgeon, is more cynical when he states, 
"To hell with Japan's future."
   The prostitute Sonoko is the comic center of the movie. 
Played with great charm and humanity by Kumiko Aso, this
doctor's assistant is not at all skeptical or negative about her
trade.  In her own innocent and untutored way, she loves
men, and deals with her profession as quite the honorable
way to support her sister and brother.  When she has sex
with the son of a woman who begs her to do so because that
young man is going to the front and "virgins attract bullets,"
she can sleep soundly, knowing that she has done yet
another good deed for her nation.  
   Exquisitely acted and photographed with a true feeling for
life in a village largely untouched by Allied bombing, "Dr.
Akagi" happily does not pass moral judgment on the small
people with whom the movie deals but rather condemns the
authoritarian government that has made wholesale slaughter
inevitable.
