Title
Review for Baby Doll (1956)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Baby Doll" was considered shocking when it was first released.
At this much later date, it just seems contrived. Tennessee 
Williams  wrote the screenplay, and Elia Kazan directed.
The film stars Carroll Baker as the title character, a gorgeous 
young woman who has been married for the past year to failed
businessman Karl Malden.  It was a precondition for their marriage
that it would not be consummated until its first anniversary,
which is now pending.  Malden, desperate to revive his business
and gain access to his wife's bed, burns down the plant of his
arch-rival Eli Wallach.  His plan succeeds at first, as Wallach
must use Malden's facilities to produce his cotton.  But Wallach
and Baker begin a liason that could prove Malden's undoing.
There are two kinds of people who will enjoy this movie: those
who would like to see Karl Malden act like an idiot, and those
who would like to see Carroll Baker wearing skimpy clothes.  
Admittedly, many people fall into one or both categories, 
but more is expected of "Baby Doll", which somehow was nominated 
for several Oscars.
The opening scene has Malden peeping through a hole in a wall
at Baker, who is sleeping in a crib and sucking her thumb.
This sets the tone for the movie, as Malden behaves like a
reckless idiot and Baker acts like she is half her age.
It is difficult to like or sympathize with any of the leading
characters, who are selfish and even criminal.
There are several conversations between Wallach and Baker
that seem endless, as he first sizes her up and then tries 
to win her.  Baker's motivation to fall for Wallach seems
suspect, coming right after he has threatened to kill her.
The arguments between Malden and Baker that open the film 
are much more entertaining.
There are several black actors in this film, but they
are given racist parts.  They are shown idly passing 
time, dissipated, laughing at everything but doing nothing.
"Baby Doll" also doesn't seem to know whether it is a comedy
or a drama.  Perhaps it would have worked better strictly as
a comedy.
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
