Title
Review for Bed & Breakfast (1992/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
104 min., PG-13, Comedy, 1992
Director: Robert Ellis Miller
Cast: Roger Moore, Talia Shire, Colleen Dewhurst, Nina Siemaszko,
      Ford Rainey, Jamie Walters, Stephen Root
     Talia Shire runs a Bed and Breakfast with her daughter Nina
Siemaszko and her mother-in-law Colleen Dewhurst.  One day Siemaszko
finds Roger Moore washed up on the beach outside of their house.  They
take him in and find out that he has amnesia.  Dewhurst makes him the
handyman for the Bed and Breakfast.
     BED AND BREAKFAST was filmed in York Beach, Maine in either 1989 or
1990, I believe.  Since I live just down the seacoast from there and
remember reading and hearing a lot about the filming, when it came to
the local theaters I had to go and see it.  I enjoyed this film and
highly recommend that you attempt to see it.  On a scale of zero to
five, I give BED AND BREAKFAST a four.  BED AND BREAKFAST is rated PG-13
for explicit language and adult situations.
     This film was not what I was expecting.  I was expecting through
what I had seen in the local papers some sort of drama about New England
life.  I was pleased that instead, the film was a good natured comedy.
BED AND BREAKFAST has now been released on video cassette, so it
shouldn't be too hard to find.
     I found this film very enjoyable to just sit back and watch.  The
film has a great cast.  Roger Moore (THE NAKED FACE, LIVE AND LET DIE)
is great as the stranger.  Talia Shire (THE GODFATHER, COLD HEAVEN) is
wonderful as the mother who is trying to keep Nina Siemaszko going
straight.  Colleen Dewhurst (THE BOY WHO COULD FLY) is exceptionally
great as Talia Shire's mother.  I think that Colleen Dewhurst was the
best out of the entire cast.  Nina Siemaszko (WILD ORCHID 2: TWO SHADES
OF BLUE) is very good as Talia Shire's daughter.  For the teenage girls
there is Jamie Walters ("The Heights"), who does what he does best,
looks cute for the girls.  This film is very well written and is
beautifully photographed.  The director, Robert Ellis Miller, does a
great job, getting excellent shots to go with the film.
