Title
Review for Street Fighter (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andy Eddy
December 10, 1994, v1.0
by Andy Eddy (vidgames@netcom.com), Senior Editor, GamePro magazine
[According to its author, this file may go through revisions; the latest
version will be kept on ftp.netcom.com, in pub/vi/vidgames/faqs as
sfmovie.txt.  -Moderator]
     Whether you like fighting games or not--for that matter, whether
you're an avid video-game player or not--it had to catch your attention
when it was announced that Capcom (the company behind the Street
Fighter series of video games) was financing the making of a movie
revolving around the Street Fighter characters.
     It became an even bigger story when it was announced that Steven
deSouza would be writing and directing it.  It would be his first
motion picture directing credit, though he's well known for writing
such action films as BEVERLY HILLS COP, COMMANDO, DIE HARD, 48 HOURS
and THE FLINTSTONES (only kidding).  He's also directed television
projects, such as "Tales from the Crypt"; I'll tie that in later.
     After deSouza's participation was decided on, the cast started
coming together.  The first big name was Jean-Claude Van Damme, who
would play the part of Guile--for a reported $7 million.  He was
followed up by such names as Ming-Na Wen (THE JOY LUCK CLUB) as Chun-Li
and Kylie Minogue (Australian star, best known in the U.S. for her
remake of the song, "The Locomotion.") as Cammy.  The villain M.  Bison
would be played by versatile actor Raul Julia (THE ADDAMS FAMILY and
KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN) in what would be his final film, as he would
die a short time before the movie's official release of December 23,
1994.
     The ambitious filming schedule would give deSouza and crew about
eight months to complete the film in time for the very firm
pre-Christmas release.  The majority of the filming started in June
1994 (I'll confirm the shooting schedule in a later revision), in
Thailand, followed by a stint in Australia; Vancouver was listed in the
credits also, so I'll find out where that fit in the shooting.  The
movie would offer a lot of action and fist-fighting, as the Van Damme
connection made apparent, though it was stipulated by Capcom that
STREET FIGHTER: THE MOVIE have a PG-13 rating, to make the film
accessible to the teenage audience that made Capcom rich on the game
market.
     First, a disclaimer: If there's one thing I hate in a movie
review, it's when the reviewer talks as if everyone reading it saw the
movie with him.  I'm not going to talk much about the story and its
outcome because there are some twists that deSouza's put in to keep the
viewer off balance.
     What I will say, in summary, is that Guile is a military leader
with the "good guys" Allied army.  He's trying to thwart a plan by
Bison to use peace-loving hostages (lots of them sporting Red Cross
symbols on their clothes) as pawns to get a $20 billion ransom.  This
cash will be used to build his growing empire.  He's obviously quite
mad, both in the state of his anger and his mental health, with
references to himself as a god destined to take over the world.
     To fill out the extensive cast of characters (I'll formally list
the cast in a future release of the FAQ/review), Cammy is Guile's
right-hand ... uh, person, as is T. Hawk; Zangief and Dee Jay fill a
similar role for Bison; Dhalsim is a doctor held captive to accomplish
Bison's dastardly deeds in the lab; Chun-Li is a TV journalist, who has
Honda and Balrog as her crew; Sagat and Vega are local crime scum,
doing dirty deeds (though not dirt cheap) with Bison; Ryu and Ken are
hustlers who get caught up in the action.  A new character (due to make
an appearance in a future Street Fighter game) is Captain Sawada, who
saw minor action in the film as one of Guile's troop leaders and is
reasonably forgettable.
     I saw the movie on December 10, 1994, in the first "public"
showing of the movie with Capcom employees, press like myself and other
invited guests.  They called it the first premiere of the film.  As
best as I can tell, it was a finished print.  I've been to
working-print screenings before, and they usually lack credits, music,
special effects and often are quite scratched.  Two weeks before
release, this looked to be the version that will hit theaters.
     The cast was pretty well chosen, something that was in debate by
many Street Fighter purists.  There was the moment that after a fight,
Van Damme/Guile's bicep came into the full view to show his American
flag tattoo, an interesting twist given his very strong accent.
Instances like this are few and far between.  As with most action
films, there is a strong suspension of belief, and STREET FIGHTER: THE
MOVIE is no different.  However, given the abilities of the game's
characters (throwing fireballs, extended helicopter kicks and flaming
attacks, let alone the Hulk-like appearance of Blanka), deSouza kept it
pretty much within believability, using poetic license to enable
certain characters to do the tricks from the game.  Again, I'll leave
surprises for you to discover when you see the film; you can thank me
later.
     The creepiest aspect is Raul Julia's portrayal as M. Bison.  He
comes across as a very evil and believable baddie, with all the
flamboyance the character calls for.  When I first saw stills of him, I
was amazed at how much weight he had lost to achieve the gaunt facial
features.  Little did I know, it would appear that Julia was mortally
ill with the cancer that would claim his life a few months later.
There's a creepy moment in the film toward the end, but it doesn't last
long (don't ask me to explain ... you'll know it when you see it).  The
fact that Julia died *after* the movie was finished means there are no
awkward moments due to his death, like those faced by the producers of
THE CROW (Brandon Lee died during filming, but rewriting and creative
use of computer graphics helped them around it) or, even worse,
BRAINSTORM (Natalie Wood died during filming, which made the final
product quite jumpy).  His character still graces the screen as a
powerhouse in sheer strength and fighting skill, and Julia carries the
film with his acting.  The movie is dedicated to him with a "To
Raul--Vaya Con Dios" at the start of the closing credits.
     [Trivia: Edward Pressman, who was a producer for STREET FIGHTER:
THE MOVIE, also produced THE CROW.  I'm sure he doesn't want to be
remembered for films that have actors die before the movie's release,
but I'm afraid he's stuck with the stigma now.]
     Contrary to that is the portrayal of Guile by Van Damme.  Not to
say that his acting is bad, but he really isn't required to do that
much besides act like a tough, capable military man and do his
trademark martial-arts combat.  He does well at both--aside from the
previously noted goofiness associated with his being an American--but
the movie doesn't center around his character as it does Julia's
Bison.  Adding to that is the fact that there are a lot of Street
Fighter characters that need attention in the movie, which spreads
screen time pretty thin, Van Damme included.
     The fighting in the movie, a staple of de Souza films, is
energetic and very believable.  No pro-wrestling theatrics here, but
honest-to-goodness pounding back and forth, with some exceptions (for
instance, Zangief and Honda crashing through the floor was a bit
overdone).  A familiar face to martial-arts fans as one of Bison's
underlings (in a nonspeaking role) and in the credits as the fighting
coach is Benny "The Jet" Urquidez.  The former champion does his magic
making average actors look like black belts.
     deSouza is also known for the sense of humor he injects in his
screenplays, and STREET FIGHTER: THE MOVIE is no different.  Best of
all, it's not grins that are targeted at Street Fighter fanatics.
There were times when, because we were in a crowd of Capcom employees
and their families, certain things in the movie were rewarded with
cheers and giggles from the audience.  Your reaction in those cases,
depending on how much of a gamer you are, may not be the same.  I will
give away one for the sake of example: After Bison steps onto the
platform that holds the control panel for his vast array of weaponry,
the camera comes around for a close-up and we see it's the
joystick-and-button cluster from the Super Street Fighter II arcade
game.  The majority of the time, the gags are accessible to all
viewers, though potentially subtle (like the give-and-take between
Balrog and Honda when they've been captured).
     That's the stuff that makes the movie more than just a video-game
movie.  We've all seen how producers have tried to squeeze out
video-game-related films like "The Wizard" (with Fred Savage), "Super
Mario Bros." (with Dennis Hopper and Bob Hoskins) and the most recent
"Double Dragon" (with Robert Patrick and Alyssa Milano).  They usually
end up as a competition of product placement and/or very forced.  I
didn't get that feeling with "Street Fighter: The Movie".  While there
are a few moments of sloppiness in the script, they aren't too bad.
There's lots of action, a decent plot vehicle to bring the game's
characters on-screen and (unlike some movies these days) not too much
commercialism beyond the basic premise of a Street Fighter movie.
(After a visit to the set, by the way, I have similar hopes about the
Mortal Kombat movie that's slated for a spring 1995 release.  I haven't
seen the script however, which would be a telling factor.)
     ~ deSouza's background as a TV director hurts him here, in my
opinion, because he shoots too many scenes, to use Wayne Campbell's
phrase, in "extreme close-up." Fight scenes are more imposing from this
perspective, but it's also harder to see what's going on.  It could
have been used to mask the fighting skills of such actors as Minogue,
but I'd suspect that it's just deSouza's eye for the shot, because it
happens in other non-action scenes too.  I would guess that "Street
Fighter: The Movie" will play well as a video as a result, but we'll
have to wait.
     ~ Some scenes are also too dark and musty for easy viewing.  While
this can be attributed to the sinister lair of M. Bison, other times
it appears to be just poor cinematography.
     ~ Similarly, there are times when the audio isn't sharp enough to
get a character's line.  This makes it hard for actors with an accent,
like Van Damme and to a lesser extent Minogue, to always come through
clearly.
     ~ Here's a rehash and further comment: While not miscast, Van
Damme isn't the greatest choice for a character that's an American
military hero with a U.S. flag tattoo.  Jeff Speakman is a capable
fighter, right? Hey, even Chuck Norris could have been made up with
Guile's haircut.  Well, maybe not.  As I said, it didn't bother me as
much, but I think a better selection could have been made.  Some
purists will no doubt think Van Damme laughable.
     ~Also, the casting of the role of Cammy could have been improved.
Not to say that Kylie Minogue is bad, but when I co-interviewed deSouza
before shooting began, he was saying how he wanted a lithe British
actress with martial arts skills to play Cammy with integrity.  Then
Minogue was announced.  I suspect her marquee value overseas was a
strong reason for the choice, but they could have played much more on
the part and the action if a more capable choice was made.  Hey, how
about Cynthia Rothrock?  If Van Damme can play an American soldier,
Rothrock--a veteran in the male-dominated genre of martial-arts
films--could probably have played a British import.  I guess that's why
I wasn't chosen as casting director, eh?
     I'll admit that I'm not a big fighting game fan, and as a result
not a big Street Fighter fan.  With that in mind, I'm probably not the
best judge of the success this movie has as an extention of the game.
Perhaps fanatics will be disappointed.  In a nutshell, though, I wasn't
disappointed in STREET FIGHTER: THE MOVIE as action-film
entertainment.  In fact, someone I know who's is really into fighting
games also said he thought it was good, which I take as a qualification
that de Souza did his job in bringing the game to the big screen.
What's left to be seen is whether Capcom can pull in about $50 million
in box-office receipts it needs to break even.
-- 
             Andy Eddy, Senior Editor, GamePro Magazine
The views expressed in this text aren't necessarily those of my employer

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: If MORTAL KOMBAT is at the high end of the video-games-to-movies
spectrum....
Well, at least they tried. Alas, STREET FIGHTER is still a lousy movie,
period. They were trying to make at least an enjoyably lousy movie, but they
haven't even managed to do that. Video games often make bad movies, but at
their best they can make enjoyably pulpy ones like MORTAL KOMBAT. At their
worst, you get SUPER MARIO BROTHERS. Or this.
Capcom's video game, which revitalized a sagging coin-op video game market
and created a trend for many other games to follow, had a few firsts: it
featured a diverse and intriguing cast of characters to choose from, and it
also featured a number of strong and visually arresting female characters
(Chun Li and Cammy), who did more than hang around and wait to get saved. I
agree: It all sounds like the recipe for an engaging movie. This isn't it.
It has the heart of a made-for-TV film and the mind of one of those
thimble-deep comic-book tie-ins that got packaged with video game cartridges
when I was younger.
The movie takes the basic character templates from the game and casts them
in a thin plot that takes heavy cues from the Gulf War. General Bison (Raul
Julia, excellent) is your usual power-mad dictator who's kidnapped a bunch
of Allied Nations soldiers and is holding them hostage for a cool twenty
billion. Leading the AN attack to recover them is Colonel Guile (Jean-Claude
Van Damme), who also has a personal score to settle with the self-styled
General.
There are other folks who are equally set on revenge: journalist Chun-li
Zhang (Ming-Na Wen, the next-best thing in the movie) and her crew (E. Honda
[Peter Navy Tuiasosopo] and Balrog [Grand L. Bush]). What up, guys? I
thought Chun-li was with INTERPOL -- but never mind. The movie plays fast
and loose with the Street Fighter "mythology", which is OK, I guess, as long
as the results are at least passably entertaining. And they are.
Occasionally, there are some great moments -- watch what happens when
Chun-li first does her thing -- but they don't add up to a great movie.
The actors do what they can with the material, which is sometimes witty and
sometimes labored. Jean-Claude Van Damme isn't bad (how good can he be?),
just tacky, and Raul Julia is a lot of fun -- but costumes and makeup cannot
hide his obvious gauntness. This was his last theatrical movie --
depressing, especially since the movie was dedicated to him. I liked Wen's
Chun-li -- she looks and moves like the real article, and provides a hint of
where this movie really could have gone.
What went wrong here? There's a lot to look at. The set and costume
designers went out of their way to make the movie look interesting. The
fights -- some of them clearly modeled on the game's own action, of course
-- are acceptably put together. But there's nothing to push the movie over
the top and make it really special, instead of just something you knew they
were gonna try eventually. It has all the hallmarks of a road already
traveled, instead of something where they took risks with the goofy material
and made it into something wild and unique. It's too routine, too
predictable, too careful, and too safe.
POSTSCRIPT: There is a 1993 Hong Kong movie version of Street Fighter that's
worth tracking down. It stars Jacky Cheung as Guile, Chingmy Yau as Chun-li
and Simon Yam and Andy Lau. It's nowhere nearly as well-produced, but it is
ten thousand times more anarchic and entertaining than this one could ever
be.
POSTSCRIPT II: An animated feature-length version of the game also exists,
as well as a TV series. The series is nicely done; the feature-length anime
is not.

Author
Rob Furr
     Mark Twain's (so, okay, Samuel Clemens') wife Livy was, as it
happens, not terribly thrilled with her husband's tendency to swear.
In one specific instance, the anecdote goes, Twain was alone in a room,
and, if memory serves, injured himself.  This served as the inspiration
for a round of cursing of biblical proportions; he unburdened himself
of a month's worth of profanity in seconds.  After he wound down, he
turned around and saw Livy standing in the door to the room.  She stood
there and, very carefully, repeated every word that Twain had uttered.
Twain reportedly replied to this unemotional rendition of his poetic
blasphemies with the sentence, "My dear, you may have the words, but
you don't have the music."
     STREET FIGHTER, the most recent of the new trend in
martial-arts-for-the-kiddies movies, has the words ... has an awful lot
of words, as a matter of fact ... but it simply does not have the
music.
     It has a respectable plot; power-mad dictator (Raul Julia, in his
last role, doing a decent, but not, unfortunately, great, job as
General Bison) is trying to take over first, a small Asian country, and
second, the world, and everybody and his dog is either trying to help
him to do it or stop him from doing it.  Certain details are laughable
(e.g., Bison has sixty-some hostages, for which he demands twenty
billion dollars in ransom, and the other nations of the world are
willing to *pay* that much.  "Yeah," I said while watching, "Right.")
     It has respectable actors ... amazingly enough, Van Damme, the
biggest-name star (aside from Julia) in the film, has one of the
smaller roles.  The rest of the cast consists of second-rank actors who
you *know* you've seen before, but can't remember from where, and, for
the most part, they do a more than adequate job.  Certain of them stand
out ... the characters of Honda, Dee Jay, and Dhal Sim are above
average in this regard.
     It has decent production values; not great, but decent.  The
whiz-bang-on-the-cheap special effects that we've come to expect from
this sort of film are, for the most part, missing, and the money saved
from not trying to be the next Jurassic Park is applied rationally.
Certain effects are rather rotten, to tell the truth.  It took me more
than half the movie to figure out that Bison's floating console was
actually supposed to be floating (I'd assumed that, up to then, it was
supposed to be on a crane or something,) for instance.  However, the
overall look of the movie is far superior to the last
video-game-inspired movie (DOUBLE DRAGON.  Of course, "America's
Funniest Home Videos" usually looks better than DOUBLE DRAGON did.  On
the other hand, DOUBLE DRAGON was funnier than "AFHV" usually is, and
had a better chase scene, so it averages out.)
     It has, in short, pretty much all it needs.  There are two
detail-related problems with the movie, but it strives and almost
overcomes them.  The most significant problem with the film is that
every STREET FIGHTER II character, whether from the original version,
Special Championship version, Turbo, Super, or, for all I know, Tiger
hand-held, gets a 'speaking' part.  Some are larger than others; Vega
doesn't actually speak, for instance ... but they're all in there.
That fact tends to limit the amount of characterization and plot
involvement available to any one character, which makes the entire
movie oddly uninvolving.  There's no central viewpoint character or set
of characters that we can follow through the movie, and the resolution
of any one character's story is less meaningful; the viewer only
invested five minutes in Blanka's story, for instance, and four of
those were spent watching him in a chair making faces at the camera -
which makes it sort of hard to *care* what happens to him.  The second
problem is less major; it might even be a minor problem for anyone
who's not as, er, anal, as I am.  The military details are *laughable*,
and, unfortunately, unintentionally so.  A colonel is in charge of a
company that's apparently effective enough to have complete control of
a major seaport?  A stealthed boat can't be seen on a TV screen?  And
so on and so forth; minor to others, annoying to me.
     The key, major problem with STREET FIGHTER is that, even though
it's competently made, even though the plot holds together reasonably
well, even though it has decent performances, passable effects, snappy
lines, hilarious scenes (listen carefully to the soundtrack when Honda
and Zangreif are going at it,) it just never comes together into a
seamless whole.  Individual elements range from passable to great, but
the collection of them  looks more like Frankenstein's monster than
Cindy Crawford.  Possibly, if it had thrown most of the cast out, it
could have spent the time made available on the cinematic equivalent of
plastic surgery, but as it is, the assemblage may work, it may even
entertain, but it's not what it could have been.
     STREET FIGHTER is, at times, trying to be a martial-arts movie,
and it succeeds, for the most part.  It's not up to, say, ENTER THE
DRAGON's standards, but then, what is?  At other times, it's trying to
be a believable thriller, and at other times than that, it wants to be
the third act of a James Bond movie.
     On the Furr Scale, it's a 2.5-star three-star movie. (The Furr
Scale (I'm *so* modest) rates movies on ambition as well as quality;
clearly, ANIMAL HOUSE should not be judged on the same basis as THE
LAST EMPEROR ... thus, ANIMAL HOUSE was, IMHO, a *great* B movie; in
other words, a four-star two-star movie.  THE LAST EMPEROR, on the
other hand, was an average epic. (a two-star four-star movie.) Both
ROBOCOP and TREMORS could be rated with three stars, but ROBOCOP was
*trying* to be a three-star (or A) movie, while TREMORS was aiming
squarely at the B movie (two-star) level, thus ROBOCOP is a three-star,
three-star movie, and TREMORS was three-star two-star movie.)
     Loosely translated, a 2.5-star three-star movie is "Go see it;
you're not likely to do better this holiday season."  In an otherwise
lackluster session of movies, STREET FIGHTER by sheer virtue of not
being boring, is therefore recommended.  Just park your brain at the
door, and try to read more into it than is actually there.
