Title
Review for Waiting for Guffman (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "You know the old saying that if you don't like the weather, just
wait five minutes and it will change?" says Blaine, Missouri's proud
and ever confident mayor Glenn Welsch (Larry Miller).  "I honestly
believe that with hard work we can get it down to 3 to 4 minutes."
Glenn has a lot to be proud of.  Blaine, "the stool capital of the
world," will have its sesquicentennial celebration shortly.
     Easily one of the best documentary putdowns ever was THIS IS
SPINAL TAP from 1984.  I remember the show for Christopher Guest's line
about his amplifier.  You see, their rock band was louder, and a priori
better, than any other because their volume knob went to 11 rather than
merely 10.
     Now Christopher Guest is back with another documentary parody,
WAITING FOR GUFFMAN, which is just as good as his last.  As before, he
has a leading role and cowrote the witty and intelligent script.  This
time his cowriter is Eugene Levy.  Guest directs the film as well,
which illustrates his talents better than any other part he has in the
picture.  His comedic sense of timing combined with the hilarious
script had me laughing so hard I thought I would burst.  The film is in
three acts with a delightful epilogue.  The only criticism I have of
the picture is that the second act drags some in comparison with the
others.
     Guest plays the lead as Corky St. Claire.  Corky, who has a
background in off-off-off-Broadway productions, has brought his talents
to backwoods Blaine.  Although his last production in Blaine, a staged
version of the movie BACKDRAFT, had some unfortunate technical
difficulties that forced the fire department to be called in, he has
created a special musical for the town's big event.  He calls it "Red,
White, and Blaine," and casts a not-so-stellar local ensemble.
     After an audition session where people do everything including
reading lines from RAGING BULL, Corky chooses his players.  The actors
in his musical are every bit as bad as the actors in the movie are
marvelous.
     The first two members of the cast are Ron and Sheila Albertson
(Fred Willard and Catherine O'Hara).  They are a husband and wife
singing team and Blaine's travel agents.  ("Some people find it ironic
that although we run a travel agency, we've never been outside of
Blaine," confesses Ron.)  Their mannerisms are so excessively cute that
the whole show could have been built around their characters.  Anytime
either of them spoke, I started to giggle.  Julie Carnahan's costumes
for them feature iridescent running suits.
     The third cast member is Dr. Allan Pearl (co-writer Eugene Levy),
the local dentist who believes his destiny is as a stand-up comic.  The
actors in the movie approach the comedy so earnestly that I kept
finding myself beginning to take the fictional documentary as factual.
The more serious they became, the funnier was the humor.  And no one
was more sincere than Dr. Pearl.
     Dr. Pearl's wife (Linda Kash), who is not in the play, explains
the life of their family.  "We don't associate with the creative
types," she tells us.  "We have a Scrabble club.  We associate with
people with babies."  His wife looks upon the good doctor as her sage.
"He has tried to help me change my instincts or at least ignore them,"
she proudly reveals.
     Rounding out the play's cast is Dairy Queen waitress Libby Mae
Brown, played with perky style by Parker Posey, auto mechanic Johnny
Savage (Matt Keeslar), and the town's strange old buzzard, Clifford
Wooley (Lewis Arquette).
     The ridiculous musical with its tacky sets is reminiscent of the
"Springtime for Hitler" musical in THE PRODUCERS, which remains as one
of the funniest films ever made.  The longest and best act of the movie
is the third, which is devoted to the musical.
     In a movie this good it is hard to pick out a favorite part, but
for me it has to be the one where Corky shows us his movie memorabilia
collection.  His favorite, and mine, are his MY DINNER WITH ANDRE
action figures.  Certainly, Andre and Wally are the most improbable
candidates for action figures imaginable.
     Although I was sitting in a press screening with just four other
people in the theater, I felt like clapping when the film ended.  It is
that good.  A more delightful and good humored show I have not seen in
a long time.
     WAITING FOR GUFFMAN runs a fast 1:24.  It is incorrectly rated R
for a couple of bad words.  The film is a classic G picture and would
be fine for kids of any age.  I give the movie a strong recommendation
and *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Christopher Guest, Eugene Levy, Catherine O'Hara, Fred Willard, 
      Parker Posey, Lewis Arquette, Bob Balaban, Matt Keeslar, 
      Larry Miller
Director: Christopher Guest
Producer: Karen Murphy
Screenplay: Christopher Guest and Eugene Levy
Cinematography: Roberto Schaefer
Music and Lyrics: Michael McKean, Harry Shearer, and Christopher Guest
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     Thirty minutes into WAITING FOR GUFFMAN, my stomach hurt from 
laughing.  Like some of the most brilliant comedies of recent years -- 
CLERKS, LIVING IN OBLIVION, and FLIRTING WITH DISASTER, to name a few -- 
WAITING FOR GUFFMAN reminds us of the true meaning of the term 
"sidesplitting."  And, unlike in many of the movies on my "funniest 
films" list, there's nothing bizarre or twisted about this humor.  The 
laughs dished out by WAITING FOR GUFFMAN are universally accessible.
     Director/co-writer Christopher Guest is most recognized for two 
things:  his satire and his marriage to Jamie Lee Curtis.  His best-
known work is undoubtedly THIS IS SPINAL TAP, which he co-authored and 
appeared in.  Those familiar with that film will find certain 
similarities to WAITING FOR GUFFMAN, the most obvious of which is the 
faux documentary format.  However, where SPINAL TAP, like many parodies, 
relied upon acid humor and vicious barbs to generate laughter, WAITING 
FOR GUFFMAN is a much gentler creation.  This movie can be considered an 
affectionate satire, because, while it pokes fun at small-town America 
and high school stage productions, it also offers up a heartfelt homage 
to them.
     Because the title sounds like WAITING FOR GODOT, some viewers may 
be fooled into expecting highbrow entertainment from WAITING FOR 
GUFFMAN.  They are in for a huge surprise, for, although Guest's film is 
exceptionally perceptive, there's nothing remotely artsy or pretentious 
about it.  This "documentary", which chronicles the production of an 
amateur play to celebrate the sesquicentennial of the fictitious town of 
Blaine, Missouri, offers one laugh after another.  
     Blaine has two claims to fame -- it's the "stool capital of the 
United States" and it was visited by a UFO before Roswell was ever heard 
of.  In fact, when the aliens landed in Blaine, they invited the 
residents on board their ship for a pot luck dinner, and when they took 
off, they left behind a circular landing site within which the weather 
never changes (67 degrees with a 40% chance of rain).  Now, Blaine is 
150 years old, and, to celebrate the occasion, the town council has 
decided on a number of special events, all to culminate with the play 
"Red, White, and Blaine", which is to be produced at the local high 
school.
     Directing this play is off-off-off-off-Broadway exile Corky St. 
Claire (Christopher Guest), the man who attempted to turn BACKFIRE into 
a stage production.  Corky is ably assisted by his music director, Lloyd 
Miller (Bob Balaban), and has a fine cast of six.  They are the husband-
and-wife team of Ron and Sheila Albertson (Fred Willard and Catherine 
O'Hara), Blaine's travel agents (who have never been outside of Blaine), 
local dentist Allan Pearl (co-writer and Second City alum Eugene Levy), 
Dairy Queen waitress Libby Mae Brown (Parker Posey), auto mechanic 
Johnny Savage (Matt Keeslar), and an old coot by the name of Clifford 
Wooley (Lewis Arquette).  Abandoning their day jobs and SCRABBLE clubs, 
they come together to breathe life into a musical version of Blaine's 
history.
     There are numerous reasons why WAITING FOR GUFFMAN works.  In the 
first place, it has intimate knowledge of the objects of its satire.  
Like Kenneth Branagh's A MIDWINTER'S TALE, this movie understands the 
backstage ins-and-outs of putting on an amateur production, and uses the 
funny side of that background in the script.  Anyone who has ever 
participated in a high school play will be struck with an eerie sense of 
familiarity.  And those who have lived in communities like Blaine will 
immediately recognize the acuteness of Guest's perception.  
     Secondly, WAITING FOR GUFFMAN doesn't go for cheap laughs.  While 
the performance of the play (which takes up the final third of the film) 
has a few minor mishaps, it is not populated with the kind of pratfalls 
that could lead to easy laughs.  The play comes off much as it might in 
real life.  And, perhaps unsurprisingly, there's the same kind of charm 
about "Red, White, and Blaine" that there is about any amateur 
production where the players substitute enthusiasm for talent.
     Although I won't reveal the film's biggest laughs, I can mention 
that one has to do with a re-interpretation of a scene from a 
critically-acclaimed motion picture and another pokes fun at the kind of 
movie merchandising that surrounds big-budget goliaths like STAR WARS.  
The auditions for the play are an especially good source of humor, since 
all of them are improvised and Guest is seeing them for the first time 
as they're being presented to the camera.  
     Everyone in the cast is on-target, from Guest, who plays Corky as 
is-he-or-isn't-he-gay, to Larry Miller as Blaine's mayor.  Special note 
should be made of Parker Posey (in the process of challenging Lili 
Taylor as the independent film queen), whose portrayal of Libby Mae 
couldn't be more on-target, and Eugene Levy, who plays the most fun-
loving dentist since Steve Martin donned a leather jacket in LITTLE SHOP 
OF HORRORS.  
     There is such a thing as comic momentum, and Guest has a good sense 
of what that means.  Comic momentum doesn't refer to nonstop jokes, but 
to an atmosphere that is always ripe for humor.  By utilizing 
accomplished performers and crisp editing (60 hours of footage has been 
trimmed to 84 minutes), the director achieves this.  I'm not certain how 
widely Sony Pictures Classics intends to distribute the film, but this 
movie is worth seeking out.  WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is one of those too-
rare motion pictures that actually lives up to the label of "a comedy".
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Directed by Christopher Guest
Running Time: 84 minutes
Originally Released: January 31, 1997 (National-USA)
Of all the films I've come to see this year (1997), I think only CHASING AMY
had as many "laugh-out-loud" moments. I'm not saying that I was hysterically
rolling on the floor while watching WAITING FOR GUFFMAN, but my mouth burst
open with at least a delighted guffaw at least every couple of minutes. And I
think I'm the kind of person that laughs least at movies, even when I find
them funny. Usually all you can get out of me is a warm smile, so to get me
laughing out loud, and so frequently, is a really good sign.
WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is the story of Blaine, Missouri, a town celebrating it's
150th anniversary, and the musical that is being put on for the big event.
The play is being directed by Corky St. Clair (Christopher Guest, who also
wrote and directed this "mockumentary" as well as co-writing several original
musical numbers), the effeminate Broadway hopeful determined to make this
production a smashing success. Teaming up with St. Clair are a handful of
Blaine residents: Allan Pearl (Eugene Levy), a Jewish dentist who spent his
youth not AS the class clown, but sitting right next to him and studying him,
Ron and Sheila Albertson (Fred Willard and Catherine O'Hara respectively), a
married couple setting their sights on Hollywood, Libby Mae Brown (Parker
Posey), the dense but fun Queen of the Dairy Queen, and a few others.
Everybody in this movie is brilliant, absolutely so, but Levy particularly
stands out. These characters are portrayed with such saddening realism that
you can't help but love them, as pathetic as they really are. Although Levy
stands out, Guest, Willard, O'Hara, and Posey are all wonderful and
definitely should be commended for their performances! If there was an Oscar
for an ensemble performance, this is the group that should sweep it.
Some humor was a tad uneven from the rest of the film and, even after
starting very humorously, they nearly lost me with the tad-too-long intros.
As delightful as it was, it began to get monotonous. Thankfully, just as your
about to say "ok, maybe I should run to the bathroom", they finally get past
the intros and onto the rehearsal scenes. Like a play, this film gives a very
three-act feel, the intros (funny, but almost too long), the rehearsals (even
funnier), and finally, the actual performance of the play (excellent!).
Like I said, each character really shines, even when done with a subtle
approach. You can't really watch these people and not think they're real
people! Even they way they talk, with awkward pauses and stumbles that don't
feel staged at all, you feel like you're watching a real, albeit funny,
documentary. And even with silly lyrics, the original songs when the play is
finally put on, are absolutely wonderful!
As a word of note, despite it's "R" rating, WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is really
quite clean. This rating came from a brief, VERY brief use of the grand-daddy
of all swear words. Even if that really bothers you, let me say that it's not
presented in a vulgar, cheap-laugh way. It's actually quite humorous and
tastefully done!
It might be hard knowing what to expect with WAITING FOR GUFFMAN. It's silly
humor, but it's also so dry, subtle, and intelligently done that you're not
insulted by it. It's always really nice to see a comedy that isn't all
slapstick and vulgarity, and this film is one of the better ones of the
better ones! I'd recommend seeing it!

Author
Frankie Paiva
The often confused genre of mockumentary, basically a scripted documentary is
often not understood by every Hollywood director. The concept of having
interviews with the characters, but forgetting not to give big glamour shots
and regular filmed footage has often been forgotten in films like Drop Dead
Gorgeous. But this is a fine display of what a true mockumentary should be.
Quirky, fun, and entertaining this story of a small town putting on a play of
it’s history is sure to entertain many, while still staying true to it’s
genre.
Corky St. Clair (Guest) is a gay director that has written an original
screenplay about the history of the little Missouri town called Blaine. Blaine
is one of those Fargo-type towns where every knows everybody else, and
everybody has the same mid-west accent. The auditions are the first major part
of a play, Corky is impressed by the town’s dentist, Dr. Allan Pearl (Levy) a
man who wears very, very big glasses and is equally stunned by the duo of
Sheila and Ron Albertson (Catherine O’Hara and Fred Willard) the man and wife
who can really sing. The production has six main players, with Parker Posey
(imagine an independent film without her) as a Dairy Queen worker round out the
bunch.
When a New York critic named Mr. Guffman (hence the film’s title) promises to
come and review it they get even more excited. But the production runs into
various problems, Corky insists on having the proper funding to take the show
to Broadway, one of the actors is taken out of the play at last minute, and he
can’t get Dr. Pearl to take off those darn glasses.
Why is it that everyone in a small town is so weird and quirky? For once if
Hollywood could make a movie that didn’t showcase them in this way. Not to
say that it isn’t enjoyable, this film is loaded with inside jokes and fun
characters. I especially liked Eugene Levy as the town dentist who ends up
singing songs to the elderly in Hebrew. But after a while some of the people in
this film just seem to be there to be annoying. Seriously, this people must
have some connection to the outside world. Waiting For Guffman also stays true
to the formula never cutting away to do something super and fantastic and
letting the characters interact and respond with the audience. If your looking
for a little quirky fun I suggest you rent Waiting For Guffman, which gets ***
stars.
The Young-Uns: While not made to appeal to children, this comedy includes 2
f-words. Good Age 11 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic 

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Waiting For Guffman (1996)
Christopher Guest, Bob Balaban, Eugene Levy, Fred Willard, Catherine 
O'Hara. 
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Despite being married to Jamie Lee Curtis, Christopher Guest still 
manages to write and perform outstanding pieces of comedy. Frankly, I 
find this amazing. Were I married to Jamie Lee Curtis, I'd just follow 
her around the house all day. Getting any work done would be simply out 
of the question (oh sure, I'm gay, but we're talking about JAMIE LEE 
CURTIS here, for God's Sake!). But enough about my post-adolescent 
fantasies. Christopher Guest, one of the creators and stars of the 
brilliant comedy "This Is Spinal Tap", scores again with "Waiting For 
Guffman", a very funny bogus documentary about the 150th Anniversary 
festivities in Blaine, Missouri. 
Here's the set-up. The city leaders secure the services of transplanted 
New Yorker Corky St. Clair (Guest) to stage a musical celebrating 
Blaine's rich heritage (the town is famous for its wooden stools and a 
1946 UFO landing.) Guest is a riot as the effete St. Clair, a 
delightfully clueless off-off-off Broadway veteran. In Blaine, St. Clair 
is well-known for his stage production of "Backdraft". To create a more 
realistic feel, he sent bits of burning newspapers through the heating 
ducts. Oh sure, the theater caught fire, but the citizens of Blaine 
appreciate the great effort St. Clair put into his work. They also seem 
oblivious to the fact that St. Clair is a screaming queen. After all, 
he's married! Well, nobody has actually ever seen his wife, but they know 
she's real because St. Clair has often been sighted in the Women's 
clothing department of local stores, and he knows a great deal about 
depilatories. 
While Guest's performance is the center of "Waiting For Guffman," there 
are many more pleasures in this affectionate, low-key satire. Check out 
the expressions on the face of Bob Balaban, a local music teacher 
displaced as director by St. Clair. Balaban says little about the 
nightmare he sees being assembled, but he seethes beautifully. Eugene 
Levy, Fred Willard and Catherine O'Hara are also delightful as wanna-be 
performers who are as enthusiastic as they are untalented. The finished 
play, "Red, White and Blaine" is a real hoot. It's bad, of course, but 
it's the kind of bad that's a real pleasure to watch. 
Several critics have attacked "Waiting For Guffman" as a smug, elitist 
slam on small town America. It isn't. "Waiting For Guffman" shows real 
affection for its characters. Most of the film's cast came from small 
towns and are all too familiar with the sheer weirdness of community 
theater. That peculiar mixture of little-to-no talent, combined with 
delusions of grandeur, is captured in all its glory here. "Guffman" isn't 
as funny as "This Is Spinal Tap," but few films are. Guest goes for a 
minor-key approach to humor this time, and succeeds far more often than 
not. Incidentally, be sure and stay for the film's closing credits, which 
contain some of the movie's funniest moments. 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The town of Blaine, Missouri, was a mistake from the very
beginning when pioneer Blaine Fabin overestimated the distance he had
brought his party and assumed they had reached California.  The
residents of this town appear to have over-estimated their
accomplishments ever since.  The town, famous for its footstools has
dubbed itself the Stool Capital of America.  As the town approaches its
sesquicentennial it is planning for a celebration large by Blaine
standards, capped by a play telling of major events of the history of
Blaine in a musical pageant called "Red, White, and Blaine."  The
production is to be put in the hands of the multi-untalented auteur
Corky St. Claire (played by Christopher Guest who also co-authored,
directed, and wrote some of the music for the film).  The stars of the
show are the town's myopic dentist (Eugene Levy), the town's two travel
agents (Fred Willard and Catherine O'Hara), the cute waitress from the
Dairy Queen (Parker Posey), and the town hunk (Matt Keeslar).  Corky is
temperamental and has the same over-estimation of his own abilities
that seems nearly universal in Blaine.  The only person in town who
seems to have any taste at all is the tightly wound music teacher who
leads the band in too small a part for Bob Balaban.  The film has
repeated gags on the ego and vulgarity of the town residents, but for
the most part the characters are more caricatures than believable
people.  WAITING FOR GUFFMAN might be more impressive if it was not so
similar in approach to the wonderfully-observed SMILE, directed by
Dennis Ritchie.  In that film, which tells the behind-the-scenes story
of a California town's hosting of a teenage beauty pageant, the
characters seem considerably more real and are at the same time a lot
more funny with often-caustic humor.
     Christopher Guest has written the meatiest role for himself as the
fey director and only at times has the talent to carry the film.  Guest
previously co-wrote THIS IS SPINAL TAP, but his most creative film was
THE BIG PICTURE, a particularly insightful lampoon of the Hollywood
film-making process.  Perhaps this film's most memorable image is
Guest's odd little improvisational stomach dance, done wearing his
pants backwards.  When the Abrahams and the Zucker Brothers proposed
making the film AIRPLANE!, the studio wanted to cast the film with
well-known comic actors in the major roles.  The filmmakers very
intelligently held out to get a set of actors not associated with
comedy and the film was all the more funny as a result.  Guest would
have been well-advised to follow a similar policy since one has already
seen over- the-top comedy performances by Levy, Willard, and O'Hara.
Their characters needed an air of authenticity and credibility that
these actors simply lack.
     WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is certainly worth a viewing for the parts
that do work, but afterwards, for a real treat, rent SMILE and see what
can really be done with a lampoon of a small town and its icons.  In
this film there certainly are at least three good laughs and no slow
portions, so WAITING FOR GUFFMAN does work as a comedy but it never
works well.  I rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian Takeshita
"You know that saying about how if you don't like the weather, just
wait five minutes?  Well, with some hard work and determination, I
believe we can get that down to three or four."  So says the mayor of
the small town of Blaine, Missouri, the setting for Christopher
Guest's WAITING FOR GUFFMAN.  This line, delivered absolutely deadpan
by comedian/actor Larry Miller, sets the tone for the film:
Ridiculous lines delivered by characters who are totally serious.  The
film is presented as a documentary which opens up as the Blaine City
Council prepares for the town's sesquicentennial celebration.  They
stand around a sandtable mock-up of the town square and position
little figurines as one security-minded councilmember suggests putting
snipers on the rooftops just in case things get "out of hand".
Soon afterwards, we are introduced to Corky St. Claire (Christopher
Guest), a stereotypically effeminate musical theater director who,
after finding only limited success in The Big Apple, moved to Blaine
to produce community plays featuring local talent.  For Blaine's
celebration, Corky is putting together a production which depicts the
history of the town, from it's founding by westward-bound settlers who
thought the Missouri River was the Pacific Ocean, to its boomtown days
of footstool production (earning Blaine the title of "Stool Capitol of
the United States"), to its purported visit by aliens prior to
Roswell, New Mexico.
We are introduced to a number of remarkably funny characters through
the audition held for Corky's big musical.  There's Ron and Sheila
Albertson (Fred Willard and Catherine O'Hara), who run a local travel
agency, but have never been outside Blaine (well, except once when Ron
had to go to the next town for surgery).  They've caught the acting
bug and have appeared in Corky's previous efforts, including a musical
version of BACKDRAFT, where the audience had to be evacuated because
of the smoke.  There's also dentist Alan Pearl (Eugene Levy, who also
co-wrote the screenplay with Guest), whose singing audition is one of
the funniest moments in the film.  Finally, there's Libby Mae Brown
(Parker Posey), a Dairy Queen employee who is trying to create a soft
serve concoction to top the Blizzard.  Each displays a severe lack of
talent, but Corky sits there watching and smiling like Ed Wood,
believing that he's found diamonds in the rough.
Guest and Levy have created characters who are not outrageously
comical, but instead are just left of center.  They are normal enough
so that you might know these characters in real life, but odd enough
so that they make us laugh.  Indeed, their behavior is so regular-life
natural that it adds to the documentary feel, and it is exactly this
documentary style that makes WAITING FOR GUFFMAN so funny.  As an
audience, we're used to seeing documentaries made about serious or
interesting subjects, but we're not used to finding them humorous.
Additionally, what's played out for the camera is by all means
supposed to be serious; the documentary premise sets up a gritty view
of people who are basically living their lives.  The fact that their
actions are laughable is lost on them, but is totally our gain.  It's
as if we're in on some kind of joke that they're not privy to, and in
the crudest sense, we're laughing at them, not with them.  Sounds
terrible, but it's a wonderful vehicle for comedy.
There's no character development in this movie, and there really
doesn't need to be, since the paper-thin quality of the characters is
what makes their inclusion in a documentary so laughable.  We watch as
they try to learn the dance steps, lines, and lyrics and we can't help
but be amazed at how inept they are.  We watch open-mouthed as they
fantasize about taking the show to Broadway when they learn a talent
scout from a New York production company will be attending the
performance (his name is Guffman, and if you're familiar with Beckett,
you already know what will happen).  They end up pretty much on a
continuation of the paths they started before the entire Blaine
musical experience, not seeming to have learned a damn thing.  And we
love it.
Christopher Guest was one of the stars of Rob Reiner's THIS IS SPINAL
TAP, a hilariously innovative "documentary" about a fictional heavy
metal rock group, and there is no doubt where Guest learned the craft
for directing WAITING FOR GUFFMAN.  While Guest uses a tamer group of
subjects for his film, and stylistically differs somewhat by his
choices to utilize longer scenes and leave the film unnarrated, for
example, one can definitely see the influences from his experience
with Reiner 12 years previously (has it really been that long?).  It
is a credit to Guest that he learned well and used his knowledge to
produce a film that is as original as it is an homage to the film
which broke new ground for comedy.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Sony Classics/Castle Rock)
Starring:  Christopher Guest, Eugene Levy, Fred Willard, Catherine O'Hara,
Parker Posey, Bob Balaban.
Screenplay:  Christopher Guest and Eugene Levy.
Producer:  Karen Murphy.
Director:  Christopher Guest.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  83 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The reason inspired satire is so rare nowadays is that people have
been given a warped perception of what satire is.  The popular culture --
fed by "Saturday Night Live," David Letterman and even political pundits
-- has created the notion that irony, sarcasm and satire are
interchangeable, and that there is something inherently hip about ridicule
as a spectator sport.  But it takes no imagination to savage someone or
something you despise; the best satire in any medium has been born of
affection, from people with a gift for pointing out the negative while
recognizing the positive.  THIS IS SPINAL TAP, the best comedy of the
1980s, was a brilliant satire of the excesses of rock and roll which also
respected the commitment of the artists to their work.  WAITING FOR
GUFFMAN, a comedy from TAP alum Christopher Guest, is a more uneven
effort, but it is at its funniest skewering small-town America in all its
cockeyed optimism.
     WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is set in fictional Blaine, Missouri, a peaceful
little town preparing to celebrate its 150th birthday.  Part of that
celebration will be an original musical production called "Red, White and
Blaine," and it is placed in the hands of New York theater expatriate
Corky St. Clair (Christopher Guest).  Corky has big plans for the big
event, and builds a cast including local community theater veterans Ron
(Fred Willard) and Sheila Albertson (Catherine O'Hara) and first-time
performers Dr. Allan Pearl (Eugene Levy) and Libby Mae Brown (Parker
Posey).  The production faces crises great and small as the
sesquicentennial approaches, but even more exciting than the show itself
is the prospect of a visit from a New York producer named Mort Guffman,
who may offer to take the show to Broadway.
     Publicity for WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is emphasizing the SPINAL TAP
connection by describing Guest as "the lead guitarist of Spinal Tap," but
I don't think that comparison does GUFFMAN any favors.  Yes, it is
similarly filmed in a faux documentary style, and derives a similar
off-beat energy from its largely improvised script.  However, there are
fewer outrageous high points, largely the result of a less inherently
outrageous milieu.  The more you expect a middle-American SPINAL TAP, the
more time you might spend waiting for the inevitable disasters in the play
which turn out to be not so inevitable after all.
     It may take sitting through all of "Red, White and Blaine" before it
becomes clear that WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is not going to be a parade of
incompetence, though Guest (who co-wrote the story with co-star Levy) does
have fun with the cloistered perspectives of his characters.  The
Albertsons, who are travel agents by day, turn out never to have left the
state of Missouri themselves; a reported alien visitation in 1946 is so
much a part of Blaine's history that it makes its way into the pageant as
an accepted fact.  Most memorably, nobody in the town seems to notice that
Corky is as stereotypically homosexual a human being as has ever walked
the earth.  Guest has taken some heat for his swishy portrayal, but I
think such criticism misses the point.  Everyone watching the film
understands that Corky is supposed to be gay, but no one _in_ the film
understands it.  Gay men simply are not part of their world, so no one
thinks twice about why they have never seen Corky's "wife" Bonnie, or
about his exaggerated mannerisms being anything but "theatrical."
     The real subject of WAITING FOR GUFFMAN, however, isn't merely how
narrow the world-view of Blaine's residents may be, but how the residents
involved in the production respond to a whiff of big city show-biz.  For
Corky, "Red, White and Blaine" is his chance to return to the big time;
for Dr. Pearl, a latent comedic legend in his own mind, it is a spark of
excitement in his otherwise monotonous life.  You may spend much of
WAITING FOR GUFFMAN waiting for "Red, White and Blaine" to be terrible,
but it isn't terrible.  The orchestra, conducted with intense pride by the
high school music teacher (Bob Balaban) sounds pretty good, the songs
(written by Guest and his fellow Tap-ers Michael McKean and Harry Shearer)
are silly but hum-able, and the actors are amateurs who give the show all
they've got.  It is simply ridiculous, of course, that a show like this
could ever go to Broadway, but the performers are too wonderfully naive to
recognize that fact.  WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is occasionally sluggish through
its middle half hour, and hardly the non-stop riot SPINAL TAP was; it also
treats its characters with far more good-humored respect than you might
expect.  Guest understands that it is possible to laugh at people and
still love them, and that fine satire can be achieved with the poke of a
finger as well as a sledgehammer.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) WAITING FOR GUFFMAN is worth a little chuckle, but
that's about it.=20
GUFFMAN is a "mockumentary" about the little town of Blaine, Missouri,
and the play they're putting on for their sesquicentennial celebration.
The dentist (Eugene Levy), the travel agents (Fred Willard & Catherine
O'Hara), a mechanic (Matthew Keeslar), and the Dairy Queen girl (Parker
Posey) are recruited by the "New York" director (Guest himself) to put
on the play of the town's history. The movie's title refers to a New
York theatrical agent who has promised to fly to Blaine and review the
performance.=20
The actors and filmmakers do a good job of making the movie look like a
documentary. Willard and O'Hara are very good as the husband and wife
travel agents. The movie appears to have been shot, at least partially,
on 16mm film (the favored medium of film documentarians) with lots of
hand-held camera.=20
There are a few spots, however, where the movie is clearly NOT a
documentary, such as when the "documentary" camera shows us a character
who is supposedly locked in his bathroom, alone, or when the auditioning
hopefuls are too comically "bad" to be believable. These moments are
distracting and make one realize that this is all an elaborate joke.
Somehow the "mockumentary" is less funny when we are forced to remember
that these caricatures are carefully written to manipulate us into
laughing.=20
GUFFMAN could be said to be original because it is not about a band.
Ever since THE RUTLES, it seems these mockumentaries must inevitably be
about bands =97 CB4, FEAR OF A BLACK HAT. But really, GUFFMAN is just a
rehash of the formula that worked so well in THIS IS SPINAL TAP. The
movie's advertising even links it to THIS IS SPINAL TAP and indeed all
of the Tap are involved in the film (Guest directed and Harry Shearer
and Michael McKean helped with the music). Since the movie invites
comparison to SPINAL TAP, I will compare them.=20
WAITING FOR GUFFMAN, as Bentsen might say to Quayle, is no SPINAL TAP.=20
SPINAL TAP was funny start to finish. GUFFMAN has a funny premise but
the joke(s) start(s) getting old near the end (thankfully, it is not too
long). The characters in both movies are comic caricatures, but the
characters in SPINAL TAP are more sympathetic and resilient. The
"members" of Spinal Tap went on to record a second album (after the
soundtrack album) and somehow, they will live forever in our culture,
despite our derisive laughs. The characters in GUFFMAN are as funny, but
they are disposable. Maybe it's the difference between laughing at those
above us and laughing at those below us. When Rush Limbaugh insults the
President, we know he can take it. When he starts taking jabs at Chelsea
Clinton, the same jokes are less funny. I'm overstating the point, but I
never felt as if I was supposed to LIKE Corky St. Clair (Guest) =97 I was
just supposed to laugh at him.=20
The movie does have funny segments and several of the interviews made me
laugh out loud =97 the UFOlogist, the abductee who confuses "feelings" fo=
r
"feeling," and the self-serious city council members. But the overall
experience was nothing memorable.=20
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes
