Title
Review for Miami Blues (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
In George Armitage's adaptation of Charles Willeford's novel, Alec
Baldwin plays a wanted ex-con whose devil-may-care attitude
surprisingly hasn't yet led to his capture.  Upon reaching Miami he
meets up with ingenue hooker Jennifer Jason Leigh, adopts her as his
fiancee, and sets about supplementing their income with a string of
petty thefts.  Upon acquiring the cuffs, badge, and other
accouterments of cop Fred Ward, he discovers that larceny has never 
been easier.  Disarming black comedy-drama stands out among others in
the pack because its offbeat plot turns make it hard for the viewer to
match a rhythm to it.  The sex scene we all expect comes earlier than
expected, the initial meeting between Baldwin and Ward isn't how we
anticipate it, and Baldwin, the prime proponent of the film's
randomness, does not move to a predictable plan - he is psychotic
enough to kill on a whim, yet never rises above purse-snatching and
break-ins.  What's interesting is that while Baldwin is the cause of
so much random violence towards others, he is at the same time the
victim of spontaneous, violent acts.  It's not surprising that his
dismissive attitude treats everything as if it were a game: Baldwin
roleplays confrontations with himself (a la TAXI DRIVER), lies
continually, plays cop as soon as he gets hold of a badge, and plays
house with Leigh, whom he tells "Call me Junior".  It's an appropriate
nickname, and Leigh is a suitably ditzy companion for him.
In one picture-postcard scene, Baldwin and Leigh watch couples happily
playing with a frisbee against a Miami beach sunset.  No sooner have
the two of them set up house than they are playing with a frisbee
outside on the front lawn.  When Leigh, with an older and wiser glint
in her eye, tosses the frisbee aside at the film's conclusion, she,
for one, knows that the dream is over.  Unlike Junior, Ward,
world-weary and only one week from retirement, manages to finish what
he started.  Ward and his world are mundane and orderly, and the
antithesis of Baldwin, a character out of sync in a world out of sync.
 While convention dictates that the cop and his quarry remain separate
for the bulk of the film we nevertheless feel a connection between
them.  Their dinner together, in which Baldwin is cagey but jumpy, and
Ward is either dumb or just playing dumb, is a highlight.  Baldwin's
character is always interesting (how many films have you seen where
the criminal accompanies a house burglary with an improvisational
haiku?), Leigh somehow manages to play superficiality with a sense of
depth, and Ward fits into his role effortlessly.  Weird coincidence:
Baldwin steals a badge and passes himself off as "Sergeant Mosely". 
Two years earlier in MIDNIGHT RUN, Robert De Niro steals a badge as
passes himself off as "Agent Mosely".  Has anybody else noticed this?

Author
Rogers Cadenhead
     Alec Baldwin, the actor whose performance in THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER has
catapulted him into the rank of leading men, does his level best to sink back
down in the odd character roles with his performance in MIAMI BLUES.  In a
riveting, comic style that combines the lunacy of Jack Nicholson's Joker with a
cold intelligence, Baldwin plays a rotten SOB in a way that's fun -- at times
hysterical -- to watch.  This film, co-produced by the mind behind SOMETHING
WILD and MARRIED TO THE MOB, has a lot of good-spirited eccentricity in
common with those two pictures.  But there's a core of violent meanness to
MIAMI BLUES that can't be denied.  Senses of sex and killing are kept on-screen
too long for the dark comedy to be much of a lark at times.
     But it is the relationships, and not the plot, that make MIAMI BLUES one
of the best spring releases.  Alec Baldwin's psycho, his former hooker
girlfriend (Jennifer Jason Leigh) and the poor cop (Fred Ward) are such fully
realized characters that their interaction is, on its own, fun to watch even if
nothing is happening.  A scene between Ward and Leigh in a supermarket, and
Baldwin and Leigh at a dinner date, are both truly captivating moments.  Even
minor supporting parts, such as a female cop who has disdain for Ward because
he loses his gun, badge and false teeth to Baldwin, have fire in them -- the
female cop and Ward have this unspoken sexual dynamic motivating their
treatment of each other.  The script never addresses it, but in a scene where
the female cop arrives at Ward's door, dressed in an evening gown for her
impending date, and Ward answers in his boxer shorts and underwear, there's a
weird game going on between them.  That's an example of why this film is so
good.
     But there are also a few examples of why it can be so bad.  Two shockingly
violent episodes occur in the film -- not ferocious but still unnerving to the
point that entire rows of audience members were cringing and speaking to the
screen (when most folks don't ever do that sort of thing) -- and the entire
film has a level of violence akin to the MIAMI VICE show and many action films,
though MIAMI BLUES is not an action film, per se.  If an orgy of violence
wasn't such a regular occurrence in movies, MIAMI BLUES would be regarded as
one of the year's most inspired films.  But because we Americans are fed so
much violence, the novelty -- and the amount of relevance -- of MIAMI BLUES'
fable of crime and consequence is a little thin.  But for the performances of
the three principal performers, and some unusual film techniques, it's
definitely worth seeing.
