Title
Review for Better Living Through Circuitry (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
A Review by Akiva Gottlieb
You know it's the year 2000 when the most significant
form of teenage musical rebellion involves the embrace
of technology and, dare I say, materialism. `Better
Living Through Circuitry' is the perfect title for the
first film to document rave culture, because it
inadvertently hints at why the scene may have a shelf
life. As long as there are new advances in the digital
world, the music will keep bumpin', the drugs will
keep floating, and the newest breed of DJ's will
continue to preach their gospel through the language
of music. Rave, the biggest underground party scene in
the world, has moved above ground, and no one is quite
sure when the `comedown' will begin.
Jon Reiss' `Better Living Through Circuitry' is an
insightful commercial for rave culture; a collection
of interviews with major stars of the rave world, some
of whom (Moby, Crystal Method) have gone on to become
major international bestsellers. Reiss also talks to
kids in the scene, who explain how their subculture is
about `rebelling against being pissed off.' How could
any parent disapprove?
Well, it takes a while for the film to get into the
most controversial aspect of the all-night rave
parties; the incessant use of hallucinogenic drugs.
Ecstasy, a `happy' drug, is the most common choice
among ravers. Thankfully, `Circuitry' gives a clear
anti-drug message, with party kids claiming that the
music and energy of a rave is enough to bring on
euphoria.
Rave culture is so powerful that, to some, it is
almost a religious experience. One look at the faces
of the folks dancing the night away and it is clear
that it's about more than just the music. The bouncing
beats and electronically charged rhythm provide an
ironic helping of soul food for today's disaffected
youth. It's not just the `happy drug' that puts these
kids in a trance.
`Better Living Through Circuitry' is directed with a
style that emulates the `empowerment through
technology' theme of rave culture. `Circuitry' was
filmed with a small Sony VX1000 digital video camera,
which director Jon Reiss took into raves in a
backpack. All post-production was performed using
various programs on a Power Macintosh computer.
`Better Living Through Circuitry' is being released on
the heels of the criminally under-seen rave flick
`Human Traffic', and is an effective `digital odyssey'
which adds new understanding to my limited knowledge
of the booming underground youth culture. The film
doesn't give the viewer the rush that one could get at
a rave, but Reiss' camera takes you deeper into the
lifestyle than you may ever want to be.

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/4e5761f99b0e4936882568e400075e8f?OpenDocument
Everywhere you turn these days, the techo-rave revolution is erupting.
Feature articles in major magazines focusing on sound artists such as
Moby, Crystal Method, and Goldie.  Countless commercials fueled by
throbbing electronic beats.  My grandmother discussing the finer points
of Fatboy Slim's mixing techniques with me.  Art-house films keeping the
plot moving with the soothing noise of Underworld and Bedrock.  My
ghetto superstar brother Crackbaby constructing beats at raves in
Northern California every weekend.  And a total of three new films
coming out in the short span of two months dissecting this underground
culture that's rising the eyes and ears of the masses.
For one to understand this musical phenomenon, the new documentary
Better Living Through Circuitry is a solid foundation for converting the
facelessness of its subculture to a human level of understanding.  The
documentary focuses upon many aspects of the scene – the participants,
the promoters, the DJs, and the techno-artists/producers.  The film
provides insightful, candid interviews that clearly translate the
determination and the passion of these individuals.  And I was equally
impressed by the collection of artists included in the production:
Crystal Method, Moby, DJ Spooky, Carl Cox, Electric Skychurch, Wolfgang
Flur of Kraftwek, Frankie Bones, Meat Beat Manifesto, Juno Reactor, BT,
Scanner, Atomic Babies, Roni Size, Superstar DJ Keoki, Lords of Acid,
System 7, Death in Vegas.
A notable strength of the film was the directness and honesty the people
involved in the rave culture afforded the filmmakers.  Everyone – the
candy-ravers, the promoters, the DJs, the techno artists – shared with
the audience small pieces of the personal trials, tragedies, and
successes that brought them into this environment.  DJ Spooky and
Frankie Bones talk of their spiritual connection with deceased fathers
by playing and spinning the record collection they left behind.  The
candy-ravers discuss traveling over eight hours for one rave to dance
until dawn.  The promoters devoted the music and ignoring the greed of
the record labels that want to hire them to help expand their dance
catalogs.  The film also touches upon the negative aspects of the
culture -- the danger of the drugs and the government crackdown on rave
gatherings.  Ravers talk of people falling down dead in front of them
and others going to sleep and never waking up.  And on the flip side:
The DJs who find that the music acts as a drug stronger than any
chemical additives coursing through the brain.
The rave culture is constantly compared to the punk movement of the late
‘70s and early ‘80s, with studio-quality music being produced by
computer geeks in their bedrooms and garages. The Internet and computer
technology advances in recent years have also enhanced the ability of
unknown techno artists to spread their message and beats to the entire
world.  It is equally ironic that the film was shot in digital video and
then constructed in someone's bedroom with video editing software and a
Macintosh computer.  Pure DIY – do it yourself.
The main message of the film is that within the rave culture a constant
shift of music styles empowers the individuals within to guide and help
to create a unique culture as it evolves.  Put down your Backstreet Boys
disc, fill a backpack full of water and lollipops, wear some comfortable
shoes and clothes, find a warehouse full of people and big beats... and
start living your life.
Director: Jon Reiss
Featuring: Jason Bentley, Frankie Bones, Carl Cox, Ken Jordan, Keoki,
Scott Kirkland, Moby, Natalie Portman, Roxanne, Roni Size, DJ Spooky
Producers: Brian McNelis and Stuart Swezey
http://www.amokbooks.com/circuitry/index.html
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
