Title
Review for Anna and the King of Siam (1946)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
It is impossible to avoid comparing "Anna and
the King of Siam" to the 1956 musical adaptation
"The King and I".  The latter, of course, was
even more successful, with Yul Brynner ideally
suited to play the king.  But the 1946 version
has several advantages over its more colorful
successor.
The absence of all the musical numbers allows
for a more dense script, creating deeper characters
and a more involving plot.  Aiming at a more
mature audience, "Anna" is more grim.  Two
important supporting characters that survive in
the 1956 film are killed off here (one is even
burned at the stake, and her final shrieking can
be heard).  Anna (Irene Dunne) is also more capable
of tears and is less smug than her Deborah Kerr
counterpart.  Filmed in black and white, "Anna"
can't compete with the rich colors of the musical,
but that did not prevent the film from winning
an Oscar for cinematographer Arthur Miller.
One problem that both films have is the casting
of occidentals in oriental roles.  But if not well
cast, it is a very good cast.  Rex Harrison,
making his American film debut as the Siamese king,
is both sympathetic and humorous.  Irene Dunne,
looking much younger than her 48 years, plays the
stubborn, proper schoolteacher well.  Lee J. Cobb,
as the stolid minister Kralahome, is his usual
competent self.
The story is based on the true story of Anna
Leonowens, a widowed teacher who travels to Siam
(modern-day Thailand) in 1862 to tutor the King's
children.  She is shocked by the King's extensive
harem and his arbitrary, sometimes even barbaric
ways.  She is also angry at being forced to live
in the palace instead of being given a house of her
own.  But she remains, not only as tutor to the
King's many children and wives, but also as an
advisor to the King himself.  The King's confusion
about Western ways provides much comic relief.
"Anna" was nominated for five Academy Awards,
winning two, for cinematography and sets.
Noted composer Bernard Herrman was nominated for
his score, and the Sally Benson-Talbot Jennings
screenplay was nominated.  Gale Sondergaard,
whose character Tuptin varies wildly from haughty
to impassioned, was nominated for Best Supporting
Actress.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
