Title
Review for America, America (1963)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Born in Turkey, Elia Kazan became one of Hollywood's
best directors.  He is best known for "On the Waterfront",
"A Streetcar Named Desire", and "Gentleman's Agreement",
but my favorite film of his was his first, "A Tree Grows
in Brooklyn", from 1945.
"America, America" was Kazan's most personal effort,
telling the true story of his uncle's struggle to emigrate
to America at the turn of the century.  It was the first
screenplay that Kazan wrote, and it is outstanding.
Judging from this film, one could conclude that Kazan
was even better at writing scripts than directing films.
The Turks, then part of the Ottoman Empire, oppressed the
Armenian and Greek minorities.  The Armenians, who would be
slaughtered by the hundreds of thousands in 1915, get the
worst of it because they resist.  The Greeks endure their
subjegation in silence.
Abdul (Lou Antonio) is an intense and serious young man,
of Greek heritage. He is the oldest son of his father, who
depends on him to improve the lives of his family.  Abdul
is obsessed with leaving his homeland for the land of
opportunity and wealth, America.  But to reach his goal,
he must suffer hardships and compromise his character.
After he is robbed of the family's savings, he tries to save
money for the ship's passage by working as a day laborer.
He is slow to realize that money can never be saved
in such a life, and must swallow his pride and accept an
arranged marriage to secure passage.  Further indignities
are in store for him, as he is willing to make any sacrifice
neccessary to reach America and live up to the expectations
and faith that his family has placed in him.
"America, America" was nominated for several important Academy
Awards, including Best Director, Best Picture and Best Screenplay.
But 1963 was also the year for "Tom Jones", another excellent
film, and one that Academy voters were likely more comfortable with.
Antonio's intense performance was relatively ignored with the
focus on Kazan, although Antonio has since become one of the
top directors of American television shows.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
