Title
Review for Ladies Man, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
Because THE LADIES MAN has one of the worst trailers in recent memory, 
the more I saw the trailers, the less I looked forward to the film's 
screening.  When it finally came time for the screening, I could barely 
force myself to go.  It turned out to be one of biggest and most 
enjoyable film surprises I've had in some time.  Whereas the movie is no 
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, it is extremely funny and wonderfully 
sweet, although with quite a raunchy brand of humor.
Directed with good comedic timing by Reginald Hudlin and written 
uproariously by Tim Meadows, Dennis McNicholas and Andrew Steele, THE 
LADIES MAN stars Tim Meadows as Leon Phelps.  Leon is a radio talk show 
host who likes to help people with their sexual difficulties.  A mixture 
of Dr. Ruth and Howard Stern, Leon throws out advice a mile a minute, 
most of it unprintable.
The movie is like an African-American version of PRIVATE PARTS as it 
relates Leon's life story.  With the wild wackiness of AUSTIN POWERS, 
the movie tells us of Leon's childhood as an orphan raised by buxom 
bunnies in a Playboy Mansion look-alike with a Hugh Hefner clone as his 
surrogate father.  Having an Afro hairstyle from age 1 on, Leon is a guy 
who has been forever stuck in the 70s.  His radio show's advice comes 
from his long experience as a ladies man, having had sex with half of 
the women in town.  Maybe more.
Although this material could be crude and offensive, instead it is crude 
and funny, thanks to Meadows's eminent likeableness.  With his little, 
disarming lisp, and his broad smile, he is such an easy guy to love that 
you can understand women falling for him, even if he isn't the 
handsomest guy on the block.  A side-joke concerns his private part, 
which causes a blinding light when unleashed, and his butt, which has a 
smiley tattooed on it.
One of the reasons for the film's surprising success is the casting of 
Leon's sidekick.  His radio producer and work companion, Julie, is 
played with charm and spunk by Karyn Parsons.  She is one of the few 
women in his life with whom he hasn't slept.  
After being thrown off of his popular radio show due to viewer 
complaints and management who hates him -- again, shades of PRIVATE 
PARTS -- Leon goes from rejection to rejection as he and Julie apply for 
jobs at other stations.  After promising Julie that he'll clean up his 
act, he finally lands a job at a small religious station.  His first 
guest is a nun who talks about assuming a missionary position and 
traveling to Bangkok.  Sweating profusely, Leon looks in danger of 
short-circuiting his brain as he fights back bawdy responses to the 
comedic softballs she unknowingly throws at him.
The supporting cast is well utilized.  Billy Dee Williams, playing a 
bartender, serves also as the story's narrator, giving Leon's story a 
fairy tale rendition.  Will Ferrell plays Lance, the leader of a support 
group (VSA - Victims of the Smiling Ass) of husbands whose wives have 
been caught dallying with Leon.  A Hummer driving, Greco-Roman wrestler 
who has a proclivity for heavy body oil and other wrestlers, Lance turns 
out to be quite a song-and-dance man.  One of the film's delights is a 
long dance number with the VSA men that seems straight out of an old 
Rodgers and Hammerstein musical.  It is well choreographed, tuneful and 
funny.  (I'd trade this one number for all of DANCER IN THE DARK.)
The people, including Julie's parents, who take Leon's advice, end up 
happier and with a much better love life.  So it is with the movie.  Go 
in expecting little and you may find the movie as charming and funny as 
I did.  Our half-full audience certainly laughed like a packed one.
THE LADIES MAN runs a lightening fast 1:24.  It is rated R for sexual 
content and language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chad Polenz
In describing a lot of this year's movies to my friends and family I've been 
using the phrase "It wasn't as bad as it could've been" quite a lot. It might 
be a cliche but that's probably the best way to describe the latest Saturday 
Night Live-sketch-turned-movie "The Ladies Man." Like most of the other films 
it has a funny premise but watching it you get the feeling it's just another 
cash cow flick no one put much effort in to. 
Tim Meadows stars as Leon Phelps, a talk radio personality known as "The 
Ladies Man" because he has supposedly scored with a lot of women (we're 
talking Wilt Chamberlain numbers here). There's a sequence towards the 
beginning of the movie that explains how he came to be the man he is. It's 
kind of a cheesy spoof that seems like an idea Mike Myers might have used 
with his zany "Austin Powers" character, but here it's just too cartoony for 
the setting. It involves Leon being raised by the most famous ladies man of 
the 20th century (hint: his initials are H.H.) and somehow getting stuck in 
the mindset of the 1970s for rest of his life. 
On SNL this character is good for a 5-minute sketch because the writers 
manage to pack in a lot of outrageous jokes and mini-stories in such a small 
space. Phelps is a buffoon and doesn't realize what a clown he is with his 
huge afro and leisure suits and annoying lisp and bottles of cheap wine at 
his side. On the big screen he's still a buffoon but he takes himself so 
seriously he's not a funny character - just a complete idiot who induces 
eye-rolling. He hosts a late-night call-in radio show where he attempts to 
help people out with their sex lives but ends up mostly bragging about his 
own romps. Considering the subject matter you could certainly draw a parallel 
between Phelps and Howard Stern. If only Phelps were more like Stern, at 
least he'd be a bit more real and true to himself instead of one-note 
caricature. 
And just as one-dimensional a character as Leon Phelps is, so are all the 
other characters in the equally-flat plot. These people include Leon's modest 
producer Julie (Karyn Parsons) who doesn't have much ambition. Then there's 
Will Ferrell and Lee Evans as two of the husbands out to get revenge on 
Phelps because their respective wives both slept with him. They don't come 
across as real men at all, but cartoon characters. For antagonists they're 
not truly threatening and they're almost more likable the protagonist. Billy 
Dee Williams also has a small role as a smooth-talking bartender who narrates 
the film as if it were the original "Shaft" or something. 
The story itself concerns Leon and Julie's hunt for work after they're fired 
for being fined yet again by the FCC. There's also a secondary plot wherein 
Farrell and Evans' characters form a support group of men scored by Phelps 
and want to track him down. For some reason the filmmakers use this plot 
point as an excuse for some "South Park"-esque musical routines but it has no 
satirical bite whatsoever. 
Meanwhile, Leon gets an anonymous letter from an ex-flame inviting him to be 
with her and all the money she has. This leads up to a fine sequence of jokes 
as he goes through his black book trying to track  down the mysterious woman. 
In the process there's a lot of sex jokes about how many times he's done what 
position with whom in some strange place at some strange time. Think of it as 
a mockery of "Dear Penthouse," but without the horniness. Phelps is a sex 
machine but the film's perception of sex devoids it of all eroticism, 
sensuality and intimacy. It's not even superficial in a pornographic way, 
it's equivalent to drinking a glass of water. 
I'm going to spare you the detailed spoilers of how the film actually 
executes its story. It's about a ladies man who doesn't realize he's maturing 
and wants something more than just sex. You can take a wild guess what's 
going to happen with the pack of men out to get him. 
As a comedy "The Ladies Man" hits and misses. Most of the jokes are from the 
sitcom school of one-liners and the SNL alumni school of pushing limits. 
There's one scene in which Leon and Julie's ex-fiance square off in a contest 
to see who can eat the nastiest bar food and ends on a disgusting note. Maybe 
it's an homage to the Farrelly brothers and Mike Myers but they know how to 
be gross and funny, this scene is just gross. 
What it all comes down to is that there's really no characterization to any 
of the roles. They all come off as shallow and they have no motive for 
anything they do other than to make sure the story goes in the proper 
direction. The Julie character annoyed me the most. She's seemingly 
intelligent and a shy person, but she sticks with Leon through it all. She's 
like a wife that stays with the drunkard husband that beats him and all you 
do is keep wondering why. The screenplay is so weak and full of holes it's 
sad to think what the earlier drafts might have been like. 
There's even more I could mention but I'll stop and just honestly tell you 
"The Ladies Man" isn't as bad as it could've been. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The "artistic integrity vs commercialism" debate has always been one to draw
fire from both ends of the forum when it comes to movies. On the one hand,
you have people who truly believe in their craft, their art, their ability
to affect and touch people's lives with their contributions to the world of
cinema, and on the other hand, you have Lorne Michaels. A man who likes to
take funny sketches from his SNL variety show and turn them into
inexpensive, uninspired feature films which make him money. Sadly, this film
falls into the latter category and much like many of the other unsuccessful
SNL pictures, its opening weekend gross, low budget and high video rentals
will surely continue to ensure that more of the same kind of movies will be
produced in the future. Lorne, please...buddy, pal...help us out here...is
it ONLY about the money now? Sad, really.
PLOT:
An oversexed talk show host who still believes that he's living in the 70s
gets fired from his radio show because of his crude dialogue on the air.
While trying to find another job with his pretty producer friend, he
receives a letter from an old girlfriend, who wants to hook back up with him
and take him around the world. With that in mind, he begins the search to
find his mystery woman among the hundreds of ladies that he's bedded over
the years.
CRITIQUE:
Another typical SNL sketch turned into a movie featuring a very hip
character sadly placed inside a paper thin plot, with many weak moments, a
couple of inspiring touches and a handful of funny jokes. This movie is not
necessarily a good movie and not necessarily a bad movie, it's sort of
just...there. And I guess that's what frustrates me even more about this
film. I really liked Leon Phelps. I really dug his style, his lack of social
etiquette with women and his funky duds, but why-oh-why couldn't these guys
come up with something a little funnier, or at least, more interesting. The
story is lame. Leon loses his job and has to find another one. An
ex-girlfriend of his wants to get it on with him but he doesn't know who she
in. All sketch stuff, but not enough for a movie. Why can't these SNL movies
be a little more ambitious? Especially with a character such as Leon, a guy
who despite his complete lack of tact with the ladies, still seems to come
off as a "nice guy". But the bottom line with any comedy is the laughs, the
laughs and the laughs. And unfortunately, there weren't many in this film.
Sure there were one or two very funny scenes, including the one exceptional
scenario featuring a posse of Leon-hating men suddenly breaking out into
song, and many clever moments, but overall, I was just sitting there,
waiting for something really funny to happen. Something really funny that
never came.
Meadows was great as Phelps, Billy Dee ideal as the smooth talking bar owner
and Will Ferrell memorable once again as the ambiguously gay rich guy. Kudos
also go out to Ms. Tiffany Amber-Thiessen's luscious breasts, who in
themselves delivered great performances, but sadly, the film as a whole just
fell short in most every other category. One interesting thing to note is
that despite the film featuring some nudity, although none from the lead
actresses (or from Julianne Moore in a surprising cameo), the film on the
whole was very tame. I mean, here's a guy who thinks only about sex and the
nastiest thing that he seemed to ever say was "want to take it in the butt?"
You'd think that with an "R" rating, they would have tried to take some more
chances, but na-ha, no SOUTH PARK here, folks. Anyway, I know it may sound
like I'm mostly knocking the film but overall, I had an okay time. Enough to
recommend it for fans of the sketch and maybe even some people out there who
are looking for a different kind of easy laugh. A definite video movie,
that's fer sure.

Author
John Popick
It's almost become an annual rite of autumn - buy school supplies for
the kids, hunker down to watch the Major League Baseball playoffs, carve
a scary face into your Halloween pumpkin and sit through an awful film
based on a marginally entertaining skit from Saturday Night Live.
Potential viewers of these films break down into two equally disturbing
groups – those that watch SNL religiously and feel some bizarre
obligation to see each hastily produced film released by Lorne Michaels'
production company, and those that don't watch the show but want to see
the film because they've heard from co-workers that the skit is `pretty
funny.'  Each goes home disappointed, swearing that they'll never do it
again.  But come the following fall, they're right back in line to buy
tickets for the next skit-turned-film debacle.
The apparent purpose of these pictures is to have the main character(s)
repeat their catch phrase as many times as possible over a 90-minute
span.  It's a strange concept, considering that a skit needs to be
pretty popular to even be considered as feature film fodder.  If it's
popular, that means the catch phrase has already been rubbed into the
ground for a couple of years on the show, which should make regular
viewers cringe every time the phrase is uttered.
In The Ladies' Man, the phrase is `That sounds real good,' and it's
spoken by ‘70s throwback Leon Phelps (Tim Meadows), the host of a late,
late night radio call-in show in Chicago (it's a public access
television program on SNL, but who's keeping track?).  `The Ladies'
Man,' which logs oodles of complaints yet is supposedly popular, is a
show where listeners address questions about relationships to Leon, who
has a lisp as thick as his Afro and, reportedly, a mighty `wang.'  More
importantly, Leon (like Dr. Laura) is idiotic, unintelligent and
uneducated, offering his listeners bad advice that usually involves
`doin' it up da butt.'
In the absence of a typical plot, Man floats between two loosely
constructed threads.  One focuses on Leon trying to find a job after
he's fired from his radio station (a head-scratching move, considering
his show is so popular), while the second involves the relationship
between Leon and his seemingly normal producer (Karyn Parsons, The Fresh
Prince of Bel Air), who, for some reason, likes him and supports his
career.  Leon's only redeeming quality appears to be an authentic desire
to help people.  `I'm like Mother Teresa,' he explains, `but bonin'.'
Man features a subplot where the husbands and boyfriends of women that
Leon has bedded band together to hunt down the despicable cad.  The
group is called the VSA, and to explain the initials would deprive
potential viewers of the film's only legitimate laugh.  Among the VSA
members are Meadows' SNL castmate Will Ferrell and Lee Evans (There's
Something About Mary).
Man was directed by Reginald Hudlin (The Great White Hype) and
co-written by Meadows and two other debut scibes, Dennis McNicholas and
Andrew Steele.  The script abandons ideas like comic timing and, well,
common sense.  There are also cameos from the likes of Rocky Carroll
(Chicago Hope), Eugene Levy (Best in Show), former Kids in the Hall
stars Mark McKinney and Kevin McDonald and, strangest of all, recent
Oscar nominee Julianne Moore.  Billy Dee Williams also has a small role,
playing a bartender in a lounge that doesn't even serve Colt 45.  The
horror of it all.
1:26 – R for nudity, sexual content and adult language

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/845fb5161e1558bd882569770011bd2f?OpenDocument
Ok.  Where in the contract for an SNL cast-member does it stipulate that
they will finance your ill-conceived film, no matter what it is?  What
kind of shyster agent dreamed that one up?  And why does said movie ever
have to be granted approval to be released to the general public?
These three questions, along with "How the hell does a lisping moron
actually have game?" predominate a thinking viewer's mind as it wanders
through the cerebrally deficient film The Ladies Man.  But then your
brain reminds you that you're not here for it.  You're here so your
brain can turn off for a long, long time.
The Ladies Man is the latest of those SNL skits to turn "pro" as a
feature length film.  Joining the ranks of such greats as Wayne's World
and such abysmal failures as A Night at the Roxbury, The Ladies Man only
earns the modest title of being one of the better SNL spin-offs thanks
to the utter failure of most of its competition.  Sure, there are some
laughs.  And you can count tem on both hands, but will you even bother
renting this film?  I doubt it.
For those who don't know the story (which is to say, the lead
character), Leon Phelps (Tim Meadows) is the ladies man: a lewd Chicago
sex show host that comes off like Howard Stern with a speech impediment
and a lower IQ.  Fired from his radio station after breaking FCC codes,
Leon and his producer Julie (Karyn Parsons) head off in search of new
jobs, a mysterious millionaire benefactor, and true love.
Although this proves to be minimally enjoyable at times, and although
there is a musical number about a group of people devoted to killing
Phelps that will make you bust out laughing, the rest of the movie
proves to be so poorly constructed that it's almost unbearable.  While
I'm not yet yearning for It's Pat, the Sequel, the prospect of ever
seeing The Ladies Man again sounds too unbearable to stand.
Director: Reginald Hudlin
Producer: Lorne Michaels
Writer: Tim Meadows, Dennis McNicholas, Andrew Steele
Starring: Tim Meadows, Karyn Parsons, Will Ferrell, Lee Evans,
Tiffani-Amber Thiessen
http://www.ladiesmanmovie.com/index_net.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Reginald Hudlin.
Cast: Tim Meadows, Karyn Parsons, Billy Dee Williams, Will Ferrell, Lee 
Evans, Tiffani Thiessen, Tamala Jones, Julianne Moore, Eugene Levy.
2000 - 87 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, nudity, and sex).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 15, 2000.
It has become a sort of yearly tradition that Paramount Films teams up with 
SNL Studios to adapt one of their popular television skits into a 
feature-length film, for release each successive October. 1998 saw the 
surprisingly funny "A Night at the Roxbury," arguably the best SNL adaptation 
since 1992's "Wayne's World," and 1999's "Superstar," based on the Catholic 
school girl character Mary Katherine Gallagher, was generally entertaining, 
yet far too thin to fill up its already-brief 82-minute running time. Of 
their three most recent stabs at big-screen stardom, this year's "The Ladies 
Man," based on the exploits of shallow womanizer Leon Phelps, is, by far, the 
worst of the lot. Mostly unfunny and truly misguided in every respect, the 
film has neither the laughs of "Roxbury" nor the heart of "Superstar," 
exposing itself as merely a very shallow and forgettable comedy.
Ever since appearing on the doorstep of the Playboy mansion as a baby, Leon 
Phelps (Tim Meadows) has been a high-stylin', trash-talkin', woman-usin' 
sexual fanatic whose wardrobe and poofy hairstyle apparently haven't changed 
since the 1970's. Along with loyal producer and long-time friend Julie (Karyn 
Parsons), Leon runs a nightly radio call-in show called "The Ladies Man," in 
which he tries to solve the listeners' "romantic queries." When his raunchy 
and offensive show steps over the line, Leon and Julie find themselves 
jobless, hopping from one local radio station to the next in hopes of being 
hired. 
All the while, a disgruntled man (Lee Evans) who caught his wife sleeping 
with Leon, joins a support group for husbands whose wives' have cheated on 
them with the mysterious black man with the smiley-face tattooed on his 
buttocks. They do not yet know his identity, of course, because all any of 
them have ever glimpsed was his naked backside as he ran away.
When SNL producer Lorne Michaels puts his head together each year with 
Paramount to develop a film based on one of their skits, is there ever any 
thought into actually developing it outside of its sketchy mediocrity? This 
question plagues the entirety of "The Ladies Man," inauspiciously directed by 
Reginald Hudlin (1992's "Boomerang") and written by Tim Meadows and Dennis 
McNicholas, which includes an enjoyable opening five minutes and then settles 
into complete tedium, its novelty run out before the middle of the first 
reel. 
At least, at 87 minutes, it is mercifully short, though not short enough. In 
bringing his spicy Leon Phelps character to the big screen, Tim Meadows has 
done very little to make him more than a one-dimensional figure with middling 
appeal. In all fairness, Meadows is clearly having fun with his performance, 
but he isn't terribly charismatic, and pales in comparison to female costar 
Karyn Parsons (TV's "The Fresh Prince of Bel Air"), who shows a great deal of 
star presence and makes for a naturalistic romantic counterpart. It's just 
too bad she is stuck in disposable films such as "The Ladies Man" when her 
talent as an actress is obvious.
The supporting cast is nothing special--strictly television-star level. The 
usually enjoyable Will Ferrell (1999's "Dick") slums it up as the leader of 
the support group for Leon Phelps' victims, who is allegedly outraged that 
his wife, Honey DeLune (Tiffani Thiessen), slept with Leon, despite his 
fevered attraction to man-on-man body wrestling. Tiffani Thiessen (TV's 
"Beverly Hills, 90210") is sorely wasted in a brief appearance, although she 
is the most memorable of the minor characters. And for reasons unknown, as if 
out of some especially bizarre "Twilight Zone" episode, Academy Award nominee 
Julianne Moore (1999's "Magnolia") has a cameo as one of Leon's "women of the 
past." A truly bizarre casting decision, but also really the only noteworthy 
element of the otherwise dispensable "The Ladies Man."
Since Leon is a purely sexual and outrageous creature, as that is all he has 
ever been portrayed as on NBC's "Saturday Night Live," we are supposed to buy 
the conclusion's twist in "The Ladies Man," which is that he gradually begins 
to realize how infinitely more satisfying love is, rather than just a series 
of meaningless trysts. It's difficult to imagine SNL ever being able to 
feature this character on their show any longer, since the turning point for 
the character is one that defies his personality and loose attitude seen on 
the show. Congratulations must go out to Lorne Michaels; not only did he make 
a very bad movie, but he also managed to destroy the possible longevity of 
one of his brightest on-going SNL skits.
