Title
Review for Big Eden (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jon Popick
In the meantime, a Native American named Pike Dexter (Eric Schweig, who was
Daniel Day-Lewis' brother in The Last of the Mohicans), who runs the town's
general store, has developed an attraction to Henry.  Pike is asked to
deliver meals prepared by the Widow Thayer to Henry and Sam, but instead
find fancy recipes online and prepares delicious meals for the two men,
while making his dog eat the Widow's yucky grub.  Pike can't even make eye
contact with Henry, which mistakenly comes off as rude behavior.
Because all of this is happening in an extremely rural Montana town with a
population slightly larger than Mariah Carey's fan base, you'd expect there
to be some kind of anti-gay backlash, but there isn't.  In fact, most of the
citizens of Big Eden bend over backward to help Pike win over Henry (because
it's, like, so obvious Dean matches up better with the town's mayor).  Eden
is nothing more than a small-town gay love triangle with no antagonist and
very little conflict.
Then again, what do I know?  Eden has won oodles of awards from various gay
and lesbian festivals, but also took home the top two trophies at the
Cleveland fest, beating critically praised stuff like Memento, Amores
Perros, With a Friend Like Harry and The Circle.  Aside from the gay angle,
Eden is a formulaic mess.  Besides the breathtaking scenery and another
chance to see Louise Fletcher teamed up with a really tall Indian (a la One
Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest), Eden is only interesting for the fact its star
plays a character that's returning to his hometown...not unlike Gross'
former television co-star Ellen DeGeneres, whose new show is about the same
thing.
1:57 - PG-13 for some mature thematic material

Author
Steve Rhodes
First-time writer and director Thomas Bezucha's BIG EDEN is part gay 
romance and part slice-of-small-town-life story.  A good-spirited and 
closely observed movie, it is filled with honest characters who all 
possess a genuine chemistry.  The would-be lovers and the townsfolk 
actually care about one another.  The cynics, of course, will argue that 
such rampant humanitarianism makes it all a fairy tale, but I found it 
touching and believable from beginning to end.
As the story opens, Henry Hart (Arye Gross), a Manhattan artist, is 
called back to his remote hometown in Montana, where his grandfather 
(George Coe) has had a stroke.  Once back in town, Henry is forced to 
confront the love of his life, Dean Stewart (Tim DeKay), a straight 
buddy of his from school.  The recently divorced Dean has just moved 
back into town with his two young boys.  Dean's a physical kind of guy 
who likes lots of bear hugs and manly touching, which frustrates Henry 
enormously.  Although they haven't even spoken in 10 years, Henry still 
has his lifelong crush on Dean.  Both actors turn in nicely nuanced and 
compelling performances.
The story concerns a few, not very well kept secrets.  Henry tries to 
keep his sexual orientation from his grandfather although most locals 
figure it out.  The other secret concerns cooking.
In the story's most engaging and enigmatic performance, Eric Schweig 
(TOM & HUCK) plays Pike Dexter, a painfully shy, gentle giant who is 
uncomfortable speaking to humans, although he opens up easily to his 
dog.  A Native American, Pike runs the general store and post office in 
which the town's inhabitants spend most of their free time.  When 
Henry's grandfather requires a special diet and Pike is asked to deliver 
his food, Pike launches into the equivalent of a home study version of a 
speed cooking course.  Reading voraciously, Pike turns himself in short 
order into an accomplished chef.  He tries to hide all this by 
substituting his food for that of the local spinster who supposedly is 
preparing the grandfather's meals.  Her food goes to Pike's dog, who'll 
eat anything.
Beautifully filmed and warmly scored, the movie is a treat for the eyes 
and ears.  Only a needlessly pat ending spoils what is otherwise a 
realistic and moving story.
BIG EDEN runs 1:57.  It is rated PG-13 for some mature thematic material 
and would be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 8, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "BIG EDEN" (Jour de Fete)
     It's Utopia, this tiny town tucked away in the timberland of
northwestern Montana, where old codgers lounge on the porch of the general store
to pass the time away and the local matchmakers (Nan Martin, Louise Fletcher)
eagerly pair off the young people, regardless of sexual preference. There's nary
a homophobe or bigot around, much to the surprise of Henry Hart (Arye Gross), a
successful but lonely Manhattan artist who returns home to care for Sam (George
Coe), the ailing grandfather who raised him. And with the simultaneous
re-appearance of his best-friend from high-school and object of his unrequited
love (Tim DeKay), now divorced with two young sons, the fact of his
homosexuality must be faced. To complete the triangle, there's the tall,
taciturn Native American (Eric Schweig) who owns the general store and lovingly
yet secretly prepares gourmet meals for Henry and Sam. 
     This fable about home and family is a major debut for first-time
film-maker Thomas Bezucha (a former designer for Coach and Polo/Ralph Lauren)
who is meticulous about minding details, using ballads like "Welcome to my
World" and "Achin', Breakin' Heart" to set up the concept of our universal
longing to find a place in which we can love and be loved. In the paradise of
Big Eden, what you are doesn't matter as much as generosity of spirit, respect
and kindness. Sure, the plot's implausible but it's a good-natured fantasy so
allowances should be made. And Rob Sweeney's photography of Glacier National
Park is spectacular! On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Big Eden" is a
charming, quirky, off-beat 7. It's a heart-warming romantic comedy about a gay
man who doesn't die of AIDS or wind up alone at the end.
