Title
Review for Stag (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
Look out VERY BAD THINGS (7.5/10), you've got company! Or should that be the
other way around? This film is based on the exact same premise as the
previously mentioned film, but offers a dramatic narrative, rather than the
VERY BAD THINGS black comedy touches, and actually came out a full year
before the former ever saw a movie screen. This film is the slightly better
of the two, because it tackles the issues seriously, and really makes you
feel like this situation could happen to any one of us, and encourages you
to cringe at that very thought.
PLOT:
A bunch of guys get together at a friend's place for a surprise stag party
for their groom-to-be buddy. Once the two hookers/dancers arrive, the party
really gets going, but not until one of the party-girls drops dead via an
accident caused by the fellas. Another accident erases their male escort,
and suddenly all of these men have to face the fact that they have two dead
bodies in the house, and a live dancer wailing to squeal.
CRITIQUE:
This movie grabs you by the balls from its opening scenes, and draws you
closer and closer to the reality of their dire situation as it
systematically touches upon all of the needed elements of a great thriller.
The premise is fantastic and real. The execution and development of their
deeds are sure and believable. And most importantly, the tension and the
intrigue laced throughout this movie, lend a perfect balance to this film's
greatest asset, which is the authenticity of its characters, and the true
appreciation of the unknown future that these very men have to face in every
single scene. The film's conclusion is one of the best that I've seen in
years, and something to be proud of in any production's regard. Think 12
ANGRY MEN meets THE BACHELOR PARTY gone awry.
Add to the film's success, a pretty solid cast of actors, including an
against-type Andrew McCarthy, a genuine Mario Van Peebles, and a
strong-as-ever Ben Gazzara, and you've got yourself a fun time with the
boys. The soundtrack is also very unique and appropriate (Any film that
starts off with a Tom Jones tune is allright in my book), as is its style
and suitable runtime (barely grazes an hour and a half). It's quick, it's
filled with tension and moral issues, and it's got singer-turned-actress
Taylor Dayne stripping down to her skivvies. What else could you ask for? :)
The only semi-negatives in this film were perhaps the tiny plot holes which
are inevitable in a cast and breadth of scope as such, and the lack of oomph
from some of its actors, but in a cast of this size, one can't expect the
Oscars all around. This is a great tension-filled drama that effectively
ponders over every conceivable option and moral issue that would arise
within this very traumatic situation, and adds fuel to that fire, by
providing a respective point of view from a varied crew of men, all carrying
their own concerns, grudges and emotions over their shoulders. Watch it with
your buds or your loved one, and discuss it over a beer afterwards. It's a
great film.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Kevin Dillon, who plays the character of Dan in this film, is actor Mat
Dillon's younger brother. He also played the character of "Bunny" in
director Oliver Stone's classic 1986 film PLATOON (8/10).
John Stockwell's real name is John Samuels IV.
Mario Van Peebles earned a B.A. in Economics from Columbia University in
1978. His father is director Melvin Van Peebles. Mario also directed several
films of his own, including his first, and my personal favourite, NEW JACK
CITY (8/10).
Actor Andrew McCarthy was once considered a part of the "Brat Pack" during
the 1980's. He's played the character of Larry Wilson in both WEEKEND AT
BERNIE's films alongside Jonathan Silverman.
Ben Gazzara's real name is Biagio Anthony Gazzara.
