Title
Review for Hamlet (2000/I)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Ross Anthony
Interviews with actor Ethan Hawke and director Michael Almereyda of "Hamlet"
Ethan Hawke slides into the plush leather chair at the press table with a
smile just as comfortable; his upbeat, talkative demeanor nearly mock his
timid, shaking (often sweaty) screen persona.
(On Hamlets)
It's a testament to why the piece is a masterpiece because everybody brings
something different to it. He's so multifaceted everybody who attacks it
focuses on a different side of the character. Mel Gibson had him real
rambunctious, reminded me of the guy in "Lethal Weapon," which was a good
thing.
 Mostly these other guys who played hamlet were too old. In a modern sense
he's much more of a Holden Caulfield or a Kurt Cobain. Many of his dilemmas
are a young man's dilemmas ... Seeking meaning, feeling overshadowed by your
parents feeling lost and overwhelmed by society ...
We wanted to make it as accessible as possible ... Allow for the audience to
experience ... in a new way and treat it not as some old dusty thing that is
very precious but to break down those walls and let the character's
emotional life live in a new way.
Shakespeare purists, people who really know a lot about Shakespeare will
love it, because they just want it to be a living breathing art form. If you
have some idea in your head that British people are they only people who do
it right, then you're not gonna like it. But I don't follow in that
school... Despite the modern setting, when the movie is done it's the play
that resonates.
(On work and family life)
If you don't make your family a priority then you'll loose them. So now I
try to do things that I really believe in, get the most bang for my buck,
thus "Hamlet."
(On literature)
I wrote a novel, "The Hottest State" came out a couple years ago, it was a
really fun experience for me. The book is about a twenty-year-old guy who's
so in love with a girl that he loses his mind. I was so interested in doing
something else, because I've been in movies since I was young. At the time,
I was adamant to not make a movie out of it, but as time goes by ... I
might.
 (On philosophy)
We live in a community which tries to box us all in. Like you're a
journalist, you just do this or you just do that ... you can't also be a
musician. You know... I just resent that. I think we're all a lot more than
that.
(On other film activities...)
I just directed a picture on DV. I got turned on by "The Celebration" and
how cheaply you can make a movie. If it's any good ... it's call "The last
word on Paradise" it's mildly inspired by Dylan Thomas' "Under Milkwood"
which is it all takes place in a hotel over the course of a day and involves
about 35 people. The hope is to illustrate how close we are in proximity,
and how cut off from each other we are, how similar all our experiences are
but how separate we all feel.
(Favorite non-film thing to do...)
Take my daughter to the park and play guitar, which unfortunately she
doesn't like me to do .. "No daddy No."
Michael Almereyda, eloquent in his soft-spoken boyish manner, replaces Ethan
in the pressroom.
(On his contemporary interpretation of Hamlet)
It never occurred to be not to do it modern. I was thinking about other
plays, but this one seemed to be chasing me.


Every spoken line is by Shakespeare, the original language is very in tact
as much as it's been cut I hope it's more of a distillation than anything
else ... in an attempt to get to the essence of the play.
There's so much that's great. There is no definitive Hamlet, there's
variance, different versions, ... it wasn't published in Shakespeare's
lifetime. It's an unruly play an unwieldy play, part of the challenge and
excitement about taking it on is that you have to make cuts. You have to
decide what means the most.
That's the nature of Shakespeare is that he accommodates extremes, invites
them and demands them in a way. The adaptation was done with an element of
respect. The way you can respect Shakespeare the most is not being too
precious not being to reverent because these plays were always done as
popular entertainment they were meant for big crowds. They were meant for
mass audiences. A scholar explained the Globe theatre had a seating capacity
of 2000. I never realized that. The plays are still alive and kicking, the
idea was to pack it with spirit.
(On Bill Murray)
He's is one of my favorite actors ... He brings a peculiar kind of
tenderness to the role, he warms it up.
He was my first choice, I was glad to have an excuse to work with him and he
was glad to be excused to work with Bill Shakespeare (Laughs).
(On Ethan Hawke)
I think he's just turned twenty-nine ... but he was twenty-seven at the time
we shot it and he looks particularly boyish with the right lighting
(chuckles). He was the first one I thought of for the role and the first one
I went to. I had a six-page treatment, on the basis of the treatment he said
yes. He's an old friend, and when he said yes understanding we'd be shooting
on 16mm and everyone working for scale, we knew we could raise the money.
[Two million]. Without him the movie wouldn't exist for a second. From that
point we had the luxury of inviting our favorite actors to participate, the
key was I needed final cut because I had some bad experiences before. And
that's why the budget is so tight.
(On small budget independents)
We didn't always have permits, sometimes we were just charging around. New
York is pretty filmmaker friendly, you don't have to pay for the streets,
you just gotta get the permits. We went super sixteen because we wanted the
movie to be above all intimate, and you can be more mobile with the smaller
cameras.
I wasn't any more obsessed than when making any other movie - I just thought
I was having fun.
The challenging thing is that the movie was done so cheaply, with everyone
working at scale, and we didn't have much time especially to rehearse, we
were flying at times, so there's an edge of panic to it that I wouldn't have
minded deducting.
I like big budget films. My favorite movie last year was "The Matrix", but
it's maybe my character, my sensibility that makes me think I won't be
having big budgets to work with. I just get a sense that in order to make
films and retain final cut I'll probably stay independent.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

HAMLET (director/writer: Michael Almereyda; screewriter: based on the
play by William Shakespeare "Hamlet"; cinematographer: John de Borman;
editor: Kristina Boden; cast: Ethan Hawke (Hamlet), Kyle MacLachlan
(Claudius), Sam Shepard (Ghost), Diane Venora (Gertrude), Bill Murray
(Polonius), Liev Schreiber (Laertes), Julia Stiles (Ophelia), Karl Geary
(Horatio), Steve Zahn (Rosencrantz), Dechen Thurman (Guildenstern);
Runtime: 110; 2000)
Inspired by the maverick Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki's 1987 "Hamlet
Goes Business," Michael Almereyda (Another Girl, Another Planet/Nadja)
directs this updated mainstream, mock serious version of Hamlet with
great wit, style, and immediacy. He effortlessly transfers locations
from Denmark to the New York City of 2000, which shows how malleable
Hamlet is and how right it seems to take it away from its staginess and
sole reliance on dialogue instead of making it a more cinematic
experience. Denmark is changed from being a country to the name of the
multinational corporation that must endure the slings and arrows from
the pen of William Shakespeare. But what Almereyda fails to do in this
slenderized (no gravediggers here) version of Hamlet, is make his modern
visuals jive with the staginess of the bard's words, therefore the film
always felt jarring. Even in some very beautifully mannered scenes,
there was a note of clumsiness, indicating something was missing or
didn't match about this far-reaching production that bordered on mawkish
giddiness, though not quite falling down that hole. The old style
English dialogue and the new visuals did not make for a coherent film,
with the visuals being spectacular and relevant, while the dialogue
seemed to be from another planet, or from another venue.
I thought I would never say that Shakespeare's Hamlet is better visually
than its dialogue, but in this film version, that is clearly the case.
By not changing the tone of the Shakespearian dialogue to the
neurotically nasal everyday speech of the modern New Yorker, while
radically altering the visual effects to fit in with the current times,
the film developed a split-personality, which it was never able to
recover from. If you are going to change things, why make half the film
conform to traditional Shakespeare, when you could have taken a further
risk and made the entire film a glittering display of inventiveness, and
perhaps achieve a major breakthrough in how to present Hamlet to a
modern audience!
This Hamlet tale concerns the machinations of a power struggle in the
corporate world and about a young man named Hamlet (Ethan Hawke),
shocked that his mother Gertrude (Diane Venora) would marry her
husband's brother Claudius (Kyle MacLachlan), so soon after his death. A
death that Hamlet suspects was accomplished by Claudius and confirmed
when he chats with his father's ghost (Sam Shepard), who is first seen
on a security guard's monitor.
Instead of the castle at Elsinore, we have the Hotel Elsinore as the
business headquarters for the Denmark Corporation, which is located in
the heart of Manhattan's sleek tinted-glass world of offices. Hamlet is
a troubled soul who is a struggling digital videomaker, with fits of
self-importance and bouts of illusionary grandeur. All his woes are in
his head and he can't get the ghost of his father out of his mind.
Hamlet makes a fashion statement by wearing a woolen Scandinavian type
ski hat with flaps hanging down the sides, something the kids in NYC's
ghetto popularized in the 1980s
when their dress code had an attitude. Hamlet has such a grungy
attitude.
To get a rise out his stepfather, Hamlet makes a video called "The
Mousetrap" and succeeds in getting his ire by showing it to him along
with invited guests, in what appears to be the Guggenheim. The video is
a comically haphazard avant-garde work by the animator Lewis Klahr,
showing a variety of historical film footage.
Hamlet's girl is the teenager Ophelia (Julia Stiles), who lives in an
artist's loft and suffers from peevishness. She is annoyed by Hamlet's
amorous advances, not knowing what to make of them, and she is also
annoyed by her overbearing father Polonius (Bill Murray) who lectures
her, and her big brother Laertes (Liev Schreiber) who coddles her in a
brotherly fashion, as both men seek to control her. Hamlet and Ophelia
are a perfectly beautiful looking but obnoxious couple, who are plagued
by the modern problem of lack of communication. Hawke is a bland but
effective Hamlet, Stiles is a childish and limited Ophelia, Murray is a
deliciously hammy Polonius, MacLachlan is a transparently ruthless CEO,
Diane Venora is a physically manipulative Gertrude, whose performance
brings out both a mother's anguish for her son and her lust for her
husband, Schreiber is simply brilliant as an affecting Laertes, playing
his part more in the traditional Shakespearian mode, Sam Shepard makes
for a hell of a forceful ghost, while Steve Zahn is a sleazy Rosencrantz
and Dechen Thurman (a relative of Hawke's) is his sleazy counterpart
Guildenstern.
It is difficult to take this Hamlet in quite the same serious way it is
usually presented
onstage, and that's just fine. Refreshingly, this film does not have one
ounce of pretention  to high culture. The cast all come with their own
individual ideas about the characters they are playing and offer their
odd renditions for the traditional roles. Ophelia receives the news from
Hamlet that she should "get thee to a nunnery" via a bevy of telephone
answering messages. Hawke delivers his "To be or not to be" soliloquy in
the action video section of a Blockbuster store. He prepared his first
soliloquy about his father's death on his laptop computer, as the ghost
of his father is reported seen by the amiable Horatio (Geary).
The story, though almost cut in half, still is basically the same. But
the dramatic effect is different. You have to lose something when you
throw away all that Shakespeare dialogue. In some scenes we look through
all the egotism of the characters through glass that is crystal clear
and easy to shatter, and the effect is a sharpened sense of what we are
seeing. But when the final tragedy unfolds, there is no real emotion in
it, the film failed to pull us into that scene. It seemed as if the soul
had been taken out of it. And that is the major fault of the film.
What lingers, is a strong sense that we are steeped in a Hamlet who must
be viewed with urgency, a sense of foreboding gloom, and with a sense of
ticklish glibness. The picture was shot in super 16 millimeter. Its NYC
face is given a glossy, bluish and grayish tint, catching all the limos,
glass closets, and glass high-rise structures John de Borman could film
with his superlative camerawork. He nearly transforms this into a
neo-noir film on his own terms. NYC never looked more like a glistening
Denmark or a glass house, while "Hamlet" looks more like a work of
visual poetry instead of sounding like great literature. An interesting
concept, too bad Almereyda couldn't completely pull it off. Yet I
applaud the chances he took and all the misses never completely deterred
me from enjoying the film. It came awfully close to being camp, but the
oddness of this unlikely cast playing Shakespeare, somehow, held the
film together and made it accessible to an audience that Shakespeare
might not have reached before. I actually missed Bill Murray when he
departed the film after Hamlet accidently plugs him while he's in the
closet. Even though Hawke's Hamlet had the edge of a young man's
immaturity and impetuousness, what would have really given this film a
sense of manic self-consciousness, would have been to cast Sean Penn as
Hamlet, though James Dean in that part would have been the ultimate coup
de grace.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ross Anthony
I don't enjoy Shakespeare. Or that is to say, I haven't enjoyed Shakespeare
when presented on film or stage. The big problem is too much poetry in too
short of time. He's very clever, that guy, I don't want to miss any word
playage. But it's ALL word playage encoded in backward archaic grammar.
Seems to me, this stuff works better on paper, read at your own pace.
That said, I loved the first half of this film. This "Hamlet" drew me in
like no other Shakespearean work, thus far. The gritty New York-style
imagery, the high-tech video-insert motif, the grungey beady-eyed Hamlet (a
shaggy goatee'd Ethan Hawke resembling the lead singer of "Sugar Ray"), the
near total elimination of pompous delivery. It's not one of those snooty
productions that treats its audience as if they were some unworthy
congregation in a stuffy old Victorian church "privileged" to be pastured a
righteous speech spat deliberately by self-proclaimed people of God. No,
this Shakespeare may as well have been Tarantino; a slick method for making
a 400 year old work more accessible to 21st century masses.
Did I mention that I never made it through any prior version of "Hamlet"? If
there was any doubt, this should distance my opinion from those of the group
of Shakespearean experts, lovers, etc. I love movies, and while I appreciate
poetry (used to write it, actually) they don't work well together - not at
length anyway (length being 25 minutes plus). Perhaps this is one reason I
found the second half of this film less than compelling.
Hamlet is outraged when he learns his father (the king in William's version)
the president of a huge corporation called Denmark has died, allowing his
mother (the widowed queen) to hastily marry the uncle (king's brother). Not
surprisingly, Hamlet's state is already askew, but the appearance of his
father's ghost sets his tilt in a spinning suicidal whirl (hence the classic
line "To be or not to be?"). Great filming on the apparition, though a morta
l actor without special effects is used, his intense red-edged eyes fill the
screen with a greater dread than a Spielberg poltergeist.
And that leads me to the second thing I don't enjoy about the Shakespeare
I've seen ... the plot. Often, I find them ... well, thin, weak and empty.
And this "Hamlet" is no exception. The premise is interesting ... but the
resolve, flatly put ... ridiculous. "Penn and Teller Get Killed" has just
about as much point ... and there's a lot more laughs (with just as much if
not more blood).
Still, William has the sharpest of dagger tongues. In fact, this dialogue
interplay is a two-hour sword fight of tongues. When I view films, I like to
write down the "gems" to include as quotes in my reviews, but this film is
so chock full of gems, that even just the ones I could decode in real time
were to numerous to capture on paper. Again, this is why I think Shakespeare
is a reader's art, not a theatergoer's (save for those who have already read
the pieces).
Here are just a few of William's many many brilliant quips that stabbed my
leaning attentions: Polonius warns his daughter of Hamlet's love:
"Affections? That blaze gives more light than heat. Don't confuse it with
fire." Polonius coaxes his couch potato daughter: "The wind sits in the
shoulder of your sail and you are stay forth?" Hamlet on living a lie: "Do
not spread the compost on the weeds to make them ranker ... throw away the
worser and live the other half." (Purists, kindly forgive the imperfections
in my transcriptions.)
In film, story is still more important than dialogue. From my admittedly
limited knowledge of Shakespeare, I fault him for soapy thin plots. However,
I praise director Mike Almereyda for the following reasons:
Great choice of music, mixing modern (sometimes reverse recorded) sounds,
with the epic classical timbers that conjure up images of cathedrals and
armored horsemen, but instead are married with elevators and soda machines.
Casting of Bill Murray as Polonius, he's a fresh, every-man, deep-hearted
pleasant surprise addition to the pool of Shakespearean performers. He's
excellent. I love the scene where he lifts Ophelia's foot to tie her shoe as
he lectures her. In fact, the film is full of wonderful as-they're-talking
events that make it real and not just a rackety wooden stage of costumed
speeches.
Likewise, casting of Karl Geary as Horatio (great job by him).
The TV-play of explosions as the apparition speaks to Hamlet.
The TV-clip usages of an Asian spiritual guru speaking on the use of the
phrase "To Be."
Gravedigger singing songs of the 1960's.
TelePrompTer ending.
Almereyda, had many decisions regarding what to leave out when adapting this
work. Personally, I would have cut the Claudius plotting with Ophelia's bro
scene to one minute, cut all of Ophelia's lines until she screams (Ophelia's
silence is an anchor to the earlier part of the film), hastened that ending,
perhaps beefed up the father-son interplay and/or Hamlet/Ophelia love affair
(sorely underplayed here).
There is an interview with Hamlet principals on the site:
http://www.rossanthony.com/interviews/hawke.shtml
Hamlet. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Ethan Hawke, Kyle McLachlan, Diane Venora, Sam Shepard, Bill
Murray, Live Schreiber, Julia Stiles, Karl Geary, Paula Malcomson, Steve
Zahn, Dechen Thurman, Rome Neal.
Direction/screen adaptation by Michael Almereyda.
Written by William Shakespeare.
Produced by Andrew Fierberg, Amy Hobby. Presented by Mirimax.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
How to stage the classic "To be or not to be" soliloquy has to be one of
the key issues for any director bold, or foolish, enough to attempt to
mount a modern adaptation of Shakespeare's "Hamlet."  Michael Almereyda,
a relatively obscure writer/director, who did TWISTER (no, not that
TWISTER, but a comedy starring Suzy Amis) and little else, chooses a
Blockbuster video store for the setting.  Among a hundred copies of LOST
IN SPACE, Hamlet delivers, mumbles to be more precise, his classic
lines.  This proves an apt metaphor since Almereyda's direction appears
completely lost in space.
Modern adaptations can be audacious and invigorating retellings of
Shakespearean stories as Baz Luhrmann proved with his ROMEO + JULIET.
In contrast, Almereyda starts with and a killer cast and a promising
premise (he moves the story to New York City, where the CEO of the
multinational Denmark Corporation has just died), but he doesn't seem to
know what to do next.  Scenes are staged almost randomly without
consideration for what impact the setting will make.  Were it not for
the Bard's marvelous words and Carter Burwell's great dramatic music,
the film would not be worth anyone's while.
Liev Schreiber and Kyle MacLachlan give nice performance as Laertes and
Claudius.  Julia Stiles, an extremely likable actress who has had the
misfortune to have starred in a long string of bad teen comedies, is out
of her league as Ophelia, reminding one of a high school student who
gets a chance to play with professional thespians.
And then we come to Ethan Hawke as the lead character, Hamlet.  Hawke
can be the master of the spoken word, as he was in BEFORE SUNRISE, but
he is also given to empty posturing, as he was in SNOW FALLING ON
CEDARS.  He comes across as surprisingly bland this time.  Underplaying
almost every scene, he broods and ponders but rarely puts any life into
his character.  With a scraggly beard, dirty, unkempt hair, an old, knit
aviator cap and grungy clothes, he looks like some street person who is
there to gain our sympathy.  He doesn't appear or act like the lead.
In a movie that is more cutesy than compelling, Bill Murray, as
Polonius, gives the most intriguing performance of the lot.  With
constant comedic overtones to his every word, his is the only
performance that really comes alive.  His approach doesn't always work,
but at least he suggests some reason for the play's modern adaptation
other than "we could, so we did."
Kenneth Branagh brought in his HAMLET at 4 hours.  Michael Almereyda's
version, at half that length, feels much longer.
The saving grace is that mediocre Shakespeare (and I'm not counting
those adaptations that borrow only the story but not the dialog) is
still Shakespeare.  Yes, this HAMLET is an unenergetic misfire, but the
words are there to savor, nevertheless.
HAMLET runs 1:57.  It is rated R for some violence and would be fine for
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Shakespeare, minus all the drama
The reason William Shakespeare is described as the greatest playwright
ever is that his stories stand the test of time, both in their original
form and in any derivative adaptation. Romeo and Juliet as West Side
Story or King Lear as The Lion King, for example. The difficulty lie in
the language, five centuries old, which is hard enough for a modern
actor to get his tongue around and the sheer length of each play, hours
of screen almost begging for an adaptation which shaves the fat. You can
take a hammer to Shakespeare and not hurt the basic story, if you know
what you're doing. Director Michael Almereyda's Hamlet takes a mallet
the size of a small state to the Bard, mutilating famous soliloquies and
utterly stripping the drama out of one of the bloodiest finales ever to
get the stage sticky with fake blood.
That last sentence assumes you have a vestigial remembrance of the last
scene of Hamlet. If you are utterly new to the work, you will be utterly
lost by the time it ends.
The concept for this adaptation, moving it into modern times and
restructuring the monarchy as a corporation, is intriguing to say the
least. In this version, a hostile takeover within New York's Denmark
Corporation has left its CEO (Sam Shepard) dead, his brother Claudius
(Kyle MacLachlan) in charge and married to the primary shareholder of
the corporation, Gertrude (Diane Venora) -- I'm guessing about the
stock. One of the failings of the adaptation is that it ignores all the
cultural and legal developments of the last half millennium. None of
this sits well with pasty face Hamlet (Ethan Hawke), a university
student who is majoring in video production and will use his skills to
try to bring his uncle down.
Hamlet is also obsessed with the lovely Ophelia (Julia Stiles), sister
of his friend Laertes (Liev Schreiber). Both of them are kidlets of the
"prattling fool" corporate Yes Man Polonius (Bill Murray). As Hamlet's
behavior becomes more erratic, "mad" if you will, Claudius employs other
pals Rosencrantz and Gildenstern (Steve Zahn and Dechen Thurman) to keep
an eye on him. Murder, Madness and Suicide will all work their way into
the story 'cuz Shakespeare was good at that but the adaptation strips
the story of all of its power. All the while, the Ghost of Hamlet's dad
appears to counsel his son and, thankfully, recap what's been going on
so that the audience can follow along.
That almost saves the day. While the brain can usually pierce the veil
of time and follow the path of the language if the actor's delivery is
good, none of the ones in this version of Hamlet are. Shepard's
expository speeches don't click until a third of the way through. Murray
and MacLachlan's don't seem to properly jibe with their new corporate
clothes and Hawke is undermined by the concept. The New York City
background becomes more of a player than the principals.
Almereyda is so determined to work modern technology into every scene
that, in the most grievous example, the world famous "To Be Or Not To
Be" soliloquy is presented on videotape. Hamlet with a gun in his mouth
(just in case you're a completely ignorant git) and those six words
rewound and replayed twice more before the script moves on. Lest you sit
there thinking "huh??!" as I did, the rest of the soliloquy shows up
later, recited in the aisles of a Blockbuster store. I'll let those who
prefer a perfect Bard scream about chopping and reordering the text, I
take the position that the flick should be clear as a bell first time
out, so I can't complain about the text being out of "correct" position.
All I know is what I know and, even as little as I do know about Hamlet
having seen it less than half a dozen times, I know that this version
bites mightily.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Hamlet, he would have paid...
Mid-week rental level, specifically for those who know Shakespeare up
and down. You may derive more satisfaction than I did from the
adaptation. My concern is with the folk who walk in unknowing, who will
walk out the same way.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
Starring Ethan Hawke, Julia Stiles, Bill Murray, Sam
Shephard, Kyle MacLachlan, Diane Venora, Liev
Schreiber, Steve Zahn, and Dechen Thurman. 
There have been countless remakes of William
Shakespeare's most celebrated drama Hamlet. Everyone
from Laurence Olivier to Mel Gibson has stepped into
the shoes of the titular character with a fair amount
of success. Now indie writer/director Michael
Almereyda (Another Girl, Another Planet), with an all
star cast, has tried something a little bit different
with the bard's masterpiece. The ultimate question
facing Almereyda is whether this difference can
attract the same viewers who have seen the play filmed
to death. Is this play the thing? In many ways, yes.
The unique visual flare of the director and the
ability of making the story work in a time period it
doesn't belong are both reasons to see and enjoy this
film. However, many walls stand in the way of
perfection. 
Meet the new Hamlet; a New Yorker, a loner, a hip
stylish artist in his twenties who has lived to see
the dropping ball introduce the year 2000. He has a
cell phone, a video camera, and a Blockbuster card and
he also has a lot on his mind. His father, the "king"
of the Denmark Corporation, died and his mother,
following the funeral, immediately married his uncle.
All of this seems fine until the ghost of Hamlet's
father visits him in his apartment and tells him that
something evil is going on. Poor, confused Hamlet now
doesn't know if he's just imagining the ghost, or if
his father was actually betrayed by his own greedy
brother. 
Although not as witty or impressive as Baz Luhrmann's
similarly contemporary Romeo + Juliet, this remake
stands out for its overall cleverness in presentation.
Very dramatic with periods of laugh out loud humor,
Almereyda creates new meanings to words written
centuries ago. Some of the scenes will have you
wondering how the heck anyone could have thought of
something this original. Instead of a theatrical play
to determine whether Claudius is guilty or not, Hamlet
creates a short film entitled Mouse Trap with blatant
images of death, greed, and corruption. The short is
memorably funny and makes the film Hamlet much more
interesting. There are plenty of satisfying scenes
like this which liven up the movie but at some points,
it feels like Almereyda takes the easy way out. He
leaves out scenes (possibly because they are too
difficult to complete?) and he leaves out characters
(two talented actors - Jeffrey Wright and Casey
Affleck are in the movie for seconds as the
gravedigger and Fortinbras, a case of too much
editing). But there is more to like than to hate while
watching this movie and I guess that's a good thing.  
My major complaint is with Almereyda's obsessive use
of product placement. Sure, using real companies is
another clever way of reminding the audience that this
Hamlet is living in the same world as you are, but
eventually it becomes very distracting. For example,
Hamlet delivers the famous "To be or not to be" speech
inside a Blockbuster Video store. The speech is
extremely important in understanding exactly how
Hamlet is responding to the visits of the ghost or his
troubles with girlfriend Ophelia, but the whole time I
found myself uncontrollably spotting familiar video
boxes in the background or watching the television
behind Hamlet's head display previews of upcoming
releases. Not once did I look at Hawke and very few
times did I hear what he was saying. This happens
several times during the movie; by the end I really
wanted to rent a video, drink some Pepsi, shop at Key
Food, and call Movie-Fone.  If this adaptation is
paying tribute to Shakespeare's brilliant writing
skills by updating it, then why are there so many
visual distractions that detract the audience's
attention from the script? The visuals are stunning
and creative but the text is what has made Hamlet so
respected - what has inspired this film to be made in
the first place. 
The cast left me with several mixed impressions.
Despite hearing that Hawke was a disappointment as
Hamlet, I found him to be very effective and
convincing. You could feel his pain each time he is
betrayed (which is about a billion times) and it is
very clear that as the film progresses, his character
becomes more and more doomed for tragedy. Julia
Stiles, as Hamlet's illicit lover Ophelia, is not as
successful in her performance. It seemed like her part
was much less important than in other versions, maybe
because Almereyda cut some scenes or because she put
very little life into her role. Either way, I felt
very little sympathy for her. Bill Murray is also a
bit of a disappointment. It felt like he was reading
off cue cards - he would pause after every sentence
and look off over the shoulder of his counterpart like
someone was feeding him words. The rest of the cast
positively contributed to the film: Sam Shephard was
brilliant as the ghost, Diane Venora and Kyle
MacLachlan ideal as the mischievous relatives Gertrude
and Claudius, and Liev Schreiber right on target
playing the vengeful Laertes. You have to give credit
to these actors no matter how they faired, these roles
were very difficult to master. Mixing old lingo with a
contemporary background is tough to do.
The most recent Hamlet to add to the voluminous
collection of Hamlet's is a near-hit. At some points
you will be shocked with entertainment and other
points frozen in boredom. Check it out for some decent
experimental filming and laugh at Bill Murray doing
Shakespeare. 

Author
Ross Anthony
I don't enjoy Shakespeare. Or that is to say, I haven't enjoyed Shakespeare
when presented on film or stage. The big problem is too much poetry in too
short of time. He's very clever, that guy, I don't want to miss any word
playage. But it's ALL word playage encoded in backward archaic grammar.
Seems to me, this stuff works better on paper, read at your own pace.
That said, I loved the first half of this film. This "Hamlet" drew me in
like no other Shakespearean work, thus far. The gritty New York-style
imagery, the high-tech video-insert motif, the grungey beady-eyed Hamlet (a
shaggy goatee'd Ethan Hawke resembling the lead singer of "Sugar Ray"), the
near total elimination of pompous delivery. It's not one of those snooty
productions that treats its audience as if they were some unworthy
congregation in a stuffy old Victorian church "privileged" to be pastured a
righteous speech spat deliberately by self-proclaimed people of God. No,
this Shakespeare may as well have been Tarantino; a slick method for making
a 400 year old work more accessible to 21st century masses.
Did I mention that I never made it through any prior version of "Hamlet"? If
there was any doubt, this should distance my opinion from those of the group
of Shakespearean experts, lovers, etc. I love movies, and while I appreciate
poetry (used to write it, actually) they don't work well together - not at
length anyway (length being 25 minutes plus). Perhaps this is one reason I
found the second half of this film less than compelling.
Hamlet is outraged when he learns his father (the king in William's version)
the president of a huge corporation called Denmark has died, allowing his
mother (the widowed queen) to hastily marry the uncle (king's brother). Not
surprisingly, Hamlet's state is already askew, but the appearance of his
father's ghost sets his tilt in a spinning suicidal whirl (hence the classic
line "To be or not to be?"). Great filming on the apparition, though a morta
l actor without special effects is used, his intense red-edged eyes fill the
screen with a greater dread than a Spielberg poltergeist.
And that leads me to the second thing I don't enjoy about the Shakespeare
I've seen ... the plot. Often, I find them ... well, thin, weak and empty.
And this "Hamlet" is no exception. The premise is interesting ... but the
resolve, flatly put ... ridiculous. "Penn and Teller Get Killed" has just
about as much point ... and there's a lot more laughs (with just as much if
not more blood).
Still, William has the sharpest of dagger tongues. In fact, this dialogue
interplay is a two-hour sword fight of tongues. When I view films, I like to
write down the "gems" to include as quotes in my reviews, but this film is
so chock full of gems, that even just the ones I could decode in real time
were to numerous to capture on paper. Again, this is why I think Shakespeare
is a reader's art, not a theatergoer's (save for those who have already read
the pieces).
Here are just a few of William's many many brilliant quips that stabbed my
leaning attentions: Polonius warns his daughter of Hamlet's love:
"Affections? That blaze gives more light than heat. Don't confuse it with
fire." Polonius coaxes his couch potato daughter: "The wind sits in the
shoulder of your sail and you are stay forth?" Hamlet on living a lie: "Do
not spread the compost on the weeds to make them ranker ... throw away the
worser and live the other half." (Purists, kindly forgive the imperfections
in my transcriptions.)
In film, story is still more important than dialogue. From my admittedly
limited knowledge of Shakespeare, I fault him for soapy thin plots. However,
I praise director Mike Almereyda for the following reasons:
1) Great choice of music, mixing modern (sometimes reverse recorded) sounds,
with the epic classical timbers that conjure up images of cathedrals and
armored horsemen, but instead are married with elevators and soda machines.
2) Casting of Bill Murray as Polonius, he's a fresh, every-man, deep-hearted
pleasant surprise addition to the pool of Shakespearean performers. He's
excellent. I love the scene where he lifts Ophelia's foot to tie her shoe as
he lectures her. In fact, the film is full of wonderful as-they're-talking
events that make it real and not just a rackety wooden stage of costumed
speeches.
3) Likewise, casting of Karl Geary as Horatio (great job by him).
4) The TV-play of explosions as the apparition speaks to Hamlet.
5) The TV-clip usages of an Asian spiritual guru speaking on the use of the
phrase "To Be."
6) Gravedigger singing songs of the 1960's.
7) TelePrompTer ending.
Almereyda, had many decisions regarding what to leave out when adapting this
work. Personally, I would have cut the Claudius plotting with Ophelia's bro
scene to one minute, cut all of Ophelia's lines until she screams (Ophelia's
silence is an anchor to the earlier part of the film), hastened that ending,
perhaps beefed up the father-son interplay and/or Hamlet/Ophelia love affair
(sorely underplayed here).
Hamlet. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Ethan Hawke, Kyle McLachlan, Diane Venora, Sam Shepard, Bill
Murray, Live Schreiber, Julia Stiles, Karl Geary, Paula Malcomson, Steve
Zahn, Dechen Thurman, Rome Neal.
Direction/screen adaptation by Michael Almereyda.
Written by William Shakespeare.
Produced by Andrew Fierberg, Amy Hobby. Presented by Mirimax.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
One of the elements that make Shakespeare's plays so amazing
is that they can be adapted and interpreted in so many different
ways. Filmmaker Michael Almereyda's contemporary version, set in
corporate Manhattan, stars Ethan Hawke as the morose Hamlet, a
scruffy, self-pitying Gen-X wannabe video-maker, who loathes his
passionate mother Gertrude (Diane Venora) and shallow stepfather
Claudius (Kyle McLachlan) for conspiring to murder his
father. Paranoia is the theme, augmented by depression, despondency,
and dementia - all running rampant at the Hotel Elsinore and the
Denmark Corporation. Far better than Baz Luhrmann's "Romeo and
Juliet," this visually stunning "Hamlet" is filled with intelligent,
inventive performances - not only the leads but Liev Schreiber's
furious Laertes, Julia Stiles's petulant East Village hippie Ophelia,
Sam Shepard's mysteriously remote Ghost (who evaporates into a Pepsi
machine) and, above all, Bill Murray's Polonius, advising "To thine
ownself be true...."  The soliloquies have become inner musings,
except for "To be or not to be..." which Hamlet murmurs while browsing
in the Action section of a Blockbuster video store. But there are some
problems. First, you've got to be somewhat familiar with the
Shakespeare's original version to appreciate the nuances of this
unadorned one. Second, so much of the essential narrative has been
eliminated that confusion overload occasionally occurs. And, third,
the poetic passion and fear have been diluted by the onslaught of
high-tech gadgetry. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hamlet" is
an audacious, admirable 8.  It's a clever, consumer-oriented updating
of a great tragedy.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Pictures
 Director: Michael Almereyda
 Writer: Michael Almereyda (based on Shakespeare's play)
 Cast: Ethan Hawke, Kyle MacLachlan, Sam Shepard, Diane
Venora, Bill Murray, Liev Schreiber, Julia Stiles, Karl Geary,
Paula Malcomson, Steve Zahn, Dechen Thurman, Rome
Neal, Jeffrey Wright, Paul Bartel, Casey Affleck
   Shakespeare located many of his romantic and revenge-
filled plays alike in Italy because in his day its city-states 
were considered exotic.  Most people would never
guess that he had never been there.  That's not all.  The
playwright had not seen New York City either and yet as you 
watch Ethan Hawke go through the title character's doubts
and duties in "Hamlet," you'd not be surprised that The Great
Playwright situated his best known drama in the Big Apple,
also considered by him to be an exotic and mysterious place
crammed with stories of romance and violence.  You say that
this cannot be--that Shakespeare is not alive except in spirit? 
You protest too much, methinks, but you're partly
correct.  He is today as alive in essence as Hamlet's spirit
and has communicated his new vision of perhaps his most
poetic play through director Michael Almereyda.  
   Almereyda did some things right, others wrong in
transliterating the poet's words to the New York of the year
2000.  "Hamlet" is no more "universal" than Clifford Odets's
period pieces "Waiting for Lefty" and "Awake and Sing!"  Both
"Hamlet" and "Lefty" have themes of love, violence, envy,
loyalty, ethics and government, so that to say these themes
are universal is irrelevant.  Despite the presence of universal
themes, "Waiting for Lefty" communicates only to the diehard
Old Left in America today just as "Hamlet" most authentically
communicates to kids on their college fencing team.  Since
the vocabulary and idioms and reference points of
Elizabethan England are largely foreign to a contemporary
audience in America, the times are out of joint.  Almereyda
does the right thing in changing locations and centuries
because--as it turns out from watching this current
production--we can understand the author's meaning better
by (as an example) making Denmark the name of a modern
American corporation with great power to influence the minds
of the people under its "jurisdiction." Almereyda is nothing if
not imaginative.  The ghost of Hamlet's murdered father
appears, then evaporates not into the mist but into a Pepsi
machine.  Daddy is a spiritual being, Pepsi is material.  What
a splendid irony--the spiritual has been replaced today by the
seductive trappings of Pepsi Cola, Adidas, and cell phones to
whose rule we have lost much of our spiritual selves.  To
symbolize the prison that was Denmark, Almereyda states in
the press notes that brand names and logos and billboards
and noise are today's prison.  (That's a stretch.)
   There's much that's wrong with this production of a play
that has already been filmed some thirty-odd times. 
Squeezing the material that took Kenneth Branagh 247
minutes to get across in his 1996 film, Almereyda's
112-minute rendering leaves important scenes on the cutting
room floor, adds a few pieces of silly modern dialogues, and
transposes the sequence helter-skelter in such a way that
confusion reigns.  Though Ophelia (Julia Stiles, no less)
makes a phone call, getting the response "Hello, and
welcome to Moviefone!" eliciting the only intended laugh from
the audience, Almereyda ompletely abandons the humorous
graveyard scene, thus forcing the drama into an even more
solemn concoction than the Bard intended.
   The real flaw in this production is that despite our
awareness (from our high-school reading) of Hamlet's need to
avenge his father's murder, nothing important appears to be
at stake in this movie.  The performers go about their duties
in a stolid manner, reciting the words as though a
requirement of their high-school English teachers but without
recognizable passion.  The element of fear is missing. 
Hamlet's father appears as a ghost (Sam Shepard) who is
simply not frightening--though Shepard is the only actor in
this case who transmits Shakespearian depth. I recall one
production in which the ghost remained unseen within
Hamlet's body as though directed by William Friedkin,
his words actually coming through the young man's mouth.  
Only an exorcism could free both Hamlet and his father to set
the universe right.  Now, this was scary.  My mind summons
a staged production in which the ghost appears like a
nine-foot tall golem, similarly scaring the hell out of the
audience as well as Hamlet and his pal Horatio.  But
Shepard's character has been directed to reveal himself in a
manner as bland as Cream of Wheat, even more human than
the rest of the ensemble, his evocation of the need for
vengeance as tepid as a cup of McDonald's coffee left to chill
out to avoid a lawsuit.
   Much is made of Ethan Hawke's age.  Hawke, who is 29,
may be the youngest Hamlet ever filmed--which is realistic
since the prince of Denmark would be of his generation.  But
Hawke, a splendid preppie in his career-making movie "Dead
Poets Society" and a hip 20-something in "Reality Bites" does
not have the depth for the role.  What makes "Hamlet" a
masterful play rather than a Jacobean revenge potboiler is
the complexity of its central character.  Hamlet is morose,
sure, but he is a scholarly person in conflict with himself. 
Hamlet grieves for his dead father, he is disappointed with his
mother's conduct, he wants a revenge so complete that it will
reach the soul as well as the body of his villainous uncle. 
Hawke is simply a sullen adolescent, never smiling.  He
mopes.  He's not a lad fighting moral demons  A high-school
kid could do a better job of playing a looney tunes as well,
but this could be the fault of the director who appears to want
every emotion understated.  Polonius, who is King Claudius's
Lord Chamberlain, is a meddlesome father to Laertes, but Bill
Murray in the role looks like a man with such a sense of
humor that he is ready to burst out laughing as he intones
the now-famous advice between the generations, "This above
all, to thine own self be true..."  (For some reason he forgets
to say "And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.")  Liev
Schrieber, who is popping up everywhere, was better in the
title role at a recent performance in New York's Public
Theater than he is as Laertes.  Here's another guy who never
smiles, who mumbles affectionate words to his sister but who
in no way seethes with a desire for revenge against his own
father's slayer. Kyle MacLachlan is a bored and bland
corporate head, Claudius, in the style of Michael Douglas
early on in "The Game."  When Claudius's wife Gertrude
(played passionately by Diane Venora as a woman who dotes
on his son, refusing to give his secret away to her husband)
drinks the poisoned wine, MacLachlan looks as though his
company's stock just went down 1/8 of a point.
   To make a long story short, Almereyda overworked his
editor, Kristina Boden, but allowed his photographer, John de
Borman, to shoot some impressive New York scenes from
the skyscrapers at night to the sales signs at the
neighborhood Key Food supermarket to the Blockbuster video
store.  I say, read the book and let your imagination do the
photography.  But then as any critic knows, nothing is either
good or bad, but thinking makes it so.
Rated R.  Running Time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
It's tough to write a review for a film like Hamlet.  You can't touch
the story, so critics are basically left to drone on about the acting
and the adaptation, if it is done in some unusual manner.  In the last
ten years, we've already had the run-of-the-mill Hamlet with Mel Gibson,
an unabridged Hamlet with Kenneth Branagh, and now we get Hamlet set in
present-day New York City.
This interesting version of Shakespeare's drama is probably more akin to
Baz Luhrmann's 1996 update of Romeo + Juliet than it is to either
Gibson's or Branagh's renderings.  Both were adapted and directed by
independent filmmakers (Michael Almereyda, Trance) and both placed its
characters in contemporary settings while keeping the Bard's language.
Like Romeo + Juliet, Hamlet uses a television news anchor as the story's
narrator, and we also see clever management of modern devices like
faxes, laptop computers, cell phones, airplanes and video cameras, all
of which seem to blend seamlessly into a story that's over four hundred
years old.
Here, Hamlet (Ethan Hawke, Snow Falling on Cedars) is dark, brooding and
perpetually filming everything with his digital video camera - so he's
pretty much Wes Bentley in American Beauty.  He returns home from school
for his father's funeral and wants to return immediately to his studies
rather than watch mother Gertrude (Diane Venora, The Insider) go at it
with her new husband, Hamlet's uncle Claudius (Kyle MacLachlan,
Timecode), who has just become the new CEO of Denmark Corporation.  But
when he's visited by his father's ghost (Sam Shepard, Snow Falling on
Cedars), Hamlet decides instead to stick around and go crazy, dragging
the comely photographer Ophelia (Julia Stiles, Down to You) into madness
with him.
The rest of Hamlet proceeds as you would expect, with large chunks
missing here and there (it would be four hours long otherwise).  The
play-within-the-play becomes a clever movie-within-the-movie, even
though it's still called `Mouse Trap.'  Rosencrantz (Steve Zahn, Happy,
Texas) and Guildenstern (Dechen Thurman, Uma's brother) are as bumbling
as ever.  And Almereyda evens manages to work in things like MovieFone
recordings and those annoying celebrity messages telling you to buckle
up while you're riding in New York City taxicabs.
While the acting is quite commendable  Hawke is especially surprising 
Hamlet suffers from some painfully slow parts.  But if you're familiar
with the story, you know things are going to get a lot more interesting.
The film looks terrific, and features work from American Psycho
production and set designers Gideon Ponte and Jeanne Develle, and
handsome photography by John de Borman (Hideous Kinky).
1:51  R for graphic violence and adult situations

Author
Michael Dequina
The big struggle for a filmmaker looking to adapt a classic (read: old)
literary work for the screen is to make it accessible to contemporary
audiences.  The trend these days appears to be translating the story into
modern times--or, more accurately, transplanting the story, leaving the
original language intact.  The intent of the shift is obviously to put a
fresh spin on a familiar tale, but in the case of Michael Almereyda's
revisionist take on William Shakespeare's oft-filmed _Hamlet_, the move
feels more a lazy gimmick than an inspired dash of creativity.
I was no fan of Baz Luhrmann's surprise 1996 hit
_William_Shakespeare's_Romeo_+_Juliet_, which pioneered this
Elizabethan-language-in-the-modern-world approach for the cinema.  But
that film, set in the mythical Florida town of "Verona Beach" in an
undisclosed year, had enough of a surreal gloss to make the anachronistic
speech go down a bit easier.  The action in this _Hamlet_ explicitly
takes place in "New York City, 2000," and as such, the language cannot
help but clang.
And when familiar soliloquies are delivered in locations such as, say, a
Blockbuster Video store--which is exactly where Hamlet (Ethan Hawke)
recites the famous "To be or not to be..."--the audience is overwhelmed
by the contemporary trappings.  The new setting distracts from, rather
than enhance, Shakespeare's story about a Danish prince out to avenge his
father's murder at the hands of Hamlet's uncle Claudius, who, in turn,
has married Hamlet's mother Gertrude.  This is largely because the
alterations made to the set-up never take hold.  Fresh-out-of-school
digital filmmaker (no joke) Hamlet is the son of the dead "king" (Sam
Shepard, who also played Hawke's deceased father in
_Snow_Falling_on_Cedars_) of the Denmark Corporation.  The shift to the
business world fails to add anything new; instead of using Shakespeare's
themes of treachery, deceit, and revenge to make an interesting statement
about cutthroat corporate tactics, the change is merely an incidental
one, with no clearcut connection to the text.  If anything, it just gives
Almereyda the chance to set scenes in sleek and shiny buildings (Gideon
Ponte's production design is indeed impressive--perhaps the only thing in
the film that is a complete success).
Slick surfaces aside, this _Hamlet_, in maintaining the Bard's original
language, covers all the familiar plot points and scenes.  Claudius'
(Kyle MacLachlan) advisor Polonius (Bill Murray!) still advises son
Laertes (Liev Schreiber), "To thine own self be true."  Polonius'
daughter Ophelia (Julia Stiles) is still Hamlet's true love, and he still
eventually orders her to "Get thee to a nunnery."  Of course, there are
added Y2K wrinkles: Hamlet tells off Ophelia on her answering machine;
Hamlet's soliloquies are largely confessionals given to his video camera
as part of a diary document of sorts.  These admittedly interesting
touches cannot make up for the lack of verve in the entire film.
The sluggish vibe is set by Hawke.  While some in the cast, MacLachlan
and Diane Venora (playing Gertrude) in particular, nimbly handle their
roles and the Bard's words, they are, of course, secondary to the prince
of Denmark himself, and Hawke proves incapable of handling the task.  Not
only does he have the same slacker look he sported in the Gen-X comedy
_Reality_Bites_, but the same laid-back, forceless attitude.  Hawke has
said that he wanted to be part of a _Hamlet_ that wasn't about the
central performance, but without some intensity from the lead, the
character and his story easily gets overshadowed by the gimmick of the
contemporary setting.
Maybe that was Almereyda's point all along, to show how modern
technology overwhelms contemporary lives.  If that's the case, then why
adapt Shakespeare's play if the intent is to obscure it?  Whatever his
reasoning, just the basic idea of  Almereyda's _Hamlet_ makes little
sense, and so does the finished film.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Regular readers of my reviews should know by now that Shakespeare and I just
don't mix. I think that I was one of the few critics in the world who didn't
care much for SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE (5.5/10), and I certainly have done my
best to stay away from films which feature the traditional dialogue of the
Bard. The fact is that I never studied Shakespeare, never read Shakespeare
and never understood what the heck Shakespeare was saying half the time, so
why bother? With those reservations in mind, I walked into this latest
cinematic presentation of one of the big man's most famous writings, and
came up with this...
PLOT:
The President of the Denmark Corporation is dead. To everyone's surprise,
the widow quickly remarries his brother soon thereafter, leaving son Hamlet
wondering about the nefarious behind-the-scenes shenanigans of it all. Of
course, when the ghost of Hamlet's dad comes to visit him with some more
news regarding his untimely demise, it isn't long before everybody and their
uncle begin to suspect Hamlet of going mad. Revenge, death and a lot of hip,
modern-day gadgets ensue.
CRITIQUE:
Decent enough for a film whose dialogue was mostly Greek to me, this movie
scores points on style and acting, but ultimately runs too long, features
one too many monologues and just completely lost me in the end. Strangely
enough, I actually did enjoy this picture early on, with its modern day
setting, its hip leading man, and its solid score, but as the film drove on
further and further, I soon found myself straining to figure out what the
heck was happening. In the end, I just couldn't get by with just the "gist"
of the conversations, I really needed to know what these people were
babbling about, but unfortunately for me, the dialogue was just a little too
"Shakespeare" to decipher. Having said that, the film also seemed to lack
the proper character development, especially in the case of Ophelia and
Hamlet, whose "romance" I never really bought into.
On the other hand, I did enjoy most all of the performances in the film,
especially Bill Murray, an actor who I was extremely skeptical about before
seeing the film. In the end, he won me over with a sort of flighty
performance of Polonius, delivering his lines with much authenticity, while
still being able to inject it all with a little bit of that "Murray" charm.
Julia Stiles was also quite charming and nice to look at, despite her
character's lack of true involvement in the story, and Ethan Hawke certainly
delivered a good rendition of Hamlet, the slick techno-geek with a little
bit of a head case. I also liked the whole look and feel of the flick, which
was actually shot entirely in New York City, but didn't care much for the
pacing of it all. After a strong start, it seemed as though, every now and
again, the characters would slow the whole thing down with long
conversations with one another, or better yet, inner-monologues with
themselves. Now I imagine this sort of thing might work in a play, or
certainly in a book, but when you're watching people babble on about
something which you barely understand for a minutes on end...well, it gets
kinda lame after a while.
Of course, I would definitely recommend this to any true Shakespeare fan,
only as to compare it to all the others, and even some non-fans, if you like
any of the actors, who truly do shine in this film (yes, even Kyle
MacLachlan was pretty good). Most anyone else could certainly miss this film
and not worry too much about the impact that it will have on their lives. I
liked it better than most of the other stuffy Shakespeare flicks, but in the
end, this one just packed in too much of that ol' Bard dialogue, and not
enough coherence.
Little Known Facts about this movie and its stars:
Diane Venora, who plays the character of Queen Gertrude in this film, once
played Ophelia in a made-for-television version of Hamlet in 1990. She also
portrayed the character of Gloria Capulet in the 1996 modern-day Shakespeare
movie ROMEO AND JULIET. Boy, she really loves that Shakepeare, eh?
Actor Dechen Thurman, who play the Bard's comic relief character of
Guildenstern in this film, is the brother of actress Uma Thurman, wife of
Hamlet in this film, Ethan Hawke.
Casey Affleck is credited as being in this film, but other than one shot of
him on a television screen, I honestly can't say that I remember him being
in any of it. I'm guessing that most of his stuff was left on the cutting
room floor?

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/5f536061548d6f29882568cd000b0f58?OpenDocument
A new school of acting should be constructed based on the method of
Ethan Hawke.  I am the first to admit that I enjoy Ethan Hawke in almost
anything he does.  The reason I like him so much is because he brings
the essence of the brooding soul to the screen so well.  Hawke plays
Tortured Guy so perfectly they should give an award at the Oscars every
year and call it the `E. Hawke Award for Best Brooding Performance of
the Year'. As a natural-born brooder, the character of Hamlet perfectly
suits Hawke because the role has always been given to older guys looking
to validate their dramatic acting chops.  Hawke's Hamlet is the
Generation X Hamlet.  A Hamlet that uses his `discontent' with the world
as a razor against the neck of reality.
This updated 20th century Hamlet is brought to vivid realism by
independent director Michael Almereyda.  Almereyda places the play in
the year 2000, creating the state of Denmark as a huge conglomerate, the
slain king a CEO, and Hamlet as a digital video maker.  This
interpretation sounds almost like it's going to be as much fun as a
ten-car pileup on the expressway; you want to turn your head away from
in disgust but are strangely curious about what happened.
The surprise is that this is one of the best versions of Hamlet.
Almereyda has studied every film and stage version of the play, and his
history lessons have paid off.  He creates a stark, unflinching vision
of a dangerous world where trust is a lost commodity and betrayal is
weapon.
Hawke carries the vehicle well with his unflinching performance of a
haunted man pushed to the brink, finding solace among the haunting
visions of dead souls and images he captures with his camera.  The
supporting cast of Kyle Machlachan, Julia Stiles, Diane Venora, Bill
Murray-- doing a damn good job with the dialogue -- and Sam Shepard are
surprising in their ability to convey the motivations of the
characters.  Almereyda does an incredible job of taking the text and
rearranging the structure to capture a better essence of Hamlet as it
exists in the 21st century.  The most enjoyable scene is when Hamlet
recites the `To Be or Not to Be' while he is walking up and down the
aisles of a Blockbuster Video.  The imagery of the enormity of the
aisles and the sense of Hamlet lost within a world of escapism is
haunting and strangely unnerving.  Julia Stiles equally provides a quiet
reserve to the character of Ophelia and her muted voice speaks strongly
in scenes as others determine her fate for her.
Michael Almeryda's Hamlet is dangerous and sharp-edged.  It retains a
clear hold of the text and doesn't try to dress up the scenes with
numerous cuts and flashy imagery.  The actors smoothly roll through the
acts and do not drag things down with dramatic flair.  Speakerphones,
video, digital still photos, laptops, and cell phones are used as not
only showpieces, but also as valid devices to communicate the play's
text.  If more classic plays can be updated with such brilliance, maybe
more people will put down their Backstreet Boys biographies and pick a
Hemingway novel or a Shakespearean play and start to understand the
world around us.
Director/Screen Adaptation: Michael Almereyda
Producer: Andrew Fierberg, Amy Hobby
Actors: Ethan Hawke, Kyle Machlachan, Julia Stiles, Diane Venora, Bill
Murray, Sam Shepard
http://www.miramax.com/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=0&midStr=1338
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 Hamlet (2000) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Ethan Hawke, Julia Stiles,
Kyle Maclachlan, Liev Schreiber, Bill Murray and Diana Venora. Based on
the play by William Shakespeare. Adapted and directed by Michael
Almereyda. Rated R.
 To bore or not to bore? That is the question that ruminates through the
latest reincarnation of William Shakespeare's venerable "Hamlet."
 This truncated, contemporary outing features Ethan Hawke as the
melancholy New Yorker, for that is where this latest adaptation has been
relocated. Forget the foreboding battlements of Elsinore, it's now an
upscale Midtown hotel.
 Taking a page from recent Shakespearean ventures - most notably Buz
Luhrmann's "Romeo and Juliet," which transposed the tragic tale of
doomed lovers to contemporary Florida - director Michael Almereyda, who
also adapted the classic - has set his story of murder, foul love and
intrigue in the high-powered corporate world.
 Hamlet, the president and C.E.O. of the Denmark Corp., has died. His
brother, Claudius, not only has taken over the conglomerate, but has
married his sister-in-law, Gertrude. This, of course, doesn't sit well
with young Hamlet. Well, you know the rest.
 While the concept has merit, the execution is flawed. The movie
features several shots of New York landmarks, yet Almereyda doesn't take
advantage of any of them. A few scenes are filmed on Gotham's sidewalks,
but the rest are set either in the hotel or Denmark's corporate
headquarters.
 Unlike, "Macbeth" or "Henry V," Shakespearean plays that can be `opened
up' for film, celluloid "Hamlet's" - ranging from Olivier's 1948 version
to Kenneth Branagh's 1996 treatment - always have stayed close to or
within the confines of Elsinore, giving the tragedy the claustrophobic
atmosphere needed to help accentuate the calamities that lie ahead.
 So, setting the story in New York, one of the most picturesque cities
in the world, appears more as a gimmick than a dramatic device to
benefit the action.
 Indeed, this "Hamlet" is rather flat, disjointed and flabby. Even
though the running time is just a few minutes over two hours, the play
seems to drag - as if everything was unfolding in slow motion.
 Almereyda does create some visually interesting notions. Instead of
staging a play `to catch the conscience of the king,' Hamlet offers a
video presentation of his father's murder. And the director stages the
`to be or not to be' soliloquy in a video store with the monitors
surrounding Hamlet running scenes of death and destruction.
 But the main problem with "Hamlet" is its casting. The title role is
simply beyond Hawke's range. Wearing a snow cap that makes him look like
the twin brother of Billy Bob Thornton from "A Simple Plan, "Hawke
merely sulks and whines.
 True, he is supposed to be a melancholy Dane, but Hamlet is also
supposed to be a man of intellect and action, a schemer who can fake `an
antic disposition,' a man of words who can open his mother's eyes to
point out the errant behavior.
 Hawke's Hamlet is a wuss, which makes it difficult to comprehend,
firstly, why Ophelia can be smitten with such a dolt, and, secondly, why
Claudius can be so concerned about his actions.
 Hawke's Hamlet is too passive, too soft. He lacks the underlying rage
called for in the role.
 Julia Stiles ("Ten Things I Hate About You)" seems out of her depth as
Ophelia. She plays her as a petulant, spoiled teen-ager. Her reading of
the lines is flat and unconvincing.
 Kyle Maclachlan lacks the majesty needed for Claudius and, more
importantly, fails to display the charisma with which he could have so
quickly wooed his sister-in-law.
 Diana Venora as Gertrude shows some passion and lust, and a bit of
insight toward the finale.
 The two best performers are, ironically, Bill Murray as Polonious and
Liev Schreiber as Laertes.
 Murray is comically sly and wise as Claudius' main counselor, while
Schreiber displays the appropriate spirit and rage needed as Hamlet's
main rival.
 Overall, though, this "Hamlet" can be considered a failed experiment.
Setting the play in contemporary times while maintaining Shakespeare
iambic pentameter may have seemed like a novel approach, but somehow it
sounds disconcerting and pretentious.
 It is rather empty. This "Hamlet" lacks spark, fire and, most of all,
majesty. "Hamlet" is a drama that should be larger than life. This
version plays like a Fox network soap opera.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN.. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Bloom's reviews can be found on the Internet Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom
