Title
Review for Babysitter, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Sabira Ali
Well, this is such an underrated movie. I finally saw it for the first
time the other day, mainly because I had read so many bad reviews of it.
I like to make up my own mind, you should too. 
I'm really trying to see the point of view of the critics of this movie,
and I concede, the overall film quality looks like it's lacking in
budget, I don't think that detracts, but really I have to conclude that
they didn't like it because they didn't understand it. But enough, on
with the review. 
Alicia Silverstone plays 'The Babysitter', looking after the Tucker's
kids while they go out to a cocktail party. Also involved are her
boyfriend Jack(Jeremy London) and his manipulative ex-friend Mark(Nikky
Katt). Now the point is this, the babysitter (her name is actually
Jennifer) is the focus of sexual fantasies by all the males in the film,
they dehumanise her and imagine her as a willing participant, whereas in
reality she gives them no indication of this. As the situation escalates
through drink and bravado, these fantacies start to boil over into
reality and finally lead to a climax where Mark is killed by a drink
driving Harry Tucker. The situation is a questionable 'was it her
fault?' and depending on your own mentality I'm sure you could think
that it was. I say absolutley not, but this is the beauty of this movie,
the voyeristic way that it is filmed, the way that it invites us into
all these fantasies, shows us a mirror to attitudes. All the way
through, she is only refered to as 'the babysitter'or 'that girl' or
'your girlfriend', never by her name. Did you even notice? The irony of
her repeated question--What were you thinking?-- Is that we know exactly
what they were thinking, but what were we thinking? That slut? Poor
girl? Show some more flesh, Alicia? The real question is, who do you
identify with? The babysitter, the men, or Mrs Tucker?
I really think that this is almost a personality test. Whether you like
this movie, and essentially, like Alicia in it, depends on who you are.
I think that is a huge risk for any film-maker to take. 
As for Alicia, as the focus of the film, I think that she was great. She
wasn't really stretching herself, but this was an early movie and I
still haven't seen her struggle with a part. Still she does what she
does with great ease, and always with nuances and a subtlety that I
really admire. 

Author
Andrew Hicks
     I'm really starting to wonder about Alicia Silverstone.  Sure, she
is one of the most beautiful creatures on God's green earth (second
only to that Movie Critic at LARGE guy), but when it comes to choosing
what movies she stars in, she always strikes out.  The Crush was a
slow-moving, predictable piece of fluff.  Hideaway was a horrific novel
adaptation Alicia had only a minor role in.  CLUELESS was an annoying,
unfunny waste of time.  And people have e-mailed me too, saying
CLUELESS is a good movie and that I'm the only one who doesn't like
it.  One girl said if I'd seen the movie with "an open mind," I would
have enjoyed it.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  I went into
the theater expecting to love the movie.  The preview looked good and of
course I'm crazymadinlove with Alicia, but the movie was a bunch of bad
jokes coming from whiny, unlikable characters.  Almost everyone I saw
the movie with felt the same way.  When we were walking out of the
theater, one guy (and it wasn't me) yelled out, "That was the worst
f$in' movie I've ever seen" and the rest of us had to laugh in
agreement.
     So last night I walked into the video store and saw Alicia's
pretty face on the cover of some made-for-video thriller called The
Babysitter.  I knew it would be bad but some inner compulsion I'll
probably never understand made me rent it anyway.  What I got was 90
minutes of regret--the worst Alicia Silverstone movie ever.  And you
already know from the last paragraph what the competition is like.
     Where to begin in criticizing this movie? The plot is a thin shred
that moves slower than a glacier, the writing could have been done (and
for all we know it was) by a ten year old, Alicia is the star and she's
still wasted in a movie that has no appeal whatsoever.  There is zero
humor, zero suspense, zero drama and zero action, until the last ten
minutes, when the story is needlessly and pointlessly concluded with a
violent sequence.  Zero plus zero plus zero plus zero equals zero.  So
why does this movie get one star out of me? Well, Alicia spends twenty
minutes of the movie in the bathtub.  And if it wasn't bubble bath, The
Babysitter would have instantly joined the ranks of our other four-
star features, but you settle for what you can get.
     Alicia plays a babysitter who's spending Friday night looking
after two kids whose parents are out getting drunk at a cocktail
party.  And of course anyone as beautiful as Alicia automatically
spends their Friday nights at home (at least that Movie Critic at LARGE
guy does).  As the movie trods along, we discover she's not only the
mostly-silent star of the movie but also the object of every male
character's fantasies (and probably every male viewer's too).  The
drunken father thinks she's just the thing to recapture his lost youth,
her boyfriend lets his imagination run wild while spying on Alicia from
outside, even the prepubescent boy looks in on Alicia through the
bathroom keyhole while she's taking her bubble bath.  They even throw
in the middle aged wife's fantasies about a male counterpart at the
party.  Not that any of us asked or ever even thought about seeing this
200+ pound woman in a black silk teddy.
     At least none of the sex fanatasies ever leave the realm of the
PG-rated.  In fact, I could imagine THE BABYSITTER becoming a Cinemax
late-night staple if not for the fact that there's absolutely no nudity
in it.  So you can't call it a sex flick.  I've already pointed out
that it can't fall under drama, comedy, thriller or action, so what do
you classify THE BABYSITTER as?  Bad.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Guy Ferland
Writer: Guy Ferland (based on a story by Robert Coover)
Starring: Alicia Silverstone, Jeremy London, Nicky Katt, J.T. Walsh, Lee
Garlington, George Segal
Everybody in this film's thinking of Alicia.  No, this is not a
documentary on those of us after we first saw the "Cryin'" video.  This
is one of those erotic thrillers, but not like one starring Shannon
Whirry or Shannon Tweed.  First off, there's zero sex, almost no nudity,
and it's not as well-plotted as one of those Tweed flicks.
Well, anyway.  The "plot."  Alicia plays, well, the babysitter, who is
taking care of some kids one night while the parents (J.T. Walsh and Lee
Garlington) go out to a party.  The film, trying to be like one of those
introspective erotic thrillers, shows every characters' thoughts, except
Alicia's.  The thing is Alicia's in most of them in most cases, and the
thoughts aren't too kosher.
First off, there's her boyfriend (Jeremy London, who gave one of the
all-time lousy performances in "Mallrats," and is only a notch better
here), who's a dorky kid who hangs out with a kind of bully, played by
Nicky Katt from "subUrbia" (who shows he's got that quiet creepiness
down pat once again).  They decide they want to crash her babysitting
job, looking for the typical babysitting hanky-panky.  Somethine like
that.
The film intercuts between the subplots (Alicia babysitting, Nicky and
Jeremy, the party) and each characters' thoughts.  We get to see Jeremy
and Nicky's dreams of doing a little threeway with Alicia, J.T. thinking
of coming home to find Alicia naked in the bathtub (she has it all
covered up, the little tease), and, worst of all, Lee Garlington
dreaming of that hunk, George Segal.  It even shows them in bed
together.  Yea.  I SO wanted to see George and Lee Garlington in bed,
though I guess I'm used to George after seeing her and Mary Tyler Moore
fooling around in "Flirting With Disaster."
The ending is some kind of big tragedy thing, but come on.  Like we care
about any of the characters.  The only interesting one is Alicia, mainly
because she's Alicia, and we mostly see her in the fantasies.  So I
guess she's some kind of mystery or something.  But she is never
explored further.  So, basically, this film is just a series of
mastabatory images, sometimes featuring a non-nude Alicia (once again,
sadly), sometimes featuring a scantily-clad George Segal (once again,
sadly).
I watched this on one of those free previews of Showtime or Cinemax one
night, and let me tell you, it is the only way to watch this film.  I
mean, there's a reason they put these kinds of films on late at night:
they're just as good as sleeping pills.  And this one is one big fat
waste of time, even for an Alicia film.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Justin Felix
Written and directed by Guy Ferland
Based on a short story by Robert Coover
Starring Alicia Silverstone, Jeremy London, J.T. Walsh
Rated R (contains violence, profanity, and brief nudity)  90 minutes
Synopsis:  A small town thug convinces a dimwitted high-school student to
spy on his girlfriend, who is babysitting three unruly kids for their
alcoholic parents on a Friday night.  While this is going on, the thug, the
father, the boyfriend, and a kid reaching the onset of puberty all have
fantasies about the babysitter.
Comments:  To say this movie is bad would be quite an understatement.  I'm
not sure what writer and director Ferland was hoping to accomplish with THE
BABYSITTER.  Suspense?  Family drama?  Humor?  Erotica?  Elements of each
of these genres exist in the film, yet it fails to successfully achieve any
of them.  Instead, THE BABYSITTER is a dull, lifeless movie which manages
to bore and ultimately irritate its viewers.
I suppose this film could have been watchable if it weren't for the fact
that the characters are universally unappealing.  Alicia Silverstone is
completely wasted playing Jennifer, the babysitter.  Her character has
absolutely no depth at all, and her sole purpose in the movie is to be the
object of the other characters' fantasies.  Everyone else in the film seems
to be in a competition to see who can stoop to the lowest level by the time
the film ends.  The parents are alcoholics who become increasingly
obnoxious as the movie proceeds.  The father (played by J.T. Walsh)
fantasizes about the babysitter; the mother fantasizes about her husband's
best friend.  None of these fantasy sequences, trust me, are things that
need to be seen, but we see them anyway, complete with cheesy, make-out
saxophone music.  The thug, in the meantime, proves that he's evil through
his annoying habit of smashing half-empty beer bottles all of a sudden and
for no apparent reason.  The most absurd character, however, is the
babysitter's boyfriend who seems catatonically brain-dead.  The thug, in a
manipulative, Iago-like manner (though he doesn't really need to try hard),
manages to talk the boyfriend into binge-drinking, smoking grass, running
away from cops, and playing Peeping Tom on his own girlfriend in a matter
of minutes.  Incredible!  (Of course, the boyfriend's original plan for the
evening was, try not to laugh, to sit in an empty diner and read CATCHER IN
THE RYE by J.D. Salinger.)
If the goal of THE BABYSITTER was to be suspenseful, then it fails.  There
are surprisingly few tense moments in this film, and nearly all of them
come at the final minute.  By that time, however, the audience is so tired
of the inane characters that no one truthfully cares what happens to any of
them.  No suspense occurs in the dream sequences either because every
single one of them is obviously a dream sequence from its inception.  If
the goal of THE BABYSITTER was to be humorous, then it also fails.  I found
nothing even remotely funny about the boozing parents who seemed, at times,
to be played for laughs.  If the goal of THE BABYSITTER was to be dramatic,
then, once again, it fails.  The characters are one-dimensional and
uninteresting.  Finally, if the goal of THE BABYSITTER was to be
titillating (the type of film destined to be played ad infinitum on HBO at
2 in the morning), then it fails as well.  The dream sequences aren't
erotic; they are too brief and, outside of one very short scene, contain no
nudity.
I can't completely trash this movie.  The first 10 minutes or so vaguely
resemble an interesting film, and the conclusion sports a halfway decent
fistfight.  The other 79 minutes, though, are a drag.  Silverstone's
character, at the end of the movie, turns to her boyfriend and asks "what
were you thinking?"  I asked myself the same question, having spent 99
cents renting this turkey.
