Title
Review for Baby Boy (2001)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Why are you so afraid to leave the nest?" Jody's mother (A.J. Johnson) asks
him.  After all, he's a grown man with two families, having had babies out of
wedlock with two different women, but Jody (Tyrese Gibson) stays at home with
his mother.  He reminds his mother, who doesn't look much older than he does,
that "her" home originally belonged to his grandmother.
The theme of BABY BOY is the way that society has encouraged black men to never
grow up.  As proof of this thesis, we are reminded in voice-over of the words
that black men use to describe their world.  Their girlfriends are called their
"mamas," their buddies are their "boys" and their home is their "crib."
Jody's mother is about to start a live-in arrangement with Melvin (Ving Rhames),
an ex-con who recently spent ten years in San Quentin for "killing folks and
other stuff."  Jody tries to be cool around Melvin, which isn't always easy. 
"You have a good time, mama," Jody tells her on her first date out with Melvin. 
"You remember your curfew."  A bigger challenge comes when Jody wakes one
morning to find a buck-naked Melvin fixing eggs in the kitchen.  With Melvin's
rippling muscles and big tattoos, this makes for an impressive image.  Quite
upset that Melvin is devouring all of the Kool-Aid -- notice the choice of a
child's drink -- Jody wants to say something, but criticizing Melvin does not
seem like a promising idea.
Jody has ambitions.  Figuring that humanity can be dichotomized into the buyers
and the sellers, he wants to be one of the latter since those are the ones who
become wealthy.  In order to accomplish his version of the American dream, he
steals women's clothes from a wholesaler and sells them in the neighborhood. 
With his sweet talking gift for gab, he's a natural for closing deals with the
women, who don't care that their new clothes will be hot.
The film's recurring image is that of a grown man still in the womb.  Shocking
and mildly cute at first, this is a visual that rapidly loses its appeal.
Written and directed by John Singleton, who was responsible for the recent SHAFT
remake as well as one of my personal favorites, ROSEWOOD, BABY BOY never rises
above the level of a soap opera.  Yes, it is a well made soap opera, but not one
that we care much about.  Then again, some people can't get enough of the TV
soaps and dutifully set tapes to keep up with each day's shenanigans.
BABY BOY runs 2:09.  It is rated R for strong sexuality, language, violence and
some drug use and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film is playing now in nationwide release in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Michael Dequina
        Given the fact that _Baby_Boy_ marks writer-director John
Singleton's cinematic return to the 'hood of South Central Los Angeles a
full decade after his acclaimed debut _Boyz_N_the_Hood_, it makes sense
for Columbia Pictures to play up the connection to that seminal double
Academy Award nominee in its advertising campaign.  However, the
sure-to-be constant comparisons (which are further encouraged by
erroneous reports calling _Baby_Boy_ a sequel to _Boyz_) will only be a
disservice to what is a distinctive and worthy film in its own right.
        While not a _Boyz_ sequel, _Baby_Boy_ can be seen as a companion
of sorts since it also traces a young African-American man's coming of
age in South Central.  Similarities end, though, with the central
character, Jody (Tyrese Gibson).  Jody is 20-years-old and father of two
children by two different women, yet he's a layabout who still lives with
his rather young mother, Juanita (A.J. Johnson).  Jody, who spends most
of his days hanging out with his equally directionless best friend
Sweetpea (Omar Gooding) is every bit as selfish and immature as he
sounds, and while this has an unavoidable distancing effect on the
audience, it's a credit to Singleton and Gibson that they don't sugarcoat
Jody's unsympathetic qualities.  Whenever his girlfriend (and mother to
his eldest child) Yvette (Taraji P. Henson), Juanita, or her O.G.
boyfriend Melvin (Ving Rhames) express their frustration with Jody's
behavior, one feels their impatience right along with them--as one
should.
        Jody's belligerent act is often laid on a bit thick, as if his
outbursts are less a natural result of his short temper than it is the
manner in which he believes people expect him to behave.  His biggest
problem, it becomes clear, is not his attitude but his buying into the
fatalist mindset of the young inner city black male.  The image of his
own death recurs in his dreams and thoughts, but the visions don't really
"haunt" him per se; he seems to welcome them, as if being a "man" is to
constantly prepare himself for dying.
        But Jody isn't beyond redemption and/or redirection, and
ironically a great deal of his buried sincerity comes through in his
rather destructive relationship with Yvette.  _Baby_Boy_ may in essence
be a study of Jody, but the heart of the film is Jody and Yvette's
tortured romance.  Their moments of tenderness, and the chemistry between
Gibson and Henson, convince that these two people genuinely love and care
for each other.  But those pure moments are rare, and one is left to
wonder if their feelings are worth all the pain they put each other and
themselves through.  Singleton points no fingers, for both parties do
their part in perpetuating the vicious love/hate cycle.  "Baby boy" Jody
constantly cheats on her; the ever-suspicious but easily forgiving Yvette
can't bring herself to leave him, at least not for very long.
        The two screen newcomers are nothing short of exceptional in the
leads.  Given how abrasive his character is a lot of the time, the strong
charisma that Gibson has previously exhibited in his music, TV hosting,
and modeling careers is key to the character's engagement of the
audience.  Gibson's natural presence hooks the viewers in, and thankfully
he has the solid acting chops to keep them riveted.  He's more than able
to hold his own with the seasoned likes of Rhames and Johnson (who are
also terrific), and he is able to subtly convey what's behind Jody's
tough veneer: vulnerability, self-doubt, and, to a certain degree,
self-loathing.  Considering a number of Yvette's scenes involve her
angrily yelling at Jody, the true worth of Henson's work  can all too
easily be discounted; there's real soul behind the sometimes shrill
surface.  Most indelible is a nonverbal scene where a teary Yvette
envisions--as he sexually services her--what a life spent with him could
be like.  If pictures speak a thousand words, the looks on her face speak
a million.
        The largely internal nature of the drama in _Baby_Boy_ is
gripping enough that it's a bit of a letdown when external conflict
arises.  When Snoop Dogg turns up as Rodney, Yvette's just-paroled--but
hardly reformed--convict ex,  Singleton ends up retracing steps he and
many other filmmakers have taken in the past.  This is not to say that he
doesn't find some fresh spin, but for a film that had taken a hard look
at difficult people in difficult situations, this narrative direction
seems a bit too easy, making way for a resolution is a little too tidy.
        Nonetheless, however diluted the film's initial power feels at
the end, with _Baby_Boy_ Singleton has again succeeded in making a
thoughtful and provocative film that long resonates in the mind.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
SSG Syndicate
Susan Granger's review of "BABY BOY" (Columbia Pictures)
     In previous films like "Boyz N the Hood," writer/director John Singleton has focused on understanding troubled black men trapped in South Central L.A. but in this new film he is critical of them for not growing up and achieving their potential. The opening narration shows a young black man floating in a womb; he calls his best friend his "boy," his girlfriend his "mama," and his home his "crib."  It is Singleton's thesis that pervasive racism and a lack of role models have psychologically infantalized African-American men. And it's obvious from the getgo that 20 year-old Jody (R&B singer and MTV veejay Tyrese Gibson), accepts little responsibility for his own life. Still living rent-free at home with his mother (A.J. Johnson), he aimlessly shuttles between the mothers of his two children, Yvette (Tajari P. Henson) and Peanut (Tamara LeSeon Bass). "One thing I know how to do is make pretty babies," he brags. Occasionally he and his violence-prone buddy Sweetpea (Om!
ar Gooding, Cuba's younger brother) fence stolen clothes but mostly they hang out, smoking, munching and watching TV. Jody refuses to commit - to a woman, to a job, to a relationship. This infuriates his mother's new lover, Melvin (Ving Rhames), a tattooed ex-con with his own gardening business, who notes Jody's obvious Oedipal complex. It all leads to a confrontation with Yvette's evil gangsta ex (rapper Snoop Dogg). But in his eagerness to deliver a cautionary message, John Singleton falls into the trap of creating a superficial, contrived, coming-of-age melodrama. Plus, the vulgar, raunchy language, drug use, nudity and graphic, even degrading sexuality may discourage mainstream audiences. So, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Baby Boy" is a provocative but preachy 5, targeted primarily to an urban audience.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
BABY BOY (2001)
Rated R; running time 126 minutes
Genre: Drama
Seen at: Jack Lokes' Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/babyboy/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0255819
Written by: John Singleton
Directed by: John Singleton
Cast: Tyrese Gibson, Taraji P. Henson, A.J. Johnson, Ving Rhames,
Omar Gooding, Tamara LaSeon Bass, Snoop Dogg
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsbabyboy.html
The very first scene of BABY BOY - featuring the movie's lead character,
Jody (Tyrese Gibson), floating in his mother's womb (as a grown "man",
mind you), and speaking on the dysfunctional psyche of Black Maleness
these days - evoked a feeling of extreme sadness in me, at the current
state of Black Men In America.
Good thing I know that We Are Not A Monolith.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
John Singleton returns to The Hood, this time with a tale about boys not
quite ready to be Real Men - and the girls who enable their
dysfunctional behavior.
Jody, unemployed and not really looking to change that, is a certified
Mama's Boy, afraid to cut the umbilical cord and leave his mother (A.J.
Johnson) to live her own life.  Normal behavior for a young boy, perhaps
- but Jody has two children of his own, by two different babymamas: his
current girlfriend Yvette (Taraji P. Henson), who has still-a-child
Issues of her own to deal with, and Peanut (Tamara LaSeon Bass), who
Jody still hangs onto as backup, just in case.  "Unstable Females"
aside, Jody's got his boy Sweet Pea (Omar Gooding) to watch his back -
and Jody needs all the help he can get.
But change may soon be out of Jody's control: on the one hand, his
mama's new boyfriend Melvin (Ving Rhames), who Jody sees as a thuggish
threat, is moving in - which means Jody might have to move out against
his wishes.  And on the other hand, Yvette's old jailbird boyfriend
Rodney (Snoop Dogg) is due to be released from prison Real Soon Now.  Uh
oh...
The Upshot:
"We Are Not A Monolith".  In the nearly 200 reviews I've written for
3BC, I've included that statement in almost all of them.  But (besides
the explanation I've also included in each of the reviews with a "Black
Factor" section) what does that statement mean?
For starters, it means that the extreme sadness I felt during BABY BOY
need not be taken as a personal burden.  To put it bluntly, I don't know
Those Kneegrows.  Well, that's not exactly true.  I used to know them.
I used to be their neighbor, and if I had stayed any longer, I might
have *become* them.  I wasn't saved from that fate until I moved away
from Detroit and into college and beyond, exercising my own version of
"White Flight".  And even *that's* not quite true.  Some of Those
Kneegrows are members of my family.  If not my immediate family, then
certainly, my extended family.  For if I know nothing else about Being
Black In America, I know that no matter where you move, no matter how
much money you make, no matter how deep in denial you are, ultimately,
you cannot hide from your Blackness.  If you don't acknowledge it for
yourself, then *somebody* in this society will acknowledge it for you.
This, then, is why that extreme sadness does now, and always will,
belong to me - just as the extreme joy We tend to display when one of
Our Own does good, equally belongs to me.
Which brings me back to John Singleton.  Y'all remember him, right?  The
young brother who, ten years ago, won wide acclaim for his breakthrough
movie on (one type of) life in the ghetto?  Unless you've been living
under a rock, you probably know that BABY BOY is a followup to (though
not specifically a continuance of) Singleton's BOYZ N THE HOOD.  But the
followup, as often happens, is not as strong as that from which it
originated.
My biggest problem with BABY BOY is that it had a distinct Been There,
Done That, Got The Ghetto Flava, feel to it.  It possesses neither the
raw energy of its direct predecessor, nor the lyrical groove of the
other third of Singleton's Ghetto Trilogy, POETIC JUSTICE - comparisons
that, though perhaps not strictly fair, are still justified by
Singleton's own wishes, since he himself has grouped these three films
together in the past.  With not much new to add to the genre, one is
left to wonder why Singleton has repeated himself (aside from obvious
financial gains.  Not That There's Anything Wrong With That).
Likewise, the young talent here is not quite up to the task of their
"Boyz" counterparts.  Tyrese Gibson as Jody was fine [uh, as in
"okay"...though he's not bad on the eyes either], as was Taraji P.
Henson as Yvette, one of Jody's babymamas.  But Snoop Dogg was just too
skinny - both in physique and in acting talent - to make much of an
impression on me.  And as a direct "Boyz" to "Baby" comparison, Cuba
Gooding's brother Omar had neither Cuba's charm, nor Cuba's "Boyz"
character Tre Styles' "fish-out-of-water" feel.  Omar relied too much on
a growl and a grunt to see him through.  Honestly, I can't say that I
liked *any* of this lot, far as Important Movies go.  Cube, Gooding, and
Chestnut, they weren't.
None of which to say that BABY BOY isn't worth a look-see.  If not as
forcefully as before, Singleton does still have much of import to say on
the subject of (one aspect of) Black Ghetto Life, both as narrator and
as filmmaker; and some of his directorial stylings are simply brilliant.
On the acting front, Ving Rhames continues his habit of providing
powerful performances (worthy of his "Boyz" counterpart, the magnificent
Laurence Fishburne) in whatever he's in [and I ain't gonna front;
bru'man has a beautiful butt].  Rhames is matched well here by A.J.
Johnson, in an equally strong performance that may unfortunately go
unnoticed.  And driven by a strong soundtrack, BABY BOY provides unique
delights all its own.
My best advice is, go for the history behind BABY BOY, if you must; but
take this film own merits.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
   [I apologize in advance, for this will be my longest
    "Black Factor" to date.]
"Ghetto Wednesday".  A loaded phrase, when you think about it.  I
suppose, in the scheme of things, that it is a small price to pay for
Our films to become noticed.  Some might say there's not a price being
paid at all; merely a strange - and benign - coincidence.  And still
others might say that it is Our fault that such a phenomena exists at
all; if there is any harm, the harm is on Our heads.  I suppose all of
that could be so, and in fact, I know that some of it *is* so.  But try
as I might to ignore it, the perceived existence of Ghetto Wednesday
bothers me.  It bothers me mightily.
It probably hasn't occurred to many people to look at it very closely
(and I am *still* looking, in hopes that it *is* all just an ugly
coincidence, not an Evil Plot conjured up to cause me grief); but there
is a pattern that I and some others have noticed, for "Black-themed"
movies to be released on Wednesdays instead of the customary Fridays on
which most American movies are released.  The problem with this theory?
Two, actually: not all "Black-themed" movies are released on Wednesday,
and not all Wednesday releases are Black movies, "themed", "lead", or
what have you (recent examples of the latter include STAR WARS: THE
PHANTOM MENACE, MISSION: IMPLAUSABLE TOO, and THE MATRIX).
I have some theories on that, too.  To address the first, it occurs to
me (and some of those "others") that it's not merely "Black-themed"
movies that are released on Wednesdays; more specifically, Black movies
with a (perceived?) high "violence" content, are the ones generally
delegated...oh, let me say it plain - segregated - to Ghetto Wednesday.
As for the second, the answer lies in the different reasons behind
Wednesday releases.  For movies like "Matrix", "Star Wars", and the
like, the idea is that a Wednesday release will help to add to the boffo
box office that is expected of them (or that, at least, might be helped
by a jumpstart on the weekend).  Ghetto Wednesday releases, however,
have quite a different origin: harking back to a period in which
"violent" Black movies like NEW JACK CITY were released (on Friday) and
"riots" erupted in some theaters in primarily Black neighborhoods, a
Wednesday release of these kinds of movies, so the mindset goes, could
possibly help to stem some of the initial violent response from folks
having time on their hands on a weekend, by showing them first on a
less-free weekday.  "Ludicrous!", you say?  Perhaps.  But still, the
pattern exists; and I'd really like to be proven wrong about it.
In the end, Ghetto Wednesday could just be a figment of my (and others')
vivid imagination; more likely, it could be a harmless way of Keeping
The Peace, with some Great Father Figure looking out for all of us,
Black, White, and Otherwise.  I suppose it shouldn't bother me so; other
than its built-in segregation (of movies that I tend not to like
anyway), what's the downside?  Then again, I'm sure some folks are
comforted by Zero Tolerance policies at their children's school.  You
know - the policies that all but convict school children of being Little
Monsters for having some of the same kinds of thoughts, notions, and
(how dare they!) ideas that most of us did when *we* were in school.
Non-sequitur?  You might think so.  But I see things like this as being
on the same continuum.  And it bothers me.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I'm glad John Singleton got his "Ghetto Trilogy" filmed and on the
shelf; getting it out of his system, hopefully, means that he's read'ta
Move On, show the film world what else he's got up his sleeve.  The
question remains, though: will We support his Bigger Better efforts, or
are We just blowin' smoke (again)?
BABY BOY (rating: flashing yellowlight):
Here's hoping that Singleton will now focus on the Men amongst Us, and
leave the Boyz behind.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Singleton.
Cast: Tyrese Gibson, A.J. Johnson, Taraji P. Henson, Ving Rhames, Omar 
Gooding, Snoop Dogg, Tamara LaSeon Bass.
2001 - 128 minutes
Rated R (for sex, nudity, violence, and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 27, 2001.
In a film that is far closer to his roots in filmmaking than 2000's 
big-budget remake of "Shaft," John Singleton's "Baby Boy" is a low-key, often 
astute, drama. Described as a companion piece to his masterful debut film, 
1991's "Boyz N the Hood," the picture is considerably less violent and bleak, 
but is still set in a world (to be exact, a troubled, crime-ridden Southern 
California neighborhood) in which its residents can never be too sure if 
their lives are going to work out as planned, or even if they're going to 
survive to see tomorrow.
A film about growing up and taking responsibility for your actions and 
relationships, R&B singer Tyrese Gibson stars as Jody, a 20-year-old "boy" 
who has fathered two children from two separate women (one of which he is in 
love with), but remains at home living with his lonely 36-year-old mother, 
Juanita (A.J. Johnson). Juanita loves Jody, but feels that he should "leave 
the nest" and accept becoming an independent man, just as she wants to move 
on with her own life. Meanwhile, Jody's long-time, long-suffering girlfriend, 
Yvette (Taraji P. Henson), is beginning to feel like she isn't being 
appreciated in the relationship as she should be, and suspects that he has 
been sleeping around. Sure, they love one another, but is love really enough 
when your significant other almost outwardly cheats behind your back? 
John Singleton, whose career has been quite varied ("Boyz N the Hood" and 
1995's "Higher Learning" were powerful statements on society, while 1993's 
"Poetic Justice" and 1997's "Rosewood" were ambitious blunders), has made a 
serious-minded, ardent motion picture with "Baby Boy," although it fails to 
succeed in quite the same way that his greatest achievements have. For one, 
Singleton, who also penned the screenplay, too often goes for 
over-exaggeration when dealing with his characters' mannerisms, and the path 
that the movie follows is an admittedly cliched one. While it may be truthful 
up to a point, the actors are instructed to yell their lines in certain 
scenes, rather than just speak them in a normal tone, as if to be black you 
have to have a nasty temper and be sassy. While this aspect of the 
characters' interaction is unnecessary, it thankfully does not takes up the 
majority of the running time.
For much of the 128-minute running time, "Baby Boy" is an involving romantic 
drama that treats its participants with respect and understanding, never 
fully condemning them for their mistakes. Jody, played maturely by Tyrese 
Gibson in his first film role, is a likable, sympathetic young man, even when 
he makes mistakes and isn't always faithful to Yvette. In one of the movie's 
most powerful moments, following Yvette's discovery that he has been with 
many different women, Jody earnestly explains that he hasn't been honest with 
her because he actually does love her and didn't want to hurt her feelings. 
The same goes for Jody's mother, Juanita, who begins to see, and subsequently 
falls in love with, a man named Melvin (Ving Rhames), who is a reformed 
gangster. Juanita's last twenty years have all been dedicated to Jody, and 
now that he is an adult, she simply wants to move on and enjoy her own life, 
for once. A.J. Johnson (1994's "The Inkwell") gives a powerful performance as 
a woman who loves her son unconditionally, but wants, and needs, to let him 
go. As for Ving Rhames (2000's "Mission: Impossible 2"), his 
sure-to-be-remembered frog-hopping sex scene has got to be seen to be 
believed.
Newcomer Taraji P. Henson has the most interesting and finely-tuned role, as 
Yvette, and runs away with the entire film. Henson is a lovely fresh face 
whose performance is both perceptive and touching, and Yvette is written with 
an intelligent delicacy that makes you instantly care about what happens to 
her. It's the trickiest role, too, as a young mother who is trying to make a 
good life for her and her son, and would love to include Jody in it if only 
he could show her some commitment. 
The plot takes a wrong turn with the appearance of Yvette's criminal 
ex-boyfriend, Rodney (Snoop Dogg), who is released from jail and promptly 
takes over Yvette's apartment. Not sure how to get him out, and scared of his 
dangerous streak, the film culminates in a false-alarm drive-by shooting that 
later turns to real violence. While what takes place is captivating, and even 
effective in the issues it raises, the appearance of guns in the final act of 
an otherwise non-violent motion picture was a bit of a letdown. Snoop Dogg, 
who is fine with what he has been given, is equipped with a character who is 
portrayed as less of a person, and more of an obnoxious story device. 
Luckily, once he is out of the picture, the film concludes with several 
extremely well-written passages that wrap up the film in a hopeful, 
satisfying manner.
"Baby Boy" is not a great movie, and lacks the overall realism and intensity 
of "Boyz N the Hood," but it is a good one. The engaging performances, mixed 
with its keen observations on love and maturation, are worth seeing, even if, 
in order to get to them, you must walk down a road that has been covered many 
times before. It is clear that when he set out to make "Baby Boy," John 
Singleton's heart was in the right place.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
* COMING SOON - The grand opening of my new movie review site, 
themovieboy.com! *

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I know quite a few people who despite being college grads and
holding decent jobs continue to live with their parents, or live "at
home" as the euphemism would have it.  Is there any excuse for
this?   "Well," they say, "In Eastern societies it's not only common
to live in extended family relationships; for the young 'uns to move
out on their own is positively frowned upon."  Or, "We live in a
large home: I never see my parents."  Maybe, "You know how the
economy is...I gotta save my dough and when I live and eat with
my folks, I can stash a bundle."  Or, "I love my folks.  Why should
I leave them?"  Ah, but we're living in a Western society, there's
no such thing as living with your parents but not seeing them, and
there's no way that you're going to have the same kind of privacy
to live your own life until you take off and get yourself a crib of your
own.  Did I say crib?  According to John Singleton, who wrote and
directed "Baby Boy" and a decade ago contributed the dazzling
debut of "Boyz N  the Hood," a large segment of  young black
men in America are emotionally (but certainly not physically) 
immature, referring to their apartments as their cribs, their girls
friends as "mama," and their friends as "my boys."  While we
could argue about whether psychosemantics is bull and words are
just words, there's no getting around Singleton's angry new work
as at least a film-maker's fictionalized evidence that childish
behavior does indeed exist among portions of  our country's young
black men.
   While a mass audience could conceivably be drawn into the
theaters playing this honest and energetic film, "Baby Boy" at 129
minutes is lengthy and, given its raw, forthright spirit is more of an
arthouse piece that would cater to an audience more concerned
with learning more about life than with escaping from genuine
human concerns.  Save for a disappointing ending in which loose
ends are too neatly tied up out of Singleton's apparent desire for
closure, "Baby Boy" is so impressive that those of us concerned
about ranking movies in order of merit could put this one ahead of
"Boyz N Hood"--which starred Laurence Fishburne as a divorced
father trying to raise his son with values, to lead him away form
the violence in the neighborhood.  This time, Singleton is back in
the same south-central L.A. neighborhood but it looks like a
different place--superficially a clean, neat suburban neighborhood
where kids ride their bikes and residents keep up their neat lawns,
even pulling up weeds and planting rows of tomatoes, cabbage
and collards.  While the director had a celebrity cast for "Boyz" to
make sure that film would be potent--Fishburne, Ice Cube, Nia
Long, Angela Bassett and introducing Cuba Gooding, Jr.--this
time he's with some relative unknowns who are in no way less
effectual given the lucidity of the text.
   The story centers on Jody (Tyrese Gibson), who inhabits virtually
every scene, a man who at the age of twenty has already fathered
two children by two women, but has held onto his room in the
home of his 36-year-old mother Juanita (Adrienne-Joi Johnson). 
Juanita is not the kind of mom who fills her boy with meat loaf and
begs him to stay on at least until he gets married but at her age is
still ready for devilish fun and doesn't want her baby boy to hang
around.  Young Jody is sure he's no longer needed when he sees
mama's new man Melvin (Ving Rhames) stark naked in the family
kitchen cooking up a storm for Juanita.  Though without a job,
Jody does have a life of sorts, spending some of his time with his
favorite buddy Sweepea (Omar Gooding) and most of his
moments with his best gal Yvette (Taraji P. Henson)--who has had
an abortion and is increasingly fed up with her man's
philandering.  
   Singleton shows his desire to blame others for Jody's
predicament only in a brief statement in the opening narration, in
which he put the blame for Jody's aimlessness squarely on Jody
but throws in the rejoinder that racism is nonetheless responsible
for the young man's limited potential.  As Jody goes from his main
woman to another, to his best friend for advice and then,
reluctantly becomes mentored by his would-be stepdad Melvin,
we in the audience cannot help wondering exactly what Singleton
means when he asserts that racism is at least partially responsible
for Melvin's 10-year jail sentence for crimes committed when, as
Melvin puts it, he was "young and dumb," or from Jody's
irresponsibility in fathering one boy, sponging off his girl friend and
Juanita, and likely suffering from an Oedipal attachment to his
mother. Roger Ebert states in his review that "the movie's
message to men like its hero is: Yes, racism has contributed to
your situation--but do you have to give it so much help with your
own attitude?"  No way am I saying that racism is not still a
destructive force on our society: but where is the evidence in this
story? After all the people in the yarn have decent enough jobs--
Yvette working a computer in a nicely-designed office, Melvin
putting in a full day as a landscaper--and they live in a suburban
part of L.A. that simply cannot be compared to an urban ghetto
like Brooklyn's Bed-Stuy.  
   The acting is first-rate all around, with A.J. Johnson doing a
terrific job as an energetic, fun-loving woman who gardens when
she is not playing with Melvin and repeatedly tries to coax her
baby boy out of the crib, while Tyrese Gibson, who has a following
as a singer and music video D.J. executes a bang-up job as a guy
not at all eager to find himself, at least not while he has his two
favorite women giving him everything he seems to need.
Rated R.  Running time: 128 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A big-time momma's boy can't seem to leave his mother's crib and make 
good on the babies that he himself has produced in the world. He visits 
his kids (and their mommas) every now and then, but his main goal in 
life is...well, he doesn't have any goals. Then one day, his mother gets 
an ex-gangsta boyfriend and suddenly he isn't as welcome anymore in his 
own house. It isn't long after that, that his girlfriends start 
realizing what a jerk he really is and well...it's either time to grow 
up or bow down!
CRITIQUE:
First things first! This movie ain't about the "hood" at all, it's an 
intelligent film about love, relationships, family, friendship, maturity 
and growing up. Do not avoid this film because you think it's about 
gangbangers and stuff, because it isn't at all. It's about you, it's 
about me, it's about your girlfriend, your mother, your problems and 
your inability to face up to your responsibilities and to, well...grow 
up! This is an extremely well-written film, with some of the most 
developed characters that I've seen on the screen all year, with superb 
acting performances to match. Granted, the film does start a little slow 
(and go a little long), but hang in there, because once you appreciate 
and get to know all of its characters, you will be glad that you did. 
This isn't a kid's movie. This is about the step that you need to take 
in order to pass into full "adulthood" and some might not appreciate the 
grander theme behind that step. I certainly did, because I too passed, 
and am passing, through many of these very same things right now (yeah, 
yeah, I still live with my momma!!) and related to a lot of the events 
that went down in this flick (oh yeah, and for the record, I'm not black 
but that made absolutely zero difference in this case).
But that's not even half the story. You see, the film is damn funny, 
too...and I mean, damn funny! I was crackin' up at almost every other 
scene, and they weren't "set-up jokes" like your typical comedies 
either, just day-to-day things that we could all relate to (like the 
scene in which Ving Rhames is "drinking Koolaid" in the kitchen and his 
infamously improvised "African Squat F**k" scene, which you just gotta 
see to believe!) And there are the performances, too. Ving Rhames, now 
here's a man who has already established an early lead in the race for 
best supporting actor at the end of this year. Damn dude, you scared the 
shit outta me! Tyrese Gibson, I have no idea where this guy came from 
(an R&B singer and MTV VJ, you say...hmmmm?), but other than his uncanny 
resemblance to Taye Diggs, he nailed this part to the tee. From scene 
one on, I was glued to his performance and sympathized with his 
character as he molded and shaped himself into the person that he hoped 
to become one day. And everyone else, too. Gibson's girlfriend in the 
film, Taraji Henson, made me a backer with her many subtle touches, all 
of which helped raise her character several levels above the "typical" 
bitchie girlfriend that we've seen in many of these relationship movies.
But that's the thing that I liked the most about this movie. Everyone 
seemed real, the situations felt authentic, the characters all came 
across as people like you and me with issues and struggles and hopes and 
fears. I liked this movie a lot because it was masterfully written, 
wonderfully acted and genuinely entertaining to watch. And yeah, I even 
liked the whole homage to BOYZ 'N THE HOOD that Singleton pulled off in 
the end (he called this movie a "companion piece" to that film). A very 
solid follow-up to an ever greater original, BABY BOY is a film to be 
seen by anyone who feels like they never wanna grow up.
Note: The guy who plays Jody's best friend in this movie is Omar 
Gooding, Cuba Gooding Jr.'s younger brother (Cuba starred in 1991's BOYZ 
'N THE HOOD).
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Best Man (8/10) - Brothers (5/10) - Shaft (7/10) - Summer of Sam 
(7/10) - What's Cooking (7/10)

Author
Robin Clifford
In 1991, 23-year old director John Singleton exploded on the movie scene
with his insightful and unflinching look into the impact of violence on an
inner city black family in "Boyz N the Hood, becoming the youngest helmer,
ever, to receive an Oscar nomination. Now, he brings us back to the 'hood
in a story about a young man facing the trials of becoming a responsible
adult in "Baby Boy."
Singleton has maintained a theme on life in South Central LA since his
auspicious debut film, followed by "Poetic Justice" and, now, "Baby Boy."
The writer/director, following his smash hit, "Shaft" returns home, once
again, and makes a personal statement on being black in America and the
sub-culture that has produced a generation of boy/men whose adult actions,
such as fathering illegitimate children, are coupled with the
irresponsibility of youth. For generations, working class black society in
the inner city has becoming increasingly matriarchal, with the mothers and
girlfriends of these baby boys bearing the burden of their deeds.
Jody (Tyrese Gibson) is a steetwise, but misguided, 20-year old who has
fathered two children by two different women, Yvette (Taraji P. Henson) and
Peanut (Tamara Bass). But, he doesn't have a job, still lives with his
mother and seems incapable of taking responsibility for himself or the
babies he has made. He also has to contend with the volatility of his best
friend Sweetpea (Omar Gooding), a young gang-banger who spends his life in
and out of prison and in and out of trouble.
Meanwhile, Jody's 36-year old mother, Juanita (A.J. Johnson) is finding a
new life for herself, a life that includes less and less her son and more
and more her new boyfriend, Melvin (Ving Rhames), a reformed O.G. (old
gangster). Mom wants to enjoy, finally, the simple things in her life, like
her garden and her man. Jody is not part of this picture anymore and the
boy resents it, especially the intrusion of Melvin as the man of the house.
Jody is faced with more than just finding a place to stay as his past
actions and inability to take responsibility for them force him to the
crossroads of his life. Can he put aside his past mistakes and take control
of his life, like Melvin? Or, is he simply going to let it slide and let
the mammas take care of him and his babies?
Singleton has a lot to say on how he feels about the society that spawned
him. For generations, now, the black man in the 'hood has allowed the women
of his life to bear the brunt of being the sole parent and breadwinner in
the home. Unemployment and crime, with its inherent dangers to life and
limb, dominate the day-to-day life for black men and, if it continues
unchecked, it will be irreversible. The writer/helmer makes a strong
statement on the need for these boy/men to take control of their lives and,
basically, do the right thing.
The script, by the helmer, is oftentimes hit-you-over-the-head as it
preaches, repeatedly, the need for black men to take back their role of
family patriarch and leader. Juanita's emphatic declaration to Jody that
"you're not a baby no more" is both a plaintive plea and galvanizing demand
by black women that they are tired of footing the entire load in raising a
family. Singleton makes this statement, frequently, during the course of
"Baby Boy" and this becomes a flaw that keeps the film from being a great
one. A subtler approach to the pronouncement of the author's obvious deep
feelings about the subject would have made the film more effective.
The strong ensemble cast is capably led by newcomer Tyrese Gibson (you
might recognize him from his Guess? ads and MTV). He gives a solid,
three-dimensional performance as the confused, but intelligent, Jody,
effectively depicting the anger at being ejected from the safety of home in
favor of Melvin and confusion about just how to become a man. A.J. Johnson,
as his mom, puts a wonderful arc on her perf as a lady who has had enough.
She has worked all of her adult life coping with the crime and the
violence, which killed Jody's father years before, and raising a son to the
best of her ability as a single, working mom. Johnson puts just the right
spin on her mama who decides to cut the umbilical cord herself.
The rest of the supporting cast provides a wealth of talent. Ving Rhames
has proven himself to be one of the most versatile character actors in the
business. He can play comedy or drama and, here, he is both menacing -
toward Jody, who rejects his friendly overtures - and loving, as a reformed
O.G. who has turned his life around, started a business and fallen in love
with Juanita. Rhames puts flesh and blood into the symbol of Singleton's
idea of a good role model for the boys in the 'hood. Omar Gooding is first
rate as the explosive, loyal Sweetpea and reps the life Jody must leave
behind. Taraji P. Henson also stands out as Jody's main squeeze and mother
of his second child. She represents well the fears and the hopes of a young
woman and mother in the inner city. Snoop Dog is quite good as the sinister
element, ex-con Rodney, but the character is unnecessary and a big
distraction in the otherwise solid story.
Photography by Charles E. Mills captures the South Central locale well and,
with stylish editing by Bruce Cannon, keeps the film visually entertaining.
Costume, by Ruth Carter, is notable in that it does not call attention to
itself in its natural flow. The frequent use of old Popeye cartoons (and
Sweetpea) gives the "I am what I am" theme a humorous, retro feel that may
be lost on younger auds, but is a nice weave in the film's tapestry.
More subtlety and some judicious cutting to trim the 2+ hour runtime would
have made a better film, but I have to congratulate Singleton for his
dedication to his race and his desire to put forth a positive message that
young black men and women can be proud of. I give "Baby Boy" a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Since the turn of the century, there have been seven major motion pictures
released on Wednesdays that didn't precede holiday weekends.  Five of those
seven were films targeted to urban audiences, most of them were big bags of
crap (Next Friday, 3 Strikes, Backstage and Turn It Up), and the most recent
doesn't come close to bucking the trend.  Baby Boy is poorly written, poorly
directed, poorly acted and, worst of all, has the audacity to carry on for
over two hours.
Boy focuses on the life of a 20-year-old black man named Jody (R&B
star/model Tyrese), who spends his days kickin' it around Crenshaw like it
ain't no thang.  He's a pretty likeable lad, assuming your idea of
"likeable" is a man with no job, babies all over the city and not enough
common sense to pull his own pants up.  Jody still lives at home with his
36-year-old mother (Adrienne-Joi Johnson), where he rides his low-rider
bicycle and puts together model cars in his room, which is covered with
pictures of scantily clad women.
The first scene of the film brings up an interesting point about black men
in America being extremely infantile (they call their mothers "Momma," their
friends "boyz," and their homes "the crib"), while showing the adult Jody in
his mother's womb before transitioning into a scene where the mother of his
first child is having yet another of his babies aborted Yvette (Taraji P.
Henson) is in pain, both mentally and physically, and wants nothing to do
with her son's father.
So what does our boy do?  Heads over to see his second child's mother,
Peanut (Tamara LaSeon Bass).  She's in the shower when he drops in, but that
doesn't stop him from tearing open the shower curtain and demanding she
clean the place up and make him some mo-fo food (a real charmer, this Jody).
In the meantime, Jody's mom has begun to date Melvin (Ving Rhames, M-I:2), a
hard-edged OG ex-con who owns a landscaping business.  Jody hates Melvin's
checkered past, even though, if he's lucky, he'll end up just like him. He
demands Melvin show his mother respect, despite the fact that Jody gives
none to any of his own bitches.  There's also some hoo-ha about an older
brother who was kicked out of the house when Mom dated her last gangsta
boyfriend and was subsequently killed on the streets.  Jody is afraid the
same thing will happen to him, and there are all kinds of nightmarish
scenarios depicting the same.
Boy rambles on and on, with no rhythm and virtually no purpose (Jody does
eventually get a job...selling boosted women's clothes), other than to show
what is supposed to be the transition of a cocky boy into a real man.  I
didn't buy it and don't believe his character changed in the slightest.
We're talking about a guy who doesn't have a problem with hitting women,
stealing, disrespecting everyone within earshot and knocking up women left
and right, but then has the audacity to say, ""I ain't no killer - I can't
have that on my heart," in a pre-murder prayer before he snuffs the film's
only interesting character, played by Snoop Dogg.  When Snoop is the
highlight of your film, you've got big problems. Come to think of it, you've
got problems when you cast a model as your lead character.  Remember Fair
Game?  I didn't think so.
Okay, there's a chance I didn't get the whole thing because, after all, I am
the third whitest man in America (after Bryant Gumbel and Tony Gwynn).  But
before you start playing the race card, keep in mind the fact I loved Boy
writer/director John Singleton's first film, Boyz in the Hood, which landed
him two Oscar nominations 10 years ago.  Boy is supposed to be a "companion
piece" to Boyz, but don't sully its good name by comparing it to this mess.
2:07 - R for strong sexuality, language, violence and some drug use

Author
Annette Cardwell
Ten years after releasing the groundbreaking Boyz N the Hood,
writer-director John Singleton revisits his "young black man in the
ghetto struggling against a violent end" cautionary tale, but with more
humor and realism, in his newest film Baby Boy, showing that maybe baby
boy Singleton's done some growing up himself.
In the same South Central Los Angeles neighborhood, real life is about
to crash down on 20-year-old Jody (model/singer/VJ Tyrese Gibson). He
has two children by two different "baby mamas" -- level-headed Yvette
(Taraji Henson) and too-young Peanut (Tamara LaSeon Bass) -- he's
unemployed, and he's still living with his own mama Juanita (A.J.
Johnson).  He's also clashing with his mom's new man, an aging "O.G."
named Melvin (Ving Rhames) who's looking to move in; and, he's got to
keep his volatile roughneck friend Sweetpea (Cuba Jr.'s brother Omar
Gooding) out of trouble, without getting dragged down into more trouble
himself.  And to top things off, he's seeing competition from Yvette's
ex-con ex-boyfriend (the inimitable Snoop Dogg).
While this all-too-familiar story of inner city woe has been done to
death over the last decade, Singleton manages to keep it fresh and
unpredictable by steering the plot in unconventional directions
throughout the movie. He puts unusual yet plausible twists on such
overplayed topics as drive-by shootings and domestic abuse, and still
manages to deliver some powerful messages in the mix.  And unlike the
caricaturized roles in Boyz, he's created very complex characters that
are more believably flawed.  Instead of Laurence Fishburne's ultra-Zen
and all-knowing father, we get Ving Rhames' reformed killer who wants to
teach Jody how to be a man, but has very little patience for his
hardheaded immaturity.  Thankfully, Singleton seems to have gotten a
better sense of humor these last few years (maybe Shaft loosened him
up?) and peppers the movie with a number of hilarious scenes, including
one where Jody walks in on a totally naked Melvin cooking eggs for
breakfast.
It also seems that Singleton has great luck with putting non-actors to
work in his movies.  Just as Ice Cube showed his acting chops as Dough
Boy in Boyz, Snoop really produces with a menacing role, and film
newcomer Tyrese turns out a dramatic and varied starring performance. 
Singleton's women are even more stunning, especially Johnson as the
tough and torn Juanita and Henson, who handles Yvette's roller coaster
emotions with skill.
By refusing to be as dogmatic or overly simplistic as he's been with his
other films, Singleton may have redeemed himself and his talent with
Baby Boy.  Perhaps now we can erase those bad memories of Higher
Learning.
http://www.sony.com/babyboy/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Jody (Tyrese Gibson) is a 20-year-old African-American who has fathered
two children by two different women, yet still lives at the South Central
home of his 36-year-old mother Juanita (A.J. Johnson, "The Inkwell").
Juanita is embarking on a new relationship with reformed old gangsta
Melvin (Ving Rhames, "Pulp Fiction") and wishes Jody would get a job, move
out and become a man.  So does Jody's current girl Yvette (Taraji P.
Henson), the mother of his son, who has a steady job, car and place of
her own.  Producer/writer/director John Singleton examines the social
ramifications of Black men being brought up by single women in his companion
piece to "Boyz in the Hood," "Baby Boy."
Singleton hits us over the head with his first image - Tyrese Gibson in
a fetal position within the womb.  Jody isn't really a bad kid, having resisted
the pull of violence and being protective of his momma (although the latter
impulse could be self-motivated), but he can't commit to a woman or stand
on his own two feet.  When he does decide to make money, he does so by 
stealing women's clothing and charming the ladies at a local hairdressing 
shop into buying.  Jody's smart enough to consider what's said to him, though, 
unlike his homie Sweetpea (Omar Gooding, younger brother of Cuba) who presents 
an angry face to a world he believes owes him a living.
Jody's relationship with Melvin is a volcano waiting to erupt.  He believes
his mother's last boyfriend was the reason his younger brother was thrown
out of the house and ended up dead.  Jody becomes self-righteous over Melvin's
past rather than acknowledging the man's present as the owner of a successful 
landscaping business.  Jody also believes that his love for and honesty with 
Yvette should make up for his dalliances and refusal to move in with her.  When
Yvette's former boyfriend Rodney (Snoop Dogg) gets out of jail, his decision
to make her home his crash-pad is the catalyst for Jody's confrontation with
adulthood.
Singleton's story about one young man finally denying the repetition of history
is meandering and features a climatic moment straight out of the Hughes'
"Menace II Society," yet its sloppiness can be forgiven for the truth and humor
that permeates it.  While Singleton's decision to include violence as part
of Jody's crossing at first seems disappointing, the truth of the matter is
that in this society violence can breed respect.  The hopeful aspect here is 
that Jody normally rejects that route and Melvin has put it into his past 
(watch for Melvin's 'guns and butter' speech, a great piece of writing, not
to mention advice).
All of his characters, with the exception of Rodney (Snoop Dogg's really oily
in the role), are endearing as they struggle for their piece of happiness.
Singleton's directed one of the year's best ensemble casts.  Recording artist
and MTV veejay Tyrese Gibson delivers a star-making performance as the 
titular baby boy.  A.J. Johnson should be considered as a Best Supporting
Actress nominee at year's end for her warm and funny young mom, a woman put
into much the same position as Jody's put Yvette, who's now looking for a life 
of her own.  The ever-great Ving Rhames is powerful as the bullish Melvin who
turns out to have a lot to offer Jody once Jody lets him.  (Rhames also gets
some great laughs for a sexual move that Singleton's described as 'the African
squat' and the surprise breakfast cooking scene which follows.)  Taraji P.
Henson is also fine as Yvette.  Gibson and Henson have good chemistry as
they vacillate between childish bickering and mature love.
The film's soundtrack features a diverse representation of Black music,
including Snoop Dogg, Tyrese Gibson and Mr. Tan on the film's theme "Just
a Baby Boy."  All technical aspects of the film are top notch.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
