Title
Review for Arabian Knight (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Striking artwork is the reason to see ARABIAN KNIGHT, the
elaborate animated feature from director Richard Williams (WHO FRAMED
ROGER RABBIT).  Though appearing in the guise of a cheap ALADDIN
clone--and not helped by a lousy late-summer release date--ARABIAN
KNIGHT was actually started *way* before Walt's heirs ever hired a guy
names Williams to do voice-overs.  Now, decades later, the finished
product makes for an eye-popping bauble of modest value.  The story
could be stronger--and there's only one good song--but the visuals
have a wit all their own.
     Writer/director Edward Burns also stars in this raunchy compendium
of male commitment fears, as seen through the lives of three
Irish-American brothers.  Burns plays Barry, the middle one, and the
least Catholic of the three.  They live under the same roof on Long
Island, thanks to the oldest, Jack, who's married and has an attic room
to spare.  Though, uh, "technically challenged"--the handmade film is
blown up from 16mm--the acting is relaxed, and the dialogue is
natural.  Very natural.  The plot is harder to take.  I don't buy any
of the story situations that are presented here.
     Writer/director Tom DiCillo's behind-the-scenes comedy-of-errors
is good for a few laughs, especially whenever James LeGros (no
relation) is on screen.  He plays a preening, blonde up-and-comer who
bears no small resemblance to Brad Pitt (who starred in DiCillo's 1992
film "Johnny Suede").  The rest of the appealing cast includes Steve
Buscemi, Catherine Keener, and Dermon Mulroney.  They do well in this
extended inside-joke that's perpetually undermined by a shaggy-dog
story structure.
     Hip-hop gets an honest rap in this intriguing documentary from
director Brian Robbins.  No judgments are passed on the popular music
form, as Robbins examines the genre from *both* sides of the fence, or
prison fence, if you will.  THE SHOW opens with a visit to Ryker's
Island prison, to meet convicted rapper Slick Rick.  The short film
feels longer, thanks to an overabundance of mush-mouthed jive from the
rap stars themselves.  A better balance would include footage related
to the "experiences" that all the musicians claim are reflected in
their works.
     Fashion-photograph-turned-documentary-directory Douglas Keeve does
in 76 minutes what Robert Altman (READY TO WEAR) couldn't do in 132.
This hip, enjoyable Sundance Film Festival award-winner presents a year
in the life of New York fashion designer Isaac Mizrahi.  From concept
to presentation, with all the fears, fervor, and free-associating in
between.  Mizrahi narrates with a playful perspective of how pop
culture fuels his inspiration.  He even sings the "Mary Tyler Moore"
theme.
