Title
Review for Carla's Song (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Louis Proyect
I feel betrayed by Ken Loach, one of my favorite film-makers. His
"Carla's Song" not only fails as art, it also fails to convey the
political significance of the Nicaraguan revolution, its purported
subject. Since Loach's "Land and Freedom" dealt so trenchantly with
the politics of the Spanish Civil War, it is a major disappointment to
find politics so poorly served in his Nicaragua movie.
The fault is in Paul Laverty's screenplay. He is a Glasgow lawyer who
worked with human rights organizations in Nicaragua in the mid-80s.
This sort of involvement does not necessarily mean that you are going
to dwell on the Nicaraguan people as victims of atrocity.
Unfortunately in Laverty's case this is the singular message he
conveys.
This comes across most clearly in his strategic esthetic decision to
make the sad eponymous Carla the central character of the film. It is
1987 and we find ourselves in bleak, rainy Glasgow. There we discover
Carla (Oyanka Cabezas) on a sidewalk dancing to a boom-box. She begs
for change after her performances. She somehow became detached from a
Nicaraguan dance troupe touring the British Isles and is now barely
functional. She is rescued by George, a completely apolitical bus
driver who soon falls in love with her. He brings this wounded bird
back to a friend who will shelter her in a spare room in his
apartment. Robert Carlyle, who plays George, also played a junkie
construction worker in Loach's great "Riff-Raff," as well as the
psychopath Begby in Danny Boyle's "Trainspotting."
Shortly after taking up residence in her new quarters, Carla cuts her
wrists. After George takes her to the hospital, he discovers from a
doctor that this is her second suicide attempt in six weeks. She is
apparently suffering from post-traumatic stress. As he sits by her
bedside, George can not resist taking a look at her medical record. It
states that a horrible battlefield incident has almost destroyed her
psychologically. This incident not only had a scarring effect on her,
it also had lasting damage on her lover Antonio.
In flashbacks, we see the contras mounting an attack on Antonio, Carla
and a group of young artists and teachers who are traveling by truck
in the northern mountains of Nicaragua. They are part of a literacy
campaign that the contras have targeted. The attack does even worse
damage to Antonio than it does to Carla, but we do not know exactly
what it is. This mystery serves as a central dramatic device in the
movie and it is not a very good one. Since we do not encounter Antonio
as a key player in the drama, it is difficult to have great feelings
about his plight. He is a symbol of Nicaraguan suffering and symbols
work far better in poetry than they do in movies.
Nearly half of the movie deals with the love affair of George and
Carla. They talk about everything but politics. Nicaragua only
functions as a faraway place where something terrible happened to her
and her lover Antonio. What a contrast to "Land and Freedom," where
the two lovers are a Communist and a POUM member, who live for
politics. Carla, the Sandinista militant, does not seem to be much of
a politico herself. Her defense of the revolution amounts to a
statement that the government is trying to help the people and bad
people are trying to stop it.
Laverty has obviously made the decision that middle-class audiences in
the wealthy countries will only swallow the bitter pill of Nicaragua's
suffering if it has a sugar coating: George and Carla's romance. At a
certain point, George decides that their love can never be consummated
as long as she is still uncertain about Antonio's fate. Therefore, he
decides to fly back to Nicaragua with her and search for Antonio.
Thus the second act of the movie commences and it is where things
begin to derail completely. Loach has the look of Nicaragua in 1987
nailed down, but there is not much substance beneath this. Filmed in
Esteli, "Carla's Song," is highly faithful to the period and the
place, as anybody who visited Nicaragua in this period can testify.
The Sandinista soldiers are constantly on the move as they seek out in
the contras in the countryside. The human rights activists bustle
about and convene meetings to come up with documentation on contra
atrocities.
Alas, what is missing is exactly what made Nicaragua memorable, namely
political conviction. For the entire time these characters spend in
Nicaragua, nobody discusses politics. The main topic of conversation
is what has happened to Antonio. The movie is not really that much
about Nicaraguan revolution, as it is the search for a missing person.
George and Carla roam from town to town asking "Have you seen
Antonio?" If Laverty had devoted some energy to the search for the
soul of the Nicaraguan people, then the movie might have been
interesting. Alas, this was beyond him.
In one of the most glaring false notes in the film, we finally
encounter somebody who knows the whereabouts of Antonio. That is
Bradley, played by Scott Glenn, a member of Witness for Peace. Glenn
is a thoroughly unlikable character and one can only wonder how the
human rights veteran Laverty could come up with such an unflattering
portrait. Perhaps some misgivings about the whole tarnished Nicaraguan
experience might have affected Laverty's judgement. We are living in a
period when it is awfully easy to bash the Sandinista cause.
In any case, Bradley seems to have very little interest in politics.
He thrives on gonzo brinksmanship and goes into the most dangerous
parts of the countryside to document contra atrocities. When he sits
down to have a beer with George, he stresses how dangerous it is and
warns him that he might shit in his pants if he gets close to the
shooting. Suffice it to say, that no staff worker with Witness for
Peace ever made macho displays like this. What motivated them was a
religious belief in human rights and a broadly defined sympathy for
Nicaragua's social revolution. We eventually discover that Bradley had
been a CIA operative in Honduras who had become disgusted with what he
was doing and went over to "the other side." This information is
simply revealed by Laverty's screenplay without any dramatic
background into Bradley's character. As such, it comes across as sheer
nonsense.
Someday somebody will make the definitive movie about Nicaragua and
they will not have to rely on specious devices such as a love affair
between one of "us" and the "other." Nicaraguans are capable of
telling their own story. A movie based on Omar Cabezas' memoir "Fire
in the Mountains" could not miss. Cabezas was a guerrilla who gave up
everything to fight against the Somoza dictatorship. When he is not
describing a fire-fight with the enemy, he is reminiscing about all
the things he has left behind and misses desperately: the food, the
drink, the parties, the sex. Since Nicaraguans are some of the most
joyous people on the face of the planet, this part of the story has
added poignancy. It is too bad that Loach chose such a depressing and
inaccurate story, since there are so many better ones available.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CARLA'S SONG (director: Ken Loach; cast: Robert Carlyle (George), Oyanka
Cabezas (Carla), Subash Sing Pall (Victor), Stewart Preston (McGurk),
Gary Lewis (Sammy), Scott Glenn  (Bradley), Margaret McAdam (George's
Mother), 1996-UK)
It is difficult to know what to believe is right and wrong about this
Ken Loach politico/romance film, that is guaranteed to never completely
satisfy one politically or romantically, as it takes the ruling
government's Sandinista's side (left wing) over the CIA supported Contra
(right wing) guerrilla's side in the Nicaraguan War in 1987, and it does
this as seen through the romance between an emotionally unbalanced
Glasgow bus driver, George (Carlyle), who falls for a destitute and
friendless Nicaraguan refugee to his country, Carla (Oyanka Cabezas).
Their romance is believable as long as the story remained in Scotland.
If loach stayed in Scotland with the story, as he does in the first half
of this film, and not transport it to Nicaragua, then we might have
gotten somewhere with this unlikely romance between the politically
unaware and insubordinate bus driver and his unpaying passenger, whose
romance starts out when an inspector gets on his bus and challenges her
for a ticket, as George comes to her aid and is given a week's
suspension for his rudeness to the inspector. By chasing after the hard
to get to know Carla, he discovers that she has troubling secrets about
her past that she refuses to talk about.These dark secrets are about her
lover she left behind, who was an activist in the Sandinista movement.
The problem is so serious, that she has twice attempted suicide in
Glasgow.
George takes a double-decker bus for a joy ride outside of Glasgow to
show his girlfriend the natural beauty of the Scottish lochs and
mountain sides he loved as a boy. This action will result in his
dismissal from being a bus driver. He then impulsively makes up his mind
to take her back to her country so she can resolve what is troubling
her. Once in Nicaragua he is troubled by all the killing going on around
him. The film turns into an expose of how terrible the CIA is for
backing the vicious animals who make up the Contras. Bradley (Campbell)
has the flat role of being the shill for screenwriter Paul Laverty's
liberal pronouncements about the war, as Bradley is a former CIA
operative in Nicaragua, who has now become a pacifist working for a
human rights organization. This is all trite and, for me, unlikely
stuff. The romance is put on hold till we find out what happened to
Carla's lover. Therefore the animated George of the first half of the
film, is reduced to being a passive tourist, everyone showing him a
thing or two about their country, and the film flounders, caught between
a soft romance and a soft political treatise, accomplishing neither one
very successfully. George does manage to see how close-knit and joyous
the Nicaraguans can be, despite the poverty of their country, as he goes
dancing with the village people. And to George's credit, he knows when
enough is enough, so he resolves things with Carla, hears her song, as
she resolves things with her tortured lover, who she at last finds out
from Bradley, is still alive. George does the sensible thing for a
highly emotional person to do, he splits from here and heads for
Glasgow, supposedly a better person for having loved abandoningly and
made a little bit more politically aware of how bad the Contras are by
his unexpected adventure. I expect that he'll really have something to
say in the pubs when he gets back home, where he belongs.
It really wasn't that bad of a film, it was just too flat and preachy.
But it was pleasant to watch Oyanka Cabezas, she was quite innocently
alluring, giving her role an authentic tone to it, as there were moments
when the story seemed to be reaching for something important to say, and
that she would be the best spokesperson to present the cause. But in the
end, the film never managed to be all that convincing, probably because
it sold its product too hard. And that is unfortunate, because I didn't
learn anything new about the Nicaraguan political situation that I
didn't know before. Everything seemed too pat, more like a Stanley
Kramer liberal political film than a former Ken Loach politically
independent film, such as his LAND AND FREEDOM.
Dennis Schwartz: "Movie Reviews"      http://www.sover.net/~ozus
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Ken Loach, whose "Carla's Song" pretty much fits in with
his traditional themes and styles, has its heart in the right
place--depending on your where you stand politically.  It's the
sort of film that would be hated by Oliver North, whose
infamous scheme funneled money to Nicaragua's Contras
during the 1980s civil war in that little country.  It will be
appreciated, though, by those who believe that the United
States should not support right-wing governments in the Third
World.  Aside from its politics, though, it has the feel of a
docudrama with improvised dialogue.  This is not the sort of
design that would win it a wide audience, but then at least
Loach is staying true to his pattern--the portrayal of poor and
working-class people who are failures in life and do self-
defeating things that drive them to madness.  If the
unpredictable actions of the hero of "Carla's Song"--a bus
driver in Scotland's commercial city of Glasgow--seem
unbelievable, you've got to realize that they are the gestures
of a man driven to good-hearted foolishness by his love of an
unlikely woman.
   Loach first treats us to a picture of a man with a most
ordinary profession, bus-driver George (Robert Carlyle).  He is
suspended for a week after fighting with a Javert-like ticket-
taker on his vehicle who threatens to arrest a passenger for
not paying her fare.  Though George has an affectionate,
down-to-earth girl friend, he falls instantly in love with the
passenger, Carla (Oyanka Cabezas), whom he pursues
relentlessly despite her aloofness and unwillingness to share
information about herself.  He learns, however, that she is in
Scotland as a refugee from her country's civil war.  Alone and
adrift, she has twice attempted suicide, is saved by George
who encounters her in a pool of bathtub blood, and incredibly
enough agrees to travel with her to Nicaragua to locate her
missing lover Antonio.
Loach's Glasgow is more realistic than Alan Jay Lerner's
depiction of the Scottish people in "Brigadoon" and his
Nicaragua is far removed from Central American tourist
posters such Costa Rica's (which claim that the country is so
romantic that even the oceans get together).  The Glasgow
workers are all hostile: the cab driver whom George's bus
barely touches is enraged; the ticket-taker treats a freebie
passenger as though she were an axe murderer; George's
boss threatens to fire him for inconsequential reasons; the
passengers on the bus whine at every bump; Carla's landlady
loudly threatens to throw her out.  But some Nicaraguans are
worse.  Loach's Sandinistas are an earthy, friendly, song-
loving group who teach literacy to the peasants. But the CIA-
backed Contras are brutal, blowing up suspected Sandinista
houses and in one case deliberately and methodically
paralyzing a man, pouring acid on his face and releasing him
to his misery.  Loach also introduces a CIA operative (Scott
Glenn) who allegedly sees the horror of his mission and goes
over to the other side.  We get the impression that the
Sandanistas would not think of stooping to the ruthlessness of
their foes--that they are as innocent as America's Black
Panthers who wanted only "to introduce breakfast programs in
ghetto schools and teach righteous behavior to its targeted
beneficiaries." 
   Loach's politics are one-sided.  He has the right to herald
his views however much they may dismay and disillusion
those who have considered Sandinista leaders little more than
dictators bent on subverting all of Latin America into Soviet
client states.  His film, however, is marred by a largely
unintelligible Scottish dialect--it would be well served by
subtitles, as the English language spoken by the Nicaraguan
as a second language is more understandable than that of
the Scots.  More damaging is the uneasy mix of romance and
politics, making "Carla's Song" neither here nor there.  The
dialogue comes across as largely improvised making the film
too loose, even incoherent, but here Loach is nothing if not
consistent in his disregard for the traditional narrative.  Robert
Carlyle is effective, as he was in his previous films such as
"The Fully Monty" and Oyanka Cabezas's performance is
affecting though she does not have the sort of beauty that
would attract most men to her as obsessively she affects
George.
   With such works as "Lady, Ladybird," Loach's film about a
single mother of four with a history of abuse from males, and
"Family Life" which treats a 19-year-old woman driven mad by
societal pressures, Ken Loach is easier to respect than to like. 
"Carla's Song" keeps him firmly implanted in that ghetto.
Not Rated.  Running time: 127 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten
1998
