Title
Review for Omega Code, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Omega_Code_ (PG-13) 1/2*  (out of ****)
I'm all for family-friendly entertainment with a minimum of sex,
violence, and foul language--that is, when done right.  And while
_The_Omega_Code_, a squeaky clean thriller financed by Christian
programming network TBN, may be right from religious perspective, it's
wrong just about everywhere else.  Stick a pro-faith overlay on poorly
made cheese, and it's still poorly made cheese, no matter how positive
its message is.
_The_Omega_Code_'s title refers to the secret code of the Bible, whose
hidden prophecies govern every move of Stone Alexander (Michael York), a
trusted politician bent on world domination.  The fate of the world and
mankind rests on the shoulders of Dr. Gillen Lane (Casper Van Dien), a
motivational speaker who comes into the possession of a computer program
that unlocks the Bible code--and is the final missing piece in Stone's
dastardly plot.
But we mustn't forget that this is a TBN production after all, and thus
come in all the added religious trimmings.  Gillen, while a proponent of
the Bible code, has lost faith in God after the years-ago death of his
mother, who was deeply religious.  Needless to say, he will have to
accept Jesus Christ as his lord and savior in order to save the day. 
Then again, saving the day is not so much up to Gillen, of course, as it
is to God, and _The_Omega_Code_ features what has to be the first literal
deus ex machina since the theatre of ancient Greek times.  As
faith-affirming as it may be, the wrap-up is hokey and maddeningly
unsatisfying.
Connoisseurs of camp will be the only people who will find much
satisfaction from the acting.  Van Dien is his usual unconvincing and
completely embarrassing self; did anyone believe this smug, stiff pretty
boy could convince as being a "Dr."?  He is matched in the stiffness
department by Catherine Oxenberg as a talk show host and, as Gillen's
wife, an unknown actress whose name doesn't much matter because you're
certain not to hear it again in the future.  As Stone, York oozes slime
and sleaze, which wouldn't be a problem for the villain role if he
weren't supposed to be a _trusted_ and _loved_ political leader.  Only
Michael Ironside, in his typical shady element as Stone's main enforcer,
does any work that is the slightest bit dignified.
And when I say "only," I mean only--the direction (by Rob Marcarelli) is
flat; the special effects are laughably cheap; and the script is
amazingly lunkheaded (Gillen's wife lets him know that their house is
bugged by writing "BUG" on a paper, only to then discuss their "secret"
plans verbally).  In the end, the only thing that can be considered the
slightest bit worthwhile is its spiritual message, but its something one
can get at a fraction of the time--and for free--by simply tuning to TBN.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Robert Marcarelli
STARRING:         Casper Van Dien, Michael York, Michael Ironside,
Catherine Oxenberg
WRITTEN BY:       Hollis Barton, Stephan Blinn
RATED:            PG-13 for several scenes of shootings
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       2 Peter 1:3-4, Deuteronomy 30:10-20, Romans 16:25-26
Another Christian film with Hollywood-type production values has been
released nationally and once again, it has been pretty much ignored by the
media and critics.
THE OMEGA CODE which is being distributed by Providence Entertainment,
deals with an apocalyptic theme, using the controversial "Bible Code" as a
major plot device.  Despite the lack of a large scale marketing effort and
almost complete snub from both print and online critics, the film did well
enough to place in the top ten films (according to the box office
receipts) in its opening weekend.  This is no doubt due to the on air
support given to the film by Christian broadcasters on TBN.
Certainly the film does not deserve to be ignored, but neither does it
merit rave reviews.  After a promising beginning, it slowly becomes
muddled and confused, lost in its own sea of implausible characters and
transparent plot devices.
Casper Van Dien (STARSHIP TROOPERS) stars as Dr. Gillen Lane,
motivational "guru" and expert on mythology.  His skill in the art of
persuasion is being sought after by Stone Alexander (Michael York, AUSTIN
POWERS: THE SPY WHO SHAGGED ME), millionaire philanthropist and obvious
megalomaniac.  Together they plan to bring the dream of world peace closer
to reality.
Unknown to Gillen, Stone is using a stolen program which unlocks hidden
messages numerically coded within the Bible.  By fulfilling these
prophetic messages, Stone's rise to power increases at a rapid pace.  His
idea of world peace is, in actuality, world domination.  But the final
piece to the code is missing, in the hands of a pair of mysterious
"prophets" who try to warn the world against blindly following the path
that Stone is paving, knowing that it leads away from God and towards
destruction.
Can Gillen, who has begun to have "visions" that he cannot explain,
discover Stone's evil intents in time?  What is the final message of the
Bible Code which has been kept out of Stone's hands?  Both of these are
important questions but not as important as the one which must be asked...
"Why isn't this a better film?"
Part of the answer lies with the script by Hollis Barton and Stephan
Blinn, who between them have no other screen credits.  Instead of
developing fresh and interesting characters, they have relied upon
superficial and clichéd stock characters which stretch the limits of
credibility.
Mr. Van Dien, who looks like a TOP GUN recruiting poster, is hard pressed
to pull off the role asked of him.  He has yet to develop the charisma
that would explain the influence or popularity which his character
supposedly enjoys.
I must be quick to state that I applaud any effort to bring biblically
minded stories to the movies.  And there is much within THE OMEGA CODE
that is noteworthy.  Here we find the idea of an antichrist rising to
power under the guise of philanthropy and altruistic works; the spiritual
struggle which is waged daily;  the superiority of God's power over any
other force, whether it be spiritual or physical; and the idea that each
of us have a choice to make - that as we choose to turn to God for
guidance and protection, God is faithful to guide and protect.
But to this reviewer, the true weakness of the film is the element which
probably appealed the most to the filmmakers.  The "phenomenon" of The
Bible Code (which "predicted" Hitler's rise and Princess Diana's death,
among other events) is an example of a trend that mankind has followed
throughout the centuries.  We, as a people, instead of just reading the
Word which God has revealed, oftentimes prefer to read into the Word.  We
are fascinated by hidden messages and unexplained prophetic-like
inferences.
Such things distract from the true purpose of studying the Word.  God has
given us all things pertaining to life and godliness.  With His Word, we
have the knowledge of how to live a life more than abundant.  Instead of
embracing the Bible Code, we would be better served if we would simply
embrace the Bible.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Casper Van Dien, Michael York, Michael Ironside, Catherine
Oxenberg, William Hootkins 
Written by: Stephen Blinn and Hollis Barton  
Directed by: Robert Marcarelli 
Running Time: 99 minutes 
Preposterous religious action film (produced by the Trinity Broadcasting
Network) about a code hidden within the text of the Bible that when
deciphered will lead to the end of the world (nice of those Bible
authors to put a doomsday code into the most read book ever eh?). 
Michael York plays a millionaire diplomat who breaks the code and sets
out to become God on Earth and fulfill the doomsday prophecies, while
Casper Van Dien (terribly miscast and giving an awful performance as a
result) plays the atheist motivational speaker who must stop him. 
Michael Ironside (great as always, despite the silly film surrounding
him) plays a fallen priest and right hand man to Michael York's
character.  Here's some subtle character development you may have missed
pertaining to Ironside's character.  Now despite the fact that we see
him murder a man in the opening scene, the filmmakers aren't quite sure
if their audience will understand that he is evil.  How do they fix
that?  Make specific efforts to show that his character is the only one
in the film who smokes!  There are lots of ominous shots of Michael
Ironside smoking... oooooo scary.  But even that wasn't enough for the
filmmakers apparently, as they later have to infer that Ironside's
character is gay!  It comes out of nowhere and just makes no sense. 
My main problem with this film is that, despite the silly story (which
could have been pulled off... anything can be made believable if
executed correctly), the events of the film aren't shown with any sense
of urgency or importance.  For example, at one point York's character is
declared chancellor of the world or something, and we see one brief,
cheesy news report about it.  The movie keeps telling us that the
apocalypse is coming, but it never seems that way.  There's no "world
reaction" to anything. 
The Omega Code is available on DVD from Goodtimes Home Video.  It
contains the film in the original theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1, and
includes the original theatrical trailer, a documentary on the making of
the film, production notes, and cast and crew information. 
The documentary runs about 25 minutes and is actually surprisingly good
(it looks as though it was made for broadcast on TBN), and it does a
comprehensive job of interviewing practically everyone in the cast and
crew (with the exception of Michael Ironside, unfortunately).  The best
thing about it is that whenever crew members are interviewed, they do an
excellent job of explaining their profession and exactly what it is they
do on a movie set.  Most documentaries tend to overlook this.  Doomsday
expert Hal Lindsey is even interviewed (you'll remember his documentary
from the 1970's called The Late Great Planet Earth, where Lindsey
speculated that Jimmy Carter might actually be the antichrist). 
However, at the very beginning of the documentary the producers of the
film managed to get on my bad side.  When interviewed they actually have
the nerve to say "Ever see Raiders of the Lost Ark?  Well, our film is
like that!"  No it isn't.  Not by a long shot.  [PG-13]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Steve Rhodes
"The Bible is actually a holographic computer program!" Dr. Gillen Lane
(Casper Van Dien), a Tony Robbins-type of motivational speaker, tells
his breathless television audience in THE OMEGA CODE.  "Crisscrossing
the Torah is a hidden code that reveals the future!"  (The Bible's coded
messages include the words "Princess," "Diana," "Paris," "tunnel" and
the date that Princess Diana died.)
Robert Marcarelli's THE OMEGA CODE is like a passion play scripted by
Mel Brooks, a Shakespearean tragedy performed on "Saturday Night Live,"
a James Bond spoof acted by Bill Murray, a car chase enacted by the
Keystone Cops' stunt drivers, an opera without music choreographed by
Barney's creators and an old newsreel shown late at night on a religious
cable channel's infomercial.  With the material for a great parody, the
movie's worst sin is that the actors, who shamelessly overact, take it
all quite seriously.
A marketing phenomenon, the picture was released to just 300 screens but
rocketed to capture a spot on the top 10 box office list the week that
it came out, thanks to local churches talking it up.  The religious
thriller, produced by the Trinity Broadcasting Network, can truly be
called a thriller of apocalyptic proportions.  Avoiding any sex, nudity
and even a single "darn," the film, except for its gun violence, was
carefully crafted in an attempt to appeal to a family audience.
Described as a Buddha-like figure, Chairman Stone Alexander (Michael
York) presents himself as a world savior.  Responsible for world peace
and for skyrocketing stock markets due to his revolutionary idea of a
single global currency, Chairman Alexander will, nevertheless, prove to
have some serious character flaws.  As a clue to his true identity
perhaps I should mention that strange bombings, food shortages and
epidemics have recently been striking the planet.
As the hackneyed dialog flies fast and furious ("I know that the worth
of a real man will show up in the countenance in his wife's face."
"These people need a beast to tame their savagery!"), we keep cutting
back to evil computer nerds trying to decode the Bible's hidden
messages.  Their program has the 3D text dancing on the screen like a
double-helix ballet.  Typical of the messages it decodes is the one:
"Wild Siblings Tamed by Beast."
Only as an old-fashioned B-movie, the type that got second billing on a
kids' Saturday afternoon double feature, does THE OMEGA CODE have any
appeal.  The delight of those movie was that everyone could hoot at
them, and some of the kids would even throw popcorn boxes at the screen,
as we all roared at how ridiculous the picture was.
THE OMEGA CODE runs 1:39.  It is rated PG-13 for violence.  The film
would be acceptable for kids around 10 and up, but most kids of any age
are going to be bored stiff and confused by the movie.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Never before in my life have I seen a movie worse than The Omega Code. This 
may sound like a strong statement, but it is completely true. So many things 
went awry with the first movie funded by TBN (the Trinity Broadcasting 
Network) that I seriously could sit here all day listing them. 
Gillen Lane (Casper Van Dien) is a self-motivation and religious guru who 
lost his faith when he was ten. His mother died in a car crash when he was at 
that age and since then he's been trying to improve people's lives by 
teaching them to believe in themselves rather than a higher power. His ideas 
interest Stone Alexander (Michael York) a wealthy, but corrupt businessman 
who uses his work to promote peace in Jerusalem and other Middle Eastern 
countries to hide his work on cracking the bible code. Gillen and Alexander 
are both intrigued by this code. When the bible gets viewed in 3-D certain 
patterns emerge that predict the future. Hitler, the assassination of John F. 
Kennedy, and the death of Princess Diana were apparently all foretold by the 
bible. Whoever has control of the code and knows what's going to happen next 
can therefore claim themselves to be God. So Gillen must keep the code safe 
from double-crossing executives, bodyguards, and reporters. Along the way his 
faith may come back. 
The main problem with The Omega Code is that it tries too hard to be two 
different types of movies. It wants to preach the lord, and spread the word 
of Jesus to African countries we've never heard of. However, the religious 
message gets overshadowed by all of the action. Writers Stephan Blinn and 
Hollis Barton tried to make this entertaining, but try not to groan when 
Gillen says things like, "I’ve got to do it! It’s my child!" Try not to 
laugh when a man runs away from a big Amish-like shooter guy with a long 
beard. Scenes like these are laughably bad. So is the acting. Casper Van Dien 
still shows no hope of good acting skills. Rather than this being amusing, as 
it was in Starship Troopers, it's just really annoying. Michael York is also 
surprisingly bad. The Omega Code is so utterly predictable it's scary. Gillen 
isn’t smart enough to figure out that almost no one is on his side. The movie 
also treats the audience this way. Whether you see one movie a year or one 
hundred, it's very likely you've seen all of this before. Fifth graders are 
producing better stories with better dialog than this. Sitting through five 
hours of TBN and watching modern-day Tammy Faye Bakkers bawl it out is by far 
a less severe punishment. 
There was one joyous moment for me that involved this movie. That moment was 
when I returned the tape to the video store.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
It is possible to counterbalance weak writing with high action, cool
effects, all that. Look at all the American Ninjas, Gymkatas, etc, which,
though admittedly lacking in story, are nevertheless fun to watch for all
the head kicks and double back flips. Or, take Fair Game, a shoddy movie
with very well-choreographed effects, which keeps us coming back to it again
and again. Or Starship Troopers, which, as we go it to solely for the space
bugs, tends to satisfy (i.e., has enough space bugs to go around). The
formula is simple: construct whatever story is minimally necessary to allow
all the cool effects. This is how porn works, after all, yes? It's about
anticipating your target audience's needs and then catering to that
audience. There's an implicit deal there, even, an understanding. Supply and
demand; exploitation.
As with any 'implicit' deal, however, there's room for misunderstanding, the
possibility that a movie will lure the target audience into the theatre only
to show them a different movie altogether. Regrettably, this is what Omega
Code does: instead of foregrounding all the high-action stuff as the trailer
suggests, it attempts to supplant it with a reckless amalgamation of all the
stories that 'should' work. Which is to say what it tries to make cool is
the story, when we're not there for the story. And then, to add insult to
betrayal, it's not even a good story at that. Or rather, it's a bad mix of,
say, the religious thriller aspects of Seventh Sign (Prophecy, Omen,
Stigmata, etc), the 'biblical code' intrigue of pi, and the 'ancient
gadgetry' of Stargate, with a load of shallow historical references thrown
in as afterthought (e.g., the bad guy is "Alexander," trying to conquer that
world).
It all centers around Dr. Lane (Casper Van Dien; Starship Troopers, yes),
motivational guru, world religion expert, Joseph Campbell wannabe. He's our
hero, strutting into every situation with the same unshakable confidence
Brandon Fraser had in the 1999 Mummy. As if he knows it's all just a movie.
Soon enough Lane hooks up with Stone Alexander (Michael York), and together
they remap the Middle East with not much more than platitude and gumption.
After a feat like that, the world's easy pickings. In a matter of scenes,
then, Alexander is crowned king of the new world order. Granted, the ease
with which he conquers the known world is nominally justified by the fact
that Alexander is clandestinely following his stolen Omega Code like a
script--simply fulfilling the history-of-things-to-come as it's spelled out
in numbers, in the Torah--but still, if simple foreknowledge were all that's
necessary, wouldn't (James Bond's) Spectre have figured that out long ago?
Essentially, Alexander comes to power the same way Biff from Back to the
Future 2 wanted to: by reading tomorrow's paper. And that's been done and
done and done.
To Omega Code's credit, however, it does fulfill a few genre expectations:
the bad guy does have a foreign accent and access to all the computers; the
good guy is having marital difficulties; all the women are stunningly
beautiful; Michael Ironside is a somebody's henchman. And, as for the Omega
Code itself, it's comfortably familiar, or, is something of a mix between
the Omega Molecule in Star Trek Voyager and the Genesis Effect in Star Trek:
The Wrath of Khan. All of which is to say there's nothing new in Omega Code,
even down to it's attempt to play on our Millennium fears. It does have a 12
Monkeys moment, though, with the fugitive turning from a cop car only to
find his face on wall of television sets, but that's hardly enough to save a
movie that feels like it was accidentally routed to the theatre, when it in
fact should have gone directly to video.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com/

Author
Jerry Saravia
"The Omega Code" gets my vote for one of the best, cheeriest comedies ever 
made. It is often so damn funny that I could not hold back my laughter - a 
deliberate hark back to the kind of spoof that Mel Brooks used to make. 
The film stars Casper Van Dien as Dr. Gillen Lane, a mythology guru who 
believes he has unlocked the secrets of the Bible Code that tells of 
prophecies, past and future. Yes, these codes foretold of Princess Diana's 
demise not to mention the assassination of Kennedy, and so on. I wonder if 
any mention was made of the rape of the Central Park jogger back in the 
1980's, or the recent Colombine massacre, or how about the Oklahoma bombing. 
But never mind, obviously, it dictates events among the rich and famous only. 
Enter the wealthy businessman, Stone Alexander (Michael York), who wants to 
rule the world and needs to find the key to the ancient city of Jerusalem - 
he just needs the good doctor to unlock the remaining bible codes to 
determine the future. Or something like that. And what can we make of the two 
prophets, who appear and disappear at will? And will the overworked Dr. Lane 
fix his marriage to the sweet, lonesome Jennifer (Devon Odessa)? And is 
Alexander's trusted emissary, Dominic (Michael Ironside), intent on 
double-crossing his boss? 
Okay, so "The Omega Code" is not a comedy, it is a timely biblical thriller 
that is too unintentionally funny to really score on a dramatic level. I knew 
the movie would not work as soon as Casper Van Dien's overacting began when 
he explains on a talk show, with his motivational speaking skills intact, the 
veracity of the Bible Codes. Amazingly, no one in this film questions whether 
such codes exist. Of course, there is controversy over such codes in today's 
world but wouldn't we be more interested in what those codes say about our 
future rather than the accidental death of Princess Diana? 
"The Omega Code" is not humorous enough on a good bad movie scale to sit 
through, and hardly thrilling for one second. It is preposterous and dull 
with garden-variety special-effects that are equalled on the level of the 
defunct "Mystery Science Theatre 3000" show. The film also has the kind of 
hammy performances that would have delighted the "MST" crowd. The funniest 
thing about this movie is that it was financed by the Trinity Broadcasting 
Network - such funding should have been used for more worthwile endeavors. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE OMEGA CODE" (Providence Entertainment)
Onward, Christian filmmakers! Heavily promoted by the Trinity
Broadcasting Network, the largest Christian TV organization in the
country, this religious thriller is an end-of-the-world suspense story
based on the book of Revelation. Written by Stephan Blinn and Hollis
Barton, it manages to be a non-violent story about Armageddon,
crediting to Hal Lindsey (The Late Great Planet Earth) as "prophecy
consultant." The muddled plot revolves around Casper Van Dien as a
Tony Robbins-like motivational speaker who, along with European Union
Chairman, played by Michael York, seems to be trying to secure a world
peace agreement. Only, a secret Biblical code falls into the wrong
hands, putting the world's future at stake. Not surprisingly, Van Dien
will have to accept Jesus Christ as his Lord and Savior in order to
save civilization as we know it. Produced by Matthew Crouch, son of
TBN's president, Paul Crouch, the film is designed to alert Hollywood
that there's an audience for clunky spiritual entertainment. They may
be right from a religious perspective but film-making is an art that
these zealots have yet to master. Casper Van Dien (Starship Troopers)
is handsome but unconvincing, as is Catherine Oxenberg as a talk show
host. Michael York's such an obviously sleazy megalomaniac that it's
not credible that he's a trusted diplomat. Only Michael Ironside
emerges with dignity intact. Rob Marcarelli's direction is flat and
unimaginative, the computer graphics are juvenile, and the delusional
absurdity includes having Van Dien discover his house is bugged and
then verbally discuss his "secret" plans. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, The Omega Code is a timely but ploddingly dull 3. I'd
advise you not to pay for this preachy, blatant brain-washing;
instead, tune in - free - to TBN.
