Title
Review for Times of Harvey Milk, The (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
In 1977, Harvey Milk was the first openly gay man
elected to the city council of a major U.S. city.
But within a year, he had been murdered, at the hands
of fellow San Francisco council member Dan White.
White's subsequent conviction of voluntary manslaughter,
rather than capital murder, led to violent protests
from the bay city's large gay minority.
This summary makes for an interesting story, and
"The Times of Harvey Milk" does a good job of
putting the pieces together.  People of various
backgrounds who worked with Milk are extensively
interviewed.  This is combined with still photographs
and documentary footage of Harvey Milk, which brings
his energetic, thoughtful personality to the surface.
Best of all are the local television news stories,
about Milk, White and their agendas, giving a "you
are there" quality to the documentary.
Born in New York, Milk spent his young adult life
in the closet.  He spent time in the Navy and as a
stock analyst.  Eventually, he came out, becoming
a Broadway producer, and later moving to liberal
San Francisco to run a camera store in the heart of
the burgeoning gay community.  He ran unsuccessfully
several times for the city council, succeeding only
when the voting was changed from city-wide to by
district.  For the first time, various minorities
were represented on the council, including Milk.
Also new on the board was idealistic, deeply
conservative Dan White.  White's had financial
troubles, and an inability to compromise led to
political defeats.  He resigned his seat, but was
soon convinced by supporters to ask for it back.
Liberal mayor George Moscone decided to give it
to somebody else, enraging White.  After shooting
Moscone, White targeted Milk, not for being gay,
but for being his most vocal opponent on the council.
Before the trial, Defense lawyers carefully selected
a jury that would be sympathetic to Dan White.
The murders came days after the Jim Jones tragedy
in Guyana, with hundreds of San Franciscans among
the victims.  The peaceful protests that followed
were in stark contrast to the riots that later broke
out when White was given light sentences.  White was
released from prison in 1984, and committed suicide
in 1985 (after the documentary was made).
The film's interviews include a gay man and a lesbian
(his campaign director).  But the most interesting
interview targets are those that are less biased: an
middle-aged Union man (Jim Elliot) who thought that
Milk's political views were simply good common sense,
and an Asian business advocate who praises Milk for
his support for minority causes.  Harvey Fierstein
provides the unemotional narration.
For his efforts here, Produceer/Director/Editor
Robert Epstein received an Academy Award for
Best Documentary Feature.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
