Title
Review for Trans (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Zachary McGhee
Not Rated (strong language, mild violence, mature themes), 90 minutes, 1998.
Released commercially in 2000. Justin Lakes, Ryan Daugherty, Jon Daugherty.
Directed by Julian Goldberg.
Movies like Trans get on my nerves. They’re the type of rubbish that makes up
roughly one-half of the independent film world, and give it a bad name. The
other half are grand motion pictures carried out in the traditions of cinema:
Bright, original, cutting edge. We, as critics, may urge Hollywood studios to
take a look at this emerging art form known as independent film, but imagine a
film like this slips through the cracks and they get a good look at it?
Even Supernova, a recent film which looks pretty much like a disaster area with
its background (that film’s director walked out in an editing dispute with
the studio and replaced his name with pseudonym Thomas Lee) and pathetic
screenplay, is preferable to this mediocre, muddled garbage. Few directors can
achieve the feat which Julian Goldberg has. This movie is boring, long, drawn
out and unnecessary. If you don’t have a story to tell, don’t tell it.
Truth be told, the most horrible and condemning fact about Trans is this: I
walked out of this movie.
The plot (which I had to look up on the Internet, as it can’t be found in the
film itself) seems to go something like this: A young delinquent of some sort
manages to escape the juvenile facility he’s been placed in and goes running
all around talking and meeting with different people who manage to assist in
concealing him from authorities out to catch him, along the way somehow
managing to be called by some a "coming-of-age" tale.
Sundance officials, who selected the film to run at the 1999 festival, say that
they were "so excited" when they saw Trans. No doubt because, if there were any
insomniacs among them, they were instantly cured. I was constantly checking my
watch during the movie, and when it felt as if the film ought to be reaching
some sort of merciful conclusion, I realized that only one-third of it had
passed, leaving another sixty minutes to be endured. And so I up and left.
I give Trans one star, rather than none, because perhaps I did not give it
enough of a chance, and maybe if I had seen the rest of it there might have
been some redeeming qualities about it. Of course, a film with a prologue as
tedious, incoherent and confused as this one hardly deserves such a
presumptuous credit.
Sundance officials also noted that the visual integrity of Trans appealed to
them, and the fact that Goldberg didn’t really know "where he wanted to go"
when he started shooting somehow makes the film more true to life in its art.
Ha. I say, you don’t know where you’re going when you start shooting?
You’re wasting film.
But then, that can be forgiven. If you know where you want to go when you start
editing. Chop out the tedium. That is, of course, unless there’s nothing but
that.
E-Mail ZCMCGHEE@aol.com if you'd like to receive free film reviews via e-mail.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TRANS (director/writer: Julian Goldberger; screenwriter: Michael A.
Robinson; cinematographer: Jesse Rosen; editor: Affonso Goncalves; cast:
Ryan Daugherty (Ryan Kazinski), Jon Daugherty (Ryan's Younger Brother),
Justin Lakes (Justin), Edge (Bus station Manager), 1998)
A bleak look at a troubled teenager's life when he escapes from the
Southwest Florida Juvenile Detention Center. This fictionalized film
looks as if it could be a documentary, shot in the cinema verite style.
Its main focus is on Ryan Kazinski (Ryan Daugherty), a troubled
16-year-old, going nowhere fast, who thinks of himself as an alien from
another planet.
With only one month left to serve his reform school sentence, after
being in solitary confinement, he is on a highway chain gang where a
fight breaks out and he impulsively runs away with two others while the
guards are distracted.
After the trio are joyfully horseplaying through the swamps to escape,
they stop at a rural rest stop and the other two steal a car and leave
him on his own in southwest Florida. We know the bare minimum about him:
he never mentions a father, his mother might or might not live in
Denver, and he lives with his younger brother in Ft. Meyers, whom he
injured in a swimming pool accident when they were youngsters. The two
brothers have grown close but Ryan doesn't have what it takes to be
there for him when needed.
This kid's a downer, with a low attention span and a naive recognition
of how messed up he is. He's clueless about his goals or who he is. He
seems to be stupid and unaware of what he is doing, and he doesn't have
anyone to talk to who might help. At the rural general store, among the
good ol' white boys, after he is abandoned by his fellow escapees, he is
involved in a light conversation with them as they recognize the
predicament he's in, and when they ask what his yearnings are, he
mentions: To go to Colorado. Just live in the snow.
First-time director Julian Goldberger got into the kid's head and
presented a haunting portrayal of what it is like to be lost and
frightened in a world that is too complex for this junk food eating kid,
who looks like a psycho with his crew-cut but is as soft as a Twinkie.
What the film does best besides have their unlikely antihero be the
appealing voice of the film, is catch the desolate mood of the locale.
What it forgets to do, is tell a good story.
Ryan's quest for freedom takes him home, as he travels in a night world
consisting of the small towns in the Everglades that are rife with
speeding cars, flickering street lights, laundrymats, bus depots,
convenience stores, fast-food shops, and groups of unsupervised
teenagers out past their curfew, some looking for fights, with danger
always lurking, as one hears the persistent sound of the police sirens.
The place looks like a nightmare created by a madman, as this locality
is bereft of anything but a pop culture mentality and desperate
youngsters on the prowl.
What is obvious from the word go in this film, doesn't change by the
end: the kid shows no signs of taking responsibility for his own life
and there is no family to support him. That the prison system is not the
answer for kid's like this, is also obvious. Why he was in prison is not
given, but there's hints that he was picked up as a sniffer of chemicals
or some other minor offense. This kid is certainly not a hardened
criminal, which is the shame of it all, as there seems to be no answers
from society or from this film what to do about lost souls like him. At
least, the film makes clear that its position is that incarceration is
not the answer, which certainly goes against the current grain of
thinking in America.
Despite the film's good look and the way it uses a novel approach in its
film language to echo what Ryan is thinking, everything seems surface
deep. It could have used something else to compensate for the
mindlessness of Ryan to go along with his painful tale of hopelessness
and the film's evocative atmosphere, which wears thin after awhile.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
