Title
Review for CB4 (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Chris Rock, Allen Payne, Deezer D, Charlie Murphy, 
           Phil Hartman, Chris Elliot
Director:  Tamra Davis
Producer:  Nelson George
Screenplay:  Chris Rock, Nelson George, and Robert LoCash
Music:  John Barnes
Released by Universal Pictures
     Albert, alias MC Gusto (Chris Rock); Otis, also known as Stab
Master Arson (Deezer D); and Euripides, or Dead Mike (Allen Payne),
make up the rap group known as Cell Block 4, or CB4.  Adored by
America's youth, despised by the righteous right (as personified by
Phil Hartman), and hated by Gusto (Charlie Murphy), a man who believes
CB 4's success came at his expense, the rap group quickly climbs to the
top of Billboard's charts.
     As a series of frequently-amusing vignettes, CB4 is enjoyable.
However, when everything is tied together into a cohesive whole, this
movie is a colossal mess.  The connecting pieces, especially the
involvement of Charlie Murphy's villain, are worthless and serve only
to muddle the pace of an otherwise- entertaining series of Saturday
Night Live- type sketches.
     Satire and parody are heavily in evidence in CB4.  Right-wing
politicians, which make such ripe targets for movies such as this,
aren't the only ones that get barbecued.  Rap music is as much made fun
of as it is lauded.  Prominent black figures such as Spike Lee are
given a knock or two.  In addition, there are dozens of more subtle
jabs at elements of black and white culture.  Keep your eyes open of
you'll miss some of these, many of which represent the most
sophisticated that CB4's comedy gets.
     Admittedly, much of the humor is juvenile, and, as such, too silly
to be particularly funny, but there are enough moments of more refined
comedy to keep just about anyone involved.  Chris Rock's performance is
film is about as uneven as the film's humor.  In some scenes, he's
completely out of place while in others, his energy carries the movie.
Deezer D has absolutely no memorable moments.  Allen Payne is the most
consistent of the three leads, partially because his character is a
walking parody.  His rendition of "I'm Black" is on-target and very
funny.
     CB4 has something to offend just about everyone.  It gives the
impression of being misogynistic, although the attitude is more a part
of the story than a genuine reflection of the film-makers' views (the
director, GUNCRAZY's Tamra Davis, is a woman).  Members of the moral
majority (those few who see this film) will be suitably annoyed, as
will those who belong to some of the more militant black groups that
are so clearly parodied within CB4.
     Not too much of CB4 is memorable or ground-breaking.  In some
ways, the film is a cross between WAYNE'S WORLD and THIS IS SPINAL TAP,
although its brand of comedy and wit owes more to the former than the
latter.  CB4 is nowhere as incisive or as clever as SPINAL TAP, even
though it clearly aspires to make the connection early on with the
documentary film by A. White (Chris Elliot).  In the final analysis,
this is an example of a light film that's good for a few laughs.  It
can be watched without becoming an endurance contest, and, when it's
over, the audience can go home and forget about it.  Not a stunning
recommendation, to be sure, but CB4 will deliver for those who go to it
with modest expectations.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
