Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Rouge (1994)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z Rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 99 minutes [1 hour, 39 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Irene Jacob (Valentine), Jean-Louis Trintisnant (The Judge),
Frederique Feder (Karin), Jean-Pierre Lorit (Auguste), written by Krysztof
Piesiewicz, Krzysztof Kielowski, produced by Marin Karmitz, directed by
Krysztof Kielowski.
If we could interfere with fate, we would (or should we) do it? Perhaps the
reason some people believe in fate is because of our sense of privacy. If
everyone knew each others' business the world would be a much different place
wouldn't it? "Red" tries to play up that theme through an encounter between
two strangers. 
Irene Jacob stars as Valentine, a fashion model who is likable and very
sweet. We follow her around for a while, and at first the film seems a bit
confusing as it's hard to tell where it's going. At the same time we also met
a young, successful businessman named Auguste (Lorit). He doesn't have much,
if anything, to do with Valentine, only that he lives near her. However, his
entire character is a great technique in storytelling and filmmaking.
One day Valentine accidentally hits a dog with her car and when she returns
it to its owner, a retired judge (Trintisnant), he seems totally apathetic.
We can't help but be put off by his attitude, but at the same time he makes
for an interesting character because of his bitterness. After several
encounters Valentine realizes the judge listens in on his neighbors'
telephone conversations for amusement. He doesn't seem so much perverted as
he is curious. 
Throughout the film the storytelling is breezy as it just tries to define
the mood of their rather odd relationship. They discuss his habit of
eavesdropping: Valentine claims it's a breach of privacy, but the judge
doesn't seem to care anymore. One conversation involves a man's secret affair
with his gay lover, and Valentine decides to tell him about the judge. When
she arrives at his house she meets the man's wife and child and knows if she
were to tell them what is happening it would ruin their lives. This idea of
interrupting with fate is the central theme of the film. The judge knows some
day the wife will catch her husband and the family will be shattered, had
Valentine told them she would have only sped up their misery.
There isn't much else to "Red." It's charming but not sappy. It could be
enjoyed by almost anyone, but I would recommend it for mature audiences.
Maybe Kielowski isn't trying to make a statement about love or fate, but just
present them as he sees them. It's nice to know these kinds of things are
relevant all over the world. 
[Note: The film is rated R for a sex scene that last about four or five
seconds. Besides that, there is no other sex, profanity, nor violence and the
film should be suitable for ages 14 and up.]
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Bryant Frazer
Directed by Krzysztof Kieslowski
Written by Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz
     They don't make movies like this anymore.  Even the most
self-conscious of European films, destined to be widely promoted in
America with dull trailers, tasteful posters, and an art house blitz,
aren't as unapologetically indulgent as the recent films of Polish
director Krzysztof Kieslowski.  His DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE offers an
oblique meditation on the properties of light alongside a metaphysical
study of Veronique, a French woman who inadvertently photographs her
perfect double (Weronika) while visiting Poland.  BLUE casts art-house
standby Juliette Binoche (THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, DAMAGE) as
a mopey French widow, and features a rich and overwhelming orchestral
score and arresting imagery (a sugar cube touched to coffee fills the
movie screen as the white crystals turn brown) that literally bring the
film to a halt time and again.  WHITE is a neatly comic film about
marriage and capitalism that travels from France back to Poland and
offers up at least one show-stopping visual metaphor--the screen blazes
white in illustration of Julie Delpy's orgasm, reducing audiences to
gasps and titters.
     Kieslowski's harshest critics maintain that the films sap the
sympathies of an irredeemably gullible audience.  They accuse him of
arranging for fashionable Frenchwomen to traipse through his very
European landscapes, murmuring New Age platitudes, sleeping with
sensitive New Age guys, and pouting for the camera.  The director's
newest film, RED, the culmination of his Three Colors trilogy which
also includes BLUE and WHITE, they insist, is overblown claptrap,
substituting notions of Fate and Destiny for credible filmmaking.  The
new issue of FILM COMMENT juxtaposes a rich essay on the trilogy by
NEW YORK DAILY NEWS critic Dave Kehr with a tirade against it (by
Phillip Lopate) which insists that the film's supporters have been
aesthetically "bamboozled."
     Kieslowski's audience is neither gullible nor easily amused.  The
concluding scenes of RED, which may represent the conclusion of the
director's career, tie the three films of the trilogy together so
perfectly and unexpectedly that their themes resonate in a viewer's
head for days afterward.  The films ostensibly examine the principles
of liberty, equality, and fraternity, but they do so in the service of
a much broader agenda.  Kieslowski has integrated three very distinct
pieces into a triptych that folds in on itself and contemplates its own
nature.  In the process, his characters determine one another's
destinies, even as the director plays God.
     Irene Jacob, the uncannily radiant star of VERONIQUE, is
Valentine, a Swiss model who we see shooting an advertisement for (of
all things) chewing gum.  In the film's most memorable visual trope,
her face is to be reproduced on a huge banner and draped against the
side of a building in Geneva.  Accidents and mishaps drive much of the
action in Kieslowski's films, and the most important relationship here
is catalyzed when Valentine, trying to tune in a distant radio station
on her car stereo, hits a dog in the street.  The dog, named Rita, is
bleeding, but alive, and Valentine tries to take it back to its home.
Valentine finds Rita's owner, the retired judge Joseph Kern (the
perfectly crusty Jean-Louis Trintignant), who hardly seems to care
whether the dog lives or dies.  Kern leads a solitary life, but has a
radio set up so that he can monitor the telephone conversations of his
neighbors.  Valentine initially finds his aural voyeurism repugnant,
but a strange bond grows between the two characters as they relate
their life stories to one another.
     The film contains a great many telephone conversations, and indeed
Kieslowski investigates the ways in which we humans communicate (or
fail to communicate) with one another.  It's telling that the
relationship between Valentine and Kern (they could be lovers if not
for their age difference) is the only one in which two people seem to
be gaining knowledge and support from one another (Valentine has a
boyfriend, Michel, who is in England and who she plans to visit, but
throughout RED she only communicates with him by telephone).  It
would be unfair to give away further details, since much of the film is
wrapped up in the intricate relationships that color the lives of both
Valentine and Kern, and an odd sort of "double life" that Kern himself
is living.  The film, and the trilogy, culminate in an act of God which
hinges on the intrusion of the director himself, who decides the final
fate of his characters.
     Although Kieslowski obviously finds something fascinating in the
face of Irene Jacob (which is honestly the glue holding this film
together), one is tempted to draw the conclusion that it's
Trintignant's misanthropic old judge--who conspires to manipulate his
own cast of characters--that the director feels the closest affinity
with.  It's a very good sign, then, that the embittered judge finds
some measure of satisfaction and redemption at the end of _Red_ (which,
incidentally, Kieslowski claims is his last film).  Kern has a pointed
conversation with Jacob at one point, asking her why she stopped to
pick up the dog and take it to a doctor.  Was it to help the dog, he
wants to know, or was it to make herself feel better, less guilty? By
the end of the film, the judge will be asking himself the same question
about his own contrivance, one that is key for Kieslowski, who has said
in interviews that he has come to believe people are inherently
selfish.*  Critics have complained that Kieslowski's films are reliant
on coincidence and overblown ideas about Destiny, but it's a moot
complaint when the director is so honest about his role as grand
manipulator of his own world, weaving his presence thematically into
the work.  The culmination of his masterful Three Colors trilogy
suggests there is Something Larger than Kieslowski's characters.
Whether that is the Deity or simply the Director is left for us to
decide.
* See the discussion of RED in Danusia Stok's excellent collection of 
interviews, KIESLOWSKI ON KIESLOWSKI, published in the US by Faber & 
Faber.  ISBN: 0-571-16733-0.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Irene Jacob, Jean-Louis Trintignant, Frederique Feder, 
           Marion Stalens 
Director:  Krzysztof Kieslowski 
Producer:  Marin Karmitz 
Screenplay:  Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz 
Cinematography:  Piotr Sobocinski 
Music:  Zbigniew Preisner 
Released by Miramax Films 
In French with subtitles 
"Blue, liberty; White, equality; Red, fraternity ....  We looked very 
closely at these three ideas, how they functioned in everyday life, but 
from an individual's point of view.  These ideals are contradictory with 
human nature.  When you deal with them practically, you do not know how 
to live with them.  Do people really want liberty, equality, fraternity?" 
            - Writer/director Krzysztof Kieslowski 
     RED, the final chapter of Krzysztof Kieslowski's THREE COLORS
trilogy, is a subtle masterpiece.  With its satisfying exploration of
such complex and diverse themes as destiny and platonic love, RED is
not only a self-contained motion picture, but a fitting conclusion to
the series. Through one brief-but-important scene, this movie adds
closure to both BLUE and WHITE, tying both to each other and to RED,
and thereby reinforcing the commonality of ideas threaded through all
three.
     This time around, the protagonists are a young woman named
Valentine (Irene Jacob, who starred in Kieslowski's THE DOUBLE LIFE OF
VERONIQUE) and a crotchety retired judge, Joseph Kern (Jean-Louis
Trintignant).  Valentine, a fashion model, meets the judge after
running down his dog in the street and taking the injured animal to the
address listed on the collar.  Kern is initially indifferent to his
pet's predicament, telling Valentine to keep the dog if that's what she
wants.  She does; however, the animal eventually runs away and finds
its way back to the judge's.  When Valentine goes searching, she
inadvertently learns Kern's secret--he enjoys spying on people by
illegally tapping into their phone conversations.
     Told in parallel with the chronicle of the unusual friendship
between Valentine and the judge is the story of two lovers that Kern
spies upon.  Auguste (Frederique Feder) and Karin (Marion Stalens),
seem devoted to each other, but fate has already cast its die against
them.  For Auguste's life is eerily similar to that of Kern thirty
years ago and, like the older man, he is drawn by forces beyond his
control towards Valentine.
     Thematically, RED is the strongest of the three films.  Its
construction allows hardly a moment to pass when the viewer isn't
considering how fate manipulates the lives of Valentine, Auguste, Kern,
and Karin--not to mention the characters from BLUE and WHITE (reprised
oh-so-briefly by Juliette Binoche, Benoit Regent, Zbigniew Zamachowski,
and Julie Delpy).  Then there's the meaning of platonic love (or
"fraternity")--friendship completely divorced from sexual overtones
(maybe Billy Crystal's character from WHEN HARRY MET SALLY should see
this film).  Kieslowski shows exactly how multi-faceted any
relationship can be, and what occasionally must be sacrificed to the
basic human need of finding a kindred spirit.
     RED also toys with foreshadowing in a very literal sense.  A shot
of Valentine used for a billboard ad ("A Breath of Life") presages
something that later happens to her in real life.  It is this moment,
more than any other, that crystalizes everything that the THREE COLORS
trilogy is attempting to convey about life and destiny.
     While RED lacks the emotional depth of BLUE and the dark humor of
WHITE, it more than makes up for these with its textual and stylistic
richness.  The red-saturated visuals by Polish cinematographer Piotr
Sobocinski are crisp and consistently atmospheric, and the score by
Zbigniew Preisner is at full power (after being shunted into the
background in WHITE).
     The performances are without flaw.  Irene Jacob is mesmerizing as
Valentine, a woman unknowingly trapped in fate's web.  As is true of
the other female leads in the THREE COLORS trilogy, her acting ability
matches her screen luminance.  Jean-Louis Trintignant presents a multi-
layered character whose final secrets are not revealed until late in
the film.  Frederique Feder and Marion Stalens are solid in supporting
roles.
     RED virtually demands more than one viewing for an appreciation of
the picture's ambitious scope.  Repeated examination of RED's narrative
and thematic structure makes it apparent what Kieslowski has
accomplished not only here, but through his entire trilogy.  It's a
tragedy that this movie will not be eligible for the Best Foreign Film
Oscar (Switzerland, the country of origin, has decided to reject RED
because of its strong French and Polish production elements), but the
lack of official recognition does not alter the fact that this is one
of 1994's exceptional motion pictures.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Raymond Johnston
Dir: Krysztof Kieslowski
Photography: Piotr Sobocinski
Starring: Irene Jacob, Jean-Louis Trintignant, Frederique Feder,
          Jean-Pierre Lorit
     The third of the "Three Colors" trilogy, and according to the
director his final film, is a bleak and downbeat loosely structured
love story. In contrast to the complex revenge plot of WHITE , RED
relies heavily on parallel incidents, coincidences, premonition dreams,
doppelgangers, and superstitious fate to flesh out themes of love,
chance, and privacy. Irene Jacob (DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE) plays a
Swiss fashion model who by chance encounters retired judge Jean-Louis
Trintignant. Trintignant  is a cold and bitter old man who, like the
protagonist in the much inferior SLIVER, cynically eavesdrops on his
neighbors and expounds on the sorry plight of the human condition. The
talky encounters between them make up the main body of the film, and
their conversations impact on the lives of a small group of minor
characters.
     Following the plan of the trilogy, this film should have been
about fraternity. That theme seems to be interpreted in how people's
lives are intertwined through minor events. A minor mistake that one
character makes, for example, leads to somebody having grandchildren
thirty-five years later. Another character adjusting a car radio sets
much of the story in motion, changing the lives of several characters
permanently.
     Irene Jacob takes a blank sincerity to her role. Her motivation in
the film is called into question by Trintignant's judge character, and
her blankness leaves the answers up to the audience. She, like the
audience, is repulsed and fascinated by Trintignant's callousness and
voyeurism. Trintignant, one of France's leading actors, projects an
almost palpable air of bitter dejection and moral decay.
     What helps to unify this film is the use of red. Cinematographer
Piotr Sobocinski includes it in almost every scene. It is in banners
and photographs, costumes, slot machines, cars; any conceivable place.
A special lighting design that required more than twice the lights of
BLUE and WHITE combined also brings unity to the film.
     RED provides some interesting insight on the nature of everyday
encounters and chance meetings, but not without some heavy handed
foreshadowing and polemic speeches. It is a challenging film that may
not satisfy the fans of Kieslowski's more mainstream and humorous
WHITE. It does fall well within the tradition of European post new-wave
cinema, and is in some ways reminiscent of Godard's early color work.
     After the screening at the New York Film Festival, director
Kieslowski, through the aid of an interpreter, answered questions.
Typical of European directors, he did not say much. When asked about
the unifying  theme of the trilogy, he said that if you find a theme
there is a theme, if you don't there isn't. When asked about the three
films of the trilogy being so different, he said that it was the
distributor's idea to call the films a trilogy. When asked about being
an artist, he said that he was merely  a technician. When asked about
the film's stylistics, he said that it was due to the cinematographer.
When asked about cinematic influences, he said he never went to the
movies anymore. He also dodged questions about the meaning of the end
of the film. He did say that he was retiring from film making, and did
not know what he was going to do next. Kieslowski seems full of energy
for an aging man, and hopefully a few months of retirement will make
him want to return to work.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     RED is the story of a model who runs over a dog without killing
it.  When she tries to return the dog to its owner, she finds the owner
does not care and says she can keep it.  The owner turns out to be a
recluse and voyeur who idles away his time eavesdropping on his
neighbors cordless phone calls.  He suffers from severe depression for
some mysterious reasons, and he would like to "stop breathing."  From
this initial plot setup the show is filled with many characters and
takes numerous twists and turns.
     RED is the third and best of Krzysztof Kieslowski's putative
"trilogy" - the first two were BLUE and then WHITE.  You can see any of
them without seeing any of the others since they are all unrelated in
any real sense.  Kieslowski is the writer and the director, and he is a
master at the creating opaque mysteries.
     RED starts as a complete enigma.  Who is this hermit, and why is
he so morose?  What connection will he have with the young model's
life?  Who are all of the other minor, but important characters in what
is essentially a two person drama, and what is the purpose of their
roles?
     From knowing nothing, but being very curious the viewer is drawn
into a mysterious web.  Slowly we learn more and more about why the
hermit is the way he is and find out many surprises.  Even more slowly
we begin to see what importance he will have to the model's future.
     By the end of the show, the enigma is only partially solved.  We
know much more about every character, but much is left unknown.  You
may hate the ending, you may like, or you may just be confused by it
all.  On the suggestion box in the show, someone had written, "I wish
you would explain to me what RED was all about".  Personally, I liked
the ending and found it consistent with the rest of the movie.
     Go to the bathroom before you enter the theater; you will not want
to miss a minute of the dialog.  The writing is crisp, and the pacing
is deliberately and correctly slow.  Much to ponder in every scene.
     The camerawork is quite imaginative in the angles it uses yet it
is never cutesy.  The show was filmed too dark for me, but I am sure
this was carefully chosen to reflect the somber mood of the piece.
     The two leads were great.  The model was played hauntingly by a
lovely actress, Irene Jacob.  The hermit was played most mysteriously
by Jean-Louis Trintigant.  His makeup and his constant 3 day old beard
added to the conundrum of his character.  As good as the leads were,
the director/writer deserves most of the credit.
     Other than filming it a bit brighter, what else would I change?
Well, I would have liked to have seen the character of the model opened
up a bit more.  I would have also preferred to see some of the minor
characters developed more.  On the whole though, I would not change
much.
     At the end of the movie, an older gentlemen struck up a
conversation with me for some reason.  He said: "My friend saw RED last
week, and he thought it was about jealousy.  What do you think it was
about?" I reflected a moment and then told him to me the show was
teaching us that your life is an enigma, but ultimately you have a
destiny with someone and that destiny will eventually be revealed to
you.  He said he could see my theory too.  If any of you see it, let me
know what you think its message was.
     The movie is in French with sparse dialog which is easy to follow
in the clear subtitles - watch how they use italics to show the other
person is talking when they are on the phone.  The timing is good, and
the show runs 1:39.  It is rated R for adult material and for one 5
second scene of a nude man from the rear.  Any aged teenager who likes
serious adult mysteries would enjoy this show.  I recommend it to
everyone over 12, and I give *** 1/2.  This is a film that has you
thinking long after you leave the theater.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: December 20, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
anonymous@X.X.X (X)
     Like all things eternal RED begins and ends in the sea.  It is
well the film has the complexion of water, the water motif transports
the fairy tale, points the way.  Benign, sympathetic images answer each
other like waves, carrying within them their own inexorable unity and
completeness even as they draw upon humanistic traditions from way back
when.  So it is that Valentine gulps down the life-giving substance
before going on the fashion show; exhausted, the bolero trails off, a
wedge of light settling on her windshield like a dove.  Other lights,
other signals follow, and then the inevitable bloodshed that brings her
before the judge.  He is a dark, pathetic figure who fiddles his straps
and spills water all over -- a walking profanity against the human race
Beckett would have approved.  The all-knowing judge pontifies on the
maiden's past while they stalk each other across partitions and wheel
in circles, two Peking opera divas at war over justice and truth.  The
winner renounces his spells and charms, the loser descends into the
perfect amber sunset through the tears in her eyes.  Biblical allusions
abound: Valentine plays "winners-lose" at jackpots and crashes into
churches, and indeed she is a most saintly figure, almost made of water
herself.  Irene Jacob has such a difficult face, now overflowing with
radiance, now soulful and thin.  It takes a Kieslowski to challenge its
many facets, bring out the beauty; that must be why she is his Muse
Extraordinaire.  It is a special honor to witness that staggering
beauty as she takes the runway again, lights in her hair, flanked by a
commoner to each side, her bejeweled necklace Kieslowski's thorn crown
that absolves us of our failings.  Also present is Joseph Kern, thirty
years younger by the earnestness in his eyes, and in the stillness
before the storm they tell the future, read the signs.  (Water has its
violent ways too.)  With a ballet dancer's grace and fluid steps
stilled against time by flowing curtains and the look in those eyes,
Valentine throws herself at the theater gate, trying to beat back the
wind and the rain.  Under whose watchful gaze is she in turn spared by
the tempest in the sea?  Set in pacific, urban Geneva, RED is strangely
elemental, shot almost entirely in the magic hour in the shadow of
distant hilltops, from whence lightning issues like judgement on Mount
Sinai and the evening sun vanishes like a lost hope.  The many interior
sunsets in Kern's mansion are memorable indeed.  And yet it is morning,
ten minutes to eight, when our protagonists are plucked wet and
shivering from the English Channel.  As the judge looks on, time stops
and telescopes on to that exact moment Valentine turns back towards the
scene of the carnage.  The circle closes on the very imperfect replica
of Valentine's canvas-sized profile, accompanied by the tell-tale
foghorn which was already there when the picture was first taken.  A
peaceful note rings out, blossoms into a reprisal of the runway choral,
fades away, and finally rises to a crescendo even more glorious than the
first.  There is always hope then, just as there will be dreams of
eternal redemption.  And because of RED, there will always be memories
of a most profound and absolute beauty.
    -- To Stanley, who knew about the lightning, the wind, and the rain

Author
Steve Kong
Why can't more movies be as perfect as Red?
It's hard to find a movie as intriguing, fun, and engrossing as Red.  Red
is the third and final installment of Krzysztof Kieslowski's Three Colors
Trilogy.  The first two in the trilogy were Blue and White.  Red can be
seen as complete without any knowledge of the previous two movies.
The movie follows the life of a Swiss model, Valentine (Irene Jacob), who's
living in Geneva.  She is trying to keep a long distance relationship with
her boyfriend in England.  One night while driving home, Valentine hit a
dog.  She tried to return the dog to its owner, a reclusive retired judge
(Jean-Louis Trintignant), known only as The Judge, who spies on his
neighbours' cordless telephone calls.  We are then introduced to another
minor story that follows Auguste (a newly graduated law student) and his
love, Karin.  But, is this really a minor part of the story?
What drives Red is not the zigzagging plot or the well developed
characters, rather the mysteries and questions that arise during the film.
Who is the man who refers to himself as The Judge?  Who is Auguste and why
is he so important to what's happening?  What does Valentine see in The
Judge?  Will Valentine ever meet Auguste?  These questions drew me into the
film.  I wanted to know more; my curiosity was piqued. The beauty of Red is
that it is able to hold our attentions without guns, car chases, or
explosions.  Red is a well-written novel, whereas a typical American movie
with heroes, guns, car chases, and explosions looks like a comic book.
Red is a film about coincidence and fate.  Red is a film about how these
two things -- coincidence and fate -- mold our lives and how we don't even
realize it.  Watch for different things that Kieslowski uses to show this.
My favourite is the intersection where after Valentine makes a turn in her
car to go home, in front of a massive billboard where her gum advertisement
will be hanging right before Auguste crosses the street.  Later in the
film, we see Auguste stop at the same light in front of the gum
advertisement and pause a second to smile at the ad.  Instantly questions
arise.  These two have never met, but will they?  Will fate bring them
together?  Or will fate make them diverge?  There is the coincidence in
which Valentine runs over -- but doesn't kill -- The Judge's dog.  This
event brings Valentine to The Judge's house and this brings up even more
questions about their platonic relationship.
I got Red on laserdisc for two reasons: A friend of mine recommended it to
me a long time ago (thanks, Carlos!)  In addition, I was curious to see
other works of Irene Jacob, who I just saw in U.S. Marshals.  I want first
to apologize to Carlos for waiting so long to see this wonderful film.
Second, I want to let off some steam about how wasted Irene Jacob's talents
were in U.S. Marshals.  Jacob is a brilliant actress -- as she demonstrates
in Red-- and her talents are completely wasted on playing such a throwaway
part in U.S. Marshals.  I hope Irene Jacob gets some better roles in the
future; she deserves them.
Along with the brilliant performance by Irene Jacob comes the equally great
performance by Jean-Louis Trintignant as The Judge.  He plays his role
perfectly.  Watch for the scene in which he offers tea to Valentine.
Worth mentioning is Piotr Sobocinski's beautiful cinematography and Claude
Lenoir's production design.  Both stress the color red in a way that is
non-intrusive and not distracting.
I wish more American filmmakers would take risks and put out movies like
Red where the audience is drawn into the film not by the action or special
effects but by the well-written, thought-provoking story and well-rounded
dimensional characters. You can find Red on video; the dialogue is all
French with English subtitles.   If you're looking for a testosterone-laden
movie with guns, babes, fast cars, explosions and a mindless plot, look
elsewhere.  If you're looking for a thoughtful well-written film, Don't
Miss Red.

Author
Gareth Rees
     Valentine (Irene Jacob, the star of THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE)
is a model living in Geneva (the poster for RED shows a picture of
Valentine used in an advert for confectionery).  She runs over a dog
belonging to a retired judge (jean-Louis Trintigant), and as a result
becomes his confidante.  In an attempt to shock her out of her
idealism, the judge reveals to her that he spies upon the telephone
conversations of his neighbours.
     Valentine insists that something should be done, but learns that
the connections between people are more complex than she realises.  She
listens to a married man talking on the phone with his male lover and
determines to tell the wife about this betrayal, but then learns that
the marriage is a happy one.  She does not know which is the lesser
evil: to tell, and break up the marriage, or keep silent, and allow the
betrayal to continue.  She keeps silent.
     But the learning process is two-way.  The judge explains that he
had lost his youthful idealism when his girlfriend had left him on the
day he passed his final legal exams.  In the course of talking with
Valentine he recovers some of this idealism and loses his cynicism.
The conversations between Valentine and the judge are glorious to
watch; the house is beautiful in the dim light of evening and the two
characters are obviously attracted to something in each other they
cannot name.  The judge wishes he were forty years younger.
     RED is a film about connections between people, about the ways in
which people meet and interact with others, sometimes not even being
aware of these connections.  A young lawyer, about to take his final
exams, lives across the street from Valentine, but they have never
met.  Like the judge, he is being betrayed by his girlfriend; like the
judge he will leave on a futile trip to England to try to win her
back.  If the judge were forty years younger, perhaps he would be this
young lawyer.
     To emphasize this theme of connection between people, telephones
and red cars feature strongly and symbolically.  The film opens with a
phone call to America, and the camera follows the trans-atlantic cable
to suggest a world of visible and invisible threads joining people.
Other references weave in and out of the film and connect it to other
of Kieslowski's films: the photo of Valentine that adorns the
confectionery poster catches her in exactly the same pose as a final
shot of her on television; the young lawyer drops his books in the
street on the day before his exams (the judge had dropped his books in
the opera the night before his exams; the two Veroniques in THE DOUBLE
LIFE had dropped documents in the street to suggest their connection);
and so on and so on.
     RED is a marvel to watch, both for its visual beauty and for the
subtle and convincing development of the characters.  If it has to be
Kieslowski's swan song, then it is a good choice.

Author
Leo Bueno
     The plot: Young model meets retired judge who enjoys snooping on
other people's private telephone conversation; they become friends,
sort of.
     This is the story of the "relationship" between a young woman and
an older man.  She is a fashion model and a student; he is a
disillusioned older man.  She has a full life; he doesn't.  She is
physically attractive; he walks with a limp.  She wants love; he lost
love.  Her lover is at the end of a telephone line; his lover is a bad
memory.
     No, they don't climb under the sheets, but there is more than
friendship between them.  Maybe this movie is nothing more than a
delicate twist on WHEN HARRY MET SALLY.  Can a man and a woman be just
friends?  Can an old person romantically love a young person?  Why
shouldn't an old weird guy and a naive pretty young girl love each
other?
     If you are expecting lucid insights into this film, forget it;  I
am neither smart nor sophisticated enough to understand its
subtleties.  This often happens to me with European and particularly
French movies (which this one is, in part).  Maybe it was because I did
not see the other two legs of the trilogy, WHITE and BLUE, but having
read other folk's reviews, I am convinced that this movie stood on its
own.  Go see it, even if you didn't see the other two.
     I wondered out loud throughout the film, as I left the movie house,
and for a couple of days thereafter: "What's the point; what's the
point of this movie?"  Nobody got shot, nobody got chased and almost
nobody got laid.  These quintessential elements of Hollywood cinema
were conspicuously absent from this film; no wonder I could not figure
it out.  There was no great moral dilemma to resolve, no difficult
choice to make, no fight to be waged.  Yet, there is something
appealing about this movie.
     The characters seemed like people you have at some point known, or
want to meet.  The acting was superb.  Perhaps because the actors are
unfamiliar, one gets that "it doesn't look like they are acting"
feeling.  Yet, the plot is artificial enough for one to realize this
is, after all, fiction.
     One senses the ingredients for an offbeat romance are present, but
it isn't clear why the director didn't throw them in the pot and light
the fire.  Perhaps this movie is in essence a delicate romantic
cliffhanger; the characters get close to the edge, but don't take the
overt plunge.  You will wonder why.

Author
Kevin Leung
     Perhaps the opening sequence could have been more subtle.  That is
the only criticism I have of Kieslowski's last film, a glorious
celebration of the art of cinema and the vagaries of life, and a
tantalizing meditation on intersection between the two.  Elegiac,
self-referential, and full of world-weary wisdom and irony, RED is
widely considered an update of THE TEMPEST, with Kieslowski as
stage-manager/magician conjuring up sea-wraths, weaving intricate webs
of fate that link unsuspecting strangers and reconcile present to
past.  But the director, ever respectful of human freedom, would be
loathe to stuff alien words into his characters' mouths; instead, the
magic is mostly in the shades of light, the camera angles, the oblique
story-telling--the stuff of pure cinema.  Irene Jacob's character
(Valentine) comes upon dark suspicions, and shadows obscure her face;
Jean-Louis Trintigant's retired judge sets to unveal his secrets, and
the afternoon sun breaks through into his mauloseum-mansion.
Thunderbolts interrupt the "conversation in the theater," thus evoking
the Judge's tumultuous past and prefiguring an impending catastrophy in
one stroke, illuminating one brief moment in time against all
eternity.  The all-reflecting panes of glass that frame the characters'
isolation have never been more pristine, more revealing; every
coincidence, every glance out the window is a destiny missed, and every
turn into a side street is an adventure bursting with significance--as
if revelation is just around the corner.  Kieslowski does not invent
the conventions; the originality in RED lies in the exceptional power
of the symbols and imagery, and the propriety with which they fit into
the narrative, anticipating/recalling each other, until they seem to
sustain and animate the film all by themselves.  Indeed the color red,
in the guise of a Landrover, is used prominently as the vector of
narrative.  Nominally about "fratenity," in the master's hand it also
becomes the color of betrayal, of breathless expectations, a warning;
very early in the film (following the first fashion show), the
oppressive array of red objects and road-map of cautionary signs and
flashing lights (paced by Zbigniew Preisner's breath-taking score)
combine to establish a mood almost oracular in intensity that will
never go away.  The crafty director is not above throwing in red
herrings either: the red jacket is on the *other* fashion model as the
surprised camera pulls away; it tracks down Valentine as she glides
down the runway and then--with characteristic Kieslowskian
modesty--almost trips and falls on her high spiked heels.  In fact the
entire film has this disposition of a precisely choreographed fashion
show graced with humanizing glitches; it is a cosmic fairy tale told
with the power and certainty (as Dave Kehr suggested in "Film Comment")
of planetary alignment, yet it is also one that finally repudiates
design in favor of freedom and the chaos of life.  Kieslowski has set
out to create a masterpiece, and who can deny he has created the
cinematic landmark of the 1990's.  All in all, it seems like an
appropriate note on which to end his brilliant career.
     It is springtime in Geneva, but Joseph Kern's garden is full of
fallen leaves.  Tormented by guilt and sunk in irony and indifference,
he is really more Camus' judge-penitent than Kafka's Joseph K.
Trintigant gives a supremely controlled portrait of this black-hole of
accumulated cynicism, a deeply withdrawn man incapable of giving
anything away; only his still clear eyes reveal the madness that must
have burnt away so much of his life.  Having given up his worldly
titles, the Judge holds the world in contempt and spends his days
eavesdropping on his neighbors' phone-calls.  He is an impressive
wizard of technology, and his command of weather conditions, planetary
motion, and daylight also seems downright supernatural; but mostly he
is a haggard, bitter old man whose lightbulbs are running out.
Valentine is his opposite: she is open and radiant, the poster-girl of
red-blooded youthfulness that gives so much life and inspiration to the
film.  She meets Kern through an accident, when she runs over his
German shepherd while she is distracted by interference on her car
radio.  Initially Kern sends woman and dog away, prompting her to call
on him to "stop breathing." Later he sets her up to "discover" his
voyeurism; the display of self-flagellation is evidently meant as
revenge for his loss of idealism, to be wrecked upon the guileless of
the world.  His scheming fails, for Jacob/Valentine's face is finally
too sympathetic, and her compassion for him is too genuine.  The
subtle, poignant, and finely-nuanced portrayal of their emerging
friendship is reminiscent of the story-telling technique of the best
parts of BLUE.  Valentines tells Kern about her troubled brother, her
fears and admonitions; he gradually reveals his tribulations and guilt,
and tells her the story of his unfaithful lover who died in a
car-wreck.  He says he dreams of her (Valentine), and sets out to free
her from the cold comfort of her displaced, destructive love affair.
Round the corner from her apartment lives the earnest Auguste, a sort
of young, unspoiled "double" for Kern, whom Kern learns about while
spying on phone calls.  Not only is Auguste also involved in a ruinous
relationship, but it is clear that he shares Kern's dubious taste for
self-pity and futility.  (Kieslowski's concise characterization of
Auguste--using just scraps of dialog and a few short scenes--has the
clarity of self-knowledge.) Only the fairy-tale maiden Valentine can
save him from a fate like Kern's, but they stubbornly keep missing each
other in the streets, as though they were ciphers in an Altman tale.
It is finally up to the Judge to take drastic measures, to give them a
much needed hand on their way to their manifest destiny.
     RED is a fable about the mysterious, intangible links between
human beings, and as in THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE, these connections
are for the most part one-sided or blocked, if not missed completely
until too late.  There are the missed opportunities between Valentine
and Auguste, always a few heartbeats apart, and the miscommunications
between them and their respective ex-lovers.  Among the incidental
figures, Valentine's estranged brother Mark is always preying on her
mind.  Through the intercepted phone calls, we also learn about the
chasm between the closet-homosexual and his wife, as well as the
pathetic story of the attention-pandering elderly mother; these little
everyday tragedies seem to be growing in the air, flourishing behind
every closed door.  Kern, acknowledging his limited powers, tells
Valentine she can't live for others, but must just "be" (herself);
meanwhile he is secretly cultivating a redeeming love in the ruins with
the last summons of his powers.  It is amusing that Kieslowski chooses
the telephone as metaphor for both isolation and connectedness,
considering the days of wire-taps and crossed-up telephone lines he
must have endured in old communist Poland, where phone calls were
anything but private and insular.  Valentine, the crown jewel of a
Western culture that values individual freedom above all else, pleads
that "everyone deserves their privacy"; but when she calls at the gay
husband's home to blow the Judge's cover, she is shocked to find the
man's young daughter eavesdropping on the phone too, and seems none the
worse for having learned the terrible secret.  Perhaps people are more
complex and resilient, more understanding of others' weaknesses, than
the romantics and cynics would like to believe after all.  RED, the
most flamboyant and visually beautiful work among Kieslowski's films,
also has the most voyeurism, the most decrepit old women running around
with recycled bottles, as well as numerous other obscenities.  Death,
the greatest obscenity of them all, is present in particular
abundance.  It is as if beauty and its antithesis must exist side by
side, if not exactly in harmony, then at least with respectful
wariness, and a peculiar kind of grace.  During the second fashion
show, Valentine receives Kieslowski's coronation of light and is
showered with every tricks of flattery the camera can muster, and yet
she is completely distracted, scarcely thinking of herself at all, but
is looking all over for the disreputable dirty old man she has invited
to the show.  It is a remarkable scene, one that rivals in conception
and care the miraculous spinning shot from inside the tourist bus in
THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE.  It makes one wonder what divine grace
has given the young Jacob the centerpiece to two such memorable scenes
in a row.
     The conclusion to RED is more daring than the ending in BLUE, more
revelatory than that of WHITE, and far more subtle and mysterious than
both of them combined.  Valentine, Auguste, as well as Julie and her
assistant in BLUE and Dominique and Karol of WHITE are all assembled on
board the same ferry.  The thunderstorm, gathering force all this time
on (Auguste's unfaithful lover) Karin's computer screen, unleashes its
fury, killing all one thousand people aboard--only the principle
characters of the trilogy and an unknown English barman survive.  Also
perishing in the tragedy are Karin and her new beau yachting nearby,
but Kieslowski would only let us sympathize with Auguste's drowned pet
dog.  The Judge impassively follows the rescue on television; just
moments earlier he has been cradling his shepherd's new born puppies.
Safely landed, Auguste at last meets Valentine, whom he already knows
from her larger-than-life poster hoisted over Geneva.  The likeness of
that poster--Valentine's mystery-haunted profile caught in a blaze of
red--momentarily regenerates before him in freeze-frame.  The Judge
looks out the window, a shade more weary now, having passed one more
sentence too many; he allows himself a hint of softness in the eyes,
betraying the fondness expressed in his farewell and his gift of life.
He will not see her again.  With that, Kieslowski's long procession of
magicians and demigods--the camera buff transforming people and objects
into celluloid, the puppeteer Alexander honing his telepathy--have
worked their capricious deeds for the last time.  It is probably moot
to ask whether the Judge has condemned the many or spared the few.
Some die, others live on, and life regenerates itself--these are the
rules that the director's characters have always lived by.  On these
very terms, the dead Weronica sends warning to Veronique, her double,
and Ulla (NO END) is saved by her husband's ghost; Julie consents to
destroying the baby mice in her apartment in BLUE, and in return grants
legitimacy to the unborn child of her late husband's mistress.  Ignored
by them all, the decrepit old woman follows her relentless recycling to
all corners of the world.  Kieslowski's mythicism, dismissed as "new
age" by some frivolous critics, is ultimately as old as the Book of
Ecclesiastes, just as the conclusion to the trilogy is as harsh and
arbitary as the story of Eve.  Still, it is a tremendously moving and
fitting ending, the likes of which I doubt I'll ever see again.  Like
BLUE and WHITE before it, RED brilliantly subverts the ideal that the
color represents, turning the abstraction of universal comradeship into
the mutual congratulations of the lucky surviving few.  But if life in
our times is truly the uninterrupted aftermath of car accidents and
shipwrecks that Kieslowski's vision seems to suggest, then I suppose we
can all be doing a lot worse.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Irene Jacob, Jean-Louis Trintingnant, Jean-Pierre Lorit.
Screenplay:  Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz.
Director:  Krzysztof Kieslowski.
     Welcome to that annual year-end tradition, "Guess Which Foreign
Language Film Gets Jobbed By the Motion Picture Academy Rules."  Every
year the Academy claims it's trying to make the qualification
requirements more fair; every year, it seems they come up with more
restrictions than the Book of Leviticus.  Politics and arbitrary
interpretations continue to rob the category of worthy nominees, and
this year will be no exception: RED, the third installment in
Krzysztof Kieslowski's extraordinary THREE COLORS trilogy, has been
rejected as an entry from Switzerland.  The Academy should rectify that
slight immediately and nominate it as one of the best films of the year
in any language, a beautiful, resonant work that is the best of three
very good films.
     RED stars Irene Jacob as Valentine, a young student and model
living in Geneva.  Her life takes an odd turn one day when she hits a
dog with her car, and attempts to return it to its owner.  But the
owner, Joseph Kern (Jean-Louis Trintingnant), appears less than
concerned about the dog, or much of anything for that matter.  A bitter
retired judge, Joseph spends his days alone in his home listening in on
his neighbors' cellular telephone conversations.  At first Valentine is
disgusted by Joseph, but eventually the two develop a curious
friendship as Valentine learns about the tragedies of Joseph's life.
     As with the previous two installments in Kieslowski's trilogy, RED
represents one of the three principles behind the French tricolor.  Red
is for fraternity, but as was also true of BLUE and WHITE, the
treatment of that theme is far from the obvious.  While on one level
RED is about the friendship between Valentine and Joseph, it is also
about the way all lives interconnect, about a fraternity of all
humanity.  A parallel storyline involves a young lawyer named Auguste
(Jean-Pierre Lorit) who is preparing to become a judge, and his
relationship with his girlfriend (Federique Feder).  Gradually it
becomes clear that this story is meant to mirror events in Joseph's
life decades earlier, and it appears that they will be equally tragic.
However, Kieslowski and his co-screenwriter Krzystof Piesiewicz use
these two stories to show how redemption operates in its own time, and
how chance occurrences connect lives in ways which can't possibly be
expected.
     This brings up the question of whether it is necessary to have
seen BLUE and WHITE to fully appreciate RED.  I feel irresponsible
discouraging seeing this film in even the slightest manner, because it
has so much to offer on its own merits.  The production design is
stunning, and Zbigniew Preisner's score again provides amazing depth.
Irene Jacob, who starred in Kieslowski's THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE,
gives an incredibly sensitive performance as Valentine, who finds
herself on an unexpected journey of moral discovery.  She is matched by
Jean-Louis Trintingnant's Joseph, and their scenes together are
something truly special.
     That said, I truly believe that there are layers of RED which are
best understood when viewed through the lens of the complete trilogy.
For example, both BLUE and WHITE feature a scene where an elderly
person struggles to place a bottle in a recycling bin.  The scene
appears in RED as well, but in this case Valentine recognizes the
struggle and helps the old woman.  And in RED's emotional climax, the
lead characters from all three films appear, and an understanding of
what those other characters have been through to end up together makes
the scene infinitely more potent.  That is what makes RED so special:
it has a scope and a heart which, when combined with BLUE and WHITE, is
truly breathtaking.  This is the work of a filmmaker at the height of
his creative powers, which makes Kieslowski's announcement that he is
retiring a genuine tragedy.  RED stands independently as a great film;
the three colors together create a miraculous tapestry, one of the
great film experiences of the decade.
-- Scott Renshaw Stanford University Office of the General Counsel
