Title
Review for Great Balls of Fire! (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        The story of Jerry Lee Lewis is ripe with dramatic possibilities.
GREAT BALLS OF FIRE chooses not to explore them.  The movie could have been
a dramatic psychological character study, or it might have been a backstage
look at the music industry or at the history of rock 'n roll.  Instead
director/co-writer Jim McBride has taken the road of TUCKER and made a
movie that is all flash and no substance.  GREAT BALLS OF FIRE is no more
than a glossy, sanitized Hollywood Production of Lewis' life.
        The movie chronicles the early days of Lewis' career: his rise to
rock stardom, his controversial marriage, and his violent tantrums and
alcohol abuse.  In telling the story, McBride shows little subtlety or
nuance; he paints everything with wide brush strokes.  The entire movie is
larger than life, including Dennis Quaid's performance as the "Killer."
        Quaid displays charisma, flamboyance, and down-home charm in the
role.  His enthusiasm and cockiness are well suited to conveying the
electricity of Jerry Lee's music.  Thanks to Quaid's hyper-manic, physical
performance and strong stage presence, the concert scenes in GREAT BALLS OF
FIRE are exhilarating, even incendiary.  Before one concert, for example,
Lewis is beside himself because he has to open for Little Richard.  He
thinks he should get to headline the concert since "Great Balls of Fire" is
the number one song in the country.  Fueled by his anger, Lewis takes the
stage and delivers a rousing performance of "Great Balls."  He whips the
crowd into a frenzy by setting his piano afire at the song's climax.  As
Lewis leaves the stage, he boasts to Little Richard, "Follow that!"  Quaid
has succeeded in capturing the essence of Jerry Lee, the musician and
performer.
        On the down-side, Jerry Lee, the person, is nowhere to be found in
GREAT BALLS OF FIRE.  Neither Quaid's exaggerated one-note performance nor
McBride's script lets us into Lewis' head.  Just what makes this man tick,
besides music and 13 year old girls?  GREAT BALLS OF FIRE doesn't provide
any answers.  The movie is paper thin, altogether lacking complexity.  It
could learn a few things from SCANDAL, or better yet, LA BAMBA.
        GREAT BALLS is so superficial and so light-weight that we can never
take it seriously.  Consequently, the movie's few attempts at drama fail
miserably; they have neither credibility nor impact.  LA BAMBA, on the
other hand, overcame its cliched rags to riches story to offer some
exceptional performances and riveting domestic drama.  Esai Morales'
performance as Ritchie's jealous and troubled brother haunts me to this
day.  Lewis' life is at least as rich a source of dramatic material, but
GREAT BALLS OF FIRE carefully avoids developing any serious themes which
might disrupt its light tone.  Sure, the Killer's music is great, but it's
his personal problems which make him interesting, troubling, and
controversial.  Why even bother to make a film of Lewis' life if you're
going to ignore the cutting edges which make him an enigma?
        Winona Ryder (as Myra Lewis) manages to instill some depth into the
shallow story.  Ryder is captivating as she portrays the pain, confusion,
and excitement of not only marrying a pop idol but doing so at age 13.
Whether she's expressing Myra's wholesome innocence, her sexual awakening,
or her reckless abandon while spending Lewis' money, Ryder's screen
presence is magnetic, drawing us into the character.  Her look of fear and
bewilderment at her impromptu wedding ceremony is amusing but also
compelling.  But despite Ryder's efforts, the movie still left me with the
feeling that Myra has been shortchanged, her story and situation
underdeveloped.  GREAT BALL OF FIRE provides no more than a shallow
"Classics Illustrated" version of her life-story.
        Ultimately, GREAT BALLS OF FIRE isn't especially memorable, but I
have to admit that the movie is fun while it lasts.  It may be all style
and no substance, but what style!  The movie is intensely colorful, and it
succeeds in recreating the '50s, complete with classic clothes, cars, and
cold war.  I also appreciated Peter Cook's cameo as a British reporter and
Alec Baldwin's performance as Lewis' cousin and boyhood chum, Jimmy
Swaggart.  Swaggart's self-righteousness, moral indignation, and religious
rantings and ravings are deliciously ironic in light of his eventual fall
from grace.
        Without question, the highlight of the film is Lewis' music, which
he re-recorded for the film with Dennis Quaid lip-synching.  Lewis is in
top form; his passion and talent have not diminished over the years while
the technology of recording music has improved dramatically.  Consequently,
the songs in the movie actually sound better and are more exciting than the
originals.  I went into GREAT BALLS OF FIRE indifferent to Lewis' music and
I came out desperately eager to buy the soundtrack.  So even though GREAT
BALLS OF FIRE pales in comparison to such fine rock biographies as LA BAMBA
and THE BUDDY HOLLY STORY, I have to give the movie credit for getting the
music right.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A much fictionalized and glossed-over
     account of the first year of Jerry lee Lewis's musical
     popularity and his marriage to his 13-year-old cousin.  The
     film will be most remembered for Winona Ryder's performance.
     Rating: 0.
     Rock and roll biographies are popular, of course, since THE BUDDY HOLLY
STORY.  GREAT BALLS OF FIRE! promised to be a little different.  First of
all, this was going to be one rock biography that did not end in a snowy
plane crash.  In fact, it turned out to be quite different, but being
different did not make it better.  This is a film of uneven style, ranging
from occasional drama to musical comedy in the style of BYE, BYE, BIRDIE--
complete with production numbers.  The characters are flat and thin, and the
relationship to truth or even credibility is tangential at best.  Dennis
Quaid's wild high-energy mannerisms break new ground in his acting, but
surprisingly, newcomer Winona Ryder as his 13-year-old cousin and eventual
bride is more than a match for him in attracting audience attention.  It may
well be that Ryder is remembered for this film more than Quaid.
     The film is a *very* light treatment of Lewis's first year of popularity.
A bigamist and a troublemaker, Lewis comes to live and make music with his
uncle.  His vision is to take the wild Black music he heard as a child and
infuse it into rock and roll.  He is attracted to his young teenage cousin
who idolizes him and one thing leads to another.  At the same time, his
first recorded song is a stupendous success.  We have all the standard
cliched scenes, of course.  We have the suffering rock and roll star playing
someone else's idea of good music and failing, then playing his own style
and being really popular.  We have the unruly audience that is tamed by
hearing the hero's music.  One touch that is unusual is Lewis's conflict
with his famous evangelist cousin, Jimmy Swaggart.  But there is no
substance to the conflict besides Lewis first paying lip service to
Swaggart's pontifications, then finally openly defying them.
     But really jarring are the segues into musical production numbers, such
as a whole high school suddenly dancing to his music and doing cartwheels
(what is a 13-year-old doing in high school?).  Quaid supposedly wanted to
sing all the songs but apparently while he can flip his hair like Lewis, he
cannot do a passable imitation of Lewis's voice.  Lewis re-recorded his
songs for the soundtrack.
     Far more than LA BAMBA or THE BUDDY HOLLY STORY, this is a quickly
forgettable summer film.  I give it a flat 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
