Title
Review for Krieger und die Kaiserin, Der (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you go to see The Princess and the Warrior with the expectation of a
fast-paced adrenaline rush like writer/director Tom Tykwer's kinetic 1999
arthouse smash Run Lola Run, you may be a bit disappointed.  That's not to
say Warrior isn't good; it's just not as relentlessly concise and edgy as
Lola.  The pace is more akin to Tykwer's first film, Wintersleepers, which
was released after Lola's success in the States.  Although Warrior doesn't
measure up to either Lola or Wintersleepers, it does deal with similar
subject matter, like coincidence and destiny, making Tykwer somewhat of a
second coming of the late Polish auteur Krzysztof Kieslowski.
Warrior stars Lola's Franka Potente (Blow) as Sissi, a quiet, mousy
psychiatric hospital nurse who has a pretty serious accident at the
beginning of the film.  While accompanied by one of the nuthouse's blind
patients, Sissi is hit by a giant truck and lies underneath it, unable to
breathe.  Suddenly, a young man appears and performs an emergency procedure
that will remind some of the Pulp Fiction breastplate-puncturing scene.  As
disturbing as the scene is, it's the best "meet cute" in a confined space
since J. Lo and George Clooney took that trunk ride together in Out of
Sight.
Sissi spends a couple of months recovering in the hospital, but once she's
mobile again, she sets out to find the mystery man who saved her life.  The
only clues she has are a button she pulled off the man's shirt and the blind
patient who "witnessed" the entire incident.  What Sissi doesn't know is
that the man, named Bodo (Benno Fürmann), is a thief who unwittingly caused
the truck to hit her as he ran from a botched bank robbery.  Bodo, an
ex-soldier, dove under the truck to avoid the pursuing policemen more than
anything.
Tykwer, who also co-wrote the film's score, does a good job fleshing out the
background of his two leads, especially the heartbreaking, self-hating Bodo,
who, after the death of his wife, landed a job at a funeral home but was
sacked after bawling at his first funeral.  The bank robbery was supposed to
be The Big Score that, presumably, would help to erase the misery of his
past, which often causes him to wake up crying while clutching onto the
boiler in his bedroom.
The wide-eyed Potente, who gets to wear a few different outfits this time
(and her hair has changed from shocking orange to a tamer blonde), proves
her work in Lola was no fluke.  Her Sissi is the princess of the asylum; a
dreamer who thinks fate brought her and Bodo together for a reason.
Warrior is much more serious than Tykwer's previous two efforts, and a
little self-important, too.  While it offers a few twists and turns like
Wintersleepers (and is nearly as colorful), it has no edge, and the ending
that's supposed to stoke your imagination falls pretty flat.  Warrior is
definitely pleasing to the eye, with cinematographer Frank Griebe returning
from Lola and Wintersleepers to provide lush photography.
2:13 - R for disturbing images, language and some sexual content

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Did you ever see two people in love, folks who looks as though
they were made for each other, and you said, "This is a match
made in heaven"?  Sure you have.  Now think.  Do you really
believe this, because if you think a sec about it, you're saying that
the meeting of this happy couple is not an accident at all, not a
coincidence, but was destined by a higher power.  Could be, could
be.  This could be idle speculation or a bull session you engage in
while on a lunch break during your sophomore year in college, but
not in the hands of the unpredictable Tom Tykwer, whose visually
arresting and stylish "Run, Lola Run," about a woman who has 20
minutes to raise 100,000 marks to save her boyfriend from
mobsters brought far more than the usual arthouse denizens to the
theaters in '98.  If style outstripped substance in that fast-paced
work, the reverse is true in Tykwer's current gem. "The Princess
and the Warrior" is a rumination about love, dealing thematically
with the question of whether fate or coincidence brings people
together, the attraction of opposites, and the sometimes thin line
between psychosis and sanity.  With only a single, brief scene--
one of cars moving rapidly from the view of a camera stationed on
a roof--that reminds us "Run, Lola, Run," "The Princess and the
Warrior," or in the more alliterative German, "Der Krieger und die
Kaiserin," is a potent testament to the healing power of love.
   Featuring Tykwer's favorite actress, Franka Potente in the role of
Sissi, "Princess" hones in the shy, twenty-something nurse in the
psychiatric facility of a medium-sized German town.  Sissi was
actually born in the institution, as her mother was also on the staff,
and Sissi apparently knows little about love.  One day she is hit by
a truck and, while lying motionless and short of breath under the
wheels, she is saved by Bodo (Benno Furmann), who uses his
army training to restore her breathing and quickly disappears. 
Little does Sissi know that the accident was a result of Bodo's
being chased after a small-town robbery he botched or that he and
his brother Walter (Joachim Krol) are small-time crooks who plan
to make one big haul and leave the country.  When Sissi heals
after two months in the hospital,she is determined to find her savior
not so much to thank him but to fulfill what she believes to be her
destiny: to affiliate herself for the long term with this heroic
gentleman--except that Bodo, fighting vigorously against his own
feelings, wants nothing to do with her.
   As the plot unfolds we learn more about why Bodo acts not such
coldly toward the pursuing woman (who is not at all unattractive)
but literally throws her out on at least two occasions when she has
chased after him.  In fact, on of the great merits of this picture is
that unlike a Hollywood director who signals us from almost the
start about its characters, virtually telling us whom to like and
whom to hiss, Tywker takes his time to let his audience get to
know the people.  "The Princess and the Warrior" does not outlast
its 130-minute length.
   Unlike popcorn movies such as "Swordfish" which are intent on
providing nice-sized explosions from the start and upping the ante
until the conclusion, "Princess" surprises us by sudden reversals. 
A session of group therapy in the hospital is followed by a violent
outburst of a patient responding to a voice in his head.  An
extended period of talk and meditation is followed by an
explosively violent scene involving a frenzied bank robbery, the
violence making its impression by its very contrast with the
unobtrusive and the dormant.  The surreal conclusion is a
reflection on life, on how our existence could have been different if
only chance happenings occurred which might have caused major
changes in our entire development.
   Tykwer is well served by Johnny Kilmek and Reinhold Heil's
astonishing good and appropriate music while Frank Griebe's
camera gives us a good image of the touristic German town of
Wuppertal, with its steep hills and slopes, a place eminently suited
to people who want to hide out from the world.  Tom Tykwer
obviously believes in the power of love to heal and restore our
vitality, but happily eschews the insipidly sentimental ways that
Hollywood regularly chooses to make that all-important point.
Rated R.  Running time: 130 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Writer/director Tom Tykwer made quite a splash, internationally, with his
surprisingly popular, hyper-kinetic film, "Run Lola Run." Now, he changes
gears, but keeps his star, Franka Potente, in the modern fairytale, "The
Princess and the Warrior."
Can a filmmaker who made his mark on world cinema with a fast-paced
81-minute action flick - the same story told, with a twist, three times -
pull off a two-plus hour movie that bridges romance, bank robbery and a
visit to an insane asylum? The answer is: sort of.
Sissi (Potente) is a psychiatric nurse who lives and works in a private
hospital. When an old friend asks her to collect an inheritance at a local
bank, as a favor, she takes a blind patient in tow and heads into the city,
away from the safety of the asylum. Meanwhile, a drifter, Bodo Riemer
(Benno Furmann), is being chased by supermarket security guards for
shoplifting and hitches a ride on the back of a trailer truck. The driver,
distracted by the unwanted hitcher, reacts too late as Sissi walks into his
path and is run down.
Not knowing what damage he has caused, Bodo seeks refuge from his pursuers
under the truck and, in a burst of heroics, saves Sissi's life with an
impromptu tracheotomy. He stays with the injured nurse until medical help
can be summoned, then disappears without a trace. Months later, the nearly
recovered Sissi begins a search for "the man" who saved her life. When she
finally finds him, the sad and angry Bodo wants nothing to do with her.
They have another chance encounter when Sissi arrives at the bank to
collect her friend's inheritance just when Bodo and his brother Walter
(Joachim Krol) are robbing it. Walter gets shot and has to be left behind,
but Sissi helps Bodo escape and brings him to her hospital to hide. As she
gets to know him, she comes to believe their meeting was not just chance,
but destiny.
I have to give Tykwer credit in his single-minded vision of this modern
fairytale. It is ambitious in its scope and tries to cover a lot of ground.
It's kind of like "Beauty and the Beast" meets "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest" with the shy princess searching for her savior, a reluctant hero who
has his own share of deep-seated psychological problems. When Sissi gives
Bodo asylum in the asylum, she begins a journey of self-discovery that
draws her closer to the troubled former soldier. She also learns the truth
about his past - a gas station explosion killed his girlfriend and Bodo has
never been able to cope with the death.
Throw into this mixture the botched bank robbery and the unexpected death
of Bodo's brother and Tykwer takes us on a low-key roller coaster ride that
tries hard to cover all of its bases, but, in the end, fragments in too
many directions. The extended "Cuckoo's Nest" sequence has characters
straight out of Ken Kesey's story. I half expected R.P. McMurphy to show
his face and demand to watch the World Series.
The characters are, in Sissi's case, shy and quiet, and Bodo's, sullen and
quiet, making this a pretty quiet movie, overall, especially when compared
to the raucous "Run Lola Run." Tykwer, with Johnny Kilmek and Reinhold
Heil, provide the music score (derivative of the likes of Bernard Herrmann)
that keeps tensions building, helping the too-long runtime feel just a bit
shorter. The tech aspects of the film are pretty nifty.
Tykwer tries to do too much with "The Princess and the Warrior." Part
fairytale, part romance, part self-awakening, part bank heist, there are
just too many parts. It's ambitious and obvious that the writer/director
sees greatness in himself, but he ain't no Krzysztof Kieslowski, at least
not yet. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
The strangely named THE PRINCESS AND THE WARRIOR (DER KRIEGER UND DIE 
KAISERIN) reunites the director (Tom Tykwer) and the star (Franka 
Potente) of the hugely popular RUN LOLA RUN.  Seen then sporting her 
signature orange hair as Lola, Potente played a tough-as-nails sprinter.  
This time she plays Lola's opposite as Sissi, a sweet and vulnerable, 
blonde nurse at a psychiatric ward.  Both characters stand by their man.  
Potente, who was recently wasted in the bland part she was given in 
BLOW, reminds us again of how terrific her acting can be.  
Because of a freak accident, Sissi ends up being befriended by a 
would-be robber (Benno Fürmann).  Joachim Król (GLOOMY SUNDAY) plays the 
robbery's mastermind.  The story centers on her need to get to know the 
man who helped her, and his need to avoid her.  Although Tykwer has some 
of his time travel tricks up his sleeve again, the narrative structure 
is fairly traditional, and the movie is not so frantically paced as RUN 
LOLA RUN.  Suffering only from a somewhat self-indulgent length of over 
two hours, the movie is nevertheless mesmerizing.  Although it 
culminates in the robbery, the film keeps its focus on the human 
relationships and not the crime.  Even if it's no RUN LOLA RUN, few 
films are, it is a captivating piece of work from an excellent team.
THE PRINCESS AND THE WARRIOR runs 2:10.  The film is in German with 
English subtitles.  It is rated R for disturbing images, language and 
some sexual content and would be acceptable for older teenagers.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Christopher Null
German auteur Tom Tykwer downshifts from the frenetic pace of Run Lola
Run, landing solidly back in first gear -- if that -- with The Princess
and the Warrior, a glorified and conceited film school project if ever
I've seen one.
Tykwer reunites with Lola star Franka Potente, casting her as Sissi (the
princess, presumably) a troubled mental ward nurse who probably ought to
be a patient herself.  After a morose 20-minute setup wherein the
players are cryptically introduced, we find Sissi lying near death under
a semi truck, run down in a city street.  To her rescue comes the
unlikely hero Bodo (the warrior?), played by the Gary Oldmanesque Benno
Fürmann (also Potente's Anatomy costar), a two-bit crook who indirectly
caused the collision in the first place.  Bodo saves Sissi's life by
giving her a homemade tracheotomy, and after a long recovery, the
already unstable Sissi soon finds herself obsessed with her savior.
What follows is a mishmash of heist flicks and David Lynch movies as
Sissi tracks Bodo down, is shunned by him, and later just-so-happens to
run into him while he and his brother are robbing the local bank.  To be
sure, it's an atmospheric, dark, and weird story as we ride the elevated
trains of Wuppertal, Germany, a picturesque small town laden with
shadowy wrong turns.
Alas, it's too bad that the story of The Princess can't keep up with the
creepiness of its setting.  With little in the way of a guiding plot,
the movie is poorly structured with confusing and random character
arcs.  Tykwer ultimately seems more obsessed with framing clever
photographs than in telling his story and as a result, he manages even
to make a bank robbery look boring.
As well, setting much of the film inside the mental hospital is a cheat,
an easy out for excusing the behavior of characters that would otherwise
go intolerated in the real world -- and wouldn't be tolerated in an
asylum, either.  The film feels more like a by-product of a bad dream
Tykwer had but can only half-remember.  Most notably this is manifest in
Sissi's sudden revelation that leads to the film's climax, a confession
that is as phony as they come.  The neo-supernatural dénouement is just
as foolish.
While Tykwer would have us believe The Princess is a meditation on
chance and destiny and the meaning of life, the whole scenario is a
contrivance and a fraud.  Tykwer is naďve in mistaking cleverness in his
use of coincidence and repeating themes for what is actually an obvious
and lazy plot device.  The result is an intensely restless audience who
were hoping for another Lola and got quite the opposite.
The biggest slap of The Princess and the Warrior comes right at the end,
when after you've suffered through 2 hours and 15 minutes of Tykwer's
histrionics, he leaves you with a long, slow helicopter shot, pulling
back from the final scene in a single take that lasts for a several
minutes.  Presumably we are left to ponder the depth of The Princess's
meaning.  Instead, we put on our jackets, check our watches, and wonder
what happened to the budding talent of a new filmmaker.
Director: Tom Tykwer
Producer: Stefan Arndt, Maria Köpf
Writer: Tom Tykwer
Starring: Franka Potente, Benno Fürmann, Joachim Król, Marita Breuer,
Lars Rudolph, Melchior Beslon, Jürgen Tarrach, Ludger Pistor, Natja
Brunckhorst
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
THE PRINCESS AND THE WARRIOR (Der Krieger und die Kaiserin)
Sissi (Franka Potente, "Run Lola Run") is a quiet psychiatric nurse beloved
by the long-term patients in her care but lonely in her personal life.
Bodo (Benno Furmann) is a troubled man living with his brother Walter
(Joachim Krol, "Run Lola Run").  When Bodo's chased through the streets for
thievery, he dances through traffic, startling drivers.  Sissi, in town
with her blind charge Otto (Melchior Beslon), is hit full force by a truck.
 Bodo saves her with an emergency tracheotomy and disappears, but fate has
dealt these two a hand which must be played in writer/director Thomas
Tykwer's "The Princess and the Warrior."
Mix together "Run Lola Run" with "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" and pull
the result out slowly light salt water taffy and you've got "The Princess
and the Warrior."   Once again, Tykwer examines fate from the height of his
extreme overhead shots and his own self-importance.  "Run Lola Run" was a
fun piece of pop filmmaking, but while "The Princess and the Warrior"
contains some beautiful imagery, in the end it covers no new ground.
Once again Tykwer's star Potente holds the screen, but this time she's a
blank slate, a sleepwalker who doesn't come to life until she almost dies.
She becomes obsessed with Bodo and tracks him down by taking Otto back to
the scene of the accident.  In a ridiculous scene, Otto (this film's Billy
Bibbit) remembers a sound which identifies which direction Bodo came from -
two months later.  (This type of contrivance makes Tykwer's plot rigging
painfully obvious.)
Bodo has been established as an extremely sensitive type (he cries at the
funeral of a stranger and loses his job as a gravedigger), but when Sissi
finds him in the chalet/shack he lives in with brother Walter, he wants
nothing to do with her.  Bodo is tortured by the accidental death of his
wife and Walter is planning a bank heist so the two can go to Australia to
get away from past memories.  Sissi, however, persists, returning on a
rainy night in a bright yellow slicker that beams an alternative to the
kangaroo crossing sign hanging on the brothers' wall.  She's still turned
away, but it's clear that Tykwer is moving his game pieces for a
confrontation midst robbery, where Sissi will be provided a chance to save
Bodo.
Tykwer and his Director of Photography Frank Griebe favor shots used in
"Run Lola Run" - Potente lying prone with her hair fanned about her,
overhead shots which render towns in miniature where so many ants scurry
about, dolly shots as characters are propelled down streets and hallways.
Tykwer offers up objects as talismans - a seashell, a locket, a button, -
to create a mythology around his fantastically titled story.  Editor
Mathilde Bonnefoy has slowed down the rhythm ("Lola" was an economical 80
min. while "Princess" runs a bloated 135), but the effect often goes over
the line from dreamy to somnambular.  Tykwer's minimalist score is effective.
Once Bodo (a much stronger costar for Potente than Lola's Manni) enters
Sissi's world, the "Cuckoo's Nest" comparisons come more fast and
furiously. Sissi's back story is finally filled in before the overtly
romantic climax, but once again Tykwer goes overboard - there are just too
many accidents (hair dryers in bathtubs, gas station explosions) propelling
his central character towards a choice that only happens in movies.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
