Title
Review for Missing (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Missing" is a moving and credible film about
a young American's disappearance during a 1973
coup in Chile, and the attempts of his wife and
father to locate him... or his body.  The viewer
quickly realizes that the son almost certainly
has been killed, and that the U.S. military is
behind the coup.  After that, the film becomes
repetitive, and is interesting mostly for
Lemmon's outraged performance.
There are many scenes of soldiers occupying
the streets, shooting people arbitrarily.
These scenes are like some science fiction films
set in the future, with the resisting "humans"
on the wrong side of alien search and destroy
missions.  However, this presentation of a
third world nation's military coup is believable.
After the son's disappearance, his wife
(Sissy Spacek) remains in Chile, at some risk
to her life, to find him.  She makes little
progress with the disinterested American
officials.  The son's father (Jack Lemmon)
arrives and also gets nowhere.
Lemmon, who considers his son to be a layabout
radical, is the stereotype of a conservative,
middle-aged American businessman.  He has several
generation gap arguments with Spacek, but gradually
learns to respect her, and the son he never really
knew.  This respect may be due to his embracing
their political philosphies, once it becomes
apparent to him that the lying American officials
were behind the coup and care little about the
life of his 'troublemaking' son.
Lemmon is fine, and his confrontations with
American officials are the best scenes of the
film.  A bureaucrat tells Lemmon, "there are
no such [covert military] operations", with a
prominent portrait of Nixon in the background.
Spacek is also good, although her character
isn't as defined as it should be.
One problem I had with "Missing" is that Lemmon,
the young Americans and reporters caught in the coup
are all innocent and have perfect integrity, which
is contrasted against the contemptible American
officials and military personnel.  Sometimes the
action of the latter aren't credible, such as a
U.S. military officer attempting to seduce Spacek,
or officials presenting a bill for $973 to Lemmon.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
