Title
Review for Acid House, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Zeitgeist Films
 Director:  Paul McGuigan
 Writer: Irvine Welsh
 Cast: Ewen Bremner, Martin Clunes, Arlene Cockburn, Alex
Howden, Stephen McCole, Jenny McCrindle, Kevin McKidd,
Kirsty Mitchell, Jemma Redgrave, Annie Louise Ross, Garry
Sweeney, Simon Weir, Irvine Welsh
   For decades now, Americans have been told that they are
the world's most violent people--with the largest prison
population, the most murders, the most violent crimes, the
most drug-taking, and the most obsessed with punishing
miscreants with the death penalty.  This may be true but the
folks in the States have no monopoly on brutality.  If we
accede to the ideas in Paul McGuigan's off-beat, often
savage and occasionally comic film "The Acid House," we get
the impression that chaos is a product of the uncultured--the
alienated working class, particularly of its youthful members. 
The area treated by the film is the northern reaches of
Edinburgh, Scotland but presumably the disorder manifested
in this surreal movie can occur anywhere.  
   What gives "The Acid House" a special flavor is not the
subject matter.  Working class mores have been done
virtually to death, especially in European cinema.  With Irvine
Welsh ("Trainspotting") as the author of the book on which
this is based, we expect the surreal, the tell-it-like-it-is
attitude; and that's exactly what we get in this triptych of
stories that are only loosely connected with one another. 
Just when you thought you've seen it all, McGuigan's film
comes along to show you that there are still more innovative
ways to satirize the lumpens and the lower-middles, ways
that not even the great German director Fassbinder could
have dreamt up.  Unfortunately McGuigan does not have the
aesthetic talent to keep his overlong work on an arresting
berth, so that despite the novelty of it all, you may find
yourself looking at your watch even as the character in the
first story (who has been turned into a fly) is spying on his
friends having graphic sex.
  Shot principally on location with the backing in part of UK's
Channel 4 and the Scottish Arts Council, "The Acid House"
opens with Part One: The Granton Star Cause.  The antihero
is a young guy, Boab Coyle (Stephen McCole) whose life is
falling apart all at once.  Rejected by his pals for his failure
on the soccer field, he is dumped by his girl friend Evelyn
(Jenny McCrindle), fired by his boss, thrown out of the house
by his father (Alex Howden), and just when he thinks nothing
else could go wrong with his life, he is confronted by God
(Maurice Roeves).  This is not the gentle Deity of the New
Testament but a genuinely vengeful One disgusted that He
has created a jerk who is wasting his life. Metaphorphized
Kafka-like into a fly, the new winged Boab--who is insect-size
and in no way a large David Cronenberg construct--spies on
the people he now hates, plotting his own revenge on them.
   In "A Soft Touch," the most engaging of the three stories
perhaps because it is the least dependent on off-the-wall
surrealism, the eponymous Johnny (Kevin McKidd) is
shotgunned into marriage with the very pregnant and
chemically-addicted Catriona (Michelle Gomez).  The father
could be just about anybody who hangs out in the local pub. 
Soon thereafter Johnny finds himself cuckolded by his
upstairs neighbor, the repulsive Larry (Gary McCormack),
who takes advantage of the Soft Touch's beer and electricity
while having his way with the poor guy's equally loathsome
wife.  Does The Soft Touch learn his lesson by the
conclusion?
   In the final segment, Coco Bryce (Ewen Bremner) has one
pellet of super marios (LSD) too much, is struck by electricity
and transformed into the body of a baby--at which point his
entire sorrowful life passes in front of him.  The tot's mother,
aghast and amazed that the tyke can speak (especially
obscenities), turns against her nerdy middle-class husband,
who has become impotent when observed by the baby.  
   You sure can't accuse McGuigan and Welsh of putting on a
talking-heads movie, of setting what is basically a stage work
on the big screen. "The Acid House" takes full advantage of
the power of technology, employing special effects to display
the talking 4-month old, to track the path of a fly, to show
characters overlapping, and presenting the spectacles
suffered by hallucinating druggies.  If heroin gives its taker
the pleasure of orgasms multiplied tenfold, you wouldn't know
it from "The Acid House."  McGuigan resorts to all the
physical and verbal vulgarities reminiscent of "Trainspotting." 
A fly makes a meal out of excrement, a baby throws up
graphically after drinking a bottle of wine, a newborn is
dropped from its mother's womb with umbilical cord dangling,
and a host of four-letter words is uttered without the slightest
subtleties that double entendres could bring.  Subtitles are
gratefully utilized to allow the audience to comprehend the
utterances, all made in a dialect that not even Eliza Doolittle
could otherwise have understood.  
   To what end?  Lampooning the lumpenproles is like
shooting sleeping ducks with buckshot: it's cheap, risk-free,
and unfair.  The boorishness, which comes across for a short
time as hip, becomes numbing, the movie losing even a
pretense of offensiveness.  "The Acid House" might be
enjoyed by an audience on acid, but after watching what
these junkies go through on the stuff, who'd want to try it?
