Title
Review for Innocent, The (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE INNOCENT tells the story of a British phone company engineer,
Leonard Markham (Campbell Scott) who is called on to help the Americans
led by Bob Glass (Anthony Hopkins) in tapping Russian phone lines in
Berlin in the early 60s.  Leonard falls head over heels in love with a
local German girl called Maria (Isabella Rossellini).  She is
inconveniently still married to Otto (Ronald Nitschke).
     THE INNOCENT is directed by John Schlesinger who has made a long
string of excellent movies (MIDNIGHT COWBOY, FAR FROM THE MADDING
CROWD, and PACIFIC HEIGHTS among others).  Here he falls asleep on the
job.  For some reason, he must have managed to miss every screening of
the dailies.  If he had seen what a turkey he was creating, he would
certainly have made major changes or abandoned the project altogether.
It tells a story that never engages or involves the audience and lacks
any semblance of energy.
     It is hard to enumerate all of problems in this disaster of a
movie, but I will try to give a few.  Why did the producers (Norma
Heyman, Wieland Schulz-Keil, Chris Sievernich, and Ingrid Windisch) get
a famous British actor (Hopkins) to play an American and sign up a
third-rate American to play a Brit?  Why didn't Schlesinger realize how
ridiculous all of the accents were?
     Hopkins plays a cliche of an Ugly American.  He is obnoxious and
loud and speaks in an exaggerated style.  Campbell, on the other hand,
never enunciates a single word.  When he speaks, he mumbles in a low
and nondescript accent.  He acts as if he is on heavy tranquilizers.
Rossellini does sound German, but like the most of the rest of the
cast, almost all of her lines are whispered or mumbled as if she is
afraid someone might hear what she is saying since she is ashamed to
have signed on to do this awful movie.  She giggles a lot and makes
meaningless small talk in most scenes.  Hopkins is one of the greatest
actors alive today and Rossellini is quite good so that it is
embarrassing to see them act so poorly.  It is the worst acting
performance in Hopkins career.
     The acting and directing are not the only problems.  The script
(Ian McEwan) has no content.  If you are able to understand the
mumbles, you realize the dialog is not worth hearing anyway.  Moreover,
the plot takes many uninteresting and even more implausible twists and
turns.  The movie is never realistic and you never care for any of the
characters.  The script makes a major detour in the last part, and
McEwan tries to mimic a Hitchcock thriller.  Instead it turns into a
poor quality slasher movie.
     There is a single funny line in the whole show.  When Leonard is
under the covers in Maria's bed, she asks what he does and he retorts
that he is "an undercover agent."  This really funny line is flubbed in
the movie since he mumbles it.
     One final absurdity.  The makeup and hairdos by Christine
Beveridge of Maria and Leonard 28 years later are unrealistic.  It
looks like that got a little hair frosting and nothing more.
     THE INNOCENT goes on and on at 1:58 thanks to slow and plodding
editing by Richard Marden.  I stupidly saw it all.  Like the movie, the
credits move at a snail's pace as this were GANDHI and the audience
would not want to miss a single name.  The movie is rated R for gory,
bloody, and gratuitous violence, sex, very brief nudity, and some
profanity.  In the US, THE INNOCENT has been sitting on the shelf for
three years now.  It was released first in Germany with the pompous
title of "...  UND DER HIMMEL STEHT STILL".  It was to have been a
Paramount release, but they sold it to Miramax since it is a putative
art house style film I guess.  THE INNOCENT is being advertised as an
erotic Cold War thriller with the byline of "The only thing you can
trust is your heart." Well, trust this review instead and don't get
within a mile of it.  By the way, there is not a single erotic frame in
the movie.  I award this dog only one half of one star.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 8, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/Germany, 1993
U.S. Availability: Summer 1995 (limited)
Running Length: 1:59
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, sex, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Anthony Hopkins, Campbell Scott, Isabella Rossellini,
      Hart Bochner, Ronald Nitschke, James Grant, Jeremy Sniden
Director: John Schlesinger
Producers: Norma Heyman, Wieland Schultz-Keil, and Chris Sievernich
Screenplay: Ian McEwan based on his book
Cinematography: Dietrich Lohmann
Music: Gerald Gouriet
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Possibly the best craftsman of Berlin-based, post-WWII thrillers
is novelist Len Deighton (THE IPCRESS FILE, BERLIN GAME, SPY HOOK),
whose meticulously-researched, taught page-turners keep readers
consistently interested and involved.  Perhaps the makers of THE
INNOCENT should have consulted Deighton before embarking on this
project--a wandering, occasionally-obtuse, and often boring tale of
passion, murder, and political maneuvering set in Berlin during the
mid-50s.
     The story revolves around British telecommunications engineer
Leonard Markham (Campbell Scott), who is "on loan" to the Americans
during his stay in occupied Germany.  His immediate superior is an
arrogant, regimented officer by the name of Bob Glass (Anthony
Hopkins), who quotes regulations and warns against security
infractions.  Leonard's job in Berlin is to tap into Russian telephone
lines and feed the coded messages to the decoders for interpretation.
It's all top-secret, so when Leonard becomes involved with Maria
(Isabella Rossellini), an "ordinary" German citizen, Glass' suspicions
are aroused.  After all, just about everyone in Berlin is spying for
someone, and Maria's estranged husband (Ronald Nitschke) has some
dubious contacts.
     For a film that's on-screen for two hours, THE INNOCENT takes a
lot of time going virtually nowhere.  All the spying and counterspying
is presented in the most uninteresting manner possible, the central
love story between Leonard and Maria never ignites any sparks, and the
murder comes across as a plot contrivance.  Although the setting is
perfect for delicious intrigue, the cliched script reduces everything
to a remarkably banal level.
     The members of a first-rate cast give less than top-notch
performances.  Anthony Hopkins, playing a stereotypical American,
occasionally goes over-the-top with both acting and accent.  Isabella
Rossellini (who, during a CASABLANCA-like entrance, bears an uncanny
resemblance to her mother, Ingrid Bergman) does a workmanlike job, and
her romance with Campbell Scott couldn't be less convincing.  These two
absolutely don't belong together.  It's like Ilsa and Victor Laszlo all
over again, except this time there's no Rick.
     What's most disappointing about THE INNOCENT is how little it
manages to do with such a promising cast and premise.  Problems start
with the erratic, poorly-paced script (which probably could have used
tightening up in another draft), but they don't stop there.  By the
time THE INNOCENT gets around to contrasting the freedom of today's
post-wall Berlin with what things were once like, the impact is
severely diluted.  And the tearful reunion which marks the film's
denouement means very little because we never really care for the
characters involved.  In fact, all things considered, there's not much
in this picture worth caring about.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
