Title
Review for First Wives Club, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Middle age actresses Goldie Hawn, Bette Midler, and Diane Keaton
get together for a fun romp.  In an age where many actors brood on the
set and look angry that they have to come out of the confines of their
trailers, here we have some acting pros who have a blast hamming it up
together.  The result is not a great comedy, but a serviceable one that
provides some nice laughs and easy to enjoy entertainment.
     THE FIRST WIVES CLUB tells a story of woe from the perspectives of
the injured first wives who have been dumped for younger models.  Its
motto can be summed up in the words of Ivana Trump, who shows up as
herself and advises the first wives, "Ladies, you have to be strong and
independent, and remember, don't get mad, get everything."  Although
some men may tire quickly of the constant male bashing, the characters
are all such comedic stereotypes that I never minded.
     Three friends from the college graduating class of 1969 (my class
I should point out), Elise Elliot Atchison (Goldie Hawn), Brenda
Morelli Cushman (Bette Midler), and Annie MacDuggan Paradis (Diane
Keaton) learn that their friend and ex-student Cynthia Swann Griffin
(Stockard Channing) has committed suicide because of her first husband.
They are all shocked.  As Elise puts it, "If only she'd called me.  If
only I was listed."
     After the funeral they get together for a drunken luncheon where
they share their sad tales of their first husbands and finish each
others lines.  Elise says that, "when men get to be a certain age," and
Brenda concludes, "good-bye women, hello Pop Tarts."
     Each of the characters is unique and yet strikingly similar.
Elise is an Academy-Award winning actress with tons of makeup and
monster sized lips.  As her plastic surgeon Dr. Morris Packman (Rob
Reiner) warns her about her request for another lip operation, "If I
give you any more collagen, they'll look like they were stuck in a pool
drain."  Elise believes in her medical miracles and advises her friends
that, "It's the 90s, plastic surgery is like good grooming."  In case
you haven't already guessed, every character in the show seems
enormously wealthy.
     Keaton, playing out of character for her, does a nice job as a
whiny woman who can not express anger.  A real wimp and with a bossy
mother, Catherine (Eileen Heckart), to boot.  When Annie tells her
mother about her therapist, her mother informs her, "You are married.
You have a daughter.  You don't need self-esteem."
     Although this is the three star's movie, the secondary cast has
fun too.  Sarah Jessica Parker plays Brenda's husband's, Morton (Dan
Hedaya), sexy new girlfriend Shelly Stewart.  Shelly's brain is in
proportion to the rest of svelte figure.  Brenda greets her with, "Look
at you.  My, my, the bulimia sure has paid off."
     Director Hugh Wilson and writer Robert Harling (based on a novel
by Olivia Goldsmith) combine witty dialog with a little physical humor.
Too often broad comedies like this dissolve into slapstick.  Here the
humor is mainly in the lines which are the best part of the show.
     The husbands are complete cads without an ounce of compassion.
Annie's estranged husband Aaron (Stephen Collins) takes her to bed one
last time before popping the question to her, "I want a divorce."
Okay, so it's not exactly a question.
     All of this is merely the setup.  The movie is about a club they
form to torment their ex's and take all of their money.  Half is not
enough for the misery inflicted on them by being dumped for someone "in
preschool" as Brenda phrases it.  The husbands don't fight back and
only grumble.  Elise's husband Bill (Victor Garber) screams at her with
the epithet, "You vindictive sack of silicone!"
     Most of the picture is about the antics of the club.  The show
tacks on a mildly serious ending that attempts to cast the show as
having a message about spousal abuse.  The ending has no place in a
comedy and only dulls the comedy and insults the message.  At the very
last, the women start singing their theme song, "You don't own.  Don't
try to change me in anyway."  This is one of the happiest musical
numbers I have seen in the cinema in a long time.  What fun these three
had doing this film.
     THE FIRST WIVES CLUB runs 1:42.  It is just rated PG since there
is no sex, nudity, violence, or bad language.  Given the theme of the
comedy a kid would probably have to be nine or so to appreciate it.
Younger kids would also be in danger of taking the male bashing too
seriously.  I give the film a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Redman
You know, this is a film that must have sounded like a no-brainer in the
meetings. Mix equal portions of two financial and critical successes,
"The Big Chill" and "9 To 5" and  toss in three of the best female
comedians in the business today. Shake vigorously and serve.
Brenda (Bette Midler), Elise (Goldie Hawn) and Annie (Diane Keaton) were
best friends in their college years but havent kept in touch since
then. Brought together by the suicide of the fourth in their group, they
discover that they have all reached "that" age. All have been dumped by
their husbands of decades for a younger, newer and more pert model.
As the three bond, they become more empowered and plot to get even via
their exs billfolds. Using a group of enjoyable cronies including
Maggie Smith, Bronson Pinchot, Jennifer Dundas and Philip Bosco; they
get the goods on the guys and begin to blackmail them.
The subjects of "Trophy Wives" and womens worth as they age, the
possibilities for cutting satire and any opportunity for engaging the
audience disappear out the window as the film never tackles any of these
head-on and doesnt rise above a television movie of the week level.
Every moment I was waiting for the three stars to explode out of the
plodding doldrums.
Part of the problem is that director Hugh Wilson comes from a television
and "Police Academy" background. Hardly cutting-edge stuff and little
experience available as to how to handle this type of film.
Hawn and Keaton are two long-time personal faves and both give as much
as possible to the film, but get dragged into the mire. Midler often
turns in dynamic performances although here she is the least of the
three.
The husbands and their bimbo girlfriends are icons of people as opposed
to real humans. The only sincerely likable character in the film is
Dundas as Annies lesbian daughter.
The movie attempts to deal with a number of stories. It takes a very
extended amount of time in the beginning to even tie together the lives
of the women, giving us a slow start. Something that this film does not
need.
The dumped wives are difficult to relate to on a personal level. They
are all wealthy, even though they're no longer remarkably rich. With the
exception of Midler, they live in spacious Manhattan apartments, run
with the society set and appear to be extremely financially comfortable.
Their ex-husbands are writing checks to them with amounts close to a
quarter million dollars.
The women were injured in psychologically and it would have made the
film much more interesting if they had gone after the men in the same
way. Instead we get to watch money exchange hands from one person who
has tons of it to another person who doesnt have quite as many tons.
There are so many other problems with the movie, but there are equal
numbers of bright spots. You cant put this cast into a film without
coming up with some comical scenes, even if just by dumb luck.
The film isn't atrocious. In fact, it's pleasant, but cant we expect
something better than just __pleasant__?
[This appeared in the "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
9/26/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Diane Keaton, Goldie Hawn, Bette Midler, Dan Hedaya, 
      Stephen Collins, Victor Garber, Jennifer Dundas, 
      Sarah Jessica Parker, Marcia Gay Harden, Elizabeth Berkley, 
      Maggie Smith, Philip Bosco, Bronson Pinchot
Director: Hugh Wilson
Producer: Scott Rudin
Screenplay: Robert Harling based on the novel by Olivia Goldsmith
Cinematography: Donald Thorin
Music: Marc Shaiman
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     It's something of a mystery how three accomplished comic actresses 
like Diane Keaton, Goldie Hawn, and Better Midler found themselves in 
the midst of an atrocious mess like THE FIRST WIVES CLUB.  My best guess 
is that the story looked better -- much better -- on paper.  After all, 
the premise -- a trio of women getting revenge on the husbands who 
dumped them for younger women -- sounds like a good idea for a truly 
biting satire.  Unfortunately, although there are a few nasty thorns 
here and there, THE FIRST WIVES CLUB is a largely uninspired (and 
unfunny) comedy that collapses completely in the final fifteen minutes.  
The saccharine ending will threaten to send even a mildly cynical viewer 
into sugar shock.
     The three abandoned women are Annie (Keaton), a meek housewife who 
has been going to a therapist for assertiveness training; Elise (Hawn), 
an Academy-Award winning actress; and Brenda (Midler), the loud-mouthed 
mother of a teenage boy.  Once fast friends, they  have grown apart over 
the years, but are reunited following the suicide of another college 
pal.  After discovering how much they have in common, they decide to 
avenge themselves upon the cads to whom they gave the best years of 
their lives:  Annie's Aaron (Stephen Collins), who deserted his wife for 
her psychologist (Marcia Gay Harden); Elise's Bill (Victor Garber), who 
is currently hanging out with a very young starlet (Elizabeth Berkley, 
showing considerably less than in SHOWGIRLS); and Brenda's Morty, who's 
engaged to a vapid social-climber (Sarah Jessica Parker).  The first 
wives' sitcom-like plans for "justice" involve causing severe financial 
distress to each of their ex's, and, to that end, they employ the aid of 
an important socialite (Maggy Smith), an interior decorator (Bronson 
Pinchot), Annie's lesbian daughter (Jennifer Dundas), and a mob boss 
(Philip Bosco).
     THE FIRST WIVES CLUB probably would have been tolerable had any of 
the characters attained even a marginal level of likeability.  But none 
of the major players is remotely sympathetic, and, about halfway through 
the film, I started wishing for the end credits so I could get away from 
these people.  The first wives are shrill and irritating; it's no wonder 
their husbands dumped them.  Of course, the men are just as bad -- self-
centered, dumb, and shallow.  And, unsurprisingly, the "replacement 
women" are bimbos -- bodies without brains.  The only enjoyable 
characters are the secondary ones, like Annie's daughter.  (In her case,  
I'll give the film some credit for presenting a positive, if 
superficial, portrayal of a lesbian.)  The "male bashing" charge likely 
to be leveled at this movie is unfair -- Robert Harling's script is 
equally unkind to men and women.
     An underlying theme of THE FIRST WIVES CLUB addresses society's 
negative perception of middle-aged women, that "worth" and desirability 
vanish with graying hair.  And, while this is a shameful cultural 
problem, the film's preachy approach doesn't offer any new insights.  
There are a few witty jabs at Hollywood's obsession with the beauty of 
"anorexic teenagers".  In Elise's words, the industry is interested in 
three types of women:  "babes, district attorneys, and Driving Miss 
Daisys."  Had the movie sharpened more such well-targeted barbs and 
taken a few risks, THE FIRST WIVES CLUB might have been fun.  As it is, 
however, the screenplay is lifeless, and the Hugh Wilson's (GUARDING 
TESS) direction is flat.  As for the non-verbal humor -- well, if you're 
amused by the idea of Keaton, Hawn, and Midler sneaking out of a high-
rise apartment onto a window-washer's platform, then maybe this is your 
kind of movie.  It's not mine.
     Despite the dross they're forced to work with, the leading women do 
their best to make us believe they've struck gold.  There are even a few 
times when we almost believe them.  Ultimately, though, the material's 
poor quality defeats even the combined skills of Keaton, Hawn, and 
Midler.  There are a number of interesting cameos (including Ed Koch, 
Heather Locklear, and Ivana Trump), but the one who gets the best deal 
is Stockard Channing.  She appears in an early scene, drowning her 
sorrows in booze.  What makes her lucky, however, is that she gets to 
jump off a balcony before the memory of the opening credits has grown 
cold.  By not having to stick around for the next ninety minutes, she's 
granted a reprieve that many in the audience are sure to envy.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB * Directed by Hugh Wilson.Written by Robert Harling
fromthe novel by Olivia Goldsmith. Photography, Donald Thorin. Editing,
John Bloom. Production design, Peter Larkin. Music
Marc Shaiman. Producer, Scott Rudin. Cast: Bette Midler (Brenda), Goldie
Hawn (Elise), Diane Keaton (Annie), Dan Hedaya (Morty), Stockard Channing
(Cynthia), James Naughton (Gil), Heather Locklear (Gil's new wife), Sarah
Jessica Parker (Shelly), Stephen Collins (Aaron), Marcia Gay Harden (Dr.
Leslie Rosen), Maggie Smith (Gunilla), Victor Garber (Bill Atchison),
Elizabeth Berkley (Phoebe LaVelle), Bronson Pinchot (Duarto Feliz),
Jennifer Dundas (Chris). A Paramount release. 105 minutes. Rated PG.
There are three opening moves to this movie. The comic-book design of the
opening credits; in her palatial penthouse, Cynthia who jumps to her death
from the balcony; a flashback to four young women, close friends who are
happily graduating from Middlebury College in 1969.
Cynthia's tiny sequence is the only serious one and arguably the best in a
movie botched by its comic-book treatment of a major subject.
In the first of a string of improbabilities, the Middlebury graduates,
while  so close to each other, have not met in ages, even though they all
lived in New York City.  It takes Cynthia's funeral services to reunite the
surviving three , Keaton, Midler and Hawn. They are now 45 or 46. If  you
believe their official birthdates, the three actresses are nearing 51.
In another forced ploy (it's in the book) all of them were abandoned by
their husbands for younger chicks. This is what had happened to Cynthia
too. In additional inventions, all three women had helped their husbands
attain wealth and status;  all three men are creeps; all their new
patooties are flawed. Sarah Jessica Parker is a dumb ,vulgar, uncultured
bimbo ; Elizabeth Berkley ("Showgirls") is a naive aspiring actress, who
much later turns out to be only 16 ; Marcia Gay Harden, is a shrink who
breaks ethics monstrously as, in another outlandish arrangement, she is
both Keaton's therapist and the lover of  Keaton's husband.
Keaton is in a trial separation. She hopes matters will improve after her
husband has unexpected sex with her ... and then announces that he wants a
divorce. Hawn's ex has the cheek to ask her for alimony.
To this coarse, too-much-is-too-much mess are added, for no really valid
reason, Midler's son and his Bar Mitzvah, and Keaton's daughter who
proudly announces that she is lesbian. Neither embellishment helps the
Jewish or the gay causes.
The ladies are seething. When each receives a letter from the grave
(Cynthia's),the trio decide to exact revenge. In ways too unlikely to
analyze, they succeed.
The actresses do what they can with their parts, but none of them is
likable in a movie where nobody is. With the minor exceptions of  friends
recruited to help the wives: Maggie Smith as a sly "grande dame" and
Bronson Pinchot, "one of the nine worst decorators in Manhattan" who also
lends a hand. With the exception of tongue-in-cheek Smith, the  acting
ranges from broad to very broad, the latter fitting best Pinchot and Sarah
Jessica Parker. There is not even token dimensionality to the three
husbands, with Victor Garber (as Hawn's ex) being icomprehensively passive.
The film's subject is no joke but is treated as such yet there are few
successful one-liners or gags --save for a funny scam sequence at
Christie's auction house.  While conceived as a farce, the film is not
handled as a farce. Sluggish, dull, doing nothing for feminism, it limits
it would-be message by limiting its arena to a moneyed milieu. In the
wrap-up the ladies use their new wealth to open (in an artificial attempt
to flatter female audiences) a women's crisis center. They throw a high
society party which is like the opening of a ritzy restaurant or a fashion
show. There's a dumb, cop-out reconciliation of one couple. The last scene
has the three women doing an embarrassingly silly musical comedy song and
dance number.
Director Hugh Wilson has made "Police Academy," (hmm), "Rustler's Rhapsody"
(ugh), "Burglar" (ugh), "Guarding Tess" (good). Scripter Robert Harling
wrote "Steel Magnolias" from his play, co-wrote the funny "Soapdish" and
was one 7 writers on "Sister Act."
If you want to see a delightful film about three women who revolt against
male oppression, try the 1980 "9 to 5."

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Paramount)
Starring:  Goldie Hawn, Bette Midler, Diane Keaton, Sarah Jessica Parker,
Maggie Smith, Dan Hedaya, Stephen Collins, Victor Garber, Bronson Pinchot.
Screenplay:  Robert Harling.
Producer:  Scott Rudin.
Director:  Hugh Wilson.
Running Time:  102 minutes
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes)
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There is something so unapologetically out-of-date about THE FIRST
WIVES CLUB that it becomes somewhat endearing almost in spite of itself.
If you remember the 1980 Jane Fonda-Lily Tomlin-Dolly Parton comedy 9 TO
5, you will be familiar with the basic theme of THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, as
well as the era from which it seems to arise.  The idea of mis-treated
housewives wreaking terrible vengeance on the pig-men who done 'em wrong
is likely to cause much hand-wringing in the sensitive 1990s, and I might
buy into that if THE FIRST WIVES CLUB seemed at all interested in the real
problems of real people.  What it really turns out to be is a silly
sit-com of a movie with lots of bark but very little bite.
     THE FIRST WIVES CLUB is the story of Brenda Morelli Cushman (Bette
Midler), Elise Elliot (Goldie Hawn) and Annie MacDuggan Paradis (Diane
Keaton), estranged college friends in New York who re-unite when another
friend, Cynthia Swann Griffin (Stockard Channing, in an un-credited cameo)
commits suicide.  The women learn that Cynthia's ex-husband had just
married a much younger woman, and that each of their husbands had
similarly dismissed them for a newer model.  Outraged at being thrown over
after the best years of their lives, Brenda, Elise and Annie decide that
it is time for a little payback.  Thus is born The First Wives Club,
dedicated to making the lives of their ex-husbands -- Morty Cushman (Dan
Hedaya), Bill Atchison (Victor Garber) and Aaron Paradis (Stephen
Collins), respectively -- genuinely miserable.
     For a while, it is entertaining enough to watch the stars of THE
FIRST WIVES CLUB sink their teeth into the kind of juicy roles which are
not generally available to women their age.  That context makes Hawn's
part the most fun -- Elise is an aging film actress using every surgical
means at her disposal to fight off the ravages of time and avoid playing
"the mother."  Living in a penthouse which is a shrine to her past
glories, she drinks and exercises herself into obliviousness, and Hawn
attacks the part like a great screwball comic.  Keaton is equally adept
with Annie, a woman with self-esteem issues and a terminally cheery
outlook; she has a hilarious moment when she finally releases some
pent-up aggression on her therapist (Marcia Gay Harden).  Only Midler
fails to strike a sympathetic chord; in the 17 years since THE ROSE, has
she ever played anything but an abrasive, wise-cracking loud-mouth?
     The film is supposed to kick into high gear once the three women set
their plans in motion, but that is actually when it stalls out.  Director
Hugh Wilson has a television comedy background (writer for "The Mary Tyler
Moore Show," creator of "WKRP in Cincinnati" and "Frank's Place") and an
accompanying middle-brow sensibility, resulting in a rather limp attack on
the patriarchy.  THE FIRST WIVES CLUB is not a particularly creative
revenge fantasy in the first place -- the justice isn't poetic because the
women go for their exes' wallets, not their middle-aged egos and libidos
-- but Wilson's haphazard shot selection makes it a rather clumsy one
besides.  On top of that, whatever sting there might have been in the
story is taken out by a string of pointless cameos (Kathie Lee Gifford, Ed
Koch, The Incredibly Wealthy Woman Formerly Known as Ivana Trump) and an
ending straight out of television, as the women use their ex-husbands'
money to open a women's crisis center.  Everyone pauses to make sure we
understand that whatever fun we might have been having was all in the
service of a Very Important Message.
     It is even more disappointing that one of our heroines actually
reconciles with the husband we just spend an hour and a half cheering
against, but I suppose that is actually in keeping with the retro feel of
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB.  Midler, Keaton and especially Hawn appear to be
having a blast wreaking their own brand of vengeance on an industry which
consigns actresses to oblivion when the wrinkles set in (there is a great
line about how an older male actor like Sean Connery can still be a sex
symbol).  Unfortunately, their male production team is content to turn out
a safely frivolous romp.  There are several small pleasures in THE FIRST
WIVES CLUB -- like SHOWGIRLS ingenue Elizabeth Berkeley in the karmically
glorious role of a talentless young actress -- and one large
disappointment.  As a pilot for a network sit-com, it is fairly enjoyable;
as a big-screen comedy, it is a pilot for a network sit-com.

Author
Joe Blenkle
Funny, funny, funny! Paramount's new comedy "The First Wives  Club" is
a well-rounded outing that has a little bit of everything.
Not only is it a very funny movie, it has its touching moments, a
little bit of drama, and lots of hijinx that will keep you in stitches
for the entire length of the film.
"The First Wives Club" stars Bette Midler as Brenda, Goldie Hawn as
Elsie, and Diane Keaton as Annie, three life-long friends that have
drifted apart in their years since college.
The trio is brought back together by the tragic suicide of another
friend, who despite her great wealth suffered from a failed marriage
and an unhappy, lonely life.
The "girls" find they have more in common with their departed friend
than they'd like to admit. Despite Brenda's loving son, Elsie's career
as an actress, and Annie's seemingly happy marriage and life as a
housewife, all three discover after a night of drinking that they are
all miserable.
Brenda and Elsie's husbands have dumped them for younger women and
Annie is soon to discover that husband Aaron's (Stephen Collins) night
on the town is only a gentle way of breaking the news to her that he
wants a divorce.
The girls ban together to form  "The First Wives Club" to hand a
little bit of misery back to their ex-husbands.
Brenda schemes to get the "goods" on ex-husband Morty's (Dan Hedaya)
selling stolen goods in his electronics store; Elsie is ordered to
liquidate all her and Bill's (Victor Garber) possessions and split the
money. She sells them to Annie for a dollar. Annie auctions them off
to raise enough money to buy her husband's advertising firm out from
underneath him.
The girls definitely get the goods on the guys with hilarious results.
The film also stars Sarah Jessica Parker as Shelly, a dim-wit blonde
who has taken up with Morty; Bronson Pinchot plays Duarto, an interior
decorator friend of Brenda; and Elizabeth Berkley (Phoebe) stars as
Bill's new (and not known to him - underage) love interest.
"The First Wives Club" is a Paramount Pictures presentation produced
by Scott Rudin and Directed by Hugh Wilson. Screenplay by Robert
Harling.
--
This review, photos, upcoming attractions, links and more can be found
on my movie review web page at: http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
- stop by and visit! Guest reviews welcomed - email me at
jblenkle@calweb.com

Author
Christopher Null
     The biggest crowd-pleaser of the year is upon us -- the powerhouse
trio of Goldie Hawn, Bette Midler, and Diane Keaton foisting their
womanness on us with a vengeance.  Sure to revive the debate over
whether films like this are "man hating," THE FIRST WIVES CLUB is, in
reality, a harmless big screen sitcom that actually manages to appeal to
a large audience.
     Rambling through its first 30 minutes with no real direction, THE
FIRST WIVES CLUB eventually turns into a story about three old friends
who want to exact vengeance on their wayward ex-husbands.  Elise (Hawn)
is an aging movie star, obsessed, as most aging movie stars are, about
her looks.  Brenda (Midler) is a bitter ex-housewife who loves her son
and bemoans her lack of funds to support him -- and hasn't changed her
hair since 1969.  Annie (Keaton) is basically a middle-aged version of
Annie Hall, only now she has a lesbian daughter and an intrusive mother,
and Woody Allen is nowhere to be seen.
     The most visible of the ex-husbands is Brenda's estranged hubby
Morty (Dan Hedaya), an electronics kingpin who has moved on to the
greener pastures of Shelly (Sarah Jessica Parker).  He becomes the
centerpiece of an intricate scam the women put together to basically
drive the three husbands to madness, ruin, and poverty.
     I must admit, that for all its middle-aged woman-bent humor, THE
FIRST WIVES CLUB still managed to be amusing to this 25 year-old man,
mainly due to some really fine acting, good jokes, and a fresh story. 
Keaton is the best, as usual, and Hawn also does a fine job. 
Desperately trying to steal the show (and ending up as the only wife who
I didn't really care about) is Midler.  But when was the last time
Midler played a character who *wasn't* an overbearing loudmouth?
     It's also a manipulative little film -- pulling those heart strings
about as hard as you can without jumping out of the comedy genre.  There
are loads of cameos -- the only person they forgot was Charles Nelson
Reilly.  Basically, everything works to give WIVES a sitcom feel (I
wouldn't be surprised if they adapted it next season...).  Just to seal
the issue, they even put Bronson Pinchot in a supporting role.  (Ironic
fact:  almost everyone behind the scenes of the film (including the
director, screenwriter, and producer) is male.)
     Parting words of advice:  Guys, prepare yourselves to be dragged to
the movie theater by your wife or girlfriend.  Ladies, please don't get
any bright ideas.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Alex C. Lau
Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned.  And when you get three scorned
women together, look out world!
That's the basic premise behind "First Wives Club," an entertaining new
comedy starring Bette Midler, Goldie Hawn, and Diane Keaton. These three
portray college buddies who grew apart after graduation. Midler and Keaton
became homemakers, and both helped their husbands become business
successes. Hawn became a movie star, and her husband became her producer.
They get together after a mutual friend, played by an unbilled Stockard
Channing, commits suicide after her ex-husband divorces her and marries
Heather Locklear.
One thing leads to another, and wouldn't you know it?  There's an epidemic
going on!  Men dumping longtime, faithful wives for younger, sexier women,
film at 11!  
The rest of the movie becomes an X-chromosome-centric revenge movie, with
the emphasis on broad humor and sitcom-like situations. Looking for
subtlety? Not here.  Looking for something that a representative of the
Y-chromosome can take as a model for good behavior?  You're going to have
to look somewhere else.
And yet the strong cast, aided by the direction of Hugh Wilson, is able to
pull this off without much of a hitch.  Maggie Smith, Sarah Jessica
Parker, Bronson Pinchot, and Elizabeth Berkeley -- yes, THAT Elizabeth
Berkeley -- all contribute here.  
Keaton is the real star here.  She gets to show a lot of the talent that
got her the Oscar for "Annie Hall," and without Keaton's stellar
performance, "First Wives Club" becomes just another man-bashing fest.
As it is, "First Wives Club" rises above its masculinity-averse tendencies
and manages to come out a winner.

Author
Michael Dequina
Walking out of the big press screening for The First Wives Club, I
couldn't help but feel as if I missed something.  While the bulk of the
audience, which had been laughing heartily during the film, left the theatre
all aglow with laughter and smiles, I left thinking it wasn't anything
remotely special, a light comedy that at best had its moments and at worst
was trite, labored, and much too nice.
Goldie Hawn, Bette Midler, and Diane Keaton are ceaselessly
energetic as three pushing-50 lifelong friends whose husbands who left them
for younger women.  Film producer Bill (Victor Garber) left aging, vain
starlet Elise (Hawn) for an untalented ingenue (Elizabeth Berkley--'nuff
said); electronics salesman Morty (Dan Hedaya) left the brash, zaftig Brenda
(Midler) for sassy, svelte Shelly (a perfectly catty Sarah Jessica Parker);
and ad exec Aaron (Stephen Collins) ditched the whiny, wimpy Annie (Keaton)
for her psychotherapist, Leslie (Marcia Gay Harden).  After an old friend
(Stockard Channing) kills herself after her hubby (James Naughton) leaves
her for a young trophy wife (Heather Locklear, wasted in a wordless cameo),
the three form the First Wives Club, determined to exact painful revenge on
their exes.
Problem is, the revenge isn't painful enough.  For a feminist
revenge fantasy, The First Wives Club is much too nice; the script by Robert
Harling (based on Olivia Goldsmith's novel) doesn't have enough of a
venomous edge: the trio's revenge antics aren't that nasty, and there aren't
nearly enough acid one-liners--something is wrong if the best insults are
those the three women direct toward each other, not the men.  What makes
this a greater shame is that the three stars are in peak form, obviously
enjoying working with each other, having a ball.  Hawn takes top acting
honors, so very funny and convincing as a poster girl for plastic surgery;
Keaton next, hilariously playing Annie's neuroses to the hilt; then Midler,
who is no comic slouch but just has less of a character to work with than
her co-stars.
 There are some funny moments to be had, such as a couple of good
one-liners and slapstick gags here and there, but for every one of those,
there are a handful that don't quite work.  An interlude at a lesbian bar is
ripe with comic potential, but so little time is spent there that it does
not pay off as well as it could have.  One of the more crowd-pleasing
sequences has the trio riding an out-of-control window-washing scaffold, but
the rhythm of the scene is interrupted by a gratuitous, forced bit where a
couple in bed recognizes Elise through the window and compliments her
appearance.  Director Hugh Wilson also attempts to add some seriousness to
the proceedings, throwing in moments where the music grows more somber and
the audience is cued to "feel" for the lead characters; these moments are at
odds with the majority of the film, which often asks the viewer to not just
laugh with, but at, the over-the-top heroines.
It would not surprise me if The First Wives Club became a
word-of-mouth hit with women, especially older ones; the feminist message,
the three stars, and the outrageous comedy will probably be enough.  But for
this (yes, male) viewer, it wasn't quite enough.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I was a minority for the opening night rush hour showing 
of THE FIRST WIVES CLUB. Affirmative action on the part of most 
middle aged mothers couldn't get most teenage guys into the theater, 
but I allowed myself to be dragged along to see this one because the 
only other movie opening was the Bruce Willis western LAST MAN 
STANDING and I didn't want to be the first or last man standing in 
line for that.
        THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, as expected, abounds in 
feminine mid-life crisis humor. If movies were paired off, THE 
FIRST WIVES CLUB would be married to CITY SLICKERS, its 
masculine counterpart. Both have an abundance of laugh-out-loud 
lines and physical comedy, although the female version isn't quite 
on par with the 1991 Billy Crystal classic. Beneath the comedy, 
CITY SLICKERS had a poignant seriousness about friendship 
and aging that THE FIRST WIVES CLUB tries harder to achieve 
but never quite does.
        Still, the teamup of Bette Midler, Goldie Hawn and Diane 
Keaton makes for an amazing comic partnership. Even though the 
combined age on those three has to be over 150, they're still in top 
form. Midler is the spurned Jewish woman whose rich husband 
(Dan Hedaya) has left her for Sarah Jessica Parker. Hawn is the 
washed-out actress who relies on cosmetic surgery -- particularly 
collagen injections that leave her looking like Lips Manlis from 
DICK TRACY -- to stay young. Keaton's character is the neurotic 
type who spends most of her time on her therapist's couch, trying 
to stay optimistic about her failing marriage. Her contribution to 
the movie seems like ANNIE HALL: TWENTY YEARS LATER, an 
inevitable comparison since her character's name actually is 
Annie.
        The three were inseparable friends in college, but have 
proven separable in the almost thirty years since. They reunite at 
the funeral of a fourth friend who committed suicide after being 
dumped by her husband for a younger woman and, after a drunken 
lunch of several hours, realize they're all three in the same boat. 
Midler's got Sarah Jessica to contend with, Hawn's movie producer 
husband is currently with Elizabeth "Jessie Spano" Berkeley and 
Keaton soon finds out her husband is getting it on with the 
therapist.
        Having this much in common, they decide to form an 
informal organization to help each other out. Remembering the 
title of the movie, they name it THE FIRST WIVES CLUB. What 
follows is a series of juvenile pranks and blackmail scams on the 
bastard husbands, including the most memorable scene of the 
movie, in which the three of them break into Hedaya's penthouse 
and must make a hasty exit in the window washer's cart when he 
and Parker return.
        The movie itself is predictable, juvenile and all that, but 
I liked it anyway and so did the predominantly fortysomething 
audience I saw it with, including my mom, who was lobbying for 
a four-star rating. I recognized enough flaws to not be completely 
enthralled in the movie, and I certainly couldn't identify with being 
dumped for a younger woman (give me a few years on that), but 
when something is as funny as THE FIRST WIVES CLUB is, I can 
overlook the brief but forced drama and contrived sitcom 
recycling.
