Title
Review for Solyaris (1972)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David M. Arnold
As a laserdisc collector I have learnt that often it doesn't pay to be 
impatient. Sometimes an out-of-print disc gets re-released and becomes 
readily available again.  Sometimes this is worth waiting for.  This 
has happened to me with "Dune" this past winter, and it just happened 
again with "Solaris".  When I first tried to obtain a copy of "Solaris", 
it was only available from the "Collectible and Out-of-print" department 
of my laserdisc supplier, for $150.00.  As a re-release, it may now be 
had, new and sealed, for much, much less.
Critic Penelope Houston said of "Solaris" that it was "Russia's answer 
to 2001: A Space Odessy".  Completed in 1972, the film comes from an era in 
which it seemed that nearly everything done in the West resulted in (or, 
was the result of) a Russian response.  Like "2001", "Solaris" explores 
the possibilities of Alien  Contact.  Unlike "2001", it does so with a 
deep emphasis on humanity.
The story follows a scientist, Kris Kelvin (Donatas Banionis), who is a 
pecialist in space psychology.  He has been assigned to get to the bottom 
of the peculiar goings-on at the Solaris space station.  Solaris is in orbit 
around an alien planet that is completely covered by an ocean.  The space 
station, designed for an expedition of 80+ people is now inhabited by only 
three.  Kelvin views the film of a deposition made by Burton (Vladislav 
Dvorjetzki), a pilot who flew a rescue mission near the alien ocean's surface.  
The pilot reported seeing strange things, including a giant, animated statue 
of a boy whom he recognized as the dead son of a colleague.  The prevailing 
view of the scientific panel that heard Burton's deposition is that Burton 
was suffering from overwork; there is a minority view that the alien ocean 
may be organic, sentient, and capable of communicating telepathically.
Kelvin wraps up his terrestial affairs in a bittersweet scene with his 
parents, and travels to the Solaris station.  There, he discovers that one 
of the three remaining crew members, his old buddy Gibarian (Sos Sarkisyan) 
has committed suicide after recording a puzzling message intended for Kelvin.  
The remaining two crew members Snouth (Jueri Jaervet) and Sartorius (Anatoli 
Solonitsyn) are secretive and shut themselves up in their labs.  Kelvin 
becomes aware of other presences aboard the station.  Snouth and Sartorius 
explain that the "guests" have been appearing for some time.  Kelvin soon 
meets another guest, in the form of his dead wife Hari (Natalya Bondarchuk) 
who also committed suicide several years earlier.
Kelvin learns that the guests have odd physical characteristics.  He tricks
Hari into entering a transit capsule and blasts her into space.  She 
reappears. He locks her in his quarters.  She escapes by bashing down the 
door, critically lacerating herself in the process.  The wounds heal before 
his eyes.  Despite these oddities, Kelvin believes (or, wants to believe) 
that the soul of his dead wife inhabits the body of the "guest" that has 
taken on her form. Kelvin has received a rare gift:  The opportunity to 
redress some wrongs that resulted in the loss of a loved one.
Eventually, Kelvin comes to the conclusion that the guests are forms 
emanating from the alien ocean.  Whether the ocean is capable of materializing 
matter, or is merely inducing perceptions in the minds of the crew is not 
made clear (I prefer to believe the latter), but the guests are as real to 
the crew as a brick wall and just as hard to ignore.  The crew rig up an 
experiment in which they transmit Kelvin's brain waves to the planet below.  
The experiment nearly kills him, but when he recovers he discovers that 
the "guests" are gone.  And, in a final scene that is beautiful, moving, 
and joyous, the ocean opens up to Kelvin for First Contact on a very 
intimate level.
"Solaris" is based on Stanislaw Lem's novel of the same name.  Like 
the best of speculative fiction, "Solaris" uses fantastic situations 
for observations on mundane human conditions.  After so many years of 
anthropomorphic humanoid  aliens in "Star Wars" and and on "Star Trek", 
it is startling to contemplate what alien intelligence might REALLY be 
like.  The alien life form in "Solaris" is a single, global life form.  
Or, perhaps a global colony with a single intellect.  Or, maybe something 
totally different.  We see the Solaris crew grappling to understand 
this intelligence, we see them consider blasting the  planet with lethal 
radiation (the standard, human knee-jerk reaction to the unknown).  And 
we seem them finally reconcile themselves to it.
Many science-fiction films abandon the human aspect in favor of 
futuristic gadgetry and fantastic settings.  "Solaris" presents the 
deepest view of Humanity of any science-fiction film I have seen.  
Tarkovsky purposely puts the standard sci-fi accoutrements in the 
background to focus on the characters' humanity. And, the interpersonal 
relationships between the characters are more complex, more complete, 
and have more depth of feeling that is standard for the science fiction 
genre.
And, speaking of humanity, the film is a revelation to me on another 
level.  I had grown up with the usual Cold War propaganda about the 
Evil Empire behind the Iron Curtain.  Now, I view this film, and I see 
ordinary people dealing with ordinary human issues of love, death, fear, 
and understanding: This drives home to me how wrong that propaganda was.  
Our government, our System, was preparing us for conflict with the Soviet 
Union using traditional techniques to dehumanize the enemy in our eyes.  
This film reinforces how universal the human condition is, despite 
political boundaries or nationalities.  It's ironic that this film, 
from the peak of the Cold War, can be such a powerful bridge between 
cultures.
Andrei Tarkovsky was a brilliant, visual filmmaker.  His shots are 
composed with layer upon layer of meaning.  "Solaris" features 
Tarkovsky's trademark of switching between color and black-and-white. 
More than one critic has called him a "visual poet".  The scenes of 
the alien ocean are breathtakingly beautiful.  However, anyone expecting 
a science-fiction adventure will be  disappointed.  This film is 
reflective, it is contemplative.  And, the science-fiction setting
is merely a backdrop for a film for which the primary emphasis is 
speculation on deeper human issues.
Image Entertainment's laserdisc of Solaris is letterboxed, in Russian 
with English subtitles.  (This is one foreign-language film I wish had 
been dubbed.  I know enough French and German to pick up dialogue in 
these languages with the help of subtitles, and I enjoyed listening to 
the musical, tonal Vietnamese language in "Scent of Green Papaya".  But, 
the Russian language is inscrutable to me and not all that pretty to 
listen to.  Subtitles miss nuances of dialogue and distract from 
Tarkovsky's wonderful images.)  Image has re-relased the disc in their 
"Lasers for Less" category:  Collectors should be advised to get it 
while they can.
To reply  via  EMail,  replace  "Xexecpc" with "execpc" in the
address above.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Andrei Tarkovsky
Writers: Friederich Gorenstein and Andrei Tarkovsky (based on the novel by
Stainislaw Lem)
Starring: Donatas Banionis, Natalya Bondarchuk, J체ri J채rvet, Anatoli
Solonitsyn, Nikolai Grinko, Sos Sarkissian, Vladislav Dvorjetzki
Andrei Tarkovsky's "Solaris" was advertised as "Russia's answer to '2001'"
when it first came out in 1972, bringing many people to believe that this
was the film that held the answers to the film, that expanded and made
sense out of it.  This is completely untrue once you see the film, although
one could see that the two films have many things in common: they're both,
what some people call, "cinematic poems;" both deal with space and alien
intelligence in more reserved and complex fashions; and both are leisurely
paced with long periods of silence and little going on in terms of action.
But this is where the films' similarities end.  After all, "2001" dealt
with the dehumanization of man; "Solaris" takes the opposite view, showing
the humanity of man.  Instead of dealing with the way technology has
crippled evolution, and turned us into inhuman droids, "Solaris" takes on
an independent from "2001" theme: the way that memories haunt us, and the
way that human contact is only a form of perception.  The film doesn't try
to be a "Russian '2001'"; it tries to be a completely different film.
"Solaris," based on a science fiction novel by Stainislaw Lem, deals with
what would probably be a trite episode of "Star Trek" (pick a version): a
space station hovers over a planet called Solaris that is filled completely
with an ocean.  It is believed that the ocean is the brain of the planet,
and that the ocean is basically the alien lifeform.  But some people who
have come back from the station claim that they saw visions that
materialized and haunted them, and all but three scientists remain there
when the story begins.
In the film's opening scene, we are introduced to Kris Kelvin (Donatas
Banionis), a psychologist/cosmonaut who has been chosen to go to the space
station to discover what has happened and make a decision to either
continue working at Solaris or leave (which means they may destroy the
planet).  After a 40 minute introduction to Kris, the plot, and to his
family, including his dying father (Nikolai Grinko), Kris gives a
heart-felt goodbye, and he's off to the station.
Upon arriving there, he discovers that his one friend who worked there,
Gibarian (Sos Sarkissian), has committed suicide, and has left him a
bizarre video message that sort of explain his actions.  He also finds the
other two scientists - Snauth and Sartorious (J체ri J채rvet and Anatoli
Solonitsyn, respectively) - acting really weird and reclusive.  Soon
enough, Kris sees weird images, such as his wife from years ago, Khari
(Natalya Bondarchuk), who committed suicide years ago, who then
materializes and tries to live life with him like it was before.
Of course, she's not the real Khari as much as it is a materialization
thereof.  The fake Khari is unable to recall any memories that the real
Khari had, and merely looks just like her and perhaps even acts a bit like
her.  However, she is only able to live when she is in his presence, or
else she dies or commits suicide, only to come back to life shortly
afterwards.  She soon becomes Kris' second chance, and he soon begins to
think of her as an entirely different person than the real Khari, given a
chance to love again.
The film deeply explores these themes, and actually goes beyond the realm
of being merely a cool sci-fi flick, becoming an existential exploration of
humanity and the ways that memories can be frightening and painful, but
also can be soothing and warming.  Watching Kris lie with his dead wife's
fake "guest" all day while the other scientists complain that he isn't
doing anything is one of the saddest and unnerving things in cinema because
after all, don't we have a point in our lives we wish we could re-live so
that we could take as much advantage of it?  It's the fact that this film
evokes universal deep emotions and does it without insulting our
intelligence that makes this a truly haunting experience.
Tarkovsky has been called a "cinematic poet" by so many critics that I
won't even try and be original by saying that he is.  But I will say that
he is definitely one of the best directors of mise-en-scene and shot
development that I have ever seen, up there with Kubrick, Welles, Ophuls,
and Bergman.  Shots aren't there to just show the story but are crafted to
evoke deep feelings, and give a sense of hypnotic mysticism.  The opening
shot of the reeds flowing in the water is a gorgeously simple shot, and
it's the simplicity that really makes the shots the most effective.  In
fact, everything else has a very minimalistic yet extremely deep feel to
them, noted as early on in the simple opening credits with Bach's "F Minor
Choral Prelude" playing somberly in the background, giving the film its
unique feel.
Tarkovsky also tells his story at a very leisurely pace, much like, say,
Kurbick.  I imagine that the story by Lem is perhaps 100 pages, if that,
but Tarkovsky turns it into a 167-minute film, filled with long shots,
extremely long scenes of very little going on, and various other techniques
to make everything last longer than a typical director would allow.  Yet
all of these never result in boredom, and the entire film has a hypnotic
feel to it.  You know the kind of long scenes where very little happens,
and the actors speak in long, hushed tones, and you just sit there, staring
at it, afraid to breathe, waiting for the director to screw up and ruin the
experience?  These kinds of shots, filled with all sorts of complex
layering that requires complete audience attention, seem to be Tarkovsky's
forte.
While the science fiction and special effects take a back-seat to the
themes and ideas postulated by the film, this film nevertheless is really
cool to look at.  The space station itself is a pretty atmospheric locale,
and the white background of Kris's chambers creates a cool-looking and
almost lonely feeling for the disturbed character.  We never see much of
the technology though (it works here), and we only get glimpses of the
planet they're on, seeing that everything is a gorgeously wavy ocean.  The
cinematogaphy is absolutely gorgeous, perfectly accenting Tarkovsky's
complex shots, and making this just one of the better-looking films in film
history.
The final shot of "Solaris" is one of the most haunting final shots in film
history, bringing the film's themes and ideas to a dramatic and poignant
close, and also allowing some very heart-felt emotion to pour in.  It's the
fact that we can all (probably, I hope) identify with Kris's connection to
the past that makes "Solaris" a real experience, not only in the cinematic
sense of the word, but also in the emotional one.  We all have done
something that we regretted afterwards, and there's at least one moment we
wish we could live over again with the knowledge we have today.  That's
what "Solaris" is about.  I'm not knocking other sci-fi films that deal
with general fear and horror (like the "Alien" series), but because
"Solaris" dives deep into the questions of humanity, and puts that focus in
the forefront, it is, along with "2001," the best science fiction film ever
made.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
