Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
Number of Reviews
44

Author
Stephen Evans 
Eyes Wide Shut 
Dir: Stanley Kubrick. Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman and Sydney Pollack
Cerebral, brooding and darkly comic, Stanley Kubrick's swansong, like
his greatest films, requires multiple viewings before a full
appreciation begins to sink in. And that may be unfortunate, since an
ambitious art film - even with two major stars - will have a hard time
competing for a repeat audience during summer blockbuster season.
Worse, few movies could live up to the expectations for Eyes Wide
Shut. Fueled by more than a year of rumors about the plot, nearly all
of them untrue, an audience will be looking for the ultimate erotic
film. This isn't it. To say Cruise and Kidman do nothing more than
nibble earlobes isn't giving anything away. Rather, we're doing film
fans a favor by letting them know if they've come for a hot time,
they'll be disappointed. And that's not their fault. It's easy to get
the wrong ideas about this picture.
Despite a teasing ad campaign from Warner Bros., this is not a movie
about kinky sex featuring Hollywood's most famous married couple. Or
even yawn-inducing sex.
Eyes Wide Shut is a tale of sexual obsession, with deep psychological
undertones, told with the logic of a nightmare.
Cruise and Kidman are wealthy Manhattanites (although the film was
shot entirely in England) with a darling seven-year-old daughter and a
well-appointed apartment. As Dr. William Harford, Cruise is a man at
ease in high society, overly confident with himself and his place in
the world. Kidman is Alice Harford, an art curator and seemingly
devoted wife whose sexual fantasies threaten the couple's complacent,
insular life.
Their intimacy is established from the beginning, and not in an erotic
way. The movie opens with a shot of Kidman slinking out of her black
dress. Later, while her husband dresses for a Christmas party, they
chat casually while she sits on the toilet, then wipes. It may be a
cinematic first.
They attend a party hosted by the fabulously wealthy but decadent
Victor Ziegler (Pollack), whose lifestyle provides a stunning peek
inside the world of the super-rich.
The Harfords are an attractive, desirable couple. And they are not
immune to temptation.
Alice dances and flirts at the party with an oily Hungarian
aristocrat, while Dr. Harford soon finds two willing companions
clinging to each arm. The Harfords barely rise above these attempted
seductions. The doctor is about to wander off with his two bimbettes
when his host sends for him. It's urgent, a servant implores.
Upstairs, a beautiful model slumps in an upholstered chair in
Ziegler's bedroom.
"I think she OD'd," Ziegler says, seemingly more concerned about the
impact this could have on him.
The doctor intervenes, calmly and without judgment.
"You know," Harford tells the young woman as her eyelids flutter. "You
really need to get into rehab."
He rejoins Alice and they leave the party, but all the attention and a
head full of champagne have put hinky ideas in her mind by the time
they get home.
Back at their apartment, William and Alice relax with a joint. But
something's turning in her mind. They argue about jealousy, fantasies
and sexual politics. In a stunning sequence that illustrates the
sudden chasm between the couple, Alice confesses she once saw a young
naval officer who she would willingly have thrown away her marriage
and family for a single night of sex.
The revelation shocks her husband, who is actually quite repressed and
naive, unable to grasp the possibility that his wife could be
unfaithful, even though it's never made explicit that she actually
would. But the possibility is enough to send the doctor reeling into
the New York night, where he begins an odyssey of temptation and
sexual obsession, flavored with syrupy decadence. This is where the
film begins to wobble, as it is difficult to believe Harford's ego is
so fragile that a chance comment from his stoned wife would send him
out of the house on a dark quest for...indeed. For what?
Each stop along his journey draws him, fascinated, to a deeper level
of sexual deviance. Each new encounter is more perverse than the
preceding event. This isn't as titillating as it sounds. Think of
Scorsese's After Hours (1985), with less humor, more nudity and
approximately the same weirdness quotient.
Following a chance encounter with an old college chum, now stroking
the ivories at smoky, midtown jazz clubs, Harford learns of strange
parties where his friend is forced to play blindfolded. But the piano
player admits the blindfold once slipped and he saw garishly costumed
men and mostly naked women doing, well, unspeakable things. The jazz
player gives Harford the password to the party and slips away.
For a troubled soul like Harford, this provokes curiosity of a very
high order. He persuades the owner of an uptown costume shop to reopen
after midnight so Harford can rent a black cape and demonic
mask. After an interminably long, silent ride, a taxi drops him at the
gate of a Connecticut mansion where a costumed Black Mass orgy is in
full swing. This is the sequence where digital shadows and
computer-generated "observers" were added to some scenes so the
picture could qualify for an R rating, as opposed to the box-office
poison of NC-17. That illustrates the ridiculous problems with the
rating system, since it deprives adults of the chance to experience
what Kubrick intended, while actually making the film more - not less
- accessible to children.
Harford certainly stares with eyes wide open as his conception of the
world splinters like the glass shards in a kaleidoscope.
Kubrick's stock-in-trade is metaphor and allegory. Here, he has
created the cinematic equivalent of a fever dream. And that's
appropriate, since the source material is Traumnovelle, or Dream
Novel, by Arthur Schnitzler, a friend and student of Freud.
Stunningly photographed in the ultra-formal compositions that Kubrick
favored, this is an often fascinating but flawed look at the
complexities of marriage, sex and love, informed by a highly flexible
notion of morality.
Eyes Wide Shut may not be the final masterpiece we would have hoped
for from the late director, although in its dispassionate, darkly
humorous view of humanity it is without question a Kubrick film. His
imprimatur saturates every frame. And even mediocre Kubrick is more
challenging than a dozen contemporary pictures, vying for audience
attention at the octoplex.
Rated R for considerable nudity, sex and language.
Cinema Uprising copyright ( 1999 by Stephen B. Evans. All rights
reserved. This work may not be reproduced or transmitted in any form,
by any means, without the prior, written permission of the author.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Lauded as a genius by many, Stanley Kubrick commands a superlative
filmography that includes such critically-acclaimed films as "2001: A Space
Odyssey," "A Clockwork Orange," "Lolita," and "Dr. Strangelove, or: How I
Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb."  Now, sadly, he's added "Eyes
Wide Shut" to that impeccable body of work and his final film is the first
and only blot on his near-flawless copybook.
        This much-publicized psycho-sexual tease-a-thon, with its star
billing of real-life marrieds Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, is nothing more
than one long (two-and-a-half hours long) boring exercise that features
Kubrick operating with talent wide shut.
        Kubrick, faithless to Arthur Schnitzler's 1926 novella "Dream
Story," has confused eroticism with nudity.  He has confused
intellectualism with talking slowly.  He has confused profundity with
pretentiousness.  In addition, the director has made some strange casting
choices, leaving Sydney Pollack in and leaving accomplished performers
Harvey Keitel and Jennifer Jason Leigh out.  Pollack, the director of such
box-office hits as "Tootsie" and "Out of Africa," is normally solid in his
occasional acting stints but here he's miserably out of his depth ... and
there isn't much depth to begin with!  Unhappily, there's not likely to be
a director's cut of this film to determine whether the decision to exorcise
Keitel and Leigh was the right one.
        In fact, with the exception of the stark black-and-white credits,
snatches of baroque music on the soundtrack, and many, many grainy tracking
shots down lavishly-decorated corridors, there's none of Kubrick's
trademark brilliance in this film.
        Cruise and Kidman, who bring little more than marital torpor to the
project, play well-to-do New Yorkers Bill and Alice Harford.  He's a doctor
and she's an unemployed art gallery director and they share a Central Park
West address.  At an opulent party hosted by their friend Victor Ziegler
(Pollack), Alice gets a little tipsy and starts dancing with a Jeremy
Irons-like Hungarian, who's singularly determined to get her in the sack.
Bill, too, is seen arm-in-arm with a couple of models before he's pulled
away to deal with an overdoser.
        Back home, Bill and Alice smoke a little pot before Alice's
aggressive jealousy kicks in.  As retribution, she confesses to her husband
that she once had deep feelings for a naval officer she eyeballed at a
hotel where she and Bill once stayed.  This hurtful admission sends Bill
into a tailspin; he pounds the streets of the Village in his heavy black
overcoat struggling with black-and-white images of Alice in the grip of a
horny midshipman.  It's all way too much for him.
        For revenge, Bill almost has sex with a hooker.  He almost has
feelings for a underage girl he sees in a costume store.  Then he almost
does the hooker's roommate.  And he's almost involved in an overblown
rococo orgy when an old college chum of his tips him off to a mysterious,
password-protected party where everyone wears masks and "the women are
incredible" (i.e., naked).  This "erotic" set piece, a cult-ish bacchanal
complete with chanting, incense, and lots of strategically-placed
partygoers covering up the dirty, might impress the likes of Hugh Hefner,
but it's a lot less shocking than it's intended to be.
        What's the big deal?  Bill doesn't exactly *do* anything (other
than throw his money and credentials around), and Alice only ever lusted in
her heart.  Whoop-dee-doo.  Still, they make up at the same agonizingly
slow pace--was Kubrick, notorious for multiple takes, paying them at an
hourly rate?
        Even geniuses have their bad days.  "Eyes Wide Shut" just happens
to be Kubrick's bad day, an unerotic, disappointing, and altogether
pointless end to an otherwise memorable career.

Author
Jeremiah McVay
         Historical epic. Dark, satirical comedy. Science fiction
parable. Costume drama. Horror.
         If one were to categorize Kubrick's films, these would likely
be the categories some of his greatest known works would fit into. While
much can gained from such a pursuit, I usually try not to categorize
films excessively, but, while viewing Kubrick's final work, it occurred
to me that this may be the one that would be most difficult to place in
a specific genre. Kubrick is an auteur and, like all great auteurs, his
work usually gains more value when viewed as part of a greater body of
work. This may sound as if it is some sort of excuse to like the film
more than I probably should, but it is not. Instead, I am merely trying
to state that Kubrick has always had a unique style and vision. His body
of work can nearly be considered as a genre unto itself-- a quality
seemingly inherent to the films of many auteurs.
         The category Eyes Wide Shut most seems to fit into at times
would be that of the psychological thriller. I often found myself
comparing the film to Carol Reed's The Third Man (1949), and, but for
the pacing, I think the parallels hold up well: A man who seems
relatively happy with his place in the world finds that the whole basis
of his security may have been faulty; he then descends into an
underworld that, while always present, he was never aware of. If one
considers the scene in which Holly Martins (Joseph Cotten) witnesses the
results of Harry Limes' (Orson Welles) black market dealings in the
hospital full of bed-ridden victims as the centerpiece of The Third Man,
it really makes a nice parallel to the centerpiece orgy scene of Eyes
Wide Shut. It is this voyeuristic scene in which Cruise's character,
Bill Harford, begins to finally realize that he has entered a world he
is not prepared to deal with.
         An oddity about this scene is in the simple fact that it is a
centerpiece. Kubrick's films usually conclude with a scene that offers a
final seductive twist or irony, but the "twist" in this film seems to be
nearer the middle section. Oddly enough, considering the controversy
surrounding the sexual content of the film, this may be Kubrick's most
mainstream film yet-- even more so than Spartacus (1960). The conclusion
of EWS is so mainstream that it really changes the entirety of the film
and, in fact, because of this, perhaps one could say that it is a
characteristically "twisted" Kubrick ending.
         The strength of the film's plotting is that it simply flows...
It is much like the frequently repeated piano notes of the film's
highly-recognizable, yet somewhat simplistic, score. The film begins
somewhat lightheartedly [relatively speaking], then seems to crescendo
up to the centerpiece scene and decrescendo to the conclusion. Just as
with the most well-crafted symphonies, every moment of the dynamic
change is as intense as the next-- it is not a case of peaking
intensity, but of peaking dynamic.
         The credit for this can lie firstly with Kubrick himself. His
direction is as fluid as usual, adding just the right touch to every
moment, whether it be with camera angle or movement, mise-en-scene, or
anything else. Secondly, the film is able to rely on great performances
(apparently all those call backs for reshoots paid off). Tom Cruise may
give his best performance to date, and proves that he has come a long
way since his roles in such films as The Outsiders and Risky Business
(both 1883). He matches and compliments the intensity of the film itself
with his own intensity, often quiet. I especially liked the way he
seemed to be faking sincerity every time he would assume his role as
physician-- this may not have been intentional, but it worked. I must
say I was surprised by how little Nicole Kidman was actually in the
film, but when she was on screen, she was incredible. It may have been a
smaller role than expected, but it's the best I've ever seen her.
         Kubrick is a man of details, and that is why his films have so
often taken so long to complete. It pays off here, as it usually does.
The most prominent details are the supporting cast members. Even some of
the seemingly least important roles are filled with actors of apparently
high prowess, making the illusion of the film seem all that more real.
Beyond that, the art direction must be mentioned. The entire look of
this film is composed of details upon details. New York is so
realistically simulated in England that I often found myself thinking I
recognized certain places. A testimony to the attention paid to details:
the Village Voice newspaper dispenser below a street light in the
Greenwhich Village setting. The lighting and decoration of most of the
interiors suggests such decadence that it becomes quite believable that
you have entered another alternate reality where orgies and over-dosed
models are as ordinary as a filthy kitchen sink.
         All of this leads back to the story, as it should. Of course,
every viewer may have their own opinion (and that is one of the charms
of Kubrick), but it seemed to be the story of a man whose faith is
challenged, and, through numerous brushes with danger beyond belief, is
restored-- but not until he has confessed and received forgiveness (or
the nearest thing to it). Basically, it is a double-jointed attempt at
enforcing certain values by challenging them and, in my opinion, it is
successful.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Jeff Foehringer
Cast: Tom Cruse, Nicole Kidman, Sidney Pollack
Screenplay: Stanley Kubrick, Frederic Raphael
(based on the novel "Traumnovelle"  by Arthur Schnitzler)
Produced and Directed: Stanley Kubrick
      The most frequently mentioned aspect of this movie has been the fact
that it is Stanley Kubric's last film.   We have heard it called 'Kubricks
final masterpiece' so often that it is east to forget that this is totally
irrelevant to the quality of the movie.  Kubrick did not plan to die after
the filming, so it's not likely that he looked at this film as a finale
statement of any sort, a grand summery of everything he felt and knew about
filmmaking.    Most likely, he thought he had one or two more films in him,
as did most of us.  And had he survived to make a few more movies, "Eyes
Wide Shut" would probably be remembered as one of his lesser works, a great
director making a highly idiosyncratic choice of scripts, rather than as a
final masterpiece.
    Kubrick  is in top form as a director and story-teller in EWS.
But this is ultimately the film's only redeeming quality.   The script, both
story and dialog, is trite and contrived.   There were at least a dozen
times I knew exactly what the next line would be and the plot held no
surprises or revelations.  In the hands of any other director, and probably
without the star power of Cruse and Kidman, EWS would have come across as
another lame adventure in sexual psychobabble.
     We start of being introduced to Kidman's butt.   Cruse plays a doctor
and Kidman his unemployed art-dealer wife, living an expensive Park Avenue
life.  They attend a dinner party held by Pollack, where they both spend
time flirting with other people, both obviously thinking the other won't see
or mind.  Kidman's scenes are the more important here.  She gets tipsy and
dances with a slimy rich Hungarian who gives her his philosophy on marriage
as he tries to seduce her.
This sets up for a conversation later at home when the couple gets high as a
prelude to lovemaking.   Here the scripts starts to fall down as Kidman's
character mentions her flirting and tries to start a fight when Cruse says
it would be understandable that a man might try to seduce her.  The rest of
the scene follows a pattern of nothing he says is going to be the right
thing, and comes across as contrived as Kidman seems to do her best to start
a fight about nothing.   The failure of this scene is the most unforgivable
in the film, as the main purpose for the exchange is for Kidman to tell him
about an incident where she almost slept with another man and had for a
moment been willing to sacrifice her marriage for a one-night stand.  His
confidence in his wife's sense of emotional monogamy shaken, Cruse sets off
an what will become a sexual odyssey into the underside of sex that Cruse's
character was only vaguely aware existed.
   Cruse's odyssey is beset not only with unforeseeable temptations, it is
beset with coincidences which the story relies on for froward motion.  Just
as Cruse is recoiling form his wife's confession, he is called to the
bedside of a friend and patient who died and whose daughter Cruse needs to
console.   The daughter confesses her love for him and tries to seduce him,
but Cruse is rescued from temptation as her fiancée arrives.   Later Cruse
drops in to a nightclub where an old classmate is playing piano.  And the
old friend just happens to mention a sex party where he plays background
music.  Cruse of course gets him to reveal the location and secret password.
An earlier encounter with a hooker who comes on to Cruse is believable
enough, but again he is rescued at the last by a call
on his cell phone from his wife.  Cruse comes to his senses and leaves the
prostitute's apartment.
   Even at the masked sex party, Cruse is saved form committing adultery as
he is persuaded to leave by some one who know him and warns him he has been
detected.  Later, he is rescued from complication of his being at the party
when it turn out that a close friend of his was there under on of the masks.
     The constant coincidences are further marred by cliched lines or
situations.  At most turns of the movie, I could just feel what was going to
happen or be said next.
      Kubrick certainly put all of his skills and talents as a filmmaker
into telling us this story.  His trademark shots and scene placements
continue to give a you-are -there feel to the story.  We can feel the menace
as Cruse walks into the costumed sex party, which is part religious rite,
part theater, and certainly becomes an orgy.   The film is visually
beautiful and as always, Kubric has chosen his background music effectively.
But for me, one of the effects of all the artistic work in direction and
lighting is that the film almost takes itself too seriously for such a weak
script.
   Of the much argued placement of digital figures to cover up
the genitals of couples in the orgy, it is not something one would notice
unless you knew about it before-hand, and no real detriment to the film
unless you absolutely have to see penis-vagina contact to enjoy your films.
I do not fault Kubrick for putting them in his original cut as the scenes
both artful and chilling.  But I don't think the European audiences who will
see the film  unaltered are really getting that much more for their money.
   The cynic in me is now starting to believe that the secrecy and rumors
surrounding the film's release were done intentionally to hide the fact that
the story is so lacking.  There is practically nothing about this film that
needs to be kept secret.  Most likely, the secrecy was a marketing ploy.  I
almost wish that the rumors of Cruse and Kidman having sex on screen (they
don't)
Cruse wearing a dress (he doesn't) or Kidman shooting up heroin (she smokes
pot)  were true.  This would probably made for a much more interesting film.
    In short, this film is for Kubrick fanatics only.

Author
Gary Jones
14th and 17th September 1999: Cineworld, Bristol 
I first heard about Eyes Wide Shut in March 1996. I had been an admirer
of Stanley Kubrick for twenty years, and in that time had only twice
been able to experience a new Kubrick release, so it was good to hear of
a new film starting production. It was nevertheless a bit of a
disappointment that Kubrick's next film would not be his much
anticipated project A.I., but would instead be a drama starring Tom
Cruise and Nicole Kidman.
For three and a half years, the Internet has been awash with speculation
and rumour about the cast and content of Eyes Wide Shut. Cast
replacements and secretive and protracted principal photography fuelled
the gossip, much of it outrageous, and nearly all of it incorrect.
Finally the film itself here, and in the most tragic of circumstances.
This is the last time we will ever see a new film from Stanly Kubrick.
He was a legendary figure - one of the few truly great film makers - and
a much misunderstood man. And now he's gone. 
In Eyes Wide Shut, Tom Cruise plays New York doctor Bill Harford and
Nicole Kidman plays his wife Alice. Their marriage seems perfect, but
one night Alice admits to having had sexual fantasies about another man.
Bill is deeply disturbed by this revelation and in his jealousy and
desire for revenge enters a sexual underworld, the heart of which is a
masked ritual orgy that takes place in a country mansion and at which
things turn very dark for Bill and very weird for the viewer. 
Is Eyes Wide Shut the fitting end to a great career that some reviewers
have claimed, or the monumental turkey that others have reported? I
think it depends on whether you get Kubrick films or not. Some are put
off by the feeling of cold detachment in many Kubrick films - we often
don't empathise with the characters or feel we are in the presence of
real people, but instead we observe the characters as subjects on a
microsope slide. This clinical formality can either be deeply off-
putting or can be the price you willingly pay for letting Kubrick in to
mess with your head. Personally, I'm willing to go along for the ride.
After first seeing Eyes Wide Shut, I wasn't sure what I thought of it.
Now it's had a chance to bed down a little, and I've seen it again, I
think it is marvellous, but overlong. The film is full of subtleties of
plot and theme that endlessly turn over in the mind. Questions are
raised in the film and apparently answered, but ambiguities remain, and
multiple interpretations are possible. A second viewing raises as many
questions as it answers.
The centrepiece of the film is the masked orgy sequence. From the moment
Bill arrives at the mansion gates to the moment he leaves, this
20-minute sequence is as good as anything Kubrick has ever done. The
interplay of image and music to evoke mystery, eroticism and fear is
spellbinding (although occasionally I had to wonder how satisfactory
oral sex can be when the participants are wearing masks). The American
release of Eyes Wide Shut was altered by placing computer-generated
figures over certain of the more vigorously copulating orgy-goers. This
was done to get the film an 'R' rating, rather than the more appropriate
but commercially difficult 'NC-17' rating. This has become known as the
"Austin Powers" version of Eyes Wide Shut. The digital cover-ups were,
apparently, approved in principle by Kubrick before his death. In the
U.S., hardcore porn is freely available, yet commercial considerations
mean that adults cannot see a serious mainstream film featuring
simulated sex in which no genitals are visible but which includes an
unacceptably vigourous level of thrusting. What a strange country
America is. 
The film has an extraordinary visual quality. As he has done before,
Kubrick shot Eyes Wide Shut using low lighting levels. The film was
deliberately underexposed during shooting and overexposed during
developing to compensate. This produces a dream-like washed-out grainy
feel to the image. At times the scene seems alive with an orange glow,
and during some close-ups, the grain is so prominent that the image
seems to shimmer. (On a more practical level, low lighting levels also
means a relatively small crew, so daily rates can be kept low, thereby
allowing longer shooting schedules.) The look of the film is also
influenced by a recurring motif of christmas tree lights and many other
examples of similar tiny lights, such as in shop displays and cafes, and
in curtains of beaded light.
Although there are few of the obvious trademarks, such as dramatic
tracking shots through interior spaces, or the full-face shots of
characters on the edge of insanity, the film still has the distinctive
Kubrick feel. Interiors are framed and lit to provide not just a place
where the action is set, but a psychological location for the
characters. Colours scream out at you with significance. What that
significance is it is hard to say, but perhaps any attempt to put it
into words is to miss the point. Kubrick films work at a deep
subconscious level, creating moods and reactions in the viewer that are
not meant to be explained or understood.
As is usual with Kubrick films, the choice of music is eclectic and
mixes original compositions with existing recordings. The original
pieces are by Jocelyn Pook, whose sombre chamber music is central to
several parts of the film, including the masked orgy sequence. Kubrick
has again made use of the music of avant-garde composer Gyorgy Ligeti.
The use of Ligeti in 2001 was spot on, but the use of his piano music in
Eyes Wide Shut has come in for some criticism. To the untrained ear,
such as mine, it sounds like little more than a child playing individual
notes with little concern for melody or rhythm. Listening to the music
in isolation, it is austere and foreboding, but in the context of the
film, that damned piano music struck me at times as just plain
ridiculous and nearly destroyed what it sought to augment. 
Another noteworthy aspect of Kubrick films is the performances he gets
from his actors. Tom Cruise is not an actor that seemed a likely choice
for a Stanley Kubrick film, having neither the emotional intensity of a
star like Jack Nicholson, nor the relative anonymity of the cast of 2001
or Full Metal Jacket. The casting of Cruise is reminiscent of that of
Ryan O'Neal in Barry Lyndon. In defending his casting of O'Neal, Kubrick
said in one of his rare interviews that "the personal qualities of an
actor, as they relate to the role, are almost as important as his
ability". Presumably similar considerations lay behind the casting of
Cruise, who carries the main acting burden, appearing in virtually every
scene. He is nevertheless hamstrung by his narrow range. Nicole Kidman
is generally fine, but even she sometimes seemed to chew the scenery a
bit. The minor roles are the usual collection of Kubrick eccentrics.
None of this is meant to be critical - it's the peculiar nature of the
performances, even those that would be deemed stilted or just plain bad
in other films, that contribute to the disconcerting other-worldly
appeal of Kubrick films. Sydney Pollack's performance as Bill's friend
Ziegler does, however, seem slightly out-of-place, his being the sort of
naturalistic performance we'd expect in a normal film.
The pacing of the film is often painfully slow. Scenes are dragged out
and lines... are... often... delivered... with... great... big...
gaps... between... words. Kubrick has been known to trim slow sequences
after critical test audience reaction (he did it with 2001 and trimmed
the European release of The Shining) and it is interesting to speculate
whether he would have similarly tightened-up Eyes Wide Shut if he had
had the chance. With his death, the film became untouchable. Despite
being half an hour too long, Eyes Wide Shut is the work of a master
whose ambition and vision makes a trip to the movies an experience that
transcends mere entertainment. It is magnificent, but occasionally a
magnificent bore.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Marie Richardson, Rade 
Serbedzija, Todd Field, Vinessa Shaw, Alan Cumming, Sky Dumont, Leelee 
Sobieski,  Thomas Gibson, Madison Eginton, Tres Hanley, Clarke Hayes. 
Music by Jocelyn Pook. Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and Frederic Raphael,
 inspired by "Traumnovelle" by Arthur Schnitzler. Produced and directed 
by Stanley Kubrick. 159 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
After watching Stanley Kubrick's "Eyes Wide Shut" and sorting through 
your own reactions, I suggest you hop online and check out those of 
various critics. After all, part of the pleasure of a Kubrick film comes 
from comparing notes with others, because his work is open to so many 
different interpretations.  
Count on "Eyes Wide Shut" to provide an abundance of divergent opinions. 
The film concludes with a blunt, single-word statement from Nicole 
Kidman's character. One critic called the finale "guardedly hopeful," 
suggesting that "Kubrick believed in some sort of human progress after 
all." Another writer, after "carefully considering the wording of the 
character's final statement and the context in which it was made," states 
that "in the end, depersonalization wins out." 
Meanwhile, a third critic, who considers this Kubrick's most humane film, 
found the final shots moving and commented on the film's "unexpected last 
line," referring to it as advice that is "at once practical, eloquent and 
obscene." 
All of this in response to one carefully placed word. What fun! To the 
very end, Stanley Kubrick remained the consummate provocateur, as well as 
an unparalleled master in all aspects of filmmaking.
Deliberate and haunting, the two hour, 39 minute production is a grandly-
crafted dreamscape, simultaneously intimate and detached. Kubrick puts 
his lead characters in overwhelming settings, where piquant observations 
are nearly engulfed by the swirl of light, color and sound. The fallout 
comes later, during painful exchanges between husband and wife.
Inspired by Arthur Schnitzler's 1926 novella "Traumnovelle," "Eyes Wide 
Shut" follows Alice (Nicole Kidman) and Dr. Bill (Tom Cruise) Harford, an 
affluent New York couple, to a Christmas party at the opulent home of one 
of Bill's friends, Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack). Separated for most of 
the evening, Bill visits with an old medical school buddy, tends to a 
female guest who has overdosed on drugs and deals with two flirtatious 
models, while Alice becomes giddy on champagne, fending off the smarmy 
advances of an aging European gent who fancies himself a playboy.
While sharing a joint at home the next night, a discussion of fidelity 
turns traumatic when Alice, annoyed by some over-assured, vaguely 
condescending remarks from her husband, explains that she once strongly 
considered cheating on him with an attractive stranger. I was mesmerized 
by Alice's bedroom monologue and Bill's reaction to her words. Here is a 
man who views his marriage like a Faberge egg, a meticulous construct 
with every aspect of the relationship affixed in just the right place to 
maximize its elegance. When Alice rebels, her slurry confession/verbal 
assault shatters his treasured illusion. 
Faced with the prospect of a living marriage that demands active 
participation rather than routine maintenance, Bill panics. He leaves to 
visit a patient, but instead of returning home, prowls the darkened city 
streets, repeatedly envisioning a lurid affair he knows never happened. 
His compulsive exploration takes him into the furthest reaches of New 
York's sexual underground, which turns out to be far more dangerous, both 
spiritually and physically, than he could possibly have anticipated.    
Throughout the film, Kubrick uses a thrust and retreat approach that 
underscores Bill's wary dance with true intimacy. Again and again, 
characters almost connect, only to pull back at the last moment. The 
effect is frustrating and illuminating. 
Kubrick has more tricks up his sleeve. From the opening shot, an image of 
Alice's nude form that cuts to black like the blinking of an eye, he 
deals with audience preconceptions as adroitly as Alice does with Bill's. 
We get the much-anticipated orgy scene, but it is an detached spectacle 
that is more chilling than erotic. The participants begin with the ritual 
exchange of kisses, but the figures wear masks and their lips never touch.
 When the sex finally starts, the motions are formal, almost mechanical 
(and in the U.S. theatrical version, censored by digital figures inserted 
to insure an R-rating from the prudes at the MPAA). Anyone expecting a 
high-brow porn movie is in for a big disappointment.
As with most Kubrick films, the imagery is sumptuous and arresting. At 
the Christmas party, he uses a grainy film stock that accents the rich 
gold and white motif. Actors are strikingly framed and lighted, with 
splashes of color alternately highlighting and contrasting the mood of 
each scene. The New York street sets are detailed, but under-populated, 
adding to the ghostly feel. Jocelyn Pook's score is equally effective, 
with pronounced piano notes heightening the tension.
But the most resonant moments are the stark exchanges between Kidman and 
Cruise. Although Kidman has less screen time than her husband, she 
dominates the proceedings with a revelatory performance that is 
spontaneous, fragile, authoritative and altogether riveting. But don't 
overlook Cruise, who displays his trademark intensity while giving his 
character welcome shadings.
After only one viewing, I haven't come close to processing "Eyes Wide 
Shut" enough to make any sweeping pronouncements on the film. Stanley 
Kubrick movies require multiple viewings and I look forward to seeing 
this seductive, challenging psychological drama again, to further study 
the final work from one of the greats. 

Author
Christopher Null
     Mr. Kubrick would have been upset.  I take that back.  He would
have been totally pissed.  I'll get it out up front: Our screening was
interrupted by a fire alarm, which sent the entire San Francisco press
constituency outside for a full hour, and ultimately forced us to miss
about five minutes of the movie, right in the middle, where it was
getting juicy.
     That aside, this is one hell of a movie.  A somewhat bizarre cross
between A CLOCKWORK ORANGE and THE SHINING, EYES WIDE SHUT is the work
of a meticulous craftsman -- a luscious and rich odyssey through the
streets of New York, and into the minds of a couple of its residents.
     Those residents are Doctor Bill Hartford (Cruise) and his wife
Alice (Kidman), who live a pretty good life in Manhattan.  But when a
friend's (Pollack) party gets a little kinky  just enough to stir up
some long-hidden emotions  Alice confesses to a one-night stand that
never actually happened... but which she desperately wanted to.
     This sets Bill's mind in motion, sending him on something of an
accidental journey through the bowels of NYC, from a brief visit with a
hooker to a costume dealer who whores out his daughter to the biggest
damn orgy you've ever seen.  Or at least the biggest that I've ever
seen.
     All the while, Bill gets more and more convinced that his wife is
depraved and wanton, which only fuels his desires even more.  More than
a journey of the eye through these lavish sets, Bill's is a journey
inside the mind of the paranoid, and it gets him in a little too deep by
the movie's end.
     The movie isn't as raunchy as you might have heard.  In fact, it
almost seems tame except for the big orgy scene and a ton of naked
Kidman shots.  And no, Cruise does not wear a dress in the movie.
     EYES WIDE SHUT is a thrill to watch  if for no other reason than
to try and guess who is an underground sexual deviant and who isn't
(hint: everyone is, of course).  It is chilling and delicious at the
same time, and while the film is a bit obtuse, lacking the
gripping/clever endings of the rest of Kubrick's repertoire, it's a
fitting end to a brilliant career in the cinema.
Director: Stanley Kubrick
Producer: Stanley Kubrick
Writer: Stanley Kubrick, Frederic Raphael
Starring: Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd Field, Marie
Richardson, Alan Cumming, Leelee Sobieski
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Jerry Saravia
A common criticism of Stanley Kubrick's work is that he is cold, calculated,
unfeeling and detached. Most of these charges are unwarranted - he is not aloof
but merely observing events as they unfold and doing so with an intellectually
emotional distance while involving the audience. "Eyes Wide Shut," the late
director's last work, is strangely more emotional and less distant than his
last couple of films, and it is a return to the intimacy between people that he
explored so masterfully in "Barry Lyndon." 
The film opens with a shot of a woman, Alice Hartford (Nicole Kidman), entering
a room and removing her black dress from a distance. The shot is so perfect and
beautiful that it establishes Kubrick's theme immediately - we can observe
sexuality but from a distance. As it turns out, Alice is married to Dr. Bill
Hartford (Tom Cruise) and he will not acknowledge her presence or her looks by
looking at her - his eyes are wide shut. She asks: "How do I look?" He
responds: "You look fine" while adjusting his bow tie. She says: "You are not
even looking." 
A moment later, they are leaving their daughter with a babysitter as they go to
a garish, ostentatious Christmas party given by their good friend, Victor
Ziegler (Sydney Pollack). Bill ends up wooing two women at the party and coming
very close to a threesome affair. Alice drinks and dances with a charming
Hungarian playboy who seduces her with talk about "The Art of Love," galleries
and paintings. Both are interrupted or prevent themselves from indulging in
carnivorous sex. Bill is interrupted by Victor's secretary, and Alice excuses
herself and insists that a wedding ring makes all the difference. 
Bill and Alice arrive home, and she alarmingly senses that Bill may have slept
with the two voluptuous beauties. Bill says he wouldn't and knows she would
never commit adultery. Alice is angry and confesses that she came close to
walking away from her future family life for a sailor. Bill leaves the house,
confused and upset and engages in an evening of missed sexual opportunities -
all the while he fantasizes Alice's supposed infatuation with a sailor. 
"Eyes Wide Shut" may sound like any other sexual mystery potboiler but coming
from Stanley Kubrick, you know it will not be. And it isn't at all, nor should
it be erroneously considered soft-core pornography (similar charges pervaded
Atom Egoyan's "Exotica"). It is about the allure of sex, the possibility of
sexual encounter - in other words, this film is all foreplay and circumstance.
Save for a masked orgy sequence, there are no sex scenes in Kubrick's latest
odyssey. We are briefly shown a sexually charged and erotic scene where Alice
and Bill are kissing and fondling each other while she stares at the mirror
accompanied by Chris Isaak's great song, "Baby Did a Bad, Bad Thing." That's
about as close to eroticism as the film gets. 
It is indeed an odyssey - it is a journey into Bill's fears and insecurities
about Alice's sexual fantasies. During two days and nights, he finds himself in
one sexual encounter after another. From a sweet prostitute named Domino to the
aforementioned masked orgy to a Lolita-like underage girl in bras and panties
(Leelee Sobieski) to a dead patient's daughter who flirts with him to am
excited hotel desk clerk to a homophobic gang, and so on. Meanwhile, we get
black-and-white images of Alice's romp in the hay.
Based on Arthur Schnitzler's "Traumnovelle," "Eyes Wide Shut" is a fascinating
film because it is so voyeuristic - it could easily have been helmed by a
talented artist like Roman Polanski. In fact, there are correlations between
this film and Polanski's superb "Bitter Moon" - the presentation of sex and its
hidden pleasures to the protagonist as played by Hugh Grant mirror Bill's.
There is also a strong similarity to the over-the-top yet frighteningly real
"L'Enfer" by famed director Claude Chabrol which also dealt with jealousy and
sexual frustration. 
>From the opening frame to the last, I was completely mesmerized and involved by
"Eyes Wide Shut." Every shot is beautifully realized, composed and brilliantly
photographed. We see lots of brightly and dimly lit Christmas trees, references
to what lies "where the rainbow ends," sexual mind games and deceit at every
turn of events, nude paintings obscured by characters (echoes of "A Clockwork
Orange"), slightly canted angles to delineate tension and perhaps frustration -
everything in some form or another refers to sex in some way. Kubrick has never
shown sex, and the less we see the more we are compelled by the dreamlike
quality of the film's journey into the heart of darkness - the realization that
jealousy in a marriage is inevitable and perhaps necessary. 
"Eyes Wide Shut" also has a wonderful cast. Tom Cruise eschews his trademark
boyish smile (except for the opening scenes) for long stares usually at a low
angle (A Kubrick motif). His slow descent into anger is thrilling to watch, and
one of his most quixotic moments of his career is when he confronts his friend
Ziegler and discovers the true nature behind his own adventurous and nocturnal
activities. 
Nicole Kidman has become a first-rate actress, and her mood swings are
something to behold. I also liked her laughing fit at Bill's remarks that he
would not sleep with his patients - when was the last time that a character
laughed at Tom Cruise? Her final moment of realization about their marriage is
stunning - this woman should be nominated for an Oscar. 
Also worth mentioning is Sydney Pollack's quietly decadent millionaire
character Ziegler - he is more fierce and yet just as restrained as he was in
"Tootsie" or "Husbands and Wives." Vinessa Shaw displays a sweetness and
sexiness not often seen on the silver screen, and she plays a prostitute! Rade
Serbedzija ("Before the Rain") has one of the sole moments of comic relief as
the owner of the Rainbow, a costume shop, who asks the good doctor for advice
about his balding spot. Todd Field is also engaging as the piano player Nick
Nightingale who plays blindfolded at some musical events. 
If I have one or two gripes about Kubrick's long, difficult and splendid film,
it is the abrupt ending and the inclusion of a character that would have been
better omitted or replaced by another actor. The ending is optimistic (a rarity
in any of his films) but somehow feels rushed. Still, this is among the late
master's finest films, preferable to the pretensions of "The Shining" or "Full
Metal Jacket." "Eyes Wide Shut" easily stands among such giants as "A Clockwork
Orange," "Paths of Glory" or "2001." It is a bizarre, strangely moving and
enlightening film guaranteed to provoke as much controversy as any of his other
works. Stanley, you may be gone, but we are glad you came back with one of the
best films of your career. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, comments, or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Director Stanley Kubrick passed away in his sleep only four days after
handing in his final cut of this film. Lovebirds Tom Cruise and Nicole
Kidman spent close to two years of their lives shooting this film with the
infamous perfectionist. Harvey Keitel, well...let's just say that everyone
got really stressed. Now, let's see what all the fuss was about...
PLOT:
A wife, upset by her husband's lack of jealousy, begins to flirt around and
admit to having thoughts of adultery. Her husband, shaken by his wife's
forthrightness in this respect, spends the night wandering from one very odd
sexually induced circumstance to another.
CRITIQUE:
This film is not for everyone. It is a complex, overly symbolic,
turtle-paced, dramatic sexual investigation, which features some great
acting from Tom Cruise, a consistently intriguing eye from director Kubrick,
a creepy score and plenty of beautifully photographed sequences. Did I fully
understand the whole movie? Certainly not. Would I be willing to watch it
again after discussing its complete potency with others? Certainly. But
understand that if you are the type of viewer who likes a film's meaning
handed to you on a silver platter, certainly, this one ain't for you. This
film is basically a big-budget art-house flick starring the Cruises and
directed by a legend in the field of movie creation. It's also very nice to
look at, with some solid acting, but much like many other art-house films,
there is way too much that is left to interpretation, leaving you feeling
somewhat hollow immediately after the film's conclusion. The film's message,
much like any other piece of art, is left to be quite subjective, and
certainly better understood after several viewings, or at least some
coaching.
Having said that, I do believe that the film moved along at too slow a pace,
with many coupled conversations seeming to go on far beyond their interest
point. And this is all despite the fact that the subject matters at hand,
jealousy and sex, struck a nerve with me. I personally would have
appreciated a much deeper insight into their rooted interplay, as opposed to
the larger emphasis paid to one very particularly strange scenario featuring
a lot of naked people. I don't think I've seen this many breasts parading
around in a movie since the last porno that "a friend left at my house." The
film's brighter points feature a superb presentation of sights and sounds
through a grainy-gaze, plenty of joyous Christmas lights sprinkled all
around, and a typically memorable score by the man named Kubrick (Despite
its obvious use for dramatics at certain points.)
All in all, much like many of Mr. Kubrick's other films, this is not the
kind of movie that can be fully digested in one sitting. If you are the type
of person who likes to decontruct puzzles, loves naked people and has a
hard-on for either Tom Cruise or Stanley Kubrick, then check this one out,
you might truly enjoy its uniqueness. If, on the other hand, you don't like
long, generally slow and esoteric films, featuring Nicole Kidman laughing
way too much, then I suggest you skip out on this one altogether, and maybe
check back into it in a couple of years. Who knows...your eyes might be
willing to be much more wide open by then :) (Sorry, but it's been a long
day, and that's the only cheezy pun that I could come up with at this late
hour...)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Believe it or not, infamously reclusive director Stanley Kubrick actually
makes a cameo in this film. Look for him sitting at a table in the cafe
where Bill gets Nick's address.
Actors Harvey Keitel and Jennifer Jason Leigh's scenes had to be deleted
when both actors could not return to London to re-shoot some of their
scenes. Director Kubrick respectively replaced the duo with actors Sidney
Pollack and Marie Richardson.
A VHS copy of the Tom Cruise movie RAIN MAN (8/10) can be seen in Alice and
Bill's bedroom on top of their entertainment stand during their
marijuana-enhanced argument.
A 65-second sequence during the film's orgy scene was digitally altered.
Kubrick, apparently suspecting he'd have trouble getting past the MPAA
ratings board in the U.S., authorized an edit of the scene which consisted
of superimposing objects, and people, over the exposed genitalia of some
actors. The film did indeed receive an R rating, rather than the dreaded
NC-17. European versions of the film will be uncensored (natch!).
The paintings hung on the wall of the Harford's apartment are the work of
Kubrick's widow, Christiane, and their daughter Katharina.
Leelee Sobieski, the teen actress who plays a key role in the film, has told
reporters that she got along beautifully with the reclusive Kubrick, and
asked him for a lock of hair for her collection (apparently she collects the
hair of famous people she works with). An amused Kubrick complied. Sadly,
Tom Cruise did not.
Astonishingly, the budget for Eyes Wide Shut, despite a 15-month shoot, came
in a relatively modest $65 million.
The streets of Manhattan where Cruise walks were re-created, in meticulous
detail, at Kubrick's Pinewood Studios outside of London, where the entire
movie was filmed.
Kubrick retained tight control of the film through the end, including its
marketing campaign: He personally selected the teaser clip and trailer
images to be shown. And he had strong feelings regarding the press, with the
New York Daily News reporting that the director had left instructions that
only five publications were to be granted interviews: the New York Times,
the Los Angeles Times, Premiere, TIME, and Newsweek. Kubrick also wanted to
ensure that the teaser and trailer were shown on the Internet.

Author
Chad Polenz
Eyes Wide Shut
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1999, R, 159 minutes [2 hours, 39 minutes]
[drama/thriller]
Starring: Tom Cruise (Dr. William Harford), Nicole Kidman (Alice Harford), 
Sydney Pollack (Victor Ziegler), Todd Field (Nick Nightingale); written by 
Stanley Kubrick, Frederic Raphael; produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick; 
inspired by the novella `Traumnovelle' by Arthur Schnitzler.
Seen July 24, 1999 at 8:45 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #12, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***: very good sound, good seats, average picture]
        I was just on the Internet chatting with a friend of mine and fellow 
film critic Ian Waldron-Mantgani who's usually anxious to hear my verdict on 
most newly-released films since I get to see them before he does (he lives in 
England and most films don't open overseas until a few months after their 
American premiere). I told him `Eyes Wide Shut' is a lot like every other 
Stanley Kubrick film - weird. But when he asked me if it was `good weird' or 
`bad weird' I couldn't think of an honest answer, so I guess I would just 
have to say yes.
        How could a film that had undergone super-ultra-mega-secretive 
production for 18 months not have some kind of stigma attached to it? I, and 
the entire world for that matter, really didn't know what to expect from 
`Eyes Wide Shut.' All we'd been told officially is that it's a story of 
sexual jealously and obsession, but everyone (myself included) suspected it 
was going to be a twisted, surreal drama that would push sexuality in movies 
to another level (a la `Crash' or `The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her 
Lover' - two films which disgusted and offended me). 
        And now that the film is finally released as its auteur intended it 
to be (well... there is that controversy over 65 seconds of 
digitally-superimposed figures - more on this later), is the final product as 
extreme as the hype said or is it just the way Kubrick makes movies?
        Yes.
        It's hard to think of any other movie where I could tell you that 
probably everything you've heard about it is true and false at the same time. 
Yes, it is a surreal, sexual drama pushing the boundaries of mainstream 
movies. Yes, it does have outrageous sex scenes and innuendo. Yes, Cruise and 
Kidman endure a helluva lot to get through this picture. But it's not 
softcore porn for the masses and it really isn't that `sexy' per se. 
        Every Kubrick film is different from every other film in terms of 
genres and storylines, but the theme and mood to `Eyes Wide Shut' are in the 
same spirit of style of his complete filmography. It's weird, surreal, 
shocking, intriguing and bizarre - but it's up to the individual viewer to 
determine whether these elements work for them or not. The story is basically 
realistic and believable on some levels, but I don't think it expects us to 
believe it could take place in the reality we know (it better not).
        The first half of the film is told in classic Kubrick fashion - it 
slowly lays the foundation of the story and emphasizes the characteristics of 
the main players. It is also tricky in its delivery so that when the plot 
begins to boil, slowly at first but then very rapidly, we realize we've 
mistaken the obvious for the subtle and vice versa.
        We meet Dr. William Harford (Cruise) and his wife Alice (Kidman), an 
upscale Manhattan couple who may or may not be part of the higher social 
order among New York's wealthy and important people. They attend a huge party 
hosted by their friend Victor Ziegler (Pollack) and after separating we're 
led to believe they are either an unhappy couple or swingers. This scene is 
one of the most important parts of the film and also one of the strangest. 
Alice has a bit too much to drink and finds herself swept off her feet by an 
extremely dapper South American man who speaks in the kind of eloquent 
phrases you only hear in soap operas but with all the suaveness of James 
Bond. Meanwhile, William is charming two beautiful models  in the same 
overly-eloquent small talk which has kept his wife at bay. But just when you 
think you know where this is about to go a small emergency crops up and 
suddenly the tone is serious.
        The film then spends a long duration exploring the Harford's martial 
bliss and fidelity. They find themselves arguing over the other's actions at 
the party which then leads to even more exploration of their sexual 
curiosity. They do seem to be compatible and a few romance scenes back that 
up, but there seems to be something missing. During an argument Alice tells 
William, in explicit detail, about a fantasy she had about another man which 
she's convinced she could have followed through on and it would have been 
worth the repercussions at home.
        I'm not sure if married people ever have to deal with these kinds of 
problems, but the atmosphere here is so tight and so chiseled with the finest 
details that the drama definitely seems believable and goes a long way 
towards establishing William's character and what happens to him after the 
turning point in the story.
        And what that point is could be one of the strangest and most 
perverse in film history. Because William is so subconsciously outraged that 
his wife could possibly have such strong sexual desires he finds himself 
sucked into the New York underworld. First, he comes close to patronizing a 
prostitute and then visits his friend from medical school, Nick Nightingale 
(Field) who is now a piano player in a jazz bar, and amazingly (and 
coinincidentally) enough has connections to a secret society.
        This is the part `Eyes Wide Shut' will be remembered for. It involves 
a twisted, unsettling plot element which is also photographed in such a way 
to `set a new record' for a commercial motion picture. Considering that 
almost everything about the film has been about sex, sexuality and the 
various taboos associated with it, and the fact that Harford is about to 
crash a secret society's meeting, it's clear what's going to happen here. 
It's also wherein a controversy lies over the digital altering of 65 seconds 
of the film. Suffice to say that if you don't know what has been superimposed 
you probably won't be able to tell. 
        I really don't have a problem with this digital imagery, even if it 
was done against Kubrick's wishes (most say he would never approve of this 
form of censorship, but others argue he would have to get an R rating), what 
bothered me the most is just the idea of it all. The tone and the attitude of 
the society is scary because it seems to be a religion about sex, yet at the 
same time, once the ceremony is over it's not much different from a porno 
movie. Kubrick can be weird at times, but when he dabbles with sex it almost 
always comes off as gratuitous and completely unnecessary (one of the major 
reasons `A Clockwork Orange' falls short of true greatness). What's more, 
it's not what the society does that accounts for the turning point in the 
story, it's just their sheer existence. Since this is the case, why not stick 
with the secret religious cult aspect?
        From here the film takes a sharp turn towards a different mood, plot 
and storytelling form. It becomes an intense psychological thriller and an 
interesting mystery as Harford realizes he has been part of something so 
unbelievable he can't comprehend it and refuses to believe it. Especially 
after his life and safety and that of his family are threated by these 
strangers who somehow know everything about him. Like the viewer, he starts 
to look for logical answers but the more he uncovers the more paranoid he 
becomes. 
        The second half of the film is just the continuation of Kubrick's 
elaborate mind game. In some ways it's just as surreal and bizarre as all the 
sexuality explored during the first half. Not unlike `The Game' and `The 
Spanish Prisoner' we're suddenly feeling for a common man trying to figure 
out why the entire world suddenly seems against him and how he can fight them 
without much power of his own.
        Slowly the story begins to unwind and many answers are provided, but 
not all of them and especially not the most important ones. Is it because the 
screenplay is lacking? Possibly, but I'd suspect it's just Kubrick toying 
with us as he does so well.
        Aside from the direction and use of theme, many other aspects of 
`Eyes Wide Shut' deserve kudos: Cruise's performance which proves once and 
for all he's not just a pretty-boy (do I hear another Oscar nod?); the 
cinematography which manages to blast each frame full of glowing, rich light 
but simultaneously gives a sense of darkness, fear, and mystery; the 
outstanding set and production design which completely captures the essence 
of modern New York City (the film was not shot on location, everything was 
constructed on a sound stage!); along with some other subtlties such as its 
sense of humor, the score and soundtrack, etc.
        To answer Ian's question, I'd have to honestly say that `Eyes Wide 
Shut' is that the good weird parts outweigh the bad weird parts, but there's 
so much more that could have been done. Kubrick leaves us wanting more, but I 
have a feeling if we look at this hard enough we'll be content with what we 
have.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page
 - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just blind ratings 
and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Author
Alex Ioshpe
Oliver Stone's latest feature is the last one standing in the long line of
biographies of American presidents.  It's a three-hour long saga about the
life of one of the most hated and misunderstood leaders of the 20th century.
Stone doesn't hold back anything as he digs deep inside politics and legal
maneuvers of the White House. The director holds Nixon responsible for
everything he has done. At the same time he creates a very human character,
a brilliant and tortured man that is caught in the dirty game of politics,
which is here pictured as a wild animal. He is simply trying to tame it.
But the occasional switch to the raging sky and the clouds swiftly fleeing
over the White House as events run ahead of the president's ability to
control them. Stone doesn't in any way apologize for Nixon. He blames not
only Nixon's own character flaws but also the Imperial Presidency itself,
the system that, once set in motion, behaves with a mindlessness of its own.
"Nixon" is a modern Shakespeare story - a saga about a ruler destroyed by
his fatal flaws. There's something almost majestic about the process: As
Nixon goes down in this film, there is no gloating, but a watery sigh, as of
a great ship sinking.
Sir Anthony Hopkins is staggering and plays Nixon with incredible honesty
and understanding, creating a very emotional picture of the
37th American President.  Joan Allen's magnificent and captivating
performance is certainly worth an Oscar statuette. She is strong and loyal
as Mrs. Nixon. The rest of the cast is equally magnificent, including: James
Woods, J. T. Walsh, Paul Sorvino, Ed Harris and Bob Hoskins. Everyone does a
serious and demanding job, no one are disappointing.
Stone never loses focus and his direction is steddy, honest and determined.
He is displaying the historical facts and at the same time concentrating at
the human element. At times he is showing to black and white showing
flashbacks from Nixon's youth and childhood. The flashy editing by Brian
Berdan and Frank Corwin, Robert Richardson's  rich cinematography and John
Williams' musical score create a hectic and bizarre atmosphere.
The film's only fault is that it's a bit tiering and overloaded with too
much political material and legal maneuvers. Still it's an honest and
captivating - a solid piece of movie making.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The late Stanley Kubrick had a gift for laying raw our emotions in a way
that could make us quite uncomfortable as we examine our normally
suppressed feelings.  In A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, he forced us to look deep
within our souls and consider our true feelings about violence.  In
other films like DR. STRANGELOVE and FULL METAL JACKET, the subject was
militaristic patriotism.
In EYES WIDE SHUT, writer and director Kubrick tackles a subject,
sexuality, which American audiences aren't used to considering
seriously.  Although films like THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY and
AMERICAN PIE use sex for comedic purposes and X-rated films are
available for explicit sexual fantasies, most movies avoid any serious
treatment of sexuality.  Americans, after all, are quite comfortable
with movie murder but much less so with cinematic sex.  The MPAA, for
example, is happy to award a film an R when human beings are shown
hacked to death.  On the other hand, explicit lovemaking is certain to
run the risk of the dreaded NC-17.
Real-life married couple Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman spent almost 2
years under Kubrick's tutelage during the making of EYES WIDE SHUT.  He
taught them how to take the risk of completely letting go of their egos
and inhibitions.  Normally cocky Cruise, for example, plays a man who
rapidly loses control as he finds himself sucked into a sexual
whirlwind.  Kidman, known for her perky humor and striking good looks,
plays a woman obsessed by unfulfilled, adulterous, sexual desires.
Cruise and Kidman play a wealthy, married couple named Dr. Bill Harford,
a general practitioner, and Alice Harford, a currently unemployed art
gallery manager.  His lucrative Manhattan practice means that they move
in the best circles.  Along with their lovely daughter, they appear to
form a model family -- in all senses of the word "model."
As the story opens, the Harfords are off to a large, lavish Christmas
party hosted by one of Bill's superrich clients, Victor Ziegler (Sydney
Pollack).  At the party, two luscious, young women hit on Bill, while,
in the other room, a dashingly handsome, older man flirts excessively
and explicitly with a plastered Alice.
The man brings up the subject of Ovid, the poet of love as he tries
verbally to seduce Alice.  She reminds him that Ovid ended up alone in
some remote area.  He agrees, but points out the fun Ovid had before
then.  This scene is an omen and arguably the key one in the movie, for
it poses the question of whether such risky sexual activities are worth
it, even if the price is devastatingly high.
The scene on which the story turns happens soon after the party.  High
on pot, Alice reveals a truth to Bill so striking that their love is
never the same again.  She confesses that she was so smitten by a Naval
officer that she glimpsed once in a hotel lobby that she vowed to
herself that she would leave her husband and daughter, if need be, for a
single night of bliss with that officer.  Moreover, she still thinks
erotically of him.  She claims this does not diminish in any way her
love for Bill and their daughter.
The image of his wife having sex with this stranger is something that
Bill can't shake.  His waking moments are filled with daydreams of his
wife having passionate sex with the sailor.  This affair that she didn't
have, but wished she did, haunts him like demons that he can't exorcise.
Once their bonds are thus shattered, he, for the first time, becomes
truly vulnerable to sexual advances from others.  When he's
propositioned by a friendly streetwalker, he accompanies her home, not
quite sure if he thinks this is a good idea or not.
In a movie that's surprisingly funny at times, the hooker needs him to
place his order.  "What do you want to do?" she asks with grin.  After
an awkward pause, Bill smiles back at her, not knowing quite what to
say.  "What do you recommend?" he finally asks as he would of the
sommelier when choosing just the right wine at one of the fancy
restaurants he frequents.
With a taste, and only a taste, of life on the wild side, his next
encounter becomes life threatening and the subject of the mystery that
makes up the body of the story.  He attempts to crash an extremely
secret orgy.  (The brief orgy scene is the one in which American
audiences are "spared" the embarrassment of seeing intercourse.  We have
digital fig leaves in the form of extra bodies inserted in front of some
of the obviously copulating couples.  These few seconds of changes keep
the movie from getting an NC-17.  The rest of the world gets the
director's cut.  If the characters had committed murder instead of sex,
no cover-up would have been required.)
As has been widely reported, Kidman's performance is stellar and will
undoubtedly get her at least a nomination for an Oscar.  Her acting
stays right on the edge.  Cruise's acting is no less impressive.  His
wide, horrified eyes make the terror in his heart palpable.  He's
excited about the possibilities of illicit sex and then panic-stricken
at the outcome.
Larry Smith's oversaturated, grainy cinematography depicts well the
grime that has entered the characters' heretofore-spotless life.
Jocelyn Pook's loud, staccato piano score for the film reminds us of
Bill's fear and panic, as if we can hear his heart beating out of his
chest.
The rich picture leaves us with so much left to discuss, the film's many
religious allusions being just one topic out of many.
"Life goes on," Victor lectures Bill.  "It always does.  Until it
doesn't.  But you know that, don't you?"
Yes, life does go on for Bill and Alice, but the ground has been shifted
by the earthquake that has occurred between them.  What will happen next
is undoubtedly much more complex than the last scene implies.  In this
movie, to which there will most certainly not be a sequel, it is left to
audiences to decide the fate of the tragic couple.  In a film that
revels in its ambiguity, the ending is the most intriguingly ambiguous
of all.
The best filmmakers provide the best questions, not the easiest answers.
It is in the not-quite-resolved conclusion that this film serves as a
fitting tribute to Kubrick's legacy.  He will live on forever in our
hearts and minds.
EYES WIDE SHUT runs 2:33.  It is rated R for strong sexual content,
nudity, language and some drug-related material and would be fine for
teenagers only if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jonathan Richards
     Stanley Kubrick died within a week after finishing his cut of
this movie, and if he had any inkling of the critical and audience
controversy he was spawning, he died a happy man.  Some have hailed
"Eyes Wide Shut" as a masterpiece, while others have suggested the
emperor is as unclothed as most of the people in his movie.  I have
even heard it wildly speculated that he might have shot up a speedball
and taken the easy way out rather than face the consequences of his
folly.
    Now, how can you not want to see a movie that can kick up this
kind of dust?
    "Eyes Wide Shut" is essentially a movie about family values with a
lot of naked women in it.  If that sounds like an intriguing recipe,
the sad fact is that in the hands of the legendary cinematic genius,
the dough did not rise on this last loaf.  Genius has been defined as
an infinite capacity for taking pains; if anything, too many pains
were taken here, and the result is a strangely earthbound,
unsurprising movie.
     Kubrick was known for working slowly.  There are children in
junior high who were not born when he made his previous film, "Full
Metal Jacket", and there are children in preschool who were born since
production began on "Eyes Wide Shut".  Harvey Keitel and Jennifer
Jason Leigh had to be replaced when the months began to turn into
years.  The little girl who plays Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman's
daughter must have been given a compressed shooting schedule; if she'd
had to stick around for the two years Tom and Nicole did, the aging
process would have shown (Tom and Nicole hold up pretty well.)
     The story, based by Kubrick and co-scenarist Frederick Raphael
("Two for the Road") is based on "Dream Story", a 1926 novella by
Viennese author Artur Schnitzler.  It follows Dr. Bill Harford and his
wife Alice (Cruise and Kidman) through a couple of days of sexual
fantasy and temptation.  The fantasies are consummated, the
temptations are not.  After a Christmas party at the Manhattan mansion
of a friend (Sydney Pollack) at which both are sexually tempted, they
have a fight, and Alice taunts her husband with a memory of a naval
officer with whom she would have gladly cheated.  Bill is then called
out into the night to the home of a patient who has just died.  Over
the course of a long night he is hit on, solicited, tempted, and in
the movie's centerpiece scene, attends a masked orgy at a palatial
Long Island estate (unforgivably digitally altered by the MPAA to
protect the innocent), but the closest he comes to actual sex are his
tortured fantasies of Alice and the naval officer.
     "Eyes Wide Shut" is full of intellectual concepts about sex and
human nature, but very few of them translate into cinematic life.
Kubrick constructs complex metaphors with color, using a palette
dominated by reds, blues, and yellows, and constantly fragmented by
the garish lights on the Christmas trees that turn up in every scene.
He does a treatise on masks, and some of it is eerily effective.  He
ruminates about the nature of men and women -- Alice tries to provoke
Bill by being deliberately hurtful, Bill uses deception to try to
avoid stirring things up.  Bill can be thoughtless and condescending,
Alice tends toward the irrational and emotional.  Bill has a maddening
habit of repeating what's said to him ("What do you think?"  "What do
I think?"); eliminate the repetitions and the pauses that mount
agonizingly as the film slows and slows in the last third, and Kubrick
could have brought it in under two hours.
     Who knows what he might have done if he'd lived a little longer?
Kubrick famously edited up to the last minute.  But for all his
profound ideas, lavish sets (he built New York in London, and the
result is a mesmerizingly off-keel and strangely all- white Manhattan)
and attention to detail, the goods just aren't there on film.
Dialogue is banal ("You know what they say -- once a doctor, always a
doctor") and, especially in the unfortunate last scene, painfully
direct in tying up philosophical threads ("A dream is never just a
dream.")  There are some terrific small performances, notably Marie
Richardson and Alan Cumming, but Kubrick's direction of Pollack's big
scene is embarrassing, and Cruise and Kidman don't quite manage
characters that make us believe or care.
     Having said all this, there's only room here to graze the iceberg
of things to talk about with "Eyes Wide Shut".  Kubrick's screen
legacy is so rich, and his legend so powerful, that we bring loaded
expectations to this movie, for better or for worse , and we find
ourselves endlessly discussing and examining meanings, successes,
failures, images, details, inconsistencies, motives, metaphors, music,
prurience, eroticism and the lack of it, dreams and reality.  In the
end, after the disappointment of his last movie, this becomes
Kubrick's final success.

Author
Marty Mapes
**** (out of 4) Stanley Kubrick is my favorite director. I didn't know
who he was until AFTER 1987, the year of his last release, FULL METAL
JACKET. So EYES WIDE SHUT was the first and only Kubrick movie I've seen
in regular release. Maybe my perception is biased, but EYES WIDE SHUT is
excellent.
At a ritzy party, Dr. Bill Harford and his wife Alice (Tom Cruise and
Nicole Kidman) mingle separately. Bill is approached by two models. They
boldly flirt with the doctor, and he loves the attention. Alice is swept
onto the dance floor by a debonair Hungarian blueblood who makes a pass
at her. She too enjoys the attention and doesn't entirely rebuff the
come-on. Back at home, the two start making love, each having been
turned on by events at the party. This is the famous scene from the
trailers.
Their thoughts from the previous night have been gnawing at them, so the
next night the two talk about sex, about fantasies, and about how sex is
different for men and for women.
The talking turns into arguing. Alice, a little spacey from some
marijuana, and angry from the fight, decides to tell Bill her most
secret fantasy. Once, on vacation, she made eye contact with a naval
officer. In that moment, she fell in love -- not love, but lust -- with
the stranger. She had half hoped, half feared, that they could see each
other again, that they could meet, that they could make love. She tells
Bill, with a touch of provocation, "I was willing to give up EVERYTHING
for one night".
Their argument is interrupted -- which proves to be as frustrating as
being interrupted during sex -- with a phone call. One of Bill's
patients has died, and he has to go visit. The unfinished fight and his
wife's hurtful confession weigh heavy on his mind. After being
propositioned by the grieving daughter of the patient, and harassed by
some gay-bashers, he looks for some kind of sexual release, away from
Alice.
He spends that night, and the next several days, touring the seamy,
sexual underworld of New York in an angry, frustrated funk. Hookers,
ritualistic orgies, and underage prostitutes become the norm, while
visits to home, wife, and child start to seem unreal. But Bill is a
newcomer to this sex-filled world and he can never quite consummate his
desire. At every turn, fate, coincidence, or a false step keeps him
unfulfilled and still searching....
EYES WIDE SHUT is very well crafted. First off, the acting and direction
were great. This was probably Tom Cruise's most challenging role, and he
rose to the occasion, mostly. There were times where I was not convinced
he was a doctor, but his emotional control more than made up for it. His
dip down into obsession was key, and he acted the part well.
Kidman was equally good in a surprisingly small role, particularly
during their fight and their reconciliation. During the fight, Alice
doesn't have the words to clearly tell Bill what she wants him to know.
Kidman is able to convincingly and concisely portray the earnest
frustration of not being understood. Later, at the reconciliation, she
is in the position of power, and Kidman handles this opposite situation
just as well. 
Also, the look of the film is outstanding. Kubrick uses a grainy
film-stock throughout, which I can't explain, except that it might have
been a compromise for the sake of shooting in lower light (something
Kubrick has done before, notably in BARRY LYNDON). Many scenes are lit
in rich, low, golden tones. One set -- the party scene -- is seemingly
lit by thousands of tiny Christmas lights. Or maybe he did it to mask
the scenes using digital effects. The look is consistent and not
inappropriate, but I can't say for sure why Kubrick chose it.
Also, the interior scenes are simply amazing to look at. I already
mentioned the party scene lit by tiny lights. But the most impressive is
the ritual before the orgy. A perfect circle of bright light illuminates
a red-robed figure. Dozens of figures gather around the outside. Every
figure is masked and robed in lush, rich, dark cloth. The first glimpse
is shocking -- not in a cheap, SOUTH PARK way, but somehow disturbing to
the core. And yet it grows on you, which might make it even more
disturbing.
Kubrick's cinematography (carried out by rookie cinematographer Larry
Smith) and editing (by Nigel Galt, until now a sound editor) are
deliberate and exact. One can see a sharp mind making just the right
cut, to just the right angle, at just the right time.
A few examples come to mind: first, during the argument, Bill and Alice
are shown from mostly head-on. But when Alice drops her conversational
bomb, the angle moves to the side -- we are now outsiders looking in,
instead of intimate confidantes.
Later, after a very long sequence at the dark, exotic masquerade/orgy,
Kubrick and Galt cut directly to Bill entering his apartment. The stark,
sharp contrast in settings makes "home" seem so boring, so banal. It
tells us exactly how Bill must have felt coming back to "reality" after
seeing a titillating glimpse of a more sexually exotic world. 
Finally, music plays an important part of the experience, as with 2001:
A SPACE ODYSSEY. In particular, a sad, ominous 2-note theme (Jocelyn
Pook scored the movie) is played slowly on a piano over Bill's
wanderings through the New York underworld. It is like a slower, sadder
version of John Carpenter's theme to HALLOWEEN. It adds the final
dimension to a cohesive, expressionist world.
Perhaps the best thing about EYES WIDE SHUT is its hopeful ending. In a
way, Kubrick is like Dante. He is the guide on a journey through one
particular circle of Hell, but he safely brings us back to where we
started.
I'm sad that there will not be another Stanley Kubrick movie. Nobody
else does so much, so well. Each movie is a masterpiece for a different
reason. 2001 has an incredible look and painstaking detail. BARRY LYNDON
has unbelievable color, scope, and cinematography. PATHS OF GLORY is a
gut-wrenching human tragedy. And EYES WIDE SHUT, well, it has a little
bit of everything.
I really only got to see one NEW Kubrick movie, and that's a great
disappointment. But at least I finally got to see one. I hope another
director comes along with such a high "batting average" (Kubrick's worst
film was probably SPARTACUS, which was still pretty darn good) but I
won't hold my breath. Stanley Kubrick, here's to you.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.cX-Mozilla-Status: 0009es
mmapes@moviehabit.com

Author
Jon Ridge
     I must admit to being completely distracted a good ten or twelve
minutes into EYES WIDE SHUT, the film that took forever and a day to
complete.  Therešs been such a great mystique about it, and so much written
and gossiped and hypothesized, for so damn long ­ the film was practically
created on the internet ­ that to be seeing the finished
product, finally, was something of an event.  And, in a word:  wow.
The very first image, of Nicole Kidman gradually and teasingly exposing
her full figure from the back, is at once voyeuristic, kinky and poignant.
Which kind of describes up the picture, as a whole.  The couple, Bill (Tom
Cruise) and Alice (a vulnerable, esoteric Kidman) prepare casually for a
Christmas party in Manhattan; she asks his opinion of her
looks, from the toilet seat, and he tells her she is beautiful, "always
beautiful", without actually looking.  Itšs a nice, efficient set-up,
explaining in little time the state of a nine-year marriage.  Bill doesnšt
have to question or doubt his wifešs loyalty, nor her beauty; she, and it,
have always been there.  Over the course of the party, husband and wife
go their separate ways, and both are approached by individuals with more on
their minds than small talk.  Alice, buzzed from champagne, dances with an
older man who suggests it would be only natural for her to cheat, because
that is to be expected in a marriage.  Advice acknowledged, she cordially
declines his offer; she doesnšt give in to advances, drunk or otherwise, but
she almost seems willing to, nevertheless, in spite of herself.  Bill seems
readier to stray, arm in arm with two pretty models,
but also doesnšt, though for reasons which have nothing to do with
faithfulness.  Duty calls, instead, with a naked girl upstairs who has had
"a bad reaction" to narcotics and booze.
Back home, later, the couple gets stoned ­ she much more than he ­ and
have an open, intimate discussion about sexual possibilities and diversions;
mostly pertaining to people outside their marriage.  As a gorgeous, deep
blue emanates from the bathroom (evocative to the mood of the dialogue)
against Kidman in her underwear, the conversation quickly becomes heated and
defensive.  It is here, and in other places, too, that all those reported
multiple takes truly pays off.  The couplešs revealing talk sounds raw and
genuine and true; it has a valid, middle of
the night feel, when youšve been talking for hours and all thatšs left is
the heart of the matter.  Alice - and this is where Kidman (lovely, and sad)
shines ­ recounts a chance encounter from the past, involving herself and a
young officer of the Navy.  Nothing happened, but it couldšve, and she would
have given everything in her life that she knows or holds dear
to not have let that moment pass.  So, what holds/held her back?  The
obvious answer would be family and marriage, but watch Kidmanšs face all
through her characteršs confession, and you sense itšs something much deeper
than that.  Much deeper than what Bill accepts as general fact.  Alice would
not betray him, that one time, but now it seems more likely.
The idea pisses him off; that a single, solitary fleeting glance had
the potential to forever alter the course of their relationship is scary.
They are conveniently interrupted by a phone call from a patient of Billšs,
whose father has just died, and he leaves to console the woman.  And, during
the remainder of the long late night, he imagines his wife in the arms of
another.  We see his perception change, his cool demeanor slowly dissolve,
with each of the people he will come in to contact with.
Everything, every interaction, appears to revolve around sex.  The
woman who called is distraught, when Bill meets her, and she channels her
grief through sexual desire and a false declaration of love; the scene, on
the very bed of the deceased man, is funny and morose.  A hooker (an
alluring Vanessa Shaw) invites Bill to her place for sex, but the two share
nothing more than a soft kiss (and itšs, by the way, one of the best
looking close-ups Išve seen).  An old friend from med school (played by Todd
Field), who dropped out and is now a pianist working various gigs, tells of
a covert meeting place for men and women who wear cloaks and masks and
participate in acts like nothing hešs ever seen before.  Intrigued, and
against his friendšs better advice, Bill picks up a costume
to wear to the gathering, at a store run by an odd man, who first rebukes
the activities of his underage daughter, but will later extend an indirect
proposition to Bill for some of the same.
There is a distinct air of artificiality to the lives of these
strangers, this environment, somehow making Alicešs earlier admission all
the more profound; grounded.  And, as Billšs own marital devotion is called
into question and tested, time and again ­ culminating with the filmšs most
controversial sequence, at a strange, ritualistic orgy ­ EYES WIDE SHUT
develops into a rather shattering and mature meditation on whether or not we
really know our partner ­ ourselves, for that matter ­ and how much.
Speaking of the orgy sequence, I would like tošve seen the unabridged
version, because those much-debated 65 seconds, or so, carry the promise of
total erotic mischievousness.  The point is that Bill is witnessing things
he shouldnšt, or would be better off not seeing (like the pedophilia, that
has come before), and even one of the masked women at the party seems to
know it, though they remain completely anonymous to one another.  How
fitting is it, then, that this faceless person saves Bill from dire
consequences of his unauthorized visit.  From himself:  what is he doing?
Is he at this place because it turns him on to be, or is
being there a means of not dealing with newfound jealousy, and confusion?
Or, both?  He has come to Alicešs moment in time, and is rescued against his
will.  Which leads a tender moment between husband and wife, late in the
film, when the tables are turned and it is he who confesses to near sexual
indiscretion.
The orgy has since been remodeled, adding meticulously placed digital
figures, to escape the dreaded NC-17 rating, but I canšt for the life of me
see why the filmmakers felt it necessary to do so.  The film is head-to-toe
thoroughly adult; censoring even a tiny portion doesnšt make sense,
besides securing a wider audience.  EWS is strictly for the 17 and older age
range; Tom Cruise is a huge box office draw:  distribute the film in its
original, intended form, and people would still go.  Even still, I like what
was done; the orgy sequence does not seem real, anyway.  Itšs a fevered
daydream of libidinous imagery and flesh, screwing for the sake of screwing,
and feels kind of otherworldly.  We get just enough of a view of what is
being done, to figure out whatšs going on, and thatšs fine.  The censorship
- ugly word, but thatšs what it is ­ in no way detracts from the tone EWS
has worked so competently to establish by that point.
This is one of the best films of the year, provocative and intelligent.
It has been impeccably lit, be it the numerous arrays of bright yellows that
accompany the opening Christmas party and within Bill and Alicešs upscale
apartment, or the lush reds and neon greens along the streets Bill roams
aimlessly.  EYES WIDE SHUT is beautiful to look at.  The cast is solid,
most notably Vanessa Shaw, and Sydney Pollack as the enigmatic confidant who
sets the record straight on a few crucial events for Bill (or, does he?).
But, itšs Kidman, I think, who holds the movie together.  Her screen
time is nothing compared to that of Cruise, but she plays all of it with
nuance and precision.  Her pot-induced "millions of years of evolution"
monologue is a perfect example of timing and subtlety; Alice is altogether
happy and dissatisfied with her life ­ who isnšt ­ and struggling to figure
out why.  Or, maybe I was struggling to.  The performance is a revelation
for Kidman, last seen in the awful PRACTICAL MAGIC, and worthy of Oscar
consideration.
Some scenes seem a bit out of place, like the skin-bare tryst set to a
Chris Isaak song.  And, the flirtation between Cruise and the female
roommate of a prostitute who has been diagnosed HIV positive.  But they,
alike all others here, compound what is, for all the waiting and hype, an
elegant and mesmeric motion picture.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Do you remember the fable: "The Emperor's New Clothes"? Because
this film was made by the late Stanley Kubrick, because two of
Hollywood's top stars devoted two years of their lives to its
creation, because the "hype" has been so carefully orchestrated...few
have dared to call this exquisitely photographed film what it is:
shallow soft-core pornography. Despite Kubrick's meticulous direction,
it's a wretchedly written, cliche-filled dirge about sexual obsession,
based on Arthur Schnitzler's "Traumnovelle" (1926).  The slow-paced
story begins with Tom Cruise, as a Manhattan physician, and his wife,
played by Nicole Kidman, preparing to attend a lavish Christmas party,
hosted by Sydney Pollack. That evening, as she flirts with a suave
Hungarian, he's hit on by two giggly models - until he's called
upstairs by the host to revive yet another model who has
overdosed. Later, while stoned, Kidman taunts Cruise with an erotic
tale about a naval officer in Cape Cod.  Reeling with jealousy, he
indulges in his own angst-filled fantasy, involving a kinky tryst with
a hooker and a sinister, masquerade orgy. And he flashes his doctor's
ID card more often than an FBI agent. Why Kidman and Cruise chose to
indulge in this heavy-handed, exhibitionistic carnal endeavor is best
left to their personal therapists - and the gossip columnists. Sure,
the color-drenched cinematography is stunning but, having said that,
it's like leaving a Broadway musical singing the scenery. In
evaluating Jocelyn Pook's moody score, a friend put it best
commenting: "The music sounds as if were composed by a piano tuner,
pounding on one note." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Eyes
Wide Shut" is a perverted, pretentious, numbing 3. It may be
deliberately depraved but you won't be deprived if you wait for the
video.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

EYES WIDE SHUT (director: Stanley Kubrick; screenplay: based on an
Arthur Schnitzler's 1926 novella `Dream Story' (Traumnovelle), Frederic
Raphael/Stanley Kubrick ; cinematographer: Larry Smith; cast: Tom Cruise
(Bill Harford), Nicole Kidman (Alice Harford), Sydney Pollack (Victor
Ziegler), Todd Field (Nick Nightingale, Jazz Musician), Thomas Gibson
(Fiancé, Carl), Marie Richardson (Marion), Rade Serbedzija (Milich),
Vinessa Shaw (Domino), Leelee Sobieski (Milich's Daughter), Alan
Cummings (desk clerk), Fay Masterson (Sally), Sky Dumont (Sandor
Szavost), Julienne Davis (Mandy), UK-1999)
This is Kubrick's 13th and final film after a 46-year career, having
died in March of this year, ironically just one week after the film was
shot while in seemingly good health and optimistic about the film, all
set to begin a massive publicity campaign for the opening. In any case,
he has accomplished a work of exquisite visual craftsmanship, another
fitting feather in the cap for one of the most original innovators in
cinema today. His sharp photographic images intermingled with some
grainy shots and his never static camera angles (reminiscent of ones
used in his other films) and his use of different shades of light to
transpose his visions from a dream world to reality, give the film a
magical look, capturing and sweeping us into its grand design. It is a
film that unfolds like a dream, whereby it is to be viewed with eyes
wide shut.
The film's opening immediately engages us in its sexuality: the tall,
curvaceous lady peeling off her black dress with her back to us, is
Nicole Kidman, and the next shot fades to darkness, it is as if the
curtain was pulled down on a sex show and we are told that now that we
have seen her lovely ass, the rest is up to our imagination. The show is
over; we can make of it what we want. And to do that, we have to take
this 19th century novel about a wealthy class of Jews living in Vienna
and observe how Kubrick has them now as modern day WASPS living a
sexually debauched lifestyle in New York City.
There is a stimulating dream quality that pervades the entire film and
draws us into the characterization of Dr. Bill Harford (Cruise) and his
stunning wife Alice (Kidman), who once worked in an art gallery before
it closed. The intricate telling of their relationship involves the
dreams they have, a ceremonial orgy he attends, nudity-including his
viewing and kissing of a corpse for a long few moments, a jealous
marital relationship to tweak our morbid curiosity, and an obtuse ending
that should satisfy those who can't accept tidy endings in their films.
Kubrick has made an art film (in the good sense of that term) that
delicately weaves a story of a fashionable New York City doctor and his
stunning wife of 9 years and their sweet seven year old daughter they
both adore. They have hit a speed bump in their marriage, and it is all
because of sexual reasons. Make no mistake about it, sex is their
problem. Kubrick, bless his courage, will stick to this obsessive theme,
not giving an inch of leeway for any other reason, from the alpha to the
omega of the film. And to his credit, it is that intensity that gives
the story fuel to propel itself and work its way into the understanding
we have of the chemistry and dynamics in the relationship the two have.
A picture perfect relationship that is shown to be already not perfect
after the first five minutes of the film.
The couple are off to a swanky party given by Victor Ziegler (Pollack),
who resides in a town house fit for a king. He is some kind of a wealthy
magnate, one of the doctor's patients on Fifth Avenue. Before they
leave, they say all the right goodbyes to their daughter and her
trustworthy babysitter in their opulently decorated condo apartment (the
art work on the wall is from Stanley's wife Christiane and daughter
Katharina Hobbs).
We follow the couple around for a few nights on the town, during the
Christmas season, as they explore their sense of who they are through
their dreams and through the acting out of their fantasies in a very
real way, until all becomes blurred for them, except what it is they can
salvage from their present lives and really need to have in order to
survive. If this couple was not rock solid sure of themselves- he
through his ability to think things through and remain placid in the
face of danger and she through her ability to articulate who she is as a
woman, even when tipsy or high, they could not survive- because a
fragile ego would not get them over the hump they face.
That Cruise is nearly perfect for the part (the only slight negative
thing about his performance was that his constant cell phone action
reminded me too much of the Jerry Maguire character), as he displays a
wide range of emotions and ability, to be a turd and then come back and
be human again, is the kind of acting he hasn't been required to do so
far in his career, but with the wonderful relationship he developed with
Stanley, he is able to understand who he is and be able to be convincing
as a young doctor for the rich and as a dye-in-the-wool materialist,
committed to being a doctor and intelligent enough to see changes in his
life as necessities. It is interesting to note that Stanley's father was
a doctor and the apartment used in the film is a model of his dad's
place.
Working with his real-life wife of seven years was also a marvelous
idea: Kidman, who is perfecto in her role, as the liberated but not
quite liberated woman, who pours poison into the mind of her husband,
and loves him while being afraid of herself and her desires and of the
real world, where she is prey for all the male predators out there ready
to take her to bed as part of their conquest, and is still seen as
someone who is afraid of acting out her sexual fantasies. They play off
each other as they twist their emotions around and in the end they both
get more answers than they wanted. To be right for the couple's parts,
are to be vulnerable and to have it in them to be seen as sympathetic
figures who are locked in a very erotic struggle with their passions;
while, at the same time, to be seen as selfish, craving for their own
desires and fantasies to be fulfilled.
The entire cast is superb.The  main supporting character in the story is
Sydney Pollack, a replacement for the fired Harvey Keitel, and he is
fluid in his role as the unseemly millionaire playboy, who is quite
equipped to play dangerous games with the who's who in the world of the
rich and famous.
Ziegler's Christmas party starts out with the couple lost to themselves,
not knowing any of the other guests present, but the champagne soon gets
to Alice and a Hungarian smoothy comes onto her, hitting on all her pent
up sexual fantasies and by using sweet words arouses her sexual
curiousity. Bill, meantime, is being tempted by two sexually aggressive
models who are leading him around by the arm, with nothing on their mind
but for them to have a threesome. But before anything can materialize,
the doctor is called into Victor's bathroom and asked to revive a naked
hooker slumped in a chair who overdosed after Victor just had sex with
her.
Also at the party is a jazz piano player, Nick Nightingale (Todd), who
went to medical school with Bill but dropped out. When they meet the
next night at the Greenwich Village club he has a gig in, he intrigues
the doctor by telling him he plays blindfolded for a secret gathering
of those who dress up in costumes of masks and cloaks, and where a
mysterious orgy takes place. Bill has just left a patient of his who has
died and his daughter who is soon to be married, who catches him off
guard by passionately kissing and telling him that she loves him, all
this occurring while her father's corpse lies in the same room they are
in and her fiancé is on his way up to the apartment; he also gets
seduced by a prostitute he met on the street who he was willing to pay
$150 for, who takes him to her very modest apartment, but he leaves her
when his wife calls him on his cell phone; but, she has peaked his
sexual appetite and he is still hungry for some pleasure. This reaction
comes after the pivotal moment of the film, the heartfelt conversation
between Bill and Alice when the couple smoke a little pot and loosen up
and bring out in the open the jealousy that is affecting them because of
the party, each trying to pump the other about what is on their mind and
getting more than what they bargained for in return. This scene is sheer
brilliance, one of the best Kubrick has ever done, it is a scene that is
so humanly emotional, something that his naysayers said he could never
do; the acting catches all the nuances of a real and fictious
relationship, something that an inexperienced acting duo could not have
done so effortlessly and made it seem so impactful. Angry with him over
his taking her faithfulness for granted, she has told him that she once
desired another man who only looked at her, and would have gone to bed
with him if he had only asked. Bill has subliminal dreams about this,
picturing her having sex with this navy officer, as he rode around town
in a cab, on streets created in the Pinewood Studio, but cannily
reflecting the eerie atmosphere of Manhattan's changing scenes of the
tawdry Lower East Side, the lively Village, and the exclusive Upper West
Side. What made the streets particularly foreboding was the skillful
manipulation of lights to reflect either a dream or reality world he was
in, with the penetrating brightness of the neon emanating from the clubs
and storefronts making them look like sites from hell.
The persistent doctor with money to spare, finds his way to a Village
costume store to get a costume at a late hour of the night. Sex is
everywhere and in all different styles in this film, here the
14-year-old costume store owner's daughter is caught in the store by her
father having sex with two oddly dressed men, and when reprimanded for
this only comes onto the good doctor, who always seems to be flattered
by such attention.
Gaining admittance to the The Long Island mansion of the orgy by using
the password given to him by his jazz friend, Bill enters a macabre
world of sinister pleasure, that is played less erotically than it is as
a formal costumed ritual, replete with medieval music and choreographed
ritualistic movements. Sexual acts are taking place in all the rooms, as
Bill is warned by one of the masked naked woman that he is in great
danger, that he will be unmasked and harmed if he doesn't leave at once.
When he is questioned about how he got in by the inquistors of this orgy
and can't explain himself he is threatened with being stripped  and
possibly slain, but is saved by the same woman who first warned him to
leave, as her action is one of "redemption," adding some kind of
malevolent religious motif to this already adventurious night out on the
town for Bill.
Back home, Bill awakens his wife from a nightmare, where she is dreaming
of sex with a myriad of different men. This scene is complex and
telling, as it shows the liberation of the couple from their secret
desires, how they manage to come to terms with each other and reach out
for love in a world that is not as perfect as it is dehumanizing, as
they desperately try, for once, to be honest about who they are.
Bill in his search for answers for what happened in the mansion, must
force himself to play sleuth as he tries to track down his missing jazz
friend, but is taken aback by discovering that the woman who saved his
life has died of a drug overdose. He is further surprised that Ziegler
knows that he was at the orgy, as he confides that he had him followed
as a friendly gesture so that he can come to his senses and forget about
it- that he doesn't have an idea who he is starting up with.
The last scene could be out of either The Godfather or Fellini's
Satiyricon, as the mask stripped off Bill at the orgy is mysteriously
lying on the bed next to the sleeping Alice.
The slide down a decadent path for the couple ends mirthfully, but on a
seemingly depersonalized note, as Alice's answer to everything is a
resounding let's f***.
This film has all the earmarks of a masterpiece despite its let down in
certain spots:
Is the Cruise character worth all the fuss over saving? Is Kubrick's
overtly homosexual characterization of a desk clerk gratuitous or
necessary to show that Cruise attracts both men and women to him? It is
probably a film that has to be seen a few times before its
characterizations fully sink in and the power of its story can be fully
appreciated. The obtuse nature of what really happened and the mind
blowing affects of their dreams, are stunningly presented by a master of
his craft- in his re-created purgatory streets of NYC and in how he
magnifies the bathroom used in Ziegler's place out of its usual role of
functionality, as it becomes a labatory where love and death and sex are
equated in the same terms, and morality for the "new age" is achieved
without the usual rectitudes of a religion's right or wrong tenets.
But this also puts the burden on the viewer to come up with their own
answers on these matters, since the dreams that have opened up the
couple's perspectives and driven a wedge between them before they came
to some terms with themselves, has still left them with a rocky road
ahead. The whole societal process of how dehumanized we have all become
is opened up for further speculation, as sex our most intimate response
to love is dehumanized and played out in the need for an orgy. An orgy
the doctor would have gladly broken all his marriage vows for if allowed
to participate in it. This two day whirlwind the couple has might be the
beginning of who knows what, and that is scary, as most people want some
reassurances about their future. People also should know who they are
without identifying themselves with their career, as the doctor always
does.
Kubrick questions what a marriage is, as it is dissected as an
institution based on property rights, and he puts all answers for what
its contract stipulates on the table for further negotiation.
A thinking man's work of art has evolved, and a very splendid film to
end the century on, as well as to end the career of one of our most
distinguished directors. In this film's case, all the hype the film got
did not work against it.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
Warner Bros. Pictures
159 minutes
starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Marie Richardson, Rade
Serbedzija, Todd Field, Vinessa Shaw, Leelee Sobieski
inspired by the novella "Traumnovelle" by Arthur Schnitzler
written by Stanley Kubrick and Fredric Raphael
directed by Stanley Kubrick
In my years of watching movies, I have never once heard anyone be
called a Kubrick rip-off. Sure, film students from here to Timbuktu
constantly use Tarantino and Scorsese as "inspirations", but no one
can rip-off Stanley Kubrick. Why? Maybe because Kubrick's work was so
distinctive, right down to every detail. Stanley Kubrick was film's
most notorious perfectionist, and up until his death a few months ago,
he may have been film's greatest visionary.
With films like "2001: A Space Odyssey" and "Spartacus" he took us to
places that we've never been, and with "A Clockwork Orange" and
"Dr. Strangelove", he expanded our knowledge of things we may have
seen. Kubrick's 17th and final film, "Eyes Wide Shut", is a
masterpiece which is also his most intimate and character-driven film.
In "Eyes Wide Shut", Tom Cruise plays Doctor William Hartford, who is
living the upper-class life in Manhattan with his wife, Alice(Nicole
Kidman) and their young daughter, Helena(Madison Eginton).  The film
opens as Bill and Alice are getting ready for a Christmas party held
by Bill's friend, Victor(Sydney Pollack). At the party, both Alice and
Bill are hit on, but both escape their desires.
That night, after the party, Alice confesses to having sexual
fantasies about other men. After she describes her desires in graphic
detail, Bill has an eventful night on the town where he makes many
sexual and moral discoveries. These involve a hooker, a jazz lounge,
an orgy and a couple of deaths.
Bill ends up getting himself caught up in a psychological web of
jealousy, obsession and revenge. The succession of events are dark,
haunting and disturbing. There is a scene, which takes place at a
ritual orgy, that is one of the most graphic, terrifying and
provocative scenes that Stanley Kubrick has ever put to film.
"Eyes Wide Shut" garnered lots of publicity concerning its risky
subject matter, its two-year long shoot, and its brush with an NC-17
rating. But everything seems to have paid off. Cruise and Kidman fit
their roles perfectly, and all the components fit together.
The film is excellent in its portrayal of a bored married couple and
it is excellent as a dark mood piece. Kubrick magically pushes us
further and further into the story, and the intrigue never ceases.
"Eyes Wide Shut" is a thriller, a romance and a work of art.
The years that have passed since "Full Metal Jacket" seem to be worth
the wait, because "Eyes Wide Shut" is one of 1999's best films. The
film is quite long, and not for the faint of heart. Those expecting a
Tom Cruise romantic comedy a la "Jerry Maguire" will be
disappointed. Those looking for challenging fare among the mess of
summer movies will be pleasantly surprised.
Stanley Kubrick's legacy will continue to live on, both in film
schools and at home. Although he may have been eccentric, he managed
to make unconventional films that people wanted to see. He gave us
something to think about. There is always more to his films than meets
the eye, and his final masterpiece, "Eyes Wide Shut", is no exception.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
James Brundage
Open Your Eyes -- A review of Eyes Wide Shut
Written by Stanley Kubrick and Frederic Raphael
Based upon the novel "Traumnovelle (Rhapsody: A Dream Story)" by Arthur
Schnitzler
Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd Field, and Leelee
Sobieski
 I feel as if my life up to the current point should be divided into three
parts.  The first part consists of having not seen or heard of Eyes Wide
Shut.  During this period, I may have seen a few Kubrick efforts (Dr.
Strangelove, The Shining, 2001: A Space Odyssey and Spartacus), but I did
not know of his current, highly controversial project: Eyes Wide Shut.
 The second part is made up of the two and a half years since I discovered
that Stanley Kubrick was making this film and the day -- today -- that I saw
it.  At the time, I had already been a critic for a year and a half.  I was
beginning to consider doing retrospectives, was renting as many films as I
could afford. I saw The Shining again and again, rented Full Metal Jacket
and A Clockwork Orange (FMJ I didn't care for... as crazy as it sounds, I
loved A Clockwork Orange), and began my long period of waiting.
 This period of waiting, of the collective millions of Kubrick fans and
thousands of movie critics keeping their eyes and their ears open for any
news of the final result was a quieter mirror to the louder (yet equally
obsessed) fans of Star Wars, who awaited George Lucas' next effort.  Several
of us wavered, headed into the Star Wars anticipation camp, but the faithful
remained.
 I can almost picture some publicist at Warner having the mixed reaction of
sorrow and raw joy.  Everyone knew, at that point, that you couldn't buy
publicity like this.  A few days before his death there was the infamous
teaser of Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman doing it in front of a mirror.
During the season finale of "ER", the full teaser hit home and everyone was
talking about this movie.
 For my initial reaction, check out www.filmcritic.com 's features section,
where you will find EYES WIDE *&!@?: Why Eyes Wide Shut will not succumb to
the hype curse.
 For the next two months we were bombarded with hype about Eyes Wide Shut
with few words being said.  Magazines did features on the movie asking
various questions, and getting no answers.  Certain people speculated
correctly and incorrectly about what happened in the movie.  We all heard
about the NC-17 or R debate concerning the orgy sequence.
 Time featured Tom licking Nicole.  Rolling Stone had Nicole's breasts being
guarded by a cowboy hat.  Esquire had her in that "oh so nice" dress and had
the balls to say what every other magazine knew but wouldn't admit to:
Nicole has a nice ass.
 Us speculated that the movie was going to be the sexiest film ever.  Yet,
aside from a few sequences that are revealed to us (the majority of which
are cards played in the first hour of the 2:33 movie), we saw nothing of the
movie, and knew nothing much about the plot.
 Opening day greeted it with glowing reviews from everyone except
Entertainment Weekly, who gave this film a lackluster review.  Yet none of
them, in my mind, fulfilled their functions as a critic as far as a movie
this big is concerned.
 The function of the critic is not only to inform over the quality of a
picture (whether it is a good film or a bad film), the entertainment value
of the film (whether it was fun to see or made you want to sleep), but also
on the nature of the film itself.  On its soul.
 I was once having a discussion about the difference between drawing
(doodling, not to say that actually drawing itself isn't art) and art with a
poet and a painter.  "Drawing," the poet stipulated, "was when a piece
contained none of the person."  "No," the painter replied.  "Drawing
contains less of a person that art, but drawing still contains some of a
person."
 "You're both wrong," I said.  "The difference between drawing just plain
old anything, and the definition of art itself, is that art crosses the line
between being a part of a person and having a consciousness all of its own.
It is not to say that art is artificially intelligent: a man-made sentience,
but instead that it chooses to mimic sentience.  It becomes its own being,
and, although we are its creators, we have little control over altering it."
 Eyes Wide Shut, a film truly able to be called art, does contain a mimicry
of sentience.  Like all great art, the mimicry is so complete that you are
indeed able to convince yourself that this is a sentience, that this is a
reality.  It may not be yours, but it is a reality.
 Like all realities, Eyes Wide Shut contains people (not characters), it
contains places (not locations), it contains events (not things that
happened).  The distinction between all of these pairs lies in tone.
Whereas someone can be quite a character, they are not truly a person until
you know them.  Where as you have the location of the movie being New York
City, its place is somewhere surreal, dreamlike (hence being like
Traumnovelle, or Rhapsody: A Dream Story).  While things occur in all
movies, only events alter.
 Like our reality, Eyes Wide Shut contains heavy amounts of decadence, sex,
and profanity.  It contains drugs and alcohol, good and bad.  It contains
unfavorable people, sinister events, and moments of revelation.
 To begin dispelling rumors Eyes Wide Shut is not, as Us magazine claimed it
would be, the sexiest film of all time.  In fact, having watched literally
thousands of films, I do not hesitate to call Eyes Wide Shut the most
thoroughly unsexy movie of all time.  Unlike the characteristic sex in
movies, which is literally a thing that happens, with no consequences, Eyes
Wide Shut shows the side of sex that Hollywood truly loathes: sex as an
event.
 Eyes Wide Shut is about sex in the fact that it concerns the grave effects
that sex has upon people.  As described, it is a thriller of jealousy and
sexual obsession.  It is not a thriller in the American sense, with guns or
psychopathic killers.  Nor does it contain anything of pure evil (although
there are points at which you will no doubt feel that it does).
 Instead, Eyes Wide Shut is both Kubrick's final film and his final step in
becoming an expatriate.  It has nothing American left in it... it is, at its
core, a very British film.  The suspense is neither physical, nor visceral,
nor psychological, but instead intellectual.  There are points where we have
Bill Harford (Cruise) being followed by the tall dark stranger and where we
have an-oh-so-cruel smile by Alice (Kidman), but these are the only moments
where any hint of psychological terror comes to mind.  Instead, we have more
intellectual frights; twists of plot that shock us, and a flawless mastery
over filmmaking.
 To describe the plot, it concerns an argument between Bill and Alice about
a Christmas party at which both were the subject of highly amorous advances
(Bill by two models, Alice by Hungarian mystery man who acts like a complete
snake).  In this argument, which contains perhaps the most intelligent
banter ever to go back and forth on the nature of jealousy and desire, Alice
admits to having an erotic encounter with a sailor in Cape Cod the previous
summer.
 As the pain of adultery hits home, Bill is called to see one of his
patients' daughter, because the patient has just died.  The daughter, facing
marriage, admits to a love she has harbored for Bill and offers herself to
him, only to be interrupted by her fiancé's arrival.  Bill, startled by this
revelation, leaves the house and spends hours wandering the streets of New
York.  He finds himself near a prostitute, and almost commits adultery
himself.  Via jazz musician Nick Nightingale (Todd Field), he discovers
about an orgy for the rich that occurs weekly at a different location each
time.
 He goes to this place, again trying to delve himself into decadence, only
to be faced with death and be saved by a woman who takes his place.  He also
runs into a costume and tuxedo salesman who pimps his 15 year old daughter
out (played by Leelee Sobieski, who steals the scene away from Cruise (and
we're talking Cruise's finest performance ever)).
The masked men behind the orgy (which is almost druid-like in nature) have
him followed and threaten his family.   Cruise, seeing the mask from the
party in his place in bed, realizes his mistakes and promises to confess
everything.  To an American audience, this will come as a highly
disappointing climax to a film that, despite a lack of physical action, is
thoroughly gripping.  However, I, a lover of independent and foreign cinema
as well as intellectual films, tend to enjoy these types of climaxes.  The
moments at which a full change is realized.
 Eyes Wide Shut is probably the most highly anticipated film (by film
lovers, that is), in years, and, although most people expecting tons of sex
will be highly disappointed by the film's lack of rampant sex (although it
is very high in nudity), I am very pleased at the result.  In fact, this is
the point in the review where I call it THE BEST FILM OF THE YEAR.
 One gripe that many seem to have with Eyes Wide Shut -- its look of
artificiality is what I consider to be its greatest technical asset.
Although Cruise, Kidman, and Pollack will score nominations for Best Actor,
Actress, and Supporting Actor, the cinematography in the film and the set
design are both worth mentioning.  The film was shot not in New York City,
but instead on soundstages in London, England, and thus it contains a
slightly off-kilter feel to it.  It looks like New York City on the surface,
but then tiny things seem different.  This place seems to have too many
extras, and that place too few.  The people are too nice at one moment and
too cruel and the next.  Certain parts of the city are too bright for New
York, and certain parts are too dark.  Because of this, we have the feeling
that we are both in and out of New York City.  That the film is being both
realistic and unrealistic at the same time.
 The film grain is either similar or identical to that used in A Clockwork
Orange, which gave off the same sense of artificiality.  In A Clockwork
Orange, we felt that the film was like a nightmare.  Eyes Wide Shut displays
the same brilliance.  Both of these aspects make the film dreamlike, which
is what Eyes Wide Shut is about... a dream world.
 Also of note is the fact that Cinematographer Larry Smith is the very first
cinematographer to be so skilled that you feel as if he is literally playing
with the shadows.  He overlights the initial party sequence, uses natural
lighting for many of the scenes on the street, and underlights in the
bedroom and in the already infamous orgy sequence.  He also chooses, as does
Kubrick, to not focus on the act of sex but instead upon the aftermath (the
scene in front of the mirror, which is 30 to 90 seconds in the ads,
depending on a censored or an uncensored version, is only about 15-20
seconds in the movie itself), opting often to slide right past the sight of
copulation to focus on something else that may be more trivial (it is a
perfect metaphor, that the camera, like us, should want to both stay and
turn away at the same time).
 Eyes Wide Shut should be see as Bill's odyssey to become bad contrasting
his failure to do so.  Although he attempts to commit his own adultery, Bill
eventually fails.  He is, at his heart, a good man, faithful to Alice to the
end... no matter what may come between them.
 Thank you, Stanley Kubrick.  If, after all that waiting, you turned out
something bad, I could never forgive you.

Author
Shane Burridge
Yikes.  I'm not sure how many people are qualified to handle the critique of 
a new Kubrick film upon its release, but one thing is certain: time has 
proven many a detractor wrong.  Kubrick's films have always confounded 
expectations, which is why inevitably they become reappraised and treated 
more generously.  2001 was not the cowboys-in-space jingoism that sci-fi 
films of the time were built on; BARRY LYNDON was more like a walk through 
an art gallery than a lusty historical romance; FULL METAL JACKET avoided 
the path of all other Vietnam films and spent one half of its time at boot 
camp and the other half in burned-out rubble.  And even though I should know 
better, I've also fallen victim to my own preconceptions.  I was crushed 
after seeing the long-awaited premiere of THE SHINING - it just wasn't scary 
- but went back for a second viewing nonetheless, and then a third, and then 
a fourth.  It has become more insidious each time and has yielded a 
subterranean, primal quality that I find strangely engrossing.  I figure the 
same will happen with EYES WIDE SHUT.  The difference is that this time I 
was not disappointed.  That is, I didn't have any expectations.
I'm not prepared to tell anyone what EYES WIDE SHUT is 'about', either 
storywise or in terms of concept.  I think it's sufficient to say that 
Kubrick is at the top of his form - at the age of 70 he has retained the 
provocation and vivacity of his earlier works.  But I wonder how many 
critics will go into theaters with not only their mouths but their ears wide 
shut also.  Hypothetically: four people go to see EWS.  One person enthuses 
about it afterwards.  Another is bored senseless.  The other two are simply 
confused.  Guess which three of the above were silly enough to read 
tabloids, watch 60 MINUTES, look for gossip on the Internet, and end up with 
their own fixed vision of what EYES WIDE SHUT was 'supposed' to be.  No, 
there are no hot-and-heavy sex scenes between Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, 
and no full frontal nudity on their behalf either (it's with much 
satisfaction that I browsed through all these misguided rumors that I've 
been saving up only after actually seeing the film for myself).  But you 
have to wonder how prankish Kubrick himself is in this regard - the film's 
theatrical teaser, in which Cruise wordlessly fondles Kidman before a 
mirror, is undoubtedly going to plant preconceptions in every viewer's mind. 
  In fact Cruise and Kidman spend only a handful of scenes together: the 
storyline is concerned mainly with Cruise's own journey of discovery. His 
character alone appears to be responsible for the film's title, Kubrick's 
metaphor for those who walk through an uncertain world with eyes wide open 
but seeing nothing, or at least nothing they can comprehend.  Cruise meets a 
variety of characters who are not what they seem:  they wear masks, 
costumes, or wigs; they have foreign accents or ambivalent sexuality; they 
appear by chance and then are unavailable when he seeks them; even the city 
he lives in has a hybrid idenitity - for the first half of the film we could 
easily believe it was in Europe.  He has elliptical conversations with his 
wife and doesn't know when his friend (Sydney Pollack) is telling the truth. 
  Everyone in this film wears a mask, even when they're not wearing masks: 
Cruise's trademark grin is different this time, a nervous reaction that 
seems to be covering frustration or cold panic.  Cruise starts 
investigating, and Kubrick's Steadicam sinuously keeps pace with him.  
Throughout the film he is primarily an observer - he encounters many women 
in various states of undress but is permitted only to look and not touch 
(two models at a party, a prostitute (and her roommate), a drug overdose, a 
corpse, a debauchery.  This frustration is obviously piling up on him - the 
first hour of the film is shot in warm and seductive flesh tones - and even 
when he takes action he remains an observer rather than a participant.  But, 
like Cruise, we will never know what the 'truth' behind this tale really is, 
and no doubt film buffs will be picking over clues for some time to come.  
It's worth bearing in mind, however, that Kubrick would not have wanted any 
one truth to emerge in the first place.
It's perverse that Kubrick should spend two years shooting a film that takes 
place over two days, but the results appear to be worth it.  Cruise and 
Kidman have never appeared so intense.  Cruise, carrying the weight of the 
film, does well in the preferred Kubrick style: the deliberately paced 
dialogue (each character takes their turn to speak), the way exposition is 
dragged out by characters who are nervous or awkward, the way one person's 
dialogue is repeated as a question by another.  All of this makes EYES WIDE 
SHUT unique among other contemporary films that throw up their pop offerings 
on similar subjects.  It is by turns playful, sensuous, menacing, funny, 
otherwordly, and elegant. It is a film that will get under your skin.  It's 
mesmerizing just to watch these people acting (the well-publicized constant 
retakes eventually shape the mannered performances preferred in Kubrick's 
productions), including scene-stealing supporting roles such as the rental 
shop owner and the desk clerk.  The fact that the married couple of the film 
are played by a real married couple also help give the film a little extra 
edge - that, and the knowledge that this was the master film-maker's final 
opus.
It's appropriate that Kubrick should go out with a deliberation on 
obsession.  It's fitting too that the final credit crawl should be 
accompanied by a waltz, given that his most indelible cinematic image has 
been that of spacecraft gliding to the strains of Strauss.  And despite the 
tentative plans for at least one further film, Kubrick probably knew all 
along that this was going to be his swan song.  He died only days after 
screening his approved final cut.  The abrupt, final line of the film can be 
read as Kubrick's last joke: he literally went out with a bang.
And ten years from now, I'll start thinking on what EYES WIDE SHUT is 
actually 'about'.
This might sound like the worst of cliches, but I saw 2001 at the age of 14 
and it changed my life.  Thank you, Stanley.


Author
Greg King
EYES WIDE SHUT (R).  
(Warner Bros/Village Roadshow)
Director: Stanley Kubrick
Stars: Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Marie Richardson, 
Thomas Gibson, Todd Field, 
Rade Serbedgia, Leelee Sobieski, Fay masterson, Alan Cumming, Vinessa 
Shaw
Running time: 159 minutes.
It has taken nearly twelve years for director Stanley Kubrick
to produce his eagerly awaited follow up to his previous film, the
powerful anti-war film Full Metal Jacket.  Because it was shot over a
gruelling 18 month schedule and amidst incredible secrecy, and
completed just before his death earlier this year, Eyes Wide Shut has
become the most anticipated film of the year, after The Phantom
Menace.  That it is also this respected director's final film means
that Eyes Wide Shut will probably be analysed from a misleading
perspective.  Many commentators will be tempted to read more into the
film's themes and meaning than was intended.
Based on an obscure short story by German author Arthur
Schnitzler, Eyes Wide Shut is a sombre and deeply personal exploration
of sexual obsession, intimacy, fidelity, temptation, and jealousy.
The film basically follows a 72 hour period in the lives of Dr William
Harford (Tom Cruise) and his beautiful, stay at home wife Alice
(Nicole Kidman), who live in splendid comfort in a luxurious New York
apartment.  However, after nine years their marriage has grown stale,
predictable and even boring as their daily routine seems to drive them
further apart.
But then, during a lavish Christmas party thrown by one of
Harford's wealthy patients (director Sydney Pollack), the couple
inexplicably flirt openly with strangers.  This leads to a
surprisingly intimate revelation from Alice, when she admits to having
sexual fantasies about a handsome sailor she met on their last
holiday.  Bill is shocked, and his anger leads him to wander the
streets in frustration and confusion.  He has a number of casual,
sexually charged encounters that actually lead nowhere.  His
wanderings lead him to a secret, ritualistic-like orgy, in which all
of the participants wear masks and cloaks.  He is left shaken and
deeply disturbed by this experience and its unsettling aftermath.
However, his experiences also serve to bring him and Alice to a
greater understanding of what has been lacking in their relationship.
Kubrick and co-writer Frederic Raphael draw some striking
parallels between Alice's lurid sexual fantasies and Bill's
encounters, and offer some deep psychological insights into the nature
of modern relationships.  Its exploration of sexual relationships and
sexual attraction is unusually personal territory for a director
renowned for his aloofness and distance, and Eyes Wide Shut has a more
sympathetic view of women than many of Kubrick's previous films.
Despite its subject matter though, the film is tastefully done, and is
neither particularly pornographic nor erotic.
The cinematography is typically stylish and lavish.  As usual,
Kubrick also effectively uses music to underscore the film's moods.
Jocelyn Pook's disturbing and deliberately discordant piano-driven
score adds to the unsettling atmosphere of the film's second half.
However, the careful build up of tension and atmosphere ultimately
leads nowhere.  Like his earlier Barry Lyndon, Eyes Wide Shut is
visually quite stunning, superbly crafted and beautifully acted, but
it is also slow moving, ponderous and pretentious.
It bears all Kubrick's usual trademark touches, although it's
sometimes hard to see why this notorious perfectionist spent 18 months
crafting the film.  (A sound technician can be seen reflected in an
early bathroom scene, a mistake that seems to have slipped by the
notoriously perfectionist film maker.)
Over the 18 month shoot, Kubrick has teased out of his two
stars their most complex, intriguing and mature performances yet.
Having this popular and highly visible married couple play the leads
in the film adds a further nuance and emotional depth to the on-screen
intimacy that would be hard to replicate.  Cruise, who is on screen
for most of the film's overly generous 160 minutes, surprises with his
most confident yet insightful performance yet.  Although the usual
mannerisms are present, Kubrick has been able to shape a more complex
performance from Cruise.  Although she has far less screen time, it is
Kidman who grabs the acting honours with a gutsy, revealing and
painfully emotional performance.
There seems little justification for the highly publicised
replacement of Jennifer Jason Leigh, who was unavailable for
re-shooting.  Marie Richardson takes over her role, for what is little
more than a cameo appearance.  The performances from the ensemble
supporting cast are all superb, with Alan Cumming a stand out for his
delightfully sly turn as a hotel concierge.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros.
 Director: Stanley Kubrick
 Writer:   Stanley Kubrick, Frederic Raphael, novel
"Traumnovelle" by Arthur Schnitzler
 Cast: Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd
Field, Marie Richardson, Alan Cumming, Thomas Gibson, 
Clarke Hayes, Rade Sherbedgia, Vinessa Shaw, Leelee
Sobieski
   Human beings have roamed the earth for two million years. 
What we call civilization began about seven thousand years
ago.  During the past seven millennia, the world has
witnessed every form of government and about as many
patterns of culture as can be imagined.  Some cultures value
money above all, others religion.  Most people have spent all
of their time in rural areas while in the more developed areas
the rustic pleasures exist only as a break from urban stress. 
Despite the variety of peoples, there is just one set of taboos
that all civilizations have supported: their interdictions center
on sex.  While just a bare handful of cultures have condoned
incest, all have proscribed sexual relations outside of
marriage.  Though this restriction is often honored in the
breach, one truth is preeminent: a married person cannot
have sexual relations with other than his or her spouse
without threatening their marriage.  Why this unusual
importance on sexual fidelity?  Interpretations abound.  In his
final film, "Eyes Wide Shut," one of America's foremost
directors, Stanley Kubrick, investigates the significance of sex
as both an obsession and a source of jealousy of the most
consequential kind.  The film, which was started in 1995 and
completed a very short time before the director's death four
years later, has been kept under heavy wraps, presumably to
increase the public's curiosity.  Virtually no details were made
public until a critic from a London newspaper broke with a
premature review which (though the essay all but called the
film a masterwork) created considerable wrath among
executives in the releasing studio.
   Sexual obsession and jealousy are not new themes in
literature, theater, and movies.  You need only look back to
the ancient Greek stage to find the motifs at work in plays
like the Agamemnon of Aeschylus and the Medea of
Euripides.  What gives "Eyes Wide Shut" its particular
distinction is only partly the story, but mainly its use of a
married couple, both major actors, in the lead roles: Tom
Cruise as Dr. William Harford, a successful practitioner
deficient in the departments of personality and understanding;
and Nicole Kidman as his stay-at-home wife, Alice, a woman
who is presumably looking for a job but has a full-time career
conjuring up particularly Freudian dreams and fantasies. 
Kubrick opens the film boldly on an image of Alice, her robe
dropping from her shoulders to reveal a naked back: but
when Kubrick almost immediately blacks out the scene, he is
hinting at his motif.  "Eyes Wide Shut" is about temptation
and retreat; perpetual obsession and failed realization.  The
movie is a portrayal of sexual intrigue that brings to mind
playwright Arthur Schnitzler's displays of libidinous yearnings
among the rich and powerful in his own Austria of the past
century.  In fact it's no happenstance that Kubrick's movie is
closely based on one of Schnitzler's lesser works of fiction,
"Traumnovelle" (Dream Story).  Schnitzler's narrative is given
a dazzling physical re-creation before Kubrick's lens, the
cryptic atmosphere jogged by Jocelyn Pook's aesthetically
appealing sound track and a costume design by Marit Allen
that in one extended scene effectively recreates the
Hapsburg Empire in our own time.
   To say that this movie is a version of Billy Wilder's 1955
comedy "The Seven Year Itch"--about the fantasies Tom
Ewell enjoys of the sexpot (Marilyn Monroe) who movies in
upstairs while his wife is vacationing--would be a ludicrous
analogy, to be sure, grossly trivializing Kubrick's themes. 
And yet "Eyes Wide Shut" re-shapes the comic cleverness of
"Itch" into an almost Greek tragic construct.  Bill and Alice
have been married for nine years and have a lovely seven-
year-old daughter.  They are financially secure and travel in
New York's upper-middle class circles. A sexual restlessness
materializes, given full vent at a party held by millionaire
Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack).  While Bill receives the
flirtatious attentions of two bimbos, Alice, who by now is tipsy,
is aroused during a coquettish dance of her own with a suave
Hungarian who attempts to seduce her.  When the couple
return home, relaxing by smoking pot, Alice becomes
aggressive while debating her husband about the sexual
differences between men and women, describing a near-affair
she had with a sailor.  As Bill imagines the liaison (shown in
several black-and-white, dream-like images) his envy gets the
better of him.  He is led into a series of connections with
love-hungry women, beginning with contact with the
distressed Mary (Marie Richardson) who declares her love for
Bill and an indifference toward with her fiance.  Later allowing
himself to be almost seduced by a hooker (Vinessa Shaw),
he learns from a jazz pianist friend (Todd Field) of a location
in which masked orgies take place.  Renting a costume from
the eccentric Milich (Rade Sherbedgia), he taxis to the
mansion and is attracted to a woman who leads him on a
tour of the house, in whose rooms costumed couples are
bumping and thrusting (their gyrations partially hidden by
digitally created figures recently introduced to avoid an NC-17
rating).  
   If you were ever curious about whether a doctor--who has
seen scores, perhaps hundreds of naked bodies of patients--
can maintain his libido or whether he would suffer the fate of
a chocolatier who is so entombed in his creation that he
eschews the consumption of his own product, this film
provides an answer.  No way is Bill's professional exposure
to the female form desensitizing.  As he wanders about the
mansion entranced and amazed by the orgiastic animations
about him, and as he meanders about the streets of New
York (exquisitely re-created in Pinewood Studios), his mojo
remains on the same high peak enjoyed by Austin Powers in
an obviously more lighthearted movie.  Under the spell of his
wife's revelations about a near-affair, he sees sex
everywhere--his wife's carnal yearnings restricted to Freudian
dreams while her husband's are furthered by dreamlike
reality.  
  At times the film looks like a creation of Harold Pinter, so
menacing is the orgy in which Bill soon finds himself out of
his depths.  At other times we could swear that "Eyes Wide
Shut" is the creation of a Franz Kafka, Alice's nightmares and
the guilt-ridden Bill's actual experiences creating a mysterious
and alluring ambiance.
   "Eyes Wide Shut" is not the masterpiece that some have
expected it to come from the vivid imagination of the creator
of such bold works as "Dr. Strangelove," "2001," "Full Metal
Jacket," "The Shining" and "Clockwork Orange."  Stanley
Kubrick took his time, a meticulous man who has obviously
planned each shot with impeccable attention.  His visual style
is manifest in every scene, in the way he conveys the murky
menace of New York streets by night, the desperation of the
opulent at a massive, costumed orgy that at one point turns
into a trial that would have titillated Torquemada, the intimate
scenes that take place between a man and wife who have
become perhaps too comfortable with each other and are
seeking new and dangerous games to play.  With a classic
performance by Nicole Kidman, whether on the dance floor
teasing her unctuous partner or stretched out vulnerably on
her bed overwhelmed by her imagination, "Eyes Wide Shut"
is a fitting conclusion to Mr. Kubrick's monumental career as
a director of challenging fare, inviting a variety of
interpretations from his cineastes.  Conversations, especially
between Alice and Bill, are almost painfully deliberate, as
though Kubrick  were petitioning his audience to lean on each
word as though concocted on Mount Sinai.  Despite its length
of better than two and one-half hours, there is not a wasted
sliver of celluloid in this engaging--if not quite overpowering--
tale.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Eyes_Wide_Shut_ (R) **** (out of ****)
The late Stanley Kubrick's long-awaited final film, _Eyes_Wide_Shut_, is
the perfect example of a true NC-17 film--but not in the way one would be
led to believe.  Ever since production began on the film way back in the
fall of 1996, rumors have been swirling about the sexual content of the
film: "Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman bare all and really do the nasty";
"Tom wears a dress"; "Tom lusts after teenage Leelee Sobieski"--if the
reports were to be believed, _Eyes_Wide_Shut_ would turn out to be a
high-budget, A-list porn film.  Fanning the flames of speculation was the
now-familiar scene of a nude Cruise and Kidman making love in front of a
mirror, the first taste of the film made available to the public.
Having seen the actual film, I advise anyone ready to don their
raincoats for a showing of _Eyes_Wide_Shut_ to think twice.  Yes, there
is some strong sexual content (some of which was altered to receive an R
rating, but more on that later), but not the wall-to-wall fornication as
had been whispered.  Rather than _being_ sex, _Eyes_Wide_Shut_ is _about_
sex--a film that explores this adult theme in a sensitive, mature, and
thoughtful manner.  If that isn't a film that could not better exemplify
a rating that simply means, in its literal definition, "No one 17 and
under admitted," then I don't know what is.
Kubrick isn't above a little playful teasing, and that's what he does
for the opening section of _Eyes_Wide_Shut_, which appears to suggest all
manner of ensuing tawdriness.  The opening shot is of Kidman's character,
former art gallery manager (_not_ psychiatrist nor medical doctor) Alice
Harford, doffing her duds and baring nearly all.  Once fully dressed, she
and her husband, Dr. Bill Harford (Cruise) make their way to a swank
party thrown by wealthy friend Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack, in a role
once meant for Harvey Keitel).  At the soirée, a tipsy Alice engages in a
dangerous flirtation with an anonymous partygoer while eyeing her husband
getting friendly with a pair of seductive models.
Not too long after that, a fully nude female form appears onscreen, but
not in the way one would expect.  Similarly unexpected is the turn that
soon comes in one astonishing Cruise-Kidman bedroom scene, which reveals
itself to be the film's driving dramatic force.  While this scene is all
about sex, it is not _of_ sex; in fact, it is of words describing sex,
and in decidedly inexplicit terms.  What lends this scene such power,
however, is the hypnotic effect that comes when all facets of cinema are
triumphantly married: photography, editing, writing, and especially
directing and acting.  A description of what the scene literally entails
would sound deceptively simple and thus completely fail to do it justice.
 Directed with remarkable precision and control by Kubrick and quite
simply the most triumphant moment in Kidman's entire acting career, this
scene is the first of _Eyes_Wide_Shut_'s fair share of haunting moments.
This charged encounter sends Bill off into the streets and the film into
its main (for lack of a better term) action, where in one, long night, he
is simultaneously repulsed and enticed by various sex-related situations
he happens to stumble upon.  The decadent centerpiece of his journey (and
of the film itself) is a now-notorious orgy sequence, made even more
controversial by the addition of some obvious digital effects work used
to obscure some sex acts--and hence secure an R rating.  From what I
understand, no genitalia nor glimpses of penetration could be seen in
Kubrick's unobstructed view, which is just as well--the point of the
scene is not to titillate but to create an unsettling atmosphere where
desire and carnal curiosity becomes tinged with danger and outright fear.
(The atmosphere is stunningly bolstered by Jocelyn Pook's chilling
minimalist score.)  The point still comes across in the censored version,
but undoubtedly diluted, for the unconvincing CGI work just serves to
distract more than anything else.
This bit of censorship (which Warner Bros. insists was approved by
Kubrick before his sudden death in March) also shows just how
out-of-touch the Motion Picture Association of America's ratings board
is.  It fails to realize that it's not the presence of sex that matters
but its context and intended effect.  For all the scandalous associations
that come with an orgy, there is nothing exploitative about the sequence;
it is far more disturbing than it is the slightest bit arousing (which it
isn't), and the sex is a means to a cinematic end and not the end itself.
Kubrick, his co-scripter Frederic Raphael (working from the
"inspiration" of Arthur Schnitzler's novel _Traumnovelle_), Cruise, and
Kidman's end is to create a probing and painfully real examination of a
marriage, relationships in general, and basic human desire and nature. 
Clocking in at well north of the two-and-a-half-hour mark, there is bound
to be a slow stretch here and there, and one late plot revelation is a
bit too easily predictable; but overall, there is nary a false note in
the execution.  Though receiving equal star billing and delivering an
outstanding and  revealing (in every way) performance, Kidman's presence
definitely takes a backseat to that of her on- and off-screen husband,
who dominates the screen time.  Cruise's innate likability and
average-guy appeal makes him the ideal audience surrogate for this foray
into the sexual underground; one can completely relate to his fascination
and fear of all that he witnesses.  The secondary roles are also
well-cast, from Pollack (who, in the end, is probably a more effective
choice for his role than Keitel could have been) and Sobieski (as a
fetching nymphet) to a hilarious Alan Cumming as a hotel desk clerk who
makes no secret of his interest in Bill.  The one strained performance
comes from Marie Richardson, who bears a passing resemblance to her
role's original portrayer, Jennifer Jason Leigh (who was replaced when
she was unavailable for reshoots); though stiff and awkward in her single
scene with Cruise, her work is far from ruinous to the film.
It would take something much larger than that to detract from the vision
of Kubrick, to whose control the audience completely surrenders.  The
common reaction once the end credits began to run was a simple "hmm," and
while it doesn't sound that way, that is a good thing.  _Eyes_Wide_Shut_
is thought-provoking, but the film's spell goes beyond that; it makes you
_want_ to think about it afterward.  That feeling even permeated this
week's gala premiere of the film; in post-screening interviews, many of
the celebrities in attendence expressed their need to think about what
they had just seen.
That, right there, makes me somewhat grudgingly grateful that the film
didn't end up hitting screens with the dreaded NC-17 rating. 
_Eyes_Wide_Shut_ is a rich, challenging work, and as such, it is certain
to fly clear over the heads of a baffled American moviegoing public;
consequently, the film is all but certain to die a quick--and
much-talked-about--box office death.  And in this entertainment/political
climate of scapegoating, had the film been released with an NC-17,
fingers would have been pointed at the rating, rendering it even more
useless than it already is.  If one of the biggest, if not the biggest,
movie star in the world is unable to make an NC-17 film commercially
viable (regardless of its subject matter, challenging or otherwise), then
no one would ever want to touch the NC-17 ever again.  There is no
excusing Warner Bros.'s tampering with Kubrick's work, but at least it
leaves the door open for another name star, another high-profile
director, and a major studio bold enough to take risks meant to be seen
exclusively by an adult audience.  However, the sad case remains that it
is sure to be a very long while before anyone dares to think of entering
that doorway again.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Luke Buckmaster
EYES WIDE SHUT
Cast: Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd Field, Marie
Richardson, Rade Serbedzija, Vinessa Shaw, Leelee Sobieski
Director: Stanley Kubrick
Screenplay: Stanley Kubrick & Frederic Raphael, based on the novel
Traumnovelle by Arthur Schnitzler
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 and a half stars
"The screen is a magic medium. It has such power that it can retain
interest as it conveys emotions and moods that no other art form can
hope to tackle." -- the late Stanley Kubrick.
For those of you who were looking forward to seeing two and half hours
of Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman going at it like dogs, let me say this
right off the beat: this movie is _not_ a porn flick.  And, contrary to
some disgruntled viewers, the late Stanley Kubrick did not film it with
his eyes wide shut.
In the Kubrickan universe, where war, sexual satire, and even the
evolution of man have been explored, infidelity in marriage doesn't seem
like an important topic in comparison.  Or perhaps it's the most
important of all.  Whichever way to decide to interpret it,
perfectionist and ultra-reclusive filmmaker Stanley Kubrick's historic
last film - he passed away shortly after completing post-production - is
about intimacy, or a lack thereof.  It's a film that will be studied and
scrutinized, criticized and praised, liked and loved, hated and loathed;
but it shouldn't be underestimated.  Kubrick's beautiful use of visual
art and music is spectacular, and his assurance in himself is
unmistakable.  'Eyes Wide Shut' is a story told by a director who truly
knew how to tell it.
Allegations that Kubrick became a dirty and perverted man in the last
few years of his life are, I'm certain, very false. 'Eyes Wide Shut' is
no more unsanitary than the violence in 'A Clockwork Orange' or 'Full
Metal Jacket,' the difference between these films, obviously, are their
genres.  It's true that 'Eyes Wide Shut' is intentionally a film that
has some sleazy moments, but Kubrick was never a director to take cheap
shots.  He slowly, quietly constructs his New York settings as the seedy
undercurrents of American culture, then abruptly and powerfully reminds
us that the true terror of the surroundings lie in the behavior of those
who inhabit them.  This all contributes to the film's itchy
physiological feel - 'Eyes Wide Shut' is dark and cynical, and
reverberates in your mind like a nightmare that never quite leaves you
alone.  Who would have thought that Stanley Kubrick would have ended his
career directing with almost Poe-like quality, reaching the inner
recesses of the human mind, and revealing just a few of the evils that
lie within.
Once again Kubrick endeavors to film the un-filmable.  It's no
coincidence that 'Eyes Wide Shut' boasts some of the most startling and
disquieting screen moments you're likely to see all year; also no
coincidence was the immense hype surrounding its release.  Kubrick
reportedly masterminded the film's advertising campaign, by revealing
small tidbits every now and then (including the much talked about mirror
scene), refusing to provide media outlets with a synopsis of the story,
and billing 'Eyes Wide Shut' as a Cruise/Kidman/Kubrick collaboration.
Tom Cruise, however, takes the spotlight for the majority of the film's
160-minute running time.  He plays Bill Harford and Kidman plays his
wife, Alice.  They are a wealthy New York couple, married nine years
with a daughter, and seemingly have it all.   That is, until one
peculiar night in which Bill prowls around the grim streets of New York,
encountering sexual temptation after sexual temptation, longing for a
release, or even a vague sense of joy.  Without going into much depth,
some of his journeying  - both literal and metaphorical - results in an
encounter with a hooker, an all-too-young looking teenager (played by
'Deep Impact's' Leelee Sobieski), and, of course, the invitation-only
orgy that everybody's been discussing ("Does Tom Cruise really wear a
dress?"  "Is it true that he molests a goat?")
No wonder everybody's been talking about it - it's quite a scene.  But
just labeling this and a couple of the film's other breathtaking moments
as "visually stunning" or "money shots," I fear, doesn't give them
justice.  The "orgy scene" has every actor in it wearing bizarre yet
strangely charismatic masks, the kind which would suit a screen
adaptation of Edgar Allan Poe's 'The Masque of the Red Death' (in fact,
that is 'Dark City' director Alex Proyas' next film), if you're familiar
with it.  Kubrick's use of imagery, editing and a recurring and chilling
music score inflates the already absorbing atmosphere he creates.   As
we gaze at the screen, fixated into the world that Harford penetrates,
it is clear that we are under the spell of Kubrick's full-throttle
direction.
If the film's characters seem lost to you, that's because they are -
they're confused, insignificant people floating around dangerous worlds
that are obviously out of their league.  'Eyes Wide Shut' flows like a
dream, like reality, and like a dream of reality; Kubrick never makes it
clear what we, as an audience, should be looking for, if we should be
looking for anything at all.
Managing to keep a frowned face for most of the ordeal is Tom Cruise,
whose performance is as much about daily behavior as it is the
unpredictable circumstances that his character gets swept up in.  Only
Stanley Kubrick could have made Tom Cruise walking down a street look
interesting, and only Kubrick could have refused to cut to a different
location until he well and truly needed to.  Cruise is strong - perhaps
his strongest ever - as is Kidman, although her dialogue at times seems
just a little lengthy and abstract.  Arguably the world's most famous
couple, Cruise and Kidman this time refrain from using their charisma to
slap a grin on our faces; instead, they relied on Kubrick to see them
through.  No one needs to tell them that this was a safe bet.
Whilst the film's advertising hype was a great commercial ploy, it will
also draw to the cinema people who wouldn't have come otherwise, and
many of these - I suspect - will dislike and be frustrated by 'Eyes Wide
Shut,' due to its slow, quietly menacing pace.  Already, Internet
message boards and newsgroups have been plagued by comments from
disgruntled viewers; some of them have dubbed it 'Eyes Wide Shit,'
others have suggested that the Cruise/Kidman combination should be
replaced by Dennis Rodman and Carmen Electra.  If you don't think that
'Eyes Wide Shut' will grab you, I suggest you don't see it.
On the other hand, why miss out on such an extraordinary film
experience?  I'm certain that many viewers will be quick to contact me,
and inform me of their dissatisfaction with the movie, but allow me to
propose something first: perhaps you've missed the point.  'Eyes Wide
Shut' is a thoroughly dissatisfying film, yes, but this is (here's that
word again) intentional.  It remains a captivating physiological
thriller that builds a creepy, unsettling momentum, and leaves you with
a bad taste in your mouth.
Even the film's very last line of dialogue is bound to leave you in your
seat - if only for a few moments longer than normal - as everything
before it suddenly takes on greater resonance.  For those of you who
want to see 'Eyes Wide Shut' for its depth, not its sex, or for its
content rather than its hype, the following warning is for you: it's
sometimes hard to watch a film seriously when everybody around you are
there purely to satisfy their curiosities.  Whether you like it or love
it, hate it or loathe it, one thing's for sure - you'll have never seen
anything quite like it.  Kubrick's last hurrah is, thankfully, another
masterstroke to add to the list of a man who was truly one of
Hollywood's most audacious filmmakers.


Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Stanley Kubrick.
Cast: Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd Field, Madison Eginton, 
Rade Sherbedgia, Vinessa Shaw, Marie Richardson, Leelee Sobieski, Fay 
Masterson, Alan Cumming.
1999 - 159 minutes.
Rated R (for nudity, sex, and profanity).
Reviewed July 17, 1999.
Leave it up to Stanley Kubrick to spend the last two years of his life making 
the most humane, emotional motion picture of his career. A planned 
eight-month shoot that began in late 1996, the filming kept going, finally 
surpassing years of dedication on the parts of known-perfectionist Kubrick, 
and stars Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman. Two actors (Jennifer Jason Leigh, 
Harvey Keitel) dropped out after filming their roles due to scheduling 
conflicts, and so their scenes had to be reshot; filming for the actors 
making virtual cameos stretched from a couple weeks to several months; a 
cloak of secrecy was heavily shrouded over the particulars of the plot, and 
only weeks before the release was the premise confirmed; talk of a possible 
NC-17 rating due to soft-core sex scenes was denied when the picture got an 
R, and it was only days before its July 16 release that it was discovered 
images were digitally added, allegedly with Kubrick's permission before his 
death, in a now-hotly-debated and controversial 65-second sequence involving 
an orgy. Kubrick has, to be sure, always been a master of the camera and 
filmmaking in general (just take a gander at 1968's "2001: A Space Odyssey," 
1971's "A Clockwork Orange," and 1980's "The Shining" for proof of his 
one-of-a-kind nature), but his previous films all have had an obvious cold 
detachment about them. It wasn't a flaw on Kubrick's part, but simply one of 
the defining elements of each of his films. His latest, and final, triumph is 
"Eyes Wide Shut," which is a Kubrick picture in every sense of the word, 
except for in the lasting impression it leaves on the viewer. At once 
downbeat and intellectually-draining, the unforgettable characters that make 
up the world of "Eyes Wide Shut" nonetheless are more tender and, simply put, 
human, than in any of Kubrick's past films.
Set during the week before Christmas in New York City, Dr. Bill Harford (Tom 
Cruise) and his wife, Alice (Nicole Kidman), live in a large Central Park 
West apartment with their 7-year-old daughter, Helena (Madison Eginton). 
Happily married, when Bill and Alice make their way to a ritzy holiday party 
given by their friend, Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack), they find themselves 
both having to turn down members of the opposite sex that make sexual 
advances toward them. The next night, after smoking a little pot, Alice finds 
herself confessing to Bill that in the previous summer, while on vacation at 
Cape Cod, she briefly met a devastatingly handsome naval officer, and if he 
would have happened to want to be with her, she was ready to give up her 
husband, her daughter, her whole life, just for one night. Immediately 
afterwards, called to be told that one of his patients has died, Bill, 
emotionally distraught by his wife's revelation, sets off on a night-long 
odyssey of his own through the streets of Manhattan that concludes at a 
secluded and highly guarded mansion in which a suspicious masquerade ball is 
in full swing.
It's difficult to describe the premise of "Eyes Wide Shut" because, for one, 
the story has been so heavily secretive for so long that to say anymore 
wouldn't be fair, and two, words merely could never do justice to the film as 
a whole. Deliberately-paced and eerily beautiful, the film is an ultimately 
rewarding experience that, when all is said and done, adds up to 159 minutes 
of sheer cinema artistry. One of the biggest delights of "Eyes Wide Shut" is 
in its completely unpredictable nature. Rarely ever can you detect which 
direction the film is going in, or where things will end up, and, therefore, 
for the entire running time I was completely glued to the screen, eager to 
find out what would happen, and subsequently who we would meet, next. 
Reminiscent of Ingmar Bergman's "Wild Strawberries," the film is lyrical and 
passionate, but never sexually titillating as was so widely predicted, and 
there is a strange, rewarding fascination in watching one character go 
through his own journey, whether it be in physical or emotional terms.
Written by Kubrick and Frederic Raphael, "Eyes Wide Shut," like very few 
films I've seen, slowly but surely wrapped around me and put me under its 
rapturous spell. Every character, including each of the supporting ones, have 
been created with such subtle, truthful details that it would be very 
difficult to forget or not be affected in some way by all of them. Tom 
Cruise, often times, and unfairly, criticized for, in essence, playing the 
same role over and over again, strips away every one of those exterior 
pretenses this time around and never strikes a false note, handling every one 
of his difficult scenes with matured aplomb that I don't think I've ever seen 
from him. Meanwhile, Nicole Kidman in a slightly smaller role than expected, 
is the heart and soul of the film, as the alternately distanced and loving 
Alice who, in a tour de force monologue, admits to, once, having the desire 
to put everything behind her simply to be with a stranger. "And yet," as she 
says to Bill, "at that exact moment I've never felt closer to you." A 
particularly moving, seemingly minor but vitally important moment, comes when 
Bill gets home from work later at night to find Alice helping their daughter 
with her school work. Alice clearly loves her child so very much, but as Bill 
observes her, he questions how she could ever have considered leaving her.
As for the supporting characters, no one is let off without making some sort 
of long-term impression. The now-23-year-old Vinessa Shaw, previously a teen 
actress (1992's "Ladybugs," 1993's "Hocus Pocus"), makes a warm, delicately 
touching turn as Domino, a prostitute whom Bill comes into contact with and, 
for one fleeting moment, finds a comforting solace in her understanding, 
strangely virtuous personality. Todd Field, as Bill's old medical school 
buddy, Nick Nightingale, who later dropped out and is now a piano player, 
works very well with Cruise and they have one scene together set in a small 
night club/bar that really cooks, both for the fabulous dialogue and their 
effortless accord with one another. Sydney Pollack is dynamite as the 
friendly Victor Ziegler who may or may not be harboring a few secrets of his 
own. Pollack treats every one of his lines as if it were his last, and 
therefore, is able to make the character his own. In a scene towards the end 
between Bill and Victor, Pollack also happens to leave us with a 
thought-provoking notion: "Life goes on. It always does, until it doesn't." 
Rade Serbedgia, as a man who runs a costume shop, is memorably off-kilter and 
amusing, and as his sexually promiscuous teenage daughter, Leelee Sobieski 
lights up the screen with her angelically devilish smiles. And Faye 
Masterson, as Domino's roommate, Sally, has a poignant scene with Bill in 
which she reveals something that I never saw coming, and that may at first 
seem pointless but, on closer introspection, couldn't be any further from the 
truth.
The centerpiece of "Eyes Wide Shut," of course, coming midway through, is the 
private masquerade party that Bill manages to get into when he acquires the 
password. It should be noted that it is in this scene that the infamous 
65-second orgy occurs, in which digitally-created images were placed in front 
of the perverse sexual acts to only partially hide what was going on. At once 
ludicrous of the MPAA to treat American adults like children, the added 
figures really do look believable and, dare I say it, contributes to, rather 
than hurts, the dream-like air of the scene. As for the approximately 
17-minute sequence as a whole, things develop at such as gradual, foreboding 
pace, and aided magnificently by the ominous, red-letter music score, by 
Jocelyn Pook, which is the repetitive striking of two piano keys, that the 
suspense builds up to an almost unbearable crescendo. This scene is, by and 
far, virtuoso filmmaking, one of the most indelible moments on film this 
decade, and only goes to prove what a brilliant craftsman Kubrick was. 
Throughout the film, there are passing references to dreams, including one 
moment at the end when Alice suggests to Bill that they really should stop 
dreaming, in relegation to their potentially troubled marriage, and 
admittedly, the whole film feels like an ostensibly aimless dream with no 
final destination (which, in many ways, it does indeed have). The lighting 
cinematography by Larry Smith is perfect, choosing to go for a somewhat 
grainy, washed out look that only makes the often-seen colorful decorations 
and Christmas lights all the more powerful. Finally, the production design by 
Les Tomkins and Roy Walker, is sumptuous and wholeheartedly Kubrickesque 
(similar in look to "The Shining"), as they have taken the nearly impossible 
job of creating New York City on a London soundstage. Occasionally the sets 
look just as they are, sets, but that odd mixture of NYC realism and 
artificiality only compliments what the film is about.
So, what is "Eyes Wide Shut" about, anyway? No, I don't mean the clearcut 
story, but what exactly lies underneath that? One of the joys of Kubrick was 
in the way that he respected and treated his audience like thinking adults, 
to draw their own conclusion to many of his films' occurences. To me, "Eyes 
Wide Shut" is a morality tale in the classic tradition, about a married 
couple who, over a couple days, discover more about each other--their dreams, 
feelings, and fears--than they ever thought they would in a lifetime, and 
through that, must come to terms with their relationship, as well as their 
own decisions as individuals, before they can decide what will happen next. 
Truly unlike Kubrick, however, "Eyes Wide Shut" concludes with a marvelous, 
powerful last scene that ends on a relatively hopeful, positive note. As the 
screen went to black and the words, "Directed by Stanley Kubrick," filled the 
screen, the masterful, final chapter in Kubrick's highly-respected, 
forever-remembered life came to a close.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Christian Pyle
Everything I know about the movies I learned from Stanley Kubrick.  "The
Shining" was the first movie of his that I saw, and as I watched the scene
where Danny big-wheels through the large room I understood for the first time
in my life that movies don't just happen, that everything in a movie is
carefully crafted and pieced together.  My crude sense of filmmaking prior to
this epiphany was that someone just pointed a camera and actors did stuff in
front of it.  That, I figured, was pretty much the whole process.  Then I saw a
Kubrick movie, and "it skinned my eyes for me" (line borrowed from "The Horse's
Mouth").
It would be a few more years down the road before I would devote myself to
seeing all of Kubrick's movies.  By that time, "Full Metal Jacket" (Kubrick's
most recent film until now) had long since gone from the big screen to late
night cable.  So, all the Kubrick I had seen until today had been on the small
screen.  I've followed the trickle of reports about the progress of "Eyes Wide
Shut" for two years; with the death of the director earlier this year, "Eyes"
became my last chance to see a Kubrick film on the big screen when it was first
released.
The plot:  After a party where they both flirt with other people, Dr. Bill
Harford (Tom Cruise) learns that his wife Alice (Nicole Kidman) lusts after
other men.  This revelation sends Bill into New York City on a sexual odyssey. 
An old friend (Todd Field) tells Bill about an underground orgy.  Bill bluffs
his way into the party, which takes place at a secluded mansion.  The trappings
of the orgy resemble a black mass-everyone is cloaked and masked, and the sex
is preceded by a ritual.  A woman, naked except for her mask, warns Bill to
leave before he is exposed, but he fails to heed her advice.  The rest of the
film concerns Bill's investigation into the sexual coven.
>From the moment when Bill's delusions about his wife are shattered-the moment
when his eyes go from wide-shut to wide-open-everyone around him is changed. 
Suddenly his mere presence seems to elicit extreme lust in women:  one woman
(Marie Richardson) mauls him only a few feet from her father's corpse; the
daughter (Leelee Sobieski of "Deep Impact") of a shopkeeper (Rade Serbedzija of
"The Saint") offers herself to him with her eyes.
Although "Eyes" is based on a German novel ("Traumnovelle" by Arthur
Schnitzler), it could just as easily be an updating of Nathaniel Hawthorne's
short story "Young Goodman Brown."  In that story, the title character
discovers that all of the seemingly virtuous people in town, including his
wife, are part of a satanic cult.  The essential difference between "Young
Goodman Brown" and "Eyes Wide Shut" is that Bill does not have the comfort of
being the only virtuous person in the world.  He is as corrupt as those around
him, and his sins bring harm to others.  Like the Hawthorne story, "Eyes" is an
allegory with Calvinist overtones (every human is utterly depraved and
undeserving of redemption).
I've given "Eyes" two grades:  one for Kubrick fans, another for everyone else.
 For those who look at the film stylistically, it is a wonderful experience. 
For those who aren't devotees of Kubrick's work, "Eyes" will probably seem dull
and predictable.  
Tom Cruise still can't act.  He's one of those stars who generally plays
variations on a single persona, but the character of Bill Harford is nothing
like the impulsive young hotshots that are Cruise's stock-in-trade.  However,
that Cruise is obviously out of his depth works for the role in a strange way: 
Bill is also out of his depth.  Also, Cruise has a natural talent for seeming
dense, and Bill is very dense (after nine years of marriage he's just
discovered his wife has sexual desires).  However, Cruise is especially
effective in Kubrick's trademark close-ups; he manages to look as if his whole
world has just shattered.  
Kidman and Sydney Pollack (who plays a friend of Bill's) are excellent.  Kidman
is especially riveting, but she has only a few scenes.
I saw "Eyes" a week after it hit town, and the theater was still packed.  Even
though this meant that I had to sit on the front row and look up at a 90-degree
angle for three hours, I was pleased to see that so many people realized that
the release of Kubrick's last film-twelve years after his penultimate film-was
a major event.  But I also worried that many of them would leave disappointed
because they came with mistaken expectations.  
A few months ago I saw a magazine cover with a photo of Cruise and Kidman and
the text "THE SEXIEST MOVIE EVER?"  I grimaced; even then I knew it wouldn't be
sexy at all.  Kubrickian eroticism is an oxymoron.  The essential defining
element of his style is its coldness.  All of Kubrick's best works are
essentially horror movies, and horror of the first order-it doesn't scare you,
it chills and disturbs you deep in your gut.
Despite all the fuss over the rating, "Eyes" is also not shocking.  The
simulated sex at the orgy is oddly pedestrian (so much so that we're left to
wonder why the coven would go to the lengths they do to cover up their
activities).  In an age where the internet provides a carnival sideshow of
every possible perversity and where the President of the United States uses
cigars as dildos, the humping in "Eyes" hardly even seems dirty.  If you're
looking for shock, try Pier Paolo Pasolini's "Salo, or The 120 Days of Sodom."
"Eyes" is not for those seeking cheap thrills, but it is also not for people
who aren't tuned into Kubrick.  A friend who went to "Eyes" with me (and who
had to be dragged against her will because she has a phobia of Tom Cruise)
challenged me to defend the movie.  I can't defend it; I can't even explain why
it affected me as deeply as it did.  "Eyes" resonates on a purely aesthetic
level that defies description or explanation.  Trying to explain Kubrick to
someone who isn't attuned to his style is like trying to describe sunlight to
someone blind since birth.
The experience is akin to seeing my first Van Gogh painting up close and
personal ("Undergrowth with Two Figures" at the Cincinnati Art Museum).  The
power of the painting smacked me right between the eyes and left me dumbfounded
as it washed over me.  But others might look at the same painting and be
unaffected.  What it boils down to is you either get Kubrick or you don't.  If
you do, you should rush out to see "Eyes;" if you don't, you will probably find
"Eyes" to be silly, but you owe it to yourself to study his work when you have
the time.
Grade: A- (for Kubrick fans); D- (for the rest of you)
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.wpd.net/madreview/

Author
rutger h cornets de groot
On Stanley Kubrick's 'Eyes Wide Shut ' (1999)
America's double sexual moral was rarely brought to a sharper light
than prior to the posthumous premiere of
Stanley Kubrick's last movie Eyes Wide Shut. For weeks, the American
tv-audience's interest was roused by an enticing clip showing a naked
Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman kissing in front of a mirror. The media
could not get enough of the randy pseudo-scandal atmosphere they
themselves had created. But the American viewer did not get to see any
of the sex: 65 seconds worth of "graphic content" - this wonderful
neutral term for anything inappropriate - was hid from view by
digitally added human figurines. Kubrick himself, who had died four
days after completing the movie, could not be asked for his opnion
anymore. Still, the alterations appear to have taken place with his
consent. He knew, no doubt, that depicting so-called penetration
scenes would irrevocably earn the movie the much dreaded NC-17 rating.
Unfortunately, Kubrick's compromise did not have the desired effect.
Thanks to the hullabaloo - Roger Ebert, too,
said he couldn't approve of the changes - and also thanks to the many
interviews with "Hollywood's hottest couple", Cruise and Kidman, about
the ins and outs of extramarital sex, sex in front of a camera, sex
for sex's sake, etc., the general public was slowly, but surely,
prejudiced into thinking that Kubrick must have been a semi- or even a
full blown director of pornography.
The irony is that this observation is less distant from the truth than
one would think. For years, Kubrick was attracted by the thought of
making a porn movie under studio conditions and Terry Southern,
co-scenarist of Dr. Strangelove who also signed for the script of Blue
Movie, almost persuaded Kubrick at that time into directing this porn
classic. And indeed, why not? Kubrick's own Lolita and A Clockwork
Orange show that sex was not an alien theme in his world. Besides,
there is no conceivable reason why Kubrick, who tried so many
different genres in his small oeuvre, would shrink from pornography
(or what then would be his version of it). 
Considering this variety of genres, one wonders what the common factor
of Kubrick's works might be, that is to say, the core, that which
necessarily comes out in each expression. To do justice to his movies,
one cannot view
them as mere contributions to the respective genres. The Shining is a
'horror movie', like Barry Lyndon is a 'costume movie' and Full Metal
Jacket is a 'Vietnam movie', but before all of this, they are made by
Stanley Kubrick. At best, what could be said is that this variety of
his work shows that he was conscious of the fact that there are
innumerable alternatives to any approach to reality.
The question of what motivated Kubrick is all the more interesting
since his personality seems to be almost completely untraceable in his
movies. That is why biographers and psychologists find themselves
disappointed when they try to assign that personality in order to
locate the center of his art. This is not, of course, because he would
not have a personality, but because the driving force in his movies is
so strong that it seems that they are governed from a great distance.
Therefore, in order to enter his realm, one needs to look for certain
characteristics in style and recurring images - less obscure, surely,
than a number, 114, that must have been of particular importance, but
less common, too, than the cliche of the genius who never left his
house. 
Kubrick made his first film, Fear and Desire, with money that he had
hustled as a chessplayer in Greenwich Village.
His passion for chess has never left him and this is something that
can be clearly told from his movies. The
perspective with which Kubrick looks at reality is that of a
chessplayer: strategic, distanced and with a surplus of
cognitive ability and rationality. It is a view on the world that
disregards the personal, the 'human-all-too-human'. This indeed
romanticized him with an unapproachable and legendary aura, but his
psychological structure simply had to bring along this preoccupation
with what is 'great' - not because it could not degenerate into
paranoia or absolutism, but because 'greatness' is the perspective
with which chessplayers look at the world. Not by chance, the
chessplayer shares this outlook with both generals and filmdirectors,
as can be told from the panoramic battlefield
of Spartacus, Paths of Glory and Full metal Jacket. Not as panoramic,
but blown up, nonetheless, to the very extreme are such typical
Kubrickian settings as the immense 'War Room' in Dr. Strangelove, the
colossal hotel in The Shining and, finally, space itself in 2001: A
Space Odyssey.
Of course, the more the consequences of this perspective inflate
reality, the nearer the border is drawn to a moment
where either nothing is possible or everything turns into its
opposite. Kubrick reached this moment rather early in his career, in a
film that in its long title expresses the outcome of this process: Dr.
Strangelove, or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb. A
nightmare comedy with a nuclear apocolyps as its final solution: it
seems as though Kubrick went straight through reality here, even when
he could not preserve his seriousness. Still, the humor in this movie
is not the result of a concealing or extenuating approach, but,
rather, of the absolute urgency with which Kubrick posed the question
of the future of man and atomic bomb. After all, one cannot expect to
preserve oneself, or even one's seriousness when one attempts to
pursue a movement of thought that leads to catastrophe. Kubrick used
Peter Sellers as his alter ego, but immediately dispersed into three
through him (the Group Captain Mandrake, President Muffley and Dr.
Strangelove; originally also the cowboy who at the end personally
delivers the bomb to the Ruski's). This is how he tried to outsmart
reality, by surrounding it from all sides and assailing it with
alternatives. More balanced and, indeed, more poetic, Kubrick repeated
this process six years later in 2001: A Space Odyssey, where he 'went
through reality' once more, this time by having astronaut Dave Bowman
break through the barrier of space and time ("Beyond the infinite")
and have him witness his own rebirth as "Star Child". 
Realities such as these, taken to the extreme consequence, were the
result of a logic that Kubrick could only give form and shape to if
and when he attained complete and full control over his films. Outside
influences on his work were to be kept at the lowest possible level.
This did not only apply to human interfering, but also to reality
itself, which he rebuilt in his studio. To Kubrick this was the only
way to design a world according to his own insights. Besides, when you
create a world of your own, you're also allowed to destroy it, if you
so chose.
In contrast - but not in contradiction - to the fending off of other
peoples' interfering with his movies, Kubrick attached high value to
mankind in a world that, since the Enlightenment of Barry Lyndon's
18th century, had more and more come to reflect his own chessplayer's
mind: rational, logical and, as an extension of that, technical and
scientific. Nothing fascinated Kubrick so much as the fatal disparity
between the ever progressing technological achievements on the one
hand and the lagging spiritual developments of mankind on the other.
This is the reason why Kubrick's people (mostly men; women, who
emphasize feeling, play secondary roles) try to
find access to a system (often their own creation) that is founded on
logic and rationality. But in order to gain access they need to
surrender their control over themselves. As soon as that happens the
system turns itself against them and expels them, after which they are
left to wander meaninglessly through a labyrinth-type surrounding,
where they find that the only thing they can rely on is, after all,
that same fragile humanity.
One early depiction of such a labyrinth can be found in the endless
trenches of Paths of Glory. They are the mad
creation of a system that cynically claims its own men, who have given
up the authority over themselves. Another
labyrinth is on board the spaceship of 2001: A Space Odyssey, where
the astronauts do their workouts in paths
that have no beginning, ending or even direction, and where the HAL
9000-computer finally and fatally takes command. In The Shining we
find the opposite mechanism at work: the gigantic hotel, with its
endless hallways, chambers and enormous spaces does not expel Jack
Torrance (Jack Nicholson) but gains power over him and reduces him to
a mere function of its morbid jokes. Perhaps this is the reason why
the labyrinth got its most literal expression in this movie: not only
outside, in the snow, but inside too, in the hallways where the little
boy drives his tricycle in endless rounds and blood from ages past
comes flooding in.
There is another figure in which Kubrick depicted his appreciation of
the human: that of the machine-man. The
most literal example of that creation is, of course, the HAL-9000
computer in 2001: A Space Odyssey But there
is Dr. Strangelove, too, who is not able to control his arm and Alex
Burgess in A Clockwork Orange, who has his
impulses programmed into him. In Full Metal Jacket, soldiers are
trained to become killing machines. They expel
the fat boy Gomer Pyle from their midst, an event that is mirrored in
the second half of the movie by Pyle's antipode, the North-Vietnamese
female sniper, who singlehandedly takes up the task of expelling the
Americans from her country.
Finally, in A.I. (Artificial Intelligence), the project that Kubrick
had been working on since 1977 but that he left unfinished, again the
subject was a machine-man: a robot in the guise of a little boy, who,
against a background of ultramodern high tech, desires to become
human. 
Going from this machine-man to Eyes Wide Shut seems to be quite a
leap, since the human factor would  supposedly be visible au naturel
here. But what is better suited for depicting the loss of humanity
than the moment where love and eroticism transfer into mechanically
experienced sex? 
After a party at a friend's house, where Alice Harford (Nicole Kidman)
is seduced by one of the guests, she confesses to her husband Bill
(Tom Cruise) that several years before she had an encounter with a
naval officer during which she was willing to give up "everything":
him, their marriage, their 7 year old daughter, herself. Additionally,
she tells him about a dream that she had in which she went to bed with
"hundreds" of men. Bill becomes so upset by this that he leaves the
house, not so much with the plan to commit adultery, as to find out
which powers are at work here. His wandering expedition leads him
through a series of women, each of whom is willing to give herself to
him, although this never actually takes place. It all results in the
visual highpoint of the movie: a closed gathering with a Freemasonry
character in a Kubrickian country house (huge rooms, hallways,
staircases) where masked men and women indulge in sex. It is here that
Harford is exposed as an intruder and where both the motive of the
system versus the human, as well as the subsequent expulsion become
actual. And so, Bill and Alice relate inversely proportional to
eachother: what Alice experiences in her dream is what Bill
unsuccessfully tries to copy in reality. But considering the title and
the corresponding title of Arthur Schnitzler Traumnovelle ("Dream
novella") on which Kubrick based the script, one wonders whether or
not what Bill experienced is real at all. Perhaps Bill's quest was
nothing but a dreamt initiationrite1 with the purpose of
renewing him and making him see that Alice is not only related to him
through sexual ties. Their reconciliation in the end, while doing
Christmas shopping with their daughter, indicates that despite
Kubrick's passing away there might still be hope for mankind. It is a
conclusion to which the already classic final word of the movie -
Alice's four letter invitation to Bill - seems to follow up on very
nicely.
Rutger H Cornets de Groot
http://sites.netscape.net/cornets/film/ews.htm
E-mail with comments to cornets@yahoo.com

Author
Aaron Strader
This has some major spoilers for the film, so be forwarned.
The won't appear till later in the article, so you're safe for now.
Starring: Tom Cruise (Dr. Bill Hardford), Nicole Kidman (Alice
Hardford), Sidney Pollack, Leelee Sobieski, Todd Field (Nick
Nightingale)
Directed, Co-Written, Produced by: Stanley Kubrick
Inspired by: "Traumnovelle" by: Arthur Schnitzer 
This is an interesting film.  I must first off state, that you musn't
believe ANY of the rumors of the film.  Cruise is not a cross dresser,
Kidman doesn't shoot heroin, and there's not any scene between the two
that would suggest that they were aided by a sex therapist.
The look of the film is to suggest that it follows the translation of
the inspired book from the film was written.  The translation, "Dream
Novel," makes you thing that the film should have been titled Dream
Film.  There is a noticable amount of graininess to the film.  Rather
than complain about it as some may and already have, see it as a style
of shooting.   I would gather that Kubrick got on another lighting
kick shooting this and shot with as much natural light as he could.
This and the film looks like it was pushed another two stops to add
more grain and brighten it slightly.  
As an auteur and stickler for details, Kubrick seemed to be a bit lax
on this one.  The film looks great, but there are a good deal of
bloopers/flubs that occur.  You see LOTS of boom shots (in reflection)
and you see the camera at least twice.  16 months for this?  Wow.
Reflection is the biggest killer for this film.  Their apartment and
almost everything in the film casts reflections and the crew can be
seen in these, some quite glaringly.
One more topic of heated discussion:  I saw the "Austin Powers"
version, and to be perfectly frank, unless you know where the overlays
are supposed to be, you'll probably not see them.  Two girls standing
next to each other look a little suspicious, but I can wait for the
unrated version on video to see it the way it's supposed to be.
The film itself starts with (Cruise) Bill and (Kidman) Alice getting
ready for a little X-mas soiree.  They go to a quite elegant party in
what seems to be a storagehouse for lighting equipment, which is
actually an apartment owned by Pollack.
Bill runs into an old friend from medical school who is now the
party's entertainment.  Soon after, Bill and Alice are flirting with
others at the party, thinking that the other has not noticed.  Bill is
called to help with a partygoer who has had a bit too much of a good
time.
The next day, Bill and Alice, casually smoking marijunana in their
bedroom discuss the previous nights flirtations.  They both discover
that they both knew about the flirting.  Bill starts talking about
what women can provide in a relationship, and gets Alice extremely
angry.  In her hazy state, she tells of an opportunity she almost
acted on to cheat on Bill, not caring about the possible aftereffects.
Bill gets called away when one of his patients dies, and goes to
console his daughter.  When his patient's engaged daughter makes a
plea for his love and affection, he is struck with images of an affair
that never occured between his wife, Alice and a naval officer.  He
sees "opportunity" as a betrayal to his wife, and before they can
continue, they are interrupted.
As he strolls home, he encounters a hooker.  Seeing another
"opportunity" arise, he follows the hooker home.  They toy around, but
before the act ensues, Alice calls his cell phone.  He breaks the date
with the hooker, and heads back out into the night. 
He passes a lounge and notices that his old medical school buddy is
playing, so he heads in.  When he meets the friend, the friend reveals
that for extra scratch, he plays these strange parties, while
blindfolded.  Bill is intrigued and wants to go to one.  Nick
reluctantly sets him up with directions and a password.  
What follows this is a short meeting where Bill obtains a costume for
this party and meets a young girl, Leelee Sobieski, and her father.
The young girl has drawn his eye, but her young age, and the prescence
of her father deter this from happening.
He gets to the party, which is to say the least, a strange affair.
After partaking in some strange "religious" right, women and men pair
off for the orgy to end all orgies.  A woman warns Bill in disguise,
that he should leave before he is exposed as a fraud at the party.
He is detained after a second warning, where he is outed for not being
in the group.  
After getting home, he hides the evidence of his evenings events.
Unable to carry on in his day, he tries piece the events of the
previous night together.  In the process, he finds that Nick has
disappeared, his life is possibly in danger, and the woman that warned
him has died.  
I'm trying to save a bit of the film here, it's worth sitting through
to get to this point.  This is only about 100 minutes at this point.
This is a strange film, because despite the events that occur, the
film has a strong family message behind it.  It will be hard to
pidgeonhole this film as a certain kind of a film.  It's got sex in
it, it has nudity, drugs, and many more immoralistic values.
But they all serve to show why they are bad in one's life.
I recommend this film highly on many merits.  Cruise and Kidman are
rarely together for longer than 5 minutes after the opening scene, and
the secrecy that shrouded the film should hopefully be apparent as to
why it was kept once you see it for yourself.

Author
Joy Wyse
There has always been the question about the difference between Art and
Pornography.   I was reticent about seeing this film because of the hype
and the previews that preceded it.  I dreaded that I might be offended or
embarrassed by it.  No. It is Art.
How many times have you scoffed at an actor who declares that he (or she)
would consider nudity `if the role warrants it for artistic reasons' when
you know full well that he's only making a dumb excuse.  The nudity in
this film did not bother me in the slightest.  It is Art.
Never before have I seen a motion picture that has stayed with me in its
entirety.  I can call to mind every single scene that I saw.  Each and
every actor is embedded in my head, from the leads to the one-liners. 
There are constant surprises, such as the costume shop, and the hotel
clerk that are special, but even the rowdies on the street or the butlers
are perfect.  I don't think that Kubrick only did take after take with the
stars, he did it with everyone.  What a thrill those actors must have felt
to have a Director bring them to full performance rather than dismissing
them as `background'.
This movie is a very deep study into the workings of a marriage.  Love is
not the only basis for a lasting commitment.  Just as important is trust,
without which, love crumbles.  That is the basis of the plot.  Here is a 
happily married couple, with a darling, educated daughter.  They are
financially secure, socially prominent and physically attracted to each
other.  They have achieved the American dream.  
They are so secure in their relationship that it bothers her when he
doesn't show jealousy about her and a flirtation.  The distrust starts to
build and they jibe at each other.  What happens in the next 48 hours is a
great presentation of what could occur.  
This is a Masterpiece.  This is Art.  I do want to see it again, but I
don't need to.  It's imbedded in my mind.

Author
Kevin Patterson
EYES WIDE SHUT arrives in theaters as one of the most anticipated 
releases of 1999, overshadowed perhaps only by STAR WARS: EPISODE I - 
THE PHANTOM MENACE. The reason for all the hype, of course, is that 
it is not only the first film from Stanley Kubrick in thirteen years, 
but it is also his last, as he died shortly after showing an initial 
cut to the cast and to studio executives. This situation has led to 
some controversy over whether or not the film, as released, truly 
represents Kubrick's intentions for the final product, especially 
after it became known that digital images were inserted during one 
scene in order to ensure an R-rating. Adding to the hype has been one 
report that Kubrick had told a friend that, in his estimation, Eyes 
Wide Shut was his best film yet.
I don't think that EYES WIDE SHUT is, or could have been, Kubrick's 
best film yet. It does not reach the heights of DR. STRANGELOVE or 
2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY, and I doubt that any post-production tinkering 
would have changed that. But with all the attention that EYES WIDE 
SHUT has received, we tend to forget that Kubrick probably never 
conceived of this film as any sort of "grand finale." He simply set 
out to make an original and thought-provoking drama, and at that task 
he has succeeded admirably.
As EYES WIDE SHUT begins, we are introduced to a wealthy New York 
couple, Dr. Bill Harford (Tom Cruise) and his wife Alice (Nicole 
Kidman). They go to a party hosted by Victor Ziegler (Sydney 
Pollack), a patient of Bill's who moves in an even more elite crowd 
than the Harfords. At the party, both Bill and Alice, after having a 
few too many drinks each, flirt briefly with others, but nothing 
comes of it and they go home. The following evening, while the two 
are smoking pot in their bedroom, Alice asks Bill about the women who 
were with him at the
party. They quarrel over whether or not there is any jealousy present 
in their relationship, and finally she recounts a story about a 
handsome naval officer she noticed on their family vacation years ago 
and claims that, had the officer shown any interest in her, she might 
well have left Bill and their young daughter for him.
Bill is understandably upset, but before he can resolve things with 
Alice, he is called away to the home of a patient whose father has 
just died. After he leaves, he goes out for a walk and encounters a 
variety of sexual temptations, but never actually acts on any of 
them. He goes to the apartment of a prostitute, for example, but his 
cellular phone rings before the two of them do anything. Eventually 
he makes his way to an isolated mansion, where he finds a strange 
ritual taking place that seems to be a hybrid between a religious 
ceremony and a sexual orgy. All the participants are masked, and a 
secret password is required to enter. A woman approaches Bill and 
warns him that he is in danger, and soon the masters of ceremonies 
realize that he is not supposed to be there. It seems inevitable that 
he will somehow be "punished" and possibly even killed, when suddenly 
the unidentified woman intervenes on his behalf. He is ordered to 
leave immediately, and no one will tell him what will become of the 
woman now.
At times, it seems as though EYES WIDE SHUT is about to settle into 
the mode of a classic thriller, with a single protagonist on the run 
from powerful, shadowy forces. Bill has reason to believe that the 
mysterious woman from the orgy, as well as the acquaintance who 
illicitly gave him the password, have been killed. When he tries to 
determine their whereabouts, he is warned in no uncertain terms to 
stay away, and the safety of his family is threatened. There are a 
few elements that are disappointingly conventional, such as an 
ominous figure in a trenchcoat who seems to be tailing Bill, or the 
two anonymous men who approach him in a black car and step out to 
deliver him a typewritten note. (There is, however, at least a hint 
that this stereotypical, clichéd 'bad guy' behavior may have been 
intentional.)
For the most part, however, Kubrick and co-writer Frederic Raphael 
keep the focus on the emotional suspense, as Bill and Alice continue 
to deal with their personal fears and insecurities about themselves 
and about each other. One of the most interesting aspects of the 
story is that their relationship nearly falls apart over sexual 
jealousy despite the fact that neither of them ever actually cheats 
on the other. Instead, they are driven apart by mere suggestions, 
possibilities, and even dreams -- one night, Bill comes home to a 
distraught Alice, who has had a nightmare in which she imagined 
herself having sex with countless men at once and laughing at Bill as 
he looked on. And even as he fears for his life, Bill continues to 
flirt with the New York City sexual underworld, still never actually 
betraying his wife but coming dangerously close at least once more. 
The thriller plot is composed similarly out of suggestion and 
ambiguity, as it is never clear if any real violence has taken place 
or if the entire situation is just a combination of unusual 
coincidences and intimidation tactics. The conflicts in EYES WIDE 
SHUT arise not out of actual events but out of the possibilities that 
exist in the minds of Alice and Bill, as they contemplate sexual 
abandon and, in Bill's case, physical danger. Issues of internal 
moral character become more important than legalistic details of what 
exactly happened (or, in this case, didn't happen) and why and when.
Kubrick's talent for hypnotic style and masterful orchestration makes 
him an ideal director for this sort of material, which relies more on 
thematic coherence and on the intensity of the psychological 
experiences than on its intentionally flimsy plot. He creates a 
convincing cinematic landscape, with an emphasis on the bleak and 
slightly decadent aspects of life in New York City, then utilizing 
them to construct a nightmarish excursion into the sexual underworld 
that is at once frightening yet believable. The orgy scene in 
particular is a perfectly composed piece of surreal tension, as the 
participants chant in a foreign language and engage in mechanical, 
ritualistic sex as Bill wanders through, perhaps fascinated, perhaps 
repulsed, and perhaps both. What little dialogue the scene contains 
is spoken from behind masks, creating the eerie impression of voices 
dissociated from the actual persons, floating in a void where 
ordinary human interactions have no place.
As is typical of Kubrick's films, the characters' quandaries arise 
out of a form of dehumanization, in this case the possibility that 
simple, impersonal sex could replace devotion and love as the center 
of Bill's and Alice's lives. Despite its explicit content, EYES WIDE 
SHUT is not an exhortation to the mindless sort of "sexual freedom" 
that permeates Hollywood. (If anything, it gets a little too 
obviously preachy; a brief subplot involving an HIV scare can't help 
but come off like something out of a high school sex-ed video.) The 
scenes of nudity, which are used almost exclusively to suggest 
infidelity and objectification, are more disturbing than anything 
else, and are certainly not intended to be erotic or sensational: 
stylistically, EYES WIDE SHUT has much more in common with BLUE 
VELVET or EXISTENZ than it does with the latest soft
core direct-to-video garbage.
There are times when the psychological drama and the suspense 
thriller seem to rest awkwardly side-by-side, but Kubrick and Raphael 
effectively resolve both threads at once in a conclusion that is 
low-key but appropriate and actually somewhat optimistic. There are 
no real scenes of confrontation in the final reels of EYES WIDE SHUT. 
Instead, the threat of physical harm and conspiracy is marginalized 
to the point where Bill feels he can safely leave behind the strange 
events of recent days, and he and Alice seem ready to count their 
blessings and move forward. And yet this is not a picture-perfect 
ending. There are some lingering doubts in their dialogue in the last 
scene, and it is not lost on them that they may have been saved 
partly by coincidence and lack of opportunity.
Kubrick has always been known as a somewhat pessimistic filmmaker, 
perhaps not without reason: A CLOCKWORK ORANGE imagined a future 
world overrun by selfishness and violence, DR. STRANGELOVE ended with 
nuclear holocaust, and the "happy" ending of 2001 showed a character 
who achieved enlightenment only when he ceased to be human. EYES WIDE 
SHUT demonstrates that he can play the other side of the coin as well 
and create characters who are not defeated by the unavoidable dangers 
of his troubled universe. Bill and Alice don't quite descend all the 
way into the abyss and climb back out, as is par for the course in a 
cautionary tale with an optimistic conclusion, but at the very least 
they step right up to the edge of the abyss and still manage to turn 
away.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
http://members.aol.com/ReviewsKTP/reviews.html

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Eyes Wide Shut
Rated [R], 2 hours 40 minutes
Starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman;
Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and Frederic Raphael
Inspired by the novel "Traumnovelle" by Arthur Schnitzler
Directed by Stanley Kubrick
website: http://www.eyeswideshut.com
BEFORE WE BEGIN: American movie theaters will show a CGI censored
version of Stanley Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut. It has nothing to do with a
lack of corporate cajones on Time-Warner's part. No, the folks at the
MPAA, fearful that 65 seconds of frenetic thrusting in a simulated
sexual frenzy would warp our little minds, initially rated Kubrick's
final cut a deadly [NC-17]. To attain a commercially viable [R], a
couple of computer generated bodies, some clothed some not, were
inserted (sic) with permission of Kubrick's producer (his
sister-in-law). You try to figure out the MPAA thinking on this.
"Thrusting" is OK when it's, like, a spear through an eyeball (pick a
slice 'n' dice flick) or a fireplace poker through (and castrating) a
man's genitals (Carrie 2). But a little hererosexual ass wiggling is
verboten. Naked homosexual touchy feely and tongue entwining (Edge of
Seventeen) is OK for [R] but simulated breeder bump and grind is
perverse? Someone at the MPAA needs a reality check.
Well, you need some anecdotal background first, thoughtfully provided by
director Peter Bogdonavich whose oral history of Kubrick ran in the http://search.nytimes.com/search/daily/bin/fastweb?getdoc+site+site+78135+0+wAAA+stanley%7Ekubrick"
target="_blank">New York Times Magazine (the link is free, but
registration is required). In it, Jerry Lewis recounts a conversation he
and Kubrick had when they were in adjoining editing suites, Kubrick
working on 2001: A Space Odyssey and Lewis on something only the French
would like. Lewis said to Kubrick "You cannot polish a turd". Kubrick
responded "You can if you freeze it."
Eyes Wide Shut is visually stunning and emotionally cold. It moves as
slow as molasses, and the damn piano thumping (heard in the teevee
commercial) soundtrack is incredibly annoying. As for the performances,
my colleague, Harvey Karten, put it better than I ever could when he
wrote: "Conversations ... are almost painfully deliberate, as though
Kubrick were petitioning his audience to lean on each word as though
concocted on Mount Sinai." Cranky cannot praise or condemn the work of
Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman or Sydney Pollack because the heavy hand of
Kubrick's direction has squashed any emotional nuance they could have
delivered to the density of a black hole.
That being said, those film students inclined to see Kubrick's Eyes Wide
Shut will do so regardless of what any critic says so, in deference to
them: As with The Shining, the cinematography is outstanding. That
Kubrick intentionally shifts to a grainy look at the very end of the
flick is a symbolic move that is in keeping with the meticulous
production planning he is known for. The title of the movie itself is
itself symbolic, as researched and explained by Entertainment Tonight as
psychologically indicative of a waking dream state. Cranky's real time
experience indicates that "Eyes Wide Shut" is more indicative of his
struggle to keep his eyes open while waiting for the film to make its
point, which it does only in the final line of dialog, nine thousand
seconds or so after the initial, visual revelation that Nicole Kidman's
character is adverse to wearing underwear. By the time that final line
of dialog hit, Cranky didn't care.
Cranky writes for the people that pay cold cash for their movies, and
reports that paying full ticket price for Eyes Wide Shut would be a
waste of your money. It is definitely a waste of your time.
Dr. William Harford (Cruise) and his lovely wife Alice (Kidman) have
been invited to a Christmas party, they are not sure why, by the
fabulously wealthy Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack). At the party, Bill
sees his wife dancing way too closely with a smooth-talking Hungarian
Sandor Szavost (Sky Dumont). Alice sees her husband flirting with, and
disappearing with, models Gayle and Nuala (Louise Taylor and Stewart
Thorndike). She assumes the worst but doesn't slip off with the
Hungarian. Post party, fueled by a couple of tokes on a doobie, the
couple get into an argument about marital fidelity and Alice reveals
that, once, she thought about cheating with a naval officer she met in a
holiday hotel. Bill is shocked (Shocked! I say!) by the admission and
can't get the fantasy images (thoughtfully photographed in black and
white just in case we, the viewing audience, can't distinguish fantasy
from reality) of his wife and her naval officer out of his mind.
When presented with the opportunity to do something about it (ie. cheat
with a damn fine looking street whore, played by Vinessa Shaw, who comes
on to him after he's been assaulted by some drunken collegiates who
assume this good looking guy wandering down Christopher Street, a known
gay area in New York, is gay), he doesn't. In short order, Bill is
tempted by a teen slut (Leelee Sobieski); crashes a super-exclusive orgy
in which the emotionally vacant super-rich, all in masks and robes,
watch the hired help copulate; is threatened with great bodily harm for
crashing said orgy; is again tempted by the teen slut, this time with
full encouragement of said slut's father (Rade Sherbedgia). Then his
friends get beat up and various acquaintances start dying, all in a
24-hour period. It may be coincidence. It may be conspiracy. It may be
someone screwing with his brain. Regardless, It is boring as hell.
Cranky wonders if Kubrick is cackling from the Great Beyond at the
critics who have missed the point of Eyes Wide Shut; that point being
you can read way too much into any situation and blow your perceptions
up into a delusion bordering on the epic. Having worked on big budget
films, I report from experience that no professional filmmaker that I've
met intentionally sets out to make a bad film but, based on what I saw
at the screening, I'm wondering if Kubrick did just that. In his best
work (Dr. Strangelove, 2001: A Space Odyssey, A Clockwork Orange and The
Shining) he pushed genre and expectations far beyond any previously
conceived boundary. So why not create a plodding, tedious, emotionally
tight-fisted two hour and forty minute endurance test just to see how
many film critics would write knee jerk acclamations based on
non-existent symbolism they interpret to have a greater meaning? Having
set the high bar for political satire, SF, horror and war flicks, why
not out do Ed Wood? It's the only explanation that makes sense.
Wood's final film masterpiece, I Woke Up Early The Day I Died, starring
Billy Zane, will probably take the title back when it's released in
September.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Eyes Wide Shut, he would have
paid...
For what you would spend on a pair of tickets, you could buy legitimate
Kubrick masterpieces on VHS
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š by, Chuck
Schwartz. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
PRODUCED AND DIRECTED BY: Stanley Kubrick, WRITTEN BY: Stanley Kubrick and
Fredrick Rafael, ACTORS: Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd
Field, RUNTIME: 159 , MPAA: Rated R for strong sexual content, nudity,
language and some drug-related material.
RATING: 10/10 - ALTERNATIVE RATING: A
After 12 years, Stanley Kubrick finally directed his last feature, dieing
right after the production was completed. He never got the chance to witness
the audience react to one of his greatest achievements.
Only "The Phantom Menace" shared the controversy and the anticipation of
Kubrick's return to the big screen. But when some Star Wars-fans can (and
probably will ) be a bit disappointed by Lucas' new fantasy,
Kubrick-supporters will recieve everything  they have been waiting and
hoping for.
So far the greatest achievement of the year, his latest, and final, triumph
is a Kubrick picture in every sense of the word. It is beautiful, sensual,
at times creepy, gothic and mystifying.  It leaves the viewer with a lasting
impression. Intellectual and fascinating. The unforgettable characters make
you dive into the world of "Eyes Wide Shut" from the first scene. It is more
tender, sensual and human, than in any of Kubrick's previous films.
Set during the week before Christmas in New York City, Dr. Bill Harford (Tom
Cruise) and his wife, Alice (Nicole Kidman), live in a large Central Park
West apartment with their 7-year-old daughter, Helena (Madison Eginton).
Happily married, when Bill and Alice make their way to a ritzy holiday party
given by their friend, Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack), they find themselves
both having to turn down members of the opposite sex that make sexual
advances toward them. The next night, Alice finds herself confessing to Bill
that in the previous summer, she briefly met a devastatingly handsome naval
officer. "..That afternoon you and I made love and talked about our future,
and our child...Just the sight of him [naval officer] stirred me deeply and
I thought if he wanted me, I could not have resisted.  I thought I was ready
to give up you,  the child, my whole future..."
This sudden and unexpected revelation shatters the stability in Bill's
everyday life, moving him farther and farther away from his everyday
existence into a completely different world. He leaves home to visit a
patient, but instead of coming back, he wanders the streets of New York. A
series of mysterious chance encounters leads him on an unexpected path of
discovery into a bizarre sexual underworld, where the rich and famous have
their sex games. What happens next depend on the path he chooses.
Kubrick doesn't hurry. At the same time, the characters discover more about
each other during these 24 hours--their dreams, feelings, and fears--than
they ever thought they would in a lifetime. And when the film ends, and a
new day is slowly emerging, you still don't know whether it was real or only
a dream. Kubrick slowly guides us through Hell, and brings us back at the
end, exacly where we started, giving us a chance for a fresh start.
"Eyes Wide Shut" is in many ways a perfect film. It is beautifully directed.
Every shot, every move, every camera angle and every cut has been wisely
selected with great care and professionalism. Both the cinematography and
editing as well as the beautiful art direction are award worthy. The acting
is flawless and every charecter has its place. Nicole Kidman has been
granted surprisingly little time, at the same time her charecter is the
heart of the movie. Kidman is nothing less than wonderful. Cruise really
caries the film on his shoulders, the evolution of his charecter is
incredibly essencial for the picture. This is probably his most mature and
serious part and he is incredible - greater and more powerful than ever. The
music does not bare the mark of a genius, but is incredibly effective,
giving the film a feel of terrifying horror, reminding about Hichock and
Carpenter's "Halloween".
 The film created a lot of controversy concerning sex. First I want to point
out that Kubrick's portrayal of sex is graphical, but never pornographic.
The beautiful castle in the woods, the mediaeval costumes, masks and
frightening choir create a creepy, gothic effect. All the couples are
masked. They can not kiss or see eacthother's faces, and for most part they
do not speak. Sex is here pictured as cold and ritualistic - more disturbing
than erotic, partly because of an underlying danger that is always present.
"Eyes Wide Shut" is by no means an easy movie. It's a personal, emotional
and  heavy drama, created to provoke thought and debate. The film generates
many interesting ideas, and the question "what is this film about" must be
answered by every individual. I think that Kubrick's new motion picture is
about several things. It is about the terrible suspicions that creep into
our minds and drive us to the brink of madness, when we find out that the
great love of our life may not be as faithful as we had imagined. It's about
modern society and moralizm, sex and family. But mostly it's about a theme
that has been present in almost every of Kubrick's previous films:
dehumanization of society.
It is strange that right before his death, Kubrick directed the most human,
and sensual film in his legendary and rewarding career.

Author
James Sanford
     Deception -- how we are deceived by others and how we deceive
ourselves -- is the theme of "Eyes Wide Shut," a perplexing, chilling
and often surprisingly comic movie that could only have come from the
mind of the late Stanley Kubrick, a director who was always more
interested in challenging his audience than in pandering to it.
Though it casts Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman as a well-to-do couple
who've been married for nine years (which Cruise and Kidman in fact
are), this is neither a love story nor a docudrama about the private
lives of its stars. In fact, despite the advance hype, "Eyes" features
surprisingly little carnal contact between the two. That would have been
giving viewers something predictable; instead, "Eyes" confounds
expectations again and again.
So much of the movie is about the everyday illusions we create
and/or buy into that when its moments of truth arrive they're as bracing
as if you'd stepped out of a steaming shower straight into a winter
storm. The shocks go straight to the heart.
Set at Christmastime, a season in which presents and trees are
dressed up to conceal what they really are, "Eyes" follows Dr. Bill
Harford (Cruise) and his unemployed wife Alice (Kidman) through a couple
of tumultuous days and nights. Though they live a seemingly comfortable
life in a glorious apartment on New York's Central Park West, we can
sense from the very first scene a storm is about to rattle their little
paradise.
Bill and Alice have begun taking each other for granted -- instead
of looking he blandly tells her "you always look beautiful" when she
asks him what he thinks of her hair. At a party thrown by Bill's patient
Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack), a quietly troubled Alice pounds glasses
of champagne and teases a Eurotrashy type into spending much of the
evening on the dancefloor. Bill is almost picked up by a pair of
striking young women who promise to show him "what's at the end of the
rainbow."
Back at home, Alice ups the tension when she rolls a joint (she
tellingly keeps her stash inside a Band-Aid cannister) and tries to
knock down the invisible wall between them. What follows is a quirky
corkscrew of a conversation about human nature that ends with a
disturbing confession intended both to hurt and to haunt Bill, which it
does.
It's a powerhouse of a scene, played to absolute perfection by
Kidman, who has the smaller but far showier part in the story. Cruise,
in contrast, is in practically every scene of the movie but more often
as a low-key observer than as a participant. Though Bill is always
around, he's not often accessible.
Loneliness is the other undercurrent running through "Eyes." Bill
is forced to go off on his own to deal with his shattered ideals; a
woman (Marie Richardson) sits desperately by herself at the bedside of
her dead father; a hotel desk clerk (Alan Cumming) flirts with Bill in
the hopes of getting something started; a pianist (Todd Field) talks
about having left his family behind in Seattle.
Even when people do get together in Kubrick's sullen and dreary
world, it's not a happy sight, since it almost always involves some sort
of passionless, impersonal sex. A storeowner (Rade Sherbedgia) offers to
rent out his young daughter (Leelee Sobieski) as if she were part of his
inventory; a hooker (Vinessa Shaw) ropes in a client; costumed
participants in an elaborate ritual pair up for silent, anonymous
trysts. As Bill makes his way through New York, it becomes clear that
while cheap thrills are everywhere, fulfillment is hard to find.
Doubtless many viewers will be left dissatisfied by "Eyes" as well.
Like Martin Scorsese's "After Hours," another creepy and darkly funny
tale of a solitary man adrift in the Big Apple, this is not a movie
about likable, easily understood characters or conventional situations.
Instead Kubrick and co-screenwriter Frederic Raphael (sp?) have designed
"Eyes" as a tour of an emotionally barren Wonderland where people have
chic-sounding names like Nightingale and Domino, where first impressions
are almost always wrong and unpleasant realities are tucked away inside
glittering facades.
 Anyone who knows Kubrick's work will tell you the man was not in the
business of making crowd-pleasers, and "Eyes" is no exception to that
rule. But regardless of how you feel about it immediately afterward,
there's no denying the movie gets under the skin. In the same way a
feverish one-night-stand can leave you feeling confused, angry and still
strangely gratified, "Eyes" is a film with an impact that lingers long
after its finale. James Sanford

Author
Ross Anthony
I heard that some people liked this film. I was not one of them.
Kidman and Cruise play a rich married couple tempted by seductive notions of
infidelity. Kidman's character is intoxicated (alcohol and later marijuana)
for the first 50% of her performance, then she's awkwardly cold sober for
the finish. Cruise is smashing, as always ... but great performances seem a
bit of a waste in absence of a solid script.
Cruise plays an M.D. and ever-trusting husband that Kidman desperately wants
to make jealous. Towards that goal, she tells of a poking incident in their
past. But, to make that tale really poking we needed to see Cruise's rock
solid trust in her earlier on (not just hear of it). Perhaps a knowing
glance from Cruise while Kidman danced with a debonair gentleman would have
done the trick.
There were some outstanding performances by secondary actors. Notable as
well, was the cinematography. Shot with a bit of a grain through a softening
filter to give the lights an eerie glow, care was also taken to balance rich
primary colors nicely.
As for the odd script, I think there may have been some big schematic
symbolism -- as if the whole movie had been an analogy for ... I don't
know -- because if there was, I sure didn't get it. And although there were
a few (very few) good lines; most were stock, predictable, or less than
memorable. I may have tolerated the tediously slow build up if the payoff
was shocking; though the theme was a good one, the real shocker is that
there was no payoff.
As for the hot steamy sex ... there really wasn't much of that either; just
a lot of naked women (although cruise has his shirt off as often as
possible). Perhaps since the primaries were two of the sexiest people alive
having meaningful lovemaking in the opening sequences, and because they are
married in real life -- we regular folks might find empathy concerning
infidelity temptations a strain.
Starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman. Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and
Frederic Raphael. Directed and Produced by Stanley Kubrick at Warner
Brothers. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... C+
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Homer Yen
Stanley Kubrick has done something very impressive with `Eyes Wide
Shut'.  I can't quite put my finger on it.  Maybe it's the confidence
in which he carried out this project, seemingly unafraid of what stodgy
studio executives might think or the fact that this film might garner
the dreaded NC-17 rating (which it originally did).  Maybe it's the way
in which he directs Tom Cruise, stripping him of the surefire charisma
that has been the trademark of all his films.  Maybe it's the way in
which he presents the movie, not as a conventional story with
characters and plots, but rather as an exploration that doesn't (and
shouldn't) reach it's destination.  For all these reasons and more,
`Eyes Wide Shut' is an intriguing exercise in moviemaking.
But what is Kubrick's intention here?  Is it merely a film about sex? 
After all, it's hard to tell from the enigmatic movie trailer,
especially when passionate kisses are exchanged to the seductive tune
of Chris Isaak's `Baby Did a Bad Bad Thing'.  But don't think for a
moment that this is some creative attempt at soft-porn.  Rather, this
film is about missed opportunities and the chances that we take as it
pertains to one of our most basic of needs.  To that effect, this film
is more atmospheric and more like foreplay rather than the act itself. 
The film introduces us to William and Alice Harford (Tom Cruise and
Nicole Kidman), who are wealthy Manhattan socialites.  They attend a
posh party.  Alice is approached and propositioned by a suave foreign
guest.  Meanwhile, William has garnered the attention of two very
beautiful models that want to take him to the end of the rainbow.' 
This set of encounters leads to a frank conversation between the two
later on that evening.  While stoned on pot, Alice confesses her deep
attraction for a sailor that she met while vacationing.  She openly
laments how much she wanted him for the night and how ready she was
willing to give up everything just for that encounter.  William is
obviously a person who needs to be in control (one of his strange
power mannerisms' is to flip open his wallet to reveal his medical
license like an FBI agent whenever he meets someone).  This confession
has obviously rattled him.  He leaves his house, inflamed with images
of his wife making love to this stranger.  As he wanders the streets of
New York, strange sexual situations present themselves.  Each situation
represents a facet of carnality, but interestingly, each situation has
no obvious resolution.  We are to fill in the blanks.  Once again, it
is an exercise in exploration, and we are to draw our own conclusions. 
His odyssey through the night eventually leads him to an incredible
orgy where participants where masks, while ritualistic verses are
chanted (this is where you'll find the most graphic scenes).  This
20-minute sequence is nothing short of hypnotic.  Through it all,
William seems to adopt the look-but-don't-touch' principle.  He is an
observer, appalled yet fascinated while his fear is overshadowed by his
curiosity.
This is the kind of film that critics love to watch.  They will marvel
at his use of muted colors to symbolize the hush-hush nature of sex. 
Indeed, even a common kitchen looks uncommonly alive and his decision
to set this during Christmas allows for even more wondrous lighting
effects.  Critics can also applaud Kubrick for not making any
compromises while creating this film.  This movie is decidedly meant to
be viewed by mature viewers only.  I found this piece of moviemaking
bold and provocative.  Notice that I am not commenting on the story
itself.  I don't think that was Kubrick's focus.  The film sets out to
provide an atmosphere of mystery, and it does it very well.


Author
Richard Wallis
Eyes Wide Shut
Rating (out of five): *****
Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack, Todd Field, Marie
Richardson, Rade Serbedzija, Leelee
Sobieski, Vinessa Shaw and Madison Eginton
Directed by Stanley Kubrick
Written by Stanley Kubrick (based on a novel by Arthur Schnitzler)
Rated R for profanity, sex, nudity, drug use and very mature themes
Theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1
Released in 1999
Running 159 minutes
One of the key signatures of a Stanley Kubrick film is that it can be read
on several different levels. In many circles, Dr. Strangelove and 2001: A
Space Odyssey are accepted as allegorical sexual satires. Many people
believe The Shining to be a racial statement against the evils of killing
Indians. Even Spartacus is not safe from intricate deconstruction. And now
comes along Eyes Wide Shut, Kubrick's most thematically complex and
intellectually stimulating film yet. It is also one of his greatest.
Regarding Eyes Wide Shut as merely a plot-driven psychological thriller is
doing the film a great injustice. In fact, I prefer not to take the film
literally at all. Many critics have blasted Kubrick's swan song for being
too much of a free-form, open ended, unsexy bore; shame on them! If you need
pervasive sex to have a satisfactory movie-going experience, look elsewhere.
Based on Arthur Schnitzler's classic novella "Traumnovelle", Eyes Wide
Shut's sole purpose is to evoke a strange, nightmare-like state. The
criticism that the film has no real conclusion is highly inept. After all,
when was the last time you had a dream or nightmare that had any kind of
resolution? This is a tough film that raises some very serious questions,
and is brave enough to admit that it has no clear-cut, black and white
answers. The viewer is left to make his own conclusions and judgments,
something virtually unheard of in modern film making.
At the heart of the story is Dr. Bill Harford's (Tom Cruise) night of sexual
odyssey through the streets of New York and the harsh reality that follows.
In many ways, the plot is very reminiscent of Martin Scorsese's forgotten
sleeper After Hours, which consisted of short, bizarre vignettes where the
hero was at the mercy of whatever oddball he might have the misfortune of
running into. Such is Dr. Bill's case; in the coarse of one night, he has
lost almost all control of his life and becomes dependent of other people's
actions. The phrase "in over his head" doesn't even begin to describe the
potentially deadly situations he gets himself involved in.
The fuel for his fire is jealousy over his wife, Alice (Nicole Kidman,
taking a much more supporting role than was expected). It seems that during
their Cape Cod vacation over a year ago, she was sexually tempted by an
unknown Naval officer, claiming that she would have given up everything -
Bill, their daughter, even her future - for just one night with this
anonymous sailor. Throughout the night, Bill is periodically enflamed by
fantasies of his wife with the officer. This only pushes him further and
further into his self-dug hole.
This is, of course, a very literal interpretation of the story. As I said,
the film is best when viewed in a less superficial light. It is, in all
aspects, a dream (or nightmare, perhaps) put onto celluloid.
Much has been said of the climactic orgy sequence (which, ironically, comes
mid-way through the film) and the digital "masking" that it underwent for
American release. While I am steadfastly against tampering with the work of
a genius, I do believe that some people are making too much of this. The
fact that the studio felt the hypocritical need to cater to younger
audiences (which the movie is clearly not meant for to begin with) is
reprehensible, but if nobody knew that 65 seconds of film had been altered,
I feel confident that the orgy sequence would be remembered as the
brilliantly effective scene that it is. Trust me; it is absolutely
terrifying even as it stands.
Alas, some people are outraged by this alteration (Roger Ebert has dubbed it
the "Austin Powers" version, referring to the strategic placement of objects
to hide certain body parts), even going as far as to dock the film a
half-star for a mistake on the studio's part. Frankly, I find this
laughable; it's almost as if they are looking for a reason to withhold a top
rating for fear of seeming biased. However, I am not afraid to say it; Eyes
Wide Shut is a masterwork, possibly the finest film of the decade and
certainly more than worthy of being a genius' final testament.
Find all of Jason's reviews at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        I really wanted to love "Eyes Wide Shut," the much-hyped
final film from the the late Stanley Kubrick.  I'd hoped to use
this review as a soapbox from which to praise and mourn one of
cinema's most innovative filmmakers, and I wanted to be able to
tell you that "Eyes" is a remarkable achievement, a visceral
odyssey of sight and sound that would prove, like Kubrick's best
work, impossible to shake.  Such words would make the director's
untimely death (he passed away four days after completing work
on the project) even more tragic, as he appeared to be on a
creative upswing: Kubrick had reportedly been gearing up for
another film, a promising sci-fi thriller entitled "A.I."  But
now, whether he intended it or not, this final movie must
forever bookend the remarkable career which began with 1953's
"Fear and Desire" and progressed through such cinematic milestones
as "2001: A Space Odyssey," "Spartacus," "Lolita," "The Shining,"
"Dr. Strangelove" and "A Clockwork Orange."  Could any film
possibly ascend to such lofty heights?
        Preliminary signs looked good: "Eyes" has generated
positive word of mouth from the handful of people who were
allowed an early peek at the completed film.  Even with the
good buzz, however, relatively few plot details were available
for the asking: a fierce veil of secrecy, reportedly instigated
by Kubrick himself, has blanketed the project almost from the
start.  About the only details I knew going into the screening
were: a) the film reportedly takes a cerebral look at sexual
dysfunction; b) the movie was nearly rated NC-17 because of
its nudity and depiction of sexual acts; and c) the film's
stars (and real-life spouses) Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman have
plenty of opportunity to 'get jiggy' with each other on-screen.
Walking into the theater, I wondered exactly what I was going
to get.
        So how does the movie stack up?  Well, I'll put it this
way: I saw the film on opening day with two of my closest
friends, and our opinions covered the entire spectrum.  While I
had significant problems with the story, I found much of the film
brilliant, overflowing with the Kubrickian touches that have made
his work such indelible artistic achievements.  Friend #1 was
basically indifferent, citing a couple of things he enjoyed and
a couple he didn't, but overall possessing no strong opinion either
way.  Friend #2 called it "unquestionably the worst movie I have
ever seen in my entire life."
        I can understand all three viewpoints.  "Eyes Wide Shut"
is far from perfect and nowhere near Kubrick's best work, but I
think that one's potential appreciation (I hesitate to use the
word "enjoyment") of the film will depend primarily on the
expectations the viewer brings into the theater.  As usual,
Kubrick establishes a laconic pace early-on for the story, which
will unquestionably bore many viewers (never have I heard so
much restless shuffling from an audience).  Surreal images float
dreamlike across the screen.  Long passages of the film are
rendered in absolute silence as the director allows our eyes,
not our ears, to convey the full story.  It is, in short,
business as usual for a Kubrick film.
        The marketing campaign is directly responsible for
the disappointment and confusion many audience members feel
after screening the movie.  "Eyes Wide Shut" is being
advertised as a rauchy sex-fest, but it's nothing of the
sort-- although the film contains a rather extreme amount of
nudity, the concept of sexual dysfunction is explored with a
cool, aloof eye from Kubrick.  Yes, there's a lot of on-camera
sex, but it's neither erotic nor passionnate.  Everyone has
been objectified to the point where all desire is irradicated.
People here seem to make love simply because it is expected
of them, not because they have any wish to perform the
action.  Despite the nudity, you'll be hard-pressed to find
a LESS erotic movie.
        The story, in a nutshell: Bill Harford (an excellent
performance by Tom Cruise) is a happily-married doctor living
with his wife Alice (Nicole Kidman) and their daughter in
upper-middle-class bliss.  Bill's life seems perfect until
Alice drops a bombshell on him, admitting that she still thinks
about sex with other men despite the decade-long marriage the
couple have enjoyed.  After Alice confesses that she nearly
cheated on her husband with a naval officer, Bill enters a
48-hour state of mental turmoil, during which he becomes
immersed in a seedy underworld where sex, scandal and
death are bedmates.
        First, the good news: "Eyes Wide Shut" is constructed
with the considerable technical virtuosity that Kubrick has
demonstrated in nearly all his films.  It boasts the loveliest
cinematography I've seen in recent memory (Kubrick was a staff
photographer for LOOK magazine before he embraced filmmaking,
and he knew how to use lighting, angles and color to maximum
effect), making the film fascinating to watch even when the pace
lags.  Tom Cruise turns in an Oscar-caliber performance for
his role as the confused and hurt Dr. Bill.  The film boasts
a rich, chilling gothic atmosphere, which serves the story's
tone well.
        Now, the not so good: "Eyes Wide Shut," even by Kubrick
standards, is excessively long and often uninvolving.  The sparse
musical score (consisting almost entirely of a solo piano playing
two notes) is repetitive to the point of madness.  (I'm sure it
was done for atmosphere, but by the end of the movie the audience
burst into laughter each time it appeared.)  And at times, the
movie seems unsure of what it's supposed to be, and what it's
trying to say.
        Still, even if it doesn't quite work, "Eyes Wide Shut"
will likely be remembered as a great experiment gone slightly
wrong.  I respect Kubrick's attempt to embrace complex themes
and tell an astoundingly orignal story, rather than adopting cheap
cliches and formula, as so many other filmmakers choose to do.
It's not a perfect film, but Kubrick afficianodos, a group I
consider myself part of, will no doubt find much to like, even
if these praiseworthy aspects have more to do with the film's
technical elements rather than the actual storytelling.  It's
not the be-all, end-all Kubrick film that I'd hoped it would be,
but it has much to offer the patient viewer.
        Whether non-fans will like it is another question
entirely.  It's possible, as long as they're expecting a
cerebral odyssey and not a porn movie.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The way to become rich in the American entertainment industry is
to give the public what it wants.  Evidently what the public wants is
to see Nicole Kidman nude.  Last season Broadway offered NICOLE KIDMAN
NUDE: THE PLAY, officially titled THE BLUE ROOM.  The draw of this play
was apparently from all the publicity that one got with the price of a
ticket a quick look at Nicole Kidman starkers.  And free with the look
you got a reputedly mediocre play about sexual mores.
     But most of the country could not get to Broadway to see this
theatrical indelicacy.  Now no less a filmmaker than the late Stanley
Kubrick brings to the screen NICOLE KIDMAN NUDE: THE MOTION PICTURE,
officially titles EYES WIDE SHUT. The film is not based on THE BLUE
ROOM--it just happens to be another story about sexual mores.  Kubrick
himself is no stranger to the act of bringing heavenly bodies to the
motion picture screen.  But I do not remember another film that has so
titillated the audience into wanting to see the body of a major
character since GODZILLA.  And in fact, Kidman does show off her body
so frequently and so gratuitously in the early part of this film we can
only conclude that she has decided she likes doing it.  The irony is
that her character's nudity and even her sexuality is only tangential
to the main line of the plot.  Most of the scenes of nudity, the first
one being a good 60 seconds into the film, are added totally
gratuitously.
     As the film opens successful young physician William Harford (Tom
Cruise) and his wife Alice (his wife Kidman), a stylish and wealthy New
York couple, are preparing to go out for the evening.  They are going
to a Christmas party at the palatial home of the well-connected Victor
Ziegler (Sydney Pollack).  When they get to the party both Harfords
find themselves being seduced by other guests. William is set upon by
two young models, Alice by a somewhat older Hungarian Lothario (Sky
Dumont) who quotes Oscar Wilde as if the wit was his own.  The Harfords
each resist, but the tension later causes a rift in their marriage that
has them each questioning their relationship.  But that disagreement is
only the background for the central action, a bizarre chain of
incidents sparked by a chance meeting at the party.
     That evening the Harfords have a sort of sophomoric argument on
sexuality that does little more than show that both William and Alice
are each in their own ways naive about sex.  Kubrick allows the
argument, and much that follows it, to go on way too long.  With 2001:
A SPACE ODYSSEY Kubrick started pacing his film more slowly.  Going
counter to the trend of films moving faster, Kubrick has made the
pacing of his films more deliberate and occasionally more textured.  In
this pacing some points get really belabored.  A few of his sequences
seem to go on much too long and his storytelling is characterized by
foot-dragging.
     EYES WIDE SHUT is not in all ways a well-directed film in spite of
the Kubrick name.  Cruise's acting style seems limited to facial
expression.  There is little emotional impact in his performance.
Kidman goes through a wider emotional range more believably, but still
there is nothing impressive done here.  Ironically Spartacus and
Varinia in SPARTACUS make a more compelling couple than William and
Alice played by an actual husband and wife in EYES WIDE SHUT.  Stanley
Kubrick's final film surprises the viewer with an engaging thriller
plot involving a sinister forces having their roots in history.  There
are some surprising problems with the film but it is not without its
moments of delight.  I rate it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
     Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler...
     The society that we see portrayed in this film is almost certainly
based on one that did exist, though the original probably died out in
the middle 18th century.  The original is popularly called the Hellfire
Club (though members called themselves "The Monks of Medmenham") and it
was for a time an important force in European, and particularly
British, politics.  Like the society that Kubrick shows us here it was
a secret society; even most members may not have known who the other
members were.  The secret society combined satanic mysticism--either
real or feigned, probably some of both--and orgies.
     The founder and leader of the secret society was Sir Francis
Dashwood, an influential Member of Parliament and eventually Chancellor
of the Exchequer.  It is not known with any sureness who else was a
"monk."  One person who it is strongly rumored was a member or perhaps
only an honorary member but a repeated guest was Benjamin Franklin.
The Earl of Sandwich was certainly also a member. (As an aside, if his
name sounds a little funny the latter was not surprisingly also an avid
gambler.  His unwillingness to leave the gaming table to eat caused him
to invent a food concoction more portable than a plate of food.  He
would grasp a piece of meat in the hand between two slices of bread.
And that's the origin of the "sandwich" and of its name.)
     Other members of the Hellfire Club included painter William
Hogarth and politician John Wilkes.  The club met and had their orgies
and their strange ceremonies at Medmenham Abbey.  Meeting at the chapel
of the abbey and at the West Wycombe caves near the Dashwood estate,
the club held strange ceremonies and orgies very much like the ones we
saw in the film.  For more information, read
http://www.blather.net/archives3/issue3no1.html.

Author
Walter Frith
In memory of Stanley Kubrick - July 26, 1928 to March 7, 1999.
Isn't it odd that on the day (July 16, 1999) that Stanley Kubrick's last
film, 'Eyes' Wide Shut' opens, that it marks the 30th anniversary of the day
the Apollo 11 space mission was launched and its occupants would be the
first men on the moon four days later on July 20, 1969.  Since a film about
a space odyssey is Kubrick's masterpiece, I feel the space time continuum
rumbling around us.  : - )
Where were you when Stanley Kubrick died?  Kubrick died in the early morning
hours of March 7, 1999.....a Sunday.  I had been out late with friends the
night before and slept in until about noon and I was lying in bed trying to
wake up by watching t.v. --- as if that works!  While channel surfing, CNN's
Headline News had the story at the top of its 30-minute newscast and I
jumped out of bed and ran out to tell my family of the news.  Kubrick's
death was overshadowed the next day as baseball legend Joe DiMaggio passed
away.  Since he hadn't turned out a film in 12 years since 1987's 'Full
Metal Jacket', Kubrick worked for two years in the final process, filming
his last picture which is an appropriate swan song for those who understand
his vision and those who don't.  That aspect of his work never changed
throughout the decades and there's no reason to believe that Kubrick would
change to conventional film making so late in life.  Kubrick would also
stick to his re-occurring theme of dehumanization for his final film.
In no small way, I am deeply convinced in the strictest of terms that 'Eyes
Wide Shut' ranks right up there with Kubrick's great classics such as 'Dr.
Strangelove' (1964), '2001: A Space Odyssey' (1968), and his most
controversial film (maybe not anymore) 'A Clockwork Orange' (1971).  Kubrick
has explored every aspect of human nature under the most meticulous
circumstances.  You could practically write an entire book on each one of
his landmark films.  His thorough examinations of war, social strife,
political incompetence, technology running amok, showing that times change
but people don't, prove that Kubrick was way ahead of his generation.  His
take on sex hasn't been seen with such broad study since 1962's 'Lolita' and
that film is now a Sunday school film compared to 'Eyes Wide Shut'.
Tom Cruise plays Dr. Bill Harford, an M.D. married happily (or so it seems)
for nine years to his wife Alice (Nicole Kidman).  The two of them have a
seven year old daughter.  One night will attending a party of high society
thrown by a colleague of Bill's (Sydney Pollack), some degrading things
begin to happen in the lives of the main characters that will affect them
over the next 24 hours that will undoubtedly change their lives forever.
Alice dances with a handsome and much older Hungarian man with some
distinguished grey whose personality is that of a poet who likes to seduce
women.  Bill is hit on by some young women at the affair, sometimes two at a
time and helps his colleague and party host out of a jam when a girl with
whom the host has been having sex, almost overdoes on cocaine and heroine in
the upstairs bathroom.
After arriving home, Bill and Alice let the pot they've been smoking open
some new sides to their personality.  As their minds expand, they find there
is great sexual tension in their marriage and Alice reveals that she once
made love with a navy officer and was willing to throw everything in her
life away, including her family, in order to be with this man for only a
brief time.  Bill is blown away by this.  From the audience's point of view,
his assumed fidelity towards his wife goes unrewarded and he leaves the
apartment for a sexual exploration of his own in New York city's
underground.  You must see the rest of this film for yourself to believe it,
enjoy it and be artfully shocked by it.  There is one harrowing scene at a
party attended by a couple of hundred people out at a mansion in the
countryside that is unforgettable.  It's a sex ritual and orgy that is
clandestine, posh and upscale, and for adults only where everyone wears
formal dress, cloaks and capes, and masks.  At one point, there are no words
spoken.  It is only what looks and feels like a soliloquy of mime art.  It
is a scene that ranks right up there with the opening war room scene in 'Dr.
Strangelove', the computer malfunction in '2001: A Space Odyssey' and the
climactic scene of Malcolm McDowell's lidlocked eyes during the final stages
of brain washing in 'A Clockwork Orange'.
At the centre of the film's main characterizations, 'Eyes Wide Shut' is more
about fore play than it is sex.  The scenes involving sexual display are
tastefully done and there is a lot more innuendo in the film than you may
have been led to believe during the film's advanced publicity.
Kubrick, for the last time in his career, uses many unknown actors to sell
his message and does it brilliantly.  He makes a mega star like Tom Cruise
fit in well with these people and never gives one character in a minor
supporting role domination over another.  In a major supporting role, Sydney
Pollack is sensational.  I always said that he should have received a Best
Supporting Actor nomination for 1982's 'Tootsie'.  Directing himself as
Dustin Hoffman's neurotic talent agent, Pollack was hilarious in a role he
made totally convincing.  Nicole Kidman is very admirable in her role in
'Eyes Wide Shut'.  I would have liked to have seen more of her acting talent
used in the film but she is not as dominating in the film's second half.
Carrying this film for the better part of the way the same as he did in
'Born on the Fourth of July' is Tom Cruise.  Forget his marketable name,
forget his early juvenile films and give this man the credit he deserves.
Cruise exhibits sexual frustration and a wrestling match with his conscience
superbly in this film as a man with an unwavering amount of decency in the
perverse world he discovers.  It's a challenge any actor would have
difficulty with and Cruise holds his own with any other actor that could
have played this role.  Two Oscar nominations and his ability to act equally
as well opposite Dustin Hoffman, Jack Nicholson and Paul Newman (who heaped
well deserved praise on Cruise), make Cruise that rare commodity of actor
AND movie star and those who don't see his talent can only hope to in the
future.
What is truly remarkable about the ending of 'Eyes Wide Shut' is the way it
is strangely fitting as to what happens to the film's characters.  Kubrick
intentionally leaves it open to intense debate as to whether or not it is
the correct ending and I'm sure he counted on this.  Not knowing he would
never see the reaction film audiences around the world would have to it
makes Kubrick's death all the more untimely and his movies will forever
speak to us in a way he never could personally.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Ross Anthony
I heard that some people liked this film. I was not one of them.
Kidman and Cruise play a rich married couple tempted by seductive notions of
infidelity. Kidman's character is intoxicated (alcohol and later marijuana)
for the first 50% of her performance, then she's awkwardly cold sober for
the finish. Cruise is smashing, as always ... but great performances seem a
bit of a waste in absence of a solid script.
Cruise plays an M.D. and ever-trusting husband that Kidman desperately wants
to make jealous. Towards that goal, she tells of a poking incident in their
past. But, to make that tale really poking we needed to see Cruise's rock
solid trust in her earlier on (not just hear of it). Perhaps a knowing
glance from Cruise while Kidman danced with a debonair gentleman would have
done the trick.
There were some outstanding performances by secondary actors. Notable as
well, was the cinematography. Shot with a bit of a grain through a softening
filter to give the lights an eerie glow, care was also taken to balance rich
primary colors nicely.
As for the odd script, I think there may have been some big schematic
symbolism -- as if the whole movie had been an analogy for ... I don't
know -- because if there was, I sure didn't get it. And although there were
a few (very few) good lines; most were stock, predictable, or less than
memorable. I may have tolerated the tediously slow build up if the payoff
was shocking; though the theme was a good one, the real shocker is that
there was no payoff.
As for the hot steamy sex ... there really wasn't much of that either; just
a lot of naked women (although cruise has his shirt off as often as
possible). Perhaps since the primaries were two of the sexiest people alive
having meaningful lovemaking in the opening sequences, and because they are
married in real life -- we regular folks might find empathy concerning
infidelity temptations a strain.
Starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman.
Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and Frederic Raphael.
Directed and Produced by Stanley Kubrick at Warner Brothers.
Rated R.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollock. Rated R.
Eyes Wide Shut isn't the masterpiece many were hoping to see in Stanley
Kubrick's final film, but it is an impressive achievement; a
mesmerizing, haunting, adult psychodrama about marriage, fidelity and
sex. It's a Stanley Kubrick film from beginning to end, consistently
exhibiting the auteur's trademark penchant for long, continuous takes,
his unparalleled deftness behind the camera and his uncanny ability to
extract gorgeous performances from his exhausted cast (indeed, Eyes Wide
Shut attained infamy even before its release for its notoriously
laborious shoot: Kubrick, a renowned perfectionist, reportedly held his
cast "hostage" on the set for nearly a year).
In an uncharacteristic maneuver, Kubrick cast two big-name stars in the
lead roles, namely real-life husband and wife Tom Cruise and Nicole
Kidman. They play Bill and Alice Harford, a volatile couple who, during
the course of a couple nights, ponder the validity of the idea that a
husband and a wife must be faithful to each other. He is an M.D., she's
unemployed and we are introduced to them as they are getting ready to go
to a fancy party. At the affair, they are both propositioned and both
nearly succumb to the temptation to play around with someone else.
When they return to their lavish New York apartment Kidman (after
smoking a dash of weed) inquires whether her husband had sex with two
models who approached him during the night. He (truthfully) says that he
did not and asks what happened with that Hungarian guy she was dancing
with. They proceed to argue until Alice tells her spouse a lustful
story: evidently some time ago, she had a thing for a young naval
officer. She admits that she was ready to give up her whole future with
Bill and their young daughter if this guy wanted her even for one night.
Bill is jolted by Alice's story and we anticipate his reaction, but at
that moment he gets a phone call and has to go "show his face" at the
house of a just-deceased patient. This turns out to be the beginning of
a long and eventful night on the town. The daughter of the dead patient
hits on him but he wisely turns her down. He almost does the dirty deed
with a kindly hooker who approaches him on the street. Then, through a
series of coincidences, he winds up at a gothic mansion where a
ritualistic (and frankly, creepy) orgy takes place, with costumed people
performing various public sex acts on each other. Erotic dread mounts as
Cruise (who's not supposed to be there) wonders the spacious halls
watching the "action" until he is discovered to be an outsider.
Much hoopla has been raised over the fact that Warner Bros. digitally
edited the orgy scene. With the help of a computer, they put in cloaked
figures to block some of the actual sex acts (they can still be seen,
just not in all their glory) in order to avoid the dreaded NC-17 rating.
European viewers will see the film as Kubrick envisioned it. Roger Ebert
calls the American version the "Austin Powers version," and many others
have bashed the alterations. I am of the potentially controversial
opinion that the figures only supplement the scene's mystical
atmosphere.
The first thing one notices about Eyes Wide Shut is how it looks. This
is an artful, distinctively gorgeous production, shot in dark, moody
hues and featuring some elaborate, beautiful scenery. From the giant
mansion used in the film's centerpiece to the decor at the Christmas
party to the Harford's apartment, this film is always a pleasure to look
at. To boot, a great soundtrack makes it more atmospheric still.
At the core, behind the graphic, controversial content and unappealing
mood, this is a good-natured movie that emphasizes the importance of
fidelity. It looks at sex as almost perfunctory by portraying it as
unnerving rather than erotic. It's something superficial and yet
something necessary to achieve a deeper relationship. At the end, it
seems, Bill's eyes are wide open to the special kind of love he and his
wife have for each other, more meaningful than anything he could ever
hope to find on the streets of New York.
Kubrick elicits wonderful performances from both Cruise and Kidman. Tom
is completely convincing as Dr. Harford, a man who seems guided solely
by destiny, with no control of the course his life will take. Nicole
projects a quiet intensity as the jittery yet aggressive wife and her
performance is stunningly effective: she's headed for an Oscar nod. The
movie has some help from a similarly strong supporting cast, at the head
of which is director-cum-thespian Sidney Pollock, enigmatic and
articulate as Harford's mysterious friend.
Eyes Wide Shut is not perfect: the last hour could have used a slightly
more scissor-happy editor and both Cruise and Kidman are too good-
looking for me to believe that either would have a very strong
temptation to philander. Still, this is an important work from a great
director, and while it may not be on par with some of Stanley Kubrick's
best it is a worthy final film, a complex exploration of jealousy and
faithfulness.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Eyes Wide Shut (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole 
Kidman and Sydney Pollack. Directed by Stanley Kubrick.
 Eyes Wide Shut is an examination of betrayal.
 Director Stanley Kubrick's final film looks at the consequences of 
marital infidelity.
 He does so by scrutinizing this premise: Is it being unfaithful to your 
spouse if you fantasize about having an affair with another person?
 This is the issue that is raised by William Harford (Tom Cruise) and his 
wife, Alice (Nicole Kidman), who have been married  happily, it seems  
for nine years.
 William is a successful doctor. Alice, who used to manage an art 
gallery, now stays at home and takes care of the couple's daughter.
 After attending a party at the home of their friend, Victor Ziegler 
(director Sydney Pollack), in which two women come on to William and a 
charming gentleman named Sandor Szavost tries to seduce Alice, the 
couple return to their lavish apartment and get on with their lives.
 The next night, as the two are sharing a joint, Alice asks William if he 
was tempted by the women. William says he wasn't because he loves Alice 
and being faithful is one of the tenets of marriage.
 Alice, a bit high, then admits to her husband that a year ago, while on 
vacation, she fantasized about having sex with a naval officer she 
spotted in the hotel at which they were staying.
 William is most upset by this revelation and cannot cope with the fact 
that his wife  even for an instant  contemplated being unfaithful.
 This starts William on a dangerous and self-revealing course that leads 
him through the dark sexual underbelly of New York's elite.
 Kubrick's movie is sexually frank, provocative and disturbing.
 The director, who co-wrote the script with Frederic Raphael, was 
inspired by the 1920s novel Traumnovelle by Arthur Schnitzler. 
 And as in most Kubrick works, the technical aspects of Eyes Wide Shut 
draw you into his world.
 At times he uses his camera like a voyeur, eavesdropping on his actors 
as they discuss the intimate details of their relationship.
 In the scene where Szavost tries to seduce Alice on the dance floor, the 
camera continuously circles the two.
 Kubrick's use of colors, especially yellow in the opening party 
sequence, also helps set the tone of the film.
 The director's use of music also heightens the drama. The discordant 
notes of the minimalist piano piece "Musica Ricerata, II," mixed with 
such divergent tunes as "Baby Did a Bad Bad Thing" by Chris Isaak as 
well as such standards as "I'm in the Mood for Love" and "I Only Have 
Eyes for You," are the exclamation points as Kubrick's story moves 
along.
 Kubrick has never really been known as an actor's director. When you 
think of his films, you think of the "Dawn of Man" or the space station 
sequences from 2001 or Slim Pickens riding the atomic bomb near the 
finale of Dr. Strangelove.
 In Eyes Wide Shut he has encouraged and succeeded in getting Cruise and 
Kidman to bare themselves emotionally.
Cruise, because of his looks, has always been underrated as an actor. But 
time and again, in such films as The Color of Money, Born on the Fourth 
of July and Rain Man, he has proven he is a performer of subtlety and 
depth.
 Here he adds a vulnerability and a sense of uncertainty that makes his 
odyssey all the more desperate and poignant. 
 You feel sorry for William because you know he is not sure what he is 
searching for.
 He also uses Cruise's looks to question his sexuality. In one scene, a 
bunch of New York toughs harass Cruise's 
 William as he is walking down the street, thinking he is gay. In another 
sequence, a gay hotel clerk gives "Bill" some needed information because 
he is infatuated with his looks.
 William can't find his answers if he is not sure of the questions. Is he 
seeking revenge? A few times he comes close to cheating on Alice, but at 
the moment of crossing that line, providence continually intervenes  
whether it be the ringing of a telephone or a knock at the door.
 Kidman, like her husband, also has been somewhat underrated because of 
her beauty. But in films such as To Die For, Flirting and The Portrait 
of a Lady, her dramatic and comedic talents have overshadowed her 
beauty.
 That also is true in Eyes Wide Shut. Kidman opens her self up, allowing 
the audience to see the insecurities and doubts that exist below the 
surface in every marriage.
 Eyes Wide Shut, at two hours and 40 minutes, is a movie that takes 
patience. It is an intimate, interior story, a truly mature and adult 
exercise. It is Kubrick examining an emotional terrain few filmmakers 
have had the courage to tackle.
 And while many may feel the movie is obvious, plodding and a bit dull, 
others will find it riveting, intense and sensual. You can count me in 
the latter group.
 Eyes Wide Shut will not be remembered as Kubrick's finest film, but it 
will be regarded as his most adult venture.
Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He 
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at 
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Sydney Pollack,
Todd Field, Marie Richardson and Rade Serbedzija
Director-Stanley Kubrick
Canadian Rating-18A
Released by Warner Brothers - 07/99
=93Eyes Wide Shut=94, the final theatrical effort of late visionary direc=
tor
Stanley Kubrick, transports the viewer through a dark, fascinating
tunnel of sexual voyeurism. Like a thought-provoking amusement ride
through a towering Gothic cathedral, Kubrick=92s closing bow plumbs the
innermost depths of the human conscience. =93Eyes Wide Shut=94 is a rare
psychological thriller that had my eyes feverishly affixed to the screen
throughout most of the 2 hour, 40 minute running time, all the while
pulsating with the type of technical brilliance associated with
Kubrick=92s name. Even the most simplistic conversation between character=
s
is given Grade-A treatment by the director - the lighting, camera
movement and background score all helping to sustain the impeccable
atmosphere.
To me, that is one of Kubrick=92s most impressive achievements: the
ability to create and maintain atmosphere. =93The Shining=94 is a stunnin=
g
example of his exquisite talent to mesh characters, plot and
surroundings into a total cerebral experience. =93Eyes Wide Shut=94 is
another one of these dream-like experiences. Upon its initial release,
critics and audiences stood at a decidedly mixed consensus. Some more
naive viewers, presumably unfamiliar with Kubrick=92s craft and brand of
filmmaking, went in anticipating more of a prototypical Tom
Cruise/Nicole Kidman romance vehicle. In turn, the somber, artsy
approach most likely drove them away sickened with humdrum monotony.
Others found the experience to be vague and meandering - posing the
suggestion that perhaps the concept and material was not worthy of the
great director=92s touch. Personally, I will offer high praise for the
visually and intellectually consuming =93Eyes Wide Shut=94. It may not
warrant a =91Classic Kubrick=92 stamp of approval, but =93EWS=94 is a hau=
nting
piece of visionary artwork, and certainly a worthy finale in a
phenomenal filmmaking saga.
Cruise and Kidman play Bill and Alice Harford, a wealthy New York couple
who, at first glance, seem to be at the peak of happiness in their
lives. We join Bill and Alice on the Eve of a party they are rushing to
attend, hosted by Victor Ziegler (Sydney Pollack), a long-time friend of
the family. We watch curiously as Alice succumbs to the charm of an
older businessman, and as the two embrace each other on the dance floor,
openly discussing the meaning of marriage and whispering other
adulterous notions. Bill, meanwhile, is being tempted by a pair of
flirtatious girls who obviously want to lure him into a more private
sector of the ongoing party. More than a trifle vague, but interesting.
All of this subtle sexual cavorting leads to Alice, who - under the
influence of pot - reveals that she once considered an affair with
another man. Bill, confused, begins to prowl the moonlit streets to
search for some kind of redemption.
These events unspool into a surreal, engrossing exploration of
character, and it is here that Kubrick=92s visual genius really tightens
its grasp. Bill, a physician, encounters an old doctor-friend turned
musician (Todd Field) who reveals the secret of an masked underworld
gathering. After a brief stop at costume shop owned by a strange old
kook (Rade Serbedzija), Bill makes tracks for the bizarre sex convention
hoping to.... well, we don=92t really know. I imagine you=92re all famili=
ar
with this part. Yes, it=92s the notoriously controversial orgy sequence.
To escape the wrath of the dreaded NC-17, Kubrick was forced to trim
roughly 1 minute of gratuitous fornication and obscure a number of
protrusive body parts using shadows of onlookers (digitally added during
post-production). Some critics, like Roger Ebert, were quick to express
their disapproval of this MPAA intervention - arguing that Kubrick=92s
intended version would never be seen. These critics do make a valid
point.
But I want to skip easy jabs at the MPAA and focus on the film as it
stands. Two of the most captivating moments in =93Eyes Wide Shut=94 occur=
during simple character interaction. The first is the conversation
between Cruise and Field in a darkened bar. Every word, every syllable
is emphasized, and the incredible mood projected by such a customary
moment is definitive of Kubrick=92s magical ability to enrapture the
viewer over his career. The second moment is a chilling conversation
between Cruise and the convention leader, which just oozes atmosphere
and style, with lucid background music and tantalizing camera angles.
Although alone it may resemble a cat walking across a piano, the score
is of fundamental support. =93Eyes Wide Shut=94 is almost perfect from a
technical standpoint, and you already know what editing factor would
make it totally perfect.
No one other than Cruise and Kidman is given enough screen time for
register, but playing a pair of well-realized characters, the real-life
couple delivers. At times, our emotional link to the Bill character
wavers, and Kidman=92s vocal slurs occasionally become grating. =93EWS=94=
 is
also overlong, and some of the dramatic stuffing lacks real substance.
What I=92m saying is that =93Eyes Wide Shut=94, written with unstable
fluctuation between certain characters and events, is not the classic
cinema of =932001: A Space Odyssey=94 or =93A Clockwork Orange=94. But, a=
s he
places the viewer under his spell from minute one, we realize it may be
a long time before the realm of movie-making sees another rare genius
like Stanley Kubrick.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman and Sydney Pollack
Directed by Stanley Kubrick
Running Time: 2 hours 39 minutes
Stanley Kubricks last film, Eyes Wide Shut is a odd drama which could turn
into a unlikely money maker due to the presence of Tom Cruise and Nicole
Kidman. The two play married couple Bill and Alice Harford. During a pot
induced argument, Alice admits to Bill that she nearly cheated on him with a
sailor. Bill is shocked by the statement, and sets about on a odd trip
through New York while thinking about sexual and moral politics. He also
stumbles across a mysterious secret society.
Kubricks career hasn't always be perfect, with unfulfilling movies such as
The Shining, and the pretty but empty Barry Lyndon. Of course, he's made
classics such as Dr. Strangelove and Full Metal Jacket. Eyes Wide Shut is a
mixture of both Kubricks best and worst: the plot and characters are
unsatisfying, but the look and feel of the film are so carefully crafted it
makes the film entertaining to watch.
The film has a strange, dreamlike aura which helps it immeasurable. The
deliberate grainy look Kubrick gives to the film makes it seem dreamlike,
with lights looking brighter than bright, and the majestic sets, especially
in the secret society headquarters, are a joy to watch. The direction is
also faultless, with nice zooms, cut aways and fade in, and is all largely
seamless. There's also an appropriate soundtrack, featuring a eerie
collection of tunes, although the piano solo which makes itself unwelcome
during some of the more dramatic scenes is rather grating and atmosphere
defeating.
Another pleasant surprise with Eyes Wide Shut is the strength of the main
cast, especially Tom Cruise. Although Cruise gave a nice performance in
Jerry Maguire, it wasn't particularly demanding, and it took Cuba Gooding
Jnr to give the film any bounce.  But Eyes Wide Shut centres heavily on
Cruise's character, and it takes Cruise to carry the film. Thankfully, h
can, and he gives a sterling performance as the troubled lead man. Nicole
Kidman, although featuring heavily during the start of the film, is slowly
pushed out of the plot. This is shame, as her performance is certainly,
well, 'off centre.' She's either stoned or drunk during most of the film,
which gives her an opportunity to over emphasise her emotions. There's a
delicious scene where a Hungarian flirts with her, and her performance as
she goes giddy eyed over him is a joy to watch. Her pot-induced argument is
also bizarrely funny. Sydney Pollack gives solid support as a friend with a
strange agenda, and Todd Field is fun as a grinning piano player who gets
Tom Cruise into trouble with the secret society.
The plot and characters themselves, however, are a little unsatisfying.
Firstly, it is somewhat hard to work out some points of the plot. Although
Kubrick explains the main plot with voice overs and flashbacks, other plot
elements are introduced and thrown away with no real explanation. Seeing as
Kubrick had three years to strengthen up the plot, it's a little
disappointing. Some of the characters are a little two dimensional, and
Nicole Kidman suffers terribly from the plot mechanics due to the stories
insistence of centring on Cruise. The script, written by Kubrick and
Frederic Raphael, is deliberately slow, if a little too slow, and never
really exciting. Occasionally, it just meanders on a bit.
One last note: those watching Eyes Wide Shut for the sexual content will
most likely be disappointed. Unless you worship Nicole Kidman, the film is
curiously unerotic. Perhaps Warner's should of advertised the other merits
of the film rather than the sex.
Eyes Wide Shut is a fitting movie to end Kubricks career. It's no
embarrassment, it's not perfect, it sums up what was great and not so great
about Kubrick. This review is not truly accurate: it will probably take
multiple viewings to truly understand what is going on here. But as many
people will only see this once, the verdict is: Eyes Wide Shut is a
interesting, somewhat overlong drama with enough style to keep it going.
