Title
Review for Passion Fish (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PASSION FISH (1992) *** Written, directed and edited by John Sayles. 
Cinematography, Roger Deakins. Production design, Dan Bishop. Music, 
Mason Daring. Cast: Mary McDonnell, Alfre Woodard, David Strathairn, 
Vondie Curtis-Hall, et al. A Miramax release. 134 min. Rated R 
(language). 
A New York cab accident paralyzes TV soap actress May-Alice Culhane 
(Mary McDonnell) from the waist down. Bitter, rebellious and given to 
corrosively black jokes on herself,  May-Alice makes a "difficult" 
paraplegic. She stays angry after she moves to her empty family home in 
rural Louisiana. Becoming something of a hermit, she swills wine, 
watches TV non-stop and keeps firing nurse-companions. May-Alice may be 
a royal pain, but the nurses, in a clever twist of the script, are 
themselves pains in sundry ways. 
The moment Chantelle (Alfre Woodard) shows up, any film or TV-watcher 
over age 9 knows that between the once spoiled, now hostile white woman 
and the pan-faced black graduate of the school of hard knocks, there 
will be bonding.  Predictable too are the sparks that will fly in the 
process of generating a rapport  between the two, as well as alleviation 
of the women's aches.  But writer-director Sayles has a way of taking 
the foreseeable and giving it, if not total originality, at least 
freshness. 
In a photographic darkroom of her house, May-Alice finds a Leica M-3 
camera. This is a model introduced several decades ago, a classic 
without the gadgetry and automation of no-think modern cameras. It still 
works beautifully, it is still used by photographers.  Like the Leica, 
"Passion Fish" is something of a classic movie story plot, one that  
generally works well, without  having to resort to audience manipulation 
or gimmickry.
>From the start to about the midpoint the film engrosses and captivates.  
McDonnell's acting, natural looks and appeal (even when she bitches), 
the script and the direction, make May-Alice's rage entirely 
understandable. There is self-pity here, of course, but not of the 
viewer-alienating kind. 
What is really a tour-de-force is that without fake sentimentality, 
without condescension, and without diminishing May-Alice's hurt, John 
Sayles's film entertains and makes you laugh. The writer-director also 
holds in reserve some minor surprises, mostly dealing with Chantelle's 
own problems.  
Sayles has a good stock of ingenious, inventive and funny touches or 
scenes, most of them plausible.  Among the best : three satirically 
treated visits to May-Alice :by former schoolmates; her soap opera 
colleagues; and her producer. All of them stress that no matter how sad 
May-Alice's situation is now, her former life was one of immense 
inanity. By "lfe" I mean her professional life, since, oddly, we learn  
almost nothing about her private existence before the accident. 
Also bizarre is the nature of new romances that develop for both women. 
It is no doubt unintended, but I have the feeling that Chantelle and 
May-Alice are slumming sentimentally.
Chantelle meets Sugar (Vondie Curtis-Hall), a local Don Juan, bon vivant 
and rake. As for May-Alice, there is a serious rekindling of attraction 
for Rennie (David Strathairn), erstwhile "wild boy" school chum, now a 
subdued gas-pumper, handyman and bayou guide, father of five and husband 
of a prudish, puritanical termagant. Like much else that is left to 
one's imagination in the film, Rennie's wife is heard about but not 
seen. 
Sayles, an independent and "different" filmmaker, has respect for his 
audience and does not spell out everything. But extending this 
sketchiness to the women's  new male relationships makes me rather 
uncomfortable.  
These are not matches made in Heaven. Sugar's past record and present 
attitudes do not bode well for the kind of steady, supportive rapport 
that Chantelle needs. Granted, too, that May-Alice is not presented as a 
thinker (the dialogues are naturalistic but of no particular depth or 
interest), she still towers, in appeal and sophistication, above Rennie 
the Redneck.  
The slow, deliberate tempo of the film works very well initially.  It is 
around the halfway mark that one starts becoming conscious of slowness 
-- and of some arbitrariness.  One example: when May-Alice starts 
shooting pictures,  this, we realize, will help her psyche. But 
photographers' eyebrows will go way up as May-Alice develops and prints 
her work with antique chemicals and paper that must be moldy by now -- 
and all this without assistance or special equipment.is she does. 
"Passion Fish" has the appeal of a solid subject done without 
Hollywodian preaching or moralizing.  All-around performances are good, 
Woodard's  and McDonnell's are excellent.  The movie feels like a 
"Kammerspiel " (a chamber play) opened up, with the best sections 
happening in and around the house.  May-Alice, for example, starts 
taking pictures. Whether she realizes it or not, the audience knows that 
this will help her psychological rehabilitation -- a plus point in the 
film.   
No matter how warmly you might feel about some of the characters, except 
for May-Alice's plight, there is nothing that's particularly strong or 
involving about the problems of the rest.  And neither the protagonists 
nor the supporting cast are given many dimensions. 
To put it differently, Sayle's script, especially when it is ironical, 
is more interesting than the creatures it contains. 

Author
James Berardinelli
     After being rendered a paraplegic following a freak New York City
automobile accident, soap opera star May-Alice (Mary McDonnell) retreats
to the house in Louisiana which she inherited from her parents.  There,
she is cared for by nurses who come and go with revolving door
regularity, driven away by May-Alice's bitterness--until the arrival of
Chantelle (Alfre Woodard), that is.  Desperately needing a job and
pursued by her own personal crises, Chantelle has no choice but to stick
it out.
     PASSION FISH will win no awards for originality.  It embodies some
of the oldest storytelling motifs around:  the growth of a relationship
between two mismatched people and the valiant fight of someone to
conquer a disability.  In a way, the movie is a little like DRIVING MISS
DAISY, with a healthy dose of THE WATERDANCE thrown in.
     In its portrayal of paraplegics and the struggles they have to
endure adjusting to their disabilities, PASSION FISH is inferior to THE
WATERDANCE.  In his 1992 film, Neal Jimenez may have given a definitive
portrayal of how a once-normal person comes to grips with the sudden
loss of mobility.  PASSION FISH does a good job telegraphing May-Alice's
pain, but the presentation isn't as powerful.
     This isn't the most accomplished "buddy film" of recent memory,
either, but it is one of the rare few featuring women, and possesses all
the candor and openness of a FRIED GREEN TOMATOES.  Sayles' strength has
always been characters and, in PASSION FISH, he manages to create a pair
of vibrant, complex ones.
     The film starts in the middle of the story, and, as it progresses,
we are treated to revelations of both future and past.  There are no
flashbacks.  Everything that we learn about what was comes through
dialogue--a snippet here, a snippet there.  As is the case when we meet
someone in real life, we aren't made aware of everything at one time.
     The relationship between the two main characters is at times too
strained to attain the level of emotional honesty that the movie
expects.  Nevertheless, perhaps that's one of the elements that
differentiates PASSION FISH from the legion of other films in its genre.
Also, the May-Alice's abrasive temperament could have been toned down
without detracting much from the movie.  While the experience of
becoming a paraplegic admittedly gives a person the right to be bitter,
there are times when this trait threatens to transform May-Alice into a
stock character.
     Because John Sayles is a great writer and director, and because his
two leads are more-than-capable in their roles, PASSION FISH overcomes
its many shortcomings to provide a clear look at an unusual
relationship.  While there isn't much life to the supporting characters,
May-Alice and Chantelle are intriguing enough to keep the audience
involved.
     There was a 1992 film called SOAPDISH that took over ninety minutes
in a mostly-unsuccessful attempt to lampoon daytime television.  As
almost a throw-away element of PASSION FISH, John Sayles manages a more
humorous and incisive satire in this movie.  Few elements of soap operas
are spared a dig.
     The bayous of Louisiana provide a rich backdrop to the film.  None
of the cinematography is epic in nature, but there's something about the
wetlands, with their alligators and snakes, that captures the attention.
It's also interesting to note how well Mary McDonnell allows May-Alice's
accent to slowly reassert itself.
     PASSION FISH, primarily because it is so deeply character-driven,
is short on action, but heavy on drama.  This is a film for those who
love to watch real-seeming people struggle through
different-but-unspectacular lives.  It's a small movie, about small
changes in attitude and understanding, and it knows when to be serious
and when to laugh.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     May-Alice Culhane (played by Mary McDonnell) was once the queen of the
soaps.  Then a reckless taxi driver turned her into an unemployed
paraplegic.  She wakes in a hospital with no memory of the accident and with
a vicious attitude toward life.  She determines to return to her family home
in Louisiana's Cajun country to drink, watch television, and generally pity
herself.  In this state she goes through several nurses.  Either she could
not stand them or they could not stand her.
     Finally, Chantelle (played by Alfre Woodard) is sent by the agency.
Chantelle wants the job, but has little experience and a bad background.
Surprisingly, she is a natural at dealing with May-Alice.  Each battles the
other and has enough need to put up with the other's bullying.  Chantelle
starts seeing a man from town while May-Alice strikes up a friendship with
an old potential beau, Rennie (played by David Strathairn).  Rennie is
already married with five children and May-Alice's condition makes sex
impossible, but there clearly is some interest.
     John Sayles both wrote and directed PASSION FISH, taking his time to do
it right.  In showing us some of May-Alice's old friends, Sayles is able to
have some fun at the expense of the soap opera industry and at overly demure
Southern womanhood.  The film is longish at 134 minutes, but it does not
drag.  Some of the Louisiana scenery is very well photographed.  I give
PASSION FISH a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
[Seen at the Montgomery Theater in Rocky Hill, NJ.]
