Title
Review for Last Temptation of Christ, The (1988)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ralph Benner
     Martin Scorsese had for years wanted to make a movie of Nikos
Kazantzakis's novel THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST. Even if he seemed an
odd choice to do it, because his movies seem so explosively modern and
contentious (MEAN STREETS, TAXI DRIVER, RAGING BULL), when we got to
know him, through watching his movies, most of them tinged with
Catholicism and alienation, and listening to or reading about him, we
knew he was more than up for the at best dubious challenge: He's just
the right kind of intense, anguished Catholic, completely enveloped by
the mysticism of his religion, to give us a fresh perspective on Christ
as a man. I hope I can say this with support from other recovering
Catholics: I also loved the majesty of the Church -- its physical
grandeur and harmonious theme (that we as people must forgive ourselves
before we can expect to be forgiven by a God, at least that's how I've
always viewed the main tenet of Christianity throughout my Catholic
education) -- and as a teenage moviegoer, I too was overwhelmed by
movies like THE GREATEST STORY EVER TOLD. The image of Christ was story
book perfect -- the epitome of ethereal iconolatry. But when reaching
adulthood, and trying to make sense of what I now see as legend, my
view of Christ got tarnished: He was no longer Max von Sydow. Scorsese
succinctly puts it this way about what he wouldn't do: "I didn't want a
Christ who glowed in the dark."
     Chief among the reasons religion is appealing to many is that
there is no answer to the earthly finality of death, so therefore we
hope there is something more, something beyond death, a God or supreme
power with an eternity of answers. It is a matter of faith, yet maybe
more realistically a matter of comfort. (Or, as C.S. Lewis might
suggest, a way to avoid the fear of death as nothingness.) But out of
this beautiful simplicity comes the various roads to God, each so
detoured by hidden mines of biased interpretation and dictatorship that
poor put-upon Madalyn Murray-O'Hair is right -- religion has caused
mankind more misery and death than any other single idea in history.
(It certainly would be hard to argue that the idea has brought us
everlasting peace and love -- its primary goals.) The lasting power of
the God myth to believers isn't that they've seemingly resolved death,
it's in accepting otherworld perfection -- something we can't really
relate to or achieve, something we can only be in awe of through
imagination. Realism, then, becomes the enemy. While it's hard to
comprehend all the arguments being made against Scorsese's film, the
easiest to understand is that fundamentalist Christians vehemently
reject as blasphemy the notion that a God, in this case a God's "son"
named Christ, can be viewed as a human being and therefore subject to
all human temptations. At the very core of Scorsese's belief is that
his God sent his own son as a man of human flesh and blood and possible
moral weakness precisely so that we could relate to him, and it's an
admirable, if not altogether impossible position to take, because soon
after it's unveiled, up pop so many contradictions and inconsistencies
that, while we sure as hell aren't getting "a glow in the dark" Christ,
we start hoping for one. Scorsese's naturalism exposes how rigged the
religious game is.
     In the 8/21/88 issue of the Los Angeles Times entertainment
tabloid Calender, Lawrence Christon (honest, that's his name) wrote,
"The protesters represent a much larger group of the alienated and
disaffected, whose spiritual hunger has never been truly satiated. In
THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST they see not only the deadly literalness
of the reified image that displaces the spiritual imagination, but they
also sense that this one last apprehension of divine purity, this
single incorruptible ideal that they've held against the manifold
pollutions of the modern world, has been taken away from them and used
up by the movie." To paraphrase Blanche in A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE,
they don't want realism, they want magic. Perhaps this explains why
George Stevens' THE GREATEST STORY EVER TOLD was far less successful
with critics than with the alienated and disaffected. When Stevens made
his epic, his goal was to fuse reverence with skepticism by using
nature as the bond; the huge panoramas of his colored Ansel Adams-like
locales were used to enhance the basic belief that there had to be
something that or someone who created it all. Stevens also knew that to
succeed he had to re-define the sepulchral trap that often befalls the
actor playing Christ, performing as the "receptacle of sacred relics."
Max von Sydow is the very essence of Michelangelo or Raphael, and his
screen persona seems otherworldly.  Nevertheless, he managed to get all
the epigrams and platitudes to resonate with stunning clarity of
meaning. The big Cinerama screen helped as well -- the magic had
magnified power. (Some of us still remember, in the original roadshow
version of the movie before United Artist unmercifully cut it, the
"dropping" of the thirty pieces of coin on the soundtrack during
Judas's betrayal.) More significantly, there is no "real thing" about
Von Sydow to trouble us, even if right now most of us claim to only
want reality. Von Sydow's as far from real as Charlton Heston is as
Moses -- we feel safe, secure in the knowledge that Stevens isn't going
to explode possible falsehoods.
     But it is the "real" in Christ that Scorsese as artist and
troubled Catholic searched for in THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST, and it
would have been hypocritical of him to make a movie that supported the
other kind of view. That in the end he concluded that there was
resistance to temptation and that he actually deviated little from
mythology says this about Scorsese: he's deeply respectful. And
certainly far more than the dummmy-headed protestors who never bothered
to see the movie they feigned distress over. (Sound familiar? Rather
like Dole screaming about violence in movies he's never seen while
avoiding condemnation of the violence in movies made by Arnold and
Bruce, who support his drearidacy.) Yet in weighing his sincere
intentions with what's on the screen, the movie, very much like the
novel, is a failure. There's naturalism to a degree: the movie has the
most realistic look yet at what Judea might have been like, and the
spikes being hammered into Christ's flesh are terrifyingly big, and we
get Christ questioning and fearful of his father's plans -- but there's
no spell. The center is severely crippled by Willem Defoe as Jesus.
Unfair as it is, too many of us spend our time looking at the spaces
between his teeth, and it is exactly that kind of visual handicap we
don't need to deal with. If an actor playing the most discussed and
mythicized figure of western civilization attempts to play him as an
emotional, mental maelstrom, it has to be a performance ripped from
within the character he's portraying, without the burden of
distractions. After all, it is this daring conception that is the very
heart of the novel and what Scorsese aimed for. How can we become
involved with the interpretation when the actor's defects overshadow
it? Defoe is also torn in another direction -- he's less the novel's
Christ than he is Scorsese as Christ. (De Niro's least satisfying work
in his movies with Scorsese comes when he too plays Scorsese instead of
his characters.) Most of the yahoo fundamentalists who see the movie
will not notice the substitution, but for the movie lovers out there,
the resemblance of Defoe's urban intensity, his wiry nervousness, his
manic jabberishness to Scorsese's is unquestionable, and so the element
of the natural Scorsese wants and we want for him gets lost. The result
is that not only does Kazantzakis's Christ get usurped, so does Christ
himself.
     I found myself surprised by some commendable things in the movie:
Harvey Keitel's Judas is a man already out to kill Jesus and after he
discovers the beauty behind the Christian message, he is torn between
love and betrayal; both could be divinely-inspired duty. To see this
view of him realized without apology is -- I can't resist it --
miraculous.  Watching Christ dancing, drinking, contemplating
fornication with Mary Magdalene will be labeled as blasphemy by the
blankhead religious but how could Christ resist temptation without
first recognizing what it is? If Christ has foreknowledge that he'll
succeed in resisting, what is the lesson for imperfect man? It's brave
that the cannibalistic aspect of Catholicism gets its sickie due --
that we see wine turned into blood.  (This ritual is as repulsive as it
is infantile.) The dream sequence, wherein Christ contemplates
temptation, is a mistake in conception: not only too long but
unconvincing; you can hardly wait till Christ rejects what Lucifer
offers. Sex and children barely make it as lures into the lair of the
devil. They're integral, are they not, to a God's master plan?  (It was
St. Boniface who said, "Man's road to God always begins with a sexual
act." That's why I reject the Virgin Birth and priest celibacy -- they
undermine the strength of the family. Think about how the Church
glorifies men, represses women, demands the faithful to accept the
dictums of supposed celibates -- one of whom claims inhuman
infallibility. How can so exclusive a fraternity pretend to be an
advocate of "the family" when so much of what it celebrates undermines
the family's strength?) Though Scorsese's temptations are all subduedly
played out, you find yourself wishing for a few De Mille orgies as an
entertainment reprieve. Peter Gabriel's music comes on with such
African-Brazilian roots that I wondered if it weren't lifted from some
of Sergio Mendes's less commercial recordings, like "Primal Roots."
Still, it's potent stuff, and heavily so during the slow-motion walk
Christ endures at the beginning of his crucifixion. With Jews smiling
and laughing and mocking him from behind, it's likely to be recognized
as the movie's most memorable, if not controversial moment. Adding to
the power of this scene are two women on either side of Christ, in the
foreground. Their faces are exaggeratedly compelling and repulsive --
you want to slap them out of sight.
     Putting aside one's admiration of Scorsese's courage to make
TEMPTATION, it's an an oddly indifferent movie made by a man so
committed to his religious spirituality: the story has neither a
mythological nor intellectual hold of us. Hard as Scorsese tries, he
can't unleash the power of the myth; the defiantly implausible material
acts as its own gainsayer. Inevitable it is: when you dance with
religious myth, you end up with blisters filled with contradiction. No
matter how you finagle the material, you get trapped by its
preposterousness, not too unlike how creation scientists get trapped by
their blatant dismissal of not the theory but fact of evolution. The
best you can do is avoid disgracing yourself, which as novelist
Kazantzakis and as movie maker Scorsese managed to do. THE LAST
TEMPTATION OF CHRIST is Scorsese being true to himself; he's been
tortured for what to viewers seems like aeons by befuddled beliefs and
remains so. And he can not be accused of being a blasphemer or a
hypocrite to his masochistic pleasures. His tango, however, is over:
Realism has no function in religion.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Martin Scorsese
Writer: Paul Schrader (based on the novel by Nikos Kazantzakis)
Starring: Willem Dafoe, Harvey Keitel, Barbara Hershey, Verna Bloom,
Harry Dean Stanton, David Bowie, Andre Gregory, Juliette Caton, Victor
Argo, Irvin Kershner, John Lurie, Barry Miller
What happened if Jesus Christ was given a choice in whether or not he
was crucified and died "for our sins?"  What if Jesus wasn't as perfect
as he is said to be, and was instead a human being, almost cursed with
the thought that he was the Messiah, the son of God?  Director Martin
Scorsese's epic motion picture, which retells the traditional story of
Jesus in a whole other manner ponders these questions, and does it in a
way that presents a kind of film that is extrememly rare: a
philospophical motion picture.
Based on the novel by Nikos Kazantzakis, the story tells the latter part
of Jesus's life (played by Willem Dafoe, who, well, looks like
Jesus...or the general perception of him), with most of the pretty
important parts (like the Sermon on the Mount, the whole fasting in the
desert with the temptations of Satan, the Last Supper, etc.) being told,
but in a way that shows that Jesus was a human being.  I've never read
the bible personally, but when you're forced to go to church for the
first 18 years of your life, you do hear a lot of stories from the
bible, and one of the big myths is that Jesus was a flawless man.  This
film breaks him down to be a man.
Of course, why wouldn't he be a regular man with a tremendous burden on
his shoulders?  Although being born to a virgin woman (played by Verna
Bloom, who was also Dean Wormer's wife in "Animal House"), he still grew
up a man.  It seems that him being perfect was just a myth in the bible,
a way that the different men who wrote it bent the truth a bit to touch
people (which is touched upon later in the film).  The way that Schrader
(who wrote the script), Scorsese (who directed the film), and Dafoe (who
played Jesus) present it is that he's a man who's almost cursed to die
for everyone's sins, and is saddled with the birthright of being this
perfect human being, when he confesses to a couple confidences that he
can't help but want to have sex with attractive women when he sees them,
just like the rest of us...well, sorta.
The film poses the question "What would happen if Jesus was able to live
like the average human being?"  Luckily, it doesn't arrive at this
question until the two-hour mark.  Before this time, the film shows his
life prior to the crucifixtion where he is told he's allowed to come off
the cross and be a regular schmo by a young female angel (Juliette
Caton).  Why is it lucky they did this?  Because the film would seem
gimicky if they had just jumped to it without backing itself up.
For the first two hours, the film tells his early story, from when he's
making crosses for the romans, to when he's being followed around by
Judas (Harvey Keitel) and eleven other apostles, to his inevitable
crucifixtion.  Not being of great knowledge as to his mid-life (the most
details I know about are his birth and death, since the Christmas and
Easter seasons are so close together on the church calendar), I don't
know how much is true, but this is a work of fiction, since everything
has a new twist to it.
For example, he is constantly confessing his fear of living the way he
does, and shows constant apprehension to die for everyone else, which
brings on the anger of Judas, who calls him a coward throughout the
film.  He also has to suffer the cruelties of others thinking of him as
a madman, as he does sound like one a lot of the time.  And, of course,
he suffers scrutiny for taking into his little clique the prostitute,
Mary Magdalene (Barbara Hershey, saddled with a near impossible role of
being the woman who is the object of Jesus's affection), since he's
supposed to be this big sign of purity.
The final forty-five minutes of the film chronicle his life after being
let down of the cross, where he marries another woman named Mary
(hinting at an oedipal complex with his mother, also named Mary...or
maybe not...), and settles down to a simple and happy life, with lots of
children.  There is a powerful ironic ending which thankfully stays in
tact with the rest of the film.  Also, instead of being just a cheap
ironic twist, it spurns out a deeper philosophical idea, which makes
this a brilliant work of biblical satire.
The way the film is constructed is interesting, as it seems to bring out
a fascination Scorsese has with his best works: concentrating on a
person or persons who are trapped by a lifestyle or something deeper. 
In "Goodfellas" and "Casino," the mafiosos were trapped by the lifestyle
they had chosen; and in "Raging Bull," Jake LaMotta was trapped in the
world of boxing, the boxing ring being a metaphor for his life.  Jesus
is similarly trapped, but by the fact that God chose him to be his son. 
It's a tragedy of a movie, as Jesus discovers that his place was never
to be a man like everyone else, but to be the ultimate martyr - to stop
death, and save everyone's soul.
The direction is very bizarre, and creates a film that is extremely
surreal.  The opening is dizzying, probably to get the sense of the
confusion Jesus is suffering at the particular point in his life.  And
there's lots of scenes of nudity, blood, and assorted gore, including a
freaky deaky scene where Jesus approaches his desciples after fasting in
the desert, and he pulls out his heart and holds it in front of them. 
The surrealism helps the film, though, and also creates a hypnotic feel
to it, which holds the audience's attention the full way through.
Unfortunately, as brilliant and philosophical as it is, the film is one
of the most controversial pieces of art of all time.  Like Monty
Python's "Life of Brian" (which was a comedy that dealt with a man
mistaken for Christ, but not once picking on Christ himself), the film
spurned a lot of picketing, featuring people who had mostly not even
seen the movie.  It's a shame that people are so narrow-minded and don't
take a chance of expanding their thinking to something higher and more
profound.  Sure, there's a scene where Jesus does have sex with Mary
Magdalene.  But it's not pornographic, and never flashy - it's just
poignant.  People need to realize that just because a piece of art
expounds on the "holy scriptures," it doesn't necessarily mean it's
"blasphemy."  The passages in the bible were meant to be thought about
in such a manner.  At least that's my opinion; I could be wrong.
The acting is not amazing, but does feature a wonderful performance from
Willem Dafoe, who creates a sympathetic and pithy Jesus.  This man is no
Brian Deacon - he shows Jesus in a completely different way, and he
pulls it off amazingly.  Harvey Keitel is a great Judas (sorry, folks,
there is no hanging scene), and there are two great cameos from
character actor Harry Dean Stanton as Saul/Paul (see the movie to
understand this), and David Bowie as none other than Pontious Pilate (he
rocks in his one scene).
Scorsese received a well-deserved Oscar nomination for his directing,
which is luckily never heavy-handed or preachy.  Every scene is a
mini-masterpiece (save a corny scene where Jesus raises Lazarus from the
dead), as he paints each scene with the appropriate feel.  He shows he
is once again one of the best directors, if not the best, working today.
"The Last Temptation of Christ" is one of those hard-to-find films which
is overly-bashed for moronic reasons.  I'm not even a Christian
(agnostic, if you must know), but I found the film to be a poignant, and
brilliant way to look at the gospels of Jesus.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
E. A. Knowles
     Buddha once said "All suffering is caused by desire..."  Expectation is
certainly an expression of desire, and I certainly suffered through this film.
Considering all the controversy aroused by this film, at least it could have
been a great movie.  I would've been satisfied if it were even a good movie.
The best thing I can say is that maybe this was an average movie atrociously
edited.  The next best thing I can say is that this was a potentially good
movie badly made.  In its best moments it reminded me of VIDEODROME (someday
I'll explain); at its worst CALIGULA or DUNE....  But enough ranting--here's the
review:
What I thought was good about the film:
1) David Bowie as Pontius Pilate.  One little scene, well played.  When
   Jesus refused to do any miracles for him, he says "What a disappointment."
   The best line in the film.
2) Harvey Keitel as Judas.  A great original portrayal of Judas.  A
   wonderful performance spoiled only by the absurdity of what the script
   requires him to do.  Judas's character is so convincing, that you can
   really understand his exasperation with Jesus.  But why would such a
   sensible guy follow such a lunatic (as Jesus is portrayed in this film)?
   Only the writers know for sure.
3) The scene where the disciples are waiting for Jesus to come out of the
   desert.  He's been gone from more than a month, and they're beginning to
   have doubts.  Very believable conversations.  The scene is then spoiled of
   course by the appearance of you-know-who, who promptly pulls his heart out
   of his chest, holds the bloody, gross thing out to his disciples and say
   "Take this.."  WHY??  Why would they want his bloody heart?  Why was
   this scene necessary?  (This special effect wasn't even well-done.  It
   looked like a magician's trick--like he had a sheep's heart hidden in his
   cloak.).  Up to this point it was a good scene.
4) Harry Dean Stanton as Saul/Paul.  A stellar performance, and one of the
   few preachers in the film (and this includes Jesus,of course) who seemed
   eloquent enough for the job and who the script gave something intelligent
   to say.
5) The dream sequence (--not really a dream sequence-- things were
   ambiguous enough that you could actually interpret this sequence as
   actually happening, then having God, in answer to Jesus's prayer, turn
   back time and put his back on the cross).  The girl who played the
   make-believe archangel (who was really Satan) did a good job.  Jesus's
   confrontation with Paul/Saul was one of the few scenes that didn't seem
   forced and stupid.  The scene where a few aged disciples are with Jesus on
   his deathbed worked well for me too.  It seems that this sequence and the
   conclusion was the whole point of the film.  The rest of the film was so
   badly done though, that this ending does not justify it.  In fact, I bet
   that if the rest of the film was better thought out, intelligently
   scripted , devoid of cheap, stupid thrills and edited competently, these
   last scenes and the movie itself wouldn't had drawn the disgusted protest
   that it did.
1) The opening sequence of scenes.  This might have been because of bad
   editing, but I felt like I had begun in the middle of the movie!  We have
   some guy falling down every few minutes, hearing voices in his head,
   talking to himself and all in all acting bizarre.  Then we see him making
   crosses for the Romans to crucify Jews on.  Everybody hates him, he's
   extremely confused, and doesn't seem very intelligent.  He follows a
   stranger (thinking "maybe this is an angel from God sent to lead me where
   I'm supposed to go") into a brothel.  He sits and waits while everybody
   else fucks the prostitute over and over and over again (Barbara Hershey
   must've been tricked, like everyone else, into thinking this was a
   significant movie to play such a compromising role).  Then when
   everybody's left he runs up to the prostitute and asks for forgiveness?
   What's going on here?  What did I miss?  Who's that girl?  There's no setup
   at all for what happens in this film.
2) The film did not tell a story.  It did not show any reasons for what
   happens in the film.  We simply jump from scene to scene and there doesn't
   see to be any connection between them.  One scene has Jesus make a fool of
   himself in the city (Jesus makes a fool of himself quite often in this
   film) and basically has to run for his life out of town.  The next scene
   has him riding into the town triumphantly with everybody greeting him.
   WHY??  What changed their minds.  Who are these people?  Why is anybody
   still following this jerk?  Scorsese seems to want it both ways: He assumes
   we know the story, so he needn't dwell on details leading up to major
   scenes, then he changes the  details of the major scenes so drastically as
   to make any assumed story that ties them together ridiculous.
3) There was too much gratuitous gore and gratuitous nudity in film.  Maybe
   the makers of the film will hide behind the cry of "Authenticity!" but I
   say "Bullshit!"  This was along the lines of what you saw in CALIGULA (a
   film that, despite being offensive, obscene, depraved and artistically
   bankrupt, had more continuity and sense in its script than this movie).
   Do we really need to see a bunch of naked women (all with good figures,
   mind you) jumping and writhing around while John the Baptist is
   preaching.  Is a graphic sex scene the only way we could know that Mary
   Magdalene was a prostitute?  Why did Jesus have to pull his bloody heart
   out??  Seeing one sheep's neck cut was enough.  There's no subtlety in
   this movie, only excess.
4) My biggest complaint is with the characterization, casting and scripting
   of Jesus.  Not for any religious reasons.  They could have portrayed Jesus
   as a homicidal Satan worshipper for all I care.  I would buy it if the
   portrayal were convincing, consistent and competent.  Jesus is portrayed
   in this film as a confused, manic-depressive hysteric who has a talent for
   miracles, but the worst timing for them.  This guy is a real loser.  He
   hears voices, he has pains in his head.  He's afraid to follow the voices,
   he decides instead to build crosses to crucify people.  When he decides to
   follow the voices, he does things like attack people who weren't bothering
   him, wander into brothels, get people cut up by Roman soldiers etc....
   He's never sure if it's God or the Devil talking to him.  He changes
   his mind a lot.  He doesn't understand anything he's doing or why he's
   doing it, yet he's always trying to convince everyone that something is
   the way out of all their troubles -- this "something" is always changing,
   and he's woefully lacking in anything resembling eloquence when he tries
   to explain.  There are scenes in this movie where Jesus thinks "I don't
   know what to say.  I'll just open my mouth and God will put the words
   there," then he talks and says stuff that's completely inane.
   Nevertheless, he gets followers (don't ask me how or why).  Jesus never
   says anything clever or profound or convincing in the whole movie, so you
   have to wonder how he persuaded all these people to follow him --
   especially when they follow him into a temple surrounded by Roman
   soldiers.  This is an especially troubling scene, because when the moment
   of truth comes Jesus is speechless, sort of faints after showing the crowd
   how well he can make his palms bleed, and is hustled out of trouble while
   those who came with him are cut to pieces by Roman soldiers.  This
   characterization of Jesus is a cross between Agnes of God and Son Of Sam.
   Willem Dafoe does not have an easy job to do, and probably would've had
   a hard time doing a conventional Christ.  Here he's a disaster.  His
   performance is all the more depressing when contrasted with the
   performances of the rest of the cast (Keitel as Judas, Hershey as Mary
   Magdalene, Harry Dean Stanton as Paul, David Bowie etc...  all did the
   best they could, and as isolated performances, they were all excellent
   -- they just got stuck in a dog).  In all fairness though, it would have
   taken a great actor to pull off this role.
5) The miracles in the movie were really lame.  Considering the character
   of Jesus was so "low", the miracles had to be the only "rational" reason
   that people might follow him.  Also, it was a chance for this film to save
   itself with FX.  They seemed almost like parlor tricks, the way they were
   presented.  And when ever Jesus really could've used a convincing miracle,
   he didn't deliver.  
This is the harshest review I've ever written of a movie, but it deserved it.
I was not offended by the content of the movie.  There have been movies much
more sacrilegious than this one.   There have been movies much more gratuitous
than this one.  I was disappointed.  It was just a bad movie.  It wasn't even
enjoyable in a mundane way.  It wasn't even daring.  Its daringness was hyped
all out of reality.  It was just a bad movie.  I rank it somewhere between
CALIGULA and DUNE -- give it a -2 on the Leeper scale (-4 to +4).  It would've
gotten even a lower score if not for David Bowie.

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    An astonishingly difficult movie to watch, THE LAST TEMPTATION OF =
CHRIST may be Scorsese's most important film, and yet his most =
impossibly abstract as well.  Scorsese presents the life of Jesus =
Christ, through Nikos Kazantzakis' novel, which details the life of =
Christ from approximately 20 until the day of crucifixtion.  Jesus of =
Nazareth (Dafoe) is a carpenter, who opens the film making crosses, so =
that he can escape the fate he is subjected to, his destiny on Earth.  =
Yet, he soon learns his evil ways for aiding in the deaths of others, =
and subjects himself to a desert in exile, in hopes that he can reach =
God.  Before leaving, he asks for forgiveness from Mary Magdelene =
(Barbara Hershey), a prostitute who is also a childhood friend of Jesus. =
=20
After going to the desert, Christ learns his true purpose in life, =
and what he must do.  Aided by Judas (Keitel), he sets off on teaching =
the world his message.  Along the way, he meets John the Baptist, the =
rest of the prophets, and tries to teach the world his message.  Christ =
is also confronted by internal demons and self-doubt, as he tries to =
find his true purpose throughout the entire film.  During the story, =
Judas is the closese ally of Jesus: his betrayal, argues the film, was =
not out of hate, but out of love, in order to allow Christ to die. =20
He is eventually captured, and crucified as per the Bibile.  =
However, as he is about to die on the cross, he is saved by a girl, who =
brings him to his marriage with Mary Magdelene.  The girl is a guardian =
angel who is from God, and who has saved him from his death.  Jesus goes =
on to live a life as a man, as a carpenter, and does not die on the =
cross.  On his deathbed, in the final moments of his life, he is visited =
by the prophets, and by Judas, who denounces his master for "not keeping =
his end of the bargain."  Judas reveals the angel to truly be the devil, =
and the life Jesus had lived to be the ultimate selfish act.  Jesus =
escapes from his deathbed, and asks his father for forgiveness, for =
succumbing to his last temptation.
Visually and aurally, the film is absolutely breathtaking.  No other =
director has even come close to realizing Jerusalem during the time of =
Christ's life to the screen.  Peter Gabriel contributes a score than is =
simply astonishing, with pulsing rhythms that capture the viewer.  The =
performances are simply exquisite, with Dafoe leading the way with a =
mesmerizing turn as Jesus.  Keitel, although his accent is a problem, is =
passionately brilliant, fighting through language to bring the character =
to life.  The visuals are also amazing.  Scorsese frames his movie in a =
harsh tone, leaving the impression that Jesus truly is a man who is =
having human frailties.
The film, though, has many trouble spots.  Paul Schrader's script is =
one.  Schrader uses modern-day New York English to tell the story, along =
with New York words, New York mannerisms, and New York slang speech.  =
The film also does not focus on the godly aspects of Christ.  There is =
no underlying message behind the man's words.  The film fails to capture =
the glory and splendor of Christ.  Had it faithfully explored that =
aspect, than the dichotomy of Jesus' soul, his frailties and doubt mixed =
with his unmistakable glory, would have been simply spectacular.  The =
message of Christ is confused between love and violence, and the film =
merely tells us Jesus is great, instead of showing us his greatness.
The film is also overlong.  It just drags in the middle, with =
nothing truly happening.  Christ is a confused figure, in the sense that =
the audience doesn't know who he really is.  Schrader forgets to give =
Jesus a message, to show that he truly is the Messiah, to give him the =
divinity.  Without that, he is a rambling prophet, who the audience =
themselves do not believe.  There are several moments of accidental =
hilarity, and most of them occur when Jesus is attempting to preach.  =
There are moments of brief awe and power, followed by moments of =
confused hilarity.
That said, the controversial Temptation sequence is something to =
behold.  It is a step in an unexpected direction, one that leaves the =
audience puzzled, until the arrival of the disciples.  It is a simply =
breathtaking scene, with Jesus about to die as a mortal.  It is truly =
one of Scorsese's finest moments.  It is unfortunate that Scorsese =
couldn't make a film about Christ as powerful as that one scene. =20

Author
Jason Wallis
"The Last Temptation of Christ" (1988) 
"The Last Temptation of Christ" * * * * 
Starring Willem Dafoe, Harvey Keitel, Barbara Hershey, Harry Dean Stanton,
David Bowie, Verna Bloom, Andre Gregory, Juliette Caton, Roberts Blossom,
Irvin Kershner, Nehemiah Persoff and Barry Miller 
Directed by Martin Scorsese 
It is very rare that a film comes along and transends the way we look at
someone or something. A film that actually has the power to change the way
someone thinks. Martin Scorsese's epic masterpiece "The Last Temptation of
Christ" does just that. Watching it, you can feel that you are in the
presence of true genius and are viewing one of the most remarkable films of
our time. 
And I know what you're all thinking: is Scorsese really the right guy to
direct a film of this nature? I was thinking precisely the same thing.
Actually, he is the only one that could pull it off without seeming preachy
or making the movie contrived. When you see the movie, you'll know exactly
what I'm talking about. No other director (that I'm familiar with, anyway)
could have put as much thought or passion into this film as Scorsese has.
As any true Marty fan knows, he grew up with dreams of becoming a priest.
Fortunantly, he became a filmmaker instead but, with this, has made up for
not becoming a man of the cloth as he has intended. He has made barnone the
greatest religious or biblical movie of all time. 
Another aspect I wanted to tackle right off the bat is the argument that
this film is blasphomy. Being based on Nikos Kazantzakis' novel, it has
actually succeeded in becoming even more controversial that the material
from which it was based. The thing is this: in a scene late in the film,
there is a sexual encounter between Jesus and Mary Magdeline. Blasphomy,
right? The hook: it is not taking place in reality. It's all part of an
elaborate trick being played on Jesus by Satan, who is tempting him by
showing what his life probably would have been like if he had been born a
mortal man. Now, being the strict Christian that I am, if Scorsese had
shown this in any other light, I would not be recommending this film to the
extent that I am. But he is doing it to prove a point. It is, ultimently,
the last temptation of Christ. Satan is preying on him when he is at his
weakest; dying on the cross. 
Now that those two points are out of the way, I can discuss the film. Like
I said, a movie of this power and beauty comes along once in a blue moon.
As I hope you have already guessed, it tells the story of Jesus Christ, who
we all have been brought up to believe was a purely perfect man that did
not possess any of the human qualities that every man has; such as fear,
longing, anger, etc. If you say he had these qualities, just like anyone
else does, that is considered a sin. Why? If he was born a man, then why
shouldn't he be born with at least some of the emotional qualities that all
people have? And if he was purely perfect, then how could he have been
tempted for forty days and forty nights in the desert? God forgive me if
I'm wrong, but maybe Jesus, despite popular opinion, did have his faults
and emotions as any other person has. 
Don't get me wrong here; I am a Christian and I do believe that Jesus was a
divine human being and the son of God. So I don't want hate-mail from all
you devout Christians out there who may be reading this (what am I saying;
hardly anyone reads this, let alone devout Christians). Just wanted to get
that point across. 
I'm going to be redundant here and mention again that Scorsese was the only
person who could have directed this movie. He adds just the touch to every
scene. For instance, when Jesus trashes the temple, turning tables up and
whatnot, you can see the intensity. I don't know how else to describe it.
You can just feel it. Not just at that part, either. The night that Jesus
is to be captured, he goes to pray in the forest. Marty adds exactly the
right amount of sentimentality to the characters that it evokes certain
emotions that very few films can make come out. 
I guess that's also thanks to the wonderful performances throughout the
movie. Willem Dafoe is the perfect Christ, and Barbara Hershey makes and
wonderful Mary. But then there's the roles of Judas and Sal (Harvey Keitel
and Harry Dean Stanton, respectivly). I mean, they're great in they're
roles and all, but I just think they should have switched parts. It's
obvious that Judas was a very guilt-ridden man and that Sal was very
intense and pronounced. Now, does Keitel look guilt-ridden? Does Stanton
look intense? Hell no. They really aren't fit for their roles, but they do
a pretty good job anyway. 
There's really not a whole lot to say about the story. We all know it by
now. We've all been taught about the disciples and the last supper and all
that. But Scorsese has put a completely different spin on what has been
generally regarded as the greatest story ever told. And in every scene, you
can see that special touch that only Marty can do. 
"The Last Temptation of Christ" belongs up there with the director's other
efforts, including the brilliant "Raging Bull" or "GoodFellas". And I can
only hope that those who have so blindly dismissed it as blasphomy will
give it another look. 
Check out Jason Wallis' Filmaholics Anonymous web page at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Keith Doyle
[This review is posted here because it *is* a review of the film.  While it
does cover a lot of the controversy regarding THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST,
it does it in the context of the film itself.  Opposing reviews are, of course,
welcome (Siskel and Ebert both panned the film, for example), but they must be
reviews and based on the author's opinion of the film after viewing it
him/herself. -Moderator]
     Well, due to all the controversy surrounding THE LAST TEMPTATION OF
CHRIST, I went to see just what the furor was about on opening Friday night.
     I arrived at the CinePlex theatres in Century City a little after 8:00
hoping that perhaps the 9:00 show wasn't yet sold out.  Only show for which
they still had tickets: 12:00 midnight.  Okay, I didn't have much else to do,
so I bought a ticket for midnight.
     In the meantime I wandered around checking out the protest activity.  It
appeared that at any given time there was about 1/3 part protesters and 2/3
moviegoers outside the theatre, so there was no shortage of activity, hundreds
of people milling around, etc.
     During the entire time waiting around moviegoers were subjected to quite a
bit of entertainment in the form of lots of imaginative protest signs, "Holy
Word, not Hollywood," "The Greatest Story Ever Distorted," "Don't Rewrite
His-Story," etc.  About half were preprinted and the other half were homemade.
Included were a very few protesters with signs for the other side, all
handmade.  I thanked a couple of those for getting out and standing up for
Marty's rights to make such a movie.
     There was one identifiable organized group mixed in with the protesters
ranks, the TFP, who seemed to be made up of a very few well-dressed gents with
big red sashes and perhaps a few helpers, and had most of the area directly in
front of the theatre complex staked out, where their audience was not so much
the waiting theatergoers, but the automobile traffic out front.  They had a
great color flyer entitled "Blasphemy!" and a coupon to send away for more
flyers, or just send money to their cause.  They didn't stick it out as long
as the more generic protesters; they were gone by the time I got in line for
the last show, about 10:45.  Their statement of "who they are" on the back of
their flyer was kind of interesting:
     "The American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family, and Property
(TFP) is a civic and cultural organization.  Its doctrinal inspiration is
entirely Catholic, and its goal is to preserve our country and Christian
civilization from the ideological offensive (revolutionary psychological
warfare) promoted incessantly inside all the countries of the West by insidious
Communist propaganda."
     The bulk of the protesters were there until we went in, (which ended up
being close to 1:00 due to protest-induced delays) and no one was around at 4:00
when we got out.
     The newsmedia was there for a couple of hours, but didn't seem to be
getting much of any use out of the scene, any time the lights went on the
protesters immediately crowded around the newscaster and started chanting about
Jesus, etc. to the point of drowning out any comments by the newscaster herself.
There were lots of "Gimme a J" kind of chants and songs and the like.  Turned it
into a real E-Ticket ride and kept my long wait for the movie considerably less
boring.
     At any rate, after the wait, I had no idea what to expect about the
movie, and after seeing it, I have to say:
     The protesters *completely* missed the boat on this one.  I feel if they
saw the movie and understood the point that is being made, they'd love this
movie.  Unfortunately, it's been ruined for them, as I doubt that even if they
did see it, their eyes could un-cloud long enough to get the point.
     This movie will clearly mean far more to Christians than non-Christians,
due to the message it presents.  The basis of this movie is that Christ is the
Son of God, and it is a basic underlying assumption throughout the entire movie
that is not called into question in any way.
     This movie asks fundamental questions some of which are the more difficult
ones to answer (in my opinion) and answers them in a most effective and
Christian manner.
     One question could be basically worded, "Why did the Son of God have to be
crucified for our sins?"
     The technique used to answer this question is basically to propose a 
scenario whereby Jesus may have had the "choice" to rather than be crucified
*for* man, live his life as a normal human man.  In this movie, the alternate
choice is explored via a dream sequence that occurs while he's on the cross, a
dream apparently under control of Satan, where he imagines himself being
removed off the cross by an angel, followed by living out his life as a normal
man, getting married, having children, etc.  Satan tells him that all women are
the same, that when Mary Magdalene dies, he can take up with another women and
another etc., and it is as if he is married to them all.  This Jesus in his
dream, falls for Satans line hook like and sinker thinking it is an actual
message from God via the angel, until at the end on his deathbed Judas points 
Satan out for who he/she really is (appeared as a little girl a la Fellini).
Ultimately, we come to find out that as the Son of God his living a normal
life would be meaningless, selfish, and a complete waste.  After all, how
could a Son of God just live a normal life?  It would only make sense if it
was special in some way, and having him die for us was that way.  So in the
movie, he wakes out of the dream, and realizes his true destiny.
     Now in order to present a scenario where Christ has the "choice" to live
as a man and be plausible that he might make that wrong choice (so we can
evaluate the potential consequences along with the Jesus in this movie)
Scorsese/Kazantzakis has decided to make him unsure of his true destiny, and
doubts himself.  How else could the scenario of him following plan B instead of
plan A be plausible?
     In a sense this movie explores a "what if" scenario in a parallel universe.
1.  At the very beginning of this movie, there is a disclaimer that the Jesus
depicted in the film is not based on the Jesus of the Gospels, but on a novel.
2.  The movie is very modern and stylistic, virtually surreal.  A great 
soundtrack by Peter Gabriel.
3.  The slight amount of nudity is hardly what I would call "gratuitous",
anyone who is titillated by this movie would have to be exceedingly repressed
(hmmm...).  I think a statement about it found in TIME magazine just about says
it:  "The sex scene (in which Mary Magdalene entertains some customers) exposes
a strong womans degradation more than it does her flesh."  Scorsese is using
modern film techniques, THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST is not Disney-watered-down
by any means.  
4.  The first 15 minutes could easily be misinterpreted.  Until you get to the
end of the movie and understand what the point of it all is, it isn't hard to
see how many people could misinterpret the apparently "wimpy" Jesus depicted
here, and the reasons why he would even visit Mary Magdalene's "brothel."  But
after seeing the entire movie and I look back on it, it is necessary to the
plot to establish the fact that Jesus and Mary Magdalene have the potential to
be "mates" and establishes effectively what relationship they do have during
the course of the movie.
5.  The protesters conjured up more "blasphemous" concepts via their
protestations than the movie ever did.  In the sideshow atmosphere they
created, I began to envision the movie deserved carnival barkers out front
screaming "Step right up, inside, Jesus gets the girl!," "Sex with Jesus,
right this way, just $6.50," etc.  The movie wasn't like that at all.  If you
don't take Jesus being the Son of God for granted, while you can certainly
enjoy the movie you will quickly realize that the movie remains completely
within the context of that premise.  It is a movie for believers.  I expect
that the Atheist organization that was also there passing out fliers to the
attendees will be a little disappointed when they actually see the movie and
find that it doesn't live up to the protester's promises.
     I think that this movie will appeal to *thinking* Christians, and they
will find it one of the best movies about some of the concepts behind Christ
ever made.  *Nonthinking* (i.e. programmed) Christians will probably never
even see it, or if they do, won't be able to separate all of the negative
things they've imagined is going on in this movie from what is actually
happening on the screen.  I find it pretty sad, perhaps just another item on
the list of "monuments to the stupidity of a certain subset of Fundamentalist
Christians".
     Then again, such Christians do get uncomfortable any time anyone has
anything at all to say about Christ that isn't under their control.  Remember
that the Catholic church screens a lot of reading material, etc., because it is 
over the heads of the flock's ability to keep in context and not misinterpret.
I could see how this movie would definitely be in that category, you have to
be a thinking person to add up 2+2 in this movie to get the point.   The
protesters keep coming up with 5.  Odds have it that Scorsese aimed a little
over the heads of much of the audience, and many people won't understand the
point.
     Further, perhaps certain Fundamentalist protest groups are actually out
looking for something to find fault with (especially in the media) and any
"liberal media" product that wasn't strictly overseed by all-knowing church
members that makes statements about Jesus, good or bad, is a prime target I'm
sure.  The fact that they actually agree with the message does not speak well
for their powers of comprehension.
     I think any Christian who has formed an opinion of this movie based on all
the misinformation floating around, doesn't know what he's talking about when
he makes comments.  Unfortunately, many of these who may actually see the movie
will be over prepared to "tune out" any potential blasphemy, go to it with
blinders on, and exit with a "see I told you so, I knew what to look for, and I
was right it was there" because they have been force-fed what to read in
between the lines.
     The rest of us should go see it, Christian or not, and with an open mind,
as I think you will leave with more insight into the life of *a* Son of God
than the protesters will ever have.
Keith Doyle
#  {ucbvax,decvax}!trwrb!cadovax!keithd  Contel Business Systems 213-323-8170
