Title
Review for Vampire in Brooklyn (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jerry Saravia
Eddie Murphy is pretty much on the same wavelength as Whoopi Goldberg: they are
both big, audacious comic stars who don't easily fit into any of the countless
tired Hollywood formulas written for them. Whoopi has had a little more success
than Eddie in the 90's, prior to Eddie's "The Nutty Professor." As a result,
Eddie has not had a major comedy hit since 1988's "Coming to America," arguably
his best picture. The new Eddie Murphy played a vampire in a film by Wes Craven
back in 1995, a role you'd never expect the old Eddie from "Beverly Hills Cop"
to play. 
Murphy plays an African vampire with a goatee named Max who travels to Brooklyn
to find his soul mate. His soul mate turns out to be a frustrated, edgy cop
played by the lovely Angela Bassett ("What's Love Got To Do With It"). Max bites
a few necks along the way to get to her but he can't do it all himself. He
enlists the help of a young thief who becomes a sort of deteriorating,
latter-day Renfield. We've seen this type of story countless times before, and
there is no reason any of this should really work. Murphy as a vampire in a Wes
Craven flick? Is this comedy-horror or a horror-comedy? 
The surprise is that "Vampire in Brooklyn" is not half-bad at all, a minor
guilty pleasure. There are plenty of good laughs, dozens of one-liners, frenetic
camerawork from Max's point-of-view as he soars across Brooklyn, nasty dream
sequences, and Murphy shows ample skill as a vampire who can shape-shift into a
holier-than-thou, Alan Sharpton-type Reverend or a thick-accented Italian
gangster named Guido. The photography is appropriately dark and damp considering
most of the story takes place at night. There are some nice, subtle touches such
as the flickering candlelights that surround Murphy and Bassett's erotic dance
and arm lanterns that extend from the wall, all lifted from Cocteau's "Beauty
and the Beast" and Coppola's "Dracula." 
I also found there to be pleasant chemistry between Murphy and Bassett - it
would be nice to see them in more romantic pairings in the future. The scenes of
Murphy inviting Bassett to dine with him ("I would like to have you...for
dinner") are priceless and fitfully funny. The other plus is Murphy's impeccable
impersonations and marvelous make-up jobs that show him off as the talent he
always was - still, these scenes have little to do with the story at hand. Often
such comedic highlights, which are precious few, interfere with the ghastly
blood and gore. 
"Vampire in Brooklyn" is packed with gross gags galore and unnecessary gore. A
horror-comedy should balance both horror and blood equally rather than going
overkill on the gore, as witnessed by John Landis's excruciating "Innocent
Blood." The ending is also strangely unfinished - I would love to have seen a
more imaginative killing method rather than the traditional stake-in-the-heart.
A little originality would not hurt - who can ever forget Christopher Lee's
Dracula killed by both a cross and the rays of sunlight? 
"Vampire in Brooklyn" proved to be a failure as Murphy's comeback - a year
later, he wowed audiences and made a major comeback with "The Nutty Professor."
This film certainly beats the last dreary "Beverly Hills Cop" picture he did and
the tired, laughless "The Distinguished Gentleman." It is a hoot and a half and
sporadically funny but not enough of a challenge for dear old Eddie. My advice
to Eddie Murphy is to steer clear of family comedies, like "Dr. Doolitle," and
return to his raw, politically incorrect roots, as it were. He was funnier and
more outrageous when you did not know what to expect. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Eddie Murphy, Angela Bassett, Allen Payne, Kadeem Hardison,
      John Witherspoon
Director: Wes Craven
Producers: Eddie Murphy and Mark Lipsky
Screenplay: Charles Murphy, Michael Lucker, and Chris Parker
Cinematography: Mark Irwin
Music: J. Peter Robinson
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     It seems that movie makers have lost the art of creating a good,
scary vampire flick.  The last such film to grace the screen was
probably FRIGHT NIGHT, and that was a decade ago.  Since then, the
"sensitive" vampire has come into vogue--a creature tortured by its
own inhumanity and appetites.  While these existential nightstalkers
have an appeal as character studies, they aren't all that frightening.
True evil, of the absolute, soulless kind, is what makes for a
terrifying bloodsucker.  Unfortunately, that's not exactly what VAMPIRE
IN BROOKLYN offers.
     To be fair, Eddie Murphy does a better-than-average job as
Maximillian, the last vampire on Earth.  There are moments when Murphy
is positively chilling, and he doesn't ham it up too much.  Comedy is
mixed in effectively, but it's what the humor is mingled with that
doesn't work.  As a horror film, VAMPIRE IN BROOKLYN is a failure.
Aside from Murphy's creature, there's nothing compelling in this
picture.  The script is dull, the characters are flat, and the direction
is rather ordinary.  (This is especially surprising considering that
horror master Wes Craven, who did the first and last NIGHTMARE ON ELM
STREETs, is at the helm.)
     Maximillian makes his entrance to Brooklyn by crashing a ship into
the docks.  On board are numerous corpses, all drained of blood.  A huge
wolf is seen disembarking, but no one believes the eyewitness.  Next
thing, there's a vampire roaming the streets, feeding on gangsters and
recruiting a young thief/con man (Kadeem Hardison) as his ghoulish
servant.  But Max is in New York for a reason--he's on the trail of
the only other member of his kind, the offspring of a vampire/human
mating, a woman whose "other half still sleepwalks in humanity."  He
intends to bring out her true nature and introduce her to immortality.
The person in question happens to be Rita Veder (Angela Bassett), a
police officer assigned to investigate the murders on the ship that
brought Max to the United States.  And the vampire isn't the only one
interested in her.  Her partner, Justice (Allen Payne), is equally
smitten.
     The hero is supposed to be Justice, but Allen Payne's portrayal
lacks energy.  The result is a bland and unsympathetic character.  Why
should we care about this guy?  Instead, our attention gravitates to
Murphy, the only performer attacking his role with relish.  Thus, as in
all recent vampire movies, it's the villain, not the good guy, who keeps
us interested.  And Max isn't really such a bad seed--he's just lonely
and misunderstood.  The centuries can turn tedious without a mate to
share them with.  There's some chemistry between Murphy and Bassett, but
absolutely none in the Bassett/Payne pairing.  Yet both relationships
get equal screen time.
     There are a few comic highlights.  One occurs when Max shape-shifts
into an Al Sharpton-type preacher who gives a sermon on how "evil is
good."  Here, as the script ventures into pure satire, it acquires an
edge that is absent most of the rest of the time.  Also, some of the
interplay between Julius (Hardison) and his older buddy Silas (John
Witherspoon) is witty, and worthy of a few laughs.  This pair does a
great "Two Stooges" act.
     Overall, however, VAMPIRE IN BROOKLYN doesn't live up to its
promise or premise.  The humor is hit-and-miss and the horror just isn't
all that frightening.  Eddie Murphy proves that he still has screen
presence, but he needs a better showcase.  The problem here isn't as
much the talent in front of the camera as it is the weak and hackneyed
script.  VAMPIRE IN BROOKLYN is in need of an infusion (or should that
be transfusion?) of originality and creativity--two qualities that are
blatantly absent.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
