Title
Review for Phantoms (1998)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
James Sanford
PHANTOMS(Miramax)
 Author Dean Koontz got a lot of press three years ago when he roundly
bashed the screen adaptation of his best-seller "Hideaway," and his
criticisms were justified: "Hideaway" was a lurid mess that squandered
the talents of Jeff Goldblum and Alicia Silverstone. But before someone
hires Koontz as a film critic, let it be noted that he's gone on the
record praising the filmization of  his novel "Phantoms," a movie so
dull and mechanical it makes "Hideaway" look like "Silence of the
Lambs." Combining all the worst tendencies of contemporary horror films
into one slimy package, "Phantoms" isn't even an effective gross-out,
with some of the most un-special effects to soil the screen in a long,
long time.
 The real horror here is Koontz's pathetic dialogue ("Are you okay, 'cuz
I need you to be okay, alright?" is one of his more inspired lines) and
illogical story. "Phantoms" starts off like that classic "Twilight Zone"
episode in which a man wandered through an empty town and kept finding
evidence that someone had just been there, even though he couldn't see
or hear any other people. But Koontz isn't interested in mystery, he
wants to peddle gratuitous gore and highfalutin hoodoo about
soul-sapping demons who periodically visit the Earth to digest everyone
in a remote, isolated area, be it the Roanoke Colony in 16th-century
Virginia, the ancient Mayan cities, or, in this case, everyone in sleepy
Snowfield, a hamlet in the Rockies.
 When sisters Lisa (Rose McGowan) and Jennifer (Joanna Going) realize
they're the only ones left in town, they don't go on a looting spree in
the business district. They go looking for trouble instead, stumbling
upon several decapitated bodies and gruesome remains in the process.
Sheriff Hammond (Ben Affleck) and his weirdo deputy Stu (Liev Schreiber)
show up to help investigate the mystery, which grows more tedious --and
ridiculous-- by the minute. Frequently, our heroes receive phone calls
from the evil  forces; it's a sad sight to see gifted actors like
Affleck and Going standing around and trying their best to look
terrified by what sounds like a malfunctioning car wash. A
ghastly-looking Peter O'Toole also shows up to embarass himself as a
scholar-turned-tabloid-journalist who makes such dramatic prouncements
as "It's chaos! Chaos in the flesh!" while struggling stay on his feet
during his scenes.
 Some comedies are so funny you forget to laugh; "Phantoms" is so scary
you'll forget to scream. You will, however, do a lot of yawning and
perhaps some unintended giggling before the pointless, badly staged
finale in which the "Ancient Enemy" that everyone's been babbling about
for the past hour and a half reveals itself  to be little more than an
oversized version of the old Ajax "White Tornado." The appropriate
response to "Phantoms" is a long, loud "Boooooo!".

Author
Neal Richardson
Principal Cast:  Peter O'Toole, Rose McGowan, Jennifer Going, Ben Affleck,
Liev Scribner
I'll be the first to admit it.  I think Dean Koontz is a fabulous writer.
But translating the work to the screen will never measure up to a
novel's standard.  That said, this is the best adaptation of a Koontz
novel that has been produced by Hollywood.
The plot, in brief, is fairly simple.  Two sisters come home to a small
mountain town only to find that it's deserted.  A few surviving deputies
are left, but the force that took the town is still there.  And it starts
to toy with them.  The military gets called in and is wiped out and only
an old man with an unusual theory has any idea as to what is going on.
Major subplots get thrown out but most of the book's spirit remains
intact, despite major cuts to the story.  The action gets streamlined as
does the character development.  The suspense, however, remains intact.
There's a marvelous use of sound to put people on edge.  
Joe Chapelle does a good job with the material.  Confronting the monster
unfolds a lot like John Carpenter's "The Thing."  In fact there are shots
that are obvious homage's to that scarefest.  That's perfectly fine.  
I haven't had much experience with the movie horror genre and I imagine
that more experienced critics have ripped this movie apart with some of
its cliches.  I got my entertainment.
Koontz has said that he won't allow anymore of his books to be made into
movies unless he's writing the screenplay and producing in some fashion.
If this is an indication of the work that gets produced, then I'm looking
forward to more.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Peter O'Toole; Rose McGowan; Joanna Going & Ben Affleck
Phantoms is a very pleasant surprise. I have to admit that I wasn't really
expecting very much from this horror film based on the Dean Koontz story.
Two sisters return to a small northwest town to find it apparently deserted.
Although they soon discover that the town isn't deserted but that everyone
has been killed by someone or something. They also realize that the same
thing that killed everyone has also trashed the engine in their car so that
they are unable to leave the town. It turns out that not everyone is dead,
and the two sisters are joined by a few members of the local sheriff's
department who were out on a call when the carnage ensued, and avoided being
killed. Unfortunately, whatever killed the rest of the town intends to make
sure that they don't stay alive very long. I can't say a whole lot about the
thing doing the killing in this film without giving too much away, so lets
just say the audience is kept guessing throughout most of the film.
While Phantoms was better than expected, I wasn't really expecting a whole
lot. The movie was not incredibly scary, but it was fun to watch. The cast
was the usual assortment of attractive young actors including some names
that you may actually be familiar with. These include Liev Shreiber and Rose
McGowan (both were in Scream) and Joanna Going who isn't a big name yet, but
my money says she will be. Rounding out the cast was Ben Affleck who made
this film before going on to win an Academy Award for Good Will Hunting. All
gave pretty good performances, at least as good as you can expect from a
horror film. Although I won't knock the writing too much since it was penned
by horror master Dean Koontz who knows a good scare when he sees one. The
production values are high and the special effects are stylish, if not
overly spectacular.
The idea behind phantoms is a good one, and it comes across on the screen
fairly well. Phantoms is a good choice for a little scare, just don't rent
it expecting it to become you new favorite movie.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Dimension)
Directed by     Joe Chappelle
Written by      Dean Koontz, based on his book
Cast            Peter O'Toole, Joanna Going, Rose McGowan, Ben Affleck,
                Liev Schreiber, Clifton Powell
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for violence and profanity)
Running Time    95 minutes
Reviewed at     The Imperial, Cary, NC (21JAN98)
    PHANTOMS is the new Dean Koontz crap-fest, about a remote Colorado
town where some 700 people have disappeared, save for a few things left
behind:  a body here, a body part there, a conspicuous pile of
"undigestibles" (buttons, watches, pacemakers, etc.) over in the corner.
Two sisters (Joanna Going and Rose McGowan) make the grim discovery,
after arriving in the empty town.  One's a doctor, so she suspects an
epidemic and they both begin poking around, instead of immediately
heading for the hills.  (They'd have to hoof it, though, as neither
theirs nor any other car around will start.) As night falls, they're
joined by the local law (Ben Affleck presiding) and they continue to
poke around, though now accompanied by periodic gunfire.  (They shoot at
stuff.) Later that evening, they're joined by a tabloid-employed, Army-
escorted expert on mass disappearances who happens to look exactly like
Peter O'Toole.  And they continue to poke around.  And more gunfire
happens.  And, soon, we begin to learn exactly who or what is menacing
the town and causing these actors to take themselves so seriously.
    Despite dim dialogue and even lousier lighting, the first half of
PHANTOMS *does* pull off a few well-wrought frights.  (My neck hairs
might've risen to the occasion, had I not been walking to and fro,
asking the management of the Cary Imperial about an audio problem that,
to these ears, sounded like a speaker with a blood- soaked blanket
thrown over it.) Things get scary in a different way in the second hour,
with cruddy CGI effects and increasingly insipid plotting.  (I liked the
sheriff's snap conclusions about the invading menace.  He's seen his
share of "Star Trek" episodes.) You'll yawn, you'll wince, but if you
walk out early, you'll miss Liev Schreiber's return.  (He first appears
as an intense deputy.  In later scenes, he's back, hamming it up as "one
of them.") Oh, and at the end, there *is* one huge, helluva hearty laugh
to be had, at O'Toole, standing in the snow and delivering a monologue
to... an open manhole.  Friends, now *that's* entertainment.  Directed
by Joe Chappelle (HALLOWEEN 6) and scripted by Koontz, from his 1983
novel.  (Rated "R"/95 min.)

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Dean Koontz and Tegan West, from a novel by Dean Koontz
Starring: Rose McGowan, Joanna Going, Ben Affleck, Peter O'Toole
Ingredients: 
Giant blob creature, four people trapped in a small mountain town
Synopsis: 
A giant ancient petroleum-based blob creature who thinks of itself as
Satan has killed a small town of 400 people, but it has left four people
alive: a sheriff (Ben Affleck),  a doctor and her sister (Rose McGowan,
Joanna Going), and a scientist (Peter O'Toole). Because the blob thinks
that it is Satan, it wants the four survivors alive to 'spread its
gospel.' Instead, the four people intelligently try to figure out a way
to kill the thing. Will they succeed?
Opinion: 
The movie starts out pretty well. A lady doctor and her sister are
driving their vehicle in the sunny mountains. They pass by a sign that
says, 'Snowfield, 4 miles.' Then the creepy music sets in. No sooner do
the sisters reach the town than they discover (gasp!) that everyone in
town is dead. In a better movie they might find themselves in a battle
for survival against an evil creature. But in this movie the evil
creature has already determined it wants the heroes to live, so there is
not much chance of the women ever being in danger. That's where the
movie begins to lose suspense; the audience already knows the girls can
never get hurt. The other thing is, since the blob has already killed
everyone in town in the first minute of the movie, there is not much for
it to do the rest of the movie but sit around and wait for people to
spread its 'gospel.' This doesn't make for an exciting or believable
movie. There are a couple of scenes were tentacles jump out of dead
people, and giant butterfly attacks the police, but it doesn't help the
movie gain any momentum.

Author
Jon Popick
I thought that I could go a bit further into the New Year (or at least
further into January) before I saw a film worse than Firestorm.  Boy,
was I ever wrong.
Now, I've read about 10 or 12 Dean Koontz books, but I don't think that
Phantoms was one of them.  The reason for my uncertainty is that most of
his work is pretty much the same.  I stopped reading Koontz for that
very reason.  He's Stephen King light.  And to make things more
frightening, the films made from his stories are turning out to be worse
than King's adaptations.
Phantoms is set in a small Colorado town where Jenny, the local doctor
(Joanna Going) has taken Lisa, her younger sister (Rose McGowan) home so
she could spend some quality time away from her alcoholic mother.
Driving into town, they notice that things seem very quiet.  Too quiet,
in fact.
To make matter worse, Jenny's housekeeper is all dead when they get
home.  The phone is dead and the car won't start, so Jenny and Lisa hoof
it to the police station, where they find (gasp) everyone dead.  Sound
creepy yet?  Didn't think so.
Eventually, some other cops (Ben Affleck and Liev Schreiber) come by
totowell, apparently just to read some really bad lines.  If they
wanted to make things REALLY scary, they would have taken a tape measure
to Schreiber's head.  That is one huge melon.  It's bigger than Billy
Corgan's and nearly as big as Rosie O'Donnell's.
The scenes that are supposed to be scary are just sad.  They are cut
together very poorly and lit even worse.  You can't really tell what's
happening or whom it's happening to.  That's why I spent most of the
movie imagining what McGowan (Scream and The Doom Generation) would look
like riding naked on my Kenmore vacuum cleaner.
By the time the evil expert Timothy Flyte (Peter O'Toole) shows up, I
was completely gone mentally.  So were about 15 people who got up and
left during my screening.  They were the lucky ones and I cursed them as
I drove home.
Nobody in the theater jumped, screamed or even inhaled suddenly.  It was
almost like they pumped carbon monoxide into the theater to quell the
teaming masses.  They didn't need to.  Phantoms is just plain bad
filmmaking.

Author
Nick Amado
Though "Phantoms", a current horror, sci-fi release, has nothing to do 
with th 1987 comedy "Planes Trains and Automobiles", I am struck with a 
line from the latter that really sums everything up. When Steve Martin is 
berating John Candy, he says, "Oh, and when you're telling these stories, 
here's an idea....have a point! It makes it so much more interesting for 
the listener!" Apparently, Mr. Koontz wasn't listening.
"Phantoms" spends its first thiry minutes confusing the hell out of the 
viewer, making us ask, "what could possibly be responsible for all this 
grisly death?". Perhaps if anyone in Hollywood was creative enough to 
create a reasonable answer to that question, then this might be a 
worthwhile film, but deep inside, we know no one is good enough to write 
themselves out of this one. "Phantoms" has so many problems, plot holes, 
and inconsistencies that it is hard to know where to start. So I'll start 
with the lame characters. Two sisters (Rose McGowan and Joanna Going) 
wander into this town to find everyone mysteriously dead. The entire town 
has been wiped out, and yet they bump into the sheriff and two officers. 
I won't even ask why they're ok. They explore this town, becoming 
increasingly creeped out and realize that bodies are disappearing, 
strange noises are emenating from the phone, (why? No clue.) and nasty 
animals lurk outside, waiting to suck the life out of you. In 
desperation, Sheriff Affleck makes a radio call for help but the receiver 
says that they can't hear the message. Funny, then, how some mysterious 
task force shows up to this dinky town in their white ultra-protecto 
suits to solve the problem. Why these sisters have anything to do with 
the story is beyond me. They never contribute. Affleck is a former FBI 
agent who's haunted past is his ONLY reason for being a part of this 
story, and when Peter O'Toole comes in, you just know that no one in 
Hollywood remembers that this man is a professional and deserves better 
scripts. 
Of course, this is a mysterious being from the depths of the Earth's 
core, and there is one man who has studied it extensively. Apparently, he 
was laughed at by his colleagues, and now he is a tabloid writer. This 
underground superspeicies knows who he is and wants him to come 
investigate, so he shows up in his own white ultra-protecto suit. (The 
suits, by the way, don't provide any protection, but at this point, who 
cares?) This tabloid writer turned Earth Savior is played by Peter 
O'Toole. O'Toole fills in the gang that this is a creature that feeds off 
the life and intelligence of the humans it sucks down. It has been around 
since the begining of time, "this thing was responsible for the end of 
the dinosaurs!" he proclaims. It seems this super creature has consumed 
someone who has seen "Alien" and got the idea that popping out of corpses 
mouths and devouring other people is a cool monster move.
Why this creature is here, why it choses this tiny town to start it's 
Earth-conquering quest, why it has managed to elude the history books and 
scientists (EXCEPT for Mr. O'Toole), why one character keeps popping up 
as a living corpse controlled by part of this creature,  and why Koontz 
thought this would be an interesting film is beyond me. NONE of these 
questions are answered at any time. Director Joe Chappelle did a supreme 
job of showcasing his amaturish director devices. He builds tension with 
slow movements towards some door, has the music heighten, the close up on 
the character's face, the shot of the hand about to open the door and 
"bam!"...nothing there, but oooh. It was scary for a sec. When the girls 
first reach the town and find dead people, they think it is a disease. 
Reasonable at this point, so when one of them (a doctor) tells the other 
to try and use the phone, she grabs a tissue for her sister to use. We 
all know that kleenex will stop nasty airborne viruses from infecting us 
when we use the telephone.
Everyone who made this film owes themselves an apology. And if "Phantoms" 
doesn't make my year's worst list next January, then we are in for a real 
bad year in the theaters.
Zero out of four stars
Copyright (C) 1998 Nick Amado

Author
Alex Ioshpe
What starts as a frightening and stimulating psychological horror film, soon
turns into a primitive and brainless monster flick. And although it presents
some interesting ideas and some chills, it remains a waste of money and
talent.
Dr. Jennifer Pailey (Going) arrives home with her teenage sister Lisa
(McGowan) only to find the 400 residents of Snowfield Colorado missing or
dead. Most seem to have died or disappeared in the middle of their daily
activities with no sign that they knew what fate was about to strike.
Unnerved already, the pair are dismayed to find that the phone lines have
been cut and that their jeep which had been working a few minutes earlier
now refuses to start. Setting out on foot, they soon find three cops who
have just returned to the town and are now also trapped. Sheriff Bryce
Hammond (Affleck) with the help of two deputies including the slightly
unhinged Ben Wargle (Schreiber) has decided to investigate the cause of the
disappearances before calling in help. What they find defies explanation and
they quickly decide to make that call. But even with the help of two armored
transports filled with scientists, soldiers and an expert scientist who has
studied ancient mass disappearances (O'Toole ), they can not stop the
unstoppable and unknown force that has been unleashed. It is at this point
that the film takes an unfortunate veer away from psychological horror into
the less threatening monster movie genre.
I loved the way the first part of the film was structured. It began with a
surprising and shocking prologue and a chill that refused to leave me for
almost an hour. I loved the way the story was built, hinting on
extraterrestrial activities, forcing the viewer to look at the sky, while
the actual danger comes from the unknown depths of our planet. There are
some interesting ideas here. Like what it means to be a god. I got scared
and shocked and intrigued, but then...came the finale..I must admit that
after such an engaging and terrifying prologue you are all wired up and you
wait in anticipation for the resolution and explanation of these strange and
bizarre events. And when it finally comes, it's so disappointing and
primitive, that all you want to do is to turn off your VCR. An animal that
gets intelligence, memories and knowledge through eating flesh and can take
any form and shape of its devoured pray. That's an interesting explanation!
In comparison to this scientific discovery, "Godzilla" is a worthy Nobel
price winner.
The fact that you get to see Peter O'Toole and Ben Affleck play undeveloped
and immature characters in small, pale parts only makes things worse. The
"Scream"-veterans Going and McGowan seem more at home and, as you probably
can guess, their performances are not going to make it to the Oscar night.
The film manages to gradually build up suspense and horror, but falls right
on its face, when it is at its best. It is a strange combination of a
successful horror film and a stupid cliche-ridden monster story. In the end
it's nothing more than a mediocre horror flick, not worthy of your special
attention.

Author
Matt Williams
Why is it that Hollywood has such a hard time adapting the works of
best-selling horror authors to the screen?  Witness the countless failed
atempts at adapting Stephen King's horror novels.  Not a one (excepting
maybe Misery and The Shining) has been worth a dime.  Enter the works of
Dean Koontz. Hollywood already made a botch of his novel Hideaway. Now,
the curse strikes again with Phantoms.
Dr. Jenny Pailey (Joanna Going) is returning to her small hometown of
Snowfield, Colorado, bringing her sister Lisa (Rose McGowan) back from
L.A.  But when the two sisters arrive, they find the small town
completely deserted...almost.  They begin to discover bodies, but are
clueless as to what might have caused such widespread fatality. Could it
be disease?  A chemical agent?  Radiation?  An amazingly efficient
lunatic?  Or something else . . .
The girls are not alone long.  Soon, they are joined by the county
sheriff, Bryce Hammond (Ben Affleck), and a couple of his deputies
(including Liev Schreiber), and later by some anti-terrorism experts,
and, of all things, a tabloid writer (Peter O'Toole), who may truly have
an idea of what's going on. The purpose of all these newcomers seems
purely to provide the movie with more bodies to kill without having to
eviscerate its leads.
The title of the film is never explicitly explained, yet there are
several options to pick from:  the phantoms could be of the dead
inhabitants of the town (who have a mysterious knack of haunting the
living), or perhaps it could apply to the ultimate source of all the
death. But, luckily, the ludicrous (and grammatically incorrect) line
used so prominently in the advertising campaign ("Throughout history
there have been unexplained mass disappearances...scientists call this
phenomenon 'phantoms'.") is nowhere to be found in the movie.
Of the actors that actually have a character to play, most of them do a
good job. Affleck and Going are appealing, but O'Toole seems to be
slumming it up a bit here. Of the recognizable characters, only Liev
Schreiber hits the wrong note, aiming his performance way over the top
in a role that could have been much subtler.
There are some rather effective moments in the film.  The opening
scenes, when the girls begin to explore the apparently deserted town,
unsure of what is going on. Unfortunately the mystery is dispelled all
too quickly, and we're left with only one unknown for the film to solve:
who will die before the end credits roll. However, with the constant
influx of new generic characters, rest assured that it will be no one
worth caring for. Some cleverer writing could have cured this problem,
enhancing both the mystery and the overall film.
Another noteworthy sequence involves Affleck and a dog that may or may
not be what it seems. By this point, the movie has lost most of its
plausiblity, but it goes to show that a good setup and proper pacing can
create suspense out of thin air.
However, ultimately the movie fails.  The majority of its action seems
to be of the "generic character does something stupid and dies"
variety.  The ultimate source of the mystery in the film, when it
finally is revealed, is disappointing...as is the unneccessary hook for
a sequel.
There was a spark of an idea in Phantoms, but that spark fizzles early,
leaving a movie as vacant and abandoned as the town of Snowfield,
Colorado.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 500 upcoming releases

Author
David Nusair
Starring Ben Affleck, Joanna Going, Rose McGowan, Liev Schrieber
"Phantoms" is based on a novel by Dean Koontz, one of my favorite authors.
In fact, I read the book about the same time I heard a movie was going to
be made, and loved it.  It was with this knowledge that I went into
"Phantoms" expecting a kick-ass horror flick.  Unfortunately, I was very
disappointed.
The movie isn't all that dissimiliar from the book, which isn't surprising
considering Koontz also wrote the screenplay.  The premise is simple:  A
young doctor and her sister enter the small town of Snowfield only to
discover that the entire population is either dead or missing.  With the
help of a few surviving police officers, they set out to discover what
happened to the town.  Peter O'Toole shows up a bit later to assist our
protagonists, as he is a reporter who may or may not know what it is that
they're dealing with.
You would think that a movie with a plot as relatively simple as that
would be a fast-paced horror/mystery.  But, with a director like Joe
Chappelle, you'd be wrong.  Chappelle, who's last film was "Halloween 6"
(arguably the worst of the series), hasn't the faintest idea how to direct
a full-length motion picture.  He ruins nearly every scene with multiple
point-of-view shots, super-fast editing, and shoddy camerawork.  He seems
to be under the false impression that fast editing and camera movements
equals a fast-pace.  All that does is disorient the viewer and confuse the
storyline.  Perhaps under the direction of a more experience director,
"Phantoms" would have been the excellent film I had hoped for.
The fault certainly doesn't lie with Koontz, who has crafted a superb
companion piece to his excellent novel.  Nor does it lie with the young
cast who attempt to make the best out of a bad situation.  Well, everyone
except Affleck, who seems rather out of place as the tough-as-nails
sheriff.  Affleck is an excellent actor (see "Good Will Hunting" for
proof), but, as Dirty Harry might say, "a man's got to know his
limitations". 
"Phantoms" had the potential to be a great horror film, but unfortunately,
it was saddled with a truly incompetent director.  Let's hope that the
next Koontz novel to make it to the big screen isn't helmed by a
third-rate, wannabe-auteur with delusions of grandeur.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     If you are going to take a long novel and adapt it for the screen,
you are essentially cutting it to the length of a novelette.  Something
has to go.  It must have been a painful task for Dean Koontz to cut
down the scope of his novel.  He had to make a lot of choices as to
what would play to a horror film audience.  I remember consciously
thinking when I read the novel PHANTOMS that I would have been willing
to go through everything in the novel up to this point, all the horror,
if I could just be in on this one conversation between a human and...
well... something that was definitely a long way beyond human.  That
moment--chapters long in the book--either did not make it to the film
or passes by so quickly that it is hardly noticeable.  The moments when
something violent or repulsive is happening seem to go on forever, but
my little moment with its sense of wonder seems to have been pushed
aside.  Shame on you, Mr. Koontz, for not recognizing what was really
unique powerful about your own novel.  Instead we have one more horror
film with grisly gore and in-your-face special effects.  On the other
hand, at least it is played seriously.  This is all material that could
have been played for laughs and perhaps the film's greatest strength is
that it was not  If anyone is going to treat Koontz's ideas seriously,
it is going to be Koontz.
     Dr. Jennifer Pailey (played by Joanna Going) lives in the high
Colorado town of Snowfield.  She brings her sister Lisa (Rose McGowan)
to the town for a visit and to get her away from the corrupting
influence of life in Los Angeles.  She does not imagine that what she
is bringing Lisa to is far worse than what she is leaving. Their first
discovery on arriving is that Jenny's landlady is lying dead on the
floor of her home, her skin having turned strange colors.  It is quite
a shock, and it is only the first.  When they go to report it to the
police, the officer on duty is dead with identical symptoms.  Most of
the town is empty and those that are still there are dead.  This
explains why the streets seem so quiet.  As in ANDROMEDA STRAIN they
find that whenever it happened, whatever "it" was, some people died
immediately and some went slowly insane. Finally after wandering the
museum of horror that had been Snowfield, they find three living
people, the sheriff (played by Ben Affleck) and his two deputies, also
returning from out of town.  As they investigate they find the
telephones will connect them only with a mumbling presence, but
whatever killed the town is still present and still a danger.  More
exploration turns up no new survivors, but a cryptic message "Timothy
Flyte the Ancient Enemy."  It is on this clue that the whole
understanding of the nature of the menace will hinge.  Eventually the
military is informed of what has happened and they enter the town to
find out what has happened.  The Army brings in a scientist (Peter
O'Toole) with an oddball theory as to what happened to Snowfield, tying
it into previously unexplained historical incidents.
     The cast is of lesser-known actors, all but Ben Affleck and, of
course, Peter O'Toole.  Frankly, great actors are not really needed
here, though the script calls for some, the doctor and the sheriff,
perhaps to be a little older than the very young actors featured in
this film.  Under the direction Joe Chappelle the principles give their
lines but add little to the film beyond acting menaced.  There is only
one actor who has to go beyond that.  Peter O'Toole has to act the role
of a latter-day Dr. Van Helsing, a joke in the scientific community but
with the spark of an idea that might explain a lot of history.  He has
to walk a gentle tightrope between being wise and being a little
unstrung.  That is the same tightrope that O'Toole had to walk in
LAWRENCE OF ARABIA, and in spite of my initial skepticism on seeing him
in the role, perhaps he was just what it needed.
     PHANTOMS runs its good ideas past the viewer much too fast, but at
least they are there.  It feels like a very much scaled down version of
the novel.  I give it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and high +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.
     Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler...Spoiler.. .
     What is nicely done in the film but far better in the book is how
the theories of the nature of the enemy change in the course of the
book.  It starts seeming like some sort of disease, a la THE ANDROMEDA
STRAIN.  Then it appears more malevolent and seems like some sort of
shape-changer.  Then the characters realize they are in contact with,
and talking to, the force of evil going back to the beginning of time.
They are essentially in conversation with the Devil and it is affably
talking to them.  Think of what an opportunity that would be.  The film
sort of flashes over it, but what if you really could discuss history
with the force behind all evil.  Suppose you could discuss history with
a being that has been here since the beginnings of time, marshaling the
most powerful side in the battle between good and evil.  What would you
ask first?  I mean this would be better than getting Saddam Hussein on
MEET THE PRESS.  Finally the concept transforms again to come up with a
science fictional explanation for the Devil through the ages and even
that concept is intriguing.  It is much muted in this adaptation, but
even in the film some intriguing possibilities come through.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    When Jennifer and Lisa Pailey (Joanna Going and Rose McGowan) return
home to the quiet little town of Snowfield, Colorado, they find the maid
dead on the floor. This happens two minutes into the film. Scared, the
two women trek around town, finding that the streets are empty and the
air silent. Later, they find severed heads, and by this time it is
crystal clear that there is a problem. Luckily, they meet up with
Sheriff Bryce Hammond (Ben Affleck) and two of his underlings (one of
whom is Liev Schreiber, doing his best to act all nervous and crazy and
stuff).
    While searching through a hotel because of strange music emanating
through the building, they find a message written with lipstick on a
mirror (in a locked room with no windows, one of the characters notes).
The message refers to a certain Dr. Timothy Flyte. With no idea as to
what on earth is going on, Hammond calls for help, mentioning the
lipstick message in his call. The help shows up with Dr. Flyte (played
by Peter O'Toole) to solve the problem.
    See, it turns out that there is a big worm that looks like
solidified oil; conveniently, it thinks it's Satan. This is a Learning
Worm, so it is very smart. I'll leave the rest of the shocking plot
developments for you to discover for yourselves.
    Although I describe with utmost sarcasm the way Phantoms moves
along, I must admit that these silly little plot details are just about
the best thing about the film (aside from the cast). I think smart oil
is a unique idea for a bad guy, especially in a horror film.
Regrettably, the film is bad. It isn't scary, or suspenseful, or even
particularly well-crafted. The characters are stale and cardboard-like.
Like most of the films that enter this genre, this one has nothing new
to offer.
    The film begins on the wrong foot, jumping too quickly into action.
The two sisters, for example, are given one scene of dialogue before
they're confronted with the problem. I guess it's possible to be
concerned based solely on the fact that they are the good guys, but in a
perfect world I would like to have gotten to know them better before
seeing terrified looks on their faces. The same goes for Hammond,
although we at least learn a juicy bit of his history. The
actors--McGowan, Going, and Affleck--all do what they can with the lack
of depth, but they are defeated nonetheless.
    And it doesn't help that the characters are stupid. Towards the
beginning, they discover the body of a police officer, who has clearly
drawn his gun and fired off three rounds. Regardless of this fact, the
characters still consider the possibility that they are dealing with a
virus. Only O'Toole can project some kind of intelligence, although it
should come as no surprise that he is wasted in this role.
    Phantoms was directed by Joe Chappelle, who doesn't give off the
feeling that he wants to be making this film. Every moment is so
standard that I doubt any particular sequence will leave you feeling
like you've seen something all new and different. This is an alarming
thing to consider, especially when I realize that this is a horror film,
intended to scare and shock me. We've all seen films in which the evil
force can look human and fool our heroes. Here's yet another film that
uses this approach, and nothing new is done with the premise.
    If you just have to go out an see a horror film, then I suppose this
one isn't any worse than the other slop that's playing right now. I
suppose it's moderately fun on a really campy level, especially when we
get to see the big oil creature. When I watch a film like this, I just
have to wonder if it's really getting so hard to scare people. There
isn't a moment in this film that startled the audience with whom I saw
it. It simply fails in its prime directive.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Peter O'Toole, Joanna Going, Rose McGowan, Ben Affleck, 
      Liev Schreiber, Clifton Powell
Director: Joe Chappelle
Producers: Joel Soisson, Michael Leahy, Robert Pringle, Steve Lane
Screenplay: Dean Koontz based on his book
Cinematography: Richard Clabaugh 
Music: David Williams
U.S. Distributor: Dimension Films
     Snowfield, Colorado.  In the summer, it has a population of 4000.  
In the winter, it has a population of 400.  On this day, it has a 
population of 4.  So begins Dean Koontz's PHANTOMS, a horror film that 
starts out creepy but ends up disjointed and borderline-incoherent.  
It's a shame that the final product isn't a little better packaged 
because, unlike many lame entries into the genre, this one actually 
contains a few interesting, philosophically titillating ideas.  (For 
example, what does it really mean to be a god?)  Sadly, they're not 
presented effectively.  It's the same old story:  a promising premise, 
poorly realized.
     To call PHANTOMS dissatisfying is to oversimplify the problem.  A 
better term is frustrating, because you have the sense that there's so 
much more to the story than what shows up on screen.  Of course, that's 
often the problem with adapting a novel, even when the screenwriter and 
the book's author are the same.  The movie has such a sketchy, rushed 
feel that it's almost like reading the outline of a story rather than 
the story itself.  The plot flashes by at breakneck speed and there's 
little or no time for character development.  What there is time for, 
however, are the obligatory scare tactics necessary to make the audience 
jump at shadows.
     As PHANTOMS opens, Dr. Jennifer Pailey (Joanna Going) is bringing 
her teenage sister, Lisa (Rose McGowan) home with her to the sleepy town 
of Snowfield to give the younger woman a chance to get away from the 
hustle and bustle of Los Angeles.  The Snowfield that Jennifer returns 
to is not the one she recently left, however.  No one is around, except 
Sheriff Bryce Hammond (Ben Affleck) and two of his deputies.  There are 
a few dead bodies, severed hands, and decapitated corpses, but most of 
the town's residents have vanished.  Then, when one of Bryce's officers 
is killed and the other one (Liev Schreiber) appears on the verge of a 
nervous breakdown, the four survivors' investigations lead to a 
terrifying conclusion.  Meanwhile, government officials, who are aware 
that something strange is going on in Snowfield, call on the services of 
Dr. Timothy Flyte (Peter O'Toole), a university professor-turned-tabloid 
writer with experience in paranormal matters.  Flyte identifies the 
creature in Snowfield as "The Ancient Enemy", a creature not from outer 
space, but which once resided deep within the Earth's crust, and now, 
convinced that it is a god, it has emerged to begin its reign of terror.
     While veteran actor Peter O'Toole brings an air of refinement and 
respectability to the role of the slightly nutty professor, this part 
isn't going to earn him a seventh Academy Award nomination.  Ben 
Affleck, who was likable in CHASING AMY and solid in GOOD WILL HUNTING, 
is rather lifeless here.  Joanna Going (INVENTING THE ABBOTTS) and Rose 
McGowan (SCREAM) are a couple of pretty faces with little else to do 
beyond speaking hackneyed dialogue.  Only Liev Schreiber (SCREAM 2) gets 
a chance to cut loose with an uninhibited and over-the-top performance.
     Working from Koontz's script, director Joe Chappelle (who survived 
having helmed one of the worst films of 1996, HALLOWEEN: THE CURSE OF 
MICHAEL MYERS) manages to create several eerie sequences.  The early 
part of the film, with Jenny and Lisa wending their way through what has 
become a ghost town, has a claustrophobic feel to it.  Eventually, 
however, the tension drains away as the somewhat-burdensome plot kicks 
into high gear and too much time is spent on exposition instead of 
character development and atmosphere.  The second half of PHANTOMS, 
despite being reasonably fast-paced, isn't all that interesting.  
     Koontz aficionados assure me that the novel is great.  Never having 
read PHANTOMS, I'll take their word for it.  The movie, however, isn't 
anything special.  What ends up on screen is a pastiche of monster movie 
clichés with few genuine scares, sequences that could have been lifted 
from any one of the ALIEN movies, and an effects creature that's 
anything but special.  All this adds up to is yet another "high concept" 
horror movie that isn't noticeably better than its numerous, "low 
concept" counterparts.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
