Title
Review for Voleurs, Les (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
France, 1996
U.S. Release Date: varies (limited)
Running Length: 1:57
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, nudity, profanity, violence, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Catherine Deneuve, Daniel Auteuil, Laurence Cote, Fabienne Babe,
      Didier Bezace, Julien Riviere
Director: Andre Techine
Producer: Alain Sarde
Screenplay: Michel Alexandre, Pascal Bonitzer, Gilles Taurand,
      Andre Techine
Cinematography: Jeanne Lapoirie
Music: Philippe Sarde
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     THIEVES is Andre Techine's followup to his unexpectedly successful
1995 art-house entry, WILD REEDS.  In fact, Techine drew so much
interest for his installment of the French TV series, ALL THE BOYS AND
GIRLS OF THE WORLD, that Filmopolis Pictures rushed out and acquired the
distribution rights to Techine's previous film, MA SAISON PREFEREE. 
Now, the acclaimed director whose movies were once rarely seen beyond
New York's Walter Reade Theater is reaching increasingly larger and more
enthusiastic audiences.
     Actually, in the wake of MA SAISON PREFEREE and WILD REEDS, THIEVES
represents a slight step down.  Emphasis, however, on slight.  The film
features riveting performances by French icons Catherine Deneuve and
Daniel Auteuil as two points of a romantic triangle.  The third
component is essayed by the sexy Laurence Cote, who, despite ten years
of French screen credits, is a virtual newcomer to U.S. viewers.  The
acting, a hallmark of Techine's films, has never been stronger than in
THIEVES.
     Auteuil plays Alex, a French cop with a chip on his shoulder and a
penchant for keeping his emotions under lock and key.  Auteuil, who does
this kind of role so well (check out UN COUER EN HIVER for an example),
is perfectly cast, and never for the briefest of moments does his
portrayal ring false.  Deneuve, the ageless star who is returning
opposite Auteuil (the two played brother and sister in MA SAISON
PREFEREE), is superlative as Marie, the fragile philosophy professor who
falls in love often and easily.  On the other hand, although Cote gives
a strong performance, her character, Juliette, is more of a catalyst
than a three-dimensional individual.  Juliette's presence remains
enigmatic and sketchily drawn, and is all-but-forgotten during the
movie's final third.
     The event that jump-starts THIEVES is the murder of Alex's criminal
brother, Ivan (Didier Bezace), who was the head of a car-stealing ring. 
Juliette is somehow mixed up in the ring, but the situation is
complicated because she's sleeping with Alex, who has been trying to
gather enough evidence to put his brother behind bars.  Marie,
Juliette's other lover, becomes involved in the investigation when
Juliette disappears and Alex approaches her to see whether she has been
in touch with the young woman.  Through a series of flashbacks presented
from four different perspectives (Marie's, Juliette's, Alex's, and that
of Alex's adolescent nephew, Justin), Techine develops both plot and
characters.
     The best parts of THIEVES are the beginning and end, which
concentrate on Alex and Marie, both as they interact with Juliette and
with each other.  The middle section of the film is somewhat murky, and,
with Auteuil and Deneuve largely off-screen, less compelling.  Taking
nothing away from Cote's performance, she doesn't hold our attention the
way her co-stars do, in part because her character doesn't exhibit the
same emotional depth or breadth.  This segment of the movie also
features the most exposition, introducing us to the inner workings of
the thieves' ring.  Compared with the emotional tension choreographed by
Techine when he concentrates on the romantic triangle, this aspect of
THIEVES seems mundane. 
     THIEVES' payoff occurs during the last third, when Alex and Marie,
ostensibly searching for Juliette, become entwined in each others'
lives.  This isn't love, at least not in the conventional sense, but
something that is, paradoxically, less profound and more complex.  As
the two of them try to establish a sense of trust, the normally-open
Marie finds herself shutting down while the emotionally-closeted Alex
discovers, much to his surprise, that he is capable of developing
feelings for a woman whom he initially treats with contempt. 
Ultimately, the film's anchor is Alex, whose highest hope for life is
not to feel pain, who never laughs and sees evil everywhere, and whose
personality alters with brilliant-but-unmistakable subtlety.
     Techine's development of Alex and Marie is masterful; Auteuil and
Deneuve keep our attention riveted to the screen whenever they're on. 
And, while the director doesn't succeed in plumbing the emotional depths
reached by MA SAISON PREFEREE, there are elements of THIEVES that touch
us nearly as forcefully -- those moments just aren't as plentiful.  So,
although THIEVES is strong and keenly-insightful, it is the least
imposing of Techine's trio of U.S. releases.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "It was a bad dream and nothing else," says Alex.  Alex is a cop
and the lead in the mystery THIEVES (LES VOLEURS) by director Andre
Techine (THE WILD REEDS and MY FAVORITE SEASON).  Although Alex's quote
has nothing to do with the mystery, it sums up my thoughts about the
film.
     The picture is well acted, but the script by the committee of
Michel Alexandre, Pascal Bonitzer, Gilles Taurand, and Andre Techine is
pointlessly obtuse.  I love mysteries, but this one was little more
than a collection of obscure and fairly unrelated events.  Once the
mystery was solved, my immediate reaction was "so what."  Although the
performances have technical merit, the script does not create
characters worth caring about.
     The film starts with a young boy named Justin (Julien Riviere)
viewing the body of his father Ivan (Didier Bezace).  Justin is told
that his father has been killed in an accident.  Soon the house is
filled with characters who will play parts in the mystery.  The most
interesting performance is given by Laurence Cote as Juliette Fontana.
She is correctly described in the film as a woman with a boyish look.
Ivan's brother, Alex the cop arrives and smells a rat.  He has a recent
newspaper article that makes him suspect his brother did not die in a
car accident.
     The story then skips back in time and works its way forward to
where the film began.  Juliette is a petty thief, a perfume shoplifter
to be exact.  Her brother Jimmy (Benoit Magimel) heists cars.  When
Alex interrogates her, he likes her looks.  (She sports almost nothing
but micro-miniskirts in the film.)  Soon they will begin a series of
trysts at hotels all over the city.  She refuses to do it at his place
since he is a cop.  Alex finds out that she is also having a fling with
her professor Marie Leblanc (Catherine Deneuve).
     Beyond that I cannot say much more without giving away the
mystery.  Since there is precious little else to enjoy in the film, I
do not want to reveal anything.  I hope you are not as disappointed as
I was when you find out the answer.  After the natural conclusion of
the film, there is a part labeled "Epilogue" that is the least
interesting part and seems to last forever.
     Although I found the pacing too slow and the cinematography
(Jeanne Lapoirie) too dark, the show does have an least one tidbit of
useful advice.  "Luxury cars are dead," advises Jimmy.  "The future is
in trucks."  Maybe you can save money on your new BMW and skip that
alarm system, the thieves think your mode of transportation is passe.
     THIEVES runs 1:57.  It is in French with English subtitles.  The
film is rated R for profanity, violence, nudity, and explicit sex.  The
show would be okay for teenagers if they are quite mature.  I was both
bored and disappointed by the film so I cannot recommend it.  I give
the picture ** for the acting.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Vincent Merlaud
directed by Andre Techine, written by Pascal Bonitzer and AT
with Catherine Deneuve, Daniel Auteuil, Laurence Cote, Didier Bezace,
Benoit Magimel, Fabienne Babe and Ivan Desny.
Back in 1994 the worldwide triumph of the autobiographical Les Roseaux
Sauvages (Wild Reeds) kept Andre Techine busy collecting awards, delaying
the production of his next feature, originally to be entitled L'Enfant De
La Nuit.
To make a long story short: a Lyons police lieutenant (DA) investigates
the murder of his crime-organizer--brother, which happens to be connected
to large-scale car thieves; in the process, he ends up having an affair
with his deceased brother's girlfriend, who herself sleeps with her
philosophy teacher (CD, definitely a woman). The story is told within
flash-backs, using different off-voices, which should please every admirer
of the cinema of Mankiewicz and Scorsese.
As usual, Techine deals with his favorite themes: fraternal hatred,
brother-sister relationships, rituals of provincial life, the opposition
of town and mountain. But this time the director leaves his beloved
Southwest -- the action taking place in the Lyons neighborhood --,
abandoning for a while his early story-telling technique, builds his most
complex and fascinating story yet, which however includes traditional
aspects of film noir and melodrama. The climax consists in a highly
efficient depiction of car-theft gone awry, which most of those currently
directing in Hollywood would do well to study.
The events portrayed in this film sometimes seem to be a mixture of
ancient tragedies, along with transsexual brotherly fights, seen with
psychological distanciation. Yet this is Techine's most vital film, thanks
to a magnificient cast. For many years now, the present reviewer has been
claiming that Daniel Auteuil is the best French actor of his generation,
and no one will deny the performance he delivers here is outstanding.
Working in harsh conditions -- "We close down at 6PM. After that it's Fort
Apache here." -- his character, the detective, has graphic sex with his
brother's girlfriend. I don't know many movie stars with the guts to shoot
a frontal sodomy scene; Auteuil's acting here is Actors' Studio worth. The
relative newcomer Laurence Cote, formerly known by Rivette fans only, is
also remarkable, tied between her sex affairs with both Deneuve and
Auteuil, and her love for her brother. Her bath scene with Deneuve has to
be included in every lesbian film anthology. And in a supporting part,
Deneuve gives her most human performance in years, which reminded me of
the character of Madame Juve in Truffaut's La Femme d'a Cote. To all
Deneuve fans: she's extravagantly breathtaking in Ruisz's forthcoming
Genealogies d'un Crime.
I'll be expecting Techine's next picture, which he currently shoots with
oscar-winner Juliette Binoche.
>From 1 to 10 on the scale of Techine's deconstructed eastside dramas: 8
vm

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THIEVES (LES VOLEURS) (France,1996) *** 1/4  Directed by Andre Techine.
Written by Michel Alexandre, Pascal Bonitzer, Gilles Taurand,Andre Techine.
Photography, Jeanne Lapoirie. Editing, Martine Giordano. Set design, Ze
Branco.
Music, Philippe Sarde.Cast:  Catherine Deneuve (Marie Leblanc), Daniel
Auteuil (Alex), Laurence Cote (Juliette Fontana), Fabienne Babe
(Mireille), Didier Bezace(Ivan), Julien Riviere (Justin),Grandfather (Ivan
Desny),Pierre Perez (Fred),Regis Betoule (Regis), Naguime Bendidi
(Nabil),Didier Raymond(Lucien),Benoit Magimel (Jimmy Fontana), Chiara
Mastroianni (Graduate Student) . A Sony Classics release. In French with
subtitles, 117 min.Rated R (strong sexuality, violence,language)
Andre Techine ("Te" as in "terrible" "chi" as in "Chicago", accent on "ne"
as in "negative") used to be a critic for the "Cahiers du Cinema" in that
magazine's most esoteric period, before he began making films in 1974. His
background may explain some of his characteristics as
director-screenwriter. He is now in his early fifties.
Through 1996, 14 of his films have been released. Since 1993's "My Favorite
Season" (starring Catherine Deneuve and Daniel Auteuil), Techine has been
on a roll, in the USA too, with that movie, "Wild Reeds," and now "Thieves"
(also with Deneuve and Auteuil).
Daniel Auteuil  keeps reminding me of the great Michel Simon (1895-1975) in
one way. Simon was, from his earliest films on, the ugliest star in France.
Among the big, talented names today, Auteuil is up there too, at least in
the category of far-from-pretty. His re-teaming with beautiful Deneuve adds
another Beauty and the Beast to this category,  but not in simple, obvious
ways -- especially since the man's acting easily makes you forget his odd
looks.
In "Les Voleurs" Auteuil shares the limelight with many other characters,
but the main spotlight is on him. I say "main" because spotlights are also
on several others and in an almost bewildering array of combinations and
permutations. These, plus the film's use of many flashbacks and
flashforwards, force the viewer to concentrate without pause on the people,
facts and events on the screen. I would have preferred fewer flashbacks and
a more linear construction.
To tell the plot would take up more space than a reviewer is given.  It
would also disclose what should not be revealed. Not so much in the
whodunit way, though this movie is among a host of other things,also a
thriller, but in all the other components.
"Thieves" takes place in our time, in and around Lyon, France's third
largest city.Alex (Auteuil) is a police detective who never smiles. He
divorced his wife (a cop too) because he did not want to hve children ("who
wants to bring them up in this world?"). He is all-cop, always in contact
with seamy life. His main beat is the "Cites," low-rent public housing
complexes for low-income people (including immigrants) where it is risky
for him to walk the streets at night.
Alex is semi-alienated from his family and has not seen some of them for
four years, others for ten. He lives alone on a small salary. His father, a
mysterious man, is wealthy. Alex has an older brother, Ivan,  a shady type
who runs an industrial-strength operation of expensive stolen cars, and has
just opened  Mic Mac, a nightclub. Ivan has a wife, a 10-year old boy (a
loner), many mistresses. He boasts to Alex about his wealth, disdains
Alex's modest existence.
When Alex does meet member sof the family, it is for unavoidable or
semi-professional reasons. The encounters, even when friendly on the
surface, reveal a great deal of disapproval , antagonism and hostility on
all sides.  .
In  Ivan's entourage are a young man, Jimmy  and his sister Juliette. They
both have criminal records. Jimmy is now the junior partner at the Mic Mac.
There is an odd, kinky relationship between Alex and Juliette, after she is
brought to him for shoplifting. There is also Marie (Deneuve), who teaches
philosophy at the uiversity, is divorced and a grandmother (scrumptious)
who has entered into a passionnate relationship with her student... who
happens to be Juliette. Because of Juliette, the professor and the cop meet
and develop a weird sort of rapport.
Much happens in the movie, with the stress on character exploration and
relationships. Some relationships may strain belief, but do not break it.
The Alex-Ivan setup goes further and deeper than the sometimes
Hollywood-familiar "brothers on opposite sides of the law."  Juliette, a
dysfunctional cipher in many ways, keeps reminding me of Juliette Lewis.
She has had several quirky relationships and there is even a vague hint of
incest. And so it goes.
This is not "entertainment" in the ordinary sense, but while not cheerlful,
the complex, unusual persons and happenings,the tough, psychological,
erotic and "intellectual" aspects are fascinating to follow in this
zig-zagging story. Twice I have seen "Thieves" eight months apart. The
second viewing was even more satisfactory than the first.

Author
David Blatt
        In the opening scenes of Andre Techine's `Thieves' (Les Voleurs), a
young boy, wakened by voices late at night, finds that his father,
Ivan,  has been killed under mysterious circumstances.  The next day,
his father's estranged brother, Alex, arrives for the funeral with his
girlfriend, Juliette. Juliette chooses to stay outside the house,
explaining that she doesn't know the family inside. But when she thinks
no one is watching, the boy, Justin, steals a glimpse of  Juliette
planting a kiss on the forehead of his father's corpse.
The mysteries of Ivan's death and what the boy sees are gradually
revealed in Andre Techine's powerful and enigmatic film. In a narrative
style that shares similarities with Atom Egoyan and Kristof Kieslowski,
Techine weaves together a complex yet easily followed tale that jumps
back and forth between multiple narrators and  time periods
over the course of a year leading up to and following Ivan's death. 
Ultimately, the plot mysteries are resolved, while leaving the much
deeper mysteries about the relationships that unite and divide the
film's central characters.
The film's title refers most literally to Ivan and his circle of
accomplices, who run a petty criminal operation out of Lyons that
involves shipping stolen cars to the Middle East.  One of his young gang
members, Jimmy, has a sister, Juliette (Laurence Cote), a street-tough
girl in her late teens torn pulled three strongly conflicting
influences: her brother and Ivan and their life of crime; her female
lover, Marie (Catherine Deneuve), a professor of philosophy at the
college Jimmy pays for her to attend, and her male lover, Alex (Daniel
Auteuil), a world-weary detective whose beat is the crime-ridden urban
projects of Lyons. Juliette's ambiguous sexuality and gender (she is
repeatedly mistaken for a boy) nicely represent a world where things are
never quite as they appear.
As the story unfolds, we enter into a tightly-weaven web of 
complicated rivalries and alliances.  Alex and Juliette first meet when
she is brought before him on shoplifting charges.  When he discovers her
ties with the brother he has long despised, they begin a sexual
relationship that begins with mutual contempt, but for Alex at least,
slowly and tentatively evolves into something more.  Alex keeps himself
so well proected from intimacy that he insists they remain almost fully
clothed during sex.  She remains so much a part of her upbringing that
she refuses to step foot into a cop's apartment. Yet Alex's attachment
to Juliette grows to the point where he chooses to endanger his career
so at not to risk implicating her in the events surrounding his
brother's death.
Concern for Juliette's well-being creates an equally unlikely bond
between Alex and her other lover, Marie.  Unlike Alex, who comes to
cherish what Juliette offers him yet retains a profoundly cynical and
anti-romantic view of human nature, Marie falls deeply in love with her
young pupil.  Where we are shown Alex and Juliette engaged in rough and
dirty intercourse in a hotel, Marie and Juliette share a sensuous, naked
bath in Marie's apartment. Yet if Juliette and Alex are thwarted by
being on opposite sides of the law, there is an equally great distance
separating Marie's romanticism and Juliette's hard-edged despair. When
Juliette is forced to flee Lyons, a devastated Marie abandons her job
and commits herself to writing Juliette's story.  Eventually, Marie
chooses to leave Alex with the responsibility of preserving Juliette's
legacy.
The Alex-Juliette-Marie triangle is only one of several struggles that
`Thieves' explores. There is also a variation on the classic battle
between two brothers who stand on opposite sides of the thin line of the
law. In this case, it is Alex, the cop, who is
ostracized from a family which sees upholding the law as a crime. When
Alex tries to connect with his young nephew after Ivan's death, the
boy frankly explains that he has no desire to hang out with a policeman.
Despite his father's violent end, it is clear that Justin sides with the
thieves.
`Thieves' is a provocative and rewarding film that steers far away from
simple and contrived messages. Techine demands of the audience that we
decide for ourselves what the film is about and what it has to tell us. 
While depriving us of pat linear storylines and a happy resolution, the
joy of viewing intelligent filmmaking and first-rate performances is
more than enough to make `Thieves' a rare cinematic pleasure.
