Title
Review for Lan feng zheng (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BLUE KITE, THE (Lan feng zheng)(director:Tian Zhuangzhuang;
screenwriter: Xiao Mao; cinematographer: Hou Yong; cast: Lu Liping (Chen
Shujuan-mother), Pu Quanxin (Lin Shaolong-father), Zhang Wenyao (Tietou
as a child), Li Xuejian (Li Guodong), Guo Donglin (Lin Yunwei), Li Bin
(Grandmother), Chen Xiaoman (Tietou as a teenager), Lu Liping (Chen
Shujuan), Xiaoying Song (Sis), Tian Yi (Tietou as an infant), Li Xuejian
(Uncle Li), Guo Baochang (stepfather), Zhong Ping (Chen Shusheng),
1993-China)
This film was made in mainland China and is one of the great and
courageous films of the 1990s. It's by Tian Zhuangzhuang (Horse Thief).
It has been banned in China for its political content, and the director
has not had another film of his released overseas. It follows the story
of a fictional family from their wedding in 1953, at the time Stalin
died, to a year later at the birth of their child, and all the way until
the harsh consequences of their lives have finally sunk in by 1968 as
being irreversible. It is narrated by their young boy Tietou as an
adult, with different actors portraying him as he grows up (Chen Xiaoman
as a teenager was the most memorable of these performers). Tietou tries
to make sense out of what happens to his ordinary family, but he just
can't seem to fully comprehend why so much misfortune occurred. It is a
tragic tale of a mother holding her family together, as they are caught
up in the fervor of political zealots who need scapegoats to go after
those who are different.
"The Blue Kite" is the most acrimonious indictment in a film of Chairman
Mao's regime, that I can recall. It begins with the Rectification
Movement and moves through the Great Leap Forward and the brutal
extremes of the Cultural Revolution. The picture best demonstrates how
the politics and history of the revolutionary times affect the lives of
real people. How from year to year there is great changes in what set of
beliefs to follow, and the worst thing is to be accused of being a
Rightist, a counterrevolutionary. This provocative film is not a
flattering look at the myopic political situation in modern China. It
tells of simple truths, emphasizing family life, while it is brilliantly
crafted in a most moving way.
The story mostly takes place in the crowded apartment complexes in
Beijing, where Tietou lives with his father, Shaolong (Pu Quanxin), who
is a librarian and his mother, Shujuan (Lu Liping), who is a teacher.
The extended familily of a sister and brothers and grandma live nearby,
also live in simply furnished apartments. Times are difficult, there is
not enough food, but everyone seems happy and there is a sense of strong
family ties and a strong comradeship among neighbors. There is also an
air of innocence and fun that seems to be contagious. It is a time for
Tietou to fly his blue kite and for his kindly father to make another
one if this one gets stuck in a tree.
The most critical development for the family, is when the library staff
is called into a meeting. The staff is told by the party bureaucrats
that it has not been self-critical of itself and has not been able to
find any reactionaries among them. In the middle of the discussion,
Shaolong goes to the bathroom. When he returns, there is an eerie
silence, with everyone looking at him. Unfortunately, it is he who has
been deemed as the reactionary. He is thereby ordered to go away for
reeducation to a collective labor farm. He will die there in an accident
when a tree falls on him.
The mother's life is a difficult one. She is trying to adjust to the
changing political climate, as she tries to give her full love to
Tietou, who has difficulty understanding what has happened to the
family. She will go through two more marriages - as she weds an army
officer, an old friend of the family, and later to a prosperous party
official, who is a quiet and erudite man. He makes the best of that
marriage knowing that Tietou doesn't like him. In each marriage, it is
shown how the politics of the revolution alters the family's
togetherness in a deleterious way. The point of the story is that the
bonds between mother and child remain strong, no matter what.
"The Blue Kite" explores in detail what happened in recent times when
mob rule took over China and hooligans marched through the streets,
denouncing fellow citizens for reactionary behavior, all in the
patriotic name of a Cultural Revolution. This film accurately captured
the mentality of those who go along with such acts, those who are
brainwashed into always thinking they are right and ignoring all the
harm they do to people that might have different opinions than they do,
people who just want to live peacefully and have decent lives. It is
surprising that this film got out of the repressive clutches of China.
It clearly showed the horrors of the human drama inflicted on its
subjects, the tremendous portrayal of motherhood by Lu Liping, and the
oppression emanating from the Chinese dictatorship. This lyrical film
offers an eye-opening experience about recent events there, and probably
the only people it can't penetrate, are the Maoist International
Movement, a group that is in self-denial about how tyrannical China is.
For them the family will be seen as counterrevolutionaries and have
gotten what they deserved.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Maoist Internationalist Movement
     This movie about the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural
Revolution in China was meant to be reactionary and in that context,
it's a pretty good film.  It's a good film not because it portrays the
important advances made in the Cultural Revolution in a way that makes
clear to the uneducated audience why the revolution was such an advance
(it doesn't even try to do this).  It is a good film because it
basically tells the truth.
     The movie focuses on a family that faces a lot of hard times
through the Cultural Revolution.  Out of context, to an Amerikan
audience, these hard times could seem like the fault of a failed
revolution.  This is a big problem with the movie.  When one man dies
of liver trouble, if the audience does not know how much medicine has
advanced during the revolution they would think this is the fault of
backward medical care that came from a failed revolution.  When another
man is going blind due to eye problems, the audience is again left
thinking it is just the failure of medicine under Mao that left the
doctor with only the option of suggesting that he not put too much
stress on his eyes.
     On the positive side, the movie lets all of it's characters
survive the Great Leap Forward with collective kitchens and enough
(though scarce) food.  One of the brothers in the family is clearly a
Rightist by all that he says and does, and he is sent off to a
rectification camp where he seems to learn some things.  The main
character admits that he was a Rightist all along.  The husband of the
main character is also sent off to rectification camp and the movie
does not try to lie and make these camps out to be evil.  The husband
is about to return when he is killed in an accident by a falling tree.
Again, some audiences will take this to mean that the revolution killed
him, but we later learn that the husband did not view the rectification
bitterly and was not angry that people had denounced his liberal
political views.
     Later in the movie the main character marries an older party
member: she says she is doing it to provide some structure for her
son.  As soon as they move in with him the audience is struck with the
size of his house and the amount of his wealth.  Compared to the
situation of the average Chinese, this man is really well off.  After a
while he tells his wife and son that he is being criticized and that he
will be arrested soon.  As he tells them this we see him burning
papers.  The thinking viewer of this movie should take this as an
example of correct criticism during the Cultural Revolution.  This man
had used his position in the party to gain wealth and a bourgeois
life.  He even used his wife as a servant, contrary to the situation
she had enjoyed in her previous marriages to poorer men.
     There are examples in this movie of the Cultural Revolution going
too far.  In fact, Mao criticized the ultraleftists in the Cultural
Revolution for their line of "criticize all, overthrow all."  He said
that they went too far and were too violent when struggle should have
been carried out without violence and when people should have been
rectified rather than punished.  There were clearly people who were
wrongly criticized, but there was only one example of serious
punishment for a non- existent crime.
     One revolutionary young woman quits her job in the army because of
what is hinted at as gender discrimination.  She is later put in prison
during the Hundred Flowers campaign of 1957.  This is probably a
realistic example of one of the errors of the revolution.  Some people
who were not politically enemies were punished because of appearances
of their actions or because of overzealous cadre.  She is released
during the Cultural Revolution.  And the prisons were not portrayed as
evil institutions of torture.  Again a mark in favor of the movie.
     The movie also tries to portray an atmosphere of fear in which
people had to watch every word they spoke for fear that they would be
punished.  The reality of this is that incorrect ideas should be
criticized whenever and wherever they are found.  It is a good example
of liberalism that the main characters of the movie let friends and
relatives slip by saying reactionary things without struggling with
them over these things.  Of course the movie did not try to explain why
it is that people would want to struggle against incorrect ideas
because that was not it's purpose.  Wait until MIM produces some
films.
     This movie is good for Maoists to see.  It is important that
people realize that the Cultural Revolution was not perfect, but that
it did a lot to advance the struggle against liberalism.  In the
context of study about Chinese history and what really happened, this
film could be informative.  But if you have not studied up on the
Cultural Revolution and do not yet know why the people were encouraged
to criticize their leaders, you would be better off sending $8 to MIM
for a copy of Jean Daubier's book, THE HISTORY OF THE CHINESE CULTURAL
REVOLUTION, rather than seeing this misleading movie.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Encouraged        by a government        policy anxious to root out its own problems,
Tietou's father        is willing to discuss with friends what        things needed
change.         When this Hundred Flowers policy is replaced by a government stance
more paranoid, local officials turn viciously on Tietou's family.
Repeatedly we see people's loyalty to the government betrayed.        The country
is so anxious to root out supposed traitors that they give the weapon of
political ostracism to anybody who finds it convenient to use it.  In one
chilling sequence schoolboys are tired of school so they accuse        their
teacher        of being a counter-revolutionary and have her humiliated and dragged
away.  It takes        little to be accused of        being disloyal and once        accused
there is little        chance of being        vindicated.
     The film is 139 minutes long and follows Chen Shujuan, Tietou's mother,
through        three marriages        and many life experiences, mostly ending in misery
either because of the system's inadequacies, and its political paranoia.

Author
James Berardinelli
     "I finished shooting THE BLUE KITE in 1992.  But while I was
involved in post-production, several official organizations involved
with China's film industry screened the film.  They decided that it had
a problem concerning its political 'leanings,' and prevented its
completion.  The fact that it can appear today seems like a miracle...
The stories in the film are real, and they are related with total
sincerity.  What worries me is that it is precisely a fear of reality
and sincerity that has led to the ban on such stories being told."
     - Tian Zhuangzhuang, director of THE BLUE KITE
     THE BLUE KITE recounts how a child and his mother survive through
the turbulence of China during the 1950s and 60s, when political
beliefs that were proper one year might be deemed counterrevolutionary
the next.  It is a troubling climate, where nothing is certain, and the
greatest difficulty of growing up lies in determining what is proper
behavior and what is likely to get you taken away for "reform."
     The narrator of THE BLUE KITE is Tietou (played by Yi Tian as an
infant, Zhang Wenyao as a young boy, and Chen Xiaoman as an
adolescent), whose birth in 1953 occurs early in the film.  His
parents, librarian Shalong (Pu Quanxin) and teacher Shujuan (Lu Liping)
are supporters of the Maoist revolution, but that doesn't stop Shalong
from being accused of counterrevolutionary activities and sent off a
labor camp, where a tree falls on him and kills him.  It is Shujuan and
Tietou's struggles through this and subsequent trials that form the
background of Tian Zhuangzhuang's motion picture.
     Tian's criticism of the Chinese revolution is effective because of
its subtlety.  As was true in Chen Kaige's FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, the
characters' stories are used to present the injustices of the system.
If anything, the methods employed in this film are less direct than
those in CONCUBINE, but no less disturbing.
     Tietou's courage, Shujuan's spirit, and the love between mother
and child are the immutable elements of THE BLUE KITE.  No matter what
year it is or how dire the circumstances faced by the characters (and,
at several points, circumstances become dire indeed), these three
things are constant.
     The acting by the principles, especially that of Chen Xiaoman and
Lu Liping, is superb.  Lu's unaffected presentation of the spectrum of
human emotions creates a very real Shujuan.
     Tian's method of storytelling, while reasonably straightforward,
will be unfamiliar to many American movie-goers.  Careful attention to
the story is demanded, especially for those unfamiliar with the
background.  Because numerous scenes end abruptly and are often
followed by sudden time changes, it's easy to lose track of what's
going on in THE BLUE KITE.
     Many of the movies coming from so-called "Fifth Generation"
Chinese filmmakers (such as Chen Kaige and Zhang Yimou) are either
banned in their native country, or heavily censored.  The government
has shown an unwillingness to allow any criticism of their policies,
either past or present.  However, one proverbial "silver lining" in
this cloud of controversy has been the greater worldwide recognition
and distribution of productions such as THE BLUE KITE.  We in the West
should feel fortunate to be exposed to such well-crafted, provocative
motion pictures.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
