Title
Review for Beauty and the Beast (1991)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ben Hoffman
This is the age-old fascinating tale of the beautiful girl and an ugly
beast.  The story is brought to life in this, the 30th animated
full-length Disney film and only the fifth classic fairy tale of Disney
films, (Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , Cinderella ,
Sleeping Beauty , The Little Mermaid, , a Hans Christian
Anderson story, which became the most successful of all animated films
ever released.) Only through animation, it would seem, could the story
reach new heights of imagination.  Add to it some inspired voice
casting and clever songs and here is a film for both children and
adults to enjoy.  The music is by Alan Menken and the songs are by the
team of Menken and Howard Ashman.
It is the 1800s.  Belle (Beauty) lives in a French village where she
enjoys reading books.  There she is pursued by, a good-looking egotist
named Gaston who is always admiring himself but he is not at all what
Belle is looking for.  Richard White is Gaston's voice.
Her father, an inventor, wanders into a castle where he is taken
prisoner by a horrible-looking beast.  Belle offers herself as hostage
so that her father can be released. Aided by the castle's staff she
discovers that even an ugly beast can have a heart of gold unlike
Gaston who is more of a beast than the one in the castle.  This is
further revealed when he leads a crowd to the castle in the films
climactic denouement.
There's just enough growling and blustering by the Beast to give little
kids a thrill. . . and just enough pathos and personality to make them
love him.  BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is full of the kind of humor one
associates with Disney films.  From the broad brush given Gaston's
egotism, to the antics of the mantel clock, the teapot, candelabra and
wardrobe, the film is a happy romp.
Beauty's loyalty to her father and self-sacrifice will not be lost on
the viewers.  While the film is primarily for children, adults will be
happy to find they, too, are enjoying it.
Easily recognizable voices are those of the Narrator, Donald Ogden
Stiers, Angela Lansbury as Mrs. Potts, the castle's housekeeper, and Jo
Anne Worley as the Wardrobe and Jerry Ohrbach doing the candelabra
voice.
Beautifully animated, with lifelike scenery, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST will
entertain you and your children.
Directed by Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise.

Author
Amanda Miller
     Okay.  Here it is.  One of the best Disney flicks out in a while.
More than comparable to THE LITTLE MERMAID.  The songs aren't quite as
good, but at least they stay more in tune with the original story,
(unlike the happy ending, sugary sweet version of Hans Christian
Andersen's "The Littlest Mermaid").  I must say my interest was captured
and held so fast that I didn't even notice the brats sitting next to
me.  I give this movie a sparkling five stars!
     The voice of Belle is played by the same girl from THE LITTLE
MERMAID, and the character much better shows her talents and reaches
for singing and acting.  Unlike Ariel, Belle is very intelligent, loves
her father, and would do anything for him.  She is also an avid
bookworm, which I thought was an excellent touch for Disney.  The Beast
is unbelievably powerful, and just rips your heart in two with his love.
Also, all of the "little" servants are just about the cutest thing
Disney has ever thought of, and I must say that the candlestick is my
favorite.
     Now for the best part.  The songs themselves aren't as good, but
remember the movies like PETE'S DRAGON and POLLYANNA where everybody
danced together through the city streets while singing?  Well, now
that's in the animation also.  They really do a good job with it, too.
And for you computer buffs out there, Disney has finally made the switch
to computer animation in their movies!  The landscape scenes are in a
form of 3-D, they have the stuff in the foreground fuzzy as if it was
filmed by a camara that was focused on the things in the distance.  Now
for the biggy about the computer animation in it.  Gotta go see it for
yourself, but I will tell you that they use texture-mapping digitized
effects and entire objects that is run off of the video toaster for the
Amiga computer.  Cool, huh?

Author
Brian L. Johnson
85 min., G, Musical/Fantasy, 1991
Directors: Gary Trousdale, Kirk Wise
Voices of: Paige O'Hara, Robby Benson, Richard White, Jerry Orbach,
           David Ogden Stiers, Angela Lansbury
     A prince gets a curse put on him that turns him into a beast (voice
of Robby Benson).  If, by the time an enchanted rose flower dies, he
hasn't fallen in love with a girl, and she in love with him, he will
stay a beast forever.  If he falls in love and a girl falls in love with
him he gets to become a prince again.  Belle (voice of Paige O'Hara)
gets forced to stay in the Beast's castle and the two start to fall in
love with each other.
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is a *very* good film, and, if you haven't
gone to see it yet, I highly suggest you go out to see it.  The
animation is perfect, much better, I think, than in the Don Bluth films.
When I was watching this film I sometimes forgot that I was watching an
animated film.  It has been quite a while since I have seen a full
animated film this good.  I almost had decided to wait for this film to
show up on video but I decided to go see it in the theaters.  I am
really glad that I did because if the Disney Studios are smart they
won't release this film on video and keep releasing it only in the
theaters.   The last full animated film that I liked this much was
FANTASIA last April in the theaters.  The songs are wonderful.  They
were written by Alan Menken and the late Howard Ashman (whom this film
was dedicated to in the end), who have also done THE LITTLE MERMAID and
LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS.
     I found that for the most part BEAUTY AND THE BEAST was much better
than THE LITTLE MERMAID.  I found that the story is much better for
BEAUTY.  THE LITTLE MERMAID was a bit too perfect for me.  For some
reason I seem to like BEAUTY's songs more, I don't know why.  The
animation though was just as good, I feel, as in THE LITTLE MERMAID.
     The voices I feel were well cast.  Robby Benson has a gruff yet
caring voice that was perfect for the beast.  Paige O'Hara, I feel, had
a voice sweet enough to be the beautiful Belle.   Richard White did the
boasting Gaston who wants to marry Belle at any cost.  Angela Lansbury,
Jerry Orbach, and David Ogden Stiers were among the talented voices that
did the enchanted furniture in the Beast's castle.  Angela was
Mrs. Potts, Jerry was Lumiere, and David was Cogsworth.
     Speaking of the voices, the characters themselves were wonderfully
done: Cogsworth as the enchanted clock that was always worrying if what
he was doing might anger The Beast; Lumiere as the little candelabra who
doesn't worry about what he is doing as long as he thinks that he is
doing right; Mrs. Potts as the caring and nurturing teapot who cares
about Belle and wants to make sure that she is happy at the Beast's
castle; Chip as the little chipped tea cup that is always wondering what
is going on; Belle the beautiful girl who despises Gaston and starts to
fall in love with the Beast; Gaston as the boasting man who believes
that every woman wants him and refuses to accept the fact that Belle
doesn't; the Beast who gets very angry easily and feels that he will end
up being a beast for the rest of his life; Belle's eccentric inventor
father who everybody laughs at; and the buffoon who is always hanging
around Gaston.
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is perfect family fare, and I highly recommend
it to anyone to go see.  I give BEAUTY AND THE BEAST a five on a scale
of zero to five.  BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is rated G which means it
contains nothing objectionable.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Disney's animated feature films are, in
     my opinion, over-rated.  They lack plot and complexity.
     Their emotional impact is limited.  The usual excuse is that
     they are only supposed to be simple children's films.  BEAUTY
     AND THE BEAST demonstrates that a lot more can be done in
     this medium.  It beats BAMBI, CINDERELLA, SNOW WHITE,
     SLEEPING BEAUTY, and all of the other classics, including
     FANTASIA.  Parents should go with their kids.  If you don't
     have kids, go anyway.  This one may not be on cassette this
     century.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4).
     I rather surprised myself with BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  When I was young,
I liked the Disney feature cartoons as little entertainments, but after age
ten or so I found the stories a little uninteresting.  Eventually I could
respect the detail in the technique, but even then I was rarely impressed
with their imagination.  Yes, they had attention to detail and if I knew
what to look for, I liked that.  But, with the exception of the dragon
sequence from SLEEPING BEAUTY and the "Night on Bald Mountain" sequence from
FANTASIA, there was not much beyond lukewarm imagination.  And the stories
were really uninteresting.  And being a realist about my own looks, I have
long been a little irritated at the subtext that equates physical beauty and
ugliness to evil.  With all that to set up my attitude, it is hardly
surprising that I would come away from BEAUTY AND THE BEAST genuinely
believing it is the best animated feature film ever to come from Disney
Studios.  And that includes that beloved intellectual fraud FANTASIA.
     The plot of the film maintains Disney's usual standard for fidelity to
the original story.  This means, of course, that if you read Madame de
Villeneuve's story and then saw the film, you would be likely to see
similarities and probably would believe that the story did somehow inspire
the film.  (Those anxious to read the story faithfully told can find it in
Andrew Lang's BLUE FAIRY BOOK.)  Some bits were more likely inspired by Jean
Cocteau's film LA BELLE ET LA BETE.  Belle, if not a real intellectual, is
at least a reader.  In fact, she seems to love books more than boys, so is
thought to be weird.  (Bravo for her!)  But Belle has a semi-secret admirer.
Gaston is handsome, big, and strong.  He is also obnoxious, insufferably
conceited, sexist, and selfish.  Gaston is supremely macho and the film
subtly makes the statement that to be macho is to be beastlike.  All of
Gaston's virtues that he tells us about are really just descriptions of a
beast.  He is big, he kills animals, he is covered with hair.  There are a
bevy of young women from the town who swoon over the beastly qualities of
Gaston.  Belle, however, is unimpressed and wants nothing to do with Gaston.
Then events conspire (or contrive) to make her the prisoner in an enchanted
castle ruled over by a real beast--or at least an apparently real beast.  He
has all of Gaston's qualities in a more extreme form.  The Beast is super-
macho, but knows that it is a curse both literally and figuratively.  Belle
wants no part of the Beast until he starts to win her over.  How does he
start to win her over?  In a manner--time-honored in Disney films--for
beasts to win over people.  I won't say how, but anyone who has seen OLD
YELLER will find the situation familiar.  The story is well-told, though
almost entirely revisionist.
     Some mention should be made of the castle's enchantment, since many of
the film characters exist as a direct result of that enchantment.  Once
touch that Cocteau put in his film version that was not in the original
story was that the walls of the castle had ornamental torch-holders that
looked like human arms holding the torches.  These ornamental holders have a
life of their own.  The Disney film extends this to most of the furnishings
of the castle, giving them also voices and personalities.  At moments this
almost has a Philip K. Dick sort of horror, when someone drinking from a tea
cup finds the cup is talking to him.  The personalities are genial, however,
and the potential horror is quickly muted.
     Visually this film is at least up to and probably better than what we
think of as the classic Disney feature cartoons.  Snow White and Sleeping
Beauty were drawn as sweet and cheerful as a bluebird but perhaps not quite
as smart.  They were characters for years when innocence was prized over
intelligence.  Belle has apricot-sized eyes and high cheekbones, but also a
range of facial expression far greater than the classic animation heroines.
There is clearly more going on in her head than in those of her previous
counterparts.  Whether it was done before without acknowledgement, or is a
new approach, a different team animates each of the major characters.  James
Baxter headed the team which animated Belle and Paige O'Hara voiced the
characters.
     The Beast is a strange concoction combining elements of a mandrill, a
bison, a lion, and the American werewolf in London.  Glen Kean was is chief
animator for the Beast.  The voice casting director (I am sorry I do not
have his name) listened on tape to several dozen voices for special
characteristics.  He said in an interview that he himself was surprised to
hear the qualities he wanted in the voice of Robbie Benson.  I share his
surprise and his conviction that Benson's voice does work for the Beast.
     In general, the art and animation are impressively done.  These days
effort goes into every background painting.  One place I noted poor
technique and it took me some time to get the joke.  While Disney artists
usually take pains to make each character different, the three village maids
who fawn on Gaston are really one character drawn three times.  They were
then animated in a perfunctory two-dimensional style.  Perhaps the
filmmakers were subtly saying that women impressed by macho are just not
worth much effort.
     The songs are by Howard Ashman and Alan Menken, who also wrote the
songs for THE LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS (one piece is reminiscent of a piece
from LITTLE SHOP) and THE LITTLE MERMAID.  Overall, the music is better than
that of THE LITTLE MERMAID.  The remainder of the film's music was by
Menken.  Ashman served as executive producer.  A note at the end dedicates
the film to Howard Ashman, who died of AIDS eight months before the release
of the film.
     There is some irony in the fact that Don Bluth left Disney animation
studios because they were not doing animation films in their own grand
tradition and now they may be doing them better.  In BEAUTY AND THE BEAST
Disney Studios has given me something it has not given me in a long time: an
animated feature film I want to see again.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.  Amazing.

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of: Paige O'Hara, Robby Benson, Jerry Orbach, 
      David Ogden Stiers, Angela Lansbury, Richard White, Jesse Corti, 
      Bradley Michael Pierce, Rex Everhart
Directors: Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise
Producer: Don Hahn
Screenplay: Linda Woolverton
Music: Alan Menken
Lyrics: Howard Ashman
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Walt Disney's 1991 instant classic, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, is not 
only the finest animated movie ever made, but deserves a prominent 
position on any list of all-time greats.  Although not the highest 
grossing Disney production, nor the best-remembered by most kids (those 
honors go to THE LION KING), BEAUTY AND THE BEAST nevertheless earned 
the most enthusiastic notices ever by the critics and was recognized 
with a Best Picture Oscar nomination (considering the weak competition, 
it deserved to win the award).  The studio knew early in development 
that it had a winner.  In an unprecedented move, Disney screened a 70% 
complete work print to a packed auditorium at the 1991 New York Film 
Festival months before the movie was finished.  The astounding reception 
helped to build a sense of anticipation that was unrivaled since the 
days of SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARVES.
     "Irresistible" is an apt description of this film, because every 
frame is imbued with a magic that is rare for any motion picture, 
animated or otherwise.  In the past, I have been known to criticize 
Disney from time-to-time, but not on this occasion.  BEAUTY AND THE 
BEAST is a triumph of artistry – a rare movie where all of the elements 
gel perfectly.  It has set the standard for today's animated motion 
picture, improving upon THE LITTLE MERMAID and establishing a level that 
no subsequent animated film has equaled.  
     The tale told by BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is an old one, dating back 
centuries prior to the version penned by Jeanne-Marie Leprince de 
Beaumont, upon which screenwriter Linda Woolverton based this script.  
Understandably, the people at Disney have added their own spin by 
changing certain plot details, modernizing Belle's character (she's a 
feminist), and adding a gallery of talking objects.  In the Beast's 
ensorcelled castle, everything has a voice:  candlesticks, clocks, pots, 
cups, wardrobes, and feather dusters.  The film makers obviously took 
their inspiration for this from Jean Cocteau's classic 1946 adaptation, 
where, although the objects in the castle did not sing or frolic, there 
was a pervasive sense of enchantment.  Watch that film, then watch this 
one -- the stylistic similarities, especially in the look and feel of 
the castle, are impossible to miss.
     Belle (voice of Paige O'Hara) is the most beautiful girl in a 
provincial town in France.  Unfortunately for those who might want her 
as a wife, including the dim, narcissistic Gaston (Richard White), she's 
also one of the village's oddest denizens.  She keeps to herself, 
helping her inventor father, Maurice (Rex Everhart), with his 
contraptions, and, in her spare time, devouring books.  She has read 
just about everything available in the town, and eagerly awaits the 
arrival of anything new.  Every time she ventures outdoors, she draws 
stares and snickers, but, despite her strangeness, Gaston is determined 
to marry her.
     Then, one fateful day, her father disappears in the forest.  Belle 
goes searching for him and stumbles upon a dark and scary castle.  
Venturing inside, she discovers a gallery of magical creatures – regular 
household objects that speak and move.  There's Lumiere (Jerry Orbach), 
a candlestick with impeccable manners and an voice that recalls Maurice 
Chevalier; Cogsworth (David Ogden Stiers), a clock with a high 
impression of himself and his role in the castle; Mrs. Potts (Angela 
Lansbury), a grandmotherly tea pot; and many others.  Then there's the 
Beast (Robby Benson), the terrifying creature who rules over this domain 
and holds Maurice captive.  Once a handsome prince, he has been cursed 
to remain a beast until he finds someone who truly loves him in spite of 
his appearance.  Now, he is filled with equal parts hope and dread at 
Belle's arrival -- hope that she might be "the one" to break the spell, 
and dread that she might be repulsed by his ugliness.  Nevertheless, he 
agrees to release her father if she accedes to being his permanent 
guest.  She makes the bargain, Maurice is set free, and she is trapped.  
In time, however, Belle discovers that life in the castle is not as 
dreadful as it initially seems.
     As a romance, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is a delightful confection, 
creating a pair of memorable, three-dimensional characters and giving us 
reason to root for their union.  Belle is strong-willed, independent, 
and smart.  The animators have taken pains to make her features more 
flexible than those of any previous Disney heroine, and her face 
displays a wide range of expressions:  anger, concern, contempt, 
contrition, fear, joy, sadness, sarcasm, skepticism, and wonder.  The 
Beast, despite his frightening appearance, isn't as terrible as he first 
appears.  Inside of him beats the heart of a true hero, and, in an act 
of self-sacrifice when he risks his life for Belle, he displays his true 
nature.
     The real allure of the movie, however, is twofold:  the amazingly-
detailed animation and a half-dozen spectacular song-and-dance numbers.  
Of all Disney's "new wave" animated features, this is the most polished-
looking.  Although ALADDIN, THE LION KING, and THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE 
DAME all have their share of eye-popping moments, none are as 
consistently impressive as those in BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  The ballroom 
sequence, which mixes computer-generated backgrounds with hand-drawn 
characters, is the best scene in the movie, but it is nearly equaled by 
a handful of others.  And, while the camera in most animated films 
remains largely static, here it's frequently on the move, soaring and 
zooming as it circles characters and imitates tracking shots.  Visually, 
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is so carefully-constructed that repeated viewings 
reveal new details, like the wayward strands of hair that fall across 
Belle's forehead.  
     The production numbers, with music by Alan Menken and lyrics by 
Howard Ashman (the duo who worked on THE LITTLE MERMAID), represent the 
best in Disney's considerable arsenal.  They're the animated equivalent 
of Broadway show-stoppers, with all the energy and audacity of something 
choreographed by Busby Berkeley.  There's "Belle", the opening number; 
"Gaston", the tongue-in-cheek villain's theme; "Be Our Guest", with 
singing and dancing china and utensils; the playful "Something There"; 
the warlike "Mob Song"; and the memorable title ballad, "Beauty and the 
Beast".
     As was the case in THE LITTLE MERMAID, the vocal characterizations 
are flawless.  While many of the actors in this film are better-known 
than those in MERMAID, the performers' immersion in their roles is such 
that, unlike Demi Moore in THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, their alter egos 
efface any baggage associated with our recognition of their names.  
Jerry Orbach, David Ogden Stiers, and Angela Lansbury are all solid in 
their respective roles.  Robby Benson, a surprising choice for the 
Beast, is excellent.  And Paige O'Hara, a relatively unknown newcomer, 
gives voice and personality to Belle.
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST also has a keen sense of film history.  In 
addition to the already-mentioned debt it owes to Cocteau's classic, the 
movie pays homage to at least three legendary motion pictures.  The 
opening shots of the Beast's gothic castle recall CITIZEN KANE.  A scene 
of Belle racing across a grassy hill overlooking her village while 
singing the reprise of "Belle" echoes a similar moment with Julie 
Andrews in THE SOUND OF MUSIC.  And the march of Gaston's enflamed mob 
towards the Beast's castle is reminiscent of FRANKENSTEIN's finale.
     Combining all of these diverse elements, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST 
attains a nearly-perfect mix of romance, music, invention, and 
animation.  While many animated features claim to appeal equally to 
adults and children, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is one of the rare ones that 
actually achieves that lofty goal.  It's a family feature that someone 
over the age of 18 can venture into without an accompanying child.  To 
Disney, for BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, I offer my most sincere thanks.  If 
they could once again come close to this level of mastery, movie-going 
audiences across the world would be forever grateful.
NOTE:  Disney is planning a future theatrical re-release of BEAUTY AND 
THE BEAST (this has nothing to do with the direct-to-video movie, BEAUTY 
AND THE BEAST: AN ENCHANTED CHRISTMAS) with six to eight minutes of 
newly-animated footage.  A sequence featuring the Menken/Ashman 
collaboration, "Human Again", will be inserted (this song was not 
included in the original film, but is in the stage version), as well as 
several other, shorter scenes.  While a release date has not yet been 
set for this new version, the animation schedule makes it likely that 
the earliest possible time frame would be late 1999.  A hold-out until 
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST's tenth anniversary, in 2001, is not an 
unreasonable expectation.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
the Rev. Mom
     All the reviews are true.  It's *won*derful.  Rush to see it on the
22nd, it is *more* than worth the $7.50 I paid to see it at the El
Capitan in LA.  It deserves to be nominated for Best Picture.
     The animation is amazing.  Pixar's done a marvelous job of
background generations, giving us scenes that are a perfect marriage of
generated and hand-drawn animation.  It blends beautifully.  The
ballroom is breathtaking, the chandelier is wonderful, and if someone
hadn't told me, I wouldn't have known about Maurice's carriage.
     The score's got everything from beautiful soaring ballads to
get-'em-on-their-feet showstoppers.
     It's poignant, touching, charming, exhilarating, and all that good
stuff.  Prepare for tears, choking up, belly laughs--it's not often you
get touched like this by a movie.  THE LITTLE MERMAID was just the warm
up.  :-)  BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is chock full of Moments.
     And, of course, the characters are *great*!  Robby Benson was the
perfect choice for the Beast's voice--he manages to convey both the
ferocity of a wild beast with immense power (combine a bear-sized
wolverine with a panther, and you get the movement and build) and the
utter vulnerability of a man discovering love for the first time.  And
yes, his voice is deep, and yes he sings.  Paige O'Hara's voice for
Belle, while similar to Jodie Benson's in range, conveys a very
different character, more worldly, confident and mature.  The opening
scene draws her character for you, so I won't ruin it with long
descriptive sentences.
     I don't want to ruin the movie for anyone (and I especially want to
warn anyone with the Disney Channel that "The Making of" special has
lots of spoiler scenes), so I'm not going to mention fave lines (other
than the one in my .sig I can't resist) or moments, but I did want to
say there's one piece of trivia that should delight fans of the TV
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (you remember Linda Hamilton?  :-)--look at the
castlist to see who plays the asylum keeper.
     Even the credits are wonderful; someone finally did things right,
and listed the credits by character, naming the voice actor, animating
director and animators for each main character as a group.  And
especially throat-lump-inducing was the final dedication:

Author
Frank Maloney
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST is a Walt Disney animated musical film.  The
directors are Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise.  The voices are provided by
Paige O'Hara, Robby Benson, Angela Lansbury, Robert White, Jerry
Ohrbach, and David Ogden Stiers.  The songs were written by the late
Howard Ashman and Alan Menken, the same team responsible for THE LITTLE
MERMAID and THE LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS.  Rated G - General audiences.
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST ranks with the best that Disney ever produced,
either before or after Walt's death.  It is, I'm sure, better than
MERMAID, despite similarities and parallels.  For one thing, Belle
(voice by Paige O'Hara) is a more interesting character than Ariel.
Belle's goal in life to get out of her stifling provincial village, not
to get married; indeed, the only marriage prospect in sight is so
unacceptable as to rule out the possibility altogether.  That suitor is
Gaston (voice of Robert White) is the hilariously conceited village
macho man, who thinks Belle's beloved books are fit only to cushion his
muddy hunting boots.  Belle is independent, bookish, the perfect
personality to learn to see past the cover of the Beast's book, as it
were.
     The voice of the Beast is done by Robby Benson, of all people, who
can roar, inject great humor into the beastly mutterings, and be tender,
hurt, and loving.  Other voice characters include Mrs.  Potts (Angela
Lansbury), a living teapot and as cozy, nurturing a teapot as ever
poured itself; Lansbury, by the way, sings the title song, sounding
rather like a cross between the cook in "Upstairs, Downstairs" and the
estimable Verna Felton, the voice of the fairy godmother in CINDERELLA.
Jerry Ohrbach did the voice of Lumiere, the candelabra (natch), and
David Odgen Stiers the clock, Cogsworth.  At first blush, one might
think, as I did watching trailers for this film earlier this fall, 
anthropomorphized bric-a-brac was more than a little too cute.  But
instead, I was charmed by them and amazed at how thoroughly personalized
they were.
     In fact, looking at the above voice cast, one is struck by the
quality overall.  The Broadway musical is alive and well in the cartoon
and this is a dream cast that no producer could pay enough to appear
live on stage for a year.  The music is excellent and quite different
from the score of MERMAID.  Only one big production number, no ethnic
overtones.  Instead, operetta-like songs and numbers, including a
classic curtain raiser that gets a lot of characters singing together
and antiphonally.  The influence of Andrew Lloyd Webber is there to some
degree and they add to the development of the characters.
     The script is funny, exciting, resonant, and entertaining to the
kids and the adults.  The animation is very imaginative and detailed.
The Beast's castle is a masterpiece of Gothic brooding.  The animators
used a multiplane camera and some rather flashy computer animation,
especially in the ballroom scene that seemed to approach photorealism at
moments.  The story opens with a prologue told by a voice-overs and
stained-glass-like illustrations, a motif we return to at the end.  The
story-telling is clear, precise and uses state-of-the-art techniques to
advance the story.
