Title
Review for Olympia 1. Teil - Fest der Völker (1938)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
Leni Riefenstahl's film of the 1936 Berlin Olympic games is considered to be 
among the greatest documentaries ever made.  It's important both as a 
historical document and as an example of film-making technique, but while 
the grandeur of the event and the film's mammoth running time do infuse it 
with an epic sense, modern-day audiences may find their attention wandering. 
  Hitler and Goebbels saw the spectacle of the games as an opportunity to 
show off the new Reich, but neither were responsible for employing 
Riefenstahl, who had made the jingoistic Nazi rally film TRIUMPH OF THE WILL 
a couple of years earlier.  Riefenstahl's attachment to the project, via an 
Olympic official, ensured that the film of the event would not escape being 
viewed as a propaganda piece in itself,  although this seems arbitrary 
insofar as the Olympics are a hype vehicle for every participating country 
anyway.  Riefenstahl, who had previously directed and acted in features, 
puts a creative spin on her document and utilizes different technological 
innovations.  She embellishes the events without changing facts, but lays 
herself open to charges of pro-fascist imagery - the opening sequence, for 
example, depicts buffed, nude athletes flexing their muscles against 
dramatic skies and has obvious Aryan overtones.  But if this is the case, 
why would she include so much footage of black athlete Jesse Owens winning 
event after event and debunking the Aryan supremacy myth right before 
Hitler's eyes?  Riefenstahl has always claimed her life's work as being 
artistically motived, and it's at least easier to believe this in OLYMPIAD 
than it is in TRIUMPH.  Notice that there wasn't any of this fuss when a 
group of directors similarly fetishized athletic bodies in the 1972 Olympics 
movie VISIONS OF EIGHT.
OLYMPIAD is split into two parts, 'The Festival of the People' and 'The 
Festival of Beauty'.  Part one focuses on track and field while part two 
looks at other events outside the stadium - but there's only so much running 
and jumping a viewer can endure.  By the time the film returns to pentathlon 
and decathlon events already covered in the first half, it starts getting 
tedious.  OLYMPIAD doesn't start off too excitingly (watching people 
throwing shot and hammers isn't too exciting at the best of times) but picks 
up once the races start - visually these are more involving because at a 
glance we can tell who is winning at any moment throughout the event, even 
if we don't know who they are.  You'd have to assume that Riefenstahl did 
the best job she could editing the 400,000 feet of film she'd retrieved from 
the 30 camera operators stationed around the Games, and there are some 
interesting moments to be found.  For example, the 1500 meters is filmed in 
one continuous take (it's odd seeing the New Zealand victor accompanied by 
sieg heils from the crowd);  we see a shot of Hitler looking deflated after 
a German relay runner drops the baton when victory appears imminent; 
Riefenstahl inserts shaky close-ups of hands and feet as a marathon runner 
is on the home stretch, projecting to us his physical and mental exhaustion; 
the horses on a steeplechase regularly dump their riders into a ditch and a 
pond; and in the film's famous closing montage, Riefenstahl makes high 
divers appear weightless by filming them at dizzying angles and variable 
speeds.  It's also interesting to see how much has changed since the days of 
the 11th Olympics - the stadiums and uniforms aren't plastered with crass 
product logos, the winners are presented with wreaths instead of medals, and 
the sporting equipment is simpler (e.g. non-flexible vaulting poles).  It's 
disquieting to see competitors on the shooting range firing at human-shaped 
targets when we know that World War II was only three years away.  Couple 
that with the final images of the flags of all nations bowing slowly to the 
ground and the smoke from the extinguished Olympic flame rising into an 
ominous sky, and you'll see why its impossible to view OLYMPIAD nowadays 
without irony.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some of the art houses are now having a Leni Riefenstahl festival.
OLYMPIAD is Leni's documentary about the 1936 Berlin Olympics.  It has
made several lists as one of the greatest movies of all time.  It is
easy to see why.
     The movie is filmed in a stunning blank and white.  The ominous
clouds that constantly surround the stadium are made even more menacing
by the contrasty black and white images.  They are an evil portent of
Germany's troubles soon to spread all over Europe and then engulf the
world.  The movie, on the other hand, could serve as an ad for the
United Nations.  Every nation is represented, and they all seem to have
their moment of glory.  I never knew that Finland had so many great
long distance runners for example.
     The movie starts with images of Greek temples.  Leni is an
absolute master of cinematography.  The angles she shoots the statues
and her blending and fading from one scene to the other along with the
texture of her prints made me think of the great impressionist
painters, especially Renoir.  Her extremely effective use of dramatic
music is reminiscent of a great Wagner opera.  Parsifal immediately
came to mind.
     After your eyes and ears have feasted in these images of ancient
Greece, one of the statues dissolves into a modern athlete, but this
and the other athletes are all naked showing the joy and power of the
pure physical body.  Eventually, they run through a town with people in
modern dress cheering them on.  This in turn switches to the 1936
Olympics, and it is all pure documentary from there.
     Leni spent several years personally editing every second of the
film.  She only slept a few hours per nights during those years and her
health got so bad she almost died, but she was obsessed with creating a
masterpiece.  She succeeded.  See the recent and excellent documentary
on her life (THE WONDERFUL, HORRIBLE LIFE OF LENI RIEFENSTAHL) to learn
more fascinating insights on the camerawork that went into OLYMPIAD.
     I must admit, that I do not watch nor am I interested at all in
sports.  Nevertheless, this documentary was mesmerizing.  Watching the
expressions of people's faces were particularly engrossing.  Many small
details were of interest like the women athletes all wore lipstick, and
the marathon runners would come to a complete stop for a minute or two
to drink their water and get toweled off.  Jesse Owens was truly a
wonderful runner and jumper, and he managed to make his world record
setting almost seem simple with his deceptive, easy going smile.
     For reasons I can not figure out, it was filmed originally in
English and not German and features a British announcer who appears
every now and then and gives the running commentary during the
Olympics.
     The movie runs about 4 hours.  I have been told it may be
available on video.  The print I saw was in pretty good shape for a
movie a half century old.  It was unrated, but was definitely a G level
show - although modern censors would have probably forced Leni to get
an R unless she cut out the 3 minutes of nudity.  I recommend it to
everyone on the planet regardless of age and give it my top rating of
****.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 21, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
