Title
Review for Everest (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Kong
Ever since I finished reading the book "Into Thin Air", I've wanted to see
the IMAX film Everest. In the latter parts of "Into Thin Air" the IMAX team
is talked about at length – the IMAX team was one of the factors in helping
to save many lives in the tragic and ill-fated ascent to the top of Everest.
Somehow I ended up waiting almost three months before seeing Everest – I'm
sad that I didn't see this film earlier! For those of you who are not
familiar with IMAX films, I'll give a brief description of an IMAX film.
When you see a movie, it is usually printed on 35mm film, which is measure
diagonally from the top left to the bottom right of a single frame. If
you're special, you'll have a 70mm capable theatre around you that can play
films printed on 70mm film – resulting in four times the resolution on the
film. IMAX film is about twice the size of 70mm – quadrupling the
resolution of the image of a 70mm film. So, as you can imagine, the image
on an IMAX film is about as perfect as can be because it has 16 times as
much resolution of the standard films you see.
All this higher resolution stuff doesn't matter if your screen is the size
of your home TV though. So, IMAX theatres are equipped with tremendous
sized screens. For me there are two IMAX screens near me. One at an
amusement park, Great America, and the other is at The Tech Museum in
downtown San Jose. The Great America theatre is mediocre at best, wowing
the audience with a large screen and some decent sound. But the theatre is
old and not well kept. Everest was not showing at the Great America
theatre, but luckily it was showing at The Tech. Everest was the first film
I've ever seen at the Hackworth IMAX Dome Theatre and I am more than
impressed – the theatre left me with my jaw on the floor. This theatre is
built to impress and it is evident from the beginning with its introduction.
But, back to the film. Everest is a documentary and it is a well-written
documentary following a team of people lead by David Breashears. Also on
the team are Ed Viesturs, who not only summitted twice, but did it both
without extra oxygen; Ed's new wife, Paula; Jamling Tenzing Norgay (son of
the guide to the first person to ever summit Everest); and Araceli Segarra
an experience climber from Spain.
The film Everest and director Breashears take advantages of IMAX to the
max. Because an IMAX film is projected onto a screen so large that it
stretches from one end of your field of vision to the other there are a lot
of things that a smart director can do with the film. Breashears amazes us
with helicopter flights, climbing shots with the camera mounted looking
down, crossings of ice glacier canyons with the camera pointed into the
dark endless hole below, and many other things that would and can make a
viewer sick to the stomach but also amaze them to the point of verbal
"oohs" and "ahs".
If you haven't ever seen an IMAX film, or if you've seen one of the more
mediocre ones, Don't Miss Everest at your local IMAX theatre. This film is
a treat for the senses.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Murali Krishnan
The latest Imax production is a documentary following three climbers in
their pursuit of the world's highest peak. One member, Ed Viesturs, is an
Everest veteran, but the other two, Spaniard Araceli Segarra and Nepali
Jamling Norgay (whose father Tenzing Norgay was the partner of Sir Edmund
Hillary in the first successful scaling of the summit) are making the
attempt for the first time.
The main draw of this film is the spectacular scenery of the beautiful but
deadly Himalaya. Often grand, sweeping shots of the mountainside are shown,
with the sense of scale unapparent until the tiny outline of the climbers
and their tents appears. The crew was making their attempt immediately
following the infamous group that was caught in sudden storm, with several
members losing their lives. The story of the ill-fated expedition provides
much of the tension and drama, and serves as a reminder that even this group
of experts are risking their lives.
The only real criticism of the film is that the static, panoramic views of
the Himalaya are not the best use of the Imax format. I personally enjoy the
more dynamic scenes, such as a helicopter winding through a river valley,
that capitalize on the full range of view that is the hallmark of the Imax
format. In fact, I enjoyed the short scenes of Viesturs and his fiancee
biking through a Utah national park (filmed from a helicopter) and of
Segarra rock-climbing, as much as the remainder of the Everest scenes. There
is also some wasted (in the sense that the Imax format did not contribute)
time detailing Norgay's desires to follow the accomplishments of his father,
in an attempt to construct a narrative for the story.
Recommended. This may not be the best in the Imax series, but certainly is
enjoyable. Everyone who likes Imax films will also enjoy this one.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Christopher Null
     Nothing would suffice in making a movie about the tallest mountain
on earth than by showing it in the largest format on earth, as well.
     This 70mm IMAX film, which I saw on the country's largest movie
screen at the new San Francisco Sony Metreon (80 feet tall, 100 feet
wide), is nothing short of jaw-dropping spectacular.
     While the tale of Ed Viesturs climbing Mount Everest (for the fifth
time) is a good one, the story of the eight people from another party
who got stuck on the summit during a fierce storm – and died – almost
brings you to tears.  EVEREST is indeed larger than life.
     Of course, this is IMAX, and you go to see the spectacle of the
photography.  But remember, there's a guy carrying that enormous camera
up that mountain.  And a guy with a microphone.  And a tripod.  And
film.  And batteries.  The making of Everest is as phenomenal as the end
product.
Director: David Breashears, Stephen Judson, Greg MacGillivray
Producer: Stephen Judson, Alec Lorimore
Writer: Tim Cahill, Stephen Judson
Starring: Liam Neeson, Jamling Tenzing Norgay, Araceli Segarra, Ed
Viesturs, Paula Viesturs
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Everest (1998)
Narrated by Liam Neeson. Directed and produced by Greg MacGillivray, 
David Breashears and Stephen Judson. 40 minutes.
NR, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
After a while, you come to expect spectacular visuals from IMAX 
documentaries. Sweeping shots of glorious vistas have become the norm for 
works created using the giant scale film format. All too often though, 
the human element ends up lacking. In many IMAX documentaries, we watch 
nature at its most majestic and humanity at its most distant. Consider 
"Everest" the exception to the rule. Despite the awesome footage of the 
29,028 foot mountain, where the snow blows straight up, temperatures drop 
to 100 degrees below zero and avalanches are as routine as the sunset, 
it's the human story that packs the most punch here. Far more than a 
grand travelogue, "Everest" quite literally is a story of life and death.
When mountaineer and Emmy Award-winning filmmaker David Breashears agreed 
to document the ascent to the top of the world, he knew he had signed on 
for a logistic nightmare. A standard IMAX camera weighs 80 pounds and a 
single 500 foot roll of large format film, which can only capture 90 
seconds of action, weighs an additional five pounds. Breashears worked 
with engineers to create a specially-modified camera weighing only 35 
pounds, designed to withstand the extreme temperatures of the mountain. 
Even with the modifications, the process was still daunting. For example, 
tests showed that the cameras could not be loaded while wearing gloves, 
quite a problem for technicians at 20 below zero.
After a great deal of testing, the equipment was deemed suitable and in 
May 1996, the expedition began. Then, on May 10th, tragedy struck when 23 
climbers in a seperate expedition were caught in a horrific white-out 
that claimed several lives, including two of the group's leaders. 
Suddenly, the IMAX team found themselves documenting a tragedy, along 
with their own stirring rescue of one of the survivors, who stumbled into 
the IMAX group's camp suffering severe frostbite to his extremities. 
The subsequent footage is both nightmarish and absolutely riveting. In 
one scene, a man calls his wife in New Zealand, naming their unborn child 
shortly before freezing to death. The film allows the viewer to get to 
know the IMAX climbers, making their emotional comments on the tragedy 
before them all the more devastating. Narrated by actor Liam Neeson, 
Breashears' film captures the dazzling visuals one expects from an IMAX 
production; colorful prayer wheels spinning in Katmandu before the 
mission begins, a team member 
carefully traversing a ladder perilously balanced over a bottomless chasm,
 climbers dangling over massive cliffs of ice, and the sheer grandeur of 
the mountain itself. But ultimately, it's the story of the climbers and 
their impractical, dangerous, amazing quest to achieve that lingers long 
after you leave the theater. 
Humans are impossibly foolish creatures, and our remarkable ability to 
set 
unrealistic goals, coupled with the resolve to make those goals happen 
despite all odds, allows us to occassionally reach the heights of glory. 
"Everest," the finest IMAX documentary to date, captures all of that, 
along with a portrait of nature at its most awe-inspiring.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 MacGillivray Freeman Films/Arcturus Motion Pictures
 Director: Greg MacGillivray, David Breashears, Ed Viesturs
 Writers: Tim Cahill, Stephen Judson
 Cast:  Ed Viesturs, Araceli Segarra, Jamling Tenzing Norgay,
Sumiyo Tsuzuki, Paula Viesturs, Liam Neeson (Narrator)
   It is a fact well established that people travel exclusively to
impress their friends.  Knowing that, it's surprising that New
Yorkers will vacation merely in Puerto Rico and the English in
Benidorm.  Could you not better arouse the envy and
admiration of your buddies back home by making Nepal your
destination?  After all, why fool around with Bunker Hill when
you gaze at Mount Everest--even try your skill at climbing a
mile or so?  But think about this.  Many people have tried to
climb to the summit and died.  At least one adventurer lost
both of his hands to frostbite.  When stormy weather comes
and the wind-chill favor falls to one hundred degrees below
zero, you may wish you had gone to Disneyworld instead.  
   But if you're still game to try, you have this consolation:
your body will help you to adjust.  If you ascend gradually, the
number of red cells in your body will double so that you can
acquire more oxygen.  (If you tried to go from sea level to
the top in one fell swoop, you'd be unconscious in minutes,
dead shortly thereafter.)   On the other hand, as you
approach the summit, don't expect to be able to think straight,
to jog to the top, to sleep or even eat.  Mother Nature uses
every trick in her book to prevent you from reaching your
goal, and to prove this, MacGillivray Freeman Films has put
together a spectacular, forty-five minute film which no mere
printed material could possibly replicate.  "Everest," one of
the most impressive nature film ever released, is on display
on the 77-foot screen of New York's Sony IMAX theater and
will be screened, presumably at additional IMAX locations. 
Filmed in 2-D and thereby requiring no special devices for
viewing, "Everest" makes a good case for reserving half of
IMAX screens for pictures using this less adventurous
technology.  What you lose from bypassing the in-your-face
highlight of the 3-D machinery you gain in lightness of head
and the familiar border separating you, the audience, from
them, the performers.  "Everest," in fact, has its own three-
dimensional look that conventional screens are quite unable
to imitate.
   Filmed in Utah, New Hampshire, Colorado, Baja California
and Nepal, "Everest" answers the question posed by the
magazine "Nineteenth Century" during the 1870s, "Can Mount
Everest Be Climbed?" In a brief historical footnote, we learn
that New Zealander Edmund Hillary and Sherpa mountaineer
Tenzing Norgay reached the summit May 29, 1953.  Like the
breaking of the four-minute mile by an Australian runner
decades ago, this breakthrough led to several successful
expeditions between then and now, though the feat is hardly a
piece of cake.  Though seven hundred people have reached
the top, one hundred fifty died trying.
   The expedition team which filmed "Everest" was led by
David Breashears, who signed Ed Viesturs to the team--a
man who not only had reached the summit twice before but
did so without extra oxygen.  Also joining the team were
Viesturs's wife, Paula, who not unwisely thought that this was
a strange sort of honeymoon; Jamling Tenzing Norgay, who is
the son of Tenzing Norgay (Hillary's guide in '53); and Araceli
Segarra, whose goal was to become the first Spanish woman
ever to reach the top of the world.  To train for the trip, the
Viesturses rode their bikes across some Utah canyons, in
itself an expedition far too dangerous for most people to
undergo as a sudden flat or an improper turn would lead bike
and rider down a slipper slope.  The viewer is already given
the treat of this spectacular rocky scenery right here in our
own country, a setting that could perhaps be surpassed in
resplendence only by Mount Everest itself.  
   David Breashears's camera tracks the climb from base
camp to the higher levels, focusing on points of singularly
high drama, particularly on the Khumbu glacier--a moving
waterfall of ice, considered the deadliest place on the
mountain because ice blocks can shift and swallow a climber. 
Though the presentation is essentially a travelogue--a
uniquely magnificent one at that--"Everest" underscores some
plot points particularly in its visual description of the plight of
one of the climbers, who had left his pregnant wife in New
Zealand to make the ascent and died during a fierce storm. 
Spectators in the IMAX audience are given the actual
struggle to save his life, as climbers from the safer base
thousands of feet below radioed him to try to assure the
hapless adventurer that everything would be all right.  In the
film's climactic moment, Segarra is shown at the moment she
becomes the first Spanish woman to reach the top of the
world.
   At a special invitational screening, the world's second such
event, the audience were treated to a brief conference by
Breashears and Viestura, who answered questions from the
audience, the most poignant being "What do you do with the
bodies of those who die in the attempt?"  "There are no
formal burials," explained the director, "As there is now way
that the extra weight can be supported."  Victims are left
where they are, at best covered up by those who discover
them.
   Getting to the top of nature's most impressive giant is
awe-inspiring enough.  Getting there while toting some of the
heaviest and most sophisticated cameras yet known--
instruments which will not quit at 40 below--is imposing.  In
short, "Everest" is not your usual set of travel photographs
that you carry back to bore your friends and relatives with.

Author
Ben Hoffman
For starters, anyone who has never attended an IMAX screening has
missed out on a new kind of amazing movie.   With a screen five to
eight stories high and some ninety feet wide, the panorama is
magnificent.   Add that IMAX films are photographed in 70 millimeter
film so that unbelievably crisp, sharp focus prevails  This huge
encompassing brings you right into the picture as if you were there.
In this thrilling movie, a documentary of mountain climbers, both men
and women, who want to conquer the very highest mountain peak on
Earth located in China we are made to feel as if we know them; we
understand to some degree their drive, their belief they can make it
to the top despite many attempts by others having ended in the
tragedy of frostbite and death because of the terrible windstorms and
avalanches.
MacGillivray Freeman Films was fortunate enough to have two veterans
of Mt. Everest leading the group, filmmaker David Brashears and Ed
Viesturs, America's leading Himalayan mountaineer.   Jamling Tenzing
of Norway and Araceli Segarra, the latter wanting to be the first
Spanish woman to reach the peak, were among those along with 8 other
climbers, 50 porters and 100 yaks who were on this expedition.   The
cameras follow the intrepid adventurers ascent, the interim places
where they stop to rest, the Sherpa villages, the base camps.
 With oxygen content of the air becoming thinner and thinner with
each new altitude, they are aware that the body must be allowed to
accustom itself.  To go straight up, even if one could, would mean
death.  These are some of the things the climbers have to keep in
mind.    Later, when they are near the top, the lack of oxygen
combines with the utter weariness to cause them to lose their normal
behavior and reasoning.   Climbing is but one of the obstacles they
have to face.
We are shown the gear used to climb, to span chasms,   But the
filming of the ascent required heroic work of getting cameras and
film to the top where helicopters found it hard to go because there
was not enough air to be gripped by the blades.
Breathtaking vistas, sweeping panoramas, fierce winds and snow storms
are the norm in this magnificent film.  For an adventure unlike most
others, EVEREST cannot be beat.
