Title
Review for Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema 
U.S. Release Date: June 1995 
Running Length: 1:33  
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, profanity, sex) 
     THE INCREDIBLY TRUE ADVENTURES OF TWO GIRLS IN LOVE, director Maria 
Maggenti's debut feature, is a lesbian romantic comedy.  Coming hot on 
the heels of BAR GIRLS and last year's GO FISH, it provides a different, 
although equally lighthearted, perspective on a romance between two 
females.  In this case, the protagonists are high school girls, and the 
experience represents the first stirrings of true love for each of them. 
     ADVENTURES gets off to an unpromising start, with some mediocre 
opening music that screams "I'm a comedy!" (as if the overlong title 
wasn't enough to get the point across).  For about the first half-hour, 
most of the jokes fall flat, and the few that work are unlikely to cause 
more than a smattering of laughter.  The characters follow fairly 
traditional patterns.  Randy (Laurel Hollomon) is a tough-as-nails 
tomboy living in "your typical, normal lesbo household."  Eve (Nicole 
Ari Parker) is a well-spoken, intelligent young woman who has just 
broken up with her boyfriend.  The two get together and become friends.
     Although the opening scenes aren't a memorable example of movie 
making, at least they're infused with a high level of energy and 
enthusiasm.  Regardless of script and budget limitations, it's clear 
that director Maria Maggenti invested a great deal of herself in this 
project.  She made ADVENTURES to show the world that lesbian love is 
just as funny and touching as its heterosexual counterpart. 
     Fortunately, as things start heating up between Randy and Eve, the 
screenplay gets a needed influx of winning humor.  And, as the level of 
comedy escalates, the audience warms up to the characters.  While it's 
true that neither is fleshed out to three dimensions, both radiate auras 
of likability.  The laughter and general goodwill generated by the final 
hour makes the plodding first thirty minutes forgivable. 
     ADVENTURES doesn't offer any new or unexpected revelations about 
lesbian lifestyles or gay/straight interaction.  Many of Maggenti's 
secondary characters are caricatures, but Randy and Eve thankfully 
settle on a slightly elevated plane.  This is in part due to fine 
performances by two little-known actresses, Laurel Hollomon and Nicole 
Ari Parker, who didn't get paid for the work they contributed. 
     This film is probably a little too predictable to appeal to the 
wide, "crossover" audience Fine Line is aiming for, but it offers a 
better-than-average entertainment experience for those who suffered 
through the likes of CLAIRE OF THE MOON and the aforementioned BAR 
GIRLS.  THE INCREDIBLY TRUE ADVENTURES OF TWO GIRLS IN LOVE represents a 
moderately enjoyable, if somewhat silly, diversion, which, in essence, 
makes it a typical -- although untraditional -- entry into the romantic 
comedy genre. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Wendy E. Betts
Written and directed by Maria Maggenti
Starring Laurel Hollomon and Nicole Parker
     As sweet and refreshing as a frosty glass of lemonade, this is a
lovely little movie that leaves the heart both warmed and aching.  It's
a tender, very funny, utterly sincere look at first love for two
teenagers who seem to have nothing in common--except that they're both
girls.   Randy, who lives with her aunt in a poor but happy lesbian
household, is a social outcast, failing in school; Evie is rich,
intellectual and popular.  The fact that Randy is white and Evie is
black is the least of their problems.
     The inevitable culture conflicts that arise when Randy and Evie
fall in love are played largely for laughs, as when Evie comes out to
her utterly vapid friends, who advise her to try and rent that movie
about the two girls who went to the prom, and a marvelous slapstick
scene in which the two girls are caught in bed by Evie's mother, who's
far more freaked out about the mess they made of her house than about
her daughter having sex.  But the often broad humor takes nothing away
from what the story is really about: falling in love. The typical
cliches of first love are shown here with such warmth and charm that
they seem newly fresh and unique--just as they do in real life when
people fall in love.  The girls playing Randy and Evie were so
believable that I felt a little embarrassed during a tender scene in
which they make love for the first time; although respectfully and
fairly modestly filmed, it seemed too personal for a stranger to be
watching.
     Both comic and romantic, naturally THE INCREDIBLY TRUE ADVENTURES
OF TWO GIRLS IN LOVE is a "feel-good" kind of movie, an accolade it
deserves far more than many slicker, more professional films.  But
although Evie and Randy's problems as a lesbian couple are treated
lightly, they're an undercurrent that can never be totally
disregarded.  The ending of the film doesn't offer a perfect
resolution, but poignantly symbolizes both the difficulty any
mismatched lovers have of shutting out the censorious voices of the
world, and the fact that it is still worth trying.
-- 
Wendy E. Betts, Editor "The WEB: Celebrating Children's Literature"
finger web@deeptht.armory.com; http://www.armory.com/~web/web.html
