Title
Review for It Happened Here (1966)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Gardiner
It's 1940 on the western seaboard of the continent of Europe. The retreating
British army is driven back to the sea on the beaches of Dunkirk, and makes
good its escape back to England carried by a makeshift fleet of sea-going
pleasurecraft and small boats that previously carried parties of
holidaymakers up and down the Thames or over and back to the Isle of Wight.
But his time the advancing German army does not stop at the coast.....
The premise of this most unusual war film is that Britain was invaded and
occupied after the Dunkirk retreat, and in a mixture of documentary and
narrative styles it sets out to tell the story of the occupation that the
country narrowly (some would say, unaccountably) escaped, up to and
including the 'liberation', orchestrated by the efforts of local partisans
with American assistance, in the war's closing year.
This is a low-key, reflective war drama, which follows its central
character, an Irish-born district nurse working in a village near Salisbury,
through the horrors of a partisan ambush that goes wrong, to a chilling
Nazi-dominated vision of London, where she finds herself assimilated into
the highly political "Immediate Action Organization" and receives her
"political re-education", on to a rural medical centre specialising in
euthenasia for "undesirables", through to the final chilling irony of
"liberation" and the wholesale slaughter of "collaborators".
It is hard to believe that this film began its life as the spare-time
project of 18-year-old Kevin Brownlow, a film enthusiast working in the
cutting-room of a small London production company, and his 16-year-old
schoolboy friend Andrew Mollo, who had a passion for military history and a
collection of old German uniforms and regalia. Starting without a budget,
using a borrowed 16 mm camera, the two doggedly pursued their dream of
completing the project for almost eight years, finding actors, actresses,
sets and backing as they went along. The incredible story of the film's
birth is told in Kevin Brownlow's 1968 book "How It Happened Here"
(Doubleday & Co., New York), now unfortunately out of print.
The most famous sequence in the work is a six-minute scene in which genuine
Neo-Nazis expound their ideas. When the film was first previewed at various
British film festivals, it was this scene that incurred the wrath of a
number of Jewish organizations, who mantained that the film lacked balance
in that no substantial counter-argument was presented to the opinions
expressed by these monsters. Early performances were greeted by jeers,
chants of "shame" and mass walk-outs from film theatres.
Kevin Brownlow maintained throughout that the Neo-Nazis condemned themselves
out of their own mouths for anyone with an ounce of intelligence, but the
topic was too hot to handle and in order to get the film accepted for
distribution by United Artists the Directors had to agree to the removal of
the sequence, which was not allowed back into the British release version
until the distribution rights were taken over by Connoisseur in 1993. The
Connoisseur video version of that date is a full, uncut transcription.
As well as the Jews, many others were offended by the film, and it was
widely criticized on political grounds, as being deeply unpatriotic. The
British public had been flattered by Churchillian rhetoric into believing
itself exempt from the flaws of other national groups. A people who had
become accustomed to declairing: "Thank you, Lord, that I am not as other
men!" was being tapped in the shoulder and told: "Sorry, my friend, you are
no different".  There could be no more subversive artistic act than an
attack on this smug self-image.
Every individual and every group that the film portrays is tainted in some
way with moral compromise. We are presented with an England peopled by cowed
and unthinking conformists who just want to "get the country back on its
feet"; fanatical resistance fighters who have no concern for the fate of
ordinary people caught in the cross-fire; German soldiers who casually
murder unarmed civilians, smile sheepishly, and continue on their way;
American "forces of liberation" who do the same to groups of so-called
collaborators as they carry out a scorched-earth de-Natzification policy of
the newly "liberated" territory; mild-mannered old country doctors in
genteel rural hospitals who calmly dispatch their patients with lethal
injections before making their way downstairs for supper. Every incident
portrayed is based on well-documented events that took place in other
occupied countries.
Nobody is spared in Brownlow's profoundly pacifist analysis of the military
mind-set. War and military occupation are presented as pits of horror and
despair that are without bottom. Ordinary, well-meaning people like Pauline
Murray are swept along by forces far beyond their control into dark
political whirkpools from which there is no escape. This is a chilling
nightmare of a film that demands of every viewer that they ask themselves
the question: What would I have done?
The ideas put forward in "It Happened Here" are so riveting even for a
modern audience that it tends to be discussed mainly as a socio-political
treatise and neglected as a film. And looked-at as a film, it undoubtedly
has its faults. The acting, as one would expect from a group of amateurs, is
uneven. Pauline Murray (who is very cleverly allowed to retain her own name
in the film) was the wife of a doctor friend of the two Directors: she had
never acted before. We  see her technique develop as the story progresses
(it was filmed more or less in sequence) and it is a process which, no doubt
unintentionally, actually adds to the strength of the film. The story seems
to emerge out of a naive daydream into something increasingly realistic and
dreadful.
The film's mixture of documentary and narrative style, somewhat reminiscent
of Citizen Kane, was an ambitious and thoroughly appropriate format,
surperbly well-realized with the help of such genuine news-reel voice-over
artists as Alvar Liddell and John Snagge (who gave their services free). The
staged "archive footage" of the Flanders Field Christmas Day football match
would do credit to any professional production company, as would the use of
rousing military music to establish and maintain atmosphere. Brownlow's
skill in carrying us along with his appalling fantasy is rooted in his
commitment to the project: we see German tanks everywhere when we know in
our heart of hearts that Kevin was only able to get hold of one, because
this is the world that we have agreed to enter into. There is no real
interest in looking for the seams and the improvisations. We are involved in
the realization of a nightmare. It is the spirit and the atmosphere of the
piece that seize hold of us, not the limitations of the production budget.
I found this film disturbing, unsettling, unfogettable. The scale of the
achievement involved in the creation of a work of this quality from such
humble beginnings can hardly be overstated. I sincerely hope that you may
get the opportunity to see it, because it is, I know, something of a rarity.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

IT HAPPENED HERE (directors/writers: Kevin Brownlow/Andrew Mollo;
cinematographer: Peter Suschitzky; cast: Pauline Murray (Nurse,
Pauline), Sebastian Shaw (Dr. Richard Fletcher-the only professional
actor in the film), Peter Bennett (IA Political Leader), Honor Fehrson
(Honor Hutton), Rex Collett (IA NCO), Nicholas Moore (IA Group Leader
Moorfield), Colin Jordan (Leader in the IA- in real life, the head of
the British National Socialist movement), Miles Halliwell (IA political
lecturer), Bart Allison (Skipworth), Reginald Marsh (IA Medical
Officer), Nicolette Bernard (IA Woman Commandant), 1966-UK)
An historical fantasy film that took eight years to make. Kevin Brownlow
started it in 1956 when he was 18 and was helped by the 16-year-old
co-director Mollo; they finished it 1964, but had to wait two more years
before United Artists could distribute it. This low-budget independent
effort (it had a whopping budget of about $20,000), initiated from an
original idea by Kevin Brownlow.The events are make believe; the B/W
film resembles an Orwellian nightmare. It is an intensive study of what
it might have been like in England in 1944 if it had lost the war and
had been occupied by the Germans. The directors are serious students of
the past and their aim is re-create that vision. It is the same aim that
they had for their other film, Winstanley (75).
Kubrick furnished Brownlow with some of his leftover film stock from Dr.
Strangelove to finish shooting it; another established director, Tony
Richardson, also helped the filmmakers out.
The German invasion of England took place in July 1940 after the British
retreat from Dunkirk. The British resisted at first, but the German army
beat down that resistance. The resistance movement lacking outside
support, was finally crushed. Then, in 1944, the resistance movement
reappeared. This is where this fantasy film begins. It looks as if it is
a semidocumentary, with scenes padded for dramatic effect and narrative.
Pauline Murray (in real-life, she is a doctor's wife) is the main
character; she is an apolitical Irish-born district nurse working in the
area of Salisbury, who gets caught up in the horrors of the conflict.
The partisan movement uses terror to get the Germans out of the rural
towns they have captured. This forces the Germans to evacuate all the
civilians in those towns. She witnesses six of her closest friends
gunned down by the partisans, and decides to make her way from the
country to the demilitarized zone of London. Fearing she can't work as a
nurse unless she joins a British fascist organization, also fed up with
the violence on both sides, she thereby naively joins the Immediate
Action Organization (IA)-  and is trained to work in their fascist style
and methods. She is most proud of the new shoes they give her, which is
probably one of the appeals the Nazis had to the people when starting
out in impoverished Germany. To answer her concerns that the IA looks
just like the Nazis, the leader tells her, we must organize ourselves
like the Nazis to succeed. We must be even better organized then they
are. When the war is over, then we will see what happens.
She will gradually see through their deceits, remaining loyal to her
friends who harbor partisans rather than being loyal to the IA. She
hears the IA diatribes against the Jews and the call for euthanasia to
rid the country of the undesirables, but she only wants for things to be
normal again in England. The power in the film is from the sheer force
of the clash of ideas and the expressions coming forth from the
nonprofessional actors. The film allows you the luxury to see things for
yourself instead of being spoon-fed what to believe.
Who better to play a fascist, than a real live one- Colin Jordan! He
presents his case for hatred in his own words, which at the time,
frightened many people, including certain British Jewish organizations
who feared his message would be taken literally. The result was that
seven minutes of the film were cut until recently, when Brownlow
regained control of the film and Milestone released it for the first
time in its full version. It was the directors intention that by having
the neo-Nazi leader speak his mind, he would reveal how ridiculous his
ideas were, which proved to be true.
One of the more interesting scenes, was that of the patients suffering
from tuberculosis being transported to a comfortable hospital. They were
played by real TB patients and were moved into a real TB rehabilitation
center. This scene of euthanasia was done in a most humane manner, by
injecting them with poison, it was one of the most powerful and stunning
scenes to behold.
The filmmakers used mainly original rather than merely authentic
costumes and props, and they refrained from using any archival footage,
which would have been easy to obtain. They drew most of their sense of
history from the 1940s by watching newsreels, but in the film they only
used voice-overs from professionals who donated their services and used
montages and close-ups to get the 1944 look they wanted. You can say
whatever you want about their methods, but when you look at the results
you feel the intensity and madness of the drama, it has a curious
starkness about it that is very compelling. It had the mark of a true
artist's stamp on it, even its amateur production values do not weigh
heavily against it. Even the ending of the film, as it comes to no
particular conclusion, it just ends by allowing this remarkable work to
be viewed for what it suggested, shows a confidence that the film
accomplished what it set out to do. It certainly took the smugness out
of anyone thinking that fascism couldn't surface in a country like
England. Everyone in the film was compromised to a certain extent,
including the decent Pauline Murray, who fell for the phony appeal of
the Nazis, thinking they could bring law and order to a country reeling
from riotous conditions. It showed the final liberation by the
Americans, as an ironically gruesome scene, where collaborators were
rounded up and executed. Earlier on, it showed the Germans killing off
the villagers and quietly smiling as they went about their business. A
call for pacifism, is the clearest message that could be heard from
between the lines when all is said and done.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
