Title
Review for Addicted to Love (1997)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Monika Huebner
Director: Griffin Dunne
Cast: Meg Ryan, Matthew Broderick, Kelly Preston, Tchéky Karyo
Sam (Matthew Broderick) is an astronomer in a small American town and
engaged to teacher Linda (Kelly Preston). He is head over heels in
love and Lindas sudden departure to New York City to live with her new
lover Anton (Tchéky Karyo) comes as a complete surprise to him. 
But as we all know love is blind and so Sam leaves for New York as
well to win her back. He moves into an abandoned house across the
street from Anton's apartment and installs a camera obscura to watch
them. Suddenly Anton's ex Maggie shows up, but she does not want her
former lover back. On the contrary, all she wants to do is vaporize
him. She may say that she doesn't want to kill him, but the
possibility doesn't bother her too much either. After all, people die
every day.  
In spite of their different motives the two team up and fall for each
other as things move on. The story sounds like something we all have
seen a million times. But we haven't. Griffin Dunne brings us the most
charming comedy since "While you where sleeping". The camera obscura
adds a "special something" to the movie and makes it an exceptional
romantic comedy. 
Everything about the movie is perfect, from set design to casting. The
dialogues are inspired and the touches of black humor add a certain
bite. 
Meg Ryan, known from "When Harry met Sally" or "Sleepless in Seattle",
surprises in a role that may finally help her get rid of her sweet
little girl image. She impresses the viewer as a maneating biker girl.
Even more surprising is the fact that the viewer believes her, much
more so than in last years "Courage under Fire" where she played a
Gulf war pilot. 
Matthew Broderick is the goodnatured and somewhat naive Sam who has
trouble accepting reality. The viewer can tell that he doesn't only
watch the stars but also tries to reach out for them. He has trouble
keeping in touch with reality. After all, who would leave everything
behind to chase a lost love? His naiveté that we don't question for a
minute throughout the movie clashes with Maggies exaggerated wish for
revenge. She would do anything to harm Anton. She doesn't hesitate to
use Sam for her plan and makes him understand right from the beginning
that nothing will happen between the two of them. That makes the
scenes when they innocently share a bed, have potatoe chips and watch
the action across the street like a saturday night show on TV even
funnier. 
Tchéky Karyo is perfect as Anton. He is, well, repulsive. That's all
there is to say about him. You can't really manage to pity him, even
after all his mishaps. He not only took Sam's bride away from him, he
is also a French chef. Worlds collide, i. e. the USA and France. This
can only go wrong. Even if Maggies revenge schemes are at times
shocking, you just can't sympathize with a man who plays "Je
t'aime...moi non plus" on his tape deck. Not everyone is captured by
the French charme that Linda and even Maggie fell for. Sam certainly
isn't. Too bad for Anton. For him things take a turn to the worse.
"Addicted to Love" is one of this year's most pleasant surprises. 
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin/indexalt.html

Author
Christopher Null
     The idea of a "revenge comedy" naturally appeals to my dark side,
and I've always been a Matthew Broderick fan -- so what could keep me
from getting out to this little film?  Not much.  Not the fact that the
first act feels like it was put together while the writer was under
anesthetic.  Not the fact that the film's editing is better described as
butchery.  Not the fact that Broderick as a hick astronomer is a bit
far-fetched.  Not the fact that Kelly Preston is an unbelievable bore to
watch.
     No, none of this could keep me from laughing at the hysterics of
Broderick and Meg Ryan trying to win back and irrevocably destroy their
respective lovers.  While ADDICTED TO LOVE has more gaping plot holes
than you can shake a stick at, it's still awfully funny when it wants to
be, largely carried on the shoulders of Broderick's natural charm and a
cast of thousands (of roaches).  And Meg Ryan ain't bad, either.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     ADDICTED TO LOVE is a fresh and surprisingly good, romantic comedy
by actor Griffin Dunne in his first time as a director of a feature
length film.  In it writer Robert Gordon creates a wondrous tale of two
jilted lovers who reluctantly join forces when they find that their
ex-lovers are now living with each other.
     Sam, played by Matthew Broderick in a role somewhat reminiscent of
his character in INFINITY, is an astronomer with a big heart.  Every
day at high noon, he points his huge telescope down to earth so the
love of his life, Linda (Kelly Preston), can wave to him from the park
in their little town.  When Linda disappears, leaving only a "Dear
John" letter for him, he tracks her down to New York where she is
living with a Frenchman named Anton (Tcheky Karyo).
     Sam, looking disheveled and with his constant 4-day-old beard,
sets up shop in an abandoned warehouse across from Anton's apartment.
Using all of his scientific prowess, he begins graphing everything
right down to Linda's degree of smile.  With the data he is confident
that he can predict when Linda will break up with Anton and return to
him.  Afterall, these same statistical techniques worked for him when
gazing at the stars.  Well, as you can imagine, humans are much less
predictable than celestial bodies.
     Into Sam's cozy world comes Maggie, played by Meg Ryan in her best
comedic part since WHEN HARRY MET SALLY...  Ryan, who is one of the
most talented actresses working today, is probably most enjoyable in
her funny parts, but, to be honest, it is in her serious roles as in
COURAGE UNDER FIRE and, one of my personal favorites, WHEN A MAN LOVES
A WOMAN that her greatness shows best.  All of this notwithstanding,
she is terrific in ADDICTED TO LOVE.
     Maggie was tossed aside by Anton, and she wants to get even with
him.  She does not want to kill him, but if he died, well, people die
every day.  She moves uninvited into Sam's lair and starts watching
Anton and scheming ways to seriously mess up Anton's life.
     Biker Maggie, with her punk rocker heavy black eye shadow and her
tough-as-steel attitude, sets Sam straight from the beginning.  She
sleeps naked, but he is not to interpret that as a come on.  She
elaborates on the pain that she will inflict on him if he even touches
her.  Ryan is given some great dialog and hurls sexual insults at Sam
as well as the absent Anton.
     From the beginning, you know that Sam and Maggie are bound to get
together.  The intelligent script makes the inevitable enjoyable anyway
because the characters created are so incredibly likable and
interesting.  You want them to fall in love and do not care if it is
clearly preordained.  Tough Ryan dishes out one funny line after
another to straight man Broderick, and the chemistry between them is
beautiful.
     Several key decisions were made that make the film work so well.
One was to concentrate on two leads rather than four.  Karyo and
Preston support the leads but never compete with them for screen time.
Broderick, in a recent interview, said that he felt awkward playing a
role that director Dunne could have played himself.  While true, the
casting remains perfect as is.  Broderick has the good sense to let
Ryan set the rhythm for their interactions and roll with the punches.
     Easily, the most intriguing and innovative aspect of the movie is
Sam's use of a camera obscura to project Linda and Anton's images into
Sam and Maggie's hiding place.  This delicious plot device is milked
for everything it is worth.  Sometimes Sam and Maggie even set on a old
sofa, MYSTERY SCIENCE THEATER-style, and make up funny dialog for what
their ex-lovers are saying to each other.
     ADDICTED TO LOVE is a sweet show, even in its blackest moments.
It posses a high spirited energy and a perfect sense of timing that
never loses the audience's attention.  Only in the needlessly slapstick
body cast scenes does the movie ever bog down.  An intelligent picture
that leaves you enchanted and delighted as you leave the theater.  I
found myself bursting into song in the parking lot for reasons unknown.
Good movies can cause such strange reactions.
     ADDICTED TO LOVE runs 1:41.  It is rated R for sexual humor and
some profanity.  The show would be fine for any teenager.  Don't miss
this little jewel of a movie.  It earns *** from me, and I almost gave
it even more.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Sanford
        Although generally thought of as the sweetly romantic type,
Meg Ryan has actually done an impressive amount of dramatic stretching
throughout her career. Those who know her only from hits such as
``When Harry Met Sally'' and ``Sleepless in Seattle'' might not
suspect she's also played an Irish asylum inmate (in ``Restoration''),
a tattooed teen-aged hellraiser (``Promised Land''), and, in her
sharpest performance to date, an alcoholic mother in ``When A Man
Loves A Woman.''
  Ryan is back on the edge in ``Addicted To Love,'' although
you'd never guess it from the film's adorable poster, which shows her,
Matthew Broderick, Tcheky Karyo and Kelly Preston cuddling and
grinning. It looks like a typical box of Hollywood candy, but
``Addicted To Love'' is full of baker's chocolate.
  Ryan is cast as a borderline psychotic named Maggie for whom
love means never having to cry ``uncle.'' Wearing a battered bomber
jacket, aviator goggles, a knowing sneer, and eyeshadow that might
have been applied with a pushbroom, she's the perfect Greenwich
Village vision of a woman scorned.  Cuddling and grinning are not on
her agenda.
  Jilted by her elitist French fiance Anton (Karyo), Maggie
vows to strip him of his dignity. ``When I'm done with him, he'll be a
twitching stain on the floor,'' she tells her timid partner Sam
(Broderick). Sam, a moony astronomer, has hooked up with Maggie
because his dreamy former girlfriend Linda (Preston) is now living
with Anton.
  Setting up shop in the collapsing hovel across the street,
Sam has trained a camera obscura on Linda and Anton's apartment. When
they're not concocting bizarre revenge schemes, involving
lipstick-wearing monkeys and children with perfume-filled squirt guns,
Sam and Maggie are couch potatoes, spellbound by the cinema-verite
sitcom of their ex-lovers' lives.
  ``Addicted To Love'' was directed by Griffin Dunne, star of
Martin Scorsese's harrowing 1985 comedy ``After Hours,'' the story of
an extraordinarily unlucky yuppie trying to survive a night in New
York.  ``Addicted'' is similarly dark. Fans who loved Ryan's
milquetoast persona in ``I.Q.'' and ``French Kiss'' may slip into
shock when they hear Maggie tell the story of her father's unnatural
devotion to his aging dog.
  While it's consistently amusing, the movie falls just short
of blossoming into a genuinely twisted tale. Screenwriter Robert
Gordon develops popsicle toes in the last act, slightly diluting his
astringent humor.
  Karyo, best known for playing stolid types in art-house hits
such as ``La Femme Nikita'' (1991), displays a surprising gift for
physical farce and manages the English language with finesse. ``Why
would I have sex with a hamburger when I can make love to a steak?''
he tells a suspicious Linda, trying to assure her he's not unfaithful.
  Sam may be a bit on the sappy side, but Broderick finds the
guy's naive charm. His understated style blends nicely with Ryan's
edgy chutzpah, and kudos to whoever put Ryan in those tie-dyed
dresses: They definitely become her. Of course, the downside of
Maggie's charisma is that it throws the story's logic out of whack,
making one wonder why Sam is pining away for the wan, colorless Linda
across the street when he's got someone much more exciting in the
house.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Appealing actors alone do not a romantic comedy make.  The genre defines a
film that is light, charming, and cute.  While "Addicted to Love" is
certainly all of those things to a degree, and *does* offer the charismatic
Meg Ryan and Matthew Broderick, for some reason it's missing that magical
spark that puts it in the same league as, say, "When Harry Met Sally..."
When his girlfriend Linda (Kelly Preston) jilts him for a French
restarauteur, Sam (Broderick) heads for the big city to try and win her
back.  Sam, an astronomer by profession, holes up in an abandoned building
across the alley from his ex and rigs up an elaborate camera obscura to spy
on her.  This fantastical device, constructed from bits and pieces from the
office, projects fuzzy images of his former lover's comings and goings onto
the whitewashed walls of his hideout like a big screen TV.  Clearly he made
the wrong career choice somewhere down the line; few private investigators
get this good a look at their quarry.
When an unwelcome visitor, Maggie (Ryan) drops in on Sam's stakeout, it's
soon clear why.  This guy Anton (Tcheky Karyo) that Linda is, er, seeing,
is Maggie's ex.  Et voila!  Maggie's contributions to the surveillance
operation include a cactus--quirky--and a number of strategically-placed
microphones, which pick up every sigh, gasp, and moan from the neighboring
love loft.
Sam and Maggie's voyeuristic goals are very different, however.  Sam is
gathering data in a scientific attempt to chart Linda and Anton's
inevitable break-up.  For the star-struck Sam, Linda's condition is just a
passing phase, like a new moon.  Maggie, on the other hand, simply wants to
exact revenge.
The contrivances of the script are mostly predictable (letting cockroaches
loose in a restaurant, for example), although it is amusing hearing Anton
explain to Linda why he smells like expensive perfume, or has lipstick on
his collar.  "Why would I have sex with ze hamburger when I can make love
to ze steak?" gasps Anton in his defense.  Maggie and Sam grimace more than
usual during that interpersonal exchange.
At one point the film turns into "Mystery Science Theater 3000," with a
tipsy Ryan and Broderick sitting in for the wise-cracking robots, dubbing
the muted lines of their rivals with much wit and pathos.  Less charming is
Maureen Stapleton's character, who shows up for five minutes simply to tell
Ryan "your tits look like rocks."  And frankly, Broderick is starting to
lose some of that puppy-ish charm that has worked so well for him in the
past.
"Love can sometimes be a very difficult thing," begins Linda's 'Dear John'
letter to Sam early on in the picture.  Watching "Addicted to Love" can be
occasionally tedious, but it's not without its moments.

Author
Christina Gross
The astronomer Sam (Broderick) and the teacher Linda (Preston) , a
blonde angel, are the perfect American small town couple. He watches
the stars and everyday at noon his love in a nearby park. He could go
on like this forever. She escapes to New York City.
Sam goes after her and discovers that meanwhile she is living with
Frenchman Anton (Karyo). So he moves into an abandoned house across
the street and waits for her to come back.
Then Antons crazy ex-fiancée Maggie (Ryan) moves in with him. Her
intentions aren't quite as innocent as his. She wants to vaporize her
ex.
To seperate the faithless lovers is only the first step. Anton has to
suffer much more. He looses his restaurant, his furniture is
reposessed and finally he is disfigured by the effects of a strawberry
allergy.
Of course the story ends well, mainly because Sam is so incredibly
GOOD.
But before we get there we can have a few hearty laughs.
I don't know what I like best: the wild couple Ryan/Broderick or the
idea to use the Camera Obscura.
Teddy bear Broderick collides with hard drinking leather wearing biker
girl Ryan.
Both are excellent. You buy both the funny and the more serious parts
of their roles.
They make the other couple fade out. Especially Linda. She is blonde
and sweet. Besides we owe her two zany appearances of her father who
alway has to deliver the 'Dear John'-letters to her ex-lovers.
Anton is the cliché Frenchman. In the end you almost sympathize with
him, when even his furniture is taken away, his skin itches and he
breaks both his arms. But not quite.
The Camera Obscura Sam uses to bring Linda's picture into his run-down
apartment provides us with beautiful images. One scene where Maggie
and Sam sit on the couch with a bag of potatoe chips and watch their
exes like a TV program reminded me of "When Harry met Sally".
I have to mention the set design. Everything is perfect: Ryans
outfits, the abandoned house and especially the collage Maggie makes
in the course of the movie.
One thing I did not like was the timid attempt to justify Maggie's
revenge.
It didn't fit into the comedy and wasn't pursued consequently enough
to lend some depth to the story.
Gesehen und Gelesen: Buch- und Filmkritiken
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Meg Ryan, Matthew Broderick, Kelly Preston, Tcheky Karyo.
Screenplay:  Robert Gordon.
Producers:  Jeffrey Silver and Bobby Newmyer.
Director:  Griffin Dunne.
MPAA Rating:  R (adult themes, sexual situations, profanity)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Begin with the fact that ADDICTED TO LOVE is about two people
stalking their respective ex-lovers, and you'll see that it isn't exactly
your conventional romantic comedy.  That's a strong statement when you
consider that "conventional" and "romantic comedy" are virtually
synonymous where major studios are concerned.  Perhaps more than any other
genre, the romantic comedy thrives on predictability, in much the same way
that romance novels thrive on predictability.  ADDICTED TO LOVE is a film
which takes risks within that genre, which makes it a rarity.  The fact
that so many of those risks pay off makes it particularly intriguing.
     ADDICTED TO LOVE stars Matthew Broderick as Sam, an astronomer living
a simple small-town life with long-time girlfriend Linda (Kelly Preston)
before she accepts a teaching fellowship in New York.  Sam contents 
himself with the knowledge that she'll be back in just a few months, until
he receives a "Dear John" letter from Linda ending their relationship.
Rather than take the break-up lying down, Sam races off to New York, where
he discovers Linda living with a French restaurateur named Anton (Tcheky
Karyo).  Taking up residence in the abandoned building across the street,
Sam begins spying on Linda and Anton, waiting for their relationship to
fall apart as he is sure it will.  That is before he meets Maggie (Meg
Ryan), Anton's ex-fiancee, who helps herself to sharing Sam's makeshift
abode.  Maggie doesn't want Anton back -- she wants revenge, and making
Anton suffer falls neatly into Sam's plans as well.  Together the two plot
to bring Anton to his knees, but unexpectedly find their joint mission
bringing them closer together.
     Perhaps the most impressive thing about ADDICTED TO LOVE is how it
makes its tricky premise work.  Screenwriter Robert Gordon could have gone
for all-out farce in which the motivations of the characters mattered less
than their wacky actions; he could have made Linda and Anton so
one-dimensionally villainous that they seemed to deserve whatever they
got.  In short, he could have written THE FIRST SIGNIFICANT-OTHERS' CLUB.
Instead, he tries something rather dangerous:  he makes everyone human.
Sam is a man whose obsession is less pathological than scientific -- he
keeps watching Linda because her behavior just doesn't make sense based on
his rational observations.  Maggie, on the other hand, is so deeply hurt
that all she can think about is hurting Anton right back, her feelings so
intense that she pulls Sam into them with her.  Even Anton is a 
complicated creation, with Tcheky Karyo giving a surprisingly engaging
performance as a man who is more self-absorbed than malicious.  ADDICTED
TO LOVE draws comedy and emotion from understanding of the people
involved.  Their actions don't automatically render them unsympathetic
because we are allowed to know why they do what they do.
     It was also a risk pairing Broderick and Ryan, since both have made
careers out of characters notable largely for their geniality.  Broderick
doesn't stray far from that persona, though he is still very appealing as
a decent guy doing some indecent things.  It is Ryan who stretches the
most, perhaps even farther than she stretched in the straight drama of
COURAGE UNDER FIRE.  This is no Sally Albright she is playing -- there
isn't a shred of romantic wistfulness left in Maggie.  Her comic lines are
savage and bitter, allowing Ryan to display a darker comedic edge which
previous roles hadn't given her a chance to show.  Her performance gives
the romance unexpected depth, lending poignancy to scenes like a romantic
interlude with Broderick in which each participant is thinking about the
one he or she _really_ loves.
     None of this would matter much, of course, if ADDICTED TO LOVE
weren't also funny.  There are plenty of quirky laughs in Gordon's script,
from a sweet scene between Ryan and Broderick providing dialogue for a
conversation between Anton and Linda to a stampede of cockroaches through
a restaurant.  Griffin Dunne's direction provides the one jarring flaw in
ADDICTED TO LOVE, creating an awkward rhythm in those comic moments of
Maggie and Sam's plan against Anton which isn't always in synch with the
character development.  The broad physical humor is sometimes out of place
in a story which does such a good job of creating characters struggling to
heal emotionally.  Then again, that is just one more way in which ADDICTED
TO LOVE doesn't take you exactly where you might expect to go.  In case it
really matters, ADDICTED TO LOVE is a conventional enough romantic comedy
that it provides a suitably happy ending.  Beyond that, let it surprise
you.

Author
Ben Hoffman
It would be difficult to find two more charming actors than Matthew
Broderick and Meg Ryan but it takes more than charm to sustain a
movie.   Somewhere between the reading of the script and getting it on
film, something went a bit wrong; not very much but enough.  The
premise of a young man and woman losing their respective significant
others, only to discover that the "others" they lost are now in love
with each other, certainly sounds as if it would have made a light
romantic comedy.
Sam (Broderick), who is an astronomer in a small midwest town, is a
young romantic. Maggie (Ryan), a New Yorker who has seen enough to make
her wary, is a photographer who by chance meets our astronomer when
both she and he are spying on the two lovers who had jilted them.   The
cynic in Maggie convinces the romantic in Sam that the best way to get
back their respective lovers is by humiliating them.  But how?
Suffice it to say, Sam and Maggie establish themselves in a run-down
loft that just happens to have a one way view into the apartment of
their ex-lovers, Linda (Kelly Preston) and Anton (Tcheky Karyo) where
they sit around watching their exes cavort.     This is where the
movie bogs down.  After a while the spying becomes a bit tiresome but
continues through a good part of the film.  That may have been the
funniest gimmick in the movie but it soon becomes a one- note
gimmick.    That screenwriter Robert Gordon was experienced in breakups
of longtime relationships because he had had one of his own is really
irrelevant.   One would hope his breakup had more humor than does the
story he wrote . . . and that is too bad because whatever entertainment
there is in the film falls mainly on the aforementioned charm of the
two leads, too heavy a burden.
In a cameo, Maureen Stapleton appears as Maggie's mother.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Meg Ryan, Matthew Broderick, Kelly Preston, Tcheky Karyo, Maureen
Stapleton, Nesbitt Blaisdell Director: Griffen Dunne Producers: Jeffrey
Silver, Bobby Newmyer Screenplay: Robert Gordon
The naive, 'milky way', 'farm boy' Astronomer (Broderick). Watches the
night skies with his 'guiding light', the telescope. Whose passion for
star gazing is only matched by his love for his childhood sweet heart,
The School Teacher. He is unceremoniously dumped in favour of The French
Chef.
The flighty School Teacher (Preston). As fresh as the spring day itself,
isn't honest about her mediocre feelings of like for the astronomer, and
falls for The French Chef as easily as one can say 'Bona Petite'. She
has a sappy, annoying tendency to write 'Dear John' letters which is an
unpardonable offence in the 'TMT Voon Books of Courting Etiquette'.
The arrogant, virile French Chef (Karyo) who is not so virile in France,
erects with surmounting fertile confidence in New York, and shamefully
uses The Photographer to get his Visa. His one saving grace is that he
truly is in love with The School Teacher.
The hurt, foul mouthed, bike riding, Photographer (Ryan) is out for
revenge. She'll do anything to bring the hard erections of the French
Chef down on his cocky head - rashes, cockroaches, monkeys with
lipstick, broken arms and ribs are all part of the days work. 'Hell hath
no fury like a woman's' and this is one angry bitch.
The camera obscura. Ahhhh, I need to get one of these so that I can
watch my neighbour plant her gardenias in her nighty. The reflections
will come out perfectly on my white wardrobe wall.
So my astrological charts say that because the 'Men are from Mars and
Women are from Venus', the testosterone loaded French Chef deserves the
flighty School Teacher - may their relationship be as passionate and
fleeting as these gods of love and war. Astronomically, the moon circles
the earth and the earth circles the sun. So opposites attract when the
Sun, 'The Astronomer', and the Moon, 'The Photographer' find some common
ground, the Earth 'revenge'. I also predict a supernova in the year
2500AD.
Intelligent, witty and original. Much appreciated for the effort Griffen
Dunne and Robert Gorden. Not big box office material, but this film will
probably age well with the passing of time as will most Meg Ryan movies.
The eternal youth Matthew Broderick continues to amaze me at how little
he has aged since 'Ferris Bueller's'. Kelly Preston is charmingly sweet,
and Karyo Tcheky carries that something 'French' which brings women to
their knees. Meg, charming, beautiful, funny Meg -  will have a special
place in my heart, whether she's geared in dark leathers with heavily
smeared metallic makeup, or a crazed woman stomping in knee deep mud in
'Restoration' or the slightly, ditzy girl looking for love in
'Sleepless'. She is Meg Ryan and one can't help loving her for who she
is.
The bottom line is that we can't choose whom we fall in love with. So in
the end past wrongs must be settled and confessions made, before this
fiasco of revenge is resolved. Perhaps the means of coming to terms with
being dumped is not the most appropriate, or the most mature - but it
was sure fun to watch.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Might as well face it, ADDICTED TO LOVE is about as 
original as the decade-old Robert Palmer song it's named after. Like 
that song, it has so much bizarre appeal we end up liking it anyway. 
Griffin Dunne, never much of a star in his own right, has gone 
behind the camera this time to bring us an unconventional but 
thoroughly predictable tale of scorned lovers' revenge. As cliched as 
the plot developments are, there are enough laughs that the movie 
almost redeems itself.
        The love-hate thing extends to the cast as well. Matthew 
Broderick, who was such a comedic force to be reckoned with back 
in the '80s, is a shadow of his former self here. He sports more 
stubble than George Michael and is never believable in the role of a 
pathetic astronomer whose girlfriend / soulmate leaves him. He sees 
the character the way we see it -- as a sad, sorry man who blindly 
refuses to move on with his life -- and doesn't take him seriously. 
The key to this kind of farce comedy is playing the most bizarre 
roles straight. Just ask Leslie Nielson.
        Meg Ryan, on the other hand, is the saving grace of the 
film. She is cast way against type, as an overly made-up femme 
fatale who has a grudge against her ex-fiancee, who just happens to 
be the new beau of Broderick's ex-girlfriend, Kelly Preston. Old 
Mrs. Travolta doesn't have much to do in ADDICTED TO LOVE, 
so this will hardly be the comeback vehicle she's been waiting years 
for. No, the movie belongs to a hilarious Ryan and the French 
boyfriend, who turns out to be a lot funnier than he seems in his first 
few scenes.
        Actually, the first few scenes make this seem like it will 
turn out to be a horrible movie. There are no laughs in the first 20 
minutes and everything seems completely surreal. The opening 
scene has Broderick accurately predicting a meteor shower, then 
turning his giant telescope on Preston, across town. She waves at 
him, which makes it all seem like a misguided dream sequence. 
Nope, it's real, and so is the Dear John letter he gets in the next 
scene, after Preston has gone off to New York.
        Broderick catches the next plane to New York and tracks 
her down, never once making contact with her. He follows her 
instead to the new boyfriend's pad, where Preston apparently now 
resides as well, and sets up shop in an abandoned house across the 
street. No sooner has Broderick rigged an elaborate camera and 
projector to relay their every move than in drops Ryan, in a 
motorcycle helmet and leather jacket. She wants revenge, while he's 
sure Preston is going through a phase, after which she will realize 
her true love for Broderick. Not until he shaves, I hope.
        Both are equally pathetic in their stubborn desire to hold 
onto the past, but have a goal in common. So they try to split up 
Preston and the French man, who owns a restaurant in town. Before 
too long, we're seeing all sorts of episodic comedy cliches, even 
placing cockroaches in the restaurant on the night the New York 
Times restaurant critic is coming. And we know Broderick and 
Ryan will fall in love with each other. They have to; they're addicted 
to it.
        ADDICTED TO LOVE works best when it adheres to the 
more conventional comedy approach, even though we've all seen 
that approach hundreds of times. The laughs aren't forced, though, 
most of them coming from the strange chemistry Ryan and 
Broderick have. And the Frenchman gets a lot of great lines in. It's 
when the film leaves the realm of believability that we wonder just 
what the hell Griffin is thinking, because the stranger the film gets, 
the less laughs there are. In this case, cliche is preferred. Might as 
well face it...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) Romantic comedies are often hard to differentiate. You
might think that a great romantic comedy would need something special
to set it apart -- a great gimmick that works well on film, funny
scenes, and great chemistry. Of these attributes, Addicted to Love only
lacks great chemistry.
Goes to show how important that attribute is.
Sam the astronomer (Matthew Broderick) tries to keep his girlfriend
Linda (Kelly Preston) from leaving their small hometown for New York
City. But she feels constricted by small town life and leaves anyway.
Sam waits for Linda to come back, but she doesn't return. Instead she
sends him a "Dear John" letter.
Sam doesn't take being dumped lightly, so he sets off for New York in
search of Linda.
He finds her with her new boyfriend and he watches them through the
window. He discovers that the apartment across the street is abandoned
so he makes a nest.  He orders a few spare parts from his observatory
and lines all the pieces up just right so that his camera obscura
projects what's happening across the street onto the big back wall of
the abandoned apartment.
In an inspired moment of great filmmaking, Sam "paints" Linda on the
wall. The projected image from the camera obscura is muted because the
wall is brown.  Sam starts painting the wall silvery white, following
Linda's virtual image around her apartment. Each time she moves, Sam
follows, leaving a trail of reflected light where he goes.
Maggie (Meg Ryan) moves into Sam's nest without telling him who she is
or what she's doing. Turns out that Maggie's ex-boyfriend (Anton,
played by Tcheky Karyo) is seeing Sam's ex-girlfriend. Maggie has
chosen Sam's nest as the best place to bug and monitor Anton's
apartment.
Between Sam's and Maggie's equipment, they have picture and sound: a
live-action movie of their ex-significant others.
Though Sam's motives are pathetic and Maggie's are spiteful, they find
they have a common goal -- breaking up Anton and Linda -- Sam, so he
can reunite with Linda, and Maggie, so she can revel in her revenge.
Most of their schemes are funny, and the movie is full of great lines.
One scene has Maggie and Sam watching Anton and Linda with the sound
off, while Maggie and Sam supply running comedy a la Mystery Science
Theater 3000.
If you've seen the previews (or if you know the genre) you already know
how it inevitably must end. Actually, the movie ends much more kindly
and humanely than it could have, but really there are no surprises.
Overall, the movie was enjoyable, and it's hard to fault it for
anything in particular.  Mostly, the problem is that Sam and Maggie
lack chemistry. Most of the time, they don't need it, but eventually,
it becomes important. (It's hard to imagine Broderick having
"chemistry" with anyone.)
But even with everything this movie did right, it just doesn't add up
to greatness.
P.S. you might be glad to know the title song never played over the
movie.  Frankly, the title seems like an afterthought. But a rose by
any other name . . . .
Check out more current movie reviews at
http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ADDICTED TO LOVE *** 1/3. Directed by Griffin Dunne. Written by Robert
Gordon. Photography, Andrew Dunn. Editing, Elizabeth Kling. Production
Design, Robin Standefer. Art Direction, Stephen Alesch. Music, Rachel
Portman. Cast: Meg Ryan (Maggie),  Matthew Broderick (Sam), Kelly Preston
(Linda), Tcheky Karyo (Anton), Maureen Stapleton (Nana), Nesbitt Blaisdell,
Remak Ramsay, Dominick Dunne. A Warner Bros. release of an Outlaw
production in association with Miramax Films.  97 min. R (sex, language)
Back from the Cannes Festival where even in weak years excellent films can
be found, I felt apprehensive about what  US summer movies held in store
for me. I chose the prosaically titled "Addicted to Love" as my first local
outing, knowing little about it beyond the fact that its lead actors were
attractive. My worries increased as the movie unfurled.
Astronomer Sam (Broderick) works in some unnamed rural area, worries when
his schoolteacher forever-love Linda decides to accept a brief educational
assignment in New York City. In one of the several scenes that require a
leap of faith, he waves at her from his truck as he follows the airliner
she's in on the tarmac. Don't try this at home.
In another jolt, but this time wonderfully screwy, as Sam prepares to
welcome back Linda, he gets instead her father reading him a Dear John
letter. Linda has found a new love. Sam goes bananas with worry, but I felt
that things were looking up. (Much later the same gentleman has an  amusing
reprise of a different Dear John letter).
After the fastest packing job in film history, Sam flies to the Big Apple,
begins to search for his lady-love and, improbably, locates her in SoHo
where she shares the apartment of her new amour Anton.  Improbably (again!)
Sam finds a racked-and-ruined space in a condemned building just across
from Anton's.
Accumulating impossibilities, our jilted hero sets up a camera obscura to
spy around the clock on the new twosome. This requires an explanation. If
you know about the development of photography, you may be familiar with the
camera obscura principle, one that dates back many centuries. Imagine a
room like a big cube. You make a small hole in one wall. This acts as a
lens and projects what it "sees" outside on its opposite wall. Some
painters used this trick ages ago, and later this became the primitive
"pinhole" camera.
The wall picture is upside down, but since Sam knows all about optics he
Rube Goldbergs a lens system that rights the picture up on the wall he has
just painted white. The final result is a Peeping Tom's (or Sam's)
voyeuristic-masochistic super-gizmo that the audience must take on faith.
Next a mysterious motorcyclist, helmeted hence faceless, shows up in Sam's
loft. To no one's surprise, the biker is Maggie, the jilted fiancee of
Anton's. A photographer, collage and, somehow, audio expert,
Maggie teams up with Sam and adds sound to images by bugging Anton's place.
Both Sam and Maggie are cuckoo. Sam, a scientific whiz but a rube in
matters of the heart, is convinced that Linda's infatuation will wane. He
sets up weird charts on which, with self-deluding hope, he follows Linda's
symptoms, such as the diminishing (he thinks) intensity of her smiles. He's
willing to wait until Linda sees the light.
Maggie however wants Anton "vaporized," needs revenge, impure and
un-simple. She's like a maenad, but even as a Gorgon with snakes for hair,
Meg Ryan would still be Miss Cute Universe -- notwithstanding grungy
leopard blouses, black-rimmed eyes, coarse vocabulary and all. But she is
certainly stretching her film persona and doing it very well. (You'll find
that as matters advance, Maggie's looks get gradually un-grunged and her
speech un-coarsened).
Even before the movie starts it is a given that the Ryan-Broderick duo will
turn into a cooing couple, that their initial aims and tactical differences
will result in harmonious co-conspiracies. No matter how you cut it, they
make an nice couple, in love and war. Unlike Ryan, Broderick is not cast
against type, since, in so many of his roles, he has been a rather quiet
reactor rather than a flaming personality.
At some point between the setting up of wild gadgetry and the Maggie-Sam
rapprochement, the movie makes you disregard disbelief. Instead, it begins
to captivate and amuse you, to enjoy its cleverness and chain of surprises,
to make you conscious that there's more originality than meets the eye.
In the other couple there is a nominal imbalance that plays with, then goes
against, movie cliches. Linda is your film-typical wide-eyed beauty who has
lost her heart and mind to a wily Latin lover, Anton, the owner of a new
French restaurant. For a long stretch, he is your movie-typical flashy,
suave, self-assured French seducer whose affair with Maggie seems to have
been a ploy towards legal U.S. residence -- the Green Card syndrome. Yet as
the story proceeds, we find out that Anton may be a hustler but he is not a
heel or a villain, not one-dimensional, and above all, not untouched by
love.
Tcheky Karyo,a heavy in "La Femme  Nikita" and other films, becomes here a
splendidly comic figure, a man whose panache obscures feelings that are
complex yet do not include complexes. In an improbable but beautifully
written kitchen sequence (which doubles as gentle mocking of American
xenomania), he tells his admiring staff about his rise from a simple cafe
waiter in Paris to an entrepreneur in New York. In the New World, a French
accent, piling on the sophistication, having a culinary lexicon, audacity,
brashness (or chutzpah) have made him a glamorous figure and opened Horatio
Alger possibilities.
Maggie and Sam feel increasingly comfortable together. In fact, as they sit
on a sofa and watch the wall-movie of Linda and Anton they seem to enjoy it
the way the silhouettes do in Mystery ScienceTheater 3000, without the
latter's obnoxious comments. And as they plot anti-Anton activities, you
almost feel that the fun of the tricks proper is bigger than the
perpetrators'  original aims. There's improbable, off-the-wall
inventiveness at work here. Such as discrediting Anton in Linda's eyes by
(don't ask) having a monkey mark the Frenchman's shirt with lipstick, or
kids squirt-gun expensive perfume on him.
Those guerilla tactics expand when Sam infiltrates Anton's life, taking a
job as a dishwasher, becoming the model employee, getting appreciated by
Anton --and then ruining the restaurant by (literally) bugging it.
(Writer-reporter Dominick Dunne, the director's father, has a cameo as a
food critic).
Unexpectedly, what hurts Anton's soul most is the loss of Linda. What hurts
his body is a devastating allergy inflicted by Maggie, followed by broken
bones inflicted in a mix-up by Sam, by now sort of a pal . The suffering
Gallic sophisticate has, at this point, become the most interesting figure
of the movie. Though this is not  quite a "noir" comedy, it is transformed
into high-energy slapstick with all the ingredients of farce : raucousness,
physicality and funny cruelty.
An interesting point is that the only product-placement item in this film
is the Leica M-series camera -- as classy and fine an item as can be. It is
symbolic of the movie's own smooth elegance and mechanism once you get past
the unlikely bits.
Actor-producer's Griffin Dunne's first directed feature may have started
out as a potential loser but ends up as a clear winner. Photography, sets
and all production values do justice to the maverick, novel, first produced
feature script by Robert Gordon, one that took over seven years to reach
the screen.

Author
Michael Redman
Sam and Maggie start off their relationship on an odd note. Hiding out
in a tumbling down building opposite their former lovers' apartment;
they watch visions projected on a whitewashed wall and listen to their
orgasms blasting out of loudspeakers while plotting their demise.
Well, it may not be much more bizarre than the beginning of many
relationships, but this one features Matthew Broderick and Meg Ryan not
your best friend and new paramour.
Astronomer Sam (Broderick) is shocked when he receives a Dear John
letter from long-time love Linda (Kelly Preston) who is far away in New
York for a two-month teaching workshop. Stunned, he hops the first plane
to the Big Apple and tracks her down by going from hotel to hotel.
(Don't try this at home kids, it's a little more difficult in real
life.)
Discovering that she has shacked up with French chef Anton (Tcheky
Karyo), Sam breaks into the abandoned tenement across the street and
sets up his personal observatory. Constructing the world's best camera
obscura, he watches their comings and goings and takes copious notes
hoping to scientifically predict their breakup.
His dedicated study is interrupted by breaking glass and the entry of
leather-clad motorcycle-riding babe Maggie (Ryan). She isn't interested
in waiting around so that he can reclaim her former sweetheart as Sam is
doing. Maggie wants to inflict pain on the man who dumped her. Revenge
is her motive.
Bugging the apartment, she brings sound to Sam's pictures and adds
artistic passion to his scientific rationality. Their spy station
complete, they are content for a while to be voyeurs. Then they slip
into a more active mode; plotting to destroy the relationship, bugging
(in another sense) Anton's restaurant, getting it shut down and
virtually destroying his life.
All along, as is inevitable, Sam and Maggie fall in love despite their
best efforts not to. Bad Girl Maggie The Cat is just the person to wake
Sam up and he brings hope to her life.
The stars are among the most appealing people working in films today.
>From a man's point of view, Meg Ryan is beautiful and overtly sexual
without having the typical Hollywood overly-endowed body by "Playboy"
and Broderick is the guy you'd like to have as a best buddy.
Occasionally there's some very heavy chemistry between them, but
sometimes it is strangely lacking.
Ryan's role is a stretch for her from her usual romantic roles ("When
Harry Met Sally") but she's up to the task. Maggie is out for blood and
although sensuous in a severe way, she's no naive Sally. Broderick is
his usual nice guy, but even he shows a talent for the sadistic.
There are several dazzling visuals, many of which involve the projected
images as Sam and Maggie stand with moving pictures of their past
significant others covering their bodies. In one particularly striking
moment, the astronomer is painting the wall white as parts of Linda's
likeness begin to sparkle with vitality.
Preston's character is nothing more than a place-holder for the plot,
but Karyo's is a different matter. For the first half of the film, he is
not much more, but when the movie shifts into the farce mode, he becomes
the center of attention.
It is this French farce component that is the weak point of the film. If
it is true that the French worship Jerry Lewis, then this section is for
them. Not being a huge Lewis-imitator fan, the bumblings around in a
body cast scenes fall flat for me.
It's damning with faint praise to say that, for all of its darkness,
this is one of the best romantic comedies recently. It's worth a watch,
but not as memorable a one as it could have been.
[This appeared in the 6/6/97 issue of the "Bloomington Voice",
Bloomington, Indiana. Michael Redman can be reached at
mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Meg Ryan, Matthew Broderick, Kelly Preston, Tcheky Karyo, 
      Maureen Stapleton, Nesbitt Blaisdell
Director: Griffen Dunne
Producers: Jeffrey Silver, Bobby Newmyer 
Screenplay: Robert Gordon
Cinematography: Andrew Dunn 
Music: Rachel Portman 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     Throughout much of her early motion picture career, the term that 
perhaps best described Meg Ryan's characters was "the girl next door."  
You remember WHEN HARRY MET SALLY and SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, her two 
biggest hits, in which she played a long-haired, sweet, slightly-
insecure, easily likable young woman.  Lately, however, Ryan has been 
trying to change her image.  To be fair, she has always exhibited more 
range that she has been given credit for (witness her triple performance 
in JOE VERSUS THE VOLCANO or her gender-bender in PRELUDE TO A KISS), 
but most directors have been happy to stick her into a formula and let 
her effervesce.  Now, after a dramatic stint in COURAGE UNDER FIRE, Ryan 
is back in another romantic comedy; however, this is no featherweight 
boy-meets-girl tale, and her character, Maggie, is no Sally.
     Maggie is a bad girl, although not quite as bad as she'd like 
everyone to believe.  She wears her hair short and unkempt, travels 
around the streets of New York on a motorcycle, and prefers donning 
anything in black that exposes her navel.  She talks tough and her eyes 
are hard little agates, except when she's alone and a softer side comes 
to the surface (Ryan does a good job showing this in mostly-subtle ways, 
such as the set of Maggie's shoulders).  Why is she so abrasive?  
Because her currently mission in life is revenge -- revenge against the 
ex-fiancee, Anton (Tcheky Karyo), who cast her aside when he found his 
latest paramour, Linda (Kelly Preston).
     Linda happens to have been the lifelong love of small-town 
astronomer Sam (Matthew Broderick).  When ADDICTED TO LOVE opens, we're 
shown a slice of his idyllic life (complete with a number of irritating 
technical inaccuracies about the abilities of a telescope) -- how he has 
a job he loves and a woman he adores.  But Linda is restless, and she 
decides to take a two-month trip to New York City.  While there, she 
meets Anton, falls in love, and moves in with him.  When Sam learns the 
truth via a "Dear John" letter, he gets on the next flight to the Big 
Apple.
     In New York, he sets up home in abandoned building across the 
street from the apartment shared by Linda and Anton, and constructs a 
camera obscura to watch their every movement (his voyeurism recalls the 
likes of REAR WINDOW and STAKEOUT).  Soon, Maggie joins him in his 
"bohemian hellhole," bringing along bugging equipment so they can have 
sound in addition to video.  Together, the two hatch a plan to break 
apart the new lovers -- Sam, so he can win back Linda, and Maggie, so 
she can see Anton "in pain, hopeless, and finished off."  
     Despite some totally unnecessary, minor believability issues (for 
example, a telescope that can pick out faint stars during daylight hours 
and a truck that's allowed to ride alongside a plane down a runway), 
ADDICTED TO LOVE boasts a smart, sassy script that risks showing its 
protagonists doing some exceptionally nasty things.  Some of Sam and 
Maggie's schemes are vicious, and there are times when we find ourselves 
feeling sorry for their unfortunate victims.
     If there's a sense of Martin Scorsese's AFTER HOURS here, it's no 
coincidence.  The director, Griffin Dunne (working from a script by 
Robert Gordon), was the star of that film, and he appears at home 
putting a seemingly-normal man in increasingly-bizarre circumstances.  
And, while it's obvious to even the most obtuse viewer that Sam and 
Maggie are going to end up together at the end, there are enough clever 
turns along the way to keep us interested.  Their romance really forms 
the coda to a deliciously nasty, dark comedy.
     Opposite Ryan, Broderick is effective as the average Joe who 
becomes wrapped up in Maggie's Machiavellian schemes, until he hatches a 
few gems of his own.  And, while Sam and Maggie don't strike too many 
sparks as a couple, they're both likable, and, together, they develop a 
nice camaraderie.  International star Tcheky Karyo (LA FEMME NIKITA) and 
Kelly Preston (last seen in JERRY MAGUIRE) are effective, if a little 
underused, as the film's second pairing.  Maureen Stapleton has a 
supporting turn as Maggie's aunt.
     ADDICTED TO LOVE isn't likely to ascend to the lofty box office 
pinnacle attained by Ryan's WHEN HARRY MET SALLY or SLEEPLESS IN 
SEATTLE, but it probably won't fall to the depths of I.Q. or FRENCH 
KISS.  It's kind of fun seeing the actress suppress her usual mannerisms 
and do the grunge thing, but not nearly as enjoyable as it is immersing 
oneself in Dunne's bizarre-yet-oddly-engaging romantic comedy about 
voyeurism, moldy strawberries, and monkeys wearing lipstick.  ADDICTED 
TO LOVE is for those who don't mind a world view that's a little askew, 
yet who can still accept that love conquers all.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
