Title
Review for Swept from the Sea (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Ben Hoffman
  Screenwriter Tim Willocks has quite faithfully transposed Joseph
Conrad's moving short story of Amy Foster.    In turn, Director
Beeban Kidron has done her best to stick with the script.
  The story is about Amy (Rachel Weisz), a  poor girl in Cornwall,
England, regarded as not too bright by her parents and farmed out to
work as a serving girl to Mr. and Mrs Smith (Tony Haygarth and Fiona
Victory).  On the surface, Amy is a placid person but inside rages a
passionate woman waiting only for a chance to burst from her  world
surrounded by the sea.   Many are the times she looks out to the sea
from the wall that protects the town.
  Meanwhile, in the Ukraine, scoundrels are filling the ears of
young men with stories of fortunes to be made in America.    These
innocents sell every bit of their meager belongings to ship out to
America.   Once aboard ship, they are put into crowded holds, their
money taken from them.  Conditions are as if they were slaves.
  All this suddenly changes when a storm comes up and there is a
shipwreck, the only survivor being Yanko Gooral (Vincent Perez), a
handsome young man who despite managing to land at the bottom of the
sea wall, looks like a miserable excuse for a human. When he is
discovered, the townspeople are antagonistic.  His Ukrainian
language sounds like the gibberish of a lunatic and they regard him
as such, making life immediately miserable for him.    Only one
person comes to his aid, Amy Foster.  As she had yearned, someone
came from the sea . . . for her.
  The only other person who is able to see anything human in Yanko
is Dr. James Kennedy (in an excellent portrayal by Ian McKellen).
This comes about only because   the doctor and Yanko have a passion
for chess.    In the film, unlike the short story, it is the doctor
who relates to a friend the story of Amy and Yanko.
  The hypocrisy of the townspeople who treat Yank as a lunatic; the
passion of Amy who loves Yanko, feeds him when she is warned to keep
away from him, and brings him back to life; and the child of their
union are all part of this interesting story.
  Prominent in the cast is Kathy Bates as Miss Swaffer.

Author
Jon Popick
A two-hour period film based on an old novel set in England about a
forbidden love affair between a reserved girl who doesn't like to talk
and a man who can't speak her language.  Yawn!
OK, it's not really THAT bad.  Swept From The Sea is the latest Joseph
Conrad novel adapted to the silver screen.  The results can range from
sublime (Apocalypse Now/Heart Of Darkness) to mundane (last year's The
Secret Agent) and Swept slumps somewhere between the two.
The story begins in the Ukraine, where a tiny village is celebrating
because one of its sons, Yanko Gooral (Vincent Perez), is going to take
a trip on the big boat to find his dream in America.  Things proceed as
planned until the ship sinks off the shore of Colebrook, England.  This
seemed intense before I saw Titanic.
In a pretty cool scene, the citizens of Colebrook wake to find dozens of
bloated bodies washed up onto its shore.  They assume that there are no
survivors and seem to quick forget about the incident after they bury
the lot.  Call me crazy, but I'd be pretty emotionally scarred after
seeing the likes of that.
Yanko, of course, is the only person to live and he stumbles upon the
Smith family house, where Amy Foster (Rachel Weisz) works on occasion as
a servant.  Now Amy, who is named after Conrad's novel, is very
introverted and shows no emotion.  This is probably due to her parents
treating her like she had the Bubonic plague.  Her only enjoyment in
life is to sit in her secret little cave and watch the water break on
the shore.
The two hit it off right away, but the townsfolk are quite literally
frightened of this dirty longhair that speaks in crazy tongues.  Amy
sneaks Yanko food and water while he is locked up in the Smith's barn,
even though the locals deem him dangerously unapproachable.  It isn't
until Dr. Kennedy (Sir Ian McKellan) discovers that Yanko isn't actually
spouting nonsense, but actually speaking another language.  The
villagers are still suspicious.
The rest is all pretty standard fare, but is beautifully shot by Dick
Pope, who photographs most of Mike Leigh's films.  The rolling green
hills and jagged cliffs that overlook the ocean are breathtaking.  I
believe it was filmed in Cornwall, England.  Director Beeban Kidron can
add this film to her previous mediocre effort To Wong Foo, Thanks For
Everything, Julie Newmar.
The acting is pretty goodfor a guy that can't speak English and an
emotionless girl.  Perez (The Crow: City Of Angels) cleans up well in
his rags-to-nicer rags part, while Weisz is nearly mesmerizing in a
quiet, unassuming way.  Think a shorter, less dumb-looking Liv Tyler.
And now she can be known for something besides naked girl by the pool in
Stealing Beauty or running girl in Chain Reaction.  Both leads needed
breakout roles, but these probably are not them.  The supporting roles,
however, are handled quite well.
For the most part, a recommendation of any movie with a male character
named `Yanko' is probably a long shot.

Author
Alex Fung
SWEPT FROM THE SEA (TriStar - 1997)
Starring Vincent Perez, Rachel Weisz, Ian McKellen, Joss Ackland,
  Kathy Bates
Screenplay by Tim Willocks, inspired by the short story "Amy Foster"
  by Joseph Conrad
Produced by Polly Tapson, Charles Steel, Beeban Kidron
Directed by Beeban Kidron
Running time: 115 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
Joseph Conrad's greatest contribution to cinema will undoubtedly be
his novel "Heart Of Darkness", crafted by Francis Ford Coppola into
the visionary landmark masterpiece APOCALYPSE NOW.  At long last, his
works are currently undergoing a mild cinematic revival -- last year
saw his novel "The Secret Agent", filmed earlier by Alfred Hitchcock
as SABOTAGE, make a return to the screen as Christopher Hampton's
sophomore directorial effort, and 1997 brings about a big-budget
adaptation of his novella "Amy Foster" to the silver screen, retitled
as SWEPT FROM THE SEA and helmed by Beeban Kidron.
It's understandable that the filmmakers chose to go with the title of
SWEPT BY THE SEA for their period romance over the film's original
shooting title, which retained the title of the original source --
not only is it a literal description of the early pivotal moment
which sets the film in motion, but it's inherently more cinematic and
has a greater echo of lush romanticism than the rather staid and
mannered tone implied by "Amy Foster".  The film is in any case more
intently focused upon Yanko Gooral (Vincent Perez), the solitary
survivor of a Ukrainian shipwreck who washes ashore by the rural
Cornish village of Colebrook, than it is interested in Amy Foster
(Rachel Weisz), whose premarital conception has rendered her an
outcast in said village, and whose use of silence as a defense
mechanism is perceived by townsfolk as evidence of simplemindedness.
It's a good thing that Yanko is the central character of the film,
for in SWEPT BY THE SEA, Amy Foster is a dullard -- bland and
uninteresting.
It doesn't help matters that Ms. Weisz is astonishingly flat and
lifeless in the female lead role.  Amy Foster is a character who
shields her passions behind a wall of cold remoteness, but Ms.
Weisz's performance in the majority of the film is simply
expressionless, with a mild hint of irritability; there is no
indication of any sort of restraint on the part of her character or
any sense of inner turmoil, while her handful of emotionally volatile
scenes are ineffective and lack credibility.
Ms. Weisz's performance is *so* awkward that it saps the life out of
the standard-issue romance between Yanko and Amy, and actually begins
to get in the way of the more interesting and better-developed
relationship between Yanko and Dr. Kennedy (Ian McKellen), the kindly
gentleman who first recognizes Yanko's intelligence and becomes his
mentor.  Given that SWEPT FROM THE SEA is positioned as a romantic
epic, this is near-disasterous -- one would like to hope that the
romantic relationship might be the interesting one in the film,
rather than a cumbersome nuisance.
The friendship between Dr. Kennedy and Yanko, though a familiar
retread, is nicely portrayed with a sense of warmth and compassion.
Mr. McKellen is typically strong, subtly introducing some conflict
and complexity into an otherwise saintly character, while Mr. Perez
turns in a capable performance as the ridiculously good-natured
outsider with only modest aspirations who is nonetheless subjected to
relentless xenophobic malevolence by the villagers.  SWEPT FROM THE
SEA clearly attempts to address the theme of persecution -- both of
the leads are outcasts, brought together by small acts of kindness
and compassion rarely found elsewhere in their daily existence -- but
it's handled rather heavy-handedly, and the film starts to become
increasingly absurd with Yanko's continued attempts to integrate
himself into the Cornish society by coming across as innocuous,
gamely putting forth a brave face and flashing a goofy, bizarrely
sheepish grin in the face of such loathing and hatred.
Tim Willocks' screenplay draws out the characters in SWEPT FROM THE
SEA in extremely broad strokes, with none of the characters remotely
enigmatic in their intentions or disposition.  As in most unabashedly
romantic and gushingly melodramatic films, the shallowly-depicted
characters neatly fall into one of two camps: heroic and sympathetic,
or eminently hissable, and while easily identifiable heroes and
villains are a staple for the genre, there is little excuse for Mr.
Willocks' lame, uneven plotting. The film completely lacks the
cathartic dramatic punch with Amy's redeeming acts during the
climactic third act that is sorely needed -- granted, Ms. Weisz's
unempathic performance doesn't help either -- and employs devices
throughout the film which are clearly intended to be cute or magical,
such as the scenes of Dr. Kennedy's introduction to Yanko's
chess-playing abilities and Amy's secret hideaway, but merely come
off as silly or goofy.  An early scene in SWEPT BY THE SEA is
particularly ineffective; while intended as a tender moment between
Amy and Yanko as the outsiders first meet, neither of the characters
have been sufficiently drawn out at this point for the audience to
have any vested interest in their fates, and consequently the
sequence loses its power and appears excessively cliched and
melodramatic.
Technically, SWEPT FROM THE SEA is a handsome film.  The sound work
by George Richards is superb, particularly in the shipwreck sequence
and the storm sequence, while Dick Pope's cinematography is crisp,
sharp, and striking.  However, John Barry's bleating score becomes
rather tiresome and doesn't meld well with the film.
What is perhaps most striking about SWEPT FROM THE SEA is its utter
conviction in its material; the film is terribly earnest, and plays
with complete sincerity.  While the plot of the film is familiar and
the romance is squandered, resulting in a historical saga which is at
best mediocre, it is the film's complete faith in the ardour and
fascination of its story which succeeds in sustaining viewer
interest.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Man, that was a big spider.  It was so big I thought I saw a small dog
 caught in its web.  We are talking big.  That spider could've kicked
 Charlotte's ass." - Hope Davis, THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   What better location for a sweeping romance than atop a
rocky knoll overlooking the raging waters of England's Cornish
coast?  In adapting Joseph Conrad's sea story embracing the
love of two young people who are reviled by their community,
screenwriter Tim Willocks has done quite a job in opening up
a 30-page story into a two-hour epic.  The movie features
director Beeban Kidron's exploitation of dramatic vistas, a
solid sense of period, and two performers who could soon
become household names.
   "Swept from the Sea," taken from Conrad's story "Amy
Foster," is somewhat autobiographical, giving its audience the
feel for the variety of experiences which filled the novelist's
stirring life.  In dramatizing the narrative of a Russian who
sailed for the New World in the late 19th century, survived a
shipwreck and later succumbed to pneumonia, Conrad
recollects his own father, Apollo Korzeniowski, who was exiled
to a remote Russian province because of his political activities
while Joseph later became the victim of tuberculosis.
   Opening amid the tempestuous clime of poverty-stricken
folk in Russia, Ms. Kidron takes us on a journey which begins
with a long voyage embarked upon by scores of people in a
train's cattle car, transferring to a rickety ship in Hamburg for
the flight to America. Yanko (Vincent Perez), the sole survivor
of a wreck, is washed ashore at Cornwall, believing at first
that his buddies sailed on to America.  The bearded, filthy,
wild-eyed immigrant, knowing not a word of English, is looked
upon with terror by the rural residents but treated kindly by
the most educated of its inhabitants, Dr. James Kennedy (Ian
McKellen) and with passionate care by Amy Foster (Rachel
Weisz).  
   The romance between Amy and Yanko unfolds in flashback
as Dr. Kennedy, an otherwise kind and generous physician,
recounts his memories to a patient he is treating for
gangrene.  Miss Swaffer (Kathy Bates) motivates the story,
asking the doctor why he is so resentful of Amy, especially
since Swaffer has been so compassionate toward the
unhappy woman.
   The story unfolds.  After Amy washes the hands of feet of
her Slavic visitor, Yanko goes to work on Mr. Swaffer's (Joss
Ackland) land without pay, a virtual slave, while Amy
continues her domestic services to the Swaffer family as an
indentured servant.  Both Amy and Yanko are treated with
scorn by the neighbors.  Because Amy's mother, Mary (Zoe
Wanamaker) and her father Isaac (Tom Bell) want little to do
with their daughter, Amy retaliates by speaking not a word,
taking refuge in silence and convincing the town thereby that
she is retarded.  Similarly Yanko, who speaks no English, is
considered obtuse, until one day he dazzles Dr. Kennedy with
some sharp moves on the chess board.  Kennedy teaches the
stranger English while he is taught chess by the Russian
expert, but as Yanko's attachment to Amy grows, Kennedy
becomes strangely resentful.
   "Swept from the Sea" is the sort of romance that could
bring the more sentimental members of an audience to tears
but what gives it a modern feel is its treatment of the age-old
theme of hatred based on cultural differences.  Amy and
Yanko are both outsiders, she because of her refusal to mix
into the society, he simply because he is a foreigner.  Looked
upon with utter disdain by the rural folk, Yanko is unable even
to participate in church services, and wonders why the people
of this Cornish community are so hard.  What he never quite
understands is that while the residents reject Amy as well,
they will defend "her interests" because she is at least one of
them.  The treatment of class and caste keeps makes the
movie feel alive, never parched and made to feel like a
"classic," while some solid acting grasps our attention.
  Rachel Weisz, known to moviegoers principally for her title
role in "Tom and Viv," comes across as an actress with a
difference.  Her eyes focus in a fixed stare on the stranger,
and the romantic glow which is present from the start gives
them the glassy appearance of sight corrected by contact
lenses.  Her outwardly prim demeanor is contrasted by
Vincent Perez's look of untamed abandon, the behavior of the
two meeting in some middle ground as Yanko adapts to this
"civilized" world and Amy becomes emotionally unfettered. 
Sir Ian McKellen is superb as the mild-mannered physician
who makes house calls--even in drenching downpours--whose
one weakness seems his inability to accept the romantic
involvement of the lovers.  "Swept by the Sea," a minor work
by one of England's greatest novelists, should serve to bring
that writer the extra attention he deserves.  Rated PG-13. 
Running Time: 115 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Matt Williams
Beeban Kidron directs this romantic epic based on Joseph Conrad's short
story, Amy Foster.  But while the film captures the scenery and scope
necessary for an epic romance, it falls short with a stale plot and a
flat romance.
Vincent Perez stars as Yanko, a Ukranian on an emigrant ship to
America.  He is washed overboard during a severe storm, and washes
ashore on the English countryside.  With his ragged appearance and
unknown tongue, the locals take him for a madman.  He soon finds himself
working for a local property owner, Mr. Swaffer (Joss Ackland), who
treats him little better than a slave.
Only two people sense the humanity inside Yanko.  The first is Amy
Foster (Rachel Weisz), a quiet woman, born to a scandalous marriage, who
is as much of an outcast in the community as Yanko.  Amy is unafraid of
the "mad" stranger, and treats him with kindness and love. The second is
James Kennedy (Ian McKellen), the town's doctor, who is as attracted to
the man as Amy, and sets out to teach the stranger English.
The tale is told in flashback by Kennedy to Swaffer's daughter (Kathy
Bates). However, both of them play integral parts in the tale.  It seems
odd that Miss Swaffer pretends as if she doesn't know the details and
that Kennedy would have to explain so much to her.
With its broad themes of ostracism and acceptance, Swept From the Sea
paints the world in black and white.  The film is at its best in its
earliest scenes, such as Yanko's departure for America, or the English
town's handling of a tragedy.  At these times, there are hints of
shading...we don't quite know where the film will take us, but we're
looking forward to the ride.  Then, once all its characters are in
place, the film settles down into a rut, with no surprises and no
excitement.
In another key problem with the film, the lovers, Amy and Yanko, lack
definition. A quiet woman, Amy says very little, and does little more.
Rachel Weisz never manages to convey any sense of Amy's inner life, and
she remains dead to us and the world. Yanko fares a little better.  At
least Vincent Perez gives him a spark of passion. However, when the two
are together, that spark does not ignite.
Luckily, there's a very strong supporting cast.  Ackland, McKellen and
Bates may be playing nearly featureless characters, but they utilize
their crafts to enliven the hollow shells and give them humanity.  Ian
McKellen in particular has a difficult job.  The film hits you over the
head with his character's subtle leanings, but McKellen manages to give
Dr. Kennedy an air of dignity underneath it all.
When the supporting cast isn't onscreen, at least there are some
beautiful vistas of the English countryside to occupy your attention, so
you're never quite bored.  Yet, when going to see an epic romance, you
usually expect a little more romance than what is delivered.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
David N. Butterworth
        First and foremost it's a love story, and I'm a sucker for one of
those.  It's also a period romance set in England, land of my birth, with
the northern wilds of Yorkshire (county of my birth) doubling for some of
the bleak, windswept Cornish locales.  And it features a lush, romantic
score by John Barry, the British composer whose music puts the icing on my
proverbial cake.  Heck, one of the dialogue coaches--Sandra
Butterworth--even bears my name.
        That's too bad, because "Swept from the Sea" is far from
unwatchable.  The scenery is quite spectacular--Dick Pope's cinematography
brings the typically wet English locations to life, from surf pounding
against the craggy, desolate cliffs to rain pelting down on the tiny
coastal village.  The actors are equally attractive (I didn't say wet).
Not just the leads, Vincent Pérez and Rachel Weisz, but the supporting
performers too--Ian McKellen, Joss Ackland, and Kathy Bates.  Very
colorful.  And then there's the music, of course.  Full, rich, and
evocative.  Typical Barry.
        Part of the problem is the story.  It's just not much of one.
Based on a short story by Joseph Conrad, "Swept from the Sea" tells the
tale of Yanko, the soul survivor of an immigrant vessel bound for
"A-may-reeka" that flounders off the Cornish coast, and Amy Foster, the
servant girl with whom he falls in love.  Amy is an outcast and the
townsfolk are mean to Yanko because they don't like his "But I've just been
shipwrecked, dammit!" looks or understand his balmy accent.  But that's
about it.   Did I mention it's a *short* story?  There's not enough plot to
flesh out the film's overly long running time.
        Fortunately we've got Cornwall to look at and Barry's score to
listen to.
        Amy is distant and aloof, a spurned free spirit who uses silence as
a defense mechanism.  She likes to dance in the rain and wade through
tidepools looking for stuff for her collection, kind of like Ariel in "The
Little Mermaid."  The locals think she's simple, or simply crazy.  Amy does
a lot of staring and mopes around without saying very much but it doesn't
make for blistering drama.  Yanko, too, is distant and aloof and the silent
type but because he's foreign, a traveler from a remote region of the
Carpathian mountains.  This makes relating to the young lovers a bit of a
challenge since empathizing with or even understanding them is difficult.
        Pérez and Weisz aren't exactly household names and are unlikely to
become such on the strength of "Swept from the Sea."  They both turn in
creditable performances, but the characters they play seem strangely devoid
of passion; their love never really ignites on screen, it smolders a
little, then goes out.  Director Beeban Kidron should have thrust them
together more often; their one erotic scene together--in Amy's secret
grotto--is awkwardly handled, as if the actors themselves felt embarrassed.
        I did enjoy McKellen's role, as the doctor who befriends Yanko and
improves his own chess game in the process.  (Aha!  Yanko must be
*Russian*, Dr. Kennedy explains when Yanko shows him a move or two.
Russians are most excellent chess players.)  Mad.  Russian.  What's the
diff?  Ackland and Bates offer predictably staunch support but, sadly,
there's not much meat here.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Vincent Perez, Rachel Weisz, Ian McKellan, Joss Ackland, 
      Kathy Bates
Director: Beeban Kidron
Producers: Polly Tapson, Charles Steel, Beeban Kidron
Screenplay: Tim Willocks, inspired by Joseph Conrad's "Amy Foster"
Cinematography: Dick Pope
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Over the years, numerous books, TV series, and movies have utilized 
England's wild Cornish Coast as the backdrop for sagas of romance and 
adventure.  The latest is Beeban Kidron's failed adaptation of the 
Joseph Conrad short story, "Amy Foster".  There's very little that's 
right about this sudsy melodrama, and a great deal that's shockingly 
wrong.  In fact, it would be an insult to romantic drivel to use that 
appellation for SWEPT FROM THE SEA.  Instead, this is something far less 
satisfying.
     The movie tries mightily to touch our hearts with its mixture of 
comedy and tragedy.  Problem #1:  the comic moments are so awkward that 
they're more likely to cause winces than laughs.  Problem #2:  the 
tragic scenes are so overplayed that they appear like clinics of bad 
acting.  Problem #3:  the script is so insipid that it's impossible to 
become involved enough with these characters to care one way or another 
what happens to them.  
     SWEPT BY THE SEA starts at the end, then proceeds to relate the 
entire story via the overused narrative technique of flashbacks.  
Occasionally, depending on the nature of the story, this approach can be 
quite effective, but here, as is too often the case, it's used simply to 
facilitate a voice-over (known by another name as "the writer's 
crutch").  This is an example of laziness on the part of Kidron and 
writer Tim Willocks, who found it easier to have Ian McKellan talk about 
details rather than going to the trouble of actually showing them.  
     Amy Foster (Rachel Weisz) is a young, attractive Cornish girl 
living in a 19th century coastal village.  Because she speaks so little 
and keeps to herself, the townspeople think of her as a simpleton, but 
they are unaware of the private "world" she has created for herself in a 
seaside cave.  One day, a rugged Ukranian by the name of Yanko (Vincent 
Perez) is washed ashore when his ship goes down in a storm on the way 
from Europe to America.  Unable to understand Yanko's language, the 
villagers shun him -- all except Amy and a few others.  Predictably, 
romance blossoms between Yanko and Amy, and they are soon engaged to be 
married.  This news comes as an unwelcome shock to much of the 
community, especially those who share blood ties with Amy.
     As poorly-written as the script and dialogue are, things aren't 
helped by the wooden performances of the leads.  Vincent Perez, who 
appeared in the art house hit, QUEEN MARGOT, and the more mainstream THE 
CROW 2, has never awed me with his limited range, and he doesn't do 
anything in SWEPT FROM THE SEA to change that opinion.  On the other 
hand, I was reasonably impressed by Rachel Weisz in STEALING BEAUTY; her 
bland, expressionless portrayal here comes as an unpleasant surprise.  
The supporting performers -- Ian McKellan as a helpful doctor, Joss 
Ackland as a local landowner, and Kathy Bates as his daughter -- are 
equally lifeless and uninspired.
     Taken as a whole, SWEPT FROM THE SEA is a mess.  It seems to run on 
forever, and the pretty scenery and John Barry's operatic score do 
little to moderate the boredom.  The bad movies that are the least fun 
to watch are usually those that aspire to some level of artistic 
pretentiousness.  This is the case with SWEPT FROM THE SEA.  But, in 
aiming to attract the sophisticated movie-goer, who will easily see 
through the stylistic posturing, the film makers have virtually assured 
that their product will have not audience.  Considering the movie's lack 
of quality, that's not a bad thing.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."
