Title
Review for Sergeant York (1941)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Sergeant York" is a very good, if sometimes
unintentionally humorous, biography of Alvin York.
York was one of the most famous heroes of WWI,
killing 20 Germans and capturing another 130
single-handedly.
Released at a time when the U.S. was preparing for
war, "Sergeant York" reassured the public that
serving your country in war is good, that the Germans
deserve a good beating, and that even Joe Sixpack
can become a stirring war hero.  The film also
has the message that religion can turn around a
failed life, and that religion and defense of your
country do not conflict.
Alvin York (Gary Cooper) begins the film as
a hard drinking Tennessee hellraiser, trying to
scratch out a meager living as a farmer on
bad land with his mother (Margaret Wycherly) and
stone-faced younger brother (Dickie Moore).
After Alvin falls for perky Joan Leslie,
he makes a valiant but unsuccessful attempt to
obtain good "bottom" farmland.  Helped by
preacher Walter Brennan, he turns to religion
and his fortunes immediately improve.
When the U.S. enters WWI, Alvin at first resists
the draft because "killin' is aginst the Bible".
But once he is fighting the "krauts", the former
pacifist seems to enjoy picking off the Germans,
even boasting that it is "just like [shooting]
a flock of turkeys".  Alvin's war heroics play
like a ten year old boy's fantasies, and in the
face of massive acclaim afterwards, he still
retains his 'Aw, Shucks' demeanor.
Cooper is perhaps too old for the role, but he
still deserved his Best Actor Oscar.  Cooper
gives York a self-effacing, rural Southern
character that seems credible.  Cooper is helped
by a fine script, which was co-written by John Huston
and was nominated for Best Original Screenplay.
Howard Hawks was nominated for Best Director,
Sol Polito was nominated for Best B & W Cinematography,
and Walter Brennan and Margaret Wycherly were
respectively nominated for Best Supporting Actor
and Actress.
Sometimes the film is so corny that it seems
ripe for parody, like an unintentional comedy.
But the quality of the script and production values
is very high, and Cooper gives a winning performance.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Richard Matich
                  SERGEANT YORK [1941]
           A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
I once thought of Sergeant York as a great movie. I now
think its just a good movie. I have every right to
change my mind, especialy when I think I have been
wrong about an opinion or an idea. I try to keep an
open mind. Why is this film so heavily regarded by
some? You must put the film into the proper historical
context. It opened to a world on the brink of war
[WWII]. Some in the country were nuetral. Some,
however,  knew a fight with Germany, Italy, and Japan
was just a matter of time. Now that we have established
the time of the film's release, we can review the story
itself. Classic film "good guy" Gary Cooper is exellent
as the backwoods hero Alvin York. York became one the
greatest war heros of all time. The Collin Powell, or
Dwight Eisenhower type of "living legend" of his day. A
simple man thrust by circumstances beyond his control
into heroic actions. York saved the lives of his fellow
comrads in the
first world war, and also managed to capture enemy
soldiers. But the film over simplifies York's story.
All the action of valor happens much to quickly to seem
real, and there is little payoff from it. The movie
ends without the rousing finnish I expected. What had I
hoped to see before the end? I still do'nt know. I
might never come up with an answer to that question.
Cooper plays York well enough though. He even
made me respect his charecter York's not wanting to
fight because it would sacrafice his princibles of
kindness and passifism. Alvin York was never a man cut
out to be a soldier, and yet the ironic twist comes
when he becomes the big hero. Somewhat, however, I
question the truthfulness about the York story. The
Sergeant himself was part of the making of the movie.
He helped with the realism of the
events. I'll bet he did! I believe he could be accused
by some of "suger coating" his life for the silver
screen. Would'nt somebody you know do the same thing?
Remember that film is forever! My theory about the
movie's realism may never be proven [or be true at
all], yet the movie rings false. Very false! Perhaps
that is my problem with the "payoff" I was illuding to.
Howard Hawkes directed, and its not his best directing
by a long shot!
We were clamouring for heroism and patriotism at that
tumultous time in our history. I just wish we had
clamoured for a piece of our collective  history that
was beyond resonable doubt about its actually having
happened.
