Title
Review for G.I. Jane (1997)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Jamie Peck
Hollywood / 1997 / 2:08 / R 
Cast: Demi Moore; Viggo Mortensen; Jason Beghe; Anne Bancroft; Lucinda
Jenny; David Vadim; Morris Chestnut; Scott Wilson; Josh Hopkins 
Director: Ridley Scott 
Screenplay: Danielle Alexandra; David Twohy 
        A buff, tawny Demi Moore shaves her head and goes Navy in "G.I. Jane,"
and the unanticipated result is a well-crafted drama that will do more
for strong women's roles than her turn as Hester Prynne in 1995's "The
Scarlet Letter" ever did. "Jane"'ll likely win her audience raves (and
she deserves them), thus covering up the box office sting started by
"Letter" and continued by last summer's "Striptease." 
        Moore's "G.I. Jane" role is that of Lieutenant Jordan O'Neil. Gutsy
Senator Lillian DeHaven (Anne Bancroft) handpicks her to play a major
part in a study that will hopefully reform the military's guidelines of
restricting women in combat. The trial she faces is to pass the
rigorous Navy SEAL training, a task that more than half of the men who
attempt to succeed end up dropping out of. But O'Neil faces her
challenge with optimism, telling DeHaven, "I expect a certain amount of
pain" from the proceedings. 
        Upon her arrival at Catalano Naval Base in Florida, her statement is
put to the test. Her drill instructor for the duration, Master Chief
John Urgayle (Viggo Mortensen), immediately tells her what the best
thing about pain is -- "It lets you know you're not dead yet." Ouch. Her
presence is immediately met with prejudice not only from Urgayle and all
of the SEALs-in-training, but also from the base commander (Scott
Wilson). Even her boyfriend (Ed Harris-lookalike Jason Beghe), also in
the military, doesn't think she'll last long. But last she does, and
upon learning that she has been given a certain amount of leeway because
of her sex, O'Neil demands equal treatment, no matter how rough things
get. And things do get rough. 
        Rather than hop on a preachy feminist bandwagon, "G.I. Jane" stays
extremely accessible. Because O'Neil is a strong part -- and because
Moore compensates with strong acting -- there's no problem in rooting
for her. Director Ridley Scott knows a thing or two about female
heroines -- his "Alien" turned Sigourney Weaver into one of filmdom's
first and finest -- and thus Jordan O'Neil is as convincing and potent
as either one of the leads from his "Thelma & Louise."
        A solid supporting cast backs Moore up. Mortensen makes his mark by
fleshing out a role that could have been the embodiment of evil
chauvinism. The sequences he and Moore share -- especially a shockingly
violent episode that comes late in O'Neil's training -- are among the
movie's most riveting. Bancroft is exceptional as a powerful political
figure who may or may not be using the press surrounding the controversy
to her advantage. The actors who make up O'Neil's squadron are uniformly
good even though none of them are really allowed to develop a
personality, and Beghe, although eventually a plot convenience, creates
an interesting character. 
        As it stands, "G.I. Jane" is a good movie, but what keeps it from being
a better one is a problematic undoing it shares with "Air Force One" --
it's allowed to play on for about 25 minutes too long. Had "Jane" stuck
to its cerebral battle-of-wills, it could have achieved greatness (and
another half-star). But it feels the need to add on a silly,
shakily-shot action climax for no other reason than to disprove a sexist
remark made to O'Neil by Urgayle. The jiggling camera work is
well-utilized during earlier parts of the film, but in the finale
becomes headache-inducing. 
        "G.I. Jane" has its flaws, but I don't mean to suggest by any means
that it is an ineffective movie. It provides a fine showcase for Moore,
who gives a daring, noble performance, and a distinctly change-of-pace
project for Scott, who's most well known for his deep impact on the
science fiction genre. Executed with intelligence and importance, "G.I.
Jane" is thought-provoking, bold and one of the summer's best surprises. 

Author
Berge Garabedian
A Demi Moore cinematic vehicle directed by the man who brought us
another "gung-ho women" movie back in 1991 entitled THELMA AND LOUISE
(8/10): Mr.Ridley Scott. His brother is fellow hot-shot director Tony
Scott of TRUE ROMANCE (9/10) and CRIMSON TIDE (7/10) fame. Scott Free
is their production company.
PLOT:
O'Neil (Moore) is selected as a test-case candidate to undergo three
months of Navy Seals training, as to identify the capability of a woman
in that branch of the United States Armed Forces. Many people want her
to succeed. Many others want her to fail. The outcome is this film.
CRITIQUE:
This is a 2-hour movie that bored me stupid during the first hour or
so, with countless shots of the men, and woman, training really hard
(how many sweaty shots of Demi Moore must we endure before we crack?),
and politicians and Army heads trying to figure out what to make of the
whole thing. "Navy Seals training is hard, and politics is a dirty
game"-now there's something we never knew before!! Yawn. To entertain
yourself during these early scenes, watch for the Scott brothers'
trademark inclusion of a heavy downpour at some point in the film, as
well as the eternal shot of a man smoking a big "manly" cigar, and
those darn cute rays of sunlight flashing through a shuttered window. 
The second half of the film does add a little intensity, and a spec of
suspense, but not enough to make it an entirely enjoyable movie. I
mean, I don't really think there's anybody out there that can't
confidently predict the ending of the film, eh? Having said that, Anne
Bancroft is perfect in the role of the steadfast, political piranha
Senator, and Viggo Mortensen draws a wonderful performance as the
"hard-as-nails" Major Chief. He even gets to deliver my second
favourite line from a 1997 film (the first being "Yeah baby, yeah !!
from AUSTIN POWERS (7/10)), "Lieutenant O'Neil, when I want your
opinion...I'll give it to you." Yeah baby, yeah !!!
Other than that, the last twenty minutes are the only ones to include
any kind of "action" in this film (as contrived and obvious as the
conclusion does turn out....), and Demi Moore's performance is
adequate. But I guess that if you're in the mood for something that
starts off slow, gets a little political, and ends on a semi-action
tip, then I guess GI JANE should visit your VCR in the near future.
Otherwise, skip it and rent the ultimate "underdog beating all odds"
movie called ROCKY (8/10). Maybe you've heard of it? Viggo rules. 
Little Known Facts: 
Earlier titles for this movie were "In Pursuit of Honor", "Matter of
Honor, A", "Navy Cross" and "Undisclosed".
Demi Moore is married to fellow actor Bruce Willis, with whom she's had
three children who go by the names of Rumer, Scout Larue and Tallulah
Belle (and who said Moon Unit and Dweezel were weird names?). Her own
stepfather (real father left before she was born) killed himself when
she was 18 years of age.
Viggo Mortensen speaks fluent English, Spanish and Danish.
Anne Bancroft was born in The Bronx, New York, under the birth name of
Anna Maria Louisa Italiano (I think she's Italian, eh?), and has been
happily married to director/writer/actor Mel Brooks for over 30 years. 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Demi Moore, Viggo Mortensen, Anne Bancroft, Jason Beghe, Lucinda
Jenny, Scott Wilson, David Vadim, Morris Chestnut,
Josh Hopkins Director: Ridley Scott Producers: Ridley Scott, Roger
Birnbaum, Demi Moore, and Suzanne Todd Screenplay: David
Twohy and Danielle Alexandra
Some valid points are made in this movie about the role of women not
just in the defence force, but also in society. Why do some men feel the
need to open a car door for a woman, to pull out a chair for her at the
dining table, or to give up a seat on the bus for a mother? Why is there
an undeniable urge to want to protect the 'weaker' sex? Do they really
need protecting? Somehow the thought of my father and brother tussling
in hand to hand combat on a battlefield puts knots of worry in my
stomach, yet if it were my mother and sister should I be more concerned?
Could these feelings be the result of my over sensitive conditioning by
society?
The Navy SEALs encompasses the toughest training program there is in
defence force of the United States. One woman (Demi Moore) is asked by a
Senator (Anne Bancroft), to undertake the training thus forever changing
the limited role and positions of women in armed combat. Moore is at
first given preferential treatment by the corps, to account for the
gender differences. Namely, steps to help climb a wall, a longer time
limit to complete tasks and separate barracks and showers. Which is not
unreasonable considering women are physiologically smaller, though no
less intelligent than their male counterparts. However, Moore realises
that she needs to go head to head with the males if she is to gain any
respect from them.
The numerous scenes of bone breaking drills are as gruelling on the mind
as on the eye. One begins to huff and puff just watching these men being
pushed to the upper limits of human endurance. The most shocking scene
is during a role played hostage interrogation. When Moore the leader of
her group is battered, bashed and simulated raped in front of her men,
in a attempt to break their code of silence. It is here that the
commanding officer makes a solid statement - "She isn't the problem, we
are." Meaning that the weakness lies not with the mettle of the female
soldier, but in the heart of the male counterpart who cannot endure
watching the torture of the fairer sex.
So perhaps society may need to change it's thinking towards women, and
their right to defend their country in armed combat. However, since
peace is predominant in the majority of the civilised world, there may
not be any need to make a hasty decision about sending women into
battle. In the mean time, I will continue to open car doors, pull out
chairs and sacrifice my seat on a bus for women. I will also go into
battle first before allowing my mother and sister to take up arms.
Hopefully, there will also come a day when there are no battles left to
be fought or won, and the only issue remaining regarding sexual equality
is who should carry the baby.
This Ridley Scott movie is more melodrama than standard war flick,
dealing with gender roles rather than actual combat. Not his best work,
although thought provoking enough to keep the viewer interested. Moore's
testosterone charged male characterisation is amusing. She has
undoubtedly been taking tough guy lessons from husband Bruce.

Author
James Sanford
        Demi Moore has had an incredible streak of bad luck lately.
Millions steered clear of her ribald vision of ``The Scarlet Letter''
and her tepid would-be thriller ``The Juror,'' and while her paycheck
for ``Striptease'' made her the Twelve Million Dollar Woman, her
performance made her the butt of a lot of scalding jokes.
  But Demi is eager to repent, and she's willing to give her
blood, sweat and tears - quite literally - for one more
chance. ``G.I. Jane'' offers her the opportunity to do all that and
more: She even sheds her hair in an amazing on-camera head-shaving,
sure to be one of the year's most talked-about movie moments.
  ``G.I. Jane'' casts Moore as Jordan O'Neil, an intelligence
officer who becomes the first woman to train as a Navy Seal. The title
refers to a nickname applied to O'Neil by the press as she undergoes a
grueling regimen that includes pushing tanks up sand hills in Sisyphus
fashion, being tortured in a simulated prison camp, and digging her
dinner out of a garbage can.
  Dramatically, the picture is strictly by-the-book, and
occasionally it teeters on the brink of self-parody, as stogie-gnawing
officers plot against human dynamo Jordan. But, like the similarly
over-the-top ``Face/Off,'' ``G.I. Jane'' has been directed with such
finesse and infused with so much star power the movie works, almost in
spite of itself.
  Director Ridley Scott (``Alien,'' ``Blade Runner'') lends
his customary striking visual sense to the proceedings: Even when
Jordan is battered and bleeding in the rain, Scott makes her look like
a portrait of gutsiness rather than a victimized mess. Scott's imagery
is beautifully underscored by sterling new songs from the Pretenders,
and it's typical of the film's canniness that Jordan's private moments
of self-doubt are accompanied by music from rock 'n' roll survivor
Chryssie Hynde, who could probably tell Jordan a thing or two about
trying to carve out your niche in a man's world.
  Moore's typically prickly demeanor, often cited by her
detractors as her biggest liability as an actress, actually works to
her advantage here, as she unearths the voracious ambition in Jordan's
soul. It's easy to see this role as a mirror image of the actress
herself, a similarly driven woman who's said to work out several hours
a day. If you don't believe those reports, check out the frightening
ease with which Moore executes one-armed push-ups and suspended
sit-ups.
  The screenplay by David Twohy and Danielle Alexandra makes
Jordan into a kind of Everywoman that's difficult not to root
for. Jordan's habit of boldly standing up to her superiors may not be
credible, but it gives the audience several opportunities to cheer her
on as she challenges sadistic Master Chief Urgayle (Viggo Mortensen)
and a manipulative Texas politico (a campy Anne Bancroft) who betrays
her.
  Even as the film turns into an action extravaganza in the
final stretch, Scott keeps his heroine solidly in the
forefront. ``G.I. Jane'' is first and foremost a star vehicle and,
thanks to Moore's astounding chutzpah, it's an entertaining one.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Demi Moore, Viggo Mortensen, Anne Bancroft, Jason Beghe, 
      Lucinda Jenny, Scott Wilson, David Vadim, Morris Chestnut, 
      Josh Hopkins
Director: Ridley Scott
Producers: Ridley Scott, Roger Birnbaum, Demi Moore, and Suzanne Todd
Screenplay: David Twohy and Danielle Alexandra
Cinematography: Hugh Johnson
Music: Trevor Jones
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     With a title like G.I. JANE, it would be easy to dismiss Ridley 
Scott's latest effort as exploitation fare.  Such a reaction, however, 
would do the picture an injustice.  On the other hand, the movie lacks 
the thematic depth that the film makers would like to attribute to it.  
Basically, this is a high-grade testosterone flick, which is ironic, 
considering that the lead actor is one of the 1990s' top female screen 
sex symbols, Demi Moore.
     While G.I. JANE is admittedly effective at doing most of what it 
attempts, the problem lies in its lack of ambition.  We've seen movies 
like this, about honor and courage in the military, since Hollywood 
discovered the war genre.  Many of the trappings may be different, but, 
at its core, G.I. JANE isn't all that different from John Wayne's THE 
SANDS OF IWO JIMA.  This film also owes more than a small debt to the 
acclaimed Richard Gere movie, AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN.  Anyone who 
has seen that picture, or any other like it (and there are a lot out 
there), will recognize every perfunctory and formulaic turn in G.I. 
JANE's script.  
     Moore is Lt. Jordan O'Neil, one of several "test cases" being used 
to challenge the military's "non-policy" about women in combat.  O'Neil, 
who was denied the chance to fight in the Gulf War, has now been offered 
the unique opportunity of undergoing the grueling training necessary to 
become a Navy SEAL.  It's a daunting task:  60% of those who start the 
program drop out, and those are men.  Almost everyone, including 
Jordan's live-in boyfriend, Royce (Jason Beghe), expect her to fail.  
Her sponsor, Senator Lillian DeHaven (Anne Bancroft), has faith in her, 
however, and believes that if anyone can survive the training at 
Florida's Catalano Naval Base, it's O'Neil.
     Looking to advance her career in the Navy, Jordan agrees to the 
challenge, but, from the moment she's introduced to her drill 
instructor, Command Master Chief John Urgayle (Viggo Mortensen), and the 
base commander, C.O. Salem (Scott Wilson), she begins to doubt her 
choice.  But O'Neil presses on, battling subtle sexual harassment, the 
resentment of her fellow candidates, and the perception that she's being 
given special treatment because she's a woman.  As the weeks wear on and 
O'Neil doesn't quit, she begins to make certain politicians nervous -- 
namely, those who were sure she wouldn't last through the training.
     It seems like more than just six years since director Ridley Scott 
made THELMA AND LOUISE, and virtually another lifetime since he was 
responsible for the science fiction classics ALIEN and BLADE RUNNER.  
Recently, Scott's work has varied from moderately entertaining (WHITE 
SQUALL) to downright awful (the ill-advised 1492).  G.I. JANE is not 
likely to inflate his sinking reputation.  In fact, this is the kind of 
generic output we have come to expect from his brother, Tony.
     Actually, if you strip away all of the details surrounding Scott's 
most recent films, WHITE SQUALL and G.I. JANE, you'll find that their 
naked plot skeletons look strikingly similar.  Both feature a small 
group of intense individuals enduring difficult physical and mental 
conditions.  Each offers a hard-bitten authority figure whose apparently 
cruel lessons turn out to be invaluable.  And both highlight the 
circumstances that build bonds between initially hostile or indifferent 
characters.  Ultimately, it's possible to find numerous parallels 
between WHITE SQUALL and G.I. JANE, which may indicate that Scott has an 
affinity for this sort of material.
     Of course, it's impossible to discuss this movie without mentioning 
its "issue":  women's equality in the military.  Unfortunately, the 
film's shallow (albeit sincere) treatment of the subject is more 
obligatory than thorough or thoughtful.  And, although G.I. JANE avoids 
being overly preachy, it also doesn't offer any new or interesting 
insights, and doesn't come close to the level of intelligence displayed 
by last year's COURAGE UNDER FIRE in tackling a different aspect of the 
same issue.  The movie's two main points, that there is no true equality 
in the military and that politicians will trade the moral high ground 
for political favors, are obvious.
     With a buff physique that has to be the result of an aggressive 
training regimen, Demi Moore has the body of an action heroine.  
Unfortunately, the dramatic aspects of her performance are not 
impressive enough to eclipse her personality.  Truly gifted actors 
quickly shed their own image in favor of the character's.  In this case, 
however, we're consistently aware that this is Demi Moore playing Jordan 
O'Neil, rather than a unique individual come to life on the screen.  We 
never forget the actress long enough to lose ourselves in the character, 
and this awareness limits G.I. JANE'S potential impact.  The supporting 
cast, including Viggo Mortensen as O'Neil's drill instructor, Jason 
Beghe as her boyfriend, and Anne Bancroft as a senator, is solid.
     With G.I. JANE, Scott has crafted an action/drama of passable 
entertainment value, but there's little here to astound or amaze any but 
the most casual or naive viewer.  The movie does a reasonable job of 
engrossing an audience for two hours -- it's the kind of high energy, 
fast-paced film where you can guiltlessly root for the heroine to 
persevere -- but that's all it succeeds at.  G.I. JANE is for those who 
prefer to cheer at the screen than be challenged by what's playing on 
it.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Walter Frith
Demi Moore's struggle to give a star making performance has finally paid off
with 'G.I. Jane'. Moore gives an incredibly strong performance filled with
dedication to her craft thanks largely in part to the guidance of experienced
veteran director Ridley Scott.  Scott, whose films include 'Alien', 'Blade
Runner' and 'Thelma and Louise' has crafted a film with some of the most
intense basic training ever seen in a motion picture.  Stanley Kubrick's
'Full Metal Jacket' from 1987 featured an incredibly harsh treatment of raw
recruits being inducted into the U.S. Marines but that film is tame in
comparison to this.
Moore plays the first woman in the U.S. military to be trained as a Navy
Seal.  This reportedly is supposed to be the toughest training of any
fighting force anywhere.  Apparently, they have a drop out rate of 60 per
cent.  The master chief of the unit (Viggo Mortensen) vows that the first day
will not end until someone drops out.  The first day of training lasts 19
hours and the trainees look very physical in their roles.  Attempts are made
to give Moore preferential treatment since she is a woman.  She resists any
attempts at special treatment and tells her commanding officer that she wants
to be treated EXACTLY the same way as every other man in her unit.  Her three
months of training hit some rocky spots from officials within the military
who conspire against her in their attempt to keep the Navy Seal unit entirely
dominated by men.
Ridley Scott's control of the camera in working with director of photography
Hugh Johnson plunges the audience directly into the action with authentic
scenes of military training both compelling and convincing.  Demi Moore is
thoroughly convincing in a very demanding physical role she plays with total
credibility.  She even sports a buzz cut to her hair to give the role more
punch.
'G.I. Jane' is primarily a basic training film which is not a film classic
but rather a slick opportunity to present a visual style of the military not
done before in motion pictures.  Anne Bancroft has some of the best work of
her career in years as a U.S. Senator who recommends Moore as the first
female candidate.  She plays her role perfectly and convincingly by providing
the basis of high rolling bureaucracy in doing what's convenient at the time
of her profile among her peers and in front of the media complete with
hypocrisy and different loyalties to suit the moment.  'G.I. Jane' is a film
that rightfully knows the limits of its subject matter.

Author
Steve Kong
G.I. Jane, what a wonderfully wrong name for this movie. Although this film
sounds like, and was promoted like, a drama about women in the military, it
doesn't go that route. The simplest way to describe G.I. Jane is that it's
an action film.
G.I. Jane is directed by Ridley Scott, from whom one of my most favorite
sci-fi films came from (Blade Runner), but the film feels suspiciously like
a Tony Scott film. (Tony is Ridley's brother, better known for his action
films like Top Gun, Days of Thunder, and Crimson Tide.) I'll get to the
looks and feel of the film later in this review.
Demi Moore is Lt. Jordan O'Neil, an intelligence officer chosen,
unknowingly, to be a pawn in a political game. The political game? Simple,
O'Neil joins the Navy SEALS in training. O'Neil is put into this position
by a fast talking senator, Lillian DeHaven, who wants to use O'Neil to get
re-elected and to look good to the press. The film follows O'Neil through
her SEAL training and also the political dealings behind her training. Most
interesting in the film is Viggo Mortensen (Daylight, Crimson Tide) as the
Master Chief. He gives a great performance, sometimes overshadowing Moore.
Moore seems to be reviving her role from Disclosure, without the hair and
with a gun. 
What I expected walking into the theatre was to see a drama that explores
the implications of females in the US Military, but what I got was an
action film that slightly touches on these issues. The film is filled with
characters, but unfortunately all of the characters are flat and
unmemorable. The only three characters that are memorable are O'Neil, the
Master Chief, and Anne Bancroft's DeHaven.
Other touches that I liked in the film were its heavy use of military
equipment, most especially the helicopters. It was nice to see so much of
the UH-1 Huey in a film, and also to see the AH-1 Cobra in action. The
training shown in the film looks tough, but does not sound exactly right.
I've seen an interview with a SEAL, on the Criterion laserdisc of The Rock,
that describes the intense training to become a SEAL, and although some of
the training is shown on the screen, some of the hardest is only mentioned
slightly via dialog or is left out.
The feel and look of the film seems to be a strange mix between the two
Scott brothers. There's heavy use of fog and smoke, which is a Ridley
thing. But then there are fast cuts and multiple angles on single actions,
which is a Tony thing. Then the action makes the film feel completely like
a Tony film. Though Ridley did a good job with the action, later on in the
film, he dropped into the shaky-camera cinematography. For those of you
that don't know, I'm somewhat annoyed to see action scenes shot with a
shaky camera, although sometimes it works really well, Ridley seemed to
overuse it late in the film. Combine the shaky-camera with the
unintentional zooming, and the action scenes seem to feel more contrived
than they do panicky.
Overall, G.I. Jane should be seen as an action film more than a drama. Demi
Moore does a good job with her role, but Viggo Mortensen does her one
better. Though this is not a very strong Ridley Scott film, it is still
entertaining. I hope that Ridley can put out a stronger film soon, on the
vein of Alien, Blade Runner, or Thelma and Louise.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Congratulations are due to Demi Moore. After a series of increasingly bad 
career moves, climaxed by her starring role in the horrific "Striptease", 
she has finally landed in a fairly good film. Structurally, "G.I. Jane" 
is just another cliché-filled military flick, but Moore and director 
Ridley Scott invest so much vigor into the film that it works anyway. 
In this intense drama, a crusty Texas senator uses her clout to challenge 
the military ban on women in combat. As Senator Lillian DeHaven, Anne 
Bancroft has a ball, using a now-you-hear-it, now-you-don't Southern 
drawl and slinky, cat-like movements in her portrayal of a sleazy veteran 
politician exhilarated with power games. This is Bancroft's best role in 
years, and it's great fun watching her play with the part. Following 
DeHaven's victory in a pissing contest with the military brass, Naval 
Intelligence officer Jordan O'Neil (Moore) is recruited as a test case, 
the first woman allowed to tackle the grueling Navy SEAL's program. 
Moore quickly establishes O'Neil as a smart, skilled and extremely 
focused officer. The script quickly throws her into the same boot camp 
nightmare we've seen in "Full Metal Jacket", "An Officer And A Gentlemen" 
and numerous other "can they triumph against the odds" pictures. The 
situation is cliched, but director Ridley Scott ("Thelma and Louise", 
"White Squall") establishes and maintains a strong momentum, giving the 
film a sense of urgency that transcends the cliched storyline more often 
than not. Moore does solid work as well. Her tendency towards playing 
things way too seriously has hurt her in previous films, but this time 
around it is a crucial factor in setting in place the integrity and 
intensity of O'Neil's personality. 
Aside from Lt. O'Neil and Senator DeHaven, the film's other characters 
are more archetypes than individuals. There's the loving, but wary 
boyfriend, the tough, but caring drill instructor, and of course, the rag-
tag mix of fellow SEAL wannabes. The film takes exactly the route one 
might expect, with the boys expressing varying degrees of outrage over 
O'Neil's presence, until it reaches the obligatory scene where O'Neil 
wins over her fellow trainees. 
During an particularly brutal battle exercise, she kicks the hell out of 
her foe, then triumphantly shouts "Suck my dick!", drawing cheers from 
the other trainees, as well as the audience. Now, let's take just a 
moment and think about this. Over the course of the film, O'Neil insists 
on absolutely equal treatment, going as far as shaving her head and 
bunking with the men. Extreme measures, but an understandable approach 
for a character determined to prove her worth. But what in the world is 
"Suck my dick!" all about? Are the filmmakers seriously suggesting that 
to be accepted as an equal with men, you must pretend to be one? An odd 
approach for a film supposedly taking a feminist stand. 
Or maybe not so odd, when one considers the many scenes of O'Neil 
training privately in sweaty, skimpy outfits, a very nice excuse for some 
long, loving T&A shots. One suspects that "G.I. Jane" isn't making any 
particular feminist statement at all. It appears the woman-in-combat 
motif was simply considered a good hook for an action movie, not to 
mention a nice vehicle for Demi Moore to salvage her flagging career. 
Despite the film's decidedly mixed messages, "G.I. Jane" still works, 
primarily because Ridley Scott knows how to make an action film feel 
solid. Clichés be damned, the training sequences pack real clout. When 
O'Neil is assaulted again and again, the staging and sound effects make 
those scenes feel all too real. Even for seasoned moviegoers, it's hard 
not to wince and turn away when watching O'Neil brutalized in such a 
realistic fashion.
Towards the end of the film, O'Neil's outfit gets thrown into an actual 
combat situation, and you can take it from there. Every conceivable 
battle cliché happens, and you know what? The climax is STILL rousing, 
because by this point you've either left the theater or thrown away any 
expectations of credibility. Feminist trappings aside, the bottom line is 
that "G.I. Jane" is a good old fashioned war movie, the kind John Wayne 
fans would approve of. Demi Moore and Ridley Scott may not have a lot to 
brag about here, but they certainly don't need to apologize either. 

Author
Michael Dequina
G.I. Jane (R) *** (out of ****)
        In recent years, Demi Moore has been better suited to promoting her
films than starring in them.  Her audacious claim that "not that many people
have read the book" resulted in a lot of press for Roland Joffe's disastrous
The Scarlet Letter, but she seemed out of time and place, to say the least,
on screen as Nathaniel Hawthorne's tortured heroine.  Moore seductively
shimmied with Barbara Walters, stripped down for David Letterman, and urged
women everywhere to do a little Striptease for themselves, but her grave
earnestness was completely at odds with the ridiculous goings-on in last
summer's notorious would-be comedy.
        However, Moore could not have been more perfectly cast as the
strong-willed heroine in Ridley Scott's surprisingly effective G.I. Jane.
Moore stars as Lt. Jordan O'Neil, a Navy intelligence officer who is chosen
as the first woman to enter the rigorous training for the Navy SEALs.  How
rigorous?  We are told early on and at various points throughout the film
that the dropout rate is 60%--that statistic, of course, reflecting only
men.  Will Jordan beat the odds, overcome the sexism of her commanding
officers, and complete her training?
        Yes, the scenario served up by writers David Twohy and Danielle
Alexandra is rather predictable, and one late development where Jordan must
prove her mettle in true combat is contrived, but they manage to throw in a
few wrinkles to make the proceedings consistently interesting.  Jordan is
not the prototypical "G.I. Jane" of the title from the get-go; early on, she
struggles as badly as one would expect a woman, and when the men say that
she's in over her head, the statement does hold some water.  Naturally,
Jordan does become a stronger soldier, but the changes do not occur
overnight--it is a gradual process, one she is still going through by the
end of the film.  Also, there is more to the story than Jordan overcoming
adversity; there is also an interesting subplot about how she is used as a
pawn in a feminist senator's (well-played by Anne Bancroft) political
wheelings and dealings.  It's unfortunate that the intelligence evident in
certain parts of the script didn't extend to the dialogue, which at certain
points is fairly laughable (my favorite line is the destined-to-be-quoted
"Get your dick back in here!").
        Scott directs G.I. Jane with a quick rhythm and (naturally) a visual
slickness, and he elicits fine performances all around, notably from Viggo
Mortensen as Jordan's iron-fisted master chief.  As good as Mortensen is,
the star of the show is clearly Moore; I cannot imagine this film working as
well as it does without her in the lead.  One of her most defining
characteristics is her steely determination, and while that same quality
seemed so wrong for The Scarlet Letter and Striptease, it is what is exactly
called for by the role of Jordan.  We not only believe that Jordan can
survive the hellish training, we also buy the fact that she actually _wants_
to go through with it.  Moore is also a bit of a revelation during the more
action-oriented sequences; she is convincing in the more physical fight and
combat scenes, showing potential as--if she ever elected to go that
route--an action heroine.
        Newsweek caused a stir earlier this year when the magazine published
an article speculating that Moore, who has not had a hit film in years, has
become an audience deterrent.  The true test of that theory comes with G.I.
Jane.  Unlike her previous solo starring efforts, it is a solid piece of
entertainment, and if its grosses go the way of Striptease, then she really
must be box office poison.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/

Author
Clara Duong
Synopsis:
As a response to accusations of sexual prejudice in the armed forces, a
female naval intelligence officer is chosen to be a test case.  If she
can survive the demanding S.E.A.L. training, she will open the way for
other women to be permitted to follow in her footsteps.  Throw in a lot
of political machinations, sabotage, brutality, water and sand and you
have an entertaining movie.
Review:
The title of this movie turned me off at first.  I mean 'GI Jane?'????? 
The other titles which were considered were more promising - In Pursuit
of Honor or A Matter of Honor would have been acceptable although Navy
Cross or Undisclosed are a little meaningless as far as I'm concerned.
I went into this movie not liking the title and being one of those
people who thinks that Demi Moore is absolutely ghastly as an actor.  To
my surprise I really enjoyed the movie.  Moore as Lieutenant Jordan
O'Neil is much more likeable than her washed out excuse for a gusty
woman in A Few Good Men. 
The storyline is simple.  Anne Bancroft playing Senator Lillian Dehaven
is a ruthless, machiavellian politician with an agenda to push.  Using
feminism to achieve political mileage, she forces the military powers
that be to backdown and permit a test case to enter the highly intensive
Navy S.E.A.L. training.  Jordan is selected due to the fact that she has
it all - looks, brains and strength.
The training is gruelling and the indignity almost painful to watch. 
Nonetheless, it's one of those movies that makes me want to cheer out
and encourage the hapless hero/heroine along in his/her endeavours. 
Sure, there are the stereotypical elements - inhuman treatment, sexual
innuendo, resentful peers, pained boyfriend and sexist commanding
officer.  Stepping away from the stereotypes though, Viggo Mortensen as
Master Chief John Urgayle tries to get away from being nothing more than
a brutal screamer.  His character exercises a little more intellectual
rigour than you would normally expect from such a character.
Jordan's boyfriend Royce is also in the military.  Although they both
started at the same time, due to the fact that he has seen active
service, he has advanced through the ranks much more quickly than she
has.  Royce (what is his surname? Do we care?) almost resents Jordan's
attempts to advance herself, although he quickly settles down to being
doe-eyed and supportive.  His character seems to have been thrown in so
that we know that you don't have to be a lesbian to want to be in the
military.
In parts, this is a very silly movie, with gratuitous lines and scenes
thrown in for effect which are so blatantly obvious or contrived that
it's hard not to cringe.  I still liked it though.  Weaknesses in the
script aside, this is a film which captures a heroic and reckless mood.
As we watch Jordan's battle, it's increasingly clear that it is a
personal battle.  This is an individual's fight for self-advancement. 
We don't have to have our teeth set on edge by didactic preachings, we
don't have to feel uncomfortable because we're having ideology thrust
down our throats.  It's enough that we can sit back and hope that this
one person gets what she wants and we can admire her tenacity and
determination without coming out and saying whether we believe women
should go into combat or not.

Author
Michael Redman
Demi Moore does her best to be husband Bruce Willis in a "guy film"
disguised as a feminist movie. Beat-up, bruised and bloody but
buffed-out, she triumphs over overwhelming odds: "Die Hard 15: This
Time It's A Babe".
In a political trade-off for confirmation of the new head of the Navy,
the military powers that be agree to a few trial cases for women in
combat. Lt.  Jordan O'Neil (Moore) is assigned to SEAL training. The
brass is sure that she will wash out within a week; after all, 60% of
the __men__ fail the intense course. We know better from the
beginning.
O'Neil sticks it out despite resentment from her fellow sailors and
harassment from drill instructor Master Chief John Urgayle (played
with a wonderful depravity by Viggo Mortensen). After she endures
weeks of physical and mental torture, the big boys start to get
worried - she might make it. They begin to put political pressure
on Senator Lillian DeHaven (Anne Bancroft), the woman that forced them
into the situation in the first place.
The film is supposed to have a Message, but it is nothing new. Some
women can do as well as some men in physically demanding
situations. Now there's a revelation. Women in the military poses some
problems. Another news flash.  Perhaps these are new thoughts to
some. After all, the audience I saw the film with thought that "If I
want your opinion, I'll give it to you" was a hilarious line.
The movie beats you over the head with the obvious. A black team
member tells the story of a relative in WWII who was denied combat
duty because it was well known that people of his race had bad night
vision. "You're the new nigger on the block," he tells O'Neil. The
not-too-subtle undercurrent in the statement is that sexual
integration of the military is inevitable. A bit more refined
statement comes from one of her superiors "She's not the problem. We
are."
The extended shots of training get old fast. If you've seen a five
minute segment of people crawling through the mud and barbed wire
while being shot at, you've seen 'em all. There doesn't need to be a
dozen of them. The film looses the ability to keep your attention
early on.
There are some plot devices that don't work and others that don't make
sense.  The top Navy staff never figures out that the officer they
have assigned to keep track of O'Neil is her boyfriend. There couldn't
be a more vivid illustration of the old joke about the oxymoronic
aspect of military intelligence.
The tired twist of a training exercise turning into real combat is no
more of a surprise than anything else is. It could have been redeemed
if those action scenes had been exceptional, but we've seen it all
before...and usually better.
I would have expected better from director Ridley Scott ("Aliens",
"Blade Runner", "Thelma And Louise"), but his films have been on the
downhill slide for a few years. As he drifts into brother Tony's ("Top
Gun") simplistic but popular territory, he's losing something
valuable. This movie has the dynamic look of previous Scott efforts,
but none of the soul.
It's not all horrible. Cheering for the underdog is always an
audience-pleaser and it's easy to do here. Much of the film looks good
visually. But these aren't enough to make up for a one-trick plot and
hackneyed script.
The one bright spot is that Moore does a credible job with what little
she is given to work with. Admittedly the role isn't exactly
challenging, but with the atrocious "Striptease" behind her, this is
certainly a step forward. Upon first glance, the films couldn't be
more different, but on closer examination the two characters could be
the same woman. Feisty and determined hot honey makes good in a man's
world.
Of course no Demi Moore film would be complete without some gratuitous
footage of her assets. Clad only in a thin tank-top and tiny shorts
and covered with sweat she demonstrates that she is really not one of
the guys even as she's doing one-armed push-ups.
Becoming a man seems to be O'Neil's goal. Not content to just be
treated equal to the others, she becomes a hit with the men when she
strongly suggests that the Master Chief "suck my [anatomical component
that we would be surprised if she actually possessed]."
Perhaps someday Scott will release a director's cut with the better
scenes in this film and find a story worth watching to go with
them. Someone give me a call if that happens.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 21 years and is
continually amazed at what passes for entertainment at times. Email to
mredman@bvoice.com is your direct link for fan mail.)
[This appeared in the 8/27/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:mredman@bvoice.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     What is it with Demi Moore?  One cannot watch her good, but older,
films like GHOST and A FEW GOOD MEN without appreciating her talent.
Her later films, on the other hand, have had scripts that specialize in
the absurd.  Why couldn't she see how hopeless they were?  Was she that
blinded by the size of the salary she was offered?  From THE SCARLET
LETTER to STRIPTEASE to THE JUROR, all have seemed destined to be
disasters.
     Her latest, G.I. JANE, is by the writer of WATERWORLD, David N.
Twohy.  Suffice it to say that it is RAMBO but with pretensions.  Her
character in G.I. JANE is accused once in the movie of trying to be
Joan of Arc.  Indeed Moore plays it like Bruce Willis playing Joan of
Arc -- think DIE HARD 5, but with a message.  The preachy script spends
more energy philosophizing than worrying about the narrative.
Remarkably little happens in the film, but it is so preposterously
presented and takes so long in unfolding that the first hour will seem
like an eternity.
     The film opens with a hazy confirmation hearing for a new
Secretary of the Navy.  As the nominee describes the progress that has
been made getting women into the military, he is interrupted by Texas
Sen. Lillian DeHaven, sitting on a platform high above him.  "Whoa,
whoa, whoa, Mr. Hayes," she chides.  "If a cannibal used a knife and
fork, would you call that progress?"
     Since it's a film about our military, the leaders are shown, of
course, as deceitful and in collusion.  They develop a scheme whereby
women are given the opportunity to qualify for combat positions
believed to be too hard for them and then they can declare women unfit
in general.  Since the toughest outfit is considered to be Navy SEALs,
they let the first woman train for that group.  And when later it looks
like Lt. Jordan O'Neil, played by Moore, might make it as a SEAL, they
develop an even more grandiose conspiracy that includes closing five
bases in Texas -- thus putting thousands of people out of work -- and
concocting false charges against O'Neil.  This cabal will stop at
nothing to prevent a woman from becoming a SEAL.
     The military in this film is one in which instructors physically
abuse their recruits while a hundred people watch and no one complains
or tries to stop it.  Although all of the SEAL candidates are hurt,
none are injured more so than Lt. O'Neil.  She is basically beaten to a
pulp.  Blood streams out of her mouth as she is slugged repeatedly
during some of the milder violence that she has to endure.  G.I. JANE
is a needlessly gory film that is so over-the-top it is hard to decide
what parts of it might be realistic.
     In one scene, a naked Lt. O'Neil is finishing her shower as her
instructor, played with rarely credible evil by Viggo Mortensen,
promotes her on the spot.  In a line so cliched that he must have had
trouble delivering it with a straight face, he says, "Remember, there
are no bad crews, only bad leaders."
     After drifting aimlessly from one outlandish scene to another, the
tedious film's last third takes the asinine plot to new lows and makes
the unbelievable first parts look almost plausible in comparison.
(G.I. JANE manages to be even more ludicrous than THE SHADOW CONSPIRACY
that I saw last week.  At least that film had few pretensions of
realism.)
     And if that is not enough to take, there is the acting, or rather
overacting.  Anne Bancroft, now merely a shadow of her former self,
plays Sen. DeHaven.  Bancroft's heavy southern accent goes in and out
like the tide.  She attempts to play a genteel southern lady of the old
school, but is never convincing even if she does wear flowing dresses,
drink bourbon, and live in dark paneled rooms.  To be fair, the script
gives her some of the worst of the movie's leaden lines.  ("Don't ever
think of playing politics with me, little darlin', or you'll be up way
past your bedtime.")  People in the film don't converse, rather they
engage in political monologues and sermonettes.  Lt. O'Neil's
instructor shouts D. H. Lawrence poetry in the faces of the SEAL
trainees.
     Moore spends most of the film grandstanding while her character
assiduously claims she isn't.  "I'm not here to make some sort of a
statement," Lt. O'Neil informs the base's commanding officer upon her
arrival.  "If you were someone else, you wouldn't be making statements
about making some sort of a statement, would you?" intones the
chauvinistic commander.
     Usually reliable director Ridley Scott does not trust the audience
to understand his points so he overemphasizes them and drills them into
our heads through repetition. He has the military villains frowning and
smoking big smelly cigars.  Scott's uninvolving action sequences are
little more than loud, and he seems obsessed with imbuing the film with
a message with a capital "M."
     Although most of the film can be quite annoying as Scott exploits
an important subject, the picture does have its moments.  Hugh
Johnson's handsome cinematography gives the film an intensity and an
honesty that the script lacks.  His use of a spastic zoom during the
gunfire was a bit much, however.  Cheri Minns's stark make-up for Demi
Moore shows the wear and tear on her face from too much water and too
many beatings.  And finally for those fans of Moore's body, editor
Pietro Scalia's favorite scene transition is another glimpse of Moore
buffing up doing one hand push-ups.  Personally, I would have preferred
acting to sweating.
     G.I. JANE runs overly long at 2:08.  It is rated R for violence
and profanity.  The film would be fine for mature teenagers.  I give
the picture thumbs down and * 1/2 for its unrealized potential.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
In his June 18, 1997 Champaign-Urbana, IL News-Gazette column titled "A
Smooth Name Switch," editor Tom Kacich wrote: "Miami University in Oxford,
Ohio, is named in honor of the Miami tribe of American Indians, which gave
up the rights to most of their Ohio homeland in a 1795 treaty. Most of the
approximately 1,700 Miami now live in Oklahoma."
After a series of name changes, in 1928 Miami U. began calling its athletic
teams Redskins. In 1972, a formal resolution by the tribe  reinforced an
already existing relationship with the University. But times and
perceptions change. Last July, the tribe sent the school a new resolution,
politely asking for the discontinuance of the name Redskins by the end of
academic year 1996-97.
Within three months the Trustees had accepted the suggestion. Soon after, a
new nickname, RedHawks, was adopted. No fuss, no muss, no bother. Civility
on both sides.
By comparison, the Chief Illiniwek case at the University of Illinois has
been a battleground for some time. This is the main (but by no means
parochial) subject of the excellent film "In Whose Honor," a new entry in
the high-quality P.O.V. (Point of View) series of non-fiction films by
independent filmmakers -- the kind of series that would probably have never
materialized were it not for PBS. (Last week's amusing P.O.V. was about the
maverick, now admired now ridiculed filmmaker Henry Jaglom).
It airs on WILL-TV  at 7 pm, Tuesday July 15.  At  8 pm, simulcast on
WILL-TV and WILL-AM 580 radio, comes a Talking Point follow-up discussion
--and no doubt, argumentation -- with comments by guests and call-ins. It
will be a hot time in the old town that night.
The documentary is being broadcast nationally. In addition to its general
importance, it has many levels of appeal for our community. It is topical,
it was mostly filmed here, Jay Rosenstein (its maker as  producer,
director, editor, co-cinematographer, chief bottle washer) is a UIUC
graduate. Still at the University, he teaches at the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications and is also a multimedia producer. Long may he
stay with us.
"American Indians are human beings, not mascots," is one of the refrains
that sum up the film as well as the feelings of many -- Indian or not --
across the nation, who have been successful in having several sports teams
abandon their Indian nicknames and paraphernalia.
The Illiniwek "cause celebre," slowly caught fire when Charlene Teters, a
Spokane Indian, came to the UIUC campus in the late 1980s as a graduate
student in Art. Soon after, she took her children to an Illini basketball
game. The mother and the children were dismayed, shocked and upset by the
dancing-prancing-twirling Chief Illiniwek.
Attractive, articulate and eloquent  Ms. Teters, is often on camera,
describing lucidly how and why she and many others feel that the Illiniwek
type of activities, symbols, regalia, mascots plus many inauthenticities
are blows to Indian pride and self-esteem as they constitute non-respect of
important rituals.
In interviews with American Indian personalities, we even learn that
genuine drumbeats are like heartbeats and not as conceived by Hollywood. (I
believe that what popularized the phony beats was the outrageously kitschy
"Indian Tom-Tom" sequence in the 1936 Jeanette MacDonald-Nelson Eddy hit
film "Rose Marie," from a famous operetta. This hit movie has to be on TV
these days since Jimmy Stewart had one of his early roles in it).
The documentary has many scenes that were started some years ago, as it
followed on the Urbana campus the outraged, originally unsupported
Charlene. She ran a one-person campaign against the Chief, picketed games,
spoke of the demeaning the Native Americans. Though shunned, even vilified
by some students, she went on doggedly, insisting that since symbols of
Indian culture meant so much to the Indians, they ought not to be treated
lightly, as entertainment.
There is much coverage of the situation, including a person at a football
game who, reacting to the pressures to eliminate Chief Illiniwek, states
that  "People shouldn't cave in to out-of-state foreigners."
No one caved in among the Trustees, the alumni, the fans or the officials.
The Trustees, like Susan Gravehorst (one of the participants in Talking
Point), wisely are not presented as insensitive foes of Charlene, but as
sincere partisans of the status quo. Mrs. Gravehorst cannot imagine how the
Chief "who deports himself with such dignity and such solemnity ... can be
perceived as a racial insult or slur." The Chiefs themselves are pleasant,
clean-cut fellows, also convinced that their "characters" actually honor
the Indian people.
The controversy is followed in detail, in ramifications that include
financial aspects,  politics, shifts by the U of I attitudes. It gets
amplified as Charlene becomes a  national leader in the cause, and is seen
in rallies and protests in other cities where games use Indian names and
symbols.
The common-sense solution is that while most pro-Chiefers are honestly
persuaded that their opponents are wrong and far too touchy, so long as a
clear majority within an ethnic minority feel so strongly and do not
consider themselves honored,  so long as abolishing the Chief does not
wound persons or institutions, the fracas could be ended quickly and gently
with the stroke of a pen. Remember Miami.

Author
Scott Renshaw
G.I. JANE
(Hollywood)
Starring:  Demi Moore, Viggo Mortensen, Anne Bancroft.
Screenplay:  Danielle Alexandra and David Twohy.
Producers:  Ridley Scott, Demi Moore, Roger Birnbaum and Suzanne Todd.
Director:  Ridley Scott.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A certain reactionary element has already decided, sight unseen, that
G.I. JANE must be a piece of hardcore feminist propaganda.  After all,
here's the film-maker behind THELMA & LOUISE directing the story of a
female naval lieutenant named Jordan O'Neil (Demi Moore) who tries to
break into the heretofore all-male Navy SEALs.  Imagine their chagrin when
they realize that Ridley Scott has pulled a fast one on them.  G.I. JANE
is actually a gruntin', sweatin', shootin' and fightin' guy movie with a
message as politically incorrect as they come.  Anyone who goes to G.I.
JANE expecting to cheer for a woman succeeding in a male dominated
environment on her own terms is in for a rude awakening.  This is the
story of a woman who succeeds in a male dominated environment by turning
into a man.
     No, I'm not referring to Ms. Moore's much-publicized shaven pate, nor
to the cigar-smoking, take-no-b.s. real-life persona she brings to every
one of her projects.  Such masculinisms may not hurt G.I. JANE's he-man
quotient, but they don't define it either.  The pivotal transgender moment
occurs two-thirds of the way through the film, as Lt. O'Neil nears the end
of her SEAL training.  During a war game exercise, O'Neil's team is
captured and subjected to P.O.W. treatment.  That treatment includes an
extended sequence during which the Master Chief (Viggo Mortensen)
physically and psychologically abuses O'Neil, and in fact prepares to rape
her.  Just when we think O'Neil is beaten, she rouses herself and -- ahem
-- suggests that the Master Chief "suck my [anatomical feature usually
associated with the male of the species]."  Suddenly, with the rousing
cheers of her comrades ringing in her ears, she is an outsider no longer.
She is one of the boys, metaphorical genitalia and all, ready to trade
whisky shots and lusty cries of "Hoo-yah."
     It's the perfect climax to a film which continues the morphing of
Ridley Scott and his brother Tony into a single two-headed film-making
organism dedicated to celebrating manly men at their manliest.  Ridley
once had a sense of style, something Tony could never claim, but that
style has all but vanished in recent duds like 1492: CONQUEST OF PARADISE
and WHITE SQUALL.  In G.I. JANE, Ridley spends most of the film pointing
his camera at men (and Moore) straining their way through the rigors
of SEAL boot camp while drill instructors shout insults at them.  It's a
tired device in movies about soldiers -- after FULL METAL JACKET, the
initiation ritual has been done as well as anyone is ever going to do
it -- which runs on and on until you may be ready yourself to ring the
bell which allows the recruits to bail out.  G.I. JANE is a one-note film
just waiting for the inevitable moment when Lt. O'Neil makes her profane
statement that the best woman for the job is a man.
     I noted that that scene is the perfect climax for G.I. JANE, but in
truth it only _should have been_ the climax.  The film actually rambles on
for another half-hour, allowing O'Neil to butt heads with a duplicitous
senator (Anne Bancroft, in a wonderfully oily performance full of
matter-of-fact sleaze) before butting heads with Libyan soldiers in her
first real mission.  That mission is necessary, of course, as a real test
of O'Neil's mettle, so that she can earn the much-desired respect of the
Master Chief who beat her insensible and sexually assaulted her.  Sure
Jordan O'Neil makes it through the program.  It's the way she makes it
through which could have plenty of viewers cringing.  When G.I. JANE isn't
monotonous or ridiculous (turning O'Neil's personal training into an
excuse for sweaty T&A close-ups), it's just plain insulting.  There's no
danger or eroticism to the scene where the Master Chief interrupts O'Neil
while she's taking a shower.  After all, she doesn't have anything he
hasn't seen before in the men's shower.  Hoo-yah.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Irredeemably stupid and pigheaded attempt at a story about the
first female Navy SEAL. Read ROGUE WARRIOR instead.
Demi Moore has never been terribly compelling, if you ask me, but she's the
best thing in G.I. JANE, a dismal and off-kilter piece of work from the
once-notable director Ridley Scott. What's to be said about a movie where
the best scene is the one where she shaves her own head?
The biggest problems with G.I. JANE are a) plausibility and b) deployment.
The broad outlines of the story are compelling -- the very concept of women
in the military has always caused a stir in many quarters -- but the movie
hasn't got the faintest idea how to put across its conceits. Plus, it
suffers from a grafted-on Hollywood plot that one can hear squeaking and
grinding blocks away.
Moore plays O'Neil, a career military woman with enough endurance for any
three soldiers. She gets involved in a pilot program to allow women in the
SEAL training program, which is being coordinated by a brassy female senator
(Anne Bancroft, utterly wasted). A good example of the movie's basic
airheadedness -- or maybe indecisiveness -- is an early scene with Moore's
beau, also a military man. "I wasn't ready to decide the rest of my life
today," he bleats at her while scrubbing her toes in the bathroom. The whole
speech was glaringly upstaged by the fact that for a military office,
O'Neil -- sorry, Demi -- has amazingly good-looking feet.
O'Neil's trouble begins before she even enters SEAL training proper. A whole
bevy of preferential treatments have been set up to provide women with a
slightly easier road into the military, and apparently all of those
protocols have been preserved in the SEAL program as well. This gets O'Neil
hopping mad, since that's the last thing she wants. There are several
tongue-tied speeches about whether or not her very presence there "makes a
statement", but the movie simply doesn't have the capacity to make us care;
it's too busy hustling us through one manufactured conflict after another.
The details of the SEAL training are ridiculous and overblown. In Richard
Marcienko's eye-opening book ROGUE WARRIOR, there are a great many details
about the brutality of the program (60 percent of the enlistees don't make
it). In G.I. JANE, we're treated to the unbelievable sight of the drill
seargeants using live ammo on the recruits in one exercise. In another
scene, the recruits have to eat their meals out of trash cans. Physical
abuse is commonplace (another total boner). Even THE HILL didn't go this
far.
As the movie plodded onwards, I kept asking myself: Isn't there some basis
in fact for a better, more compelling story about this subject? A story that
wasn't beholden to Hollywood conventions about the military, for one? The
movie also shoots itself in the foot by injecting gratuitous pop-song
snatches onto the soundtrack ("Mama Told Me Not To Come" is used to
disastrous effect at one point), which only makes the movie seem that much
more contrived and manipulative.
Demi is, interestingly enough, fine in the picture. There was never a moment
when I doubted her competence or her physical presence. It was the rest of
the movie I had my reservations about. Big ones.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Demi Moore, Anne Bancroft, Viggo Mortensen
Director: Ridley Scott
Synopsis: Test case Jordan O'neill (Demi Moore), eyes glaring beneath
her military crew cut, must survive rigorous basic training for the US
Navy Seals, an elite special forces division because if she makes it,
the military might rewrite its guidelines restricting women in the armed
forces. O-neill (Demi) deals with discrimination from the men, a cruel
instructor (Viggo Mortensen), and questionable politics by Senator
DeHaven (Anne Bancroft). The film consists mostly of training scenes of
recruits doing grueling exercise and of course one obligatory ending
scene where an emergency forces the recruits to use their skills in real
life. Take a guess. Will Demi pass this macho training with flying
colors and earn the respect of her seemingly cruel commander so that the
credits can roll? 
Opinion: Director Ridley Scott, who directed Sigourney Weaver in that
Alien movie with the space marines definitely has a flair for creating
strong female characters amidst gung ho military boys. If you can
stomach watching 40 minutes of pushups and situps and a pre-fab action
ending, you'll love this film. If not, you'll probably feel that it was
still an okay film, Demi Moore does a great  job acting, but they can
lop off 20 minutes worth of exercise film no problem. The moral of this
movie is: never give up.

Author
Phil Brady
Demi Moore plays a  Lt. O'Neil, a talented Naval Intelligence
officer whose career is thwarted by the male/female double standard: No
advancement without operational experience (combat), and few  openings
in the field for women. Ann Bancroft plays a US Senator who is staging a
re-election campaign. Chairing a defense oversight committee, she sees
an opportunity make an issue of women in the military. Threatening to
withhold an appointment of a Defense Secretary, she gets a carte blanche
concession. Any woman who measures up can have any job. Testing that
assurance, the senator opts to recruit a woman for the toughest duty of
all: Navy Seal training. O'Neil is picked, as much for her looks as her
resume.
Seal training was a poor choice. Only the best of the best need
apply, but this is less like Top Gun, and more like the Bataan death
march, interrupted by lessons in weapons and tactics. It is expected
that 60% of the enrollees will drop out. The intent is to cull out the
hardiest soldiers for the toughest insurgence and rescue operations.
Only the Pete Rose/Lenny Dykstra types need apply.  Many will need to
stoke up their strongest machismo just to grit it out. Into this ordeal,
Lt. O'Neil is thrown.
But O'Neil feels up to the challenge. She has the drive, and she is
in exceptional physical shape. A big question is whether the brass will
thwart her, and whether her fellow trainees will accept her. These
issues make up the real story of the movie. Those in command are just as
apprehensive about the dangerous political position this puts them in.
With no precedents, they try their best to accommodate O'Neil, but
separate quarters and different pass/fail requirements end up
embarrassing her and alienating her from those she needs to bond with.
That buzz-cut you see in the promos is her idea, and when she insists on
bunking with boys, the stakes go up.
Much of O'Neil's struggle is defined by her relation with the head
instructor, Master Chief Urgayle  (Viggo Mortensen in a good, complex
role). Urgayle is an expert in this rarefied survival environment, and
he is a fair man in a program where nothing is fair. He truly feels that
the presence of a woman in combat makes the rest of the soldiers more
vulnerable. When he puts O'Neil through her toughest test, he is also
brought to his limits. The best scenes in this movie include O'Neil and
Urgayle.
Director Ridley Scott remains one of my favorites. This time, he
didn't get much chance to sneak  in  his trademark art direction, but he
delivers O'Neil's story well. Demi Moore has had her ups and downs in
this business, the downs coming when she misjudges the true nature of
her appeal. It looks as if she got this one right. O'Neil's drive and
feistiness mirrors Moore's willingness to throw herself into one unsafe
role after another. The audience may  find themselves waffling between
rooting for character O'Neil and actress Moore. It's always nice to see
Ann Bancroft in a movie. She doesn't work enough to suit me, so I
cherish little cameos like the one she did in Love Potion No. 9. When
G.I. Jane was over, I had found a new actor to follow. Viggo Mortensen
was a name I had often noticed when the credits listed all the
background supporting roles, but this is the first time I got to see him
featured. I am looking forward to the next time.

Author
Rick Ferguson
Starring Demi Moore, Anne Bancroft and Viggo Mortensen
Written by Danielle Alexandra and David N. Twohy
Man, I have never seen a movie choke in the last half-hour the way GI JANE
does.  Remember the ball rolling between Red Sox first baseman Bill
Buckner's legs in the 1986 World Series?  Remember the Buffalo Bill's four
fruitless Super Bowl appearances?  Remember Waterloo?  All are famous
examples of the Big Choke, but all pale in comparison to the utter failure
of this picture to bring its story to an original and satisfying
conclusion.  Okay, so maybe I'm guilty of hyperbole.  But I simply can
recall no instance in recent memory in which director, screenwriter and
star all conspired to create such a bankrupt conclusion to an otherwise
competent, if unremarkable, production.
This collapse can even be pinned down to a single shot.  Lt. Jordan O'Neil
(Demi Moore), super-buff Navy Intel officer turned hard-core SEAL cadet,
has found herself, along with her fellow trainees, on a real-life Special
Ops mission on Libyan soil.  There's some premise concerning weapons-grade
plutonium falling into the wrong hands, but who really cares?  It's the
same sort of tacked-on, credibility-straining climax used in every
military-training film from Top Gun to Stripes.  Would real SEAL cadets
actually be sent into live combat?  No way.  Still, I was willing to accept
this premise all the way up until the point that Demi, her bald head
gleaming in the desert sun, leapt out from behind a rock- in slow motion,
no less-  with her assault rifle blazing.  It was a shot lifted straight
out of any one of the RAMBO movies.   The sight was so ludicrous that I
laughed out loud.  Whatever viable message the film might have had was lost
forever.  GI JANE is TOP GUN, set in a different branch of the service and
with a pair of surgically-enhanced breasts where Tom Cruise's nose used to
be.  All that was missing was a Kenny Loggins song on the soundtrack.
It's really too bad, because until that fateful shot, GI JANE does a decent
job setting up its premise and making a case for its heroine.  Cantankerous
Texas senator Lillian DeHaven (Anne Bancroft), presumably a Democrat,
decides to court popularity by testing the Pentagon's proscription against
women in combat roles.  From a list of overachieving candidates she chooses
O'Neil to serve as a test case:  if she can cut Navy SEAL training, the
most rigorous combat training on the planet, the Pentagon will be forced to
alter its policy.  DeHaven operates on the assumption, however, that no
woman could actually pass the course.  By setting up O'Neil to fail, she
will walk away a hero to women voters without actually rocking the Navy's
boat.  The duplicitous cunning of this scheme would make any actual
politician proud to be alive.
But O'Neil is no Shannon Faulkner.  As embodied by Moore, she is a
committed, iron-willed officer who sees the SEAL course as a path to real
career advancement.  She tells her lover and fellow Naval officer Royce
(Jason Beghe) to back her or step aside.  She demands equal treatment with
her fellow trainees, and bristles at the sight of the step-box placed for
her benefit on the obstacle course.  When it becomes clear that she is
receiving special treatment, she shaves her head and moves into the
barracks with the men, who panic at the sight of her tampons.  Hers is an
impressive display of chutzpah, and you can't help but root for her.
The Navy refused to give their blessing to his film, so we can only take
the filmmakers' word that SEAL training is as sadistic and thuggish as
presented here.  Recruits are deprived of sleep for days on end.  They are
forced to eat out of garbage cans.  They must do push-ups in the freezing
surf and spend hours holding heavy landing craft above their heads.  When
their drill instructors aren't humiliating them or beating the living hell
out of them, they're firing live machine gun rounds over their heads.  If
SEAL training were even half this brutal in real life, there would be
Congressional hearings on C-Span for the next twenty years.  This little
summer camp is presided over by the Command Master Chief (Viggo Mortensen),
a weasely little sadist who feels disdain for O'Neil but nonetheless
intrigued by her mettle.  The script gives him a few quirks (reading DH
Lawrence, for example) to distinguish him from the horde of cinematic drill
instructors which preceded him, but he remains a stick-figure nonetheless. 
That the script finds it necessary to create ominous sexual tension between
O'Neil and the Chief gives you an idea of the kind of wrong turns it takes.
The fact is we are in Fantasy Land for most of this movie, and the only
thing that makes it watchable is, surprisingly enough, Moore herself.  Her
acting talent is modest, to put it mildly, and she has demonstrated a
nearly flawless ability to choose bad projects.  If there is a common
thread to Moore's career, however, it is that all her projects, from her
"Vanity Fair" covers to her Letterman appearances to the woeful STRIPTEASE,
are built around a common object of worship: her own body.  In this sense
GI JANE is the ultimate Moore vehicle, for it exists solely to allow us the
privilege of  watching her buff up.  The key to this picture lies in the
shots of Moore doing one-armed push-ups and vertical sit-ups hanging from
her bunk.  We are to admire her physical perfection.  Director Ridley Scott
seems to understand this purpose and so wisely keeps the focus on the gal
herself; her fellow recruits are an anonymous chorus of male admirers,
there to be won over by her grit and determination.  GI JANE is Moore's
love letter to herself.
But it's a well-made love letter. Accepting it on this level, I actually
enjoyed it- until Moore came out from behind that rock with gun blazing. 
Then I hung my head and wept for Ridley Scott, the man who gave us BLADE
RUNNER, ALIEN, and the inspiring female characters of THELMA AND LOUISE. 
For Scott has now sunk to the level of his less-talented brother Tony, who
gave us TOP GUN.  He choked- he gave us ninety minutes of the most
awe-inspiring narcissism ever to hit the big screen, and then tacked a
clichéd action-movie climax on the end.  I would have enjoyed GI JANE so
much more if only, like its main character, it had maintained the courage
of its convictions.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The new one from Ridley Scott-- enough of a reason right there to
run out and see it-- is a feature-length retort to "let's see if she can
take it like a man," where "she" is a naval intelligence officer (Demi
Moore) hand-picked to be the first female allowed to undergo Navy SEAL
training.  (A program that 60% of the *male* recruits don't finish.)
And, surprise, we learn that she can do it, and without any gender
handicapping, no less.  (She sleeps in the same barracks, wears the same
shaved head, and must endure the same levels of physical abuse.  Well,
almost.  None of the *guys* experiences a simulated attempted rape from
Viggo Mortensen's Master Chief from Hell.) No, G.I. JANE isn't much of a
message movie, nor is it a particularly effective character study.
(Heh, *what* character?) But as a ball-breaking, black rain-soaked
depiction of the most brutal basic training that you could possibly
imagine, the movie is gangbusters.  (My favorite sequences:  a jog
through the mess tent, where they're given about sixty seconds to eat,
and a late-night essay-writing exercise.)
     Alas, once Moore's character wins the respect of her teammates--
which happens about eighty minutes in-- the story doesn't have a clue
where to go next.  So, we take an excursion off base, for a confron-
tation with an oily Texas senator (Anne Bancroft, drawlin' away).  And
then we wrap with a cliched training-exercise-turned-real that, while
mildly engaging, has been done to death before and even by the
director's brother Tony in TOP GUN.  Neither sequence is particularly
well-paced-- the character and plot developments feel rushed, but, you
know, what's one more summer movie that tanks in the last half (or
whole) hour?  Now, for the nit picks:  can military instructors actually
physically abuse their recruits?  Did Ridley Scott direct those combat
sequences while under the influence?  Can Demi do more than a handful of
one-handers at a time?  And, most importantly, has anybody transcribed
that delicious exchange about a cigar and it's, ah, particularly
aromatic aroma?

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
In English class they teach you that there are three conflicts used in
writing: Man vs. Man, Man vs. Nature, and Man vs. Himself. Well to really say
what G.I. JANE is, we have to add a new category . . . Woman vs. Man.
Jordan O'Neil (Demi Moore) has always wanted more experience in the military.
Unfortunately this was something hard for her to gain in a male-dominated,
very often female-degrading, organization. It seems the Navy Lieutenant still
caries a grudge after being denied a combat position during the Gulf War. But
when Senator Lillian DeHaven (Anne Bancroft) is preparing for her next
election and needs something that will give her a sure-fire win, the two meet
and our premise is setup. Pushing for woman's rights, DeHaven will get O'Neil
to be the first female "guinea pig" to go thru the Navy SEALS training
program, something that even 60% of men can't seem to accomplish. The
ultimate goal? If O'Neil can make it, full integration may be the next step
in the military.
Naturally, O'Neil goes for it. It's a chance to prove herself. It seems a
win-win situation. O'Neil will get experience and DeHaven will get some
positive publicity. Sounds perfect right? Well, aside from O'Neil herself,
nobody expects much of a result . . . including the Senator.
The building block of G.I. JANE is really just a backdrop to the real
conflicts: Will the men come to accept her? Will her boyfriend support her?
Quite simply, can O'Neil make it? This movie is very well done even if you do
know what you're in for: vulgar sexual references by chauvinistic males that
make the lone-female even more determined to stick it out. It's not a
complaint that this film is pretty cut and dry . . . it's your typical
"against the odds" hero, er, heroine story . . . but if you're looking for
something absolutely spectacular, you might be slightly disappointed.
Demi Moore, one of the highest paid female stars and also one of the most
criticized, does a decent job here. Her body is still her main asset and
she's still showing it off, although now in a more muscular fashion. Anne
Bancroft and Viggo Mortensen (as Master Chief John Urgayle) both do good jobs
at making you hate them. In fact, the only likeable character is O'Neil
herself. She's an outsider and we're stuck rooting for her whether we like it
or not. One thing that stops this film from being a stand up and cheer movie
is that's it's so brutal! By the time G.I. JANE wraps up, you're not in high
spirits, you're downright exhausted!
It's not an action flick, but G.I. JANE has plenty of fighting, screaming,
blood, and gunfire to satisfy those with an insatiable appetite for such
things. It can be hard to follow, and there are a few things that  come up
that are just as quickly forgotten about, but if you move past that, it's not
a bad film. At times confusing, at times implausible, at times hokey (some
dialogue wants to be deemed classic, but comes off quite silly), it isn't the
kind of film that will be remembered long, but it is recommendable. Here's a
movie that gives new meaning to the term "chick flick".

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Met zinnen als "Get your dick back in here!" en "Suck my dick!" denken
de meeste mensen al meteen aan een of andere porno-film. Dat,
gecombineerd met actrice Demi Moore, zou normaal gesproken voor een
"Striptease"-kloon zorgen. Niet dus. G.I. Jane gaat over het wel en
wee van Jordan O'Neil, met verve gespeeld door Demi Moore. O'Neil
maakt deel uit van een experiment dat uit moet wijzen of vrouwen de
Navy SEALS-training aankunnen. 60 % van alle deelnemers vallen af, dus
haar wordt een moeilijke taak opgelegd. Ook krijgt ze veel tegenslag
te verduren van haar teamgenoten en het hoofd van de SEALS, die haar
met een aparte kamer en een milde behandeling in de watten
legt. O'Neil snapt wel dat het zo niet kan lukken en dus neemt ze
harde maatregelen. Ze scheert haar hoofd kaal en gaat veel harder
trainen om zo haar doel te bereiken. Iets wat me meteen aan
"G.I. Jane" opvalt is de originaliteit. Met zo'n titel denk je meteen
aan een tegenhangster van G.I. Joe, die op pad moet gaan om de aarde
te redden. Da's dus niet het geval. Ridley Scott heeft er een sterke
film van gemaakt en hij krijgt ook de nodige hulp van Moore, die goed
gestalte geeft aan Jordan O'Neil. Soms verliest Scott de draad met
onnodige slow-motions of misselijk makende camerabewegingen, maar dat
wordt meestal goed gemaakt met het verhaal. De film is niet zo goed
als ik gehoopt had (het thema ligt er nogal dik op), maar wel de
moeite waard.
E-mail us at: mailto:janvanturnhout@pi.net
'Filmpje!' is located at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/8429/
where you can also subscribe to my mailing-list!
