Title
Review for Greenfingers (2000)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Firework Pictures-Samuel Goldwyn Films
 Director: Joel Hershman
 Writer:  Joel Hershman
 Cast: Clive Owen, Helen Mirren, David Kelly, Warren Clarke,
Danny Dyer, Adam Fogerty, Paterson Joseph, Natasha Little,
Peter Guinness, Lucy Punch
   In a society that's increasing less tolerant of crime, calls are
regularly sent out and political campaigns are based on
demands for tougher sentences and for prisons that punish. 
"Greenfingers" is a refreshing antidote to such mindless
chatter.  Wearing his heart on his sleeve, Joel Hershman
treats us to a movie based on a true story that punctuates the
effect of a so-called country club institution on its inmates. 
"Greenfingers" is upbeat, a feel-good British light comedy with
a couple of juxtaposed romances, but the enterprise is as
prettified and bland as the lovely Primrose Woodhouse
(Natasha Little), one of its rich young characters who inhabits
the role of a repressed mama's girl longing for the strong
arms of a handsome and unpredictable man.
   Taking place in one of Britain's alternative prisons--which
houses criminals who are specially chosen by their potential
to redeem themselves though convicted of violent crimes like
murder and rape--"Greenfingers" focuses on a robust fellow
with exquisite leadership possibilities, Colin Briggs (Clive
Owen).  Jailed for accidentally killing his kid brother whom he
had caught in flagrante with his fiance, Colin has spent more
than half his life in prison and has given up on himself when
by accident, he discovers that he has a green thumb.  Having
planted violets in a particularly barren little plot of land on the
jailhouse grounds, he is as surprised as everyone else that
his flowers have bloomed--as he, too, will in this by-the
numbers picture which trots out the usual stereotypes.  These
caricatures include one kindly old feller, Fergus Wilks (David
Kelly), who despite his charm had killed all three of his wives;
a big, bald, tattooed type; and the youthful, impulsive Tony
who seduces a most willing volunteer to the institution.
Encouraged by Fergus to make use of their latent talent, four
inmates make their little desert bloom, attracting the attentions
of the stuffy horticulturist Georgina Woodhouse (Helen
Mirren)--who encourages the men to strive ever onward by
entering the annual Hampton Court Palace Flower Show.
   Whether or not the men can garner some of the prizes
bestowed by the aristocratic judges and hosts of that
prestigious show, "Greenfingers" becomes a British version of
"Waterboy," cultivated where the Adam Sandler vehicle is
vulgar, but calculated and hackneyed nonetheless.  Given the
astonishing good looks of Clive Owen, this movie could turn
out to be a chick flick, bringing in the romantic women to
whom it's targeted, but to see Mr. Owen in this after his
spellbinding turn in the far more developed "Croupier" is
disheartening.
Not Rated.  Running time: 90 minutes.  (C)2001 by Harvey
Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Joel Hershman, from his screenplay. Starring Clive Owen, Helen
Mirren, David Kelly. Running time: 91 minutes. This film is not yet rated
by the MFCB. Reviewed on October 8th, 2001.
Synopsis: Inmate Colin Briggs (Owen) is transferred to an experimental 
open-air prison. There, he meets venerable Fergus Wilks (Kelly), who 
sparks in Colin a seemingly incongruous interest in gardening. Colin 
convinces the prison governor to allow him to start a flower garden on the 
grounds, bringing him in contact with expert Georgina Woodhouse (Mirren) 
and her lovely daughter Primrose (Natasha Little). Thanks to Georgina's 
influence, the convicts receive an invitation to a major gardening 
competition. But will their pasts catch up with them before the big day?
Review: "Greenfingers" is a good-natured British comedy very much in the 
vein of "Saving Grace". Indeed, both mingle gardening with criminal 
activity, and fans of the latter will likely find much to enjoy in the 
former. British comedy tends toward two extremes: movies filled with 
outlandish set pieces (like the "Monty Python" films) and movies in which 
the comedy arises directly from real life, without indulging in one-liners 
or awkward set-ups. "Greenfingers" is very much of this second type: the 
humour here is derived directly from the simple idea of a group of 
convicts taking an interest in gardening, and from the personalities of 
the chief players. Those raised on more sitcom-like fare may find this 
low-key approach dull, but audiences with a broader appreciation of comedy 
should find it thoroughly delightful and refreshing. Of course, this sort 
of movie is highly dependent on the performances of its leads in 
enabling us to relate to the circumstances. Fortunately, "Greenfingers" 
boasts several fine contributions, particularly from Clive Owen, whose 
Colin is sympathetic but nonetheless retains an edge which reminds us that 
he is, all the same, a criminal. Also highly enjoyable is Helen Mirren; 
although "Greenfingers" scarcely taps into the full range of her acting 
talent, Mirren is hilarious as a sort of British Martha Stewart.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Pete Croatto
My summer was recently saved by two very different movies.  On opening
night, I saw American Pie 2 and laughed like a moron.  Then a few nights
later, I watched and thoroughly enjoyed Joel Hershman's Greenfingers
even though it didn't feature a trip to band camp, girl-on-girl action,
or Seann William Scott.
However, I felt just as good leaving American Pie 2 as I did after
leaving Greenfingers, which tells the offbeat tale of British murderer
Colin Briggs (Clive Owen of Croupier).  After spending roughly half of
his life behind bars, he is transferred to a more lenient facility,
Edgefield.  The picaresque, rustic prison allows its inmates to learn a
trade, while enjoying accommodations generally found at most colleges.
At first, Briggs doesn't want to be there.  He's used to living as a
prisoner and wants to be left alone.  However, his ailing roommate,
Fergus (David Kelly of Waking Ned Devine), wears Briggs down through his
benign nature.  The two become friends, with Fergus giving Colin a
packet of violet seeds as a Christmas gift.
Briggs is astonished when the violets grow in the limestone soil, and
begins a fight with three other prisoners when an errant soccer ball
smashes his beloved flowers.  After the prison's governor (Warren
Clarke) reprimands them, he's awed at what Briggs has accomplished.  And
he's struck by an idea -- Briggs, Fergus and the other men will grow a
garden on the prison's grounds.
Greenfingers, which is "inspired by actual events," becomes a bit like a
sports movie after that.  Despite their differences, the men come
together and through hard work and love earn a spot at the big game --
in this case a prestigious garden show.  One renegade, in this case,
Briggs, will prove to have talent.  Of course, love will also rear its
head (no, not "prison love").  To Hershman's credit, he doesn't pump up
the drama or try for cheap laughs, like last year's lame marijuana
comedy Saving Grace.  I had to keep pinching myself when I didn't see a
single scene of a hardened con sneezing over a pot of pansies, or the
men giving high-fives over a particularly stunning batch of wildflowers.
The movie deals with people and scores on that concept.  It's wonderful
seeing Briggs turn from a bitter prisoner to a man who cares again. 
Give credit to Owen for keeping his cool in a part that begs for
overacting.  His speech to the parole board about being reborn through
gardening is the best scene of its kind since Morgan Freeman's last
stand in The Shawshank Redemption.  Owen's bedside scenes with Kelly,
who lends the film a human touch, are a marvel to behold, emotionally
gripping without being sappy.
Written by Hershman, Greenfingers contains plenty of laughs.  Most come
courtesy of Helen Mirren, who shines as the world-class gardener who
works with the inmates but fears for her daughter Primrose (Natasha
Little) when she starts dating Briggs.  The mother can't believe what
he'll do if her daughter "burns the Sunday roast."
Nothing is forced in Greenfingers.  The funny lines come forth naturally
in conversations and not from punch lines.  Primrose and Briggs'
relationship takes awkward steps.  Even when Briggs decides to go back
to Edgefield, it's done for reasons of loyalty, not because the movie
requires him to do so.  After grimacing through the forced screwball
antics of movies like America's Sweethearts and The Princess Dairies,
it's an almost indescribable pleasure to see a director taking his time
to tell a story very well.
Director: Joel Hershman
Producer: Trudie Styler, Travis Swords, Daniel J. Victor
Writer: Joel Hershman
Starring: Clive Owen, Helen Mirren, David Kelly, Natasha Little, Warren
Clarke, Danny Dyer, Adam Fogerty, Paterson Joseph
http://www.greenfingersmovie.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Karina Montgomery
This is an affable, charming, warm comedy-drama with interesting
characters, fine actors, and some good gardening tips.  However, Britain
has a new genre of movie these days (I noticed the same thing with The Full
Monty, fun as that one was) which is the charming, obstacle-free ascension
fable.  In this genre, The Full Monty has things going for it which
Greenfingers did not, which is bawdy humor, deeper drama, and snappy
musical numbers.  But, sadly, from a storytelling perspective,Greenfingers
is a smooth, painless ride into unlikely bliss.
Clive Owen plays Colin Briggs, the titular greenfingers, who is a criminal
of uncertain degree put into a progressive prison, where he haplessly falls
into gardening.  Everything happens from this point on with Swiss precision
and then the movie is over.  Certainly, there are ups and downs.  David
Kelly (from Waking Ned Devine, whose presence onscreen actually caused a
murmur to ripple through my small weeknight audience) is a sweet old man
and a fascinating character, whom every recognizes as such, thus negating
his specialness with regards to audience empathy.
Colin is closed off and surly, and then he is greenfingered and closed off,
and then, with no change of expression, is fully alive and thriving.  I was
charmed at spots, I laughed at spots, but mostly I saw points where the
story needed to take a turn to keep me interested - the young lovers needed
to be thwarted in some way, or the system needed to shut the program down,
or something - anything.  None of that happened, and everything went
swimmingly.  Very disappointing.
While, of course, we go to movies to see people achieve what we can only
dream of, or overcome insurmountable odds, or find love despite destiny's
sense of humor, or whatever, this is not always enough.  The hero in a
story is the person with the most to lose, or with the most to gain.  Since
Colin is so abrasive and unpleasant at the beginning, in order to
sympathize with him, I needed to root for him, have some reason to care
about him.  He has nothing to lose, because he cares for nothing, and
nothing to gain, because he is happy where he is.  Except inasmuch as other
characters decided to care for him (so did I, by extension, because I cared
for them) he was no one I wanted to spend two hours with in a dark room, no
matter how charming the subject matter.  I didn't care, and I wanted to,
and that is movie's flaw.
However, there are some laughs, and David Kelly is of course lovely, as is
Helen Mirren, in a British sort of Martha Stewart persona, and it's worth
seeing, just not worth paying too much.  Lovely flowers, excellent and
obscure dialects to study, and breezy flower show gowns, but it's all too
easy.  Most times the joy is in the journey, but here the joy must be
merely the outcome.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
These reviews (c) 2001 Karina Montgomery.  Please feel free to forward
but just credit the reviewer in the text.  Thanks.
cinerina@flash.net
Check out previous reviews at:
http://www.cinerina.com
http://ofcs.rottentomatoes.com - the Online Film Critics Society
http://www.hsbr.net/reviews/karina/ - Hollywood Stock Exchange Brokerage
Resource
http://www.mediamotions.com
http://www.capitol-city.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Greenfingers is not unlike most comedies imported from Great Britain over
the last few years.  It's extremely likeable, short, predictable,
heartwarming and ultimately empty, although you don't realize the latter
until several days later (see Saving Grace, Waking Ned Devine, The Full
Monty, etc.). Most Brit-com success rests entirely on the shoulders of its
stars, and Greenfingers is certainly no different, boasting the
well-respected Helen Mirren and Croupier's Clive Owen.
Greenfingers begins by letting us know the film was "inspired by actual
events," via a 1998 New York Times article called "Free To Grow Bluebells in
England."  Owen plays Colin Briggs, a convicted murderer who has just been
transferred to the minimum-security HMP Edgefield to serve out the tail-end
of a long sentence.  Although Edgefield is a bit more relaxed as far as
prisons go, Colin is still on edge and keeps to himself.  In other words,
he's the opposite of his roommate, Fergus (David Kelly, Waking Ned Devine),
who is elderly, ailing and knows he'll soon die in prison (he killed three
wives).
The story starts to take off when Fergus gives Colin a packet of violet
seeds for Christmas.  Colin begrudgingly plants them into a patch of hard,
barren earth, and is taken aback when the little buggers start to grow. When
the progressive prison warden (Warren Clarke, Blow Dry) sees the lovely
flowers, he decides to let Colin and Fergus start their own horticulture
club.  Their group takes on three additional members: murderers Jimmy
(Paterson Joseph, The Beach) and Raw (Adam Fogerty, Snatch), and armed
robber Tony (Danny Dyer).  The men seem interested in gardening only to
increase their chances of being paroled early.
As Edgefield's first garden begins to take shape, the prisoners attract the
attention of Georgina Woodhouse (Mirren, The Pledge), who is to British
gardening what Ron Jeremy is to pornography.  Georgina is impressed by Colin
and company, and decides to sponsor them in the highly competitive Hampton
Court Palace Flower Show.  Their exposure increases, and Colin even gets a
love interest in Georgina's lovely daughter, the aptly named Primrose
(Natasha Little).
Writer/director Joel Hershman (Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me) does well to
keep viewers interested in the film, but it all comes down to a bunch of
hard-edged prisoners blossoming like little flowers (gag!).  I'm not saying
Greenfingers is bad - it's actually quite entertaining - but there just
isn't much to it.
1:31 - R for some language and sexuality
