Title
Review for Babe: Pig in the City (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        As a critic, "Babe: Pig in the City" paints me into a
difficult corner: on one hand, I was charmed by the sheer visual
delights which awaited me; on the other, I was mortified that
Hollywood actually considers this a "family" film.  Parents who
are expecting a light-hearted distraction for little Junior had best
be warned: young children have no business anywhere near this
movie.  The simple fact that "Babe: Pig in the City" (which for
the sake of brevity will henceforth be referred to as "Babe II")
received a G rating is a disconcerting affirmation of just how far
out of touch the MPAA is with its own rating system.
        "Babe II" is a contradiction in terms, a disquieting but
frequently enchanting blend of humor, warmth and darkness that
has the misfortune of being marketed as children's entertainment.
It's hard to review a film like this, as two of the factors I use to
critique movies are: 'How entertained was I?' and 'How successful
is the movie in achieving its goals?'  With "Babe II," there's a
substantial conflict in the answers to these questions: while I was
admittedly entertained, I was also shocked by the story's surprisingly
dark tone.  It's as if director George Miller is trying to mimic the
style of Tim Burton's "Batman," but replaces the grim, human
characters with funny, colorful animals who talk and sing.  Talk
about surreal!
        The bleak overtones start early, with kindly farmer Arthur
Hoggett (James Cromwell) suffering a severe accident for which his
beloved pet pig Babe (voiced by Elizabeth Daily) is inadvertently
responsible.  Unable to work, Hoggett stands in danger of losing his
farm to the bank.  His wife Esme (Magda Szubanski) takes matters
into her own hands, and heads to a county fair to give a demonstration
of Babe's sheep-herding skills (depicted in the first film), an event
which will help raise the money needed for the mortgage payment.  Fate
conspires against them, however, and through no fault of their own
they miss their connecting flight, leaving them with a multiple-day
layover in a strange city.
        Eventually finding a hotel that will allow pets, Mrs. Hoggett
thinks the worst of her trip is over.  She is mistaken.  Babe is
essentially pig-napped by Fugly Floom (Mickey Rooney), a clown who
uses chimpanzees as part of his act.  Babe is eager to participate,
mistakenly believing that his show-business antics are helping the
farm: "I'm a pig on a mission," he explains proudly when the other
animals question him.  The hotel has its own problems, however: the
dozens of animals who live there are a clear violation of city health
laws, and the hotel operates much like the Underground Railroad, with
animals sheltered in secrecy, out of sight of the villainous law
enforcement agencies.
        This tone of shadow may not sit well with many viewers,
particularly those who liked the upbeat innocence of the first film.
"Babe II" is to "Babe" what "The Empire Strikes Back" was to
"A New Hope"; a mature, thoughtful work, covered by a layer of
darkness.  Be aware: animals and human alike are severely injured
(and nearly die) on at least three occasions in the film.  A chase
sequence between Babe and a mob of angry dogs could potentially
horrify young children.  And a scene in which the hotel is raided
by animal catchers is so bleak that I was reminded of the liquidation
of the Ghetto, from "Schindler's List."  While I did not personally
object to the tone, I remain unsure who "Babe II" is supposed to
appeal to: families who enjoyed the first film?  No, not really.
Fans of film noir?  No, because they're unlikely to see a movie
starring talking animals.
        One thing for which Miller cannot be faulted is a lack of
vision: the city in "Babe II" looks great, recalling the looming
skyscrapers and slippery shadows that marked "The Crow,"
"Dark City," and the aforementioned "Batman."  Comparisons
with Fritz Lang's "Metropolis" are unavoidable, and the film beats
viewers to the punch by borrowing the name of Lang's wonderous city
(the film's working title was "Babe in Metropolis").  As envisioned
by Miller, Metropolis is a city unencumbered by both time and space:
The Statue of Liberty is visible on the horizon, along with the Eiffel
Tower, the Hollywood sign, the canals of Venice, and other instantly
recognizable landmarks from around the world.  Modern cars share the
road with Model-T Fords, and we understand the point: Metropolis
exists anywhere and everywhere.
        Fans of the original "Babe" may be a little disappointed by
the fact that Babe himself isn't really the focus of this outing;
although the plucky little pig gets plenty of screen time, the
emphasis is more on the interaction of the animals, all of whom work
together to solve the various dilemmas, rather than on Babe himself.
Most of the important resolutions occur despite, rather than because
of, his presence here.  That's not to say that Babe is irrelevant to
the story; he functions as a sort of lighthouse through the dark
events, dispensing advice and wisdom.  (A mean stray dog explains, "I
have a professional obligation to be malicious."  Babe helpfully
suggests, "Maybe you should change professions.")
        But if Babe is content to stay in the background for much of
the time, the story doesn't really suffer.  Dozens of animals dot the
landscape of Metropolis, all of whom are fun and interesting in their
own right (watch for the singing cat choir!).  My favorite character
by far was a Godfather-like orangatan named Thelonius (voiced by James
Cosmo), who possesses a sad weariness that suits his character
perfectly.  You can actually see the regret in his eyes as certain
events unfurl, giving him a better range of expression than some of
the human characters.  He's a shoo-in for "Best Supporting Chimp."
        "Babe II" isn't a bad film by any stretch of the word: I found
it visually stunning and a great deal of fun; nonetheless, I think it
will distress its intended audience: young children are going to be
confused or scared (if not both) by what they discover in this
particular city.  My relatively low rating of two and a half stars is
an attempt at compromise: I liked the film a good deal more than
this review indicates, but I can't actually "recommend" it with a
clear conscience to anyone under the age of ten.
("Babe: Pig in the City" is scheduled for video release on May 4th.)

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing
list.  Or, you can subscribe directly from my web page.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Jason Wallis
Starring Elizabeth Daily, Magda Szubanski, James Cromwell, Mary Stein,
Danny Mann, Glenne Headly, Steven 
Wright, James Cosmo, Adam Goldberg and Mickey Rooney 
Directed by George Miller 
Rated G, but contains some scary situations 
Theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1 
Released in 1998 
Running 97 minutes 
The original Babe gets my vote as the best family film since The Princess
Bride, and it's sequel has been getting rave reviews from most internet
critics, both Siskel and Ebert sighting it more than a month ago as one of
the year's finest films. So, naturally, when I entered the screening room
that was to be showing the movie and there was nary another viewer to be
found, this notion left me puzzled. It is a rare thing for a children's
movie to be praised this highly, so wouldn't you think that every parent in
the entire city would be flocking with their kids to see this supposedly
"magical" piece of work? A tad bewildered, but pleased to not have to worry
about screaming kids and other disruptions that commonly go along with
family films, I sat back for 97 minutes and watched intently and with a
very open mind, having great expectations for the film. Looking back, I
should have taken the hint and left right when I entered the theater. 
Believe me; I wanted to like Babe: Pig in the City. The plot seemed
interesting enough; after the events that took place in the original, Babe
the sheep-pig has become a legitimate national phenomenon. But after a
fateful encounter with a water well, Arthur Hogget (James Cromwell, who the
movie could have used alot more of) has been rendered bed-ridden for a
number of weeks and the farm begins to go under financially. The only
solution that his wife (Magda Szubanski, going from delightfully charming
to downright annoying) can come up with is to make an appearance with their
new celebrity pet at a national fair (I think) and to use the money they
earn to pay off the bank (set aside for the moment the fact that they could
get more than enough cash from donations if they just made their case known
to the public). Problem is, the fair is being held in the middle of the
dreaded "city", a completely foreign place to both the pig and his
companion. 
Setting the main plot in motion, Mrs. Hogget and Babe travel to the unnamed
city and shack up with a sweet lady who just happens to love to help
animals, despite the law that you cannot keep them in hotels. It is here
that we meet an array of eccentric characters, the most memorable being the
family of chimps led by Steven Wright. 
Here is where the film took a wrong turn. Up until this point, I had being
having a rather enjoyable experience. The beginning featured some smart
writing and funny situations involving the farm animals from the first one
and even an inspired moment at the airport where Mrs. Hogget is accused of
smuggling drugs. Unfortunately, the story wears thin as we are introduced
to a new set of animals that reside at the hotel, none of them being even
one-tenth as interesting as the characters from the previous Babe. 
The main topic of discussion surrounding Babe: Pig in the City is the
question of whether or not it is to dark and disturbing for small children,
and I believe it is. At one point, a dog is hung from his neck and slowly
starts to drown. At other times, we are treated to surrealistic flash-backs
to Mrs. Hogget's full cavity search at the airport. In fact, the overall
tone of the movie is rather bleak and depressing. However, that is, as they
say, neither here nor there because kids will probably not like the movie
anyway. The animal characters and their plights were simply not intriguing
enough to sustain my interest for an hour and a half, let alone entertain a
child. 
Another problem I found with the film was it's sudden change of pacing and
tone near the end of the story. If you're going to make a darker and more
sinister sequel, fine. It may not be my cup of tea, but at least it is a
noble ambition. But to go from the downbeat feel of the rest of the movie
and all of a sudden have slapstick finale with Mrs. Hogget swinging from
wall-to-wall of a ballroom in elastic overalls? It just didn't feel right
and was more painful to watch than it was funny or entertaining, and the
same goes for the rest of the movie. 
*Complimentary movie ticket courtesy of Valley Cinemas at 
http://www.movie-tickets.com
**Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Walter Frith
Who was the most annoying character in 1995's 'Babe'?  Farmer Arthur
Hoggett's wife, of course, as portrayed by Magda Szubanski.  Just our
luck that she is the main human character in this sequel to the Oscar
nominated film and this movie is protracted, dark, idiotic and lame
brained.  What made 'Babe' such a big hit in 1995 is that the
computerized special effects (which won as Oscar), made the animals seem
like they were REALLY talking!  I'm glad this film is failing at the box
office because money was the only motivation behind this mess of a movie
that will make you despise monkeys, loathe hotels and never desire to
see Mickey Rooney in another movie.  He is a true screen legend and I
can't figure out why he would degrade himself in a film like this in a
part that is clearly intended for a no name actor staggering off of the
unemployment line.  The film has no script, mechanized direction and
screeching slapstick that falls flat on its face.
Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) is injured in an accident on the farm
and Babe and Mrs. Hoggett make a trip to the big city because Babe is in
demand right now for making guest appearances all over the world since
he won the sheep herding contest at the end of the last film.  The
reason for the trip is that it will mean a big pay day for the Hoggett's
and the money will save their farm from its creditors.  James Cromwell
appears for about five minutes at the beginning of the sequel and five
minutes at the end.  Since he was nominated as Best Supporting Actor for
the first film, I would say this is a big let down for the audience.
Upon arriving in "the city", it is a combination of all the cities in
the world as things devised by computer for the film as seen from the
hotel window view are the Eifel tower in Paris, the Statue of Liberty in
New York City, the HOLLYWOOD sign in California and the CN tower in
Toronto Canada.
Mrs. Hoggett meets the Olive Oyl type landlady of the hotel (Mary Stein)
who is also an annoying character.  Babe has a run in with a troupe of
monkeys who live in the hotel with a seemingly drunken circus clown
(Mickey Rooney) who doesn't utter a word for the two minutes or so that
he's seen on screen.  The monkeys are mean spirited and they hold Babe
against his will for an appearance in their circus and children may find
this a bit frightening as the whole circus routine is done in extremely
bad taste ending in a fire at a children's hospital???!!!
Babe befriends a bull terrier, meets other oddities from the animal
world and the film goes around and around in circles without a real pay
off and anyone above the age of 4 who enjoys this film is in serious
trouble.  This film tries to be different from the first movie but in
its attempt, it is disorganized, clumsy, and has no charm at all.
The film's climax has too many humans in it and the human characters as
a whole are given too much screen time in this one and while Babe
remains a cute and likable character, the only redeeming quality this
film has is the rascally duck from the first film and the message that a
lot of animals are indeed more likable than a lot of people.  Big deal.
We already know that!
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal Pictures
 Director:  George Miller
 Writer:  George Miller, Judy Morris, Mark Lamprell
 Cast: James Cromwell, Magda Szubanski, Mickey Rooney,
Mary Stein, Roscoe Lee Browne, E.G. Daily, Danny Mann,
Glenne Headly, James Cosmo, Stanley Ralph Ross
   Opening up on a farm that's so cozy and picturesque that it
seems not of this earth, "Babe: Pig in the City" brings forth
memories of the all-time great animal picture, "Lassie Come
Home."  Like that 1943 masterwork, "Babe" centers on a poor
family, one which may have to sell not only its prized animals
but the entire spread as well.  The soulless bankers have
come with the necessary papers: owners Hoggett (James
Cromwell) and his rotund wife (Magda Szubanski) need a
plan.  While this picture is more fanciful than Fred Wilcox's
1943 film--indeed it is propelled by computer animation which
puts traditionally hostile animals in the same picture talking to
one another--it lacks "Lassie"'s sentimental center, a small
boy (played by the late great Roddy McDowall).  For a good
deal of its 96-minute length it features only animals, forcing
the largely pre-adolescent audience to identify with a pig or
one of her buddies, be it a dog, a kitten, a duck, a goldfish--
even a trio of singing mice that might give Bill Gates ideas. 
Its second flaw is that it lacks the focused plot of its
predecessor, which features the same pair of Hoggetts with
fewer animals, one which kept the audience with both feet off
the floor rooting for the piggy to transcend his breed and
become a sheep dog.   
   The film is directed and co-written by George Miller who
uses Australian director Chris Noonan's 1995 characters
(created by a book written by Dick King-Smith), and once
again combines real animals, animatronic doubles, and
computer technology, while expanding the winning special
effects.
   At the commercial screening I attended on the fourth day of
the film's tenure, the audience of mostly kids were uncannily
quiet throughout, which is a good sign.  Yet I watched two
children, each about six years old, burst into tears near the
beginning and thereafter counted ten family groups quickly
and silently departing the theater. Why the agitation?  It turns
out that this sequel, despite its G rating, has a rather dark
text, welcome enough by in adult movies for viewers who do
not share a audience desire for celluloid elevator music.  But
why the need for grim images in a kids' romp?  I suppose
most fables have their murky side but that's often hidden in
the subtext.  "Babe," however, begins with the good Farmer
Hoggett's falling into a well (which is somehow Babe's fault),
shows him wrapped form head to toe in bandages, his family
gathered around him as though he were on his deathbed.  It
segues into the big city, to which Babe has repaired with Mrs.
Hoggett--who expects to make some money in a shepherding
presentation.  Before the porcine duo can even enter the
shabby, walk-up hotel--all they can afford--Mrs. Hoggett is
strip-searched for drugs behind a curtain after a hard-nosed
narcotics-sniffing beagle has erroneously singled her out.
   The movie is brimming with hostility from both animals and
people.  Virtually every human in the story is antagonistic. 
Hotel owners impolitely refuse to accept animals.  One who
finally does is unsympathetically eccentric, asking a barrage
of questions and answering them all herself.  Animal control
officials brutally round up monkeys, ducks, and dogs,
dragging them with sticks, enveloping them with nets, and
throwing them into trucks.  The pilot of the plane carrying
Hoggett and friend into the city takes off without allowing the
farmer to pack the duck.  What for adults may pass as a
funny scene of a quack-quack flying alongside the aircraft
until he can no longer catch it may be interpreted by the
small fry as its desperate attempt to fly to his adopted family
which appears to have abandoned him.  Most alarming of all,
a bull terrier chasing the pig if only to exercise his territorial
eminence is trapped by his chain and falls over a bridge into
a body of water where he is helplessly suspended upside-
down, thrashing about, head fully submerged.  Director Miller
could have gained sentimental points by tenderly showing
one crippled dog whose owner had the sensitivity to hook him
up to a pair of wheels rather than put him to sleep. Instead
the poor little mutt is dragged by a van going 50 miles an
hour, is unable to disentangle himself, and flips over
helplessly.
   The principal reason to see the film is the imaginative
views which unfold of large, clean cities--presumably New
York, L.A. and Sydney among them--visions that conjure up
recollections of similarly ingenious images in Alex Proyas's
"Dark City" and even Fritz Lang's "Metropolis."  The voices of
the animals are also on the money, especially the tender,
female voice of the title character, whose vocabulary is
formed by E.G. Daily.  Roscoe Lee Browne is exceptionally
warm and fuzzy, delivering the smooth, orotund tones of its
narrator.  (In a display of Hollywood chutzpah, Christine
Cavanaugh, who did Babe's voice in the original film,
demanded more money than she received the first time
around, perhaps believing she could not be replaced.  If I
were not a union man, I would have offered my services for
nothing.)
   "Babe: Pig in the City" almost did not open at its scheduled
November 25 premiere and in fact was screened for critics
only two days in advance.  The official excuse was that the
editing was taking longer than expected.  Actually, the
completed movie went back to the cutting room because of
thumbs-down reactions from preview audiences that got
spooked from its inhumanity.  What emerged could make you
think that the editor went for a cappuccino break rather than
do the necessary cutting.

Author
Jamie Peck
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
This "Babe" picks up with the titular porker leading a peaceful 
existence on the serene country farm of Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell, 
briefly reprising his Oscar-nominated role from the first movie). But a 
series of complications and crises leads Babe (voiced by E.G. Daily, who 
can also be heard as Tommy in "The Rugrats Movie") and Mrs. Hoggett 
(Magda Szubanski) on a quest for prize money and strands them in a big, 
frightening metropolis, the abstract likes of which haven't been seen 
since Tim Burton's last "Batman" film. 
There, the pair crash at an inn populated mostly by creatures great and 
small who also have the gift of gab but live in fear of the city's 
stringent animal-control policies. Before long, Babe has gained the 
trust of the hotel hierarchy - including a pair of malapropping chimps 
(Steven Wright and Glenn Headly) and a wizened orangutan (James Cosmo) - 
and also a gang of homeless, mock-vicious street strays lead by a 
tough-talking pitbull (Stanley Ralph Ross); together, they veer in and 
out of trouble. 
That director George Miller (the producer of "Babe" 1) is also the 
creator of Australia's Mad Max movies seems to explain why "Pig in the 
City" is such a bizarre film. Miller's impressive visual dynamo steers 
toward many memorable sights even when the scenes that show them off 
play on for too long. Couple that with the overt gloom of some passages 
and you've got prime examples of how this "Babe" might be too much for 
the wee ones to bear - a depressing sequence where Babe's furry friends 
get impounded almost extends to the point of morbitiy. 
Other affairs that threaten the movie's G-rating include the implication 
of an airport cavity search for Mrs. Hoggett (!), a crippled terrier who 
has flashes of the afterlife following a nasty accident, and even 
glimpses of pretty city girls in thongs that don't leave much to the 
imagination. But these head-scratching moments are simple distractions, 
not overt detractions; "Babe: Pig in the City" is simply too fun a 
fantasy to be hampered by out-of-place moments, especially given that 
the entire movie blindsides the viewer. 
So the first "Babe" ends up winning by a snout, but this 
handsomely-mounted charmer comes in a close second. All too precious is 
the film's flawless pastiche of real, animatronic and computer-generated 
critters - most memorably, a 20-cat chorus that belts out a heavenly 
rendition of "Three Blind Mice." Though naysayers (make that 
_neigh_-sayers) may dismiss the notion as just more of the same, a third 
"Babe" adventure doesn't seem out of the question, because for all of 
its uncanny nuances and twisted peculiarities, "Pig in the City" brings 
home the bacon.

Author
Scott Renshaw
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY
(Universal)
Starring:  Magda Szubanski, Mary Stein, Mickey Rooney, James Cromwell,
voices of E. G. Daily, Danny Mann, Glenne Headly, Steven Wright.
Screenplay:  George Miller, Judy Morris and Mark Lamprell.
Producers:  George Miller, Doug Mitchell and Bill Miller.
Director:  George Miller.
MPAA Rating:  G (mild bodily function reference).
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Like a classic storybook tale, 1995's BABE was set no-where and
no-when in particular.  The singular world in which the rosy, glowing
Hoggett farm and its chattering menagerie existed added to the charm that
made the original film a surprise hit and an Oscar-nominee.  BABE: PIG IN
THE CITY takes that anywhere-ness a step farther...actually, a step too
far.  The story begins as Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) suffers an 
unfortunate accident, making him unable to work the farm.  With financial
ruin imminent, Mrs. Hoggett (Magda Szubanski) decides to take the
now-famous Babe (E. G. Daily, replacing Christine Cavanaugh) for a
lucrative state fair appearance, only to end up stranded in The Big City.
Where, exactly, _is_ that Big City?  Well, a view from Babe's hotel window
includes The Statue of Liberty, the Sydney Opera House, the Eiffel Tower,
and the Hollywood sign.
     It's a cute gag the first time, but it also signals a not-so-subtle
shift in tone from BABE.  The setting is no longer Anywhere, but
Everywhere; the story isn't just a fantasy where anything could happen,
but one where the film-makers try to make everything happen.  Babe and
Mrs. Hoggett contend with suspicions that they are drug smugglers; Mrs.
Hoggett goes to jail when she inadvertently causes a mess in downtown
Metropolis; Babe comes to the rescue of a massive collection of
sort-of-homeless animals.  BABE: PIG IN THE CITY is so full of plots and
sub-plots that saving the Hoggett farm practically becomes an
afterthought, with a resolution so silly it almost seems a waste of time.
     You might suspect that a pace that frantic would be a sop to younger
viewers, but it's hard to imagine George Miller (who produced the original
and also directs here) had kids in mind making this film.  A catastrophic
performance by a low-rent circus (featuring Mickey Rooney in a weird cameo
as a clown of indeterminate personality) turns into a moody and murky
slow-motion sequence like something out of PLATOON; later, a dog with a
bad heart has a near-death experience with pastoral visions.  BABE
certainly had a few dark moments, but nothing like the consistently creepy
feel of PIG IN THE CITY.  Miller may have been playing to the kiddies when
Mrs. Hoggett goes bouncing around a reception hall in inflatable pants,
but not when a dog insults a cat with an epithet that could be interpreted
as quite vulgar.
     Ironically, that strangely mature tone introduces the film's only
truly compelling element, a melancholy performing orangutan named
Thelonious (voice of James Cosmo).  He's a mysterious presence who can't
seem to bear the idea that he's not human, and both the animal and vocal
performances are wonderfully sympathetic.  I sat just a bit forward in my
seat every time Thelonious appeared, gradually realizing that this one
character also served to point out how bland the rest of the characters
are in BABE: PIG IN THE CITY.  There are too many animals milling about to
care about any of them all that much; even the little pig himself seems to
have been sapped of personality.  The easy rapport between Babe and Farmer
Hoggett (relegated here to little more than a glorified cameo) is sorely
missed.
     Then again, a whole lot of things from BABE are sorely missed.  It's
a nice change of pace to find a sequel that doesn't merely try to remake
the original, but BABE: PIG IN THE CITY lack any of the original's
endearing gentle spirit.  It's so hyped-up and busy, it's almost as
though John Hughes got hold of our sweet little pig and tossed him into a
HOME ALONE sequel.  Too many chuckles in BABE: PIG IN THE CITY are too
forced; too many others are too close to a shudder.  This is one major
holiday disappointment, a storybook tale that should have quit with its
original happy ending.

Author
Jeffrey Huston
Directed by George Miller. Produced by George Miller, Doug Mitchell and Bill
Miller.  Screenplay by Judy Morris, Mark Lamprell and George Miller.
Distributed by Universal Pictures. Running time: 96 minutes.  Release date:
November 25, 1998.
(to read the full text of this review complete with pictures from the film,
go to: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/babe2.htm )
Making a sequel to a widely beloved film is a weighty proposition indeed,
especially when the first film is considered by many to be a masterpiece.
When it comes to living up to expectations, a filmmaker is almost doomed to
some degree of failure. For a sequel to live up to or even surpass the
original's greatness is very rare indeed.  And whereas "Babe: Pig in the
City" misses equaling the greatness of its Best Picture nominated
predecessor Babe, it is a worthy companion piece. More than that, it is a
spectacular work of art that deserves to stand alone in its own right.
"Babe: Pig in the City" warrants the classification of being recognized with
such classics like "The Godfather: Part II" and "The Empire Strikes Back" as
being one of the greatest sequels ever produced.
"Babe: Pig in the City" picks up precisely where "Babe" left off. Having won
the sheep herding competition, Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) and his pig
are elevated to fame status. A series of unfortunate circumstances and
hilariously freakish events leads to Mrs. Hoggett taking Babe from the small
country farm into the big city. In doing so, the film transports us into a
wonderfully imaginative world that simultaneously mirrors and exceeds the
creative design seen in the original.
"Babe: Pig in the City" flourishes where so many sequels fail. Most sequels
simply rehash the events of the first film. Not "Babe: Pig in the City".
This is a completely original tale that offers up a story drastically
different than the first. Also, by not being content to utilize most of the
old characters, this film gives us many new ones to enjoy. In essence, it
doesn't attempt to copy itself. Instead, it strives to achieve an
originality of its own. And it succeeds.
That's not to say the familiar is absent. "Babe: Pig in the City" retains
some of the best core elements and characters from the first film. Along
with Babe himself, Ferdinand the Duck comes along for the ride, as does Mrs.
Hoggett (one of this decade's best and most underappreciated comic
characterizations, hilariously performed by Magda Szubanski). The three
singing mice also make the journey, chiming in with their cute high-pitched
vocals.  The story structure is also similar as each segment is introduced
with title cards read by the aforementioned mice. From there, we are guided
once again by Roscoe Lee Browne's soothingly deep narrative.  Composer Nigel
Westlake also returns with his whimsical music style that is perfect for
cinematic fables such as these.
But these elements are simply the frame that surrounds an entirely new
painting. While staying at the Flealands Hotel, Babe encounters a veritable
Ark-full of new animals. Monkeys, kittens, and dogs of various breeds and
sizes are some of the new "urbanites" that Babe befriends, as well as some
wonderfully comical Pelicans that Ferdinand the Duck happens to encounter.
Each character is distinctly unique, some of which are imbued with personal
human-like struggles that are endearing and touching.
And while this world focuses largely on these animals, we are introduced to
two new human characters as well. Mary Stein plays the owner of the
Flealands Hotel, an animal-loving young spinster who harbors these lost
creatures much to the dismaying anger of her fellow neighbors. Stein's
landlady is a wonderfully odd caricature. We also meet Fugly Floom, an old
soft-spoken clown who owns many of the animals in The Flealands Hotel,
utilizing them as a part of the act that he performs at different parties
and functions.  Not having known who portrayed Fugly Floom prior to seeing
the film, it came as an unexpected pleasant surprise to see who it was. So
as not to ruin this well-kept secret, I won't reveal the actor's identity
here. It was a treat indeed to see one of cinema's legends grace the screen
again in what was a superbly gentle and heartwarming performance.
The greatest triumph of "Babe: Pig in the City" is the art direction. Simply
put--it bleeds creativity, taking the look of the original film to a whole
new level. Restricted primarily to a farm the first time around, this second
installment creates an entire city, dazzling us with unique fable-like
architecture.  But the stroke of pure genius by Production Designer Roger
Ford is his use of our world's architectural landmarks. Designing a skyline
that includes the Statue of Liberty, the Sydney Opera House, the Brooklyn
Bridge, the Hollywood sign and the Eiffel Tower, Ford has created a singular
city that encompasses all of our cities (as seen in the film photo and
pre-production drawing to your right).  Added to that, many of this city's
streets are the twin siblings of Venice's gondola-trekked rivers. The
Metropolis that has sprung from Ford's vision is a wondrous sight to behold.
It is a world that you want to walk around in.
Norma Moriceau's costume designs belong in this world, vibrant in color and
style equal to that of the Ford's landscape. Most of the costumes are
imaginatively cartoonish, with the most exotically grand design going to
that of Fugly Floom's clown outfit. Andrew Lesnie's photography captures
these elements with various lighting moods that are beautifully effective in
creating the film's multiple emotional tones.
Much press fodder has been made over the weeks leading up to the release of
"Babe: Pig in the City". Reports stated that its original cut was branded
with a PG-13 rating. These reports were discovered to be false as it was
assigned a PG rating. But even so, to be anything harsher than the original'
s G rating had many parents and fans up in arms. By deleting a minimal
number of shots, "Babe: Pig in the City" was eventually given the coveted G
rating.
Although appeased, many fans were still concerned that it would be too dark,
fearing that the film may have come to be possessed by Tim Burton himself.
Well, to coin a phrase, the reports of "Babe: Pig in the City"'s death at
the hands of a dark, scary, Felliniesque interpretation have been greatly
exaggerated. Granted it has its moments of pseudo-morbidity, but all-in-all
"Babe: Pig in the City" is the funny and charming adventure that everyone
was hoping it would be.
Whatever "dark" moments it may have can be attributed to director George
Miller (the "Mad Max" trilogy, "The Witches of Eastwick", "Lorenzo's Oil").
Having served as a producer and co-writer on the first film, Miller moves
into the director's chair for this one, putting his own unique sense of
style into this budding franchise.
The story of "Babe: Pig in the City" is an enchanting yarn, but one that
doesn't achieve the emotional or character depth of the original. Missing
here is the attempt to broach such heady themes as personal identity, an
individual's worth, challenging conformity, and one's purpose in life.
"Babe" dealt with this weighty subject matter, creating a timeless fable.
"Babe: Pig in the City" should not have rehashed these themes, but I do wish
it would have attempted to explore new ones.
This film is not bereft of moral or message as it parallels such issues as
urban strife, class differences, sacrificial courage, and so on. But this
film's goals aren't as lofty as the first's, instead choosing to take a more
straightforward approach, allowing its themes to take a back seat to an
exciting, sometimes intense, fable adventure that is undeniably clever and
inventive.
"Babe: Pig in the City" also decides against developing a relationship to
the level of which was present in the first film, specifically the one
between Farmer Hoggett and Babe. Hoggett's love for Babe, which grew ever so
gently, is what gave that film its charming and endearing quality. Best
exemplified in Hoggett's dance for Babe, this moving relationship was truly
unique. It is something that I wish would have been present again (and could
have through Fugly Floom), but was not.
Please understand, these are not negative criticisms, per se', but simply
statements of what I see as the differences between "Babe: Pig in the City"
being a very good film and the original being a great one.  But having said
that, these observations are minor critiques at best. As an overall piece,
"Babe: Pig in the City" is a thoroughly enchanting and entertaining fable
from beginning to end. Sure, it isn't a great film, but it is an excellent
one that possesses elements of greatness. It is a film that is magical with
its charm and humor, exciting in its adventurous exploits, funny with its
dry wit and cute voices, and breathtaking in its presentation.
"Babe: Pig in the City" may not be moviemaking at its absolute best, but it
is on level of cinematic quality that is rarely achieved or seen in cinema.
As a result, if you choose to let this film pass you by, you will be missing
of the year's best cinematic treats.
(to read other reviews by Jeffrey Huston, visit his film review page
"Believe Me" at: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm )

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Babe: Pig in the City (1998)
E.G. Daily, Magda Szubanski, James Cromwell, Mary Stein, Steven Wright, 
Mickey Rooney, Matt Parkinson, Eddie Barth, Bill Capisci, Glenne Headly, 
Danny Mann, David Warner, Adam Goldberg. 
Produced by Bill Miller, George Miller and Doug Mitchell. Written by Mark 
Lamprell, George Miller and Judy Morris, based on characters from the 
novel by Dick King-Smith. Directed by George Miller. 
Rated G, 2 stars (out of five stars) 
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
They should have called it "Babe: Pig in Gotham City." This dark sequel 
to the 1995 hit has virtually none of the bucolic charm displayed in the 
original. Instead, we get a grim parade of unpleasant characters, ugly 
imagery, overlong chases and numerous scenes of animals in distress. 
While imaginative and technically impressive, "Babe: Pig in the City" is 
one of the most depressing family films I have ever seen. What in the 
world were the filmmakers thinking? 
The original "Babe" won the hearts of audiences around the world with its 
simple tale of a little talking pig with a big heart. The delightful 
Australian film introduced Babe, a porcine youngster adopted by dogs 
after the death of its mother. The story followed Babe's adventures on 
the farm; getting to know Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) and his wife 
(Magda Szubanski), interacting with the other animals, and achieving 
success as the world's first shepherding pig. 
"Babe: Pig in the City" takes a wrong turn in its opening moments, with a 
slapstick well accident that is too realistically filmed to be funny. The 
accident sidelines Farmer Hoggett for most of the film, shifting the 
human focus from the kindly, soft-spoken man to his fussy, easily 
flustered wife. Bad move. 
With the farm in financial trouble, Mrs. Hoggett accepts a lucrative 
offer for Babe to appear in a shepherding demonstration and the pair 
takes off for the big city, with Babe's pal, a neurotic duck, frantically 
attempting to keep up with the airplane so he can watch over his friend. 
Hoggett and Babe miss a vital plane connection when a drug-sniffing dog's 
barking, an attempt to show-off for Babe, results in Mrs. Hoggett being 
hauled off by authorities for a full-body search.
Stranded in the city, Hoggett and Babe end up at a picturesque flea-bag 
hotel, where the pig meets a number of hardened city animals, including a 
surly group of performing monkeys, owned by a gross, ill-tempered clown 
(Mickey Rooney). When Mrs. Hoggett gets arrested in yet another mix-up 
and the clown dies (are we having fun yet?), the animals are left to fend 
for themselves. After a nasty encounter with some attack dogs, Babe saves 
a pitbull from drowning and forges an alliance between the animals. 
Almost as quickly as everyone makes friends, animal control agents storm 
the hotel, capturing most of the terrified creatures and hauling them 
away. Will Babe survive? Will Mrs. Hoggett be able to rescue the critters?
 Will your children be able to get through all of this without crying?  
Thankfully, there are at least a few sunny, clever images in "Pig in the 
City" to lighten the harsh proceedings a bit. An aerial shot of a duck 
hitching a ride in the roomy mouth of a seagull is witty. An elaborate 
set piece involving two characters springing around a large room on 
elastic bands is fun (it also serves as a lively homage to another film 
from director George Miller -- "Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome"). Distant 
shots of the town, an amalgam featuring landmarks from many different 
cities, cast a nice storybook feel and, of course, there's the inherent 
charm of watching cute little animals talk. 
There are far more talking animal scenes here than in the first film and, 
for the most part, they are even more convincing. Christine Cavanaugh, 
the voice of Babe in the original, wanted more money than the producers 
were willing to pay, so E.G. Daily of "Rugrats" fame takes over the vocal 
chores and does good work, making Babe sound just as adorable this time 
around. If only the rest of the film was as sweet.
Instead, in addition to the aforementioned disturbing images, audiences 
are treated to the spectacle of a dog dangling from a bridge with its 
head under water, flailing desperately to avoid drowning. Another scene 
shows a disabled pup on a small cart, dragged at high speeds behind a 
truck, then released to flip over and over on the sidewalk. It's a 
shocking image likely to traumatize children, even though the dog is 
shown alive a few moments later. 
A press junket and premiere for "Babe: Pig in the City" were canceled at 
the last minute, supposedly to allow more time to complete special effect 
shots for the film. Insiders report that, in fact, a test screening drew 
extremely negative reactions from the audience and the film underwent an 
emergency edit to make it more family friendly. It's scary to realize 
that the film I saw is the toned-down version.  
The big question, of course, is why? Why did the filmmakers all but 
remove James Cromwell from the movie? Why did they surround an enchanting 
little pig with foul-tempered characters and repulsive imagery? Why did 
they take one of the most creatively substantial fairy tales in years and 
crank out a garish sequel with violence and chases substituting for wit? 
"Babe" was one of the nicest surprises of the '90s. "Babe: Pig in the 
City" is also a surprise; a disappointing, depressing one.

Author
Boyd Petrie
Rated G for some violence and suggested sex.
---------- Out of 4 Stars: **** (4 stars)
Starring: Magda Szubanski, Mary Stein, Mickey Rooney, and James
Cromwell.  Featuring the voices of Elizabeth Daily (Babe), Glenne
Headly (Zootie), Danny Mann (Ferdinand), Steven Wright (Bob), and many
others.
Let it be known that I was one of the very few individuals to want
BRAVEHEART to lose at the Oscars to BABE, the 1995 family film.  Of
course, that was before I became the cynical and jaded person I have
become.  I preferred films that dealt with happy subjects.  I didn't
like SE7EN the first time I saw it in 1995.  Now, I think it's 1995's
best film.  As you can tell, my taste in film has changed considerably
(mind you, I still think BABE should have won, since SE7EN wasn't
nominated).  So upon hearing about the release of a sequel to BABE, I
was worried that I might not like it.  From the previews, I thought I
would hate it.
And gosh darn it, it takes those expectations and flips them
completely.  Just as the first film did, it surprises with a touching
and heartfelt story that is very hard to find these days.  Taking
themes that can be used in everyday life, Babe created a modern day
fairy tale.  The old story of an outsider trying to find his place in
society was reinvented for animals.  A pig, stolen from his mother,
gets sold to a farmer.  This farmer nurtures him, hoping for a
fantastic Thanksgiving ham.  But he then spots something different:
this pig could herd sheep better than any sheep dog ever could.
Well now that pig is back, and I couldn't be happier.  Frankly, this
is exactly what a sequel should be.  It doesn't really improve on the
original... it builds on it, making the franchise as a whole more
solid.  It's not better than the original, mostly due to some
particular plot elements that keep it from reaching the status that
Babe did.  But other elements, most notably the visual style, improves
dramatically.  For once, a sequel that doesn't rely on rehashing the
same old themes the original did.  Surprisingly, I wouldn't mind it if
this film were nominated for Best Picture again.  You aren't going to
find a better family film all year long.
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY begins precisely when the original left off.  As
we left Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) three years ago, his pig Babe
(now voiced by Elizabeth Daily) won the sheep herding contest after
being ridiculed by humans and animals alike.  A parade is now thrown
for the pig and his "human" as they arrive back home to greet his
loving wife, Esme Hoggett (Magda Szubanski).  But trouble is around
the corner.  As Babe wonders what to do next, he watches as Farmer
Hoggett descends into their well out back, in order to update it.
Unfortunately, Babe gets a bit too close, and falls in, causing
Hoggett to smash his finger in the pulley, plunge to the bottom of the
well, and get hit on the head by the counterweight which held him up.
Needless to say, he is unable to work for quite a while.
Esme takes over the chores, but she finds herself struggling, and
soon, two men dressed in black, their eyes seeming hollow and
soulless, arrive.  Yes...  they're bankers.  They want to sell the
farm unless the Hoggetts can come up with money to pay for their
mortgage.  Despite the prestige the pig has brought them, they are
still struggling.  They received many invitations for the pig to come
perform.  In return, a nice sum of money will be rewarded.  Esme
decides to take Babe to the festival, hoping the money will suffice to
save the farm.  But trouble brews when a drug-sniffing dog shows Babe
how he gets security's attention.  Esme is now suspected for carrying
drugs, and she misses her connecting flight to the festival.
Depressed, she wanders aimlessly to find a motel that will accept
pets.  Being unsuccessful, she sits and waits in the airport when a
mysterious janitor hands her an address.  "They'll take care of you
there," he says.
She finds the hotel, a massive, four-story building one might find in
Disneyland.  The landlady (Mary Stein) seems nervous and fidgety, and
finally accepts the two into the hotel.  Inside is a world of animals,
varying from dogs to cats to mice to monkeys.  Outside is a world of
hatred and anger.  Babe now must befriend his fellow inhabitants, find
food, rescue enemies, and save the farm.  How can one pig do all this?
Easy, when you are Babe.
While the plot seems rather childish and loony, it's handled with the
utmost intelligence, mixing themes with thoroughly entertaining sight
gags.  Instead of trying to fit one pig into a different world, we
have a pig trying to unite two sides together.  In order to
successfully live, the enemies of instinct must combine and set aside
their natural urges.  When Esme travels outside the hotel to find a
pay phone, she discovers a world of hatred, one very similar to the
animals' world.  Surprisingly, these complex themes are handled very
well, and the adult viewer will be pleasantly surprised by the
intelligence in which it is handled.  While some family films pander
to the lowest common denominator just to amuse kids, BABE: PIG IN THE
CITY tries it's hardest to entertain everyone at the same time.  And
it does, on every aspect.
Visually, this is definitely one of the best of the year, definitely
beating WHAT DREAMS MAY COME and even PLEASANTVILLE.  Full of
incredibly funny sight gags, from the wickedly designed hotel to the
humorous landscapes, BABE: PIG IN THE CITY incredulously improves on
its predecessor in this aspect.  Looking out the window of the hotel,
one can see America scrunched down into one city.  You see the
Hollywood sign on one end, and the Statue of Liberty on the other.
Frankly, this film will be nominated for at least one Oscar, and
that's for Best Set Design.  Roger Ford, the production designer, will
receive an Oscar nomination again for his work on this sequel.  If he
does not, then there is no justice in the world.  Frankly, I don't see
how the Academy could overlook his work.  Every set is immensely
appealing.  The hotel and the surrounding Venice-like waterways are a
sight to behold.  The puppet animals, such as the pelicans, are
wonderfully cartoon-ish.  Simply put, it's a real-life cartoon.  It's
pure eye-candy, and I ate it up intently.
Costume designer Norma Moriceau has an incredible job, creating
costumes for every single animal and human.  This varies from
black-and-white tuxes and ballroom gowns, to sweaters and clown suits,
Moriceau impressively creates a perfect costume for each individual's
personality.  The cinematography Andrew Lesnie does an extremely good
job at capturing the fairy tale-like story that unfolds before the
camera.  The colors are vivid and bright, even in the middle of the
night.  Look for both to be nominated at the Oscars.  Animal trainers
Karl Lewis Miller and Steve Martin (no, not that Steve Martin)
arguably had the motherload of the work placed on them.  Many animal
films have animals that obey simple commands or seem just like
animals.  But here, the animals come to life, producing extremely
life-like characters.  If it were possible, I believe that Bob (Steven
Wright) and Zootie (Glenne Headley), the husband-and-wife chimps in
Fugley Floom's (Mickey Roonie), deserve Best Supporting Actor and
Actress awards.  I'm not kidding.  You really have to see their
performances to believe it.  In the history of film, I have never even
thought of an animal receiving an Oscar nomination.  Here, I have made
an exception.
The performances are uniformly terrific, despite the lacking presence
of 1995's Oscar-nominee James Cromwell.  Though he has a limited
performance, we still care about him from the first film.  Now, we get
to learn more about Mrs.  Hoggett, portrayed by Magda Szubanski who
exudes energy in every inch of the frame.  Frankly, I feel sequels
should do this more often: center on a different character, instead of
the original human lead.  Now, we know both characters equally well.
Szubanski is a gem to behold as she fights to save her farm.  She
balances the film very well.  The other main human character is Mary
Stein.  Making brief appearances on "Star Trek: The Next Generation"
and other various shows, she finally lands a role that could introduce
her to the world.  Her towering 6-foot-1 body is appropriate for the
strange role, but she plays it with deadpan humor.  As soon as I saw
her, I knew I'd like her.  Mickey Rooney also makes a brief
appearance, but he has a heart attack and is removed from the film
rather quickly.
The voices are also terrific, especially the two aforementioned
chimps.  Frankly, I don't want to mention all of them, so I'll just
give a list of my favorites.  Elizabeth Daily, of course, who takes
over Christine Cavanaugh's vocalizations from the previous film.
Strangely, you can't tell the difference (it may be that Cavanaugh and
Daily both provide voices for "The Rugrats" television show).  Danny
Mann is Ferdinand, the quirky duck who hates to be without Babe at his
side.  Mann is hysterical once again.  The scene-stealers are Wright
and Headly, who turn in incredibly delicious vocal performances.  If
these two actors could receive Oscar nominations for their voice work
alone, they should.  James Cosmo, Nathan Kress, and Myles Jeffrey all
do great work as the other chimps.  Adam Goldberg is hilarious as an
arthritis-stricken dog who must wheel around in a hind-leg coach.  And
while I'm not sure who did the voice, the little kitten who complains,
"I'm still hungry," is sad but cute at the same time.
Director George Miller, who also produced and co-wrote the original,
has done an immense job in bringing this film to life.  Filmed in
Australia where filming is much cheaper, Miller was able to capture
the same intensity and tone the original had.  His impressive resume
continues to grow (it's hard to believe this is the same guy who
provided us with pure evil in THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK).  The writing
team of Miller, Judy Morris, and Mark Lamprell have crafted a
finely-tuned screenplay with witty dialogue that never seems tacky or
forced.  It's smart, funny, and sad all at the same time.  Just as
many sequels are, this one is darker than the original, but as they
say, "The best family films always have a dark side."  To prove this,
just look at the classics: THE WIZARD OF OZ, MATILDA, SLEEPING BEAUTY,
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  All had dark sides to them.  BABE: PIG IN THE
CITY is no different.  The music is pretty similar to the original,
right down to the singing mice (this time, a little more
prominently... just 'cause they're so cute!).  This is one of those
few films that provides you with many different emotions, but you
leave the theater feeling good all over.
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY is rated G for some violence and some suggested
sex (though nothing harsh whatsoever).  If this sounds too harsh for
your children, it really isn't.  The audience I attended the film with
seemed overwhelmingly pleased, especially little kids.  Even adults
cheered the film's intelligence.  If the Oscars do award this film
with another Best Picture Oscar, I wouldn't be disappointed in the
slightest.  While it's not quite up to par with the original, it
certainly pleases those looking for an entertaining time at the
movies.  I'm pretty sure that this film will end up on my top ten list
at the end of the year.

Author
James Sanford
 It's not unusual for a sequel to be slightly weirder and more challenging
than the film that inspired it, and sometimes that can be a good thing: Look
at "Star Wars" and "The Empire Strikes Back," for example. But "Babe: Pig In
The City," an utterly bewildering follow-up to the 1995 surprise hit "Babe,"
is so dark and disturbing you have to wonder what director George Miller was
shooting for. Despite its G-rating, the movie includes numerous scenes of
animals in peril, including a pit bull that nearly hangs himself, a crippled
dog that gets thrown into a wall and a goldfish that almost suffocates when
his tank is shattered. Oh yes, and we're also treated to several
heartwrenching tales from homeless animals about how they've been
mistreated, abused and abandoned by humans.
 Happy holidays, kids!
 Not that there wasn't a slightly weird undercurrent running throughout the
original "Babe" -- remember that one segment was entitled "Pork Is A Nice,
Sweet Meat" -- but the black comedy was offset by a message of positivity
and the genuinely endearing interaction between James Cromwell's Farmer
Hoggett and porcine hero Babe.
 "City"'s first mistake is to put Hoggett out of commission almost right off
the bat by having him tumble down a well in a near-fatal accident (that's
the first hint of what Miller has up his sleeve). Soon afterward, the bank
comes calling to repossess the farm, forcing Mrs. Hoggett (Magda Szubanski)
and Babe to high-tail it to town to try to cash in on Babe's new-found fame
as the world's foremost "sheep pig." The cityscape initially looks gorgeous
and inviting, incorporating everything from the Hollywood sign to the Eiffel
Tower to the Golden Gate Bridge. But looks decieve, and soon Mrs. Hoggett is
locked up, Babe has fallen into the clutches of a scuzzy, talentless clown
(Mickey Rooney in a disturbing cameo) who ends up dying of a heart attack
after accidentally setting the childrens' ward of a hospital ablaze. The
movie's dour air is not exactly broken by a score that sounds better suited
to an Irish wake than a family feature.
 And yet, despite its downbeat plot, "City" does manage to throw in just
enough clever bits to hold the interest. Particularly funny are the trio of
crooning mice from the first film (who are joined in this installment by a
kitty choir), and some snooty cosmopolitan cats who sniff "Tourists!" when
Babe and friends stroll down their street. The special effects here are even
better than in the original and the changeovers between real animals and
animatronic creations are almost impossible to detect. Those who appreciate
what filmmakers refer to as "production values" will be dazzled.
 At the same time, however, you have to feel sorry for the parents who'll
struggle to explain such bizarre bits as a mock-communion scene that
features Babe as a stand-in for Jesus or a lengthy and terrifying round-up
of Babe and company by villainous animal-control people who seem
uncomfortably close to the Nazis of "Schindler's List." In a time when so
many movies err on the side of predictability perhaps we should be grateful
for directors willing to take risks, but when the results are as unnerving
as "Pig in the City" it's a little difficult to stand up and cheer. James
Sanford

Author
James Brundage
Written by George Miller, Judy Morris (Luigis Ladies), and Mark Lamprel
Starring: James Cromwell (LA Confidential), Magda Szubanski
With the voices of: Elizabeth Daily (Babe), Danny Mann (Babe), Steven Wright
(Deep Rising)
The problem with sequels is that they try too much to be like the original.
Sure, there are a few exceptions. I can't think of any right off the top of
my head, but rule #665 in The Critic's Bible: there are exceptions to every
rule. Babe, by all accounts, was an intelligent, thought out movie. Babe II:
Pig in the City, tries and tries but can't quiet do it.
Sure, the humor is moderately intelligent and the narration includes things
like a mention of the chaos theory, but when it boils down to it, Babe II
was just like every other sequel: an attempt to carbon copy the original.
But, friends, the great copy machine known as Hollywood is broken, and has
never gotten a repairman, so we are doomed to watch screwed up attempts at
copying, remakes gone wrong, and things screwed up.
Babe II disappoints. It disappoints so much that I'll give you the plot
summary and then leave you be because talking about it makes my relive the
relative boredom of sitting in front of the screen with talking animals on
it.
Babe comes back from winning the sheep-herding contest he won last movie
and, when the farmer is injured and the farm goes into debt, Babe has to go
to the city. Of course he's separated from his human and of course he saves
the day for man and animal alike. There's really nothing that's anything but
simplistic about it. It's a movie void with laughs.
Now I promised I'd shut up so I will, but if you see Babe II, don't come to
me complaining about it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The second Babe film, BABE: PIG IN THE CITY, had plenty of room to
repeat what was good about the 1995 BABE. Co-writer and director George
Miller really did not need to change the film's approach.  But Miller
was not content to rest on his laurels.  The sequel is quite a
different film and gives the audience much that is new and quite
different to enjoy.  Is it as good as the first film?  To my mind it is
not quite as good.  The story is a little less a coherent story and the
big climax of the film is more slapstick and less subtle excitement.
Like BABE this is family entertainment, but I think it offers a little
less for the children and perhaps a little less for the adults also.
The tone is definitely darker and more disturbing.  But like BABE,
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY is probably the best family film of its year.
And it is one of the rare family films that may well be better
appreciated by adults than by children.
     The Hoggett Farm is certainly having its ups and it downs.  After
a series of adventures related in the first film Babe has won
international fame as the pig who is a sheep dog.  Things are going
well until Farmer Hoggett is disabled in a freak accident.  (Note: the
scenario of this accident was a joke told as early as the Fred Allen
radio program in the 1940s and has appeared other places since.  It may
even be older than that. But to the best of my knowledge, this is the
first time anybody filmed this strange sequence of events.) With Mr.
Hoggett unable to care for his farm it falls on hard times and the bank
is ready and anxious to make the times even harder.  Mrs. Hoggett takes
the famous pig to display him at a fair.  But events conspire to maroon
Mrs. Hoggett in the city with her pig and then to leave her pig all
alone.  Babe finds himself the new animal in a house full of animals
with dubious human supervision.  Among the animals Babe meets is a
Damon-Runyan-esque pit bull, a family of chimpanzees, and a taciturn
orangutan.
     The film is told in the same style as the first Babe film but
differently.  Again the story is divided in chapters whose titles are
read to us by the trio of singing mice.  The Classical and popular
music is back including the theme from Saint-Saens's Third Symphony.
Miller has managed to get the same cast back, though James Cromwell has
a much more limited role as Farmer Hoggett and Magda Szubanski has a
much larger role this time continuing as Mrs. Hoggett.  Again the
comedy is genuinely funny and sometimes very funny.  The acting and
voicing seems to have all the same people in the same roles.  The major
characters are all present, even if their roles are much foreshortened.
And as with the first film, the animals are frequently three-
dimensional characters with interesting personalities.  But the city
Babe visits is not so much a city as a Disneyland-modified city-
concentrate.  It seems like a Frankensteinian grafting together of many
of the great cities of the world.  Looking out a window, Babe sees
landmarks of cities all over the world.  The interior of the city is an
expressionist wonderworld looking like something out of Disneyland.
While the first film had some physical comedy, this new film has a long
slapstick sequence that seems out of character for the person involved.
     This is more expensive and a cut below its predecessor, but it
still is a good outing for the whole family.  I give this film a 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler... Spoiler...
     Like ANIMAL FARM, BABE: PIG IN THE CITY may have many allegorical
meanings and perhaps even religious overtones.  Babe wins over his
enemies with kindness and feeds his flock, but then allows an enforcer
to stand over feeding and no animal is allowed to partake of the food
without thanking Babe, under apparent threat of violence.  What begins
looking like an allegorical Christ turns into more a Huey Long
allegory.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by George Miller.
Cast: Magda Szubanski, Mary Stein, James Cromwell, Mickey Rooney.
Voices: E.G. Daily, Glenne Headley, Danny Mann, Miriam Flynn.
1998 - 97 minutes.
Rated G (a PG would have been more appropriate, with an emphasis on 
destruction and death).
Reviewed November 27, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
The original "Babe," came out of left field in 1995, surprising 
everybody with its charming story and original animal characters, and 
eventually led to being nominated for several Academy Awards, including 
Best Picture. I suspect, "Babe: Pig in the City," the first sequel to 
that picture, will have no such luck.
Starting off where the first film ended, Babe (voice by E.G. Daily), an 
intelligent, caring pig, and Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell) return home 
after winning the Sheepdog contest. After Farmer Hoggett gets into an 
accident and is bed-ridden, and the farm becomes in danger of 
foreclosure, Hoggett's wife (Magda Szubanski) decides to take Babe to a 
faraway fair in hopes of winning the prize money. On their way there, 
however, she is suspected of being a drug smuggler at the airport, and 
finds herself and Babe stranded in a large, fantasy-like city, where 
looking out the window of their hotel, you can see the Eiffel Tower, the 
Statue of Liberty, the Hollywood sign, etc.
"Babe: Pig in the City," is in the style of "Babe," with three little 
mice introducing the different sections of the film with chapter names, 
and with the same storybook narrator. But, for some reason, director 
George Miller decided to evade this film with a preoccupation of 
sadness, death, and destruction. Its G-rating is a joke because of its 
darkness, but that is not really my problem with the film, since all of 
the best family pictures, like 1939's "The Wizard of Oz," and 1971's 
"Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory," have a wicked side. My 
objection is that it does not merily deal with these elements, but it 
dwells in it. Although there is comedy, most of it sinks under its own 
weight because of its somberness.
One of the most innovative ideas of, "Babe: Pig in the City," is that 
the city is not a certain place, but a mixture of every city in the 
world. Because of this, it was a huge letdown that the film did not 
venture out into the different places, but was set almost entirely in a 
hotel. For a film that cost $80-million to make, I think the makers got 
jipped, although the animals, with their mouths moving when they talked, 
was more seamless and real-looking than the first film.
"Babe: Pig in the City," is mostly a joyless sequel to the joyful 
original. James Cromwell obviously was just cashing a paycheck, since he 
only had three scenes and about three lines. Magda Szubanski was sweet 
as Wife Hoggett, but too often was the butt of the jokes. And I liked 
Mary Stein as the hotel manager and secret animal lover. The climax was 
nicely done and exciting, for the most part, and I liked the chimpanzee 
characters, but it simply felt like a missed opportunity to explore the 
unusual, but visually gorgeous city. The film is more action-oriented, 
rather than filled with the warmth of its predecessor. With all of the 
dark going-ons in "Babe: Pig in the City," at the end, it felt like Babe 
wasn't so innocent anymore.

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Pig in the City picks up where Babe left off, with Arthur Hoggett 
(James Cromwell) quietly accepting a trophy for his champion sheepdog, 
er, pig.  He hugs his wife, turns down myriad offers for public 
appearances, and falls down a well, sustaining injuries that put him out 
of most of the movie.  
This is the first risk taken by the sequel, and it's one of many reasons 
why A Pig in the City is so successful.
The storybook qualities are still here: along with the Hoggetts' 
generously thatched cottage, we see a quirky hotel housing two humans 
and a menagerie of animals.  The landscapes are still beautiful and 
cozy, skies glowing like canvases by N. C. Wyeth.  Of course the animals 
talk. And the city of the title is "just to the left of the twentieth 
century," its landmarks icons from real cities -- the Seattle Space 
Needle, the "Hollywood" letters, the Eiffel Tower, the Sydney Opera 
House (the film was shot in Australia, after all).  Accordingly, the 
sets, costumes and lighting accentuate the magical effects.
What is so remarkable about this sequel is that it differs so much from 
Babe.  Yes, many of the same characters are here - indeed, I wanted more 
of the taciturn Hoggett, the sheepdogs Fly and Rex, and others - but 
this new zoo of a cast is just as charming, and even more uproarious in 
its adventures.  This film proves that strong sequels, and installments 
of series films, rely only briefly on their original incarnations, and 
stand on their own as solid and engaging stories.
Because Mr, Hoggett is laid up and the bank is threatening foreclosure, 
Mrs. Hoggett brainstorms and decides to travel to the city for a grand 
state fair.  There she will display "Pig," which is Babe's name to 
humans, and receive enough money to save the farm.  As the two board a 
plane that heads into the sky, there are captivating scenes of Ferdinand 
the duck (voice of Danny Mann) in hot pursuit, asking advice from a 
flock of wise pelicans.  When she is detained at the airport, Mrs. 
Hoggett not only misses the state fair but fails to locate a hotel that 
will accept her particular type of pet.  In the face of a stranger who 
tells her of a lodging where she and Babe/Pig will be safe, we see a 
motif that contributes again and again to the humor of the story.  
Another artifice surfaces when Mrs. Hoggett stumbles a second time into 
trouble with the law, leaving Babe alone with animals that at first seem 
menacing but turn out charming.  The bulk of the plot involves Babe's 
relationships with the animals that inhabit, in violation of city 
ordinances, this storybook hotel.  Will the creatures be saved from the 
animal control agency that evicts them?  Will Babe ever reunite with 
Esme Cordelia Hoggett, let alone with Arthur?
As Mrs. Hoggett, Magda Szubanski is outstanding.  In the original she 
was so much set decoration, a prudish Mrs. Sprat who talks two miles a 
minute and concerns herself with fattening the protagonist for 
Christmas.  In this story we see her determination developed and focused 
on those keeping her apart from Babe and from her husband.  She is 
wonderfully game in going after the endangered animals, paired with the 
drink-of-water woman (Mary Stein) who owns the hotel.  And when she dons 
an inflatable clown suit and bounces all over a ballroom in pursuit of 
Babe, we enjoy a series of belly laughs.  This was my son's favorite 
scene.
My daughter's favorite part involves a chimp named Zootie (Glenne 
Headley).  She is the mate of a punkish chimp voiced by the comedian 
Steven Wright.  Both lend their characters quirky and likable 
personalities.  Moreover, the animal actors perform memorably.  Along 
with the chimps there are multitudinous dogs (one with wheels for back 
legs, a creature that nearly made me fall into the aisle of the 
theater!), cats, a goldfish, a modest orangutan, and the familiar chorus 
of mice.  Congratulations to director George Miller, as well as to the 
many animal trainers, handlers and animatronics engineers.  They assist 
the animals in telling large sections of the narrative; perhaps the 
animals are more important than even the humans.
Mickey Rooney has a cameo as the hotel owner's uncle, a strange little 
man named Fugly Flooms.  He's a clown who entertains hospitalized 
children, and when he conscripts Babe to help in the magic act, very 
funny chaos follows.  In a small reprise of his role as Farmer Hoggett, 
James Cromwell shows his experience; he's tolerant and venerable, and 
after watching the first movie, you just know the words with which 
Hoggett will end this one.
It's refreshing to see such a promising lineup of family entertainment 
in theaters for the holidays.  My ten year-old oftens scans ratings and 
discovers no G- or PG-rated films playing anywhere.  For the next 
several weeks we will be able to take her to several.  Babe:  A Pig in 
the City holds its own with all audiences, as suggested by several 
senior citizens sitting around us, also laughing with abandon.  It may 
even garner for the franchise a second Academy Award nomination for Best 
Picture.


Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
The original _Babe_ was my favorite movie of 1995, a sleeper hit that
transcended its target audience.  Being a surprise commercial and
critical success, it had no marketing tie-ins, which limited its final
take.  Thus, Babe 2 arrives, with a budget greater than the money made
in Babe 1.  Plush dolls, vending machines hawking t-shirts, and Macy's
Thanksgiving Day Balloons arrive for holiday money-grubbing.
This is a sad review to write, because Babe 2 not only does _not_ live
up to the original, but it doesn't even come to a fraction of it.  I
shouldn't expect that sequels to modern fairy tales to match their
predecessors' magic, but this film tries too hard, and loses its charm.
Consider a driver applying the accelerator with great intensity, unaware
that his car is in neutral.
Imagine with me, if you will, _Scream_'s Jamie Kennedy, explaining the
"rules" for sequels like Babe 2.
(1) There must be _more_ talking animals.
(2) There must be _more_ slapstick comedy.
(3) There must be _more_ songs for those mice to sing: that's cute.
(4) Keep the story cards to break up the action: that's cute too, even
though "The Pig Gets Wise" made no sense, given the context of that
story partition.
(5) There must be action, however illogical, that will conjure up
pivotal scenes from the original: the trademark song that nobody
remembers the words to, the Baa-Ram-Ewe secret code, the "That'll do,
pig. That'll do."
Now throw in the limitations:
(A) James Cromwell, now a hot commodity, has limited time on the set (or
maybe he didn't approve of the script).
(B) Christine Cavanaugh, the voice of the original Babe, demands more
money ($200,000--paltry considering the $80 million budget).  Out.  E.G.
Daily comes in with noticable results.
(C) George Miller, the director, is more well-known for his dark
futuristic Mad Max films and his Twilight Zone segment, NOT for kiddie
fare (and no, he didn't direct that _Andre_ film in '94).
(D) The special effects are impressive, _but limited_.  Babe talks, but
most of the time from a single shot, repeated over and over again.
(Babe is center screen, looking straight into the camera, with a happy
smirk--regardless of whether he's happy, or scared, or tired).
Season now with the "original" elements, which, as we will find out, are
straight from the screenwriting-is-hell bin.
(i) Change the venue into "the big city".  This has been praised as
wildly original. Excuse me: didn't _Home Alone_ do this several years
ago?  How about the Muppets?  Even _The Bad News Bears_ travelled to
Tokyo.  Sorry.  No dice.
Side note: to give the city a fairy-tale look, George Miller crafted a
fantastical fantasyland that merges the landmarks of the world's great
cities, and yes, it _is_ impressive.  But this too is over-used,
repeating the same view over and again on multiple occasions.  And, for
the most part, Babe _remains in the hotel_.
(ii) Given the limitations of Cromwell, the human element is taken over
by "the boss' wife" played by Magda Szubanski.  S-t-r-e-t-c-h.  She's
not a lead actress-type, she's not funny enough in her physical comedy,
and she's simply embarrassing in some of her pratfalls. (Have her
arrested falsely on drug charges!  Have her accidentally incite a riot
with biker dudes and scantily clad babes!  Have her bounce around on a
bungee cord at a prestigious benefit dinner!)  I was hoping for a little
smirk during these scenes, but I felt sorry for the embarrassment that
she put herself in.
I am restraining myself from talking about the dark nature of the film,
the violence, the scene where a pit bull dangles from the bridge, head
submerged underwater.  Even the best fairy tales have a bit of the
macabre in it, as the Brothers Grimm have demonstrated.
No... my problem is with the story, or lack thereof.  _Babe_ is sent out
to save the Hoggett farm, but once in the city, that story is forgotten.
Being a good-natured pig in the midst of the cynicism of his environs is
nice, but, other than rescue that aforementioned pit bull, what did Babe
actually _do_?  Without giving the ending away, the farm is saved from a
left-field quirk that had nothing to do with the pig.
Speaking of "pig", or, "pig-pig-pig-pig-pig!". The word "pig" is so
overused, had they changed it to an expletive, and had the pig be Al
Pacino, I could have been watching _Scarface_.  This is screenwriting?
Further, I cannot explain the deep gnaw at my gut in the many scenes
where accidents happen to good people in fantastically elaborate setups.
Had it been a cartoon, and the victim be an equivalent of Elmer Fudd,
maybe my reaction would have been softened.  But to Farmer Hoggett?  His
wife?  An elderly Mickey Rooney?  Much too irreverent.  ("Quick!  Splice
those singing mice into those scenes!").
The film isn't a colossal failure.  I did like Glenne Headley's schmoozy
chimpanzee.  I liked the pink poodle.  The dog on the cart, who
momentarily thinks he's in dog heaven.  And a weird looking guy who may
have been doubly-cast as an airport employee and a judge.  But most of
the time, I was looking down, in boredom, or in embarrassment over the
hacked-up script.  Them singing mice, those chapter partitions, the
proficient acting of the animals-- none of these can compensate for a
story.
Let me spoil the final scene: Farmer Hoggett looks at pig, proud, says
"That'll do, pig.  That'll do." That's it.  Hope I didn't ruin it for
you.
But tell me this: what the heck did that pig _DO_?

Author
Matt Williams
I have to admit, I wasn't the biggest fan of the original movie, Babe.
The premise was cute, and the speaking-animal effects were well done,
but I still maintain that the original film was well over-praised.
Which brings us to Babe: Pig in the City, a sequel (of sorts) to Babe.
It's an unusual sequel in that it doesn't merely try to tell the same
story...but is actually markedly different. Unfortunately, different
doesn't always equate to better...
After an accident injures Farmer Hoggett (James Cromwell), the Hoggett
farm is in serious trouble.  Mrs. Hoggett (Magda Szubanski) gathers
their famous sheep-pig, Babe (voiced by E.G. Daily), to make a guest
appearance at a state fair (where a generous appearance fee will help to
save the farm).
Unfortunately, things don't go quite as planned, and Mrs. Hoggett and
Babe end up in the big city (an every-city, blending many world
locales). There, the pair are taken in by a kind landlady (Mary Stein),
who is kind to animals in a city that shuns them.
But the city is a tough place, and this animal-friendly hotel is no
exception. There's a floor devoted to a thieving clown (Mickey Rooney)
and his group of clothes-wearing circus monkeys.  There's a floor for
dogs, and a floor for cats.  Poor Babe is stuck in the attic, a
sheep-pig with no sheep to herd.
Fans of the first film may be pleased that both Ferdinand the Duck
(Danny Mann), and the inexplicable singing mice are back for return
appearances.  However, this time around, James Cromwell's
Oscar-nominated role of Farmer Hoggett is relegated to a mere cameo (as
are most of Babe's friends from the first film).
The new film instead focuses on a new coterie of animals, but few as
charming as the original.  And while a gangster-like pit bull is
entertaining (voiced by Stanley Ralph Ross), many of the new animals
lack the strong personalities of the originals.
The special effects have improved since the first film.  However, the
gimmick of talking animals has long since lost its freshness (having
been done to death in television commercials and other movies).  Talking
animals alone is no longer enough to sustain a movie.
The film's tone is rather dark and murky at times...but then, if you
recall, so was the original (in which the animals were constantly
worried about being eaten).  But gone is the sense of whimsy which
lightened up the first Babe. Instead, this sequel just leaves an
unpleasant aftertaste.
The film has its share of oddities, from the strange appearance of pig
people (who have apparently escaped from the Island of Dr. Moreau)
throughout the movie, to an unusual slapstick climax that doesn't quite
work.  The sum of these make the movie unusual and distinctive, but at
times the irregularities are borderline distracting.
Still, Babe: Pig in the City deserves some credit for at least trying
something new, rather than sticking to the exact same formula as the
original.  But, in the end, the sequel never lives up to the original,
and stands on very shaky ground on its own.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Michael Dequina
I can understand Universal's desire to make a sequel to its 1995 surprise
box office and Oscar sensation.  I can understand director George Miller's
(who served as producer on the original) desire to have the titular perky
porker to grow up a bit.  But there's something about this film I cannot
understand: did this follow-up to a beloved family film really need to be
this dark?  (And how the hell did it snag a G rating?)
_Pig_in_the_City_, as its title suggests, brings the sheepherding pig to
an unnamed metropolis (inventively designed as an amalgam of New York,
Sydney, Paris, San Francisco, among many others) to save the farm after
inadvertently causing his beloved master, Arthur Hoggett (James Cromwell)
to suffer a crippling accident.  As upsetting as the sight of some heavy
machinery falling on the gentle farmer is, it's not quite as upsetting as a
ridiculously drawn-out scene of a dog's near-drowning, not to mention an
already-crippled dog being thrown from a speeding car, his spirit then
briefly seen frolicking in a canine heaven.   The children in the audience
with which I saw the film were audibly upset, as were some parents, and I
cannot blame them.
What nearly redeems the film is the enduring charm of the pig, this time
voiced by E.G. Daily (taking over for Christine Cavanaugh); the imaginative
production design; and the impressive effects work.  As in the original, it
is impossible to distinguish the real animals from the animatronic ones to
the computer animated ones.  And as in the original, everything _does_ work
out nicely for the pig, who learns a lesson or two about life.  But walking
out of this _Babe_, I--and I am sure many others--feel that Universal
should have left well enough alone, heeding the immortal closing words of
Farmer Hoggett in the original (repeated in this film): "That'll do, Pig."
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"You're just a little pig in a big city," Ferdinand, the duck, tells his
old friend Babe. "What could you possibly do?" A lot, actually since
Babe is not exactly your average porker. Babe is a sheeppig who's been
sent to save the farm in BABE: PIG IN THE CITY, and he can summon up the
courage to tackle anything, even a pit bull.
The second in the BABE series is a complete departure from the original.
Whereas the first BABE was a low-budget, lighted-hearted film set in an
idyllic countryside, the expensive sequel takes place in a big city,
full of urban terrors.
The dark-toned film will probably frighten many of the younger members
of the audience, so it should certainly have been rated PG rather than
G. With everything from vicious dogs to a frightening scene at a gun
club, the movie has more scary images than a G-rated picture would lead
parents to suspect.
Even if one considers the show only as an adult film, the confusing
script has trouble sustaining its comedic momentum and just drifts along
with a series of hits and misses. With the exception of the chimpanzees,
the animals are all cute. The movie, on the other hand, would have been
much improved if the animals had locked the humans in a cage and not let
them out until the filming was completed.
The humans are led by Magda Szubanski as Esme Hoggett, known to the
animals as the boss's wife. One of the farm animals refers to her as "a
serial killer" for slaughtering the animals for food. Her husband,
Arthur, and the human star of the first movie, is played again by James
Cromwell. His part this time, sadly, is relegated to cameos at the
beginning and ending of story. His warmth is much missed in the picture.
The story has the Hoggetts in danger of losing the farm to the bank.
Esme and Babe (voiced his time by Elizabeth Daily from THE RUGRATS
MOVIE) set off to raise money to save the farm but get stranded in the
big city. After Esme is strip-searched at the airport - why have that in
a G-rated movie? - they end up staying in a hotel that illegally takes
in animal borders of any species.
The movie is at its best when it falls back on the sweet aphorisms of
the original. "You're brave, and fortune, more often than not in this
uncertain world, favors the brave," one of the dogs at the farm tells
Babe.
Sure enough, when Babe has to go up against the city's chief animal
meanie, a pit bull (who admits who admits that he has "a professional
obligation to be malicious," Babe holds his ground. Soon, the pit bull
orders all the other animals that, "Whatever the pig says goes."
It is easy to see where director George Miller lavished the movie's big
budget. Beside the wide multitude of talking animals, which are done
even more convincingly than the first time, the city he creates is
astonishing. Its dazzling landscape of skyscrapers and famous buildings
will have you trying to see how many you can recognize. Among others,
there are the Venetian canals, the Sydney Opera House, the Statue of
Liberty, the Seattle Space Needle and the Moscow church spires. You
almost want to ask the projectionist to hold the film for a few minutes
so you can count them all.
It is hard to criticize any movie that has 3 singing mice ("That's
Amore" being a typical song of theirs) that read the silly titles of
each chapter. It makes the movie feel like an illustrated picture book
that your kindergarten teacher is reading to you. Still, for all of its
delights, the movie is a mere shadow of its original. One suspects that,
if the studio had had the good sense to give George Miller the same
budget as the original, they would have gotten a better movie and
certainly better value for their investment.
BABE: PIG IN THE CITY runs 1:37. It is a dark and sometimes frightening
movie that is inappropriately rated G. The movie would be fine for most
kids around 8 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, gave the movie **  and a mixed review. He
thought the story was confusing and the plot needed more development. He
worried that it would scare a lot of kids. One of his favorite
characters was the little tabby kitten, who kept whining sweetly, "But
I'm still hungry!"
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: Babe: Pig in the City
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Magda Szubanski, James Cromwell, Mary Stein, Mickey Rooney, and
the voices of E.G. Daily, Gleanne Headly, Steven Wright, James Cosmo,
Stanley Ralph Ross, Danny Mann, Roscoe Lee Browne
Director: George Miller
Screenplay: George Miller, Mark Lamprell, Judy Morris based on "The
Sheep-Pig" by Dick King-Smith
Australian theatrical release date: December 10, 1998
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 stars
The fundamental difference between 1995's surprise hit Babe and its
sequel, Pig in the City, is a change of tone.  Whilst Babe happily
indulged in occasional "serious" moments, Pig in the City often
surrounds itself in gloom, and its characters are forced to attempt to
emerge themselves through it.  That's quite a hard feat for a family
film to achieve without presenting its characters as equally somber as
their surroundings.  Achieving this much is something that director
George Miller (Mad Max, The Witches of Eastwick) can be proud of, at
least for the most part.
Miller adapted Babe from the novel written by Dick King-Smith (titled
The Sheep Pig), and does the same task for Pig in the City as well as
replacing director Chris Noonan.  He gives an unusual atmosphere to the
film, which is largely to do with the setting - "The Big City."  This is
one unusual place, with Venice like canals and a wide range of sights to
see - the Sydney opera house, the statue of liberty, the Eiffel tower
and the Hollywood sign.  Miller conveys that this fairytale city is not
located anywhere, so much as it is everywhere.
Pig in the City's story caps off directly after Babe's finishes.  Farmer
Hoggett (James Cromwell, who was Oscar nominated for his performance in
the original) and Babe (voice of E.G. Daily, replacing Christine
Cavanaugh) are local celebrities for their astonishing display in the
National Sheep Dog's Championship.  But unfortunately Hoggett takes a
bad fall down a well, thus making him unable to work. The farm soon
faces financial ruin, so Mrs. Hoggett (Magda Szubanski) plans to take
Babe to a state fair in search for enough money to save their home.
They end up stranded in The Big City, and stay at an eerie hotel for
pets.
Pig in the City is an ill-advised sequel.  Babe ended on a wonderfully
high note, pleasing audiences with scenes that were both artistic and
entertaining.  It was a rewarding tale brought to life largely from
Cromwell's performance and Babe's innocence.  Although the pig's
innocence is still very much a part of the sequel, Cromwell is severely
missed.  He was the sane center of the original; everyone acted crazy
around him.  This time Magda Szubanski is the lead human actor, but her
cheerful comic mannerisms are exaggerated to ridiculous lengths, and she
soon becomes more irritating than entertaining.
There is some truth behind the many allegations that Pig in the City is
too depressing and gloomy for children.  Some scenes - namely Farmer
Hoggett falling down the well and Babe saving animals from gruesome
deaths - are distressing to watch.  Although the underlining themes of
the film include friendship, determination and courage, it is only an
uplifting experience on very few occasions.  Pig in the City is
exhausting when it should be uplifting, and annoying when it should be
entertaining.
This is not to say that George Miller has not crafted some excellent
moments and characters.  Thelonius (voice of James Cosmo) is an old and
wise orangutan who always likes to be dressed for the moment.  He is
easily the most intriguing character, as every one of his movements and
words are emphasized by Miller, and the audience subsequently takes
notice. Thelonius is one of the few animals that gives a lasting impact,
and is able to burst out of his gloomy surroundings to create an
intriguing demeanor of his own.
Adults will appreciate the atmosphere that Miller creates more than
children will.  But as a family film, a sequel, and a candidate for this
holiday's box office trophy, Babe: Pig in the City simply doesn't bring
home the bacon.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies:
http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au
