Title
Review for Dressed to Kill (1980)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael Stoneheel
Director: Brian De Palma
Cast: Michael Caine, Angie Dickinson, Nancy Allen, Keith Gordon
Released in 1980.
     A sexually active woman is brutally murdered.  Her son, a hooker
who was a witness to the murder and the victim's psychiatrist are
looking for the killer.  The main characters cope with terror, fear,
violence and sex until the mystery is solved.
     Brian De Palma is usually being accused of borrowing his ideas from
Alfred Hitchcock.  Using such opinions, this film is a mixture of a
Hitchcock suspense film and an erotic horror movie.  Personally, I think
that De Palma was also influenced by several realistic directors and by
Louis Bunuel.  Violence and sex are being used as the surface of the
film.  In a higher level De Palma is looking for the connection between
the senses and our behavior.  Aesthetically, the film is focused on the
relation between what we see and what we think and feel.  I will
describe two scenes to clarify my ideas.
     On the first scene, Angie Dickinson is sitting near a stranger in a
museum.  She desires him but in the same time she fears to approach him.
This common conflict is being illustrated by the way she looks at the
world.  When she wants the stranger she glances at him, and then she
immediately turns her head to the other direction.  After he is gone,
she is determined to find him.  She tries to follow him and looks at
every direction.  When she finally finds him in a position she wasn't
expected him to be, she decides to forget the whole thing.  The scene
continues in the same manner and the spectators see exactly what the
woman see, and also the expressions on her face.  The simple
interpretation of feelings and thoughts is due to the crucial importance
of the sense of sight in our lives.  In fact, what wee see is what we
think and vice versa.
     On the second scene, the hooker explains the boy how to perform a
sex conversion.  On the background several women conduct their own
discussion.  Every time the hooker completes a sentence, the first woman
on the background says yes to a woman we cannot see.  The second woman
on the background seems to catch on some of the hooker words, and she
reacts in a wide expression of shocking and surprise.  The difference
between both reactions makes this situation funny for the spectator who
understands that the sight of the background can be misleading.
     Although DRESSED TO KILL combines several styles, the film is
essentially realistic.  Except from the realistic sex and violence
scenes, De Palma has used several cinematography methods.  The
tremendous use of slow panning shots increases the importance of vision
and gives the audience more time to look at things and to respond by
creating emotions.  Another interesting method is the splitting of the
screen into two simultaneous scenes.  As a result, the spectator has to
choose what to see (It has the same realistic effect as deep-focus
shots).  The nightmares in the film are so real that it is not clear if
they are dreams or just thoughts.
     In the film, life is consisted of sights, thoughts, feelings and
nightmares which are being summed up to sex, violence and love.  Due to
the relations between feelings and visions, the spectator can reach a
better understanding by looking at things from "within the scene".  As a
result, the spectator becomes another participant in the film.  In my
opinion, a perfect harmony between the theme, aesthetics and
metaphysics along with excellent cinematography and acting turned into
a true masterpiece.

Author
Jason Bacon
It is not very seldom that films try to imitate Hitchcock. He is after
all, one of the twentieth century's greatest motion picture directors,
perhaps even the greatest. But, however, it is far too seldom that a
film or a director pays homage to Hitchcock without fake tenure.
Brian De Palma didn't make a poor man's thriller when he co-wrote and
directed Dressed To Kill. Instead, he made a blood-chilling, nail-biting
thrill ride that would make Hitch aficionados proud.
Angie Dickinson stars as a New York woman who is trapped (so she feels)
in a boring, dead-end marriage with a boring sex life. We find all of
this information out from her frequent visits to a local psychiatrist
(Michael Caine). She lusts for a change, and gets one in a mystery man
she meets in an art museum. Not a word is spoken between the two, nor is
anything implied during this scene, but De Palam wisely let the camera
so its job and made an eerie but effective scene.
Soon after that fateful encounter, the two sleep together. A little
later, Dickinson turns up murdered, and a high-priced call girl(Nancy
Allen), a witness to the murder, is hounded by a sleazy police officer
(Dennis Franz) and the killer. Dickinson's teenage whiz kid son (Keith
Gordon) also manages to help Allen out, and even winds up saving her
life in a chillingly terrifying scene that is very Hitchcock.
TO reveal any more would ruin the film. De Palma isn;t as good as
Hitchcock, nor will he ever be. No one ever will. but this taut,
suspenseful film full of shocking moments of originality and surprising
plot twists (although the ending is predictable), is a worthy attempt
and a beautiful tribute to the master of suspense.

Author
Paul Xavier
"Dressed to Kill" - 1980.  Review by Paul Xavier
Starring: Angie Dickinson, Michael Caine, Nancy Allen, and Keith Gordon. 
Rated R for graphic violence, nudity, language and sexual situations.
"Psycho" is a classic.  Many people hold the work of Alfred Hitchcock in 
the highest regard.  "Dressed to Kill", from Brian DePalma, is 
admittedly, a re-working of Hitchcock's classic thriller.  A lot of 
people allege DePalma is a poor man's Hitchcock.  That may be so, but 
there is no denying DePalma can make a good film.  
"Dressed to Kill" first introduces us to Kate Miller (Angie Dickinson), 
a woman who is not happy in her marriage.  Her sex life with her husband 
is unsatisfactory, a fact she discloses to her psychiatrist Dr. Robert 
Elliot (Michael Caine).  She is so unsatisfied from her husband, she 
even asks her psychiatrist if he would sleep with her.  However, he is 
married. 
She then visits an art museum, and sees a mysterious stranger that 
catches her eye.  She obviously catches his eye as well, as they have a 
fling in a cab, and later back at his apartment.  
This is the just the kind of excitement that Kate needed in her life, 
until she finds out that the tall, dark and handsome man has a letter 
from the Department of Health in his drawer stating he has a veneral 
disease.  Flustered, she leaves his apartment while he still sleeps.  
On the way down in the elevator, she notices her wedding ring is gone 
and remembers that she left it upstairs in loverboy's apartment.  Going 
back to retrieve it, as the elevator door to the top floor opens, a tall 
blond woman with a shiny razor proceeds to slash Kate into mincemeat.  
The aftermath of this event is discovered by Liz, a street-smart call 
girl who finds Kate, and the killer, in the elevator, holding the razor. 
 Liz then goes to the police, to report the murder.  Meanwhile, Dr. 
Elliot is getting a call from "Bobbi" on his answering machine.  Bobbi 
is a woman inside a man's body, was a former patient of Dr. Elliot's, 
and is obviously disturbed, as she is the one who slashed Kate in the 
elevator using Elliot's razor.  
All this happens in the first half hour.  During and after this set-up, 
DePalma gives one a movie experience with rich style, which is his 
biggest strength, providing dazzling camera work and some wonderfully 
filmed sequences; the above mentioned elevator sequence and many others. 
Another plus is the wonderful score by Pino Donaggio, completely 
involving the viewer during crucial scenes.  DePalma's direction and the 
music score work together wonderfully.  
Still another plus is Nancy Allen as Liz, who the movie focuses on after 
Kate's fate.  In spite of her not so respectable occupation, Liz is a 
very likable character that one can't help but root for.  
Even if you've seen "Psycho" (and who hasn't?), don't sell "Dressed to 
Kill" short.  In spite of the similarities in both films, "Dressed to 
Kill" easily stands on it's own as an exciting, suspenseful film and 
deserves a place in movie history as a classic just as much as "Psycho".
