Title
Review for Under solen (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rachel Gordon
Nominated last year for Best Foreign Language Film, Under the Sun is a
gentle look at romance through the eyes of a middle-aged innocent.  It's
a pleasantly simple story, shot with overwhelming beauty, but it falls
short in terms of sweeping an audience off its feet.
The setting is the lush fields of Sweden in the late 1950's.  Olof (Rolf
Lassgĺrd) is a lonely farmer who can barely hang on to the house his
mother left to him when she died nine years before.  His young,
boisterous friend Erik (Johan Widerberg) helps him with errands and some
work when he isn't digging graves.
Olof is simple and quiet, and ashamed that he can't read or write.  He
is also still a virgin.  He goes to the local paper to place an ad for a
housekeeper, hoping she will also become a female companion.  Word gets
out around the small town and their priest puts Erik on guard.
Ellen (Helena Bergström) arrives with little warning.  Olof is instantly
attracted to her and fumbles with conversation as Erik gets aggressively
flirtatious, apparently in the protection of Olof.  As time goes on,
Ellen has set the house in repair and managed the finances without
knowing that Olof can't read.  She and Olof become romantically involved
as she continues to duck Erik's advances.  Erik won't rest until he
finds a chink in her armor.
This character driven story is respectably able to keep the key players'
motivations in question. You never know if Ellen is being coy with Erik
or if she is really devoted to Olof, because her past is always in
question.  Erik seems to care a great deal about Olof but then makes
successive comments trying to degrade him in Ellen's eyes.  Olof himself
appears a simpleton led by around by others but is allowed to show more
intelligence as time progresses.  This mixture keeps the mind reeling
with anticipation as to what will happen next.
However, there are also flaws to the ambiguity.  When Olof is finally
able to show that he knows more about human nature than he lets on, it
is only after he has had intercourse.  The film seems to relate sexual
intercourse with all newfound knowledge of the world surrounding Olof,
which is hard to swallow.
Also, lacking knowledge of the characters' motivations from one scene to
the next may keep you on mental toes, but it keeps you begging for the
filmmaker to get on with allowing something to happen, already.  There
are at least eight scenes in which Erik tries to gain Ellen's physical
affections and only one in which she stops him to challenge his honesty
to Olof.  The scenes themselves are intriguing enough to watch, but
there are too many of them to keep one's attention from waning.
There is a fairy tale quality to the film that keeps the situation
endearing enough to watch.  Olof is a large man, and not particularly
attractive, while Ellen is slim and perfectly coiffed.  A link to Beauty
and the Beast can easily by made.  Between that, Erik's talk of what
little Olof has to offer, and the stunning landscapes in which
everything is shot, the viewer is transported into the environment where
the characters live instead of merely being a spectator.
Unfortunately this film falls into a difficult category to appreciate. 
It isn't necessarily a good film for couples, and yet a modern single
won't find much to like either.  A bit too much like life for our
tastes.
Director: Colin Nutley
Producer: Colin Nutley
Writer: Johanna Hald, David Neal, Colin Nutley
Starring: Rolf Lassgĺrd, Helena Bergström, Johan Widerberg, Gunilla
Röör, Jonas Falk, Linda Ulvaeus
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Colin Nutley's UNDER THE SUN (UNDER SOLEN) is a sweet and touching story of
first love.  This Swedish movie was nominated for an Academy Award for best
foreign film in 2000, but lost to ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER.  For my money, UNDER THE
SUN is easily the better of the two.  Told with impeccable honesty, the script
by Johanna Hald, David Neal and Colin Nutley, based on the H.E. Bates novel "The
Little Farm," concerns a middle-aged farmer and virgin who goes in search of
female companionship after his mother dies, leaving him alone.
In a compelling, straightforward performance, Rolf Lassgĺrd plays Olof, the
large, beefy farmer.  Although some might see him as ruggedly handsome, most
would call him homelessly plain.  In order to secure a housekeeper for his
remote farm, he takes out a simple newspaper ad: "Lonely farmer, 39, own car. 
Seeks young lady housekeeper."  He comes back to the newspaper office to add one
last line: "Photograph appreciated."  
With just two responses, Olof chooses the only one to send a photograph. 
Putting on an awkwardly fitting suit and tie, he goes to meet Ellen, played with
grace by Helena Bergström, who looks a bit like a movie star from the 1950s,
when the story is set.  Dressed to the nines in a blue suit and hat, she looks
like she is applying for a secretarial position in a modern office building
rather than a cleaning job on a fly-infested farm.
Actually, the farm may be primitive, but it looks quite inviting.  With Jens
Fischer's golden-tinted cinematography and Paddy Moloney's soothing music, the
Norwegian tourist board should set up a booth in the theater lobby.  Bookings
for Norwegian tours should be brisk afterwards.
UNDER THE SUN goes for naturalness where other movies might try for bits of
sensationalism to ignite the viewers used to Hollywood dramatics.  Rather than
throwing himself at Ellen, Olof worships her from afar.  It is she who makes the
first move, a little kiss, which causes him to jump away.  In contrast to Olof,
who treats women with so much respect that he's afraid to touch them, his
younger friend, Erik (Johan Widerberg), brags about having had hundreds of
women.  Erik is only willing to say the dreaded "I love you" if it quickly gets
something in return.  Needless to say, Erik is suspicious of Ellen's motives.
The one mystery that keeps nagging at the viewers and at Erik is what an
attractive 33-year-old woman like Ellen would find in Olof.  The answer to this
question isn't quite the shocker that many might expect, but it sets up a
touching and satisfying ending to a delightful little tale.
UNDER THE SUN runs 1:58.  The film is in Swedish with English subtitles.  It is
not rated but might be R for sexual situations and would be acceptable for
teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 19, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
