Title
Review for Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (1964)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Berardinelli
DR. STRANGELOVE, or HOW I LEARNED TO STOP WORRYING AND LOVE THE BOMB 
Starring: Peter Sellers, George C. Scott, Peter Sellers, Slim Pickens, 
          Peter Sellers, Sterling Hayden, Peter Bull 
Director: Stanley Kubrick 
Producer: Stanley Kubrick 
Screenplay: Stanley Kubrick, Peter George, and Terry Southern based on 
            the novel RED ALERT by Peter George 
Cinematography: Gilbert Taylor 
Music: Laurie Johnson 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     When you consider the history of motion pictures, certain
watershed films leap to mind--productions which have left their mark
on the craft.  Without a doubt, one of those is Stanley Kubrik's 1964
masterpiece, DR. STRANGELOVE (or, as it's subtitled, HOW I LEARNED TO
STOP WORRYING AND LOVE THE BOMB).  As political satire, few
movies--even those as incisive as the hilariously vicious 1992 release
BOB ROBERTS--come close to this level of accomplishment.  In the case
of DR. STRANGELOVE, the barbs and quips (both subtle and obvious) hold
up as well today as they did thirty years ago.
     When director Stanley Kubrick decided to adapt Peter George's
thriller RED ALERT for the screen, he recruited the author to help with
the script.  Instead of retaining the straight tone of the book,
Kubrick wanted to try for a black comedy, and with the complicity of
George and co-writer Terry Southern, DR. STRANGELOVE was born.
     Originally, Kubrick envisioned Peter Sellers playing four unique
roles.  However, after filming three of them (President Merkin Muffley,
RAF Group Captain Mandrake, and ex-Nazi scientist Dr. Strangelove), the
actor broke his leg and was unable to complete the quartet.  In his
place, Slim Pickens was signed to portray Major "King" Kong.  Other
cast members include George C. Scott as General Buck Turgidson,
Sterling Hayden as General Jack D. Ripper, and James Earl Jones (in his
first film role) as Lieutenant Lothar Zogg.
     The film opens with a deranged General Ripper declaring a "Code
Red," sealing off his airforce base, and ordering a nuclear attack on
Russia.  When his assistant, RAF Group Captain Mandrake, advises
moderation, Ripper replies that he intends to launch a pre-emptive
strike to stop a Communist infiltration which is "sapping and
impurifying all of our precious bodily fluids."
     In Washington D.C., an emergency meeting is called to determine
how to react to the crisis.  Present are President Merkin Muffley, a
man whose effete personality is adequately described by his name;
General Buck Turgidson, whose least favorite color is red; Dr.
Strangelove, an ex-Nazi scientist who is now head of the United States'
weapons development program; Soviet Ambassador de Sadesky (Peter Bull);
and the rest of the higher-uppers at the Pentagon.
     Meanwhile, aboard the bomber "Leper Colony," we are introduced to
the crew that will play a vital role in the events about to transpire.
Led by Major "King" Kong, an old-fashioned, gung-ho cowboy type
(complete with hat and Texas accent), these men are as loyal and
anti-Communist as they come.
     As a story chronicling the potential countdown to humanity's end
in a nuclear fireball, DR. STRANGELOVE is tightly-plotted and
well-paced.  As a black comedy, wielding a wit sharper than honed
steel, the film is unparalleled.  Kubrick's picture has so many targets
that it's difficult to know where to begin.  Certainly, the "balance of
power" nuclear deterrent policy gets the most obvious jabs (although
ardent supporters may not see this--DR. STRANGELOVE's attacks are
subtle enough that it's possible for an unsophisticated viewer to miss
the point).  Parodying the "missile gap" at the heart of the arms race,
we are given the "doomsday gap" and the "mine shaft gap."
     Kubrick isn't especially kind to the military mentality, as
personified by General Turgidson (elements of Scott's performance here
foreshadow how he would approach the role of Patton in the 1970 movie
that earned him an Oscar).  Turgidson sees Soviet plots everywhere,
flirts with a girlfriend in the midst of a national crisis, believes
10- 20 million American casualties (tops!) are acceptable, and wishes
the U.S. had some sort of doomsday machine to match the Russians'
capabilities.
     As the film races to its conclusion, situations become more
bizarre, with a drunk Soviet Premier Kissoff whining over the phone to
Muffley that the U.S. planes are flying too low and jamming his radar.
Mandrake tries to put an emergency call through to the President, but
the Pentagon won't accept the collect call, and he doesn't have exact
change.  And Dr.  Strangelove, Hitler's best living ally, comes up with
a plan to preserve the superior elements of humanity.
     "Gentlemen, you can't fight in here.  This is the War Room!"
exclaims President Muffley when Turgidson and the Soviet Ambassador
almost come to blows.  This may be the best known line from DR.
STRANGELOVE, but it isn't the only quotable one.  The dialogue often
drips irony, as when Turgidson dryly observes that Ripper's ability to
cause a nuclear disaster is a case of "the human element" having
"failed us here," but "it's not fair to condemn the whole program
because of one slip up."  Then there are the character names...  In
addition to Turgidson, Kong, Mandrake, Ripper, and Kissoff, there's
also a Colonel Bat Guano and a General Faceman.
     The genius of DR. STRANGELOVE is that it's possible to laugh--and
laugh hard--while still recognizing the intelligence and insight behind
the humor.  The film is always saying something, and a viewer would
have to be deaf and blind not to recognize the targets of the sarcasm.
In fact, I'd worry about anyone who takes this movie too seriously.
That, after all, isn't the kind of person DR. STRANGELOVE is aimed for;
it's the kind this film takes aim at.
Note:  The film's 1994 re-release is limited to a few major American 
cities.  The movie is, however, widely available on video and laserdisk. 
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DR. STRANGELOVE (director: Stanley Kubrick; writers: Stanley Kubrick/
Peter George/ Terry Southern, based on the novel Red Alert by Peter
George; cinematographer: Gilbert Taylor; cast: Peter Sellers (Group
Capt. Lionel Mandrake/President, Merkin Muffley/Dr. Strangelove), George
C. Scott (General "Buck" Turgidson), Slim Pickens (Major T. J. "King"
Kong), Sterling Hayden (General Jack D. Ripper), Peter Bull (Ambassador
de Sadesky), Keenan Wynn (Colonel "Bat" Guano), James Earl Jones
(Lieutenant Lothar Zogg), UK-1964)
This provocative black comedy/fantasy regarding doomsday and Cold War
politics, features a planned nuclear attack by a psychotic commander of
a nuclear base, General Jack D. Ripper (Sterling), who blames the
Commies for messing up the water with fluoride and trying to ruin our
body fluids.The film takes place in the 60s, after the showdown with the
Russians over the "Bay of Pigs failure." President Johnson, as the new
leader, is not in a position to take any threat from the Russians
lightly. The country itself was a bit paranoid during this tense period
of the Cold War. As technology used in the wrong way was no laughing
matter, a nuclear war was a strong possibility. That this film is able
to exploit that craziness of attitudes prevailing and make a stinging
satirical comedy out of it, a film that is not passé, even as of today,
in 1999, after 35 years, speaks volumes for its satirical power.
Dr. Strangelove is noted for Peter Sellers' masterful performances in
three distinct roles: Dr. Strangelove (an eccentric scientist), Mr.
Merkin Muffley (President of the US), and Group Captain Lionel Mandrake
(a stereotype of a British officer with a stiff upper lip).
The film ominously opens as the narrator in a voice-over tells about a
top-secret Doomsday Machine which could reduce the world to nothingness,
as we look over a trail of dense cloud cover and Rocky mountain peaks in
the distance, with the Earth uninhabitated by humans.
The nature of the film is irreverence for those who are involved in
building up this nuclear conflict. Kubrick is cleverly able to connect
the sexual obsessions the male caricutures have with the Cold War, which
is clearly indicated by the names he gave them: Jack D. Ripper (a
notorious English sexual serial killer), Mandrake (a plant root said to
encourage fertility), George C. Scott as Buck Turgidson (a male stud),
Merkin (slang for female pubic area), Muffley (a pubic hair wig), Keenan
Wynn as Colonel Guano (meaning bat excrement), the name used for the
unseen Russian President, Kissof ( literally- 'start of disaster'),
Peter Bull as the Russian Ambassador de Sadeski (named after the Marquis
de Sade), and Slim Pickens, the nuclear flight commander, "King" Kong
(signifying a beast with a destructive lust).
The film cuts back and forth from three main set locations (the office
of the bomb group commander of Air Force command base, the
claustrophobic flight deck interior of the B-52 bomber, and the
Pentagon's War Room). Each area is a rich source for uncontrollable
mirth and confusion, as the actors play their roles with mock
seriousness, seemingly trapped by their physical surroundings and by
their cartoon-like roles they are playing.
Group Captain Mandrake (Peter Sellers) receives a phone call from his
supervisor, Strategic Air Command General Jack D. Ripper, who sits at
his desk in a dark room, chomping on a large cigar.The obsessively
paranoid, crazed, right-wing commander informs Mandrake of  a
"shooting war": As the base is sealed according to Condition Red and all
radios are impounded because they can be used to issue instructions to
saboteurs. Ripper is beyond being dissuaded from going over-the-top, as
he does not respond to Mandrake's attempts at stopping him from
following through on the nuclear attack.
In the B-52 bomber, the crew is busy doing their routines, with Major
Kong gaping at the centerfold of Playboy Magazine, when his radio man
tells him about the Red Alert. At first, he thinks the men are horsing
around, but when convinced this is for real, we see the Texan don his
ten gallon cowboy hat and open up the instruction manual for such an
emergency and literally take us through the necessary steps to get their
mission on the way, while the music in the background strikes up, 'When
Johnny Comes Marching Home.' Over the intercom, he delivers in his heavy
Texas drawl a patriotic speech to his men - a parody of what a real
American might be thinking.
The Pentagon's huge underground War Room, a cavernous site with a round
conference table, is the third central focus of the film. Lights
illuminate the room from
above in a circle, casting a glow over the 'Adlai Stevenson-like'
President, Merkin Muffley and his advisors who sit at the round table.
At the far end of the room is the Big Board - a massive graphic display
strategic map lit to indicate the progress of the bomber wing planes to
their Russian targets.
The President is briefed by his hawkish Air Force General Buck Turgidson
of the orders issued by General Jack Ripper to the 34 B-52's engaged in
an airborne exercise dubbed "Operation Dropkick." The planes are now
fully armed with nuclear weapons and are on their way to hit their
designated targets in Russia.
Kubrick leaves us with a score of memorable scenes: when the President
talks to his Russian counterpart and they each try to decide who is
sorrier about what is happening, to Major Kong descending atop the bomb
when the bomb-release mechanism fails to function, and to Colonel Guano
shooting the sacred private property Coca-Cola machine to get change for
Mandrake, who is trying to save the world by getting some small change
to call the White House on a public pay phone. But none is more
memorable than seeing President Muffley consult with a wheelchair-bound
German nuclear scientist (an ex-Nazi who changed his name from
Merkwuerdigich-liebe, literally meaning "strange-love," when he became a
citizen). Wearing thick dark sunglasses, Dr. Strangelove, director of
weapons research and development, also has a black-gloved mechanical,
robotic hand which shakily holds his cigarette, as he whines with a
German accent: After making calculations with a slide ruler with his
black-gloved robotic hand, which he can't stop from raising in salute to
his Fuehrer, he tells the President that certain select elite people
could survive a nuclear attack for a 100 years by living underground.
Strangelove's future vision of "strange love" is a love-less, impersonal
sexual one, in a world in which everyone can "Stop Worrying and Love the
Bomb." A theme of inhumanity Kubrick kept intact throughout his film
career, even in his last film, Eyes Wide Shut...This is one of the
greatest political satires, if not the greatest ever made. A not to be
missed film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Kevin Patterson
Dr. Strangelove, Or: How I Learned To Stop Worrying And Love The Bomb  * * * *
(out of four)
NR, 1963
Directed by Stanley Kubrick. Written by Stanley Kubrick, Peter George, and
Terry Southern.
Starring Peter Sellers, George C. Scott, Sterling Hayden, Slim Pickens. 
Well, I have to hand it to Stanley Kubrick: I never realized that nuclear war
could be so funny. His 1963 classic "Dr. Strangelove" is not only a pointed
satire of the Cold War but a hilariously entertaining black comedy as well.The
political implications of the film were scary back then, and are perhaps even
scarier today, when small-scale terrorist organizations have the chance to get
their hands on nuclear materials. But the way in which the nuclear disaster
unfolds is so comically bizarre that you can't help but laugh at the absurd
irony of the situation. 
The story, in a nutshell, is this: General Jack Ripper (Sterling Hayden) goes
insane and, convinced of a Communist conspiracy to pollute the American water
supply, invokes an obscure rule of protocol that essentially allows him to
order a full-scale nuclear attack on the Soviet Union and cuts off all
communication with the U.S. government. The bewildered President Merkin
Muffley (Peter Sellers) and his advisors are then left to try to obtain the
essential recall codes to call back the pilots, an objective made all the more
necessary by the revelation that the Soviets now possess a Doomsday Machine
which will set off enough nuclear warheads to wipe out the human race if their
country is hit by a single missile. 
As is often the case with stories revolving around political/military
intrigue, "Dr. Strangelove" alternates between several different settings and
groups of characters: the President, his advisors, and the Russian diplomats
in the War Room; Ripper and his second-in-command, Captain Lionel Mandrake
(Sellers again), at the army base as U.S. Army soldiers invade the base in
search of the recall codes; and a fighter plane piloted by a goofy commander
(Slim Pickens) who is determined to bomb something if it's the last thing he
ever does (literally). 
What makes "Dr. Strangelove" so much better than the typical political
thriller, however, is the way in which the humor reinforces rather than
undercuts the film's political commentary. The politicians, for example,
resemble a bunch of ineffectual quibbling socialites more than anything else.
President Muffley calls Soviet Premier Kissoff (who happens to be drunk),
explaining that General Ripper "went and did a very funny thing," then learns
about the Doomsday Machine, which Kissoff planned to announce the following
Monday ("He likes surprises," explains the Russian ambassador). No sooner does
he get off the phone to see the Russian ambassador about to get in a scuffle
with General Buck Turgidson (George C. Scott); he is, of course, outraged at
this scandalous behavior - "Gentlemen, you can't fight in here, this is the
War Room!" 
The Americans eventually manage to call back most of the attacking planes,
setting up the classic comedy-of-errors ending. No longer is the outcome
hinging on the efforts of the American soldiers to obtain the codes from
Ripper, or on those of the Soviet Air Force to intercept the American planes,
but on ridiculously trivial coincidences. Mandrake, for example, only manages
to relay the recall codes to the President after persuading Col. Bat Guano
(who is convinced that Mandrake is a dangerous "pre-vert") to shoot the lock
off of a soda machine in order to get some change to make a collect telephone
call ("That's private property!" Guano protests at first). In the end, the
battle boils down to whether or not Pickens, unaware that a recall order has
been issued, can manually open the malfunctioning bomb-bay doors so as to drop
the fatal nuclear missile on the Soviet mainland. 
These absurdities are strangely appropriate for the film's satirical content.
Somehow, it's scarier to imagine that the annihilation of the human race might
hinge on an insane general hell-bent on counteracting Communist "fluoridation"
of the water supply or on one pilot's struggle to get a door open than it is
to consider any of the more conventional scenarios by which a nuclear war
might start. Perhaps the greatest irony is that the Doomsday Machine, designed
as the ultimate anti-nuclear defense (because no one would dare launch a
nuclear attack and thus set it off), ends up causing destruction many times
worse than the calamity it was meant to prevent. 
"Dr. Strangelove," then, offers just as many sobering observations about human
nature and society as some of Kubrick's other films (such as "A Clockwork
Orange" and "Full Metal Jacket"), but it also has quite a bit of fun in doing
so. Pointedly observant, mischievously entertaining, and all-around brilliant,
this one is a true classic.
Visit my Film Reviews Page at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Chad Polenz
Dr. Strangelove, Or: How I Learned To Stop Worrying And Love The Bomb
*** (out of 4 = good)
1964, not rated, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
[satire]
starring: Peter Sellers (President Merkin Muffley, Captain Lionel Mandrake,
Dr. Strangelove), George C. Scott (General Buck Turgidson), Sterling Hayden
(General Jack D. Ripper) Slim Pickens (Major T.J. "King" Kong), written by
Stanley Kubrick, Terry Southern, Peter George, produced and directed by
Stanley Kubrick, based on the novel "Red Alert" by Peter George.
"Dr. Strangelove" probably holds the record for the longest and strangest
title in movie history, and in a way it's symbolic of the contents. This is a
story of the end of the world, but a funny and thematic one at that.
The plot is a bit difficult to follow at first, but it is full of subtle
themes and moods. Sterling Hayden co-stars as General Jack D. Ripper (wonder
if that name is symbolic?), who has gone insane and ordered a nuclear attack
against Russia. Peter Sellers plays three supporting roles, one is that of
Captain Lionel Mandrake, a British military officer working with Ripper.
When he tries to talk Ripper out of his insane actions, it has such a
satirical, almost cartoony affect, it's funny but a little scary considering
how serious the mood is.
George C. Scott also co-stars as General Buck Turgidson, who is quite a
character to behold. We first meet him when his secretary (and girlfriend)
relays a phone conversation between him and an admiral while he is in on the
toilet! This isn't hysterically funny, but it's just the thought of the
situation that is humorous.
Other sequences like this crop up throughout the film, such as Turgidson
being called by his girlfriend in the Pentagon War Room to discuss their
relationship; the funny phone conversation that ensues between President
Muffley (Sellers) and the premier of Russia in which Muffley nonchalantly
says they are about to start a nuclear war accidentally; and of course Dr.
Strangelove (Sellers), the mad scientist.
The film does have a suspenseful aspect to it, as we wonder if the Air Force
troupe we have been following since the beginning will carry out their orders
since they don't know what is going on. This bunch is led by the eccentric
Major T.J. "King" Kong (Pickens), who seems more like Elmer Fudd or Yosemite
Sam than any kind of military leader. In fact, by the end of the film Kong
rides a nuclear bomb like a bucking bronco - how off the wall is that?
"Dr. Strangelove" will go down in history as the best satire of the Cold
War. Its strong point isn't the humor, but the theme, which comes across very
clearly of the defining mood. Who else but Stanley Kubrick could make nuclear
Armageddon so lighthearted?
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
John Beachem
CAST
Peter Sellers - President Muffley/Captain Lionel Mandrake/Dr. Strangelove
George C. Scott - General `Buck' Turgidson
Sterling Hayden - General Jack D. Ripper
Keenan Wynn - Colonel `Bat' Guano
Slim Pickens - Major T. J. `King' Kong
In honor of the late, great George C. Scott, I've decided to review a film
which is, quite frankly, one of the funniest ever made. The cliched old phrase
`They don't make um like they used to' has never been more appropriate than it
is here.
President Muffley has a problem. One of his generals, Jack D. Ripper, has gone
insane and ordered bombers to nuke the Soviet Union. The biggest problem with
this, is that the Soviets have constructed a weapon which shall destroy the
world if they should be attacked. So, the president and his military staff sit
in the war
room and try to think of a way to alert the bombers to cease their attack.
Meanwhile, General Ripper defends his base from U.S. troops while explaining
his actions to his second in command, Captain Mandrake. Problems continue to
escalate and finally the fate of the world is in the hands of Major Kong, one
of the bomber captains.
Kubrick may have been a rather erratic director, creating a string of hits
(2001: A Space Odyssey), and misses (Lolita) seemingly at random. However, he
was right on the mark with this creation,which is such a magnificent blend of
slapstick comedy, witty dialogue, and an amazingly humour look at paranoia. 
Peter Sellers is brilliant, as always, playing three very different characters.
President Muffley look constantly hassled by the problems and people he has to
face (his phone conversation with the Soviet premier is one of the funniest
moments in movie history). Captain Mandrake is perhaps the only truly normal
character in the entire film, but this simply makes him that much funnier. Dr.
Strangelove, the crippled genius, is an absolute riot as he seems unable to
control his movements at times.
George C. Scott plays General Turgidson in a way similar to his later portrayal
of General Patton, but in a much more maniacal way. The scenes with him are
always hilarious due to his overzealous behavior and strangely psychotic facial
expressions (such as the scene where he's explaining why the Russian ambassador
shouldn't be alowed in the war room). 
The biggest problem I think this movie has nowadays is that the humor seems to
be over the heads of a lot of people (not hard to believe considering how much
today's audiences loved the ghastly Austin Powers). In fact, the only flaw I
can think of is that the film does end quite suddenly (though in a very funny
way),
though I suppose one simply doesn't want it to end at all. I give Dr.
Strangelove a full five stars and recommend everyone go see it right now.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Author
Brian Koller
Dr. Strangelove, or How I Learned to Stop
Worrying and Love the Bomb (1963)
One of the best films ever made, "Dr. Strangelove"
is a black comedy about a pending nuclear war.
You can argue that George C. Scott's rabid general
is too over the top, as is Dr. Strangelove's
misbehaving robotic arm, but other than those
minor complaints, the film is virtually perfect.
General Jack D. Ripper (Sterling Hayden) suddenly
becomes insane and orders his bomber wing to
drop nuclear bombs in Russia, much to the
consternation of polite staffer Lionel Mandrake
(Peter Sellers).  As the bombers approach their
targets, President Merkin Muffley (Peter Sellers)
holds an emergency meeting in the War Room.
Also there is warmonger Gen. Buck Turgidson (Scott),
the Russian ambassador (Peter Bull), and twisted
ex-Nazi Dr. Strangelove (Peter Sellers).
Muffley manages to stop all the bombers except
one, led by redneck Slim Pickens.  James Earl Jones,
in an early role, is part of the flight crew.
"Dr. Strangelove" was produced and directed by
Stanley Kubrick, who also co-wrote the screenplay
with Peter George and Terry Southern.  The script
is hilarious throughout.  Hayden's mad ramblings
about "precious bodily fluids", Muffley's exhortation
"Gentlemen, you can't fight in here. This is the
War Room", Picken's jingoistic pep talk to his crew,
Muffley's phone conversations with a drunken Soviet
premier, Dr. Strangelove's wild schemes of mine shaft
harems, Keenan Wynn's warning "You'll have to answer
to the Coca-Cola company", the omnipresent signs
on the Army Base that read "Peace is Our Mission",
are only the highlights.
Sellers plays three roles.  He attempted Picken's
role as well, but proved unable to adopt a convincing
Texas accent.  Many of Seller's lines were improvised.
Sellers really was a comic genius, and was used by
Kubrick in his previous film, the black comedy "Lolita".
"Dr. Strangelove" received four major Oscar nominations:
Best Actor (Sellers), Best Adapted Screenplay, Best
Director and Best Picture.  But this was the year of
"My Fair Lady", which swept most of the major awards.
The Academy Award's favoritism towards colorful
big-budget musicals (e.g. "Gigi", "The Sound of Music",
"West Side Story") was never more evident.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Jerry Saravia
As cynical satires go, there is nothing as audacious, thought-provoking and 
scary as "Dr. Strangelove," Stanley Kubrick's superb film on what if the 
United States and Russia were involved in an accidental nuclear attack, and 
what if it was the fault of the U.S.
The unstable, loony General Jack D. Ripper (played by the commanding, 
towering presence of Sterling Hayden) is the C.O. of the Burlepson Air Force 
Base who has access to the code that can send an SAC (Strategic Air Command) 
wing on its way to bomb Russia. The general initiates the order to bomb 
Russia, but the irony is that no immediate war is taking place and Russia has 
no intention of bombing the U.S., though they have every intention to 
counterattack with their prodigious Doomsday Machine. This is cause for 
concern at the Pentagon where the President of the U.S. (Peter Sellers) has a 
meeting in the War Room trying to pinpoint why this unplanned attack was 
initiated. The President is joined by an ex-Nazi strategic adviser, Dr. 
Strangelove (again played brilliantly by Peter Sellers), and the stubborn 
General Buck Turgidson (George C. Scott), the head of the Joint Chief of 
Staff, among other officials. General Buck sees no harm in destroying the 
Commies and risking the lives of innocent people whereas Dr. St
rangelove sees a future where mine shafts will have to be utilized to 
accomodate the population before being affected by radiation ("Ten women to 
every man.") In the meantime, the President calmly explains to the Soviet 
Premier that it all boils down to a crazy man who went and "did a funny 
thing."  
"Dr. Strangelove" was released back in 1964 at the height of the Cuban 
Missile Crisis when nuclear missiles were a worlwide threat - a "Fail-Safe" 
error could possibly happen and there is nothing in the film that exaggerates 
that possibility. That is why it was so controversial - the satire in it bit 
everyone loud and clear. In fact, outside of 1983's "Testament," "Dr. 
Strangelove" is one example of what can go wrong in a nuclear crisis and why 
all nuclear weapons should be disarmed. We may be at peace with Russia now 
but back then, the potential for such a disaster was a strong reality (in a 
sense, it could happen today since nuclear weapons still exist).    
The suspense builds and becomes wire-tight in the hands of director Kubrick, 
who helmed the similarly chaotic, suspenseful "The Killing" - both films 
dependent on time as a factor in a crisis. Here, it becomes a chaos for the 
audience since the attack is inevitable unless the code is revealed to recall 
the several nuclear-armed planes. One of them is led by the B-52 pilot, Major 
"King" Kong (Slim Pickens), who reminds his crew that medals and promotions 
will be handed out when all is said and done. Naturally, Kong has his 
reservations about the deliberate attack, but his questioning it is reserved 
in favor of his patriotic duty, even if it means to literally ride on one of 
those bombs himself. 
General Ripper, however, has no intention of revealing the code, especially 
to the British military attache (also played by Sellers), and they have a 
couple of humorous scenes together where Ripper explains that distilled water 
and preservation of bodily fluids is essential in the face of the Russians 
who want to control everything. 
"Dr. Strangelove" is an anti-war, anti-nuclear weapons statement done with 
biting humor and bitter irony, but it is more effective than Sidney Lumet's 
serious "Fail-Safe" because it takes such a no-holds-barred approach with its 
satirical pull. As Kubrick said while writing the film with Terry Southern 
("Candy"), "the things you laugh at most are really the heart of the 
paradoxical postures that make a nuclear war possible." From its phallic 
symbols of B-52 planes to the sexual connotations of Ripper's philosophies 
and General Buck's relationship with his secretary ("Of course, it is not 
just physical") to the hysteria and absurdity in the War Room (a memorable 
set piece), "Dr. Strangelove" pokes fun but remains scarily real - the threat 
and the inevitable doom of nuclear fallout is felt from first frame to last. 
Like Kubrick's  "A Clockwork Orange," you are left unsure whether to laugh or 
to take it seriously. But when you hear Vera Lynn's "We'll Meet Again," you 
can feel Kubrick's pathos of a world at war 
with itself.  
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
