Title
Review for Coming to Light: Edward S. Curtis and the North American Indians (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
COMING TO LIGHT: EDWARD S. CURTIS AND THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS
Voices of Sheila Tousey, Bill Pullman
     The culture and history of the North American Indian were passed 
down orally from generation to generation.  When the Europeans came and 
subjugated the indigenous peoples of this continent, they did their best 
to eradicate the native traditions.  They did it by slaughter, and they 
did it by enforced reeducation, sending Indian children to regimented 
schools to learn the white man's religions and ways, and punishing them 
for speaking their own languages.  Native Americans were herded onto 
reservations, and their wardens did their best to stamp out the 
traditional dances and ceremonies.  By the turn of the century, it was 
clear to anybody who cared to look that the Indian ways were headed for 
extinction, and that they would largely vanish without a trace.
     One who cared to look was Edward S. Curtis, a society studio 
photographer from Seattle who developed a passionate interest in this 
doomed culture.  He spent thirty years documenting the Indians of North 
America, with photographs, motion pictures, and sound recordings.  He 
produced a stunning series of  20 volumes of photographs and text 
covering the native tribes.  He spent all his own money and some of J.P. 
Morgan's, impaired his health and destroyed his marriage.  For his 
pains, his work was soon forgotten, his collection of prints and plates 
sold in bulk to a Boston second-hand bookseller, where they lay 
collecting dust in a basement for decades until they were discovered by 
a clerk in the early '70s, and the Curtis revival commenced.
     Anne Makepeace's engrossing documentary traces Curtis's career and 
shows his work, and asks contemporary Native Americans to comment on the 
Curtis oeuvre.  There are some who resent it, who feel that the old 
photographs serve to arrest spirits that otherwise would have moved on.  
More, though, appreciate the magnificent photographs, and treasure the 
historical record and the link it provides with an Indian past that 
would otherwise be lost.  Some recognize relatives, or themselves, or 
have even used the Curtis photographs to reconstruct traditional dances 
that haven't been performed in half a century or more.
     In the 1920s Curtis visited Alaska's Nunivak Island, an Indian 
community as yet undiscovered by Christian missionaries and white 
settlers.  He was struck by the idyllic sense of well-being and joy 
among the inhabitants, and it shows in the pictures he took.  Within a 
decade Swedish missionaries had arrived, and pulled the plug on this 
Eden. 
