Title
Review for Star Maps (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 7/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:28
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, nudity, profanity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Douglas Spain, Efrain Figueroa, Kandeyce Jorden, Martha Velez, 
      Lysa Flores, Annette Murphy, Vincent Chandler 
Director: Miguel Arteta
Producer: Matthew Greenfield
Screenplay: Miguel Arteta based on story by Arteta and Matthew 
      Greenfield
Cinematography: Chuy Chavez
Music: Lysa Flores
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     STAR MAPS contains a number of potentially-rich themes:  the ease 
with which the American dream can turn into the American nightmare, the 
difficulty experienced by immigrants assimilating into the American 
culture, and the pain and self-loathing created by living as a member of 
a dysfunctional family.  Unfortunately, perhaps because first time 
writer/director Miguel Arteta is attempting to tackle too many issues, 
or because he doesn't have a good feel for anything below the surface, 
much of this movie comes across as shallow and melodramatic.  It also 
doesn't help that the lead actor, Douglas Spain, appears to have been 
chosen more because he possesses a particular "look" than for his 
ability to act.  Spain's stiff and unconvincing performance does little 
to draw us into his character's life and bring us face-to-face with his 
many dilemmas.
     While I can't think of another film that covers all of the ground 
traversed by STAR MAPS, the film frequently ventures into territory that 
was examined more effectively by such diverse offerings as MY FAMILY, 
ONCE WERE WARRIORS, and JOHNS.  As a result, watching STAR MAPS is 
likely to generate a sense of deja vu.  Someone once said that all 
movies are basically copies of others, and, while it doesn't always seem 
that way, in this case it does.
     The film takes its title from the profession chosen by the 
protagonist, a teenager named Carlos (Spain), who has made the bus trip 
from Mexico to Los Angeles in pursuit of his dream to become a star (the 
next Antonio Banderas).  Carlos lives with his family -- brother, 
Juancita (Vincent Chandler); sister, Maria (Lysa Flores); mother, Teresa 
(Martha Velez); and father, Pepe (Efrain Figueroa) -- and works on the 
streets of Hollywood, selling "Star Maps" (a cover for prostitution).  
His pimp is his father, who does everything he can to crush Carlos' 
dream, while continually asserting that he loves his son.  Pepe lives a 
life of lies, and it's rare that he tells anyone the truth -- not his 
wife, his children, or his mistress, Letti (Annette Murphy), whom he 
keeps on a string with promises of an eventual marriage.  
     One day, Carlos finally gets a big break.  An actress (Kandeyce 
Jorden) who purchased his services is smitten and wants to make him her 
regular toy boy.  In return for his favors, she promises him a speaking 
part in her regular television series, CARMEL COUNTY, which is produced 
by her husband.  Pepe isn't pleased by this turn of events, and, 
worrying that he might lose his son to the screen, he sets out to 
sabotage the arrangement.  Meanwhile, the situation at Pepe's home grows 
increasingly less stable.
     There's enough material in STAR MAPS to keep a soap opera going for 
several weeks, if not months.  The characters are all drawn broadly, and 
the direction lacks subtlety (the moment we see a bottle of pills being 
hidden behind some cans, we know it's going to be important later in the 
film).  There are a pair of interesting personalities here -- Carlos' 
sister, Maria, and Pepe's mistress, Letti -- but neither is accorded 
enough screen time to do more than briefly arrest our attention.  
     For the most part, the acting is amateurish, which is 
disappointing, although not surprising, considering the film's low 
budget.  This is probably a case of a director enlisting the help of 
friends and associates, not all of whom display a great deal of talent 
(only Martha Velez has any significant feature credits to her name).  
But, while the movie lacks strong performances, its greatest weakness is 
the writing.  In trying to original, Arteta inserts several offbeat 
comic sequences (Carlos accepting an Oscar after an award-winning 
performance in bed, a bizarre dinner conversation) that, while funny as 
stand-alone pieces, clash violently with the overriding tone.  The 
ending is also problematic.  While it's supposed to be ambiguous, it's 
actually frustrating, leaving all sorts of loose ends dangling.
     Despite all of its flaws, however, STAR MAPS still has a soap 
opera-type appeal.  It's not the kind of movie many people will walk out 
on, because, even considering its lack of depth, it retains the ability 
to hook a viewer into wondering what happens next.  There's enough sex, 
violence, and boiling-point emotion to capture the attention of even the 
most easily-distracted viewer.  Ultimately, however, STAR MAPS doesn't 
amount to much more than several ideas that are never effectively 
translated into anything more potent than sudsy drivel. 
The website is moving!!
ReelViews web site through 8/31: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
ReelViews web site beginning 9/1: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Scott Renshaw
STAR MAPS
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Douglas Spain, Efrain Figueroa, Kandeyce Jorden, Martha Velez,
Lysa Flores, Annette Murphy, Vincent Chandler, Al Vicente.
Screenplay:  Miguel Arteta.
Producer:  Matthew Greenfield.
Director:  Miguel Arteta.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, nudity, adult themes, sexual situations,
violence)
Running Time:  85 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Good intentions can make up for a lot, but they can't make up for
STAR MAPS.  Writer/director Miguel Arteta's debut feature concerns a Los
Angeles family as thoroughly dysfunctional as you'll find anywhere, which
is saying a lot for L.A.  Patriarch Pepe (Efrain Figueroa) pimps for young
boys whose street-corner sales of maps to the stars' homes is a front for
selling themselves to kinky Hollywood hot shots; Pepe's 18-year-old son
Carlos, recently returned from two years in Mexico with dreams of becoming
an actor, offers to work for his father as a chance to meet some
well-connected people.  Meanwhile, Carlos' mother Teresa (Martha Velez) is
recovering from a breakdown while seeing visions of the late Mexican
comedian Cantinflas, sister Maria (Lysa Flores) puts her own life on hold
to care for Mama, and brother Juancito (Vincent Chandler) sits mutely
watching television when he's not dressed up like a professional wrestler.
     The fact that this family is Mexican-American should be incidental,
but it's likely that the ethnic angle (along with the "controversial"
material) is all that snared STAR MAPS a distribution deal.  It's clear
that Arteta wanted to say something about the dark side of Hollywood,
about self-delusion for one's dreams, about the ways people use each
other, and about the struggle to find some normalcy in the middle of a
chaotic life.  He simply says them all at the same time, creating a
cacophany of heavy issues colliding with one another.  Every once in a
while, moments of humanity creep unexpectedly into Arteta's story.  Too
often, the impact of those moments is blunted by lack of direction.
     And "lack of direction" applies in both senses of the term.  Even
more than by its rambling script, STAR MAPS is thwarted by Arteta's
inability to put together a remotely professional production.  His
performers, it can be said charitably, read their lines in comprehensible
English sentences; his copious use of slow-motion, flashbacks and low-tech
visual tricks can't camouflage a basic technical clumsiness.  Somewhere in
STAR MAPS are a few interesting ideas, but Arteta forces viewers to wade
through a swamp of muddled exposition and amateurish film-making, then
doesn't offer them a map to get out again.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Miguel Arteta.
Cast: Douglas Spain, Efrain Figueroa, Lysa Flores, Kandeyce Jorden, 
Martha Velez, Annette Murphy, Robin Thomas, Vincent Chandler, Al 
Vicente.
1997 - 90 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, nudity, and sex).
Reviewed November 8, 1998.
"Star Maps," an independent film that premiered at the Sundance Film 
Festival in 1997, is a decidedly weak drama that simply isn't tightly 
enough written or plotted to be satisfying, despite some notable 
performances.
Carlos (Douglas Spain), a young man in his late teens, returns to his 
Latino family's home in Hollywood and immediately is hired by his 
troublesome father, Pepe (Efrain Figueroa), to sell star maps, which 
point the way to the homes of celebrities, even though it actually is 
secretly a prostitution job. Carlos goes along with it, despite the 
warning of his caring older sister, Maria (Lysa Flores), and ill mother 
(Matha Velez), because what he really wants to do is become an actor, 
which his father assures him his job will eventually lead to. When one 
of Carlos' customers, Jennifer (Kandeyce Jorden), an actress on a soap 
opera, tells him she will get him a gig on her show, Carlos begins to 
think everything is turning up for him, but his father has different 
plans for him.
"Star Maps" is a technically well-made film, but one that is overstuffed 
with subplots, and not particularly successful when dealing with its 
characters. Aside from the central story, we've also got subplots 
involving Pepe and his own girlfriend (Annette Murphy); Maria's 
relationship with a kind-hearted pharmacist (Vincent Chandler); Carlos' 
mother, who is suffering from a nervous breakdown; and a lot of 
goings-ons involving the soap opera. Director Miguel Arteta might very 
well be a fine director, but in his film debut, he seems to have taken 
all of his ideas and mixed them up together into a 90-minute film. 
Because of this, there is not nearly enough time with any of the 
stories, and it eventually comes off feeling empty.
Flores, as Carlos' sister, gives a strong and poignant performance as a 
young woman who longs for a relationship but does not want to leave her 
ailing mother. And Jorden is also fetching as the actress who may be 
Carlos' answer to fame. I believe it is Jorden's acting abilities, not 
the screenplay, that makes her character feel wholly three-dimensional. 
Murphy is also memorable as Carlos' father's girlfriend, who is 
unknowing of how much of a liar Pepe actually is. All of the 
performances are quite good, but all of their individual stories would 
have fared better if each one had been made into a separate film, since 
they are all interesting people.
If there is one plotline that doesn't work, it is, unfortunately, the 
central one. Although the premise of people selling star maps, and 
themselves as prostitutes, is captivating enough, not enough is done 
with it, and so it feels like a missed opportunity, and just a gimmick 
to hang all of the other stories on it.
There is a lot that's good in, "Star Maps," and yet, it is clear after 
seeing it that it desperately needed another rewrite. Ultimately, the 
film plays like a rough draft in search of a final one.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
