Title
Review for Four Musketeers, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
While Director Richard Lester was filming "The
Three Musketeers", he realized that he had too
much footage for one film.  What to do?  Break
the story into two films, and release them
one year apart.
While technically a sequel, "The Four Musketeers"
is really the second half of "The Three Musketeers".
A brief narration to "The Four Musketeers"
attempts to explain the characters and their
motives, but someone who has not recently
seen "The Three Musketeers" is certain to become
confused.  It doesn't help that at the end
of "The Four Musketeers", there are scenes
excerpted from "The Three Musketeers".
An additional problem, from a box office
standpoint, is the ending.  Action comedies
are expected to have a happy ending, but
"The Four Musketeers" ends decidedly downbeat.
Also, Racquel Welch, arguably the film's biggest
draw, has a much smaller role than in the first
film.
With these points in mind, it is no surprise
that the sequel did not fare as well with critics
or at the box office as "The Three Musketeers".
But in fact, the films are of roughly equal
quality, which is to be expected.
"The Four Musketeers", like its prequel, has
excellent sets and costumes, and a very good
cast.  Michael York stars as D'Artagnan, and
Rachel Welch is his love interest.  The villians
are scheming cardinal Charlton Heston and
murderous Faye Dunaway, while the musketeers
are played by moody Oliver Reed, sunny Richard
Chamberlain, and comical Frank Finlay.
As with the first film, the action scenes are
riddled with slapstick.  One swordfight takes
place on a frozen lake, with the combatants
stumbling and sliding.  York may be heroic,
but he is clumsy (and promiscuous) as well.
This is a big budget epic to be enjoyed, with
some suspense but little dramatic tension, at
least not until the surprisingly dark ending.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
