Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
Number of Reviews
51

Author
Matt Williams
Leave it to Hollywood to remake Lost in Space, a television show that
was itself a science fiction retelling of the Swiss Family Robinson.
The Lost in Space TV show had devolved into camp after its first season,
but though the movie remake takes itself a bit more seriously, it
doesn't give us much of a reason to.
Sixty years in the future, the Earth is running out of natural
resources. To save the population, one scientist, John Robinson (William
Hurt) has a plan. He has invented a hyperdrive, which can instantly link
two areas in space, provided each area has a jumpgate (a cosmic buoy in
space).  He has located the nearest habitable planet, Alpha Prime, and,
with the support of the world's united space organization, plans to
journey there to build a companion jumpgate to the one being constructed
in Earth's orbit.  Until both gates are complete, travel between Earth
and Alpha Prime is a time-consuming venture:  the travelers must spend
ten years in suspended animation.
As a condition of the trip, John Robinson's crew will be composed of his
family. His wife, Maureen (Mimi Rogers) is the ship's resident
biologist.  His eldest daughter, Judy (Heather Graham), is the ship's
doctor.  His two youngest kids, Penny (Lacey Chabert) and Will (Jack
Johnson) are given token assignments as well.  The only other person
accompanying the family on their trip is Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc),
who will pilot the Jupiter 2.
However, there is opposition to the plan back on Earth.  A radical
terrorist group, known as the Global Seditionists, have enlisted the aid
of Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman) to sabotage the mission.  He proceeds with
the sabotage, but things don't turn out as he expects.  Dr. Smith finds
himself an unwilling stowaway on their cosmic voyage, and the sabotaged
ship ends up lost in space.
The plot of the movie Lost in Space makes more sense than most of the
television episodes, but only slightly.  If you start to think about the
details too much, the entire plot collapses.  So, to cure that:  don't
think about the plot. Just sit back and enjoy the ride.
There are several annoying things about Lost in Space, and the most
irritating is Blarp, the Space Monkey.  He serves no purpose whatsoever
in the story except possibly as a merchandising tie-in.  He's evidently
supposed to be cute, since he has saucer eyes and he burps after eating,
but he doesn't blend with the tone of the rest of the movie.  And for
that matter, he doesn't blend much at all (despite his chameleonic
coloring)...he's obviously a special effect. He's about as seamlessly
integrated into the film as an animated cereal mascot. Coming from the
rigid world of stop motion, special effects creature animators have
terribly overcompensated in the world of CGI.  No realistic creature
constantly moves every point of his body at every second.  Someday
animators will find a happy medium, and the effects shots of Lost in
Space will look as dated as King Kong.
The characterizations in Lost in Space are adequate, although the
characters themselves are, for the most part, bland.  In an effort to
spice things up and bring the Robinson family into the '90s (or the
2050s, as the case may be), the whole family has been
dysfunctionalized.  John Robinson has become a distant workaholic father
who alienates his whole family.  Penny is now a helium-voiced rebel, and
Will is a misunderstood genius who only wants acknowledgment from his
dad.  Of all the cliched relationships aboard the wayward spaceship, the
developing romance between Don West and Judy Robinson, while still not
uncovering new ground, at least provides a humorous diversion.
Though not quite as sniveling as in the television series, the character
of Dr. Zachary Smith is still the most interesting.  Gary Oldman does a
good job, but hardly seems to be stretching his range here.  However,
the film does come up with an interesting solution to the conflicting
interests of killing off the villain and keeping him around for
potential sequels.
With its stock characters and a complex plot about as flimsy as a
spiderweb, this new Lost in Space is certainly not going to become a
classic.  It's sole asset is its eye candy.  If you just turn off your
brain and relax, it will help to pass the time.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Scott Renshaw
LOST IN SPACE (1998)
(New Line)
Starring:  Gary Oldman, William Hurt, Matt LeBlanc, Mimi Rogers, Heather
Graham, Lacey Chabert, Jack Johnson.
Screenplay:  Akiva Goldsman.
Producers:  Akiva Goldsman, Stephen Hopkins and Mark W. Koch.
Director:  Stephen Hopkins.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, violence, profanity)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
    Boy it seems like summer in the American movie business is starting
earlier all the time, doesn't it?  Time was you had to wait at least until
Memorial Day for the first sighting of a big-budget blockbuster.  Then
TWISTER crept into mid-May a couple of years ago, followed by THE FIFTH
ELEMENT's early May bow last year.  Now here comes LOST IN SPACE, pulling
out the big guns in April.  Yep, summer is coming earlier all the time.
And so is the holiday movie season for that matter.  Correct me if I'm
wrong, but isn't the new STAR TREK movie not due until November?
     I understand that in principle LOST IN SPACE is based on another
1960s science-fiction series entirely, the one with Robby the Robot and a
family named Robinson marooned in outer space.  In the big screen version,
set sixty years in the future, the Robinsons -- John (William Hurt),
Maureen (Mimi Rogers), Judy (Heather Graham), Penny (Lacey Chabert) and
Will (Jack Johnson) -- and their ace pilot Maj. Don West (Matt LeBlanc)
end up light years from home when the evil Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman)
sabotages their mission to colonize a distant planet.  The premise is
something straight out of the current TV "Trek" incarnation "Voyager," but
that's not the only place that Akiva Goldsman's script borders on "Trek"
parody.  "Anomalies" and "space-time rifts" appear with some regularity;
problems become something to be solved with a stream of techno-babble.
Even the extra-terrestrial sets have the vaguely cheesy Early Styrofoam
look of the original series.  By the time Dr. Smith grumbles in one scene
"I'm a doctor, not a space explorer," you may begin scanning the edges of
the frame for Paramount lawyers scurrying onto the set with 
cease-and-desist orders.
     Then again, "Star Trek" never got itself bogged down in the sort of
hand-wringing which passes for character development in LOST IN SPACE.
The television series turned the Swiss Family Robinson into the Space
Family Robinson; here, they're more like the Dysfunctional Family
Robinson.  When their spacecraft isn't being sucked into the sun or
attacked by relentless alien arachnids, the Robinson children pout over
the lack of attention paid to them by their work-obsessed father, while Ma
Robinson wonders "why we're trying to save the planet when we can't save
our own family."  Survival, it seems, becomes a secondary concern to using
the occasion for a big, forced group therapy session.  Combine the family
squabbles, the obligatory cameo by a member of the series cast (June
Lockhart as Will's principal), a villainous Global Sedition movement which
disappears after the first twenty minutes, pointless flirtations between
LeBlanc and Graham and an even-more-pointless friendly alien
monkey/chameleon/action figure-in-training character, and you've got one
heck of a loud and busy story from Goldsman (BATMAN & ROBIN), the Crown
Prince of Loud and Busy Stories.
     And one bitchin'-cool loud and busy story, at that.  LOST IN SPACE
may be silly and overwrought, but it sure looks great.  Creepy creatures,
spaceship dogfights, morphing, nifty costumes, well-crafted action
sequences -- I can't remember the last time I spent so much time impressed
by a film's bag of visual tricks.  There's even a modicum of decent acting
to season the spectacle, particularly from Oldman as the nasty villain and
LeBlanc as the thick-but-decent military man.  There may not be much to
recommend LOST IN SPACE as quality film-making beyond its technical
prowess, but that's probably more than enough to satisfy summer movie fans
until summer actually arrives.  Or to satisfy the "Star Trek" fans until
Thanksgiving actually arrives.

Author
Bill Chambers
LOST IN SPACE
** (out of four)
--by Bill Chambers (wchamber@netcom.ca)
(For more lame-ass reviews visit my scum-hearted website: FILM FREAK
CENTRAL! http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504 Lots to read, and
a special section called CAN'T MISS where you can tell me (and others)
what to see. Visit it, you damn filthy apes!)
starring Matt LeBlanc, Gary Oldman, William Hurt, Mimi Rogers
written by Akiva Goldsman
directed by Stephen Hopkins
Lost In Space is better entertainment than the TV series upon which it
is based; to say that is to damn the film to faint praise, for it
should eradicate all memory of that barely entertaining '60's
show. Unfortunately, like its predecessor, Lost In Space only knows
how to lose the Astro Family Robinson--once they're lost, it becomes a
concept in search of a story.
LeBlanc stars as Major Don West, an ace pilot ordered to fly the
Robinson family to a distant planet so that they may prepare said
planet for future colonization--Earth's destruction, due to a civil
war, seems inevitable, so humans will be relocated to habitable Alpha
Prime. (Why the war wouldn't then be relocated also is not a subject
broached.) Unfortunately, they are sidetracked by evil engineer
Dr. Smith (Oldman), who first intends to sabotage the 10-year mission
but is betrayed by his own men, and stuck on board as a result. With
part of Smith's plan already executed, the Robinsons are forced to
abort their journey to Alpha Prime, drive through the sun, and fend
for themselves against various encounters, some alien, some less so.
After a rousing opening battle sequence, some nifty special effects,
and the suspenseful sun trip, Lost In Space becomes lost itself. Lost
in awkward characterizations (you'd never know the irritating Lacey
Chabert, as Penny, was familiar with Mr. and Mrs. Robinson, let alone
their daughter); lost in lifted-from-Star Trek plot points (the
future- spoiling "time bubble" that is the climax has become stock
sci-fi material); lost in increasingly bad computer-generated images
(the Robinsons encounter a pointless, "cute" space monkey, which looks
as if it has wandered off the Toy Story set--worse, so badly
integrated, it looks Scotch-taped to the film). I wasn't expecting
brilliance from the un-ironically bad screenwriter Goldsman (Batman
and Robin), nor director Hopkins (Predator 2), so the fact that the
first half is actually good makes it all the more unnerving. The cast
mostly rises above the material, Chabert and LeBlanc excepted. LeBlanc
comes off like his Friends alter-ego--aspiring actor Joey--playing a
part for laughs in a big-budget movie. Gary Oldman and little Jack
Johnson are standouts; as Will (as in, "Danger, Will Robinson!"),
Johnson has a lot of charisma, and he's cute enough that they can lose
the space monkey.
Oh, if they had. If they had lost so many things instead of their
marbles...
Perhaps the sequel will be an improvement.
Bill Chambers; April, 1998; originally printed in "The NewS"

Author
Chad Polenz
starring: William Hurt (Prof. John Robinson), Matt Leblanc (Major Don
West), Gary Oldman (Dr. Smith), Heather Graham (Judy Robinson);
written by Akiva Goldsman; produced by Carla Fry, Akiva Goldsman,
Stephen Hopkins, Mark W.  Koch; directed by Stephen Hopkins; based on
the 1965 CBS television series.
Seen May 2, 1998 at 3:40 p.m. at the Crossgates Cinema 18, theater
#13, with Chris Wessell and Sean O'Shea for $5. [Theater rating:
***1/2: very good sound, picture, and seats]
        The big-budget, mega-hype "event" movie is becoming so trendy
now it is becoming a weekly routine instead of a seasonal
one. Gluttony is Hollywood's favorite sin, but it is the movie-goers
who pay the price by being dealt the same things over and over on an
ever-worsening basis. "Lost In Space" is the latest such offering - a
film so poor it would be twice as good if it were mediocre. It's made
up of every element of science fiction, but at no time does it evoke
the slightest amount of wonderment the genre was meant for.
        Audiences' attention spans are rapidly decreasing and as is
the trend with such films, this one opens with a fast-paced space
battle which serves not only as the most interesting scene in the film
(probably because it has "Star Wars" written all over it), but as the
producers' way of showing off their budget through the special
effects. Battle scenes are worthless without tension, and since we
have no idea what the setting is it's impossible to care about
anything that happens. In essence, the entire segment works like a
teaser for an arcade game, not a piece of filmmaking.
        We meet the Robinson family - a family of five that does not
get along but has been chosen to act on Earth's behalf in effort to
find another planet worthy of colonization due to the exhausting of
our natural resources. Each member of the family has a special trait
and personality, and yet none of them seem like actual
people. Professor John Robinson (Hurt) is the intelligent, quiet
leader who has devoted so much time to his work his family and
marriage are suffering without his realizing it (it's obvious what
role this aspect will play). Of course this is all established through
extremely melodramatic scenes such as the children and parents arguing
and bickering among themselves and with each other, while the
necessary problems are "resolved" at the right moments. The only thing
worse than the screenplay is the fact it's presented in a completely
serious manner without a trace of satire, and is so pathetic it's
laughable.
        The first act is not a building of a story, but a
juxtaposition of scenes that serve no purpose other than to plug in
all the required elements (such as plot, conflict, and
characterization - God forbid!). We're provided with the minimum
amount possible of these elements to keep the film from being
completely silent. In fact, it might as well be since the dialogue is
virtually non-existent. Yes, the characters do speak, but they do not
talk.  They say things that only relate to the conflict, but they
never really interact (unless it's the cartoony flirting scenes
between arrogant Major Don West (Leblanc) and uptight, unemotional
Judy Robinson (Graham)).
        It's amazing that after an hour of trite dialogue and generic
plot devices that so little happens. Eventually the pacing rapidly
increases, but the amount of genuine interest does not. The story
finally gains some prospective by living up to its title as the
Robinsons find themselves lost in space after narrowly managing to
defeat Dr. Smith (Oldman), the cartoony villain, and his plans for
sabotage.
        What ensues is a series upon series of completely unrelated
conflicts. The first such scene takes place on an abandoned spaceship
and what ensues could best be described as "Alien"-lite. The story
changes again when the Robinsons crash land on an alien planet and
must act quickly to escape it and survive.  But there's never any real
notion of suspense here because the script constantly wanders
aimlessly. Plotlines are developed, but each becomes totally
irrelevant as the story changes from scenario to scenario. The
atmosphere attempts to be surreal by incorporating time travel and
various time paradoxes, but it's presented in such a ridiculous way
it's utterly boring. By the time the last act rolls around, there is
no sense of a payoff building. The ending does not go out on a high
note with any kind of climax, instead, it seems to come to a sudden
halt (but at least it ends at all).
        "Lost In Space" is major film production at its worst. It's
frightening that a film so poorly written, directed, and acted might
be considered mainstream entertainment.


Author
R. L. Strong
New Line Cinema Presents A Prelude Pictures Production in association
with Irwin Allen Productions  A Stephen Hopkins film   Gary Oldman
William Hurt  "LOST IN SPACE" Matt LeBlanc  Mimi Rogers   Heather
Graham   Lacey Chabert   Jack Johnson  Jared Harris     Music by Bruce
Broughton    Animatronic Creatures by Jim Henson's Creature Shop
Edited by Ray Lovejoy     Production Design by Norman Garwood
Director of Photography Peter Levy, A.C.E.   Co-Executive Producer
Michael Ilitch, Executive Producers: Mace Neufeld  Bob Rehme  Richard
Saperstein, Michael De Luca JR   Produced by: Akiva Goldsman, Stephen
Hopkins, Mark W. Koch & Carla Fry   Screenplay by Akiva Goldsman
Directed by Stephen Hopkins
Running Time: 130 minutes  Rated PG-13 for scenes of violence and
offensive language
    First off, let me state categorically, that I was never a fan of the
original TV series "Lost in Space" or it's Disney source "Swiss Family
Robinson". That being said, let me sum up this review in as few words as
possible... Tedious, Meandering, and worse of all, Boring.
    We are introduced to the plot with a spectacularly dizzying space
battle between Earth's forces defending their under-construction space
warp portal, from an unknown group of terrorists. Matt LaBlanc as Major
Don West commands one of the fighter ships and easily destroys the
attackers and rescues his best friend without so much as building a
sweat. The reasoning for this Space Warp Portal is for the eventual
evacuation of planet Earth for the greener pastures of another planet in
a far distant galaxy. It seems that Earth is on the verge of
environmental collapse and it's up to renowned scientist John Robinson
to journey to the distant planet to establish the construction of a
second Portal. This is explained in such a way that it sets up the drama
but also leaves a tremendous plot hole. John Robinson has decided to
take his entire family with him on this excursion to a distant world.
But on a ship as large as the Jupiter 2 you would expect a full crew of
technicians and mechanics and laborers to help facilitate this enormous
project. But no, only the Robinson family and their new pilot Don West
are set to be on board.
    Dr. Zachary Smith is in the employ of the terrorists intent on
destroying the space portal (for what purpose is never explained).
Having botched an earlier attempt, Smith is plied into sabotaging the
Jupiter 2's Robot, re-programming it to destroy the Jupiter 2 and kill
the Robinson family. Dr. Smith boards the ship without so much as a beep
from any security system (which is highly unlikely considering the
war-like atmosphere surrounding the project), and succeeds in doing his
dirty work. And just to make maters worse, his employer then calls him
on his holographic cell phone and zaps him into unconsciousness.
    Now of course the ship takes off in a blaze of pyrotechnics and CGI
effects. The Robot dutifully emerges from it's storage compartment
ominously repeating "Destroy the Robinson's.. Destroy.. Destroy". The
Robinson's having enclosed themselves in hyperbolic chambers for the 10
year journey to their new planet, are unaware that the Robot is
destroying their navigational system. Just in time, our hero's wake up
and stop the Robot before it can cause enough damage as to endanger the
franchise.
    I'm not going to give out anymore of the plot, as from here on the
film becomes very episodic. It is paced like a miniseries, with one
cliff-hanger coming every 15 minutes. The problem is, these cliffhangers
are not suspenseful. Scenes of attacking metallic spiders are almost
comical. One interesting bit of short sightedness on the part of the
production is that a reference is made that these spider creatures
devour their dead. But we never see this. So where this choice piece of
information comes from is anybody's guess. But it does make for a nice
solution towards the end of the film. And the introduction of a Computer
generated monkey like creature is used solely for the purpose of
marketing. You can see the plush toys lining the selves, as kids across
the country line up to own their very own Blaap (that's what it's
called, don't ask me why). This annoyingly cute beastie pops up when you
least expect it and for no purpose other that to remind the audience
that it's there!
    The film is loaded with every conceivable clichi. It's familial
drama revolves around John Robinson's emotional detachment from his son,
Will. Now of course, Will is a technical genius, (Cannon Films Alert!)
having build his own Time Machine for a school science project, which
for some inexplicable reason comes into play later on in the plot. After
the destruction of the Robot, it takes Will Robinson only a few hours to
re-build and re-program the machine into a familiar and friendlier
companion. Don West is portrayed as an over sexed pre-teen. The dialogue
the Matt LaBlanc utters in his attempt to woo Judy Robinson (played by
Heather Graham - the Rollergirl from 'Boogie Nights') is utterly
childish and unlikable. It's almost like a ten year old impersonating
Andrew Dice Clay without the vulgarity. If not for his skills as a
pilot, Major Don West would be a strong candidate for Euthanasia.
    Dr. Zachary Smith is locked in his room for the majority of the
film. His character is only brought out when something needs to happen
to move the story forward. When he is first locked in his quarters, he
smashes everything in his room, for what purpose, we are never told. The
women in the film are giving even less to do as the story progresses,
becoming by the end of the film nothing more that furniture. While the
men are outside of the ship trying to discover an answer to their
situation, the women sit back in the spaceship and wait, occasionally
looking out through a window. Maureen Robinson, (played by Mimi Rogers)
wife to Professor John Robinson is given so little to do, you wonder
what the character was included for in the first place. She has neither
the warmth nor, seemingly the caring of June Lockhart's character in the
original series. Heather Graham, is as well given nothing to do other
that to make faces at Matt LaBlanc, in a vain attempt to create sexual
tension. I'm sorry to say, but maybe if she had roller skates on..
    Gary Oldman is completely wasted in what has become the most enjoyed
character in camp celebrity. Oldman's portrayal of  Dr. Smith is neither
effeminate or masculine. The character is neutered from the start. And
having him off screen for more than half of the film is painfully
evident, as the picture only really tends to come to life when Oldman is
on screen. When Goldman becomes fused with the mechanical spiders later
in the plot (which strains credibility on more than one front) his
performance is limited to only voice work as physically he is replaced
by a not very effective special effect. But credit must be given to
Director Hopkins, he has done the one thing no other director has been
able to do.. get a bad, and subdued performance from Gary Oldman. Think
about it. Oldman may have given poor performances before. But they were
always memorable ('Leon' comes to mind, as does 'Bram Stoker's
Dracula'), but he's never been boring. Until now that is.
    William Hurt gives a sleep inducing performance that would have been
more convincing had he called it in. While there are moments where Hurt
seems to be getting into the camp spirit of the piece, the film
resolutely refuses to cater to that. Therefore, Hurt's performance is
not given the spotlight the character demands. As for the child actors
in the film, the less said the better. While  Lacey Chabert (Penny
Robinson) and Jack Johnson (Will Robinson) are attractive and
personable, again the script short shifts them with superfluous teen
angst.
    Director Hopkins handles the film well enough. But the film seems
overly long and disjointed. This is a case of poor editing as the tempo
of the film changes constantly in mid-scene. The spider attack sequence
is a case in point. While there is some degree of suspense built up to
the spider's appearance, it is drained of that energy by the
introduction of the aforementioned Blaap creature. And having Will
Robinson take control of the Robot and use it like a video game
controller to blast the spiders points up a fundamental problem. How can
a child handle a problem that an adult cannot. If a 11 year old kid can
beat these critters like he was playing a video game, where is the
danger?! Hopkins is a director who has shown considerable ability. His
earlier films "A Nightmare on Elm Street 5", the underrated "Blown Away"
and "The Ghost and the Darkness" proves he is a director capable of
handling actors and effects with a sure and steady hand. But here, it's
only fair to say that he is overwhelmed.
    The biggest question I have about the film is the credit of
Animatronic Creatures by Jim Henson's Creature Shop. What animatronics
were there? If there were any, other than a limb of a spider or the top
of Blaap's head, I didnt notice one live effect. So it that isn't the
case, I'm afraid we may still be subjected to a Director's cut of this
film later on which may include a full grown Blaap. The mind shudders.
    This film has proven to me, beyond a shadow of a doubt that Avika
Goldsman's script for "A Time To Kill" was a fluke! I'm sorry to say,
but Mr. Goldsman is rapidly becoming as inept a writer as Joe Esterhaus
has ever been. The entire structure of the plot is so convoluted and
meandering as to be mind numbing. Scenes are set up without any
resolution or explanation (Dr. Smith's breaking of everything in his
room), and Character development is ignored until it is required by the
plot, which at times contradicts the character.  I never thought that I
would see a film as poorly written as "BATMAN & ROBIN" again in my
lifetime. I guess it pays to be cynical.
    All in all "Lost in Space" has only one thing going for it. And
that's is it's visual effects which are the only reason to see the film.
But at 2 hour and 10 minutes. There aren't enough effects to keep ones
attention diverted away from how poor this film really is. As much as I
disliked the original TV series.. I would definitely recommend those old
shows to this overblown tripe.
On a scale of ***** "Lost in Space" rates *=
This may not be the worst film of the year. But it's definitely in the
running.
Copyright 1998 R. L Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed with the express
written permission of the author.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Gary Oldman; William Hurt; Matt LeBlanc & Mimi Rogers
Lost In Space is the updated remake of the campy 1960's television program.
While it certainly is anything but campy, it is a worthy successor to the
original series. Unlike the series, the film version of Lost In Space is big
budget with top notch special effects. None of the aliens made from tinfoil
that were so common from the series. Lost In Space boasts an A-level cast
including Gary Oldman as the evil Dr. Smith, William Hurt as Professor John
Robinson and Matt LeBlanc as Major Don West.
Unlike TV show remakes from recent years, Mission: Impossible comes to mind,
Lost In Space doesn't turn familiar characters into something that you don't
expect. The good guys from the series are still good and the bad guy, namely
Dr. Smith, is still bad. Although, if I had one complaint about the movie it
would be with the character of Dr. Smith. While Gary Oldman does do a good
job, the character of Smith is a little too nasty, although I suppose times
change and the bad guys have to get a little more bad. Maybe part of my
problem with Dr. Smith was that Jonathan Harris wasn't playing him. Harris
was the main reason to watch the series and nobody, not even Gary Oldman,
could properly replace him as Dr. Smith. The same can not be said for the
other characters in the film, all of the current actors more than adequately
filled the rolls of their 1960's counterparts. Lost In Space, in addition to
keeping to the story line of the series also paid homage to it in other
ways. These included cameos from some of the original stars of the TV
series; Dick Tufeld, who was the voice of the Robot in the series also
voices the Robot in the film. You should also pay special attention to the
booster rocket that carries the updated Jupiter 2 from its launch pad on
Earth.
As for plot, it is the mid 21st Century and Earth is doomed to extinction
from the pollution and abuse of the past centuries. John Robinson and his
family are chosen to go to a new planet and ready it for colonization from
the people of Earth. Something goes horribly wrong on the Robinson's
journey. A terrorist stowaway, Dr. Smith, sabotages the mission and the
whole bunch of them find themselves lost in some uncharted region of space.
This new region of space is not without its dangers, including large killer
spiders and some sort of phenomenon which seems to be affecting time itself.
As I mentioned, the main reason to watch the television series was for Dr.
Smith. While Gary Oldman's Smith can't compare to the original, he is still
the most fun to watch. While his portrayal of Dr. Smith is far more evil
than the TV version, the film version of Smith still takes the same joy at
being bad. You have to love somebody that takes such pride in their work. As
for the rest of the cast, while they are not standouts like Gary Oldman,
they all do an excellent job. But what else would you expect from William
Hurt? Hurt and the rest of the cast deserve credit for even being noticed in
Lost In Space. It would have been very easy for all of them to fade into the
background of Oldman's over the top performance and of the spectacular
special effects. Not to mention the very cool updated Robot.
Lost In Space is a whole lot of fun. Whether you were a fan of the TV
series, or had never heard of it before, this is a thoroughly enjoyable
movie. Although I must admit, fans of the series will get a little extra out
of this updated version of Lost In Space with all of the references to the
original series scattered around the film.

Author
Rob Strong
A review by Robert Strong (Remove "NOSPAM" from my
e-mail address to reply by e-mail.)
Starring:  William Hurt, Mimi Rogers, Gary Oldman, Matt 
LeBlanc, Lacey Chabert, Heather Graham, and Jack Johnson
LOST IN SPACE is undeniably entertaining and shows promise
early on.  Unfortunately, it never really delivers on that
promise.  I went into the theater highly anticipating the
film and wanting to like it, but I came out feeling
somehow unfulfilled.
The plot?  Well, there's not much of one.  Earth is
dying at an alarming rate, so much so that in twenty
years, it will be incapable of supporting life.  Enter
ace scientist John Robinson (William Hurt).  He is the
head of the team sent to colonize Alpha Prime, the only
other habitable planet that humans have found.  Dr. 
Robinson has pioneered a new type of technology called
hyperspace that enables instant transportation from
one place to another, provided you have a large device
called a Hypergate.  Without a Hypergate, you could end
up anywhere.  Robinson's expedition is supposed to
build a Hypergate at Alpha Prime, and when it and the one
at Earth are completed, people will be able to instantly
escape Earth.  Unfortunately, Dr. Zachary Smith (Gary
Oldman) sabotages the mission and the whole Robinson
family, ends up lost in space.  How did the whole
brood end up in space?   Apparently, Dr. Robinson's
only condition for accepting the mission was that he
was permitted to bring his family along.  Which really
doesn't make much sense, since he had been severely
neglecting them while working on his hyperspace technology.
Several questions beg answering.  One:  Dr. Robinson
said that he would oversee the construction of a Hypergate
at Alpha Prime.  With who?  Just his family, a robot, and
the pilot of the ship to take them to Alpha Prime, Major Don 
West (Matt LeBlanc)?  Two:  The people who hired Smith to 
sabotage the mission, why are thdey doing this?  If you 
only have one shot to live, I'd take it whether I like the 
people or not.  The movie mentions that this terrorist 
organization is building its own Hypergate.  So, where did
they get the technology to build said Hypergate?  Three:
At one point, Smith is betrayed by the terrorist faction.
They electrocute him with a device he they had supplied
to him.  Then, later, he comes to with just a bad burn
on his hand.  How?  He was getting some serious juice
sent through him.  I could go on.  Then there is when our
fearless heros get lost.  They are caught in the sun's
gravitational field and they only way to escape is to
activate the hyperdrive--which I can see--but this 
somehow enables them to go _through_ the sun.  How, 
I dunno, but they do.
There were also problems with the acting.  For one thing,
none of the actors really convinced me that they were
about to be sucked into the sun and incinerated.  Another
thing was that Mimi Rogers delivered many of her lines 
poorly.  She never seemed really scared when her family
members were about to be devoured by intergalactic spiders.
Speaking of the spiders, it was a case of too little too late.
The spiders themselves were done well, but after STARSHIP
TROOPERS these bugs just don't seem that scary.  Plus,
there was the case of the alien monkey, Blarp.  For one
thing, how excatly did he get on the ship where he was
discovered?  And, really, did he serve a function beyond
marketibity?  
Still, the actors can't take all the blame.  When you
have bad dialogue, nobody can save it all.  Still,
I shouldn't be too shocked since the writer/producer
Akiva Goldsman also penned the wonderful dialogue of
1997's BATMAN AND ROBIN.  There are several 
confusing elements, such as the whole time travel
business.  In addition, the movie tries to introduce
some things that it just doesn't have time to deal
with.  A case in point:  apparantly John Robinson's
father was a military hero and...that's it.  The
movie tries to go somewhere with it, but eventually
gives up.
Well, I think that I've ramble on long enough about
the negative aspects of this film.  Let's get to the
positive.  The special effects are well done.  Very
well done, in fact.  I believe that the exact tally
was somewhere around 750 CGI's, a new record.  Some
actors do in fact manage good preformances, most 
notably Hurt and Oldman.  Chabert shows promise, but
her character is relegated to background scenery 
eventually.  Director Stephen Hopkins (1996's THE GHOST 
AND THE DARKNESS) keeps the movie moving along well, and
handles the special effects quite nicely.  There are
also some good action sequences.  Be sure to stay for
the end credits sequence, but not if your the type who
has seizures from strobing lights and like.  The banter 
between Heather Graham and Matt LeBlanc is amusing at first,
but grow tiresome.  Plus, you have to wait almost
the entire film to hear "Danger, Will Robinson!"
All in all, LOST IN SPACE requires severe suspenion of
disbelief to be enjoyed at all, but belief can 
only be suspended so far.

Author
Jamie Peck
LOST IN SPACE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
In 2058, Earth is sustaining itself by branching out into the cosmos, 
and one family is selected to play a key role in the colonization 
process. They are the Robinsons -- Professor John (William Hurt), his 
wife Maureen (Mimi Rogers) and their children Judy (Heather Graham), 
Penny (Lacey Chabert) and Will (Jack Johnson) -- and the intended plan 
is for them, along with gung-ho pilot Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc), to 
board the spacecraft Jupiter 2 and make a many-year journey to the 
distant planet Alpha Prime. Once there, the crew will establish some 
sort of portal that will allow Earthlings to make the jump to Alpha 
Prime in no time. But thanks to villainous saboteur and stowaway Dr. 
Smith (Gary Oldman) and his Global Sedition cohorts, things don't quite 
go so smoothly. Around a half-day into the flight, the Jupiter 2 is 
thrown off course. When everyone comes to, they're in a foreign place in 
an unspecified time, and must find their way back home or remain lost in 
space forever. 
In patches, "Lost in Space" is as glibly fun as a video game. Director 
Stephen Hopkins (that awful killer-lion flick "The Ghost and the 
Darkness") brings the major action sequences, surprisingly few though 
they are, to giddy, palpable life. Two extended bits stand out from the 
eventual blur: the initial siege on the Jupiter 2 by the nameless Robot 
programmed to protect and aid the Robinsons, and the search through a 
creepy ghost ship as the movie nears its midsection. That Robot (yes, he 
gets to say the immortal line, "Danger, Will Robinson! Danger!"), by the 
way, is a far better way to entertain the family audiences than the 
computer-generated Blawp, a cuddly, Gizmo-esque creature the Robinsons 
pick up on their trek. The Blawp doesn't even look like it's sharing the 
same scenes with the human actors, but most of the other special effects 
work nicely, especially the movie's sleek sets. 
The interesting ensemble cast is partially ill-used. Oldman always makes 
a good bad guy, and his "Lost in Space" work makes one wish that the 
movie hadn't cut to some special effect every time his Dr. Smith 
threatens to become a complex personality. On the plus side, Hurt and 
Johnson have a realistic father-and-son chemistry. Matt LeBlanc is 
essentially playing his "Friends" alter-ego as a hotshot hero (complete 
with one-liners like, "Okay, last one to kill a bad guy buys the 
beer!"), but his aloof swagger works, and this movie is, at least, way 
better than Ed. Mimi Rogers and Heather Graham (Rollergirl from "Boogie 
Nights"), lovely and talented though they are, are trotted out whenever 
a reaction shot is needed; Graham's sexual flirtation with LeBlanc is 
never developed and largely feels like wasted time. Spunky Lacey Chabert 
("Party of Five") fares the worst, sounding like she's been sucking on a 
helium tank while offscreen. 
"Lost in Space" was written by Akiva Goldsman, the man behind the script 
for the very underrated (and surely I can't be the only one to think so) 
"Batman & Robin." He's toned down the series' high camp factor in place 
of a dark, more sinister edge, which serves the first 60 minutes of the 
movie well. But "Lost in Space"'s murky tone and visuals just don't mesh 
with part two's elongated family therapy session. This year's first 
official summer release is a botched one, with too many distractions and 
flaws to even rank as pleasing eye-candy -- a big no-no as far as 
seasonal movies are concerned. As Robot might say, "Danger, moviegoers! 
Danger!" 

Author
Jason Overbeck
I never saw the TV show LOST IN SPACE and from what I hear I didn't miss
much.  I was quite impressed with the cast list as the film began,
images of them in other much better films race through my head.  To say
that this is a dumb action film is too kind to this utterly worthless
trash.  This is one of the years worst films.
The plot is just an excuse for a series of heartless and mindless effect
shots, notice I didn't say 'special' because nothing in this film is. 
The actors run looking bored and probably having paychecks on the mind. 
What are these actors doing in this film?! William Hurt the talented
star of Broadcast News, Heather Graham of Drugstore Cowboy and Boogie
Nights, Gary Oldman from Sid And Nancy plus Professional, these are
talented actors.  
There is no point in describing the plot because the film hardly
bothers.  This is a film about Family, pilot and badguy stuck in space
and a bunch of effects.  Watching this reminded me of last years
STARSHIP TROOPERS or this years Dark City, which not many saw, and how a
film with inteligence and/or imagination can make a fun and great
film.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Gary Oldman, William Hurt, Matt LeBlanc, Mimi Rogers, Heather
Graham, Lacey Chabert, Jack Johnson, and cameos from some of the stars
of the TV series.
Written by: Akiva Goldsman
Directed by: Stephen Hopkins
Running Time: 130 minutes
Akiva Goldsman, the writer and producer of Lost in Space is the same
person who joined forces with that hideous monster Joel Schumacher to
help obliterate the Batman franchise. Now Goldsman has left Schumacher
behind, looking to destroy some other beloved series. Thankfully, he
picked one that wasn't so established to begin with.
I remember watching the TV series Lost in Space as a kid. It was a
fairly entertaining show as far as cheesy sci-fi goes, but I haven't
seen a frame of it since I was oh, six years old. So the fact that
it's based on something I watched as a kid had no influence on my
opinion whatsoever. It holds no special place in my heart or anything
like that.
The year is 2058. Earth has almost exhausted all of it's natural
resources and now the Robinson family, led by brilliant scientist John
Robinson (William Hurt), venture out into the galaxy to find new
resources for our planet. Now two things: this is only 60 years in the
future? Goldsman's a little too ambitious there if you ask me. We
can't even control a remote-controlled car on Mars for more than two
days. We're supposed to be space travelling to the farthest reaches of
the galaxy with ease in the next 60 years? And also, you want to know
why our natural resources are almost exhausted? Look no farther than
all the spaceship cars and orbiting space stations we've built. So
humans have used up all of our natural resources to build ships to
help us look for more natural resources? Anyway, it seems we're in
some sort of civil war with ourselves over the space exploration
stuff.
A faction of terrorists hope to sabotage the mission by destroying the
Robinson family and their spacecraft. The evil Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman,
in full bad guy mode) sneaks on board to do just that, but is knocked
unconscious before the launch. The ship launches, mayhem ensues, and
to make a long story short... Dr. Smith, the Robinson family, and
their pilot Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc) end up millions of miles
from home. Now they're lost in space, get it?
What's fun about Lost in Space is seeing how many plots from other
(and better) sci-fi movies and TV shows you can spot.  Look, it's the
crash of the Enterprise from Star Trek:Generations! Now it's the Death
Star battle scene from Return of the Jedi! Now it's The Black Hole!
Now it's Star Trek:The Motion Picture!  Now it's... well you get the
idea. Actually most of the second half of the film is nothing but a
redressed version of the second half of Star Trek:Generations. There's
hardly one original concept in the whole picture.
Goldsman has unfortunately brought along his trusty one-liner book,
and it's amazing that he had any left over after "Batman and
Robin". And I can't say this enough... I hate one-liners! What makes
it even worse is that, the characters are using puns and phrases from
NOW, surely by 2058 they'd be considered obsolete. If a teenager today
was saying lines from the 1930s like "She's the cat's meow" or
"23-skidoo" they'd be beaten to a bloody pulp.
Watching "Lost in Space" is a lot like watching the film portions of
some big interactive ride at Epcot or Universal Studios. If I was six
years old again, I'm sure that I'd think the new version of Lost in
Space was great stuff. And six year olds seem to be it's target
audience, what with the silly brother-sister spats and cute little
aliens and all. It's a marketing bonanza, with action figures and
Happy Meals clearly right around the corner.
The performances by the men in the film are good, but the female
characters are all sadly wasted. And the youngest daughter Penny
(Lacey Chabert) makes me uncomfortable because I'm not sure what to
say about her. She could either be six years old or eighteen years
old. The effects are good for the most part, although a couple do look
really phony and therefore unconvincing. The best thing about the
whole film is what we're treated to as the closing credits roll. We
get a techno version of the old TV show's theme. That almost made it
all worthwhile. Almost.  [PG-13]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Fox Davidson
  From the moment I saw trailers for Lost in Space, I knew I would probably
like it. I am a junky when it comes to `90s science fiction, especially Star
Trek and The X-Files.  Now, after watching the DVD of Lost in Space, I can say
that none of my expectations for the film were bashed.  Okay, Space is not a
very good film, but it kept me entertained for two hours.
  This is the film that knocked Titanic off the top spot on the box office
charts earlier last year.  The movie adaptation of the schlocky `60s television
series.  The show was a cheesy bore.  The movie version is the same thing, but,
with lively visuals and a nice cast.
   It's amazing what special effects can do for a film; Space is a mighty
achievement in brain candy.  The story tells of the (space) family Robinson,
who's goal is to travel to a distant planet (I forget the name) to make sure it
can be colonized, for Earth will not last two more years, in the year 2043. 
This is the only movie to feature a whole family, even the 10-year old kid, as
scientists and astronauts.  When the Robinsons launch to space, a scientist
(Gary Oldman), who was hiding in the ship's bowels, takes over the controls,
while the family are in hibernation, and accidentally send the ship to a
different galaxy through some space-gate or whatnot.
  Lost in Space suffers from the usual Hollywood cliches and over the top
action scenes that completely destroyed films like Armageddon and Con Air. 
But, it does have a nice sense of adventure not found in many sci-fi movies
anymore.  But, I have seen a number of better sci-fi films within the past two
years, including The X-Files, Star Trek: Insurrection, Event Horizon, and
Sphere.  Plus, the movie kept switching from kid-friendly fluff to scary
monster flick.
  The DVD features a number of fascinating tidbits, including a music video
(for the annoying song that plays during the end credits), original cast
interviews, a director commentary, and special effects featurette.  However, I
was very disappointed with the soundtrack.  Low and unspectacular.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
That horribly smarmy Robinson family get (woah!) lost amid a veneer 
of plot, many special effects and minimal logic.  Surprisingly enough, 
it's all quite fun.
In its never-ending search to drag more people to the movies, 
Hollywood has resurrected yet another old TV series for the nostalgia 
value.  (I, for one, have zero fond memories of that rather dreadful 
series.  Go and look at a few episodes sometime - it's singularly 
awful.)  Wrapped up in muchos SFX, bankable stars and few surprises, 
one shouldn't hold much hope.  But as cynical as the whole exercise 
is, "Lost in Space" is rather entertaining.  It's mind-candy to be 
sure, but inoffensive mind-candy.
In some ways, the movie is quite faithful to the premise of the old 
series.  In a future where the Earth is on the edge of ecological 
collapse and the technology for buttons has been lost, Professors 
Robinson (Hurt) and Robinson (Rogers) are taking a ship to a nearby 
star.  There they will build a hypergate-type thingie to allow Earth 
people to pour through and despoil another planet.  But the evil 
Sedition (evil largely for not being the Robinsons) wants to get there 
first and sics the rabid Dr Smith (Oldman) onto them.  The Professors 
Robinson, their nuclear family and Smith don their many velcro'd and 
zippered uniforms and then get "lost in space".
The plot is garbage on most scientific and even logical levels.  
Given the profligate way the Robinsons live, I'm not surprised that 
the Earth is running out of resources.  All that pollution seems to 
effect their brains, because they later forget that planets exert 
gravity.  (It's amazing what the user manuals to spacecraft don't 
mention.)  In many cringeworthy scenes, Dad Robinson is made to be 
ashamed that he spent too much time saving the Earth, and too little 
supervising young Will's crosstime experiments.
Most bizarre of all, they let the murderous Dr Smith loose on their 
ship.  Now you know and I know and any sane person would know that if 
Gary Oldman stows away on your spaceship [presidential jet / apartment 
building / etc.], it is only a matter of time before he goes spastic 
with large quantities of automatic weapons and kills everyone.  
(Warning: should you ever be in this situation and Gary appears to be 
quiescent as he takes large quantities of drugs - this is no reason to 
relax.  The drug-taking Gary is just a larval stage, and soon the 
ur-Oldman will emerge, go spastic with large quantities of automatic 
weapons and kill everyone.  Do not let your guard down.  Similar 
warnings are issued for John Malkovich, Steve Buscemi and Christopher 
Walken.)
But as said above, "Lost In Space" charms despite or perhaps because 
of its cliches.  Dr Smith chews much scenery and snarls out cutting 
one-liners.  (At first the filmmakers keep him relatively under 
control, but by the end of the picture just stand back shouting, "Look 
out, he's gonna blow!".)  Matt LeBlanc, who plays a dumb, 
over-sexed lug on "Friends", here plays pilot Don West as a dumb, 
over-sexed lug.  As a consequence, he is involved in by-the-numbers 
sexual tension with the eldest Robinson daughter and some nice space 
fight scenes (in very cute fighters adapted to 3D combat).  Penny 
Robinson makes an entertaining, angst-ridden teenager who keeps a very 
funny half confessional / half fantasy video diary.  Will pals around 
amusingly with the robot.  William Hurt - who has build an acting 
career of looking vaguely disconcerted by everything - be it 
castration, devolution into primordial energy or imprisonment in a 
Latin American jail - looks appropriately agonised by every little 
decision.  Only Judy and Professor Mom Robinson come across as a 
little dull, although they are at least competent, a thankful point of 
divergence with the original.  Slap in some glossy SFX, big 
explosions, a groovy set of end credits and you get nicely entertained 
for your 10 bucks.  At times the movie does slow down, chiefly where they 
insist on pursuing the plot or blabbering about Big Issues and the 
Importance of Family, but these occasions are mercifully brief.
Do we need another brash, big and meaningless picture? Maybe not. But 
in a balanced diet of entertainment and edification, "Lost in Space" 
makes a worthy entry on the entertainment side. [***] and lemonade on 
the Sid and Nancy scale.
--
paul-michael agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."

Author
Jamie Peck
LOST IN SPACE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
In 2058, Earth is sustaining itself by branching out into the cosmos, 
and one family is selected to play a key role in the colonization 
process. They are the Robinsons -- Professor John (William Hurt), his 
wife Maureen (Mimi Rogers) and their children Judy (Heather Graham), 
Penny (Lacey Chabert) and Will (Jack Johnson) -- and the intended plan 
is for them, along with gung-ho pilot Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc), to 
board the spacecraft Jupiter 2 and make a many-year journey to the 
distant planet Alpha Prime. Once there, the crew will establish some 
sort of portal that will allow Earthlings to make the jump to Alpha 
Prime in no time. But thanks to villainous saboteur and stowaway Dr. 
Smith (Gary Oldman) and his Global Sedition cohorts, things don't quite 
go so smoothly. Around a half-day into the flight, the Jupiter 2 is 
thrown off course. When everyone comes to, they're in a foreign place in 
an unspecified time, and must find their way back home or remain lost in 
space forever. 
In patches, "Lost in Space" is as glibly fun as a video game. Director 
Stephen Hopkins (that awful killer-lion flick "The Ghost and the 
Darkness") brings the major action sequences, surprisingly few though 
they are, to giddy, palpable life. Two extended bits stand out from the 
eventual blur: the initial siege on the Jupiter 2 by the nameless Robot 
programmed to protect and aid the Robinsons, and the search through a 
creepy ghost ship as the movie nears its midsection. That Robot (yes, he 
gets to say the immortal line, "Danger, Will Robinson! Danger!"), by the 
way, is a far better way to entertain the family audiences than the 
computer-generated Blawp, a cuddly, Gizmo-esque creature the Robinsons 
pick up on their trek. The Blawp doesn't even look like it's sharing the 
same scenes with the human actors, but most of the other special effects 
work nicely, especially the movie's sleek sets. 
The interesting ensemble cast is partially ill-used. Oldman always makes 
a good bad guy, and his "Lost in Space" work makes one wish that the 
movie hadn't cut to some special effect every time his Dr. Smith 
threatens to become a complex personality. On the plus side, Hurt and 
Johnson have a realistic father-and-son chemistry. Matt LeBlanc is 
essentially playing his "Friends" alter-ego as a hotshot hero (complete 
with one-liners like, "Okay, last one to kill a bad guy buys the 
beer!"), but his aloof swagger works, and this movie is, at least, way 
better than Ed. Mimi Rogers and Heather Graham (Rollergirl from "Boogie 
Nights"), lovely and talented though they are, are trotted out whenever 
a reaction shot is needed; Graham's sexual flirtation with LeBlanc is 
never developed and largely feels like wasted time. Spunky Lacey Chabert 
("Party of Five") fares the worst, sounding like she's been sucking on a 
helium tank while offscreen. 
"Lost in Space" was written by Akiva Goldsman, the man behind the script 
for the very underrated (and surely I can't be the only one to think so) 
"Batman & Robin." He's toned down the series' high camp factor in place 
of a dark, more sinister edge, which serves the first 60 minutes of the 
movie well. But "Lost in Space"'s murky tone and visuals just don't mesh 
with part two's elongated family therapy session. This year's first 
official summer release is a botched one, with too many distractions and 
flaws to even rank as pleasing eye-candy -- a big no-no as far as 
seasonal movies are concerned. As Robot might say, "Danger, moviegoers! 
Danger!" 

Author
Marty Mapes
*1/2 (out of 4) Watching the movie, I vowed to subtract half a star from the
review because the filmmakers included a saccharine syrup, cute 'n cuddly,
computer-generated monkey. If the monkey died, the movie got an extra half
star. Alas, the monkey showed up at the end, unharmed, to the wet sickly
sound of gagging and rolling eyeballs. 
What that means is that LOST IN SPACE actually deserved 2 stars. That's
pretty generous, considering the movie's camp lacked any hint of tongue in
cheek. When Will Robinson (Jack Johnson) teaches his pet robot about
friendship, you are actually supposed to buy it. 
So why such a seemingly high rating? There are a few reasons that made me
unable to throw away the experience with the garbage. First, we saw the
movie on opening night of the first day of operation of a brand new theater.
The sound and screen kicked ass. Nobody in the country enjoyed the movie as
much as my audience did (and I don't necessarily mean that in a good way).
Also, there were more than zero scenes where I found myself rooting for the
Robinsons, or getting caught up in the movie's tension. I even liked the
computer-generated settings. I usually prefer to see models or sets, but the
CG was more detailed than I've seen in a lot of movies; it looks like
someone spent a little overtime to render some of the futuristic cities. 
Also, Gary Oldman is never a bad actor, even though he is typecast as a
villain. William Hurt isn't too bad either. Neither actor had a great role,
but their performances were watchable. 
And perhaps I shouldn't admit this, but something about the tone and outlook
of the movie brought me back to my childhood. There is very little swearing
or blood; there is a strong moral message, saccharine though it is; there is
a bit of romance (whose culmination after 2 hours is a "real" kiss -- no
sex). It felt like one of those Disney movies that I so looked forward to
when I was six. Those movies were probably as bad as LOST IN SPACE, but at
the time, they were manna from Heaven. That type of moviemaking is a lost art. 
Worst and most unforgivable was the incredibly bad dialogue. It's
squeaky-clean, family fun, trying hard to be as hip as Pulp Fiction. "You
better hold on to your joystick," is one such line. And when a Robinson is
called upon to deliver a line about warp conduit thingamajigs, they
inevitably stumble badly enough to embarrass even the lowliest Star Trek
ensign. 
Second worst, and closely related, is the screenplay. The story's exposition
takes place at a press conference, which allows the writers to explain
what's happening with the least amount of creativity, effort, or interest.
Once the story gets going, I do concede a momentary burst of interest once
in a while, but on the whole, the situations that arise are silly and
contrived. When Gary Oldman easily reprograms Will's pet robot to kill the
Robinsons, my friend summed it up perfectly: "he flipped the switch to 'evil.'" 
Then there's the tone of the movie. The Colorado Daily said the film would
have been more interesting if the central character was Will Robinson and
not his father John Robinson. Then it could be an adventure movie. They're
mostly right, except that Johnson (Will) wasn't a good enough actor to carry
it off. Still, that the film has the Robinson patriarch as our hero shows a
lack of imagination. Just because a movie is tame enough for kids doesn't
mean that we have to bow to a "promise keepers" notion of who's the center
of a family. Many quality family films have been made with a non-traditional
family structure (FLY AWAY HOME comes to mind) to much better effect. 
And the politics of the time seem a bit conservative and regressive for a
futuristic movie. In STAR WARS, the rebels were the good guys. We were
rooting for those who were fighting against the system. In LOST IN SPACE,
the rebels are the bad guys, a terrorist force that must be killed, crushed
and silenced so that our children may live free. That ominous excuse for
violence almost makes me sympathize with the terrorists. 
Finally, a few specific details deserve criticism. The movie tells us that
the setting is the year 2056. Why? Why bother saying what year this is. Just
tell us it's the future. I bring it up because the TV series was supposed to
take place in 1997. Setting a specific date only dates the movie and
guarantees that it won't be timeless (not that this movie was really in the
running anyway.). Then there is a scene that shows John Robinson checking
one of his controls on a chair that rises about fifteen feet on a pole. This
silly waste of money reminded me of Bugs Bunny's barber chair, and only
shows that the future is a time when spaceship designers haven't learned a
thing about ergonomics. 
One vaguely redeeming quality is that the end credits succeed where the rest
of the film failed: it made LOST IN SPACE look cool. The strong techno beat
sampled the cheesiest dialogue and, out of context, made it sound hip. This
is overlaid on a cool jumpy credit sequence with interesting distorted clips
from the movie. 
But if that's the best part of the movie, I can't in good conscience
recommend it. Still, if you get stuck seeing it, as we did, you might be
able to appreciate it if you keep your distance, think of liking bad movies
as a child, and bring along your "bad movie bingo" cards.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Gary Oldman, William Hurt, Mimi Rogers, Matt LeBlanc, Heather
Graham, Lacey Chabert, Jack Johnson, Jared Harris
Director: Stephen Hopkins
Producers: Mark W. Koch, Stephen Hopkins, Akiva Goldsman, Carla Fry
Screenplay: Akiva Goldsman
LOST IN SPACE is as convolutedly, complex as an episode of Star Trek in
its time dimensional best. Action packed enough to keep hormonally
charged pubescents happy and worthwhile enough, for parents to get rid
of the kids for an Easter afternoon break. I'm sitting here, still
trying to work out the in and outs of who went where and when, looking
for who and found what, only to prevent something from happening, so
that they could travel through the centre of a planet to escape it's
gravitational collapse (theoretically not sound). If you're lost in time
and space, so am I, which is why this movie is so aptly titled LOST IN
SPACE.
Imagine giant metallic spiders, battling powerful pet robots controlled
by a highly intelligent, lonely child. Included are evil doctor
saboteurs, a Captain America unlucky in love, computer generalised
monkeys with a great set of lips; a mother in charge, a father
neglecting his children, the family pride, the family misfit - say hello
to the Robinson Family. This story is immersed in state of the art
special effects, fanciful explosions with loud metallic noises
interspersed in between moments of quiet reflection, before another bout
of noise and explosions, screams, numerous amusing one liners and
finally a way home.
This adaptation of the popular 60's sci-fi series is light years ahead
of its predecessor. Gone are the once daggy costumes, the Ed Wood sets
and the corny, soppy dialogue which suited its time. Put your seat belts
on because the 90's version of LOST IN SPACE doesn't give you much time
to contemplate a toilet break. Memorable scenes include still frames of
the family Robinson frozen in mid air whilst gate travelling, Will
Robinson jumping into a pit slow motion and numerous scenes of John West
humiliating himself trying to impress Penny Robinson.
The cast is well chosen. William Hurt is in fine form as the father,
John Robinson. Mimi Rogers is ideal as the down to earth,
speak-your-mind mother, who doesn't take crap from anyone. The evil,
troublesome, meddling, snivelling Dr Smith is portrayed by Gary Oldman,
who has a knack for playing villainous roles. Then there is Matt LeBlanc
of friends, who shamelessly humiliates himself with some of the worst
pick up lines a guy can think off. But I believe the story belongs to
Will Robinson (Jack Johnson), the genius kid with a heart of gold.
Good family entertainment for all members of the family.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Ronald O. Christian

How could a movie who's advance information looks so good get such
terrible reviews?  My family and friends discussed this while in line
for the first showing of Lost in Space on Saturday.  We went in hoping
that it would be decent, but were prepared for a possible stinker.  Of
the eight of us, only my daugher (3 years old) liked Akiva Goldsmith's
previous effort "Batman and Robin"; the rest of us thought it stank.
So it was with a certain understandable anxiety that I took my place
and broke open the first box of malted milk balls.
Well, guess what:  Lost in Space is a winner.  Good characterization,
mostly decent dialog, a reasonable plot.  It offers many kudos to the
old show while going deeper into the meaning of their voyage and the
lives of the family than the series ever did.  We get the "doctor
smith theme" on the soundtrack while Dr. Smith first stows away,
mention of the chariot and lander, and of course the Robot.  (Who's
name is not Robby!  Different movie, guys, and a decade previous to
LIS.  Don't show your ignorance.)  But we also get a lot more
chemistry between Judy Robinson and Don West, better insight into
Will's genius and how his gifts have alienated him, Penny's typical
teen angst, John's conflict between his driving passion for his work
and the desire to be a good father.  I think the best moment of the
film is when John tries to embrace Judy after a rather harrowing close
call, and Judy backs away from him, mindlessly reciting her own vital
signs.  This family is not without it's interesting quirks.
I won't bother to rehash the plot, as if you're a regular reader of
these newsgroups you've already read it a dozen times.  It is in
essence a remake of the original series pilot with more depth, a real
budget, and some new surprises.
I think that the problem some people are having with the film is that
the visuals are *extremely* busy and the plot is perhaps a little too
complex.  Lost in Space is no "Star Wars", a special effects space
opera which even a three year old can comprehend.  The plot of Lost in
Space doubles back on itself more than once, and some of us found this
a little confusing at first view.  My daughter thought it
incomprehensible, although she loved the Robot and the cool graphics.
Moreover, fans of the campiness of the old series are going to be
disappointed.  There's no Giant Talking Carrots, no Space Vikings, no
Galactic Department Store, and good riddance.  The movie adheres more
to the tone and concepts of the original 2 hour series pilot, a time
before (well, shortly before) the show descended into self-parody.
Surprisingly, amongst the record number of special effects lurks an
actual plot.  The consistent underlying theme of the movie is John
Robinson's alienation from his family, especially his son, and this
plays up in the ending in moderately surprising ways.
I thought all the cast turned in good performances.  Even Lacy Chabot
and Matt LeBlanc.  In fact, let me say this about that:  I can't STAND
"Friends".  In particular I can't stomach the too-stupid-to-live
waste-of-skin characters played by Matt LeBlanc and Lisa Kudrow.  I
expected LeBlanc to be the weakest cast member of Lost in Space.  Oh
hell, I expected him to suck and I was prepared to grit my teeth and
somehow get through his performance.  Imagine my astonishment when he
turns in a reasonable performance.  He gets some of the best lines
("Ohhh, THAT was scientific.")  and delivers them fairly well.  And
this, I think, is one of the problems some reviewers have had with the
movie.  They are SO convinced (and understandably) that LeBlanc will
suck that there's nothing he could have done on screen to redeem
himself, which exemplifies to me the bad cinematic karma that comes
with being associated with a popular but utterly mindless sitcom.
The tone of the movie is rather dark and parts were a bit scary.  But
it was a more suspenseful kind of scary than (for instance) the
over-the-top ultraviolence of Starship Troopers.  My daughter got a
little upset in a couple parts, but she made it through and wants to
see it again.  So do I.  I think this is a movie we will see several
times.
Lost in Space is well worth the investment, both for fans of the old
series and for kids who've never heard of it before.  My
recommendation:  Ignore the reviews and just go see it.  It ends...
Well, never mind.  Just go see it.

Author
Richard Dickson
WARNING:  This review contains spoilers for those who have not yet seen the
film.
     The TV series Lost in Space will, to me, always be the Barney Fife to Star
Trek's Andy Griffith.  I always preferred the darker, more serious episodes at
the beginning than the descent into camp the series eventually became.  With
this in mind, I really looked forward to the film version.  Based on what I had
seen, it seemed to have the more sinister tone of those early episodes,
especially where Dr. Smith and the robot were concerned.  Unfortunately, the
film commits the cardinal sin of cinema:  not good, not bad, just ... there.
     Once again, Akiva Goldsman proves that his theory of screenwriting is to
throw as many plots in as he possibly can and hope one of them sticks.  This
failed in Batman and Robin and it fails here.  Any one of these plots -- the
initial launch and sabotage, the derelict ship, and the planet with the time
vortex -- could have been fashioned into a tight, satisfying film, but instead
we are forced to watch this story meander around through three terribly
undeveloped acts.  And he also falls prey to the time travel trap:  he allows
his hero to save the day by travelling back in time to before the Jupiter II is
destroyed.  Now, if this is possible, why not just go back in time and prevent
Dr. Smith from sabotaging the ship in the first place? Yet it's lazy
screenwriting like this that seems to dominate the market these days, writers
being asked nothing more than to dream up a skeleton on which to hang a bunch
of special effects.  Not to mention the fact that this movie seems to be little
more than a collection of variations on scenes from much better movies:  Star
Wars space battles, Blade Runner cityscapes, Alien monsters, etc, etc, etc,
none of them done with any of the style or flair of the originals.
     And beyond the dazzling effects, the movie just sits there.  Never once
was I involved, excited, or stimulated.  Gary Oldman's Dr. Smith is evil
without any real motivation, simply there to provide a threat.  The kids are
all annoying, the parents stoic stereotypes.  The only one who seems to be
having any fun with his role -- and is therefore fun to watch -- is Matt
LeBlanc's Major West.  He seems to understand the idea that this is supposed to
be an adventure, and does well as the dashing hero, despite the awful romantic
dialog he's forced to share with Heather Graham.
    The sad thing is, this movie will probably be a hit.  It has all the eye
candy needed, plus a cutting edge techno soundtrack that will probably have the
kids going back again and again.  But if the series was Barney to Star Trek's
Andy Griffith, this movie is definitely an Otis that should have remained
locked up.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Ever since my wife bought me a toy "B-9" Robot for our anniversary, I 
had wanted to see the newest incarnation of "Lost in Space."
Aside from the characters, it's not much like the campy 60's series. (Of 
course, I didn't exactly recognize the campiness at the time; I was too 
busy hiding my eyes during the alien scenes. "Lost in Space" was the 
only TV show scarier than the monster scenes in "Voyage to the Bottom of 
the Sea"!) 
Following the premise of the series occupied much of the running time. 
But it's a good premise: the Robinson family's animation is suspended 
while the Jupiter 2 cruises to a planet ten years away. Their journey is 
interrupted by a 90's version of B-9 -- only slicker, butch; but the 
booming voice is the same. Anyway, the adventures the family encounters 
after they are lost are worth watching: mostly smooth computer-generated 
critters, and a version of the vile Doctor Smith that made me and my 12 
year-old son shiver. (No, I'm still not de-sensitized to the horror that 
monsters are supposed to instill!)
Though I like William Hurt immensely (no one could have played the 
reluctant travel writer in "The Accidental Tourist" better), he is 
miscast as John Robinson. OK -- the head of the family is a heady 
scientist, but Hurt I can't see as action hero. The rest of the cast is 
solid -- the ubiquitous Gary Oldman (is he British, or what?) is 
eminently dislikable -- though not nearly as goofy as his television 
counterpart. 
Get ready for another franchise. "Lost in Space" is entertaining. I'd 
pay to see a sequel, especially with the chance it might have just a 
shade more camp and self-reflexive humor.


Author
Steve Kong
I'm not old enough to have seen the Lost in Space TV series.  And though
many of the people going to see Lost in Space will have enjoyed the series,
I figure there are going to be a lot of people like me who have never seen
it either.  Knowing the TV series is not one of the prerequisites for the
movie though.  There's only one prerequisite for the movie: The willingness
to turn off your brain.  
Lost in Space begins with a loud and eyebrow-raising space dogfight that
had me at the edge of my seat.  With the adrenaline up, I thought I was
going to be in for a roller coaster ride of a movie, but things slow down.
>From here we get some background story and learn about the Robinson family
and why they are planning to leave Earth for Alpha Prime.
It seems that Earth's resources are being depleted at a horrific rate and
in a short time, the Earth will no longer be able to support human life.
The only way to save the human race is to move and inhabit another planet.
That planet--with water and a suitable atmosphere--is Alpha Prime.
However, in order to get people off Earth in a timely manner, there needs
to be a quick way to get them across the galaxy.  This is where the
Robinsons fall into the story.
The Robinsons are to travel by space ship to Alpha Prime and set up a jump
gate -- much like the one in Stargate, but in space -- so that it can match
up with the jump gate being built on Earth.  Once both gates are completed,
humans can be shipped across the galaxy via hyperspace and arrive at Alpha
Prime instantaneously.  Without the gates, though, any hyperspace travel
will shoot the travelers into some unknown position in space -- as the
Robinsons are quick to find out.  The Robinson family is composed of: John
(William Hurt) the father and professor, Maureen (Mimi Rogers) the mom and
professor, Judy (Heather Graham) the oldest daughter and doctor, Penny
(Lacey Chabert) the younger daughter, and Will (Jack Johnson) the son.
The Robinsons will travel 10 years in the ship Jupiter 2, which will be
piloted by Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc).  Major West is taken straight out
of the movie Top Gun, spilling embarrassing lines as "Rock 'n Roll!" and
"Putting the pedal to the metal!"
Unbeknownst to the family, the evil Doctor Smith has been left for dead
aboard the Jupiter 2 after he sabotages the mission to Alpha Prime.
Sixteen hours into the flight all Hell breaks loose; John and Major West
wake up to discover that the Jupiter 2 is trapped in the Sun's
gravitational pull and they are soon going to go melting into the Sun.
Major West flies the Jupiter 2 through the Sun with the hyperdrive engines.
 Yes, you read that right, he flies through the Sun.  The drawback of the
hyperdrive again is that the ship is shot into some unknown part of space.
Or is it?
The family soon finds that they are floating next to a man-made space ship
that looks much like the Event Horizon.  But, I was relieved to find that
it was not the dreaded Event Horizon, it is the Proteus. From here the
movie has two more "acts" or parts.  One includes exploring the Proteus and
the other is exploring an icy planet.
The last few minutes of the film make no apparent sense.  It includes time
travel and some more hyperspace jumping.  If you have seen Lost in Space
and understand what was going on with the time travel, please let me know
what it's all about.
Smith is supposed to be the main antagonist in Lost in Space but a few
others crop up, maybe unintentionally.  And those would be the family
members themselves.  The Robinsons are not quite a close knit family.
Actually, they are the poster family for dysfunctional families in America.
 In Lost in Space, the family spends more time arguing with each other than
with Doctor Smith.
Lost in Space has two major flaws.  First, the script by Akiva Goodsman is
horrible.  For those of you who don't know the name Akiva Goodsman, he's
the guy who wrote the awful follow-ups to the first two Batman films.
Batman and Robin contains the worst writing I've ever heard.  This writer
has no clue about how to write dialogue.  He only knows how to write
one-liners and short quips-- and even these made me cringe.  
Second, Stephen Hopkins directs the movie.  Hopkins is the director who
brought us Blown Away and Ghost and the Darkness.  I've only seen Blown
Away and that was an uneven thriller, at best.  Lost in Space suffers from
the same problem that Hopkin's Blown Away did:  the direction is very
uneven.  He can certainly get the adrenaline pumping during action scenes,
but he is not able to take that energy and move it into some of the
non-action scenes.  Hopkins has no clue about pacing.
The actors are OK.  William Hurt is somewhat bland as John Robinson, but
heck, I can see why, he's an egghead like myself.  Mimi Rogers does what
she can with her "Come home safe, John" role.  Heather Graham, whom I loved
in Boogie Nights, gets a throwaway part here. She really doesn't have much
to do.  Lacey Chabert, who looks like a miniature version of Neve Campbell
with a 'magic-marker as eye-liner look' and Daffy Duck voice, is a toss up
between really annoying and really really annoying. Jack Johnson is
actually pretty worthy as Will Robinson, but he doesn't get enough screen
time.  Matt LeBlanc is Joey from Friends in space, he's not doing too much
new here.  The big performance is from Gary Oldman and he is not given
enough time either.
One small thing that Lost in Space suffers from is what I call the "Ewok
Syndrome."  This is where the moviemakers throw in a cute creature into a
movie just so that they can sell cute dolls on the after-market.  For
Return of the Jedi it was the Ewoks, for Lost in Space it's a space monkey
of sorts named Blawp, which serves no purpose and even detracts from the
film.  New Line just wants to sell Blarp dolls to little kids who find
Blarp cute.
So, what's good about Lost in Space?  It's special effects, sets,
landscapes, and fun factor. The press releases for Lost in Space boast that
it has some 700-plus special effects.  I didn't bother to count, but the
special effects are pretty impressive.  The sets by Norman Garwood are
beautiful and very futuristic.  The landscapes are nothing but
awe-inspiring; they bring back memories of the landscapes from The Fifth
Element.  And the fun factor is definitely there if you ignore the lame
story and unnecessarily convoluted plot.
In the end, with all of its flaws, Lost in Space is fun to see.  But,
please walk into the theatre with the brain in the "off" position.  Don't
Miss Lost in Space.  Danger Will Robinson!  Lost in Space is a mindless fun
movie!

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 3, 1998
Starring: William Hurt, Gary Oldman, Heather Graham, Matt LeBlanc, Mimi
Rogers, Lacey Chabert, Jack Johnson
Directed by: Stephen Hopkins
Distributed by: New Line Cinema
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (some intense sci-fi action) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/lostinspace.htm
Similar to 1997's STARSHIP TROOPERS, LOST IN SPACE is a story told to
and written for the lowest common denominator of movie going audiences.
Although TROOPERS was undoubtedly written for a more adult demographic
(although the intelligence level was just as undoubtedly no higher),
LOST IN SPACE starts off as and remains throughout a graphically-
enhanced comic book. The flat characters and cringe-enducing dialogue
are trademarks of a medium that tells stories in jerky segments and
plays to ignorance and suspension of belief. While this latest sci-fi
action flick may be a step up from that, it retains some of the more
undesirable aspects. 
A kickback from the baby boomer days, LOST IN SPACE has to hope for the
curiosity of adults and the willingness of adolescents to pay to see
mind-blowing visuals and sound. Much as THE FIFTH ELEMENT (surprisingly,
another Gary Oldman-is-the-antagonist film) did, this movie presents an
awesome array of colors, lights, and sounds in one continuous stream;
the producers expect the audience to sit back and say "wow." Just like
the THE FIFTH ELEMENT, there is probably an Academy Award nomination in
the future for LOST IN SPACE, but its on-screen tenacity will garner it
nothing more than a Best Sound Editing or Best Visual Special Effects
nomination. The cast and story are not nearly as good. 
Written by Akiva Goldsman, who has penned the last two BATMAN features
and also the upcoming SUPERMAN LIVES, the story is definitely the worst
part of LOST IN SPACE. It takes the Robinson family (headed up by
respectable performances from William Hurt as the father and Heather
Graham as the twentysomething daughter) off of Earth with the planned
destination of a planet that will hold Earthlings in the future. Because
Earth's life as a hospitable planet is limited, and humanity has only
discovered one other possible home in the galaxy, this is the final
shot. (Fitting, in mankind's current mega-consumptive mindset, that the
story tells us Earthlings have only twenty years left.) No thanks to a
stowaway (Gary Oldman), though, the Robinsons' ship is sent hurtling
towards the sun. In a last minute attempt to escape, they hit the
hyperdrive and careen into regions unknown. 
There are only two or three really likeable performances in the bunch.
William Hurt has power and gravity on-screen, but often it gets
channeled into horrible lines that detract from his character's value.
His attempted conversations at family values are particularly
belittling, both to the character and to the movie. Matt LeBlanc, who
plays the pilot assigned to the Robinsons' spaceship, is the best as the
arrogant fighter jock with a bag full of sarcastic lines. Heather Graham
is also good, although her young age lends a certain questionability to
her role; also, her cold shoulder to the constant come-ons of LeBlanc,
like LeBlanc's character himself, get old fast. The rest of the cast
play stereotype cardboard cut-outs. Director Stephen Hopkins, who
directs another misfired action thriller here (after BLOWN AWAY), can't
keep everything under control and some scenes are just plain ridiculous
(like Jack Johnson having a conversation with a robot about 'forgetting
logic'). Mostly full of groaners, but still, the movie manages to come
out mediocre.
FINAL AWARD FOR "LOST IN SPACE": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.

Author
me@alanine.ram.org
It's not clear to me why /Lost in Space/ has been slammed so much by
critics.  The effects are great, the plot has its moments, and the
acting is mediocre.  That doesn't seem much different from many
blockbusters that have received far more positive reviews, such as
/Independence Day/ or /Mission: Impossible/.
The plot: Humans have exhausted the resources of Earth and need to
colonise other planets in order to continue their polluting existence.
The area of space humans are interested in colonising is known as
Alpha Prime, which requires a ten year journey by "normal"
space flight.  An "hypergate" is being constructed that will enable the
inhabitants of Earth to travel to Alpha Prime in no time, but for it
to work, the gate has to exist at both ends.  The Robinson Family,
John (William Hurt), Maureen (Mimi Rogers), Judy (Heather Graham),
Penny (Lacey Chabert), and Will (Jack Johnson), are the ones
responsible for building the hypergate at the Alpha Prime end (and
this is the most incredulous part of the movie).
With Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc) piloting Jupiter II, the spacecraft
carrying the Robinsons begins its ten year journey to Alpha Prime.
However, the Global Alliance undertaking this colonisation mission has
an enemy, the Global Sedition, who recruit Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman) to
sabotage the mission and kill the Robinsons.  When Smith himself is
double crossed and left on the spaceship, he helps avert the Robinson
family destruction.  In doing so, the Robinson family find themselves
pulled towards a sun and have to engage the hyperdrive to escape.  But
as John Robinson says at the beginning of the movie, using the
hyperdrive without a hypergate at other end will result in uncertainty
in the final destination, and the Robinsons end up being lost in
space.
At this point, the story begins to lose cohesion. As the family wander
around space, they encounter a ship from their future invested with
heat-seeking silicon-based spider-like creatures and a fuzzy animated
monkey-like creature who comes to be known as "Blawp".  The ship from
the future is no coincidence: the Robinsons find that they're caught
in a time bubble whose originator is intent on going back in time to
prevent the Robinsons from beginning their mission.  But unknown to
everyone, there's a fly, or should I say spider, in every dab of
science-fiction ointment.
While the futuristic set design is what makes this movie worth
watching, the acting by most of the characters is terrible.  Oldman,
Chabert, and Johnson are the ones that shine, while the rest of the
cast come off as uninspired.  The plot has its moments, but the ending
is too weak. Worth the matinee fare on the big screen.


Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1998. Director - Stephen Hopkins, Screenplay - Akiva Goldsman, 
Producers - Goldsman, Hopkins, Carla Fry & Mark W. Koch, Photography - 
Peter Levy, Music - Bruce Broughton, Visual Effects Supervisor - Angus 
Bickerton, Visual Effects - Cinesite Europe (Supervisor - Jonathan 
Privett), The Computer Film Co, The Film Factory at VTR, Framestore & 
The Magic Camera Co (Supervisor - Steven Begg), Creature Effects - Jim 
Henson's Creature Workshop (Creature Supervisor - Karen Halliwell & John 
Stephenson, Digital Effects Supervisor - Christian Hogue, Electronics 
Supervisor - Julian Manning), Special Effects Supervisor - Nick Allder, 
Production Design - Norman Garwood, Supervising Art Director - Keith 
Pain. Production Company - Prelude Pictures/Irwin Allen Productions.
William Hurt (Professor John Robinson), Matt LeBlanc (Major Don West), 
Jack Johnson (Will Robinson), Gary Oldman (Dr Zachary Smith), Heather 
Graham (Dr Judy Robinson), Lacey Chabert (Penny Robinson), Mimi Rogers 
(Dr Maureen Robinson), Jared Harris (Older Will)
Plot: The Robinson family are about to be launched aboard the Jupiter 
Mission to set up a hyperspatial gate on the planet Alpha Prime to 
relieve strained environmental resources on Earth. But the family is 
divided by dysfunctionality from within with the two youngest children 
Will and Penny resenting their father's lack of attention to them. 
Meanwhile a terrorist organization has ordered Dr Zachary Smith to sneak 
aboard and sabotage the mission and then abandoned him for dead as it is 
launched. As Smith and the Robinsons struggle to stop the robot Smith 
has programmed to go amok, they are forced to engage the hyperdrive to 
stop the ship going into the sun, causing them to emerge at a point 
where they are lost in space.
And so the current fad for big-screen, big-budget remakes of 1960s tv 
series continues, with `Lost in Space' being the latest to receive the 
all-star treatment. It has been a massive hit, although as with much 
recent genre product (`Godzilla', `The Postman', `Sphere') has receive a 
middling response if not outright slamming from the critics. The 
critical response in this case is interesting with reviewers either 
tending to be condescendingly praiseworthy ("nice effects, just switch 
the brain off") or negative for a variety of reasons that seem to hover 
around something to do with the film's failure to be faithful to the 
original series. (The most bizarre review was the wholly hostile one in 
the New Zealand Listener which interpreted the costumes and the 
promotional LS logo as neo-Nazi and the relationship between Will and Dr 
Smith as paedophile).
But all the talk about faithfulness to the original series is founded on 
the misapprehension that the original series was some classic - which it 
isn't. When it began in 1965, the series was a typical space opera - 
`Flash Gordon' or some copy of a 1950s juvenile tv serial like `Rod 
Brown of the Rocket Rangers' - recast for the Space Age. But it was poor 
sf, shockingly ignorant of basic science (a basic trademark of any Irwin 
Allen sf series) and lacked any conceptual depth other than featuring a 
monster or space cowboy of the week. With the second season and the move 
into colour, the camp element took over with Jonathan Harris, supported 
by Will and the robot, becoming the real star of the show, playing to 
the camera as broadly as possible. It is the camp silliness and the 
kitsch appeal of the show's corniness today that has made the series a 
cult item. Certainly its popularity in reruns is for reasons that have 
almost nothing to do with sf. The movie has been criticized for its lack 
of humour, in taking a much grittier, more realistic approach and for 
having abandoned the style of the series. Which, if any of the critics 
really sat down and examined what they were saying, is a fatuous 
statement - any faithful approach would surely have left the film 
emerging as some science-fictional cousin to `The Adventures of 
Priscilla, Queen of the Desert'.
There was the question of which way the film would go. One had the 
dreadful feeling that it would turn out something like `The Brady Bunch 
Movie' with the 1960s po-facedness put through the brutally sarcastic 
wringer of 1990s deconstruction. And the presence, as both scripter and 
producer, of Akiva Goldsman who wrote the last two `Batman' sequels - 
which should in any book have deemed him unemployable in the industry 
again - did not exactly inspire confidence. At most the trailer gave the 
indication it would be all special effects flash and a no-brain "sci-fi" 
script. But the surprise is that `Lost in Space' is actually a halfway 
reasonable effort. It remains quite faithful to the series basic 
mythology while refashioning it into a scenario where real world 
temperaments intrude upon the absurd ideal of the perfect nuclear family 
that the 1960s series held up. Now the Robinsons are a dysfunctional 
family - Penny (in an annoyingly whiny performance from Lacey Chabert) 
is a cynical punked-out brat and Will an ignored child prodigy who only 
wants his father to spend some time with him; the women no longer stand 
about and do the cooking while the men go adventuring but are all 
technically competent and hold doctorates; West goes from the handsome 
hero to a cocksure macho jerk and in comes a good deal of overt sexual 
banter between he and Judy; we even get to see Smith actually performing 
a medical operation and Don West being the pilot which we never did in 
the series. The basic design of the robot is retained but at the same 
time it rebuilt into a heavily armoured fighting machine. There are a 
number of other touches that only fans of the original would pick up - 
Penny gets a new CGI version of her old space-monkey; or how Gary Oldman 
does a quite accurate mimicry of the craven and loquacious character 
that Jonathan Harris created and naturally gets to entangle Will into 
his schemes while trotting out classic Smith-isms like "Never fear, 
Smith is here." And of course the minor parts are filled with cameos by 
members of the original cast - Angela Lockhart (the mother in the 
series) is the holographic president whose image Will messes about with 
at the start; Marta Kristen (Judy in the series) and Angela Cartwright 
(Penny in the series) are reporters at the press conference; and Mark 
Goddard (Don West in the series) is the general who assigns the new Don 
West to the mission.
Just seeing how the film has reconstructed the familiar characters and 
icons of the original makes it quite intriguing. Equally so the film is 
filled with some breath-taking effects sequence which are conducted at 
an immensely exciting pace. The venture into the abandoned Proteus is a 
marvellously suspense-fraught set-piece. The sheer kinesis of the film 
carries it but the downside is that while the film sets itself up well, 
its last quarter act falls apart. Goldsman's time-travel plot is far too 
ambitious for the hurtlingly-paced space opera the film is trying to be. 
And further it seems only half a plot which leaves all sorts of 
questions and loopholes hanging - how does the future with the elder 
Will still remain extant instead of being edited out once the past is 
changed ? Or exactly what is the Proteus mission meant to be doing - did 
The Jupiter II travel through time or not and, if so, why didn't the 
Proteus mission? And the climactic dive through the planet's core is 
geologically preposterous. Nevertheless for the most part the film 
manages to divert one's attention well with its dark and savvy reworking 
of the series mythology and its hurtling array of effects bravado - it's 
not a bad start for what promises to be an ongoing series. 
Intriguing piece of trivia:- Did you know that the release of the film 
comes one year after the date the series set as the year of the Jupiter 
2's launch ?


Author
Homer Yen
"Danger, Will Robinson, danger!"  These mere four words may have been
among the most venerable that survived the fickle decade of the '60s.
Although only verbal remnants from television's past, Hollywood hopes
that this familiar phrase will entice a generation of adults and their
children to watch one more adventure featuring the space-faring
Robinsons.  Dr. Smith, Father John, Mother Maureen, sisters Judy and
Penny, young Will, and Robot have all been resurrected in the '90s
version of a family who gets lost in space.
In the future, with Earth dying and her natural resources at dangerously
low levels, ongoing efforts have been made to find a suitable sister
world to colonize.   The only one that they know of is half way across
the galaxy.  To complicate matters, a rival humanoid species
(Seditionists) is also trying to be the first to colonize that planet.
John (William Hurt) is a leading scientist and has decided that their
family will be the first to make the long 10-year journey across the
galaxy.  At the helm is Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc), an accomplished
fighter pilot as seen in the beginning, visually spectacular, fight
sequence.  If they safely arrive, the Robinsons can construct a space
portal that will link to another space portal, currently being
constructed in Earth's orbit, which would make transportation between
the two planets almost instantaneous.  But the Seditionists want to
thwart their attempts and use Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman) as their saboteur.
Suffice it to say, while it is an interesting premise that gets the
Robinsons into space, it is a contrived sequence that eventually brings
the entire cast together on a ship that has been thrown off course, lost
in the galaxy.  And despite the fact that it might seem that this film
would focus on the wild dangers and life-threatening hazards that would
face any pioneering family, at its core, it is a film about family
values (togetherness, sacrifice, et al.) buried under layers upon layers
of special effects.  Presumably, children may learn something valuable
but not even realize it.  But given the gravity of the Robinson's
situation, the movie seemed too tame to be an effective science-fiction
thriller and too 'tense' to be a story for children.  It fell somewhere
into the murky middle.
A lot of territory in "Space" is left unexplored.  The beginning battles
suggest that even greater dangers await, but most of the following
action is tepid at best.  As a family ripped from their roots on Earth
and forced to travel light years across the galaxy, all except one
seemed all too willing to just leave everything behind.  There was lots
of room for more drama and more excitement.  The film only devotes 'just
enough' time to showcase young Will's budding genius or John's search
for balance between his mission and his family.  I was also disappointed
with Judy, who spoke, perhaps two lines in the whole film.  Played by
Heather Graham, she was worlds away from her unique performance as
Rollergirl in Boogie Nights.  Here, she is reduced to shooing away the
egomaniacal Major West, whom, of course, she eventually gives in to.
Oldman, however, seemed to enjoy his role as the malevolent Dr. Smith.
There's a scene that perfectly encapsulates the tone of this film.
After boarding a drifting ship, the party soon discovers that it is
infested with metal and flesh eating, spider-like creatures.  Young
Will, using a 'holographic interface', assumes control of the robot.  It
looks like one huge video game as he zaps the oncoming critters.
Consequently, there is as much thrill here as there is playing Space
Invaders.  "Lost in Space" is full of imaginative special effects, and
may turn out to be the next big simulation ride at Universal studios.
But as a major film, it comes across looking and feeling like an
overblown Saturday morning cartoon.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Gary Oldman, William Hurt, Mimi Rogers, Matt LeBlanc, 
      Heather Graham, Lacey Chabert, Jack Johnson, Jared Harris
Director: Stephen Hopkins
Producers: Mark W. Koch, Stephen Hopkins, Akiva Goldsman, Carla Fry
Screenplay: Akiva Goldsman
Cinematography: Peter Levy
Music: Bruce Broughton
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     LOST IN SPACE is New Line Cinema's bid to enter the space franchise 
race.  Undoubtedly impressed by the long-term, consistent profitability 
of Paramount's STAR TREK movies (the ninth of which will be released 
this year), New Line has decided to resurrect another late-'60s science 
fiction television enterprise, LOST IN SPACE.  Admittedly, thirty years 
ago, there weren't many similarities between the two programs.  STAR 
TREK was a relatively serious, socially-conscious series while LOST IN 
SPACE became infected with what I'll call the "BATMAN sickness," and, 
over the course of its four-year run, devolved from a semi-straight 
program into pure camp.  Much of that silliness has been removed for 
this big-budget, big-screen effort.
     Fans of the original LOST IN SPACE will likely not be displeased by 
the direction this movie takes.  In addition to retaining the basic 
premise of the series, all of the characters are back, as well  right 
down to the nameless robot (whose voice is provided by the same man who 
did the job in the TV program, Dick Tufeld).  There are also cameos by 
four of the '60s cast  June Lockhart (who played Maureen Robinson), 
Mark Goddard (Don West), Angela Cartwright (Penny Robinson), and Marta 
Kristen (Judy Robinson).  Despite all of these nods to the past, 
however, the special effects are strictly state-of-the-art.  
Unfortunately, there's not much to supplement all the eye-popping 
visuals.  The story is unfocused and the character development is 
virtually nonexistent.  
     One of the problems is that LOST IN SPACE uses more than 30 minutes 
setting up the plot, and it's not a particularly interesting half-hour.  
(If a strong box office response warrants future installments, at least 
we will have gotten over this tedious hurdle.)  The remainder of the 
film is divided into two parts  the investigation of a seemingly-
deserted space ship and the exploration of an inhospitable planet.  All 
the while, the space traveling family Robinson are trying to find their 
way home while dealing with a dangerous stowaway.
     It's 2058, and Earth is a dying world.  The Robinsons, John 
(William Hurt), Maureen (Mimi Rogers), Judy (Heather Graham), Penny 
(Lacey Chabert), and Will (Jack Johnson), along with their pilot, Don 
West (Matt LeBlanc), have boarded the space ship "Jupiter 2" on a 
colonization mission to the planet Alpha Prime.  Thanks to a stowaway 
saboteur named Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman), things don't go as planned.  16 
hours out of Earth orbit, disaster strikes the "Jupiter 2", and, to keep 
the ship from plunging into the Sun, West is forced to activate the 
hyperdrive, which saves the ship but throws it light-years across the 
galaxy into uncharted space.  Seven people and one robot are lost, 
looking for the way back to Earth.
     The set design in LOST IN SPACE is impressive.  The interior of the 
space ship is suitably futuristic-looking, while the Earth-based scenes, 
with their visually-stunning backdrops, recall last year's THE FIFTH 
ELEMENT.  Most of the model sequences are equally flawless, but the 
computer-generated spider-like aliens have the same flaw exhibited by 
similar creatures in STARSHIP TROOPERS  they look fake.  On the whole, 
however, LOST IN SPACE has a polished, high-budget appearance.  Too bad 
some of the effects money wasn't spent on the script.
     LOST IN SPACE is infected with a meandering storyline and lifeless 
protagonists.  Without a clear narrative drive, there doesn't seem to be 
much of a point to the whole endeavor.  The desire to get home doesn't 
generate the level of urgency one might reasonably expect, and the movie 
ends up feeling like a few episodes of STAR TREK: VOYAGER strung 
together.  There isn't a clear villain, either, since Dr. Smith is more 
of an anti-hero than anything else  his motivation is self-interest, 
not malice.
     In the TV series, Smith, as portrayed by Jonathan Harris, was the 
standout, and Oldman does a superb job re-inventing the character, 
bringing back many of Harris' mannerisms while leaving his own indelible 
mark.  Smith becomes a fascinating blend of charisma and delicious 
nastiness.  Beyond Oldman, however, the cast is disappointingly bland.  
As John and Maureen Robinson, William Hurt and Mimi Rogers fizzle.  
Heather Graham, who was wonderful as Rollergirl in BOOGIE NIGHTS, fails 
to do anything interesting with Judy.  FRIENDS' Matt LeBlanc displays no 
range whatsoever.  Only the two children, helium-voiced Lacey Chabert 
and cool-as-a-cucumber Jack Johnson, show signs of having a pulse.  
Chabert especially shows spunk, but she has the least screen time of the 
major players.  Incidentally, it could be argued that it wouldn't have 
mattered if everyone in the cast had been in peak acting form, since the 
script delivers the kind of two-dimensional characters involved in 
shallow relationships that even top-notch performances couldn't do much 
with.
     LOST IN SPACE features a few action sequences that generate 
adrenaline jolts, but this is not an edge-of-the-seat motion picture.  
And, to satisfy the kiddy crowd, there's the likable robot and a 
friendly (read "cute") alien called Blawp, which is the product of Jim 
Henson's Creature Shop and seems designed to appeal to younger audience 
members.  This may add to the film's attraction in some quarters, but 
not as far as I'm concerned.  I wanted a little more energy and a story 
that went somewhere.  As a result, while I can offer a mild endorsement 
of LOST IN SPACE as a comic book come to life, it's too weak a film for 
me to stamp with an unqualified recommendation.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Jon Popick
Imagine countries from around the world, united together in building an
expensive hunk of space crap to send people into a previously uncharted
world to help save all of humanity.  The voyage is quickly sabotaged and
ultimately ruined by a maniacal crackpot.  No, I'm not talking about
Contact or even The Real World 9.  This is the big screen version of the
campy 60's television series, Lost in Space.
It all happens in the year 2058, a year which finds our planet on the
verge of environmental ruin.  There is no clean water to drink and
fossil fuels are practically non-existent.  Our only saving grace is in
the distant planet, Alpha Prime, which has a similar climate and whatnot
to Earth.  The plan (called The Jupiter Project) is to blast the
Robinson family off on a ten-year journey to Alpha Prime, where they
will build a transport back to earth, thusly making future travel much
quicker.
Sounds easy?  It probably would have been if it weren't for the meddling
Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman, The Fifth Element).  He sneaks aboard the
Robinson craft in an attempt to reprogram the ship's robot to destroy
the mission.  But, in the biggest example of intergalactic irony since
Heston saw the Statue of Liberty at the end of Planet of the Apes, Smith
ends up a stowaway aboard the now undermined vessel.  Jesus, that almost
sounded like a Dennis Miller line.
After the Earth family Robinson retreat to their sleep pods, the robot
comes to life, destroys all navigational systems and a bunch of other
very crucial things before it's stopped in one of the most harrowing
robot-gone-out-of-control scenes since Robocop.  It's too late to save
the mission as the ship has been thrown way off course.
Of course, the Robinson family is too damn resourceful to give up that
easily.  They seemed too perfectly assembled, kind of like the cast of
The A-Team.  Each one is an expert in something, but I can't remember
what they all were.  Actually, my memory became rather hazy after I saw
Judy Robinson (Heather Graham, Boogie Nights) in her gleefully tight
spacesuit.  (Editor's Note: If you would like to see more of the woman
that PLANET SICK-BOY has named `The Most Beautiful American Actress -
1997', watch her eat up the screen in Two Girls and a Guy)
I do remember that there is a really cool scene where the ship goes into
hyper-drive.  And I remember being really pissed of about a CG monkey
that they found on an abandoned craft.  I also remember that the picture
seemed about forty minutes too long, but I don't remember caring.
Writer Akiva Goldsman, occasionally a capable adapter of John Grisham
books (The Client, A Time to Kill) but primarily the dunderhead who
ruined the Batman franchise, has crafted a likeable story that's a bit
long in the tooth, but doesn't frivolously waste valuable screen time
(save the stupid monkey).  Big kudos to Production Designer Norman
Garwood (Brazil) for making one of the coolest spaceships ever.
Of the actors, TV's Joey (Matt LeBlanc, Friends) and Claudia (Lacey
Chabert, Party of Five) stand out in the only roles that stray from the
usual casting.  There were also supposed to be a bunch of cameos from
people who were in the original TV series, but I'm way too young to have
ever seen it, so I don't know who they were.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Jack Johnson (Will Robinson), Gary Oldman (Dr. Zachary Smith),
William Hurt (John Robinson), Matt LeBlanc (Major Don West), Lacey
Chabert (Penny Robinson), Mimi Rogers (Maureen Robinson), Heather Graham
(Judy Robinson), Dick Tufeld (voice of Robot)
Directed by: Stephen Hopkins, Written by: Akiva Goldsman 
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, strong language, and sexual
situations
"We're lost... aren't we?" - Penny Robinson
Yes, the Robinson family is lost again, with Dr. Smith, Major West, and,
of course, the Robot, all in tow.  You probably know about this, though,
since it's been advertised since last August or so.  It's been
advertised as much as your typical effects-heavy summer film blast, but
it sure as hell isn't summer yet.  At any rate, as you can probably
guess, LOST IN SPACE is based on the TV series of the same name that
aired in the 1960s.  And, as such, the plot has a number of similar
aspects in it.
In the future, the Earth is dying.  In only two more decades, it will be
uninhabitable for human life.  However, one planet has been found that
can be colonized to save the human race - Alpha Prime.  The planet is
ten years away however - and that's where the Robinson family comes in. 
The Robinsons, their pilot Major Don West, and a defensive robot are to
take the ten year journey (spent in cryo-sleep - by the humans at least)
on board the Jupiter 2 to Alpha Prime, and build a hypergate there. 
This gate can then be used along with the identical gate built next to
Earth so allow the citizens of our lovely blue planet to transport
instantaneously to Alpha Prime.  It all seems like a fine plan, but no
one counts on Dr. Zachary Smith, who, working in cooperation with
terrorist faction, attempts to sabotage the Robinsons' mission. 
Unfortunately for Smith, he's caught on board the Jupiter 2 when it
takes off, and, thanks to his own efforts, he, along with the Robinsons,
West, and, yes, the Robot, are now "lost in space." And I'm sure you
know what that leads to...
"Danger Will Robinson, Danger!" - Robot
And then the real questions arise.  What will happen when the Robinsons
become lost?  What will they do with Dr. Smith?  What kind of strange
dangers will they encounter out in the unexplored regions of the
galaxy?  And what happens when talented director Stephen Hopkins and
lord-of-destruction Akiva Goldsman team up to create a big-budget, major
release, highly-anticipated film?  
LOST IN SPACE swings wildly around the quality spectrum.  It has moments
of intense coolness, as well as moments of intense idiocy.  In the end,
though, despite cheesy aspects, I had a good time.  At first I felt like
I had taken part in a guilty pleasure - perhaps I had no business
enjoying a movie with the problems that it has.  But then, why should I
feel guilty?  I had fun, and damn it, that's gotta be a good thing.  
The direction is well handled, thanks to Stephen Hopkins, who worked
well on films like PREDATOR 2 (1990) and THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS
(1996).  The production design also looks great.  Gorgeous settings fill
the screen.  Details down to the costumes - even those slightly BATMAN &
ROBIN-like rubberish cryo-suits - looked good.  And the Robot was just
plain nifty.  
The special effects are incredible all around, from start to finish. 
Well, okay, there's on exception to that, but I'll get to that in a
second.
The sci-fi elements are, for the large part, well handled, even when
they could turn out convoluted.  The things the Robinsons encounter are
always interesting and fun (or creepy), whether animate or inanimate. 
Well, okay, there's one exception to the "animate" part, but I'll get to
that in a second.
Time is actually taken in this film to get to know the characters a
little better.  Even in the midst of their problems, we learn a little
more about their personalities.  A couple of these scenes are cheesy,
but largely, they fit in, and help move the story along well, as well as
helping us to care more about John, Will, Maureen and the gang, all the
way down to dear old Robot.
As for the performances, the real find is Jack Johnson as Will
Robinson.  Child actors often come across as annoying, but Johnson is
extremely good in this role.  Gary Oldman's Dr. Smith is often somewhat
of a friendly villian, but whatever take on the role that he's aiming
for, he does it very well, as you'd expect.  William Hurt and Mimi
Rogers are solid as the Robinson parents, with Hurt doing well as a
busy-yet-caring father (almost becoming a film cliche) and Rogers...
well, not having enough screen time.  Chabert also does nicely in the
role of young Penny, but, this being the first time I've heard her
voice, I was pretty surprised at the distrubingly inhuman
crazed-chipmunk-that-rode-the-bat-out-of-hell high-pitch intonation in
her voice.  And can someone explain why the special effects boys decided
to obviously enhance her cleavage?  Matt LeBlanc, as West, was also
surprising, but in a good manner.  He fit exactly as he should have into
the role of the good Major, and, even though he didn't stray terribly
far from his character Joey on "Friends," he might be able to have a
real film career - something I always thought only Courtney Cox and
Matthew Perry (okay, maybe Jennifer Aniston... ) would muster.  Dick
Tufeld's vocal work on the Robot is something fans will recognize from
the original series, as also Tufeld voiced the original Robot.  His work
here is an indispensable asset to the production, and really drives up
the old fun factor.  The Robot turns out to be not just another effect,
but another good character.  
But what about Heather Graham?  Well, this is the first film I've seen
Graham in.  Maybe it's the fact that her role was underwritten, but
Graham doesn't show much talent here.  She seems to have been hired
largely for her looks.  Of all the cast members, she is the most painful
to watch, mostly since too much of her time is taken up serving one of
the film's lamer subplots.  And, as such, she's going to serve as my
segue way into the bad elements of the movie.
That lame subplot is the flirtation between Don West and Judy.  It's
pointless, it's stupid, it's badly written, and it really didn't need to
be there.  It even leads into a short sexual-tease scene that feels very
out of place in a film that's otherwise fine for most families (as long
as they don't mind the profanity).  But there the subplot is, and it
takes up screen time, as well as allowing for two or three fair jokes. 
I guess we have to let it live.
Remember my certain "animate" problem?  And my one special effects
problem?  Well, if you want to know what it is that manages to
inexplicably be the only bad effect in the film, as well as be a
slightly lame subplot in itself, I say only this: monkeyish Ewok-spawn
must die. 
The first half hour of the film gives a couple of indications that you
might be lined up for something unsettlingly campy.  Never fear, though,
as things definitely get better once people get frozen on the Jupiter 2.
And, yes, the dialogue reaches a number of points where it sounds overly
dumb.  But most of the time, things are alright, and even when it sound
stupid, it's not so bad that it can't be forgiven.
Despite all this, though, the film is a good time.  Cheesy at times,
foolish at times, beautiful at times, unrelentingly cool at others, it's
a mixed bag that finally stacks up to be a fine show.  Akiva Goldsman,
who killed BATMAN & ROBIN (1997) and damaged BATMAN FOREVER (1995) seems
to be going up, and maybe, with work, will be a solid screenwriter at
long last.  Or hey, maybe not.  Just stay away from the superhero
franchises, Akiva.  Hopkins is still solid.  The cast is good - Johnson
is a real find - and the effects/settings/production designs are
frequently dazzling.  It has humor, adventure, and creepiness.  It has
good, and bad, and luckily for us all, the good wins out.  Yes, this is
LOST IN SPACE.  There's been a lot of films created based on TV shows. 
And for every funny THE ADDAMS FAMILY (1991) there's a painful CAR 54,
WHERE ARE YOU? (1994).  And, sure, you can't expect them all to turn out
as good as THE FUGITIVE (1993) or even MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE (1996).  But
LOST IN SPACE manages to join the ranks of the more entertaining movies
in the genre.  It's not the best, but it's one of the good ones, and I
have no problem with seeing more of the Robinson famly in the future. 
"Get lost," and enjoy.
"Breathe, Penny, breathe." - Will Robinson

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In his on-the-money essay in the April 6th New Yorker
magazine, film critic David Denby writes, "New movies are
amazingly impersonal--a rush of frenetic images that have
little in common with, say, the heart-stopping dangers and
last-minutes rescues in Griffith, the tumultuous waves of
frenzy in Gance, the stately displays of massed power in
Lean...A couple holding hands runs away from an explosion,
or runs down a corridor as flames (or floods) chase after
them. How many times have we seen those?"
   Mr. Denby--whose essay is entitled, "Mourning the Movies:
Why don't people love the right movies anymore?"--might be
expected to look with a jaundiced eye at Stephen Hopkins's
sci-fi drama, "Lost in Space."  Or would he?  True enough,
we've seen this sort of film-making before, packed to the hilt
with all the special effects money can buy, the heroes
outracing disaster from fire, floods, monsters, and evil human
beings.  It's all here.  There's are two differences, however. 
One is that the technology in this New Line production is as
dazzling as you'll find anywhere, Star Trek and Star Wars not
excluded.  The other is that despite the slimness of the story,
you may just get caught up in the human drama of a family
who have become truly lost--not simply marooned on a
remote island or a snowy mountain peak with a chance of
being rescued by the Coast Guard or an observant chopper,
but astray in some alien galaxy beyond the help of any forces
back on earth.
   Akiva Goldsman, who scripted the tale based on the 1960s
TV series starring Jonathan Harris, sets the narrative sixty
years into the future.  The planet's technology is predictably
able to transport people to regions far more remote than our
own moon but, wonders of wonders, it's a world in which all
countries have worked out their differences and live together
in peace. The enemy now is not our fellow human beings but
ourselves.  We have savaged nature to such a degree that
the planet has only about a decade to live before the air will
be unfit to breathe.  People will not be deserting the farms
and rural areas for metropolitan areas as waves of immigrants
have done for decades.  Now there's a job that not even the
Seven Santini Brothers could handle.  Everyone will have to
bolt from the earth to a planet which can sustain life.  That
new world is ten years away given the state of power in 2058,
but through the miracle of wormhole technology, the trip can
be made virtually instantaneously.  The wormhole must have
a gate both going and coming, without which you're lost.  You
can guess that the gate vanishes leaving the astronauts
stranded in the great expanse.
   To give the story the human dimension needed to allow the
audience to relate, writer Goldsman sends up a single family
unit, the Robinsons, carrying with them all the baggage of the
brood including a sassy teen, Penny (Lacey Chabert--who
sounds like Donald Duck on a clear day); the wise-beyond-his
years Will (Jack Johnson); an egghead professor, Johnson
(William Hurt); his wife Maureen (Mimi Rogers); their cute
physicist daughter Judy (Heather Graham); with Gary Oldman
performing in the role of the (need we say) evil Dr. Zachary
Smith.  The handsome and egotistical Major Don West (Matt
LeBlanc) is in the driver's seat, a guy who after serving fifty
military missions resents being called up to take a family on
what he calls a mere outing.  That this family is the earth's
last hope for survival seems lost on him: he's more interested
in making passes at Judy, whose name he hopes to tattoo on
his back to replace those of his former girlfriends whose
identities have all been surgically removed from his body.
   Though we grow to care for this family unit, whose
members we can identify with given their all-too-human traits,
we may wind up thoroughly confused by most aspects of the
story.  Dr. Smith wants to sabotage the mission though it's not
clear why, even though Gary Oldman, who inhabits this
diabolic doctor well, announces his intentions and feelings in
Shakespearean English.  (Maybe that's why.)  A huge robot
makes an appearance now and then, more clearly
announcing its intention: "Destroy the Robinson family." 
Why?  Who knows--they seem nice enough.  Spiders show
their hostility, a friendly little E.T. leaps from the brush to
become the family pet, and Will Robinson makes an
appearance toward the end of the film, suddenly twenty years
older thanks to a little time travel by the Robinsons, to whine
about how his dad never showed him enough love.
   Director Hopkins finds enough time in this 128-minute film
to evoke sentiment ("I love you very much"--John Robinson to
his son Will); the slang of the year 2058 ("Hey professor, why
don't you give the egghead a rest"--Major West to John
Robinson--and also such futuristic argot as "Gimme a break"
and "Tell me about it"); and politically correct calls for
conservation.  All of this, however, takes a back seat--way
back--to the fx which, wonder or wonders, can be realized
right now in 1998.  A look at the massive numbers on the
production crew will give you an idea of the importance of
dazzling eye and ear: digital character animator, computer
and video effects supervisor, computer graphics coordinator,
computer and video effects assistant, gaffer, computer
graphics designer, ad infinitum.  Bill Hurt may have turned in
a more three-dimensional role in his other special-effects
movie, Ken Russell's 1980 blockbuster, "Altered 
States," but the technology which staggered the eye eighteen
years ago seems laughably naive today.  Expect to be lost in
the dynamics of time travel, a space ship transporting itself
through wormholes, fires, and the like, and even a James
Bond-like galactic battle scene to set the tone.  The mewl
"Are we there yet?" becomes especially poignant when
everyone justifiably wants nothing more than to go home.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 128 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten
1998

Author
David Smith
LOST IN SPACE - Opened 3 April 1998 (US); Cast: Gary Oldman, William Hurt,
Mimi Rogers, Heather Graham, Matt LeBlanc, Lacey Chabert, Jack Johnson
        It's hard to write a movie review from a hospital bed. But it
seemed almost appropriate; the only reason I'm in the hospital is that
"Lost In Space," billed as thrill-a-minute action, oozed so much sweetness
and light I went into insulin shock. 
        There is some action hidden in there, but "Lost In Space" is
really about weird surprises. You'll be surprised at how little sense it
makes; you'll be surprised by the almost wooden acting, not-quite-complete
computer graphics, and the fact that you actually paid money to watch.
        The story of the Dysfunctional Family Robinson is a simple one
indeed - Earth is going to pot; the spacecraft Jupiter 2, manned by said
Robinsons, is going out looking for a new place for humanity to call home. 
After forty minutes of tedious attempts at character development, Jupiter
2 finally launches. The villainous Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman) tries to
sabotage the trip, but ends up being trapped aboard the craft. They get
lost on the way. 
        The insulin shock comes from the family's attempts to regain some
sense of normality. The happily married John and Maureen (William Hurt and
Mimi Rogers) aren't so happy; Judy (Heather Graham) has an obnoxious pilot
(Matt LeBlanc) chasing after her; boy genius Will (Jack Johnson) is
starved for attention; and perky Penny (Lacey Chabert) can't find a decent
shopping mall anywhere. By the end of the movie, they're such a perfect
nuclear family that you just want them to die horrible deaths at the hands
of the newly-mutated Dr. Smith.
        This movie has so many plot holes, you could drive a Mack truck
full of 60s "Lost In Space" videos through it and never miss a beat. Set
just sixty years in the future, most of its technological innovations
(from holographic phones to the hyperdrive) are wildly improbable. Even
worse is the statement that, between now and then, the Earth will become a
single, unified political entity.
        But the real killer is the "time bubble" that dominates the last
half of the movie - time paradoxes have to be done very carefully. Even
Terminator 2 messed them up, but it can be forgiven because it was cool in
so many other ways. "Lost In Space" lacks its redeeming qualities. 
        What the movie lacks in coherence, it also lacks in acting. Hurt
and Rogers just aren't convincing as a married couple. Graham and LeBlanc
are similarly uninteresting; by the end of the movie they're locking lips,
although nobody's sure why. Chabert and Johnson are just plain annoying. 
The only saving grace is the always-entertaining Oldman; deranged
psychotics are his specialty, after all, and he somehow manages to rise up
from the utter mediocrity he's mired in. 
        Even the computer graphics aren't all that spectacular. The
explosions are mundane, the Jupiter 2 looks like it's made out of plastic,
and the ubiquitous robot is just as hokey-looking as ever. Given that
"Lost In Space" tries desperately to take itself seriously, this may be
the worst flaw of all. 
        If you go to see "Lost In Space," you'll end up "Lost" yourself -
you'll have lost about five bucks and two hours of your time with almost
nothing to show for it.
----- David E. Smith, P O Box 324, Cape Girardeau MO 63702
http://bureau42.base.org/people/dave/ dave@bureau42.ml.org

Author
Bob Bloom
Lost in Space, starring William Hurt, Gary Oldman and Mimi Rogers
1 1/2 stars out of 4
  Lost in Space is an apt title for a movie that is dramatically lost for
lack of consistency and focus.
 This big-screen adaptation of the silly Irwin Allen sci-fi TV series of
the 1960s hedges its bets by trying to be all things to all viewers, and in
doing so founders in its own uncertainty. Is it straight s-f adventure? A
send-up? A family drama? Yes, no and a little bit of each.
  Lost in Space, the TV show, lost many viewers when it disintegrated from
a space drama to a campy kiddy show in which the show's purported main
villain, the evil Dr. Zachery Smith, was transformed by producer Allen into
a bumbling and verbose, comically and cowardly baddie.
 And it is the shadow of Jonathan Harris' performance as Dr. Smith that
creates havoc in this cinematic reincarnation.
 Gary Oldman, an actor not known for subtley (for reference, see The
Professional, The Fifth Element or Air Force One) is given the difficult
task of following in Harris' space boots.
 Unfortunately, he is not at all helped by the screenplay of Akiva
Goldsman, whose most recent offering was the feeble Batman and Robin.
Goldsman script is too ambitious, trying to capture the flavor the TV show
and blending it with a '90s quotient of familial angst.
 Thus, we get a movie in which dad (William Hurt as Professor John
Robinson) is a workaholic, while mom (Mimi Rogers as Maureen Robinson)
tries to balance home and career, while the kids (Heather Graham as Judy,
Lacey Chabert as Penny and Jack Johnson as Will) all reflect, in some
manner, the havoc caused by this dysfunctional family of the future.
 Eldest child Judy is a cold, brainy scientist who spends all her time
working with dad on the Jupiter project. Penny is the rebellious middle
child who would rather spend her days and nights at the mall instead of
trapsing through space. And Will is the young genius working on scientific
gizmos in order to capture his father's attention and love.
 So far, so good. A nice diversion from the Ozzie and Harriet-type family
portrayed by Guy Williams and June Lockhart and their
cute-as-button-children in the TV show.
 However, in rewriting the villainous Smith, Goldsman seems to have lost
faith in his original vision. For Oldman's Smith is merely an updated
version of Harris. He wheedles, lies, cringes and acts the coward, while
tossing out sarcastic one-liners under his breath. It's charming, but not
threatening.
 And what's a movie without some sort of serious antagonist. Therefore,
Goldsman tosses in a subplot involving time displacement and some alien
spiders in order to create a credible menacing villain.
 But by the time that all comes to pass, Lost in Space  has nearly twisted
itself back into the self-parodying world of Irwin Allen.
 Also not helping matters is the performance of Hurt. Here he seems
detached, merely acting by the numbers. He spends a lot of time furrowing
his brow and shooting sidelong glances at the rest of the cast.
 Matt LeBlanc as Major Don West seems like he's acting the part as a comic
bit from his Friends sitcom. His macho posturing is almost campy.
 Young Johnson as Will Robinson has some good moments with his robot pal,
while Chabert mouths some of the best zingers in the film. Rogers and
Graham really have little to do.
 Oldman, unfortunately, can't seem to get a handle on how to handle his Dr.
Smith. At times he's a comic villain, other times he's devilishly evil.
Either way, he's neither fish nor fowl, and that is this movie's sore
point.
 Of course, the open-ended finale leaves ample opportunities for sequels,
but perhaps this Lost in Space should merely remain lost for all time.
 It's darker and more sophisticated than the TV series, but that's like
saying The National Enquirer publishes a better product than your local
high school newspaper.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
Ind. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Author
Ernest Lilley
Cast: William Hurt (John Robinson), Mimi Rodgers (Maureen Robinson), Gary
Oldman (Dr. Smith), Matt LeBlanc (Don West), Heather Graham (Judy), Jack
Johnson (Will), Lacey Chabert (Penny), Dick Tufeld (Robot's Voice)
Director: Stephen Hopkins Screenwriter/Producer: Akiva Goldsman
LOST IN SPACE is a blast! Of all the TV series remakes I've seen, LIS plays the
deftest hand, updating the overly campy original series with a darker cast
while incorporating style and substance from the original. Gone is the
international tension that sparked sabotage of the Space Family Robinson's
colonizing mission to Alpha Centuri, replaced by the Sedition, a movement to
thwart the unified Earth government's project to establish a hypergate to Alpha
Prime - a planet probes have identified as capable of supporting Terran life.
With the Eco-systems of Earth on the ropes, Scientist John Robinson is willing
to travel to Alpha Prime by normal space to establish the crucial "other link"
and make two-way hypertravel possible. Driven by his work, and haunted by the
specter of his own father's parenting failure, he insists on taking his family.
It's a twisted idea, as the self proclaimed "Space Captive" Penny explains in
her personal video diary, but he means well by it. Dr. Smith does not mean well
by anyone, and in the pay of the Sedition sabotages the mission in classic
style. His reward for avarice is an all expense paid trip to an unknown region
of the galaxy with the Robinsons.
The elements of the original series are lovingly encoded into a very fresh work
by writer/producer Akiva Goldsman, who deserves applause for mixing the old and
new without making them look borrowedand us blue. The tributes are many, from
the appearance of five of the original LIS cast as support characters in the
pre-launch segment, to morphing of ship and robot from old to new and the use
of the familiar robot voice. Mark Goddard, the original Major West, belies his
retirement from acting in his short but nicely realized role as "The General",
giving orders to the upstart Major West. Throughout the film you will see shots
coinciding with actual sequences from the series as your mind clicks into a
place 30+ years ago, assuming you were around then. It will be curious to see
the reverse effect on younger audiences if they ever see the series pilot,
suddenly seeing the connections in the film.
While the old is well served, so is the new. The original cast cameos work to
hand 
off their roles to the next generations, especially the ones by June Lockhart
(the Principal) and Mark Goddard. The props echo or incorporate their
predecessors, but they do it with cutting edge style. Even the storyline makes
sense. It is excellent SF, and surprisingly consistent for a mass appeal Sci-Fi
project. LOST IN SPACE takes advantage of the audience's SF education in the
intervening years. Goldsman has put together a complex project that would have
been overkill not long ago but now deserves the accolade action packed instead.
The new cast does a super job of balancing old and new. Gary Oldman's Dr. Smith
is a tribute to Jonathan Harris's performance, with just the right amount of
the old ("oh, the painthe pain") and the new. Oldman's Dr. Smith happily
acknowledges his evil - it's a philosophical choice, he explains. I liked the
more competent villain he portrays as much as I liked Mimi Rogers as Maureen
Robinson. In fact, I've always liked Mimi Rogers, and I think it's good to have
a Maureen Robinson with a Playboy pictorial (Mar '93) in addition to her movie
credits. Though she doesn't show an excess of skin, Mimi shows plenty of steel
in the new role. William Hurt's John Robinson gets a 90's update too.
Screenwriter Goldsman used the part to recall the splintered families that
surrounded us as we watched the original, and to promise that among the wonders
of future parents working to save their families will be the most precious.
Hurt's character does beat us over the head with his awareness of the effect of
his work obsession though, as we all got it the first time. 
If you want a benchmark for how far CGI (Computer Generated Imagery) has come,
compare the opening "bubble fighter" space combat sequence to the Babylon 5
Star Fury shots. The only things not CGI are Matt LeBlanc and the other pilots.
Crisp and breathtaking. The B5 work has nothing to be ashamed of, but it's
nowhere near the LIS sequence. Now go back and check the Star Fighter combat
scenes from THE LAST STARFIGHTER. Ouch. And I thought they were so sharp when
they came out in 1984. Or even more telling, take a look again at the
Millennium Falcon jumping to hyperspace and then compare it to the Jupiter 2's
fiery transit. Wow.
LOST IN SPACE reunites us with an important piece of our Sci-Fi past . For
those of us who watched, glued to the screen as Irwin Allen's first family in
space launched from our black and white screens back in 1965, this timewarp
serves a kindness no school reunion ever will, showing us our memories as we'd
like to remember them - improved by the passing years. Incredibly, it even
knows when to get off the stage, leaving us brimming with hope and wondering
about what comes next.
Thank you, LOST IN SPACE. Godspeed, Space Family Robinson. Robot, keep an eye
out for them, they're our family too.
    Subscribe now by Emailing SFRevu@aol.com with any of the following in the
subject: 1) "Notify Me" to get notices when the WebPage changes 2) "Email
Subscription" to have the text version sent to you vial Email. 
  SFRevu brings Science Fiction reviews and interviews to the web each month.
Pass the word! Help SFRevu grow by forwarding copies to friends, we can use all
the help we can get. SFRevu's contents may be reused with the following
conditions: 1) credit SFRevu@aol.com and give our URL:
http://members.aol.com/sfrevu 2) contents may not be changed without the
permission of the Editor >> >>

Author
Ryan Davis
If Special Effects were the principal parts of a movie, then Lost In Space
would rank as one of the best this year. But even with all the other
elements added Lost In Space is still a entertaining film, even if it runs
a little long.
In the future the world is dying, and there is only one hope, colonize
another planet. John Robinson(William Hurt) is in charge of building a
hyperspace tunnel to connect the colonized planet to earth. His only demand
upon accepting the mission is that his family may accompany him to the
planet, they include: Maureen(Mimi Rogers), Penny(Lacey Chabert),
Judy(Heather Graham), and Will(Jack Johnson). Also on the trip is the
pilot, Don West(Matt LeBlanc), who is none to happy to be there at the
beginning and the evil Dr. Smith(Gary Oldman). During the trip they run
into lots and lots of obstacles, one after another. 
The plot is a little weak, and the ending is a perfect setup for a sequel,
so don't expect closure. The acting is surprising good with the exception
of the constantly irritating Lacey Chabert. Gary Oldman is rehashing his
performance from The Fifth Element, but its done perfectly- So why
complain? Matt LeBlanc is surprisingly likable as Major West, maybe he will
be able to get work after Friends is over. The Special Effects are great,
but the bugs have been done before and it has a Starship Troopers feel.
There is a cute little monkey creature made by Jim Henson's Creature Shop,
although it looks like its been painted on the film, it is still a nicely
rendered image. All things considering its entertaining and fun. Check it
out if your a special effects or sci-fi fan.

Author
Christopher Null
     Would that I had listened to my gut instead of LOST IN SPACE's flashy
trailer, one of the best promos for a bad movie (see also: ALIEN
RESURRECTION, CLIFFHANGER) to come along in some time.
     Where to start with my complaints about this movie?  Is it Akiva
Goldsman's ridiculous script that attempts to jam as many
fall-down-howlingly-bad lines into two hours as possible?  Actors who
obviously realize its qualities and spend the time mumbling them beneath
their breath?  A ridiculous little creature called Blorp (or Gleep, or
whatever) that's sole purpose seems to be to sell toys?  The time travel
plot that takes over half-way through the film and makes you long for the
oh-so-logical days of THE TERMINATOR and BACK TO THE FUTURE?  Hell, "The
Jetsons" paints a more realistic view of the future...
     LOST IN SPACE may ultimately be an insult to your intelligence, but it
is an insult with good special effects.  But with a big-screen TV, you can
wait for that HBO premiere instead of shelling out cash for this loser.
Director: Stephen Hopkins
Producer: Carla Fry, Akiva Goldsman, Stephen Hopkins, Mark W. Koch
Writer: Akiva Goldsman
Starring: Mimi Rogers, William Hurt, Lacey Chabert, Heather Graham, Gary
Oldman, Matt LeBlanc
http://dangerwillrobinson.lycos.com/
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer

Author
Curtis Edmonds
It wasn't all that long ago, you'll remember, when they announced the
casting for The Bonfire of the Vanities.  Those of us who were fans of
the Tom Wolfe novel cringed:  Tom Hanks as Sherman McCoy?  It was clear
to me, at least, that William Hurt was the best choice -- the only
logical choice -- to play the part of the antihero stockbroker.
Fortunately, the casting gods were on watch when Hurt was cast in the
Macon Leary part in The Accidental Tourist, two years prior.
I mention this to say that casting is hard.  I realize that.  But it
doesn't take a casting god to see that Lost in Space would be a much,
much better movie with someone else as Professor Robinson instead of
William Hurt, someone who wasn't as good of an actor, someone who could
contribute to the movie's high-camp style.  Lost in Space is not a
William Hurt movie, it's a Matt LeBlanc movie -- nonserious and
superficial.  By casting the serious and laconic Hurt in the lead, the
movie makers do Hurt and themselves a disservice.
Hurt is not the only thing wrong with Lost in Space, but he's a good
starting point.  I can see William Hurt in an intelligent, well scripted
movie about space travel -- like Contact, let's say.  Unfortunately,
that's not what Lost in Space is.  This is a strictly for fun movie -- a
silly, over-the-top sci-fi effects fest, with very little in the way of
plot or storyline or coherence.  The movie is at its best when it's at
its dippiest -- when the crew is fighting evil mechanical spiders or
hurtling through hyperspace.  Most of the performances add to the
overall silliness:  Lacy Chabert as a pouting teenager, LeBlanc as the
gung-ho Tom Cruise wannabe fighter pilot, Gary Oldman as the
cowardly-yet-evil Dr. Smith.  All these people are guilty of overacting,
yes, but at least they've picked a movie where overacting is an asset
rather than a problem.  LeBlanc is a great deal more entertaining in his
meaty part than anyone had a right to expect, and Oldman is creepily
effective as Dr. Smith.  (The other two main actors, Mimi Rogers and the
luminous Heather Graham, have characters that are so underwritten that
they don't get a chance to overact.)
The problem with Lost in Space is that it's not consistenly silly.  The
plot is simple enough:  Robinson family gets lost in space and
encounters wacky adventures.  But apparently the scriptwriter felt
guilty about writing such silliness and decided to add some depth --
exploring the relationship of Hurt's Professor Robinson character to his
dead father and brilliant son.  There's entirely too much time spent on
these irrelevant subplots and not enough time on action and wackiness.
And the action and wackiness sort of bog down in the last reel as it is,
as the plot throws in some meaningless mumbo-jumbo about time travel.
The last thing we see in Lost in Space (before the horrid
seizure-inducing end credits, the worst thing about the movie) is the
image of eight-year old Will Robinson on the bridge of the Jupiter 2
saying, "Cool."  Lost in Space works when it's cool, when it speaks to
the inner eight-year-old in all of us that likes explosions and
mechanical spiders and eye candy.  I know it sounds weird to be
criticizing a movie for not being completely superficial and mindless,
but there you go.  Lost in Space is Dumb, but it should be Dumber.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
Your Guide to the Hollywood Stock Exchange
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Are you kidding?  No jury in the world would
convict a baby for murder.  Well, maybe Texas."

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
There are some pretty impressive stars in LOST IN SPACE - it's just that none
of them happen to be actors. The stars I'm referring to are the computer
generated ones that make up the movie's "outer space"; the stars that the less
impressive actors hurtle thru as they try to find their way home. Yes, in
terms of acting, the star power is . . . well, more like a falling star. Kinda
pretty, short-lived, and pretty much dead.
LOST IN SPACE, as if you really didn't know, is based on the 60's sci-fi
television series of the same name. It's the year 2058, and Earth's precious
resources are quickly being usurped by the needs of its massive population.
John Robinson (William Hurt) is the scientist leading a mission program to
colonize a foreign planet. Earth's entire existance is contingent upon a
successful mission, but nobody, whether it be John's family or hired battle
pilot Don West (Matt LeBlanc), seems too enthusiastic about leaving their home
planet for several years. John's family consists of his wife Maureen (Mimi
Rogers), his atypical teenage daughter Penny (Lacey Chabert), his ingenious
son Will (Jack Johnson), and his beautiful scientist daughter Judy (Heather
Graham). Despite everyone's reluctance, the Jupiter 2 spacecraft abandons
planet Earth and makes its way into the vast eternity of space.
Unknown to anyone but the audience, there is an evil doctor stowaway
determined to sabotage the entire mission. Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman) has been
hired by a group of rebel conspirators to turn the expedition sour, and Dr.
Smith has re-programmed a talking robot to "destroy Robinson family"! When
everything that could go wrong does go wrong for both sides, the spaceship is
warped to an unknown destination, and now the premise of being lost in space
is complete. As for the audience, you will likely be lost in boredom by this
point, wondering if the plot, like the Jupiter 2, will ever get off the
ground. It's hard to tell who deserves the most blame - the incredibly bland
and corny characters or the horrifically lame script? Chabert is basically the
only one to overdo it, sounding like a whiny munchkin on helium. If you, like
me, were convinced by commercials that her voice was altered for some sort of
plot twist where her body would be taken over by aliens, you're wrong! That's
just her normal voice!
In yet another example of a "Friend" faltering on the big screen, LeBlanc is
so incredibly dull and yet so obviously trying so hard to be so incredibly
charming (make sense?), it makes you want to shove his ass out the escape pod
corridor without an escape pod. Graham is a babe - thank goodness there was
something for me to think about during this film. Hurt, the black hole of
excitement, sucks up any energy that might have been left. If Hurt were
available in tablet form, he would be a prescription strength sleeping pill.
Johnson isn't dull, he's just lame as the young know it all who winds up
saving everybody's ass all the time. Want an example of how cool this kid can
be? How about when he convinces the robot to think with its heart and
reconsider killing the family? Hey, don't laugh - the thing actually listened
to the Mr. Rogers-would-be-proud sentiment. But alas, if you thought a
character couldn't be much worse, there was Rogers as the epitome of generic
(or, mother as she was known). Why hire an actress? They could've had a white
cardboard cutout with the word MOM printed on it. Now that would've had some
pizzazz!
LOST IN SPACE luckily doesn't suffer in every single category that it could
have. The special effects are crisp, clear, and at least mildly captivating,
unlike any of the presences onscreen save it be Oldman, who plays his evil
character with a great deal of fun and finesse. Unfortunately, Oldman is
locked away for most of the film, giving us nothing but ample mocking
opportunities to enjoy. While the special effects are pleasing to the eye,
they are nothing you couldn't find in most modern sci-fi films. CONTACT, for
example, far exceeds this film in terms of imagery and imagination.
LOST IN SPACE just has too many shortcomings to ever be considered a work of
cinematic art, with numerous contradictions (the time travel aspect was
horribly flawed!), wooden and corny acting, worse dialogue, and an ending so
disappointing, you'd be happier to have seen the entire Robinson family get
blown to smithereens. Then again, with an ending like this film has, it's
obvious a sequel is already being considered. What an awful note to end on,
knowing there could be more of this in a year or two. The attempt to be family
oriented is commendable, but LOST IN SPACE is lost with the illusion that
special effects and the nostalgia of a classic TV series being revisited is
enough to satisfy all age groups. Well, danger potential movie goers! Danger!
This movie crash lands without ever breaking thru the atmosphere of
mediocrity.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Lost In Space (1998)
William Hurt, Gary Oldman, Matt Le Blanc, Mimi Rogers, Heather Graham, 
Jack Johnson, Lacey Chabert. Directed by Stephen Hopkins.
PG-13, 3 stars (out of 5 stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
Whenever Hollywood trots out its latest big budget film based on an old 
TV series, people invariably ask if it's as good as the original. In the 
case of "Lost In Space," the obvious answer is How could it not be? Irwin 
Allen's "Lost In Space," which ran from 1965 through '68, was quite 
possibly the lousiest show in the history of television. Nostalgic baby 
boomers remember it fondly as a camp classic. They are wrong. The film 
"Valley Of The Dolls" and the old "Batman" TV series were camp. "Lost In 
Space" was simply bargain basement kiddie dreck as its very worst. A sci-
fi version of "The Swiss Family Robinson," the show was a painfully dull 
melange of wooden acting, Grade Z special effects, and costumes straight 
from an elementary school play. The only element of the show even 
remotely interesting was the bitchy relationship between the family's 
robot and the villainous Dr. Smith, played by Jonathan Harris as a grumpy,
 grandiose old queen.
30 years after the series died and went to rerun Hell, "Lost In Space" 
has been reborn as a feature film, with a budget in the neighborhood of 
$80 million. Who would have ever thought? Even more surprising is the 
fact that, for the most part, they finally got it right. This "Lost In 
Space" is a whiz bang, tongue-in-cheek space opera, entertaining and 
visually imaginative. Although the story lurches across more than a few 
rough spots, overall it's a pretty fun ride.
The movie follows the basic premise of the TV series. Faced with looming 
ecological disaster, the United Global Space Force is looking for a new 
planet. Against his wishes, hotshot fly-boy Major Don West (Matt Le 
Blanc) is assigned to pilot the Jupiter 2, taking the Robinson family 
across the galaxy to set up a space gate that will allow instantaneous 
transportation throughout the stars. Enter Dr. Zachary Smith (Gary Oldman,
) a mercenary working for sedition interests, who sabotages the mission, 
but inadvertently ends up trapped on the ship with the Robinsons. Big 
splashy adventures follow, as the group deals with a robot gone berserk, 
intergalactic spiders, a space monkey, and an encounter with a time 
bubble, where they come face to face with future versions of themselves.
William Hurt plays Professor Robinson much like his character in "Altered 
States"; both are chronically preoccupied scientists who care for their 
families, but don't take time to show it. Maureen Robinson (Mimi Rogers 
from "Austin Powers") tries to bridge the emotional gap between Dad and 
the kids; Will (Jack Johnson,) Penny (Lacey Chabert,) and Judy (Heather 
Graham from "Boogie Nights.") The cast is fine, except for "Party Of 
Five's" annoying young Lacey Chabert, who looks like a midget Neve 
Campbell and talks like Alvin the Chipmuck. 
Thankfully, Gary Oldman, in his umpteenth role as a villain, keeps his 
portrayal of Dr. Smith in check. He captures the spirit of Harris, 
spouting lines like "Farewell, my platinum plated pal. Give my regards to 
oblivion," without approaching the hamminess ozone of his predecessor. 
Matt Le Blanc from "Friends" is likable as Major West, the Jupiter 2's 
version of Han Solo. Watch for cameos from June Lockhart (as a 
holographic note from school) and Mark Goddard (Major West's superior 
officer) from the original series. Incidentally, Bill Mumy, the original 
Will Robinson, was inexplicably passed over for a part, while Jonathan 
Harris refused to appear ("I don't do bit parts," he sniffed.)
Of course, "Lost In Space" is about special effects, not acting, and the 
results are mixed. The film boasts over 700 computer-generated visual 
effects, a new record, and many of them are knockouts. After some 
expansive shots of a futuristic city (not as good as "The Fifth Element," 
but still quite nifty,) we're treated with a dazzling launch sequence as 
the Jupiter 2 takes flight. Unfortunately, once the family hits space, 
the effects become more uneven. CGI close-ups of a cryogenic procedure 
look phony, as do some of the creature shots. 
Most irritating are scenes of the Blawp, a space monkey designed by the 
Jim Henson folks to be "user-friendly, from a merchandising point of view.
" The CGI creature moves well enough (for a walking toy commercial,) but 
the effect is never convincingly integrated into the scenes, looking as 
if it was pasted onto the individual frames of film. 
For its first two thirds, "Lost In Space" moves along at a brisk pace, 
nicely mixing visuals and genre standbys, underscored by the "Afterschool 
Special" subplot about young Will seeking parental validation. Things get 
murkier in the final reel, when the time bubble enters the storyline and 
angst-ridden future versions of the cast chase the family around. 
Naturally, all is resolved in time to set things up for a sequel.
Although undeniably cheesy, "Lost In Space" is done with high style and 
good humor. For cinematic junk food, it's tastier than you'd expect it to 
be. Notwithstanding that damned Blawp, of course. Get me a hunting rifle 
and I'd gladly mount its head on the wall, right next to my Ewok.

Author
Shane Burridge
If any recent trend can bear witness to the all-too-often voiced
complaint that Hollywood has run out of ideas, then it is the
recycling of 1960s television shows into big-budget, star-powered
cinema updates. It's jump-on-the-bandwagon thinking, of that there is
no doubt, but unlike other recent trends - the 'based on video game'
film, the 'return to the 70s disaster flicks', the 'make a movie from
anything by Jane Austen' mini-booms - this bandwagon looks set to roll
on for some time yet.  Why is this happening, and why now?  It 
could be said that this flood of old television to the 
box-office is less a process of revivifying our cultural past 
than colonizing it - the simple fact that we are in a position to 
look back gives us the right for enlightened comment and critique.  
Or it could be some kind of fin-de-siecle anxiety, harrying us to 
polish and repackage these old shows before they are looked back on 
as some potentially embarrassing remnant of the 20th century (Oh 
yeah, we knew that show was stupid, but look, we made this out of it 
to prove that we knew).  It's really more simple than either of these 
ideas:  these TV makeovers are Hollywood's way of saying Yes, we know 
we've run out of ideas, we're just not trying to hide it any more, 
and you'd better get used to it because the Baby Boomers are running 
this asylum now, and we grew up with these old shows, so you're going 
to take this reheated hash and scarf it up just the same way you've 
always done, without any need for us to apologise for it.  Because, 
folks, postmodernism means never having to say you're sorry.    
This kind of honesty is almost beyond criticism.  It's Hollywood
waving its flag and saying, Look Ma, no ideas!   So, for the most
part, we've shut up and treated these films as the harmless
reminiscences they inevitably turn out to be.  Their treatment is
wholly predictable: part revision, part homage, all marketing.  But a
few exceptions have slipped through the net: Betty Thomas' necessarily
cruel (but affectionate - you can be as iconoclastic as you like with
this nostalgia as long as you stay affectionate) repositioning of THE
BRADY BUNCH; and Brian De Palma's take on MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, which
saw the Impossible Missions Force blown away in the first scene (a
move which several people were not pleased with, because with that one
cavalier stroke, De Palma demonstrated that he was sadly lacking in
that all-important affection for the original).
Which brings us to LOST IN SPACE, and another problem concerning TV
remakes, for it is impossible to separate the cinema experience from
the historical product that has imprinted its own identity so firmly
in our culture.  LOST IN SPACE was originally intended to be serious
science-fiction but descended into camp once Jonathan Harris (Dr
Smith, a murderous saboteur who was meant to be written out after half
a dozen episodes) started getting the most of the show's fan mail. 
Soon LOST IN SPACE became nothing more than 'The Dr Smith, Will
Robinson, and Robot Show', and as the budget became skimpier (which
explains why they would spend a whole season on the same planet, then
take off and land on another planet with the same rocks arranged
differently) and the not-very-special effects even cheaper, the
once-serious concept took on a wayward surrealism unprecedented in
prime-time TV.  In fact, for many young viewers the show's absurdity
made it frightening.  LOST IN SPACE went beyond all logic and thus
into the territory of nightmare.  One particularly terrifying episode
(for me, anyway) found Will and Doctor Smith in a fog-shrouded
minimalist street set of Chinatown talking about buying hot dogs while
oversized spiders lay lurking in the dark.  With a memory of the show
as vivid as that, how could any belated cinema remake stand alone?
Nevertheless, the 1998 LOST IN SPACE manages to pull off this
balancing act, and it does it by returning to the show's roots.  It
may be affectionate, spirited, even respectful in an odd sort of way,
but most importantly it manages to do what its television predecessor
could not - have the muscle to back up its intentions.  Its most
apparent strength is the special effects, not only in quality but also
sheer volume - this is one of the most FX-saturated movies you're
likely to have seen in some time.  It's strange that the 'biological'
effects - i.e. monsters and critters in general - don't hold up as
well as the rest, but in a strange way it is reflective of the
monsters in the original show, which were just plain lousy (Look! 
There's a woman with her face painted green!  Look!  There's a guy
wearing a sparkly bowler hat and a stocking over his head!)  The
second strength the 1998 version has is Akiva Goldsman's script, which
manages to employ several motifs and undercurrents of the show without
making them obvious in-jokes or necessary prerequisites with which to
'appreciate' the update.  There are spins on the businesslike
space-pioneer 'give-me-a-hand-with-the-force-field-Don' relationship
(or nonrelationship) between John Robinson and Don West; the
friendship/bonding between Will and the Robot; and most dramatically,
the unspoken (but apparent to those of us who were regular viewers of
the series) surrogate father relationship Will had with Dr Smith -
which in this version is pursued to a horrible conclusion the 
original producers could never have foreseen.
Fine so far, but will the fans like it?  Fandom is a difficult
demographic.  The elements of the series held in most affection will
be the same ones which most pointedly fail to deliver for several
viewers on several levels, but the most common point of focus will be
the replacement of new actors for old.  Who, for example, could
possibly replace Jonathan Harris as Doctor Smith?  I wouldn't have
thought it would have been Gary Oldman, but he does a creditable job. 
Jack Johnson similarly slips comfortably into the role of Will.  I 
suspect it may be Lacey Chabert's portrayal of Penny that will rankle 
many fans (pure prejudice on my part, since I had an enormous crush 
on Angela Cartwright as a kid), whose character does admittedly 
become more engaging and less whiny as the film goes on, but what 
does she keep complaining about? At least the Robinsons have to 
be a step up from the PARTY OF FIVE family she's been stuck with for 
the last five years.  Perversely, it is the only non-human character 
of the series that is the most significantly irreplaceable.  Hearing 
the voice of Dick Tufeld, the only actor from the original to reprise 
his role (the Robot) in the film, provides viewers with the most 
immediate nostalgic experience that LOST IN SPACE has to offer - 
that, and I suppose the revamped title theme played over the end 
credits (not the show's more memorable original theme, however - 
remember, it had two!) The only major departure from prewritten 
characterization would be Don, as played by Matt LeBlanc - really, 
it's just another version of his character Joey from FRIENDS - but 
it's a perversely satisfying change: at last we get to see Don 
hitting on John and Maureen Robinson's cute older daughter Judy.  And 
about time.
I'm wary of making a comment as general as 'Fans of the TV show will
love LOST IN SPACE',  because being the first kid on the block to see
it I haven't yet had a chance to compare reactions.  But I can say
personally that as a fan of the show I was enormously satisfied with
what the film-makers had done. LOST IN SPACE works.  It is able to
exist on its own terms as an imaginative and active space adventure,
while still catering to fans of the original.  I'd go as far as saying
that it is the most enjoyable adaptation of a TV show I have yet seen.
 But once again, this is prejudice on my part - I can't think of many
other shows (well, GET SMART was one) which spawned as many
catch-phrases in the school playground.  Most of them came from Smith,
whether it was "The pain, the paaaiin" (usually when filing out for a
PE lesson) or anything ending with "Dear boy" (I'm sure also that 
many teachers must have gotten sick of kids responding "Never fear, 
Smith is here" whenever they were appointed with some minor classroom 
task). However, as much as I enjoyed Smith I have to say it was Don 
who made me laugh the most when I revisited the show a decade or so 
ago. Humorless Don, who for all appearances seemed to be a walking
clockspring of repressed rage, and who could never speak to Smith
without snarling ("You're a 24-carat goldbrick!"), was where we could
see the reality outside the show intrude into its own peculiar
universe; for this was Don-the-actor voicing on behalf of the rest of
the Robinson Family with every snarl his extreme vexation about being
relegated to the periphery while a camp old ham merrily stole the show
right from under them.  It makes you think about why Jonathan Harris 
was one of the few original cast members not to get a walk-on this 
time around.
The series LOST IN SPACE has become something of an institution now. 
Some may ask why any studio would bother to make an enormously
expensive movie of a flimsy low-budget show thirty years later.  Fans
will reply that it has been a remake that has been too long in coming.
 The facts, according to the original show, stated that the Robinsons
blasted off into space on October 16, 1997.  It's a shame the film's
producers couldn't have arranged for their debut to coincide with date
and bring the whole LOST IN SPACE phenomenon full circle.  As it
stands, this new telling of that story has wisely reset the launch
date to September 30, 2058.  I guess we can look forward to
Hollywood's next onslaught of television remakes - remakes of remakes,
in fact - around about that time.

Author
James Sanford
Ten years ago, William Hurt was "The Accidental Tourist" and now, he's "Lost
In Space."
That might seem like a journey from the sublime to the ridiculous, except
that the big-screen version of the 1960s TV show is considerably more
technically sophisticated and slightly more cerebral than the original,
which was notable chiefly for its charmingly absurd stories and
bargain-basement monsters: Remember the episode featuring the dreaded giant
carrot?
As TV-to-movie adaptations go, "Lost In Space" is probably one of the more
respectable entries in the field, with expensive production values adding a
classy sheen to what's essentially cheesy material. The film features some
impressive computer-generated animation, Akiva Goldman's script incorporates
mini-tributes to everything from the "Star Wars" movies to "The Waltons,"
and director Stephen Hopkins has avoided playing the movie as camp.
Still, something has been left out. Goldman ups the IQs - if not the
maturity levels - of most of the stalwart Robinson family and even
introduces a bit of dramatic dysfunction. Unfortunately he accomplishes this
at the expense of the characters' charms, so although libido-driven pilot
Don West (Matt LeBlanc) and disgruntled pre-teen Penny (Lacey Chabert) seem
much more human than their television counterparts, they're also less fun to
have around.
The Goldman creations that really work are his revisions of professor John
Robinson (Hurt) and the diabolical Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman). On the show,
Robinson rarely projected anything except concern, but Hurt humanizes the
man, introducing subtle twin undercurrents of jealousy toward youthful Don -
who's hot for John's daughter Judy (Heather Graham) - and Robinson's own
father, a legendary military strategist whom Don idolizes. Goldman also
restores Smith's dark heart (which vanished early on in the show), much to
Oldman's obvious delight. Graham and Mimi Rogers as mom Maureen, on the
other hand, are given little to do.
The first half of the film parallels the series' set-up, as scheming Dr.
Smith sabotages the Robinsons' mission to find a new Earth and, in the
process, becomes trapped aboard the Jupiter 2 spacecraft with the family as
they hurtle into unexplored galaxies. There's a fair amount of suspense as
the crew almost crashes into the sun and later discovers an abandoned ship
with a scary secret.
As he's proven in his scripts for the last two "Batman" movies, however,
Goldman is not particularly skilled at building plots. Though the last third
of "Lost In Space" introduces all sorts of intriguing concepts, Goldman
doesn't develop any of them particularly well, and the less said the better
about the excruciatingly cutesy Blawp, a combination monkey-chameleon which
looks glaringly fake and exists for no reason other than possible marketing
tie-ins.
Fans of the TV version will be amused by the cameos early on by series stars
June Lockhart, Angela Cartwright, Marta Kristen and Mark Goddard. Sadly
though, the innocent silliness that made the "Lost In Space" series a
classic guilty pleasure is missing in action here. Maybe the carrot monster
wasn't such a lame idea after all.

Author
Michael Dequina
Back in February at the monthly Los Angeles Comic Book and Science Fiction
Convention, New Line Cinema put on a lavish presentation for its big-screen
update of the cult 1960s sci-fi TV show Lost in Space, complete with
in-person appearances by cast members Mimi Rogers, Matt LeBlanc, Lacey
Chabert, Jack Johnson, and even Gary Oldman.  That should have set off my
warning alarms--the last time such an extravagant film presentation took
place at the convention was nearly five years ago, when none other than
Arnold Schwarzenegger made an in-person cameo to peddle... Last Action
Hero.  But no, like millions of others, I bought into the hype and "got
Lost."  If only I had gotten lost--literally--on the way to theatre and
spared myself the tedium of this sloppily slapped-together blockbuster
wannabe.
You may find yourself wondering if director Stephen Hopkins and
screenwriter Akiva Goldsman were lost themselves when they made the film.
At the convention, Goldsman claimed to be a rabid fan of the original
television series, and if that really is the case, I'd hate to see what he
does with concepts he only has mild interest in.  To say that his script
lacks narrative cohesion is to imply that there is a narrative to begin
with--which there most certainly is not.  After the setup, in which the
Robinson family--father John (William Hurt, looking and sounding as spaced
out as he does in interviews), mother Maureen (Rogers, wasted), daughters
Judy (Heather Graham, ditto) and Penny (a heavily made-up Chabert, looking
like a junior version of Neve Campbell in Wild Things), and son Will (young
newcomer Johnson, making the best of it)--and pilot Don West (LeBlanc,
doing a bad Han Solo impression) find themselves lost in space after their
ship is sabotaged by evil stowaway Dr. Smith (a watered-down but
still-lively Oldman, cashing a paycheck and loving every minute), the
script's "stream" of events becomes so fragmented and random that it seems
to be made up as it goes along--and Hopkins does little to make what does
go on the slightest bit interesting.  They encounter another ship.  They
board it.  Alien spiders attack them.  They return to their ship.  The
other one explodes.  They land on a deserted planet.  And so on.  An
attempt at a plot involving time travel occurs in the third act, but
Goldsman doesn't seem to understand the rules that come with using such a
story device; when one character's past self dies, the future incarnation
inexplicably lives on.
The look and effects should be Lost in Space's ace-in-the-hole, but
Hopkins even manages to botch that.  For a big-budget film, the visual
effects are incredibly shoddy.  In one composite background shot, I could
see the blue outline around Oldman; the various digital effects for the
space battle scenes look like... digital effects.  But nothing in those
shots is as jaw-droppingly unconvincing as Blawp, a monkey-like space
creature that becomes Penny's pet.  Entirely computer-generated and every
inch showing it, Blawp looks like it was lifted directly from a Sony
PlayStation game.  Apparently Hopkins thought the same and tried
desperately to hide it; how else can one explain the graininess of Blawp's
composite shots with the human actors?  But in doing so, the seams are that
much more obvious.  You have to be severely visually impaired to not be
distracted when a grainy shot of Penny and Blawp is immediately followed by
a crystal-clear solo reaction shot of Judy.
New Line is hoping Lost in Space will become a big franchise much like the
long-running Star Trek cash cow at Paramount.  I don't think so.  In a few
years, the Lost in Space movie will likely live on not as a series but as
the obscure answer to a trivia question:  What film ended Titanic's 15-week
reign at the top of the weekend box office?
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "How can we bring civilization to the stars if we can't remain
civilized?" Maureen rhetorically asks her husband John after another in
their unending series of marital tiffs.  Welcome to yet another
dysfunctional film family, the Robinsons.
     From Stephen Hopkins, the director of  PREDATOR 2 and NIGHTMARE ON
ELM STREET 5, and Akiva Goldsman, the writer of BATMAN FOREVER and
BATMAN & ROBIN, we have a deadly serious treatment of a classic
television series that delighted solely on the charm of its goofy props
and silly sentences.  ("That does not compute.")  The cinematic version
of LOST IN SPACE seems to be a didactic Franz Kafka space story written
for older children.  So somber in tone, you'll swear this must be a
message movie, but looking into the story's thoughts is like staring
into a black hole.  Or as the evil Dr. Smith, played without any life
or charm by Gary Oldman, says, "Give my regards to oblivion."
     The head of the Robinson household is the brooding father, John,
played passionlessly by William Hurt.  His crime is that he's been
spending too much time at the office and has missed his son's science
fair again this year.  In the only notable casting in the film, Jack
Johnson plays the intelligent and sweet 10-year-old, Will, who controls
the robot.  The general rule for the story is that the characters'
brainpower is inversely proportional to their ages.
     The talented Mimi Rogers, who used to get demanding roles but now
gets nothing substantial, plays the wife, Maureen.  She keeps her
family together by yelling occasionally at her inert husband.  As the
older daughter Judy, Lacey Chabert, who was the sex kitten in BOOGIE
NIGHTS, gives a cold performance that only comes alive the few times
she manages to smile.  The middle child, Penny (Lacey Chabert), has
been brought home three nights in a row by security.
     In a plot that is either confusing or non-existent - you can
choose - the movie limps along between some dazzling but too darkly lit
special effects.  With all the money they spent, it's too bad they
couldn't have afforded a few more light bulbs.  But with 750 special
effects, as the press notes claim, it is easy to ignore the lack of a
script and concentrate on the visuals.  (And on the aforementioned
excellent piece of acting in the central role of the boy.)
     The body of the movie has the captain, Don West (Matt LeBlanc),
"taking the family camper on an interstellar picnic."  Once out in
space, the family ends up going through the solar flares of the sun
which forces them to engage their hyperdrive.  Landing at a random
place and time in the future, they get to fight giant spiders like, but
not nearly as believable as, the insects in STARSHIP TROOPERS.  There
is a great scene for kids in which Will uses a cool looking holographic
interface to battle the bugs remotely.
     The main failing in the picture is not the pathetic script but
instead is the way they blow it with the robot.  The endearing hunk of
junk of the original television series starts off life in the new LOST
IN SPACE as a killer mechanical beast, looking like something straight
out of ROBOCOP.  "Destroy Robinson family!" the robot says, pointing
his blasters at them.  Although the family is saved at the last minute
by Will, the new robot never achieves the charm of the old.  There is
however, a lovable, yellow alien monkey with big ears in LOST IN SPACE
to partially make up for it.
     "There's a lot of space out there to get lost in," John says in
the beginning.  And the movie gets as lost as the family.  The
picture's morose ending includes equal mixtures of childhood angst,
dark ruminations on the effects of absent fathers, and an ugly monster
lifted from ALIENS.  After playing with our heartstrings, the writer
gives us a quick redemption scene and a pointer to LOST IN SPACE 2.
Since they didn't have enough ideas for the first one, let's hope they
change their minds and lose the idea of a sequel.
     LOST IN SPACE runs too long at 2:10. It is rated PG-13 for
profanity, science fiction violence, and a scary monster and would be
fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, gave it **** and said he absolutely loved
the movie because of all of its space stuff.  His only complaint was
that he didn't like the monster, but he did like the imaginative way
they killed him. On the other hand, his buddies, Matthew, Nickolas, and
Eliot, age 9, all gave the picture no stars whatsoever.  Eliot called
it "junk," and Nickolas and Matthew complained that it didn't have a
story or a plot.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Stephen Hopkins
Cast:  William Hurt, Gary Oldman, Heather Graham, Mimi Rogers, Matt
LeBlanc, Lacey Chabert, Jack Johnson
Screenplay:  Akiva Goldsman
Producers:  Akiva Goldsman, Stephen Hopkins, Mark W. Koch
Runtime:  
US Distribution:  New Line Cinema
Rated PG-13:  sci-fi violence
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        If you're going to make a film that has absolutely nothing of interest
aside from its special effects, you might consider making the special
effects good.  Lost in Space, the new spin-off of the old TV series,
does not abide by this seemingly-obvious bit of logic, and the result is
a film that has a silly story complimented by unimpressive visual
effects and sets.  I can watch and enjoy a film that is mostly style and
little substance (Starship Troopers, for example), but the style has to
be stylish, not dull and rehashed like the "style" in Lost in Space.  
        Lost in Space isn't blatantly awful, but it comes dangerously close to
being so.  There are too many characters (none of whom have any
noticeable personality), the story is too thin (and disintegrates in to
incoherence by the final scene), the interesting elements are all lifted
from other films, and, like I said, the special effects aren't special. 
It's like trying to make a cake out of nothing but water and flour. 
You'll end up with something, but it won't taste good.  
        We are introduced to one of the several main characters in an
introductory space-battle that is disturbingly close to the battle
scenes in the Star Wars trilogy.  The hero is Major Don West (Matt
LeBlanc), and he's your typical hard-edged pilot.  He's recruited to
escort the Robinsons (a really smart family-of-five) into the depths of
space so that they can find a new place for humans to live, because the
Earth can only support human life for twenty more years.  
        The Robinsons are led by John (William Hurt) and Maureen (Mimi
Rogers).  The children are Judy (Heather Graham), Penny (Lacey Chabert),
and Will (Jack Johnson).  Also onboard is Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman), who
tries to sabotage the mission, but fails, and gets caught.  Well, he
only fails partially:  he triggers a series of light shows that result
in the Robinson's ship careening into the unknown corners of uncharted
space.  Finally, about forty-five minutes into the film, they are
actually lost, as the title rightfully implies.  
        After this, the story of Lost in Space is muddled, at best.  They end
up at some lost ship (which reminded me of Event Horizon, though I know
that film is too recent for Lost in Space to have ripped it off), and
they have to fight off these metal spiders that have nothing to do with
anything.  Later, they crash on this planet in a stunt that reminded me
a lot of Star Trek:  Generations, and they uncover a time-travel plot by
a character whose identity must be hidden for the sake of shock.  Anyone
seen any of this before?  
        What a tiresome journey it is getting to the end of this film.  I knew
I was in trouble when the opening battle looked significantly worse than
anything in any of the three Star Wars films (those films are twenty
years younger than this one!).  After that, the best special effects are
cartoony:  they are pleasing to the eye, but they look fake.  Unlike the
digital bugs in Starship Troopers or the dinosaurs in Spielberg's Park
movies, nothing here inspires us with awe and wonder.  It all looks
distractingly digital, and it just doesn't mesh with the live-action
performers.
        Speaking of live action, I've never seen a group of such talented
individuals go to waste like this.  Gary Oldman is good (I hear he
recreates the character from the television series perfectly), and Matt
LeBlanc is sometimes amusing, but the rest of these actors are bland. 
The biggest disappointment is Heather Graham, who was wonderful in
Boogie Nights; she isn't really given anything to work with, and, in
turn, doesn't end up doing anything.  William Hurt and Mimi Rogers spew
their lines like actors getting paid to spew lines.  The other two kids,
Chabert and Johnson, do their best, but are not very memorable.  I don't
blame any of these performers:  the script simply gives them nothing to
work with.
        I really expected to enjoy this film.  I don't understand how or why
Lost in Space came out so dull and familiar.  There are a few pleasures,
though:  the last-minute escape in the final scene is fun, and some of
the sequences are exciting despite their ultimate uselessness in
relation to the story.  And the actors, despite their lack of fire, are
pleasant to watch.  But Lost in Space is little more than a bundle of
missed opportunities replaced by scenes we've all seen hundreds of
times.  But hope is not lost:  if this becomes a series, just remember
what Star Trek II managed to do.

Author
Andy Wright
Capsule Review:
The ongoing quest to adapt every single television series ever made to =
the big screen (soon, only Manimal and She=92s the Sheriff will remain =
untouched) continues with this disappointing attempt at a franchise, in =
which a clan of eggheads roam the universe looking for a damned map. =
While there are some fun moments in the first half of the film =
(including some neat special effects and a nifty attack by some cool =
little spider monsters) they soon get swallowed up in a morass of creaky =
moralizing and ill-conceived cutesy elements - particularly the =
appearance of a badly animated galactic space monkey that=92s so =
blatantly designed for future merchandising profits it=92d make an Ewok =
hurl. The bulk of the blame for this movie=92s faults can be placed on =
the pointed head of screenwriter Akiva Goldsman (inexplicably able to =
remain employed after the horrendous Batman & Robin) whose one-liner =
intensive script seems to be hastily cobbled together out of old Laffy =
Taffy wrappers. Although Lost in Space has its surface pleasures (mostly =
supplied by a campily subdued Gary Oldman) and will probably be enjoyed =
by kids, it may leave the viewer with some dark and unlovely thoughts =
about just how calculated the whole Hollywood blockbuster process has =
become - if this is any indication, it could be a long summer at the =
movies, folks.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients:
Scientific family in a spaceship, saboteur, military guy, big battle
with space spiders, futuristic cryosuits, time bubble, 750 special
effects
Starring: 
William Hurt, Jack Johnson, Matt LeBlanc, Gary Oldman, Mimi Rogers,
Lacey Chabert, Heather Graham
Synopsis:
Just when Earth has nearly expended its resources, humanity has found
another habitable planet called Alpha Prime. The trouble is, it takes
ten years by spaceship to get there. Professor John Robinson (William
Hurt) envisions a plan to build the first 'hypergate' - - a space device
that a starship flies through, which will instantaneously transport the
starship to a similar gate light years away. A hypergate is important
because attempting to fly through hyperspace without a gate means your
ship may end up at any random spot in the Universe.  Robinson plans to
take his family on a ten-year journey to Alpha Prime and construct a
hypergate there while folks on Earth build a similar gate on Earth. 
Unfortunately, when their super sleek ship (the Jupiter 2) gets
sabotaged Dr. Smith (who works for a terrorist group called the New
World Sedition) the Robinsons enter hyperspace without a hypergate, and
the hapless crew (Dad and Mom Robinson, doctor daughter Judy, rebellious
teen Penny, young whiz kid son Will, pilot Major West, and Dr. Smith)
gets LOST IN SPACE. In space the Robinsons must prevail over nasty space
spiders and an alternate grownup Will Robinson.
There are a few interesting cameos for fans of the old LOST IN SPACE TV
series on which this movie is based. Look for June Lockhart (The LOST IN
SPACE TV series mother) as a school principal, Mark Goddard (The LOST IN
SPACE TV series Major Don West) as a general, and Marta Kristen and
Angela Cartwright (the original Judy and Penny) as mission control press
conference reporters. If the robot's voice sounds familiar, it's because
it's still the voice of Dick Tufeld.
Opinion:
LOST IN SPACE is a 70 million dollar action epic based on characters
from the campy old LOST IN SPACE cult classic TV series about a father,
mother, daughter Judy, Judy's boyfriend Major Don West, rebellious
daughter Penny, young son Will, his robot, and the sneaky Dr. Zachary
Smith who are all lost in space and having adventures while trying to
get back to Earth. The original TV series was about ray guns and robots
and 50s style family cohesion. LOST IN SPACE (1998) is a more intense,
cutting edge version of the same characters that hits nostalgic buttons
but modernizes the space epic with better special effects and 1990s
family issues. The main idea is to take big effects sci-fi adventure and
meld it to a family situation framework. (Speaking of family, there's
even a scene that parodies THE WALTONS. )
Does LOST IN SPACE succeed in what it's attempting to do? 
I like the way the characters start off in the beginning. FRIENDS star
Matt LeBlanc gets a good change of pace. He plays Major Don West. West
is a military man, an aggressive, instinct and testosterone guy who is
sure to clash with cerebral scientific leader Professor Robinson. Lacey
Chabert as the rebellious Penny also seems promising as a possible
family issue subplot. Unfortunately, the movie pairs Penny off with a
cutesy space monkey and forgets about her problems in order to focus on
the less interesting character brainy Will. Similarly, Judy starts off
witty against the flirtatious Don West, but quickly is relegated to the
status of background Barbie doll, her banter quickly becoming old hat. 
On the good side, the thrill ride is good, the heroes sharper than TV,
the villains and threats more intense; danger really means danger. LOST
IN SPACE starts off with a space battle and the action keeps on going:
planets explode, robots open fire on monsters, zooming ships avoid
impossible collisions, and so on. But the pace alternates between
trigger-happy action, and slow, stilted dialogue without really getting
the balance right. Even the music can't decide whether to be orchestral
or to be modern. As a result, LOST IN SPACE more like a set of segmented
full-tilt serial adventures (with dark lighting and music to match) than
a single cohesive film. The film rushes forward on stop-and-go action,
and then on the last exciting serial adventure the movie abruptly ends.
Several plot threads are left unresolved. For example, early on the
family spots a fearful alien spacecraft, and the camera zooms in on it
ominously, but afterwards no further mention is made of the issue.
Likewise, Dr. Smith receives a nasty, venomous spider bite that has the
potential to mutate him into a monster, and the camera zooms in on
Smith's wound ominously, yet at the end of the film, we still don't know
whether Smith ever receives medical attention for the bite. 
LOST IN SPACE is a swooshy entertaining flick, relying heavily on its
stunts and 750 special effects. It falls in the Summer Blockbuster
category, even though it's only April. However, the film can be so much
more with a bit more fine tuning. Call me an optimist, but I'm sure - -
that if the two proposed sequels to this movie pay attention to things
like smooth pacing, brighter cinematography, sharp dialogue, making use
of female character issues, and producing the feel of one continuous
plot as opposed to the bump-and-go feel - - then the sequels can build
successfully upon the foundation introduced by LOST IN SPACE. 

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
The Nineties have been called "the era of reduced expectations", and nothing 
seems to support this more than the spate of recent films.  Many efforts 
("Starship Troopers", "The Lost World", "Alien Resurrection") seem to be little
more than tent poles for extensive marketing campaigns or establishing franchi-
ses, rather than involving an audience.  I'd be tempted to say that "Lost In
Space" is the ultimate extension of that philosophy, but I'm afraid to be pro-
ven wrong by a film even less concerned with coherence.
There's a salvaged feeling to the whole film, as if some drastic changes were
made at the last minute after the rough cut was assembled and screened.  There
isn't an opening credit sequence, and one is tempted to think (as one of my 
friends did) that the end credits were originally at the beginning, only to be 
moved to the end of the film after they made a poor impression at early test
screenings.  The film begins by introducing not the Robinson family, but the
Major West character in a space battle.  This action sequence was clearly in-
tended to wow the audience before the main story gets underway, but only suc-
ceeds at hurling lots of effects at us without engaging our emotions.
This sheer volume method of entertainment continues throughout the film, the 
plot of which consists mainly of elements from the first few episodes, combin-
ed with bits and pieces from other films made over the last twenty years.  The
mission is re-written as a sort of competition between two factions, each try- 
ing to reach (and colonize) the same new planet first.  Earth's natural resour-
ces are almost completely exhausted, and its dwindling ozone layer spells Cer-
tain Doom for the human race.  This is an attempt to update the Cold
War aspects of the original series, but (as with the James Bond series) when
the Cold War is removed, it makes the new premise seem arbitrary (why would 
two factions sabotage the others' mission if both face certain extinction when
Earth dies?).  At any rate, Dr. Smith (played perceptively, if too subtly, by
Gary Oldman) is once again trapped in the ship as it launches, caught in
his own subterfuge as the robot he reprogrammed begins to demolish the space-
craft.  This forces the crew to blast their way into deep space without proper
preparation, plunking them in an unknown quadrant with no point of reference to 
guide the way home.
Most know that the Robinson name is no accident, and transplanting "Swiss Fam-
ily Robinson" into outer space seems like a reasonable opportunity for an ex-
citing survival/exploration adventure.  Very little is done with this decent
premise other than burying the viewer under an avalanche of very uneven effects
work.  Director Steven ("Predator 2") Hopkins has experience directing effects, 
so it's puzzling that he'd use this vast amount of computer imagery with such a
lack of clarity -- even the editing has little sense of geography.  
Bruch Broughton's score is hardly noticable over the clamor.  Akiva Goldsman's
script shows most of the weaknesses evident in his writing for "Batman and
Robin" -- a predeliction for one-liners and short term laughs at the expense of
long-term structure and character development.
The saddest loss due to this approach is the robot -- Goldsman's script reduces
him to a Mr. Microphone for Will (though this is one of the film's few good
jokes), and by the time he begins to evolve into an actual character, there's
little time remaining for him to do anything.  The rest of the script is a 
daisy-chain of one-liners (most of which render the characters as unlikable 
smart-alecks) and incidents (an extended sequence on a derelict spaceship seems
to exist only to force the Jupiter 2 to crash-land on the required planet) 
that lead to a time-travel premise.  This sort of thing is tricky stuff for 
anybody, and here it collapses entirely, giving the characters an opportunity 
to return to the time and place that the sabotage occurred, thus allowing them 
to essentially eradicate the events of the film.  Oddly, the crew doesn't choose
to do this, but instead they drop themselves in the middle of another perilous
situation (when exactly the time machine is reset is unclear) which requires 
them to once again use the hyperspace button and get themselves even more lost.
The fact that their mission to save Earth has failed isn't supposed to matter 
anymore, because somewhere along the line, Pop Robinson has learned to become a
caring father after years of putting his career first (even if you buy this, 
the daughters are completely ignored, which doesn't say much for the parenting
message), and to bond less sarcastically with his wife.  The older Robinson 
daughter learns to love the chauvanist pilot, while the younger daughter gets a
pet to care about.  The family members' performances range from bland (Hurt) to
infuriatingly smug and precocious (Lacey Chabert).  Heather Graham struggles
mightily, but can't rise above her nasty, you-go dialogue.  June Lockhart has
an arbitrary cameo as one of Will's teachers.  It's sad to see such a basic 
premise made into such a noisy muddle.  Not recommended.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in the 1965 Irwin Allen created a TV series, LOST IN SPACE,
based on the comic book SPACE FAMILY ROBINSON, itself a science fiction
adaptation of Johann David Wyss's SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON.  The series
lasted until 1968.  In the series seven people are present on an
experimental ship on a space mission when something went terribly wrong
and the whole group became, well ... lost in space. The characters were
the five-person Robinson Family, the pilot, and a stowaway enemy agent,
one Dr. Smith, whose initial goal was to destroy the mission.  The
family was unrealistic, even for the 1960s in that everybody seemed to
get along with everybody.  But Dr. Smith was adept at playing everybody
off against everybody else.  Smith was the embodiment of every negative
and dangerous human impulse but subtlety, yet the Robinson family never
seemed to catch on.  The special effects were bargain basement quality
for the most part.  When the LOST IN SPACE premiered, no less an expert
than Isaac Asimov wrote a letter reprinted in "TV Guide" about how
absurd the concept was.  It was a physical impossibility to travel so
fast and far in a few seconds that you could not even find familiar
stars in the sky.  I believe he claimed it was comparable to saying a
child on a tricycle took a wrong turn and found himself in another
country.
     There are at least two advantages to making a film of the story in
the late 1990s.  The story can be presented with superb special
effects.  I would rank the visual effects of this film just a few
microns below the quality one would expect from a STAR WARS film.  The
other advantage is that in these days of all kinds of theoretical holes
in physics--black, white, and worm--you would never get a reputable
scientist willing to commit to the impossibility of finding a few-
second shortcut to some other arm of the galaxy.
     In the new film version the Earth has finally conquered war and is
ready to move on to conquering the universe.  People live together in
peace--all but some nasty holdouts called the Sedition.  John Robinson
(played by William Hurt) has devoted his life to science at the cost of
neglecting his loved ones.  As a result he has one deuce of a
dysfunctional family.  Wife Maureen and children Judy, Penny, and
Will--nobody gets along.  The world is just not as peaceful as it
initially would seem.  The Robinsons might almost be better called the
Bickersons.  But John has a plan for bringing his family together and
at the same time further his work.  The whole family is going to take a
little trip together to the Alpha star system to set up a jump gate for
instantaneous travel to that system.  After ten years of being cooped
up together in space, of course the Robinsons will get along.  Everyone
in the family recognizes this as one of Dad's less stellar ideas, but
he thinks it will bring the family.  Little does John know that the
forces of the Sedition have an agent, Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman) who is
trying to stop their little mission and kill the family.  Except for
the maladjusted family this is really the plot of the TV series, but
remarkably when watching the film, one does not think of it as being a
retread.  It feels freshly re-imagined as if we are seeing it for the
first time.
     I cannot say I am very fond of William Hurt's acting in general.
Like Harrison Ford he usually has this distant quality, as if he is
just a little bit high all the time.  Mimi Rogers plays a slightly
authoritarian Maureen Robinson.  As Will Robinson Jack Johnson is
considerably more natural than was TV's Billy Mumy.  Heather Graham
makes an okay Judy Robinson, but Lacey Chabert's Penny is annoying and
just about the last person I would want to be cooped up with for ten
years.  Matt LeBlanc as the pilot on the make with Judy is nearly as
bad.  Gary Oldman, however, is a big improvement over the TV series.
His TV equivalent Jonathan Harris was a comedy actor who was miscast
and never convincing as the sinister agent. Oldman adopts many of the
same gestures, but makes them sinister and mysterious.  And he does get
some good lines like a playful allusion to the original STAR TREK as he
complains "I'm a doctor, not a space explorer."
     It has been a while since the look of a science fiction film has
done much to excite me, but if this film has a hero, it is production
designer Norman Garwood.  Visually, LOST IN SPACE is very evocative of
1960s science fiction, but not of TV science fiction of the time.  What
I saw on the screen was what was on the covers of magazines and books
at the time of the TV series.  It was like the film was the result of
someone watching the TV series in 1965 and then visualizing it the way
cutting edge artists of the time would have.  I kept finding myself
enjoying just looking at the screen and thinking what a good cover for
ANALOG science fiction magazine this or that scene would make.  Under
Garwood's design, space is a sinister place, much more so than it was
in the TV series.  The one false move is a cartoon-like monkey that
seems like a fugitive from some other film.  Garwood does a little
playing around with the design of the robot, which changes over the
course of the film, finally getting the crystal crown that was its most
memorable feature of the design from the series.  The credits list
cameos from the original TV series.  I must not have noticed Angela
Cartwright, but it is much harder to miss June Lockhart and, of course,
the voice of the robot is the same.  The language is a little salacious
for what is predominantly a children's film, but perhaps that is a sign
of changing times.
     With the exception of Oldman's performance, this is a film I would
rather look at than listen to.  But it does manage to take old material
and breathe new life into it.  I rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
David Michael Wright
    For those of us growing up in the days of 2001, THX-
1138, the Outer Limits, Star Trek (or, to a lesser extent,
Fantastic Voyage or Planet of the Apes), we continue, often
without reason, to think sci-fi is really about history and
politics, sociology and even philosophy.  We scoff at the
simplistic story line of a Star Wars but are vindicated when
the real Han Solo contemplated the meaning of life, death
and revenge in the Blade Runner. Currently, the battle
rages, with a victory in a Terminator, Dark City, or
Gattaca, a loss with Independence Day, Event Horizon or
Sphere, the retreat into hapless comedy in Men In Black and
on and on.
      So where does Lost in Space fit into this war of
ideas?  A few scant reviews are at least somewhat positive. The
estimated $20 million box office take is unanimous in its
verdict: the film is the first to sink the Titanic from the
#1 spot.  The trailers promise non-stop action and visual
effects - which the $80 million dollar film delivers (unlike
Independence Day, it actually contains more startling
effects than advertised). Fears that Friends co-star Matt
LeBlanc would prove obnoxious are unfounded, partly because
his character is made to make fun of, and partly because he
seems to have no trouble shaking his 'Friends' image.
    But true science fiction fans - who cannot avoid seeing
either a Dark City or an Event Horizon - will be more than
suspicious of the film for it's television namesake - but to
condemn the film along these lines will likely be misguided,
despite the reference to various galactic monsters, the
famous robot, and two cameos from the TV show. And certainly
it is true that, despite our best whishes, the film offers little
to tease the imagination of distant cultures, societies and
other forms of life. Its production and direction reminds
one of a Starship Troopers - without the militaristic
or gory overtones. It is relatviely easy to make fun of the film's
thin characterizations, convoluted plot, and the distinct odor of
a bad Disney movie.
    But I think this will again be a mistake. Overall, this
is a *family* film --in the good sense of the word--, and I
cannot think off hand of another sci-fi work that has
attempted so much in that direction. It resembles a Twister
in the skies: sandwiched in between the stunning visuals are
poignant reminders of family trials and tragedies, tales of
interpersonal conflict and celebration.  But unlike Twister,
there is the makings of an interesting plot - although
unbelievable to true devotees of the genre- nonetheless it
advances the development of the characters (who actually
resemble human beings with real problems). And the acting is
fine. William Hurt downplays his sci-fi heroism (rather like
Dustin Hoffman in Sphere). Phrases are muted and depressed,
his voice is a calm monotone, and he stands in mammoth
contradistinction from the chaos swirling around him. Mimi
Rogers plays a splendid unappreciated wife, unperturbed by
her husband's excuse that he is 'saving the world'.  No more
should really be said concerning the familial conflict,
suffice to say it is well done by children and adults alike.
It is this element which really saves the film and is probably
the reason that Hurt agreed to do the picture.
    So yes, I think this is a good sci-fi movie. No, it does
not stretch our imaginations, but it does have interesting
characters and revolves around human conflict. And it does so 
in the style that we come to expect: rapid fire sepcial effects and
fireworks. For adding 'family values' to the genre, the film should
win a prize.

Author
David Wood
I'm bitter because I was just suckered again. But let me explain: Lost in
Space is actually an interesting concept, by literary and science fiction
standards; the effects were spectacular; William Hurt is an amazing actor
(with a few great sci-fi movies under his belt - see Until the End of the
World); Gary Oldman isn't so shabby either. And then we have Heather
Graham. Did you see Drugstore Cowboy? Hmmm... but we digress.  But as
usual, there's a problem, and his name is Akiva Goldsman. 
To my great amusement, they always put the writer's name in very SMALL
print on posters and trailers. This goes along with the current thinking
in American oviemaking, which is that the writer is really not a very
important part of the process. This, in turn, explains why people like
Akiva Goldsman continue to get work after writing movies like Batman and
Robin. 
Picture Akiva as Doctor Smith. It's a going to be a Fantastic Voyage. 
William Hurt and his sit-com family have to be delivered to an Alien World
to begin the Evacuation of Earth. It's a dangerous mission, but all the
necessary steps to avoid catastrophe have been taken. The Jupiter 2
spaceship is so advanced that it barely needs its rough-riding and crass
pilot (Director Stephen Hopkins)... but then, as if with a soundtrack by
the Beasty Boys, enter the screenwriter: SABOTAGE. 
What's good about this movie? The visual effects team did an amazing,
amazing job. The ship, the robot, the computers, the sets and props were
all at a level of slickness worthy of a much different, beter movie - and
all while being eerily nostalgic of the original TV material. In fact,
with the exception of that shameful Disney refugee of an alien delivered
by the Henson people, the special effects team deserved to have their OWN
movie. Since we're naming names, I have some guesses about who is
responsible for this spurious burst of talent in what would otherwise be a
complete loss: Norman Garwood (Hook, Brazil) and Ray Lovejoy (2001) are
here.  Unfortunately, this time their agents appear to have been asleep at
the wheel. Don't worry guys, it happens to the best of us. 
The movie they ended up with was actually good for about the first thirty
or forty minutes. There are some exciting space fight scenes. The
obligatory plot developments, featuring cameos by the still struggling
ex-cast of the original Lost in Space (i.e. June Lockhart), are tolerable.
There are hints of Time Travel. The suspense actually builds. 
Then we get lost. Lost in the land of bad science and bad cliches. The
actors (looking visibly embarrassed) do a pitiful job of clinging to what
little bits of character they can find in their roles. Mimi Rodgers ends
up having to do a bad impression of Louise Jefferson (you did not go,
girlfriend);  the poor kid from Friends ends up having to ruin what was
otherwise a decent acting job by having to speak his lines; finally we
culminate with a flourish by Mr. Goldsman that is practically Las Vegas
Vaudevillian; an attempt to rip-off both the ending to Star Trek III and
Return of the Jedi at the same time. No, Akiva, not even if James
Kirk and Billy Dee Williams team up is it possible to achieve liftoff by
flying into the ground.  Ahh well, another perfectly good liberal arts
education gone to waste.... 

Author
Berge Garabedian
This film is based on the campy TV show from the 1960's under the same
appellation. Mind you, most people (including yours truly) who will see
this movie will not have seen any episodes from the original series.
The movie is really a stand alone in that regard. The family
Robinson...lost in space.
PLOT:
Set in the year 2058, the family Robinson is chosen to sail out into
space in search of other planets that might contain the natural
resources Earth needs in order to survive its future. A colonization
process, if you will. They are joined by able pilot West (LeBlanc), and
evil uninvited stowaway (Oldman), who does not want to see the trip
conclude on a successful tip. Eventually, their trek goes awry, and all
are "lost in space". "How do get back to Earth?" is the question that
infests the rest of this sci-fi epic. 
CRITIQUE:
This film reminded me a lot of THE FIFTH ELEMENT (6.5/10) from the
summer of 1997. It's a film with a lot of flash, but very little actual
substance. Admittedly, there isn't an annoying character like Chris
Tucker from the other film, but this film does run a little too long,
and did lose me in regards to its complex time-travel /
multi-dimensional story line. Having said that, the special effects in
this movie were amazing, and the overall look and feel were also way
above average. You really felt like you were in the future, and riding
through space with these poor souls. 
Unfortunately for this chosen family, their 10-year old son is the
smartest one in the group, and the father is too wrapped up in his work
to notice the rest of his family (Ever heard that one before? Yawn!).
The acting is OK, and I was especially surprised at the solid
performance by TV Friend's Matt LeBlanc who shows us all that he's
definitely more than just a pretty face. 
On the down side, the family riff-raff that cuts through most of the
picture is lame and time-consuming (even though we gotta give them
credit for "trying" to develop characters in a sci-fi pic), the story
line is hard to follow, the evil character in the movie actually tells
people that he's "evil", and the movie goes on for about 20 minutes too
long. 
On the slick side, many of the special effects are really cool (the
sequence in which the family is "paralyzed" during the hyper-drive is
awesome, and the animated monkey that joins the family halfway through
the flic is mucho cool), the credit presentation at the end of the film
is slamming, and the adventures that they fall into are somewhat
thrilling (I will also admit that "somehow" they got me to semi-tear up
near the conclusion of this picture....very odd.....). 
Overall, if you're a big sci-fi fan, check this movie out for the
special effects and challenging narrative, and if you're not, I would
still suggest seeing this movie, but then you could probably wait until
it comes out on video so that you forward past some of the boring
parts. 
Little Known Facts: 
This film will always be remembered as the movie that knocked TITANIC
(7/10) out of the top spot at the box-office after 15 straight weeks at
number one.
Garry Oldman is British, and was once married to Uma Thurman for about
six months.
Mimi Rogers was Tom Cruise's first wife. 
Visit JoBlo's Movie Reviews @ http://www.microtec.net/~drsuess/

Author
Michael Redman
There are movies that are an artistic vision, struggle to get made and are
released without regard to public desires. Often these are the best films ever
made. And then there's "Lost In Space", the movie that pushed "Titanic" off
the top of the boxoffice.
Everything about this film appears calculated to make money. The
merchandising potential is obvious. Most characters look like potential action
figures. Many scenes seem to exist only to inspire video games. The rest are
toy designs.
The more subtle manipulation is an attempt to draw in every possible audience
segment. Baby Boomers will be attracted to nostalgia for the television
series. Twenty-somethings will follow "Friends" star Matt LeBlanc into the
theaters. Teens want to see zippy space ships and big explosions. Adolescents
have rebellious Penny Robinson to identify with. For the "Home Alone" crowd,
Will Robinson has become several years younger than he was on television.
While it's no sin to appeal to everyone, such a strategy serves to dilute the
product. Appealing to the lowest common denominators of several different
groups satisfies no one.
Earth of 2058 is in trouble. Man has trashed all of its natural resources and
needs another planet to use up. Professor John Robinson (William Hurt) is the
man with a plan. His hypergate will allow the population to instantly
transport to Alpha Prime, a hospitable planet millions of miles away. To
achieve this, he needs to take a 10-year trip there to construct a hypergate.
Seeing himself as a devoted family man although he is too busy to ever spend
time with them, he takes everyone along. Wife Maureen (Mimi Rogers),
biochemist daughter Judy (Heather Graham), reluctant daughter Penny (Lacey
Chabert) and boy-genius son Will (Jack Johnson) all suit up for the family
vacation of a lifetime. Military pilot Don West (LeBlanc) is assigned to get
them to where they are going safe and sound.
The plan falls through when Dr. Zachary Smith (Gary Oldman) is paid off by
the Global Sedition, a group dedicated to preventing the hypergate, to
sabotage their ship. Smith is betrayed by his employers and becomes an
unwilling stowaway.
When the damaged starcraft starts to fall into the sun, West shifts into
hyperspace to escape their imminent destruction. Unfortunately without a
hypergate, they have no control over where they go. Materializing in an
unknown area of the universe, they are -- you guessed it -- lost in space.
Based on the sixties television program (which in turn was apparently stolen
from the "Space Family Robinson" comic book), the film attempts to update the
30-year old series with mixed success.
The original had a number of problems itself. After the first few episodes
that were played somewhat seriously, the focus changed to "camp". Will, Dr.
Smith and the nameless robot fell into one silly situation after another each
week. Viewing the episodes decades after they first aired, they are
entertaining _because_ they are so goofy. Back then, they were frequently painful.
There's no intentional foolishness in the 1998 version. A few years before
the Millennium, we want our escapism dark. Dr. Smith is no longer merely
selfish, now he's purely evil as a lifestyle choice. The warm family relations
have given way to the dysfunctional family of the nineties. Professor Robinson
ignores his kids and his long-suffering wife. Penny is an angry pre-teen. Will
wants only his father's approval. Judy isn't much of anything. Even the robot
starts off as a destructive force.
All the nonsense in the film is apparently unwitting. The story is weak and
falls apart. The beginning half hour designed to establish the characters is
dull and they never become real people. The time-travel mysterious plot device
towards the end is supposed to contain surprises but doesn't. Supposedly the
family is lost, but no one appears to care about getting back home. Director
Stephen Hopkins ("Predator 2") doesn't deliver.
The acting is genuinely second-rate with rare exceptions. Hurt and Rogers are
both capable of superior performances, but don't seem to even try. Chabert has
an appealing punk appearance, but when she opens her mouth, her helium-powered
squeaky voice sounds as if it's been recorded at the wrong speed. Only Oldman
and Johnson show any acting chops.
Of course even the best actors can't do anything with a disastrous script.
Screenwriter Akiva Goldsman (responsible for that other calamity "Batman And
Robin") offers them nothing to work with.
With a record number of special effects, you'd expect that there would at
least be some eye candy. But, no. The deadly spiders are a joke. The alien
space-monkey that doesn't look like it exists in the same place as anything
else and has no function in the film. It might as well have been an
infomercial for a new toy...which is probably is.
Not everything is horrendous. There are a few bright spots. Will operates the
robot via a virtual reality set-up and it looks like someone for at least a
few minutes is having fun. The cameos by the original cast are fun although
presumably Billy Mumy (Will) is too busy with "Babylon 5" to show up. Dr.
Smith's cloaked incarnation is handled well but when he sheds the wrap, it's
the same ol' same ole.
Watching the closing credits is like experiencing a bad Sega game. I was so
convinced that the film only existed to inspire toys, that I stopped by the
theater lobby to see if the had a "Lost In Space" video game.  They didn't.
Not yet.
(As a teenager, Michael Redman, writer of this column for 23 years, never
would have believed that he could write these words: the "Lost In Space"
television series was better.)
[This appeared in the 4/8/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
C.J HILL
Lost In Space is the Hollywood remake of the terrible, black and white
series.  Unfortunately the lessons learnt over the years on how to
improve on the past have clearly not been adhered to.
The reasons for my conclusions to this are as following.  First
there's the plot.  A modern trend nowadays seems to favour great fx in
favour of a well thought out and well acted story. This is the case
here.  The story is that Earth's resources are almost depleted and the
Robinsons venture off across the galaxy in search of a planet that's
been found to be identical to ours.  The mission is sabotaged courtesy
of Gary Oldman and the family, along with Oldman who was trapped
onboard the ship as he carried out his plan, find themselves lost in
space.  Ahem.  How many times have we had the "Futuristic Earth out of
resources" plot.  Too many, that's how many.  Next, the acting.  With
the exception of Mr Oldman, who's excellent skills are clearly wasted
in this tosh and nonsense, the acting is dreadful.  Next up is the
awful script to accompany the bad acting.  It's lifeless, dull and
does not inspire any interest or empathy for any of the characters.
Finally all the action and some other scenes as well are ripped
directly out of other great sci-fi classics. Star Wars, The Empire
Strikes Back, E.T, Blade Runner and even Aliens come under the hammer.
So, is there any reason to see Lost In Space?  Well, one.  The special
effects.  They are fantastic.  These will induce compulsory
drooling. I do not expect to see these bettered until next year, when,
no doubt they will.
To sum up, Lost In Space is terrible.  It does not have one original
idea of it's own and even having big names in the cast has not helped
it one bit.  Take a tissue for your drool and an incredibly open mind
for the rest.

Author
Martin Thomas
To quote the great philosopher and poet, Gil Scott-Heron:
"...the fact is, this country wants nostalgia. They want to go back as
far as they can . . . even if it's only as far as last week! Not to face
now or tomorrow but to face backwards."
   This was his criticism of America's and the Reagan administration's
preoccupation with returning to the 1950's. Glorious days of
unambiguous morals, two parent families, innocent chaste virtue, and
whites-only drinking fountains.
     I'd say that in the Clinton years our stalker-like obsession with
nostalgia has ebbed somewhat. Don't believe me?  Just look at how
fewer movies produced today are based on old tv shows as opposed to
before. Huh? Huh? ...
....Of course, um  . . .  that's also likely to be because the vein's
been pretty well tapped. I mean.  You can't deny the barrel's being
pretty well scraped when the latest two projects are Mr.Magoo and LOST
IN SPACE.
    Don't give me that face, you and I both know that Lost In Space was
not a good show. Oh, it was certainly likeable, entertaining,
and definitely a lot of fun. Like the 60's Batman show, I didn't
appreciate its humor until I was older, and I admire that it predates
Star
Trek, but I'm still not gonna say it was "good."
   Let's face it, Lost In Space was the science fiction equivalent of
Gilligan's Island-
1) Every week the cast struggled to get back home.
2) Every week their plan was monkey-wrenched by the same member that got
them in their fix in the first place.
3) Every week you were left with the question: Not "Will they ever get
home?", but "Why don't they just kill Gilligan/ Dr.Smith?!"
    Of course, the obvious answer was that without Dr.Smith there was no
reason to watch the show.  Jonathan Harris (the actor)
turned a character that was originally supposed to be killed off in the
third episode into one of the great cowardly, comedic, effeminate
villain archetypes of all time . . . Possibly inspiring the character
that got BRAVEHEART picketed.
   BUT ENOUGH of my esoteric rambling, you want to know about LOST IN
SPACE the movie:
    The first thing you probably want to know is whether it's campy like
the tv show or not. Well, as you probably gathered from the
trailers it is serious . . . but before you exhale let me say, that's
not always a good thing. In fact, the movie is filled with many such
dichotomies and double-edged swords. For instance, the conceptual
artists did a fantastic job of designing everything and updating the
characters. A good 40% of the movie IS computer graphics which are all
Bee-Yoo-Tee-ful! ...Unfortunately, they look unrealistic, to
the point of distraction. Similar to looking at the panoramic shots in
TITANIC or a poorly done breast augmentation.
    It's the year 2058 and the Robinson Family blast off in the Jupiter
2 for Alpha Centauri in search of an inhabitable world, preferably
in less than twenty years when the earth will no longer be liveable. The
ship is secretly sabotaged by the traitorous Dr. Zachary Smith
who doesn't make it off before lift off. He's unable to abort his plan
and the ship is thrown way off course. The crew is lost in space.
Just like in the show.
   This first half does a nice job of fleshing out these concepts. The
script isn't great but it shows lots of potential, like so many
Hollywood movies do . . . until the third act, where most of them fall
apart. Simultaneously, as the Jupiter2 is attacked so does the
story find it's structural integrity compromised.
    The true "hull breach" comes at 55 minutes into the movie when the
crew discovers and adopts a very "cute"ewok/ snarf /abu-like
alien and are attacked by a swarm of unconvincing computer-generated
spiders. The plot then turns into more of a comic book- and
for those of you who actually read comics and know how good some of them
can be, I meant that in the way the general public
thinks of "comic books." Think $.25 bins, circa 1978.
   We're treated to such pseudoscience as equipment made of adamnatium
(a metal which I assure you only exists in Marvel comics)
and flying through the sun at warp speed making you travel forward in
time . . . Don't get me started on the time travel issues. There's
more than enough other plot holes to go around. I guarantee that if you
go see this before the end of the film you'll notice everyone in
the theater turn to each other looking puzzled.
   Had the movie not gone the serious route some of these things
might've worked. Alas . . .
    But really, who cares about the story? It's the characters that made
Lost In Space! What about the characters?
...Hmmn . . .
...Really, most of the dialog was too bad for the actors to transcend
the material and they leave you with no lasting impression,
including the robot.
    Gary Oldman does a decent enough Dr.Smith. After years of stinking
up other movies (THE PROFESSIONAL, THE FIFTH
ELEMENT, AIR FORCE ONE) with his one-note, over-the-top portrayal of
villains, here he's given the perfect venue. Amazingly, he
shows a restraint which makes his Dr.Smith more potent, almost scary. As
the movie's second hour spins out of control he slips in
more of the classic "Smith-isms" but by this time it's too little too
late. Jonathan Harris retains his title.
    The only performances that really stuck out we're those of Matt
LeBlanc and William Hurt, who I now have a new respect for. He
breathed alot of life into the character of John Robinson, making him
more like Reed Richards. I completely felt him as a
work-obsessed father/husband/ scientific genius who had his life on the
back burner for the last three years while he worked on a
project to try to save the earth. Next to the artists he's the best
thing in the movie. I respect him even more for not wearing a
hairpiece.
    On the flip side there's Matt LeBlanc as Maj. Don West . . . and his
performance stood out for the exact opposite reason.
     From the old show Don West was my favorite character (next to
Dr.Smith, of course). I'm sure to most of you he was just the
studly guy who was Judy's (the oldest daughter) boyfriend. To me he was
cool because he was the only one who wasn't fooled by or
tolerant of Dr.Smith. I lived for those moments when he'd get fed up,
grab Smith by the collar and beg John to let him go out back
and work him over. Surrounded by big brains he was the only one with
common sense. It's a damn shame that Matt was so cringingly
bad.
    Matt's character on FRIENDS is my favorite character on the show,
but he proves that his range extends no farther than that 30
minutes. His portrayal of Don West consists of nothing more than holding
his arms out to his sides, talking in a deep voice and reciting
his lines as if he was filling in for a sick friend. It doesn't help
that he has the worst dialog in the movie (especially in the scenes he
shares with Heather Graham) but I never got the impression he could do
more if it'd been better.
   The only other character of note is "Blarp" the aforementioned cutesy
comic-relief alien. He's the kind of character that's annoying to
everybody except kids too young to be admitted into the movie in the
first place. He was most likely put in as a harkening back to
Debbie The Bloop ( a chimp with fake long ears) from the original
series.  If you don't remember "Debbie" it's because she was
discreetly yanked after two episodes... with good reason.
    Adding insult to injury, Blarp's completely computer generated and
resembles a cross between a muppet and the HoneyCombs
cereal's mascot. He's only slightly less annoying than Lacey Chabert's
voice- which sounds EXACTLY like she snorted helium
between each take (How is anyone able to sit through an entire episode
of PARTY OF FIVE?).
"Oh, the pain!!"

Author
Craig Good
The robot is always right: "Danger! Danger, Will Robinson!"
>From the spectacularly poorly-designed opening action sequence to the
unaware self-parody of the closing credits, "Lost In Space" is
spectacularly, almost hilariously, bad.
It's not just that writer Akiva Goldsman has proved beyond the shadow
of a doubt that he is a moron (as if the two last "Batman" films
weren't damning enough). It's that the movie isn't even really a movie.
It's a package, apparently designed to strip-mine a goofy yet loveable
old TV show and regurgitate it as a... I don't know what... designed to
appeal to adolescents. (A friend reports that his 13-year-old daughter
enjoyed it.)
I would heartily recommend this film, yes recommend, to any and all
film students and lovers of the cinema. Why? Because it's a veritable
textbook on how *not* to make a movie. Do you have a 2.35 frame to use?
Then be sure to cram the camera in so tight that the audience is
gasping for breath!  Don't forget to cut randomly in a way guaranteed
to break the audience's eye fix! In fact, everything that happens on
the unnamed "planet of random screen direction" is a "How Not To" of
staging and editing. Brilliant!
But let's get back to what is laughingly referred to as the "script".
Lesson number one: Make everybody talk just like the robot. I mean,
there's a certain charm in having him speak his own exposition: "Crush,
Kill Destroy!". But every single character in the movie talks like
this, albeit with a few more articles of speech. And, to make sure
nobody misses a single thought, the Penny character delivers her
exposition as little soliloquies into a wrist recorder that shows up on
our screen as "Penny Vision".  I'm sure that Goldsman's idea of
"subtext" is that thing on the bottom of the screen that lets other
people understand Italian movies.
What merit there may have been in the effects is effectively destroyed
by over-designed and poorly-considered shot layouts and the appearance
of the most embarassingly bad CG character I've ever seen in a modern
movie. And the camera work? Apparently the director saw a "lookat
camera" on someone's workstation and fell in love with it. This is the
crudest kind of CG camera in which the view is locked to a point in
space or, in this case, a point on a CG character. The effect is to
lock that one thing in space, and the camera changes it's view in exact
synch with the character. It's something you use when doing tests or
modeling, but it's not the way real cameras work. The way it's used in
this movie is absurd.
As the energetically banal "update" of the theme song started over the
credits, my mind's eye (obviously desparate for some sort of coherent
image) conjured up Leonard Pinth-Garnell, from the old days at SNL. He
took a slow drag on his smoke, turned to the camera and gleemed,
"Deliciously bad."
I recommend it as a matinee, as long as you go in costume as either
Crow or Tom Servo.
