Title
Review for Wonderland (2000) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
The city of London has a million stories, and Wonderland tells just one
of them -- well, okay, three.  No, five -- five! Six -- eight -- all
right, eleven subplots competing for screen time.
At the center are three sisters lookin' for a little love and
compassion.  Perky Soho waitress Nadia (Gina McKee, Croupier), her hair
punked out in cute rabbit ears, indulges in the lonely hearts club of
personal ads for Mr. Right, or at least a decent fuck.  Abrasive,
no-nonsense hairdresser Debbie (Shirley Henderson, Topsy-Turvy) settles
into a tract of not taking shit from anyone, especially her
irresponsible ex, Dan (Ian Hart, Spring Forward).  He can barely be
counted on for weekend visits to their teenage son (Peter Marfleet). 
Molly (Molly Parker, Waking the Dead) is very pregnant and needs a
little support from her friends, especially when her husband (John Simm)
goes through a mid-life career meltdown.
Wonderland also finds time for their parents, friends, lovers, and a
mystery guest (Enzo Cilenti) who rides into town, inhabiting his own
little movie of playful hotel room sex.  His place in their circle of
life is revealed at the climax, natch.  Each of these characters are
given their own revealing strands trailing off from the central web of
Chekhovian sisters.  Bleak lives and bitter struggles are the order of
the day.
Talented director Michael Winterbottom (Jude, Welcome to Sarajevo) pulls
out all the stops in his cinematic bag of tricks.  He nobly attempts to
elevate this contrived soap opera material to gritty, hard-edged
realism.  Wonderland's "look" is pure cinema verite, right down to the
restless hand-held camera breezing through gritty locations,
documentary-style.  Winterbottom coaxes naturalistic performances from a
who's-who of young British talent and tosses into the mix plenty of
vivid cutaways of working class extras.
While easy on the eyes, Winterbottom's sterling visual interpretation is
significantly undermined by Laurence Coriat's generic script.  Juggling
all those characters, you'd think he'd be able to come up with at least
one that didn't simply go through the motions toward a predictable
outcome.  McKee invests Nadia with chilly grace, but the canny viewer
will see the outcome of her handsome date du jour (Stuart Townsend) long
before it happens.
The scenes with the griping parents (Jack Shepherd and Kika Markham) are
especially weak, their disgruntled non-communication played to such a
pitch it borders on parody.  By the time nasty old mum is plotting
against the barking dog next door, representative of her hatred of the
world at large, we take a sudden detour into The Wizard of Oz.  I'll get
you, my pretty!
Winterbottom makes an interesting soundtrack choice in selecting Peter
Greenaway's favorite minimalist composer, Michael Nyman.  The score's
voluptuous repetitions of graceful epiphanies might seem more
appropriate to a fantasy film, but it brings to mind the cosmic
epiphanies during everyday life glimpsed in James Joyce's Dubliners. 
Nyman's glorious excess doesn't quite jive with the gritty onscreen
squalor, but it's a bold idea to suggest the passions swirling within
mundane lives.
Coriat claims to have been inspired by Robert Altman's Short Cuts, a
film with the benefit of Raymond Carver's perceptive source material. 
One could also easily compare the structure to Happiness, Hannah and Her
Sisters, or Magnolia.  We've been down this road a few too many times
before for Wonderland to feel particularly original.
Viewers who would like something a little different from the "multiple
subplot family crisis" subgenre are encouraged to seek out Patrice
Chéreau's Those Who Love Me Can Take the Train.  This French film
employs a similar verite approach, not to mention an eclectic taste in
music, but it's less concerned with wrapping up each of the stories. 
Like life, it's a story which begins and ends in transit.
Wonderland, on the other hand, betrays the writer's hand with watertight
resolutions that have been the trappings of melodrama throughout the
ages.  For all of Winterbottom's high-tech wizardry, transforming London
into an impressionistic streak of neon light, he can't pull this humdrum
tragicomedy out of the gutter.
Director: Michael Winterbottom
Producers: Michelle Camarda, Gina Carter, Andrew Eaton
Writer: Laurence Coriat
Starring: Shirley Henderson, Gina McKee, Molly Parker, Ian Hart, John
Simm, Stuart Townsend, Kika Markham, John Shepherd
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
WONDERLAND
(USA Films)
Starring:  Shirley Henderson, Gina McKee, Molly Parker, Ian Hart, John
Simm, Stuart Townsend, Kika Markham, Jack Shepherd.
Screenplay:  Laurence Coriat.
Producers:  Michele Camarda and Andrew Eaton.
Director:  Michael Winterbottom.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  108 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Director Michael Winterbottom (JUDE, WELCOME TO SARAJEVO) goes the
Ken Loach route in this rough-edged, naturalistic dysfunctional family
drama. The story deals witht he members of a London clan coping with
various interpersonal dilemmas. Nadia (Gina McKee) searches for love in 
personal ads, finding men she's more likely to run from than run to; her
sister Debbie (Shirley Henderson) copes with single motherhood and an
irresponsible ex-husband (Ian Hart); sister Molly (Molly Parker) faces
impending motherhood not realizing her husband Eddie (John Simm) is having
a personal crisis. Meanwhile, their parents (Jack Shepard and Kika 
Markham) deal with an ever-more acrimonious marriage of their own.
     Episodic stories like this one almost invariably depend on the
strength of the acting and the consistency of the stories. On the first
count, WONDERLAND is spot on, featuring great ensemble work. The stories,
however, are much more hit and miss. In fact, not one of the sisters'
lives proves particularly gripping compared to the peripheral episodes: 
Debbie's son Jack (Peter Marfleet) wandering alone through an amusement
park;  father Bill enjoying an isolated moment of joy dancing with a
neighbor;  Eddie rehearsing how he'll tell Molly he's quit his job. It's
also frustrating how Michael Nyman's blasting score occasionally drowns
out the low-key intensity of the narrative. Jack Shepard's work as the
sadsack father could be enough to recommend it, but this slice of South
London life is pretty sporadic in its moments of emotional force.
