Title
Review for Dracula Vs. Frankenstein (1971)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jerry Saravia
I have seen my share of absolute garbage at the cinema and on video but never
have I been privy to such an absolute waste of celluloid as Al Adamson's
"Dracula v.s. Frankenstein." It is the kind of film that makes Ed Wood look like
Orson Welles. 
And now that we are on to the subject of Welles, how would he have felt if he
had seen this? Well, consider that one of the directors of photography of this
tripe is none other than Gary Graver, who had worked closely with Welles from
1970 till the late master's death. The other cinematographer is Paul Glickman
who later lensed films such as "God Told Me To" and "The Stuff." I am not sure
whose fault it is but almost all of the photography is rendered so darkly that
it is hard to make out what is happening (especially the climactic fight between
the two horror titans). Some other scenes are so haphazardly composed that you
sense a group of film school students shot it. I suppose it is more proof that
Welles was behind the compositions and photography of his later work such as "F
For Fake" as much as Graver was. 
The story behind this time waster is more entertaining than the movie itself.
The late director Adamson had no clue what footage he shot, and spent two years
trying to assemble it and make some sense out of it. Originally titled "Blood
Seekers" or "Blood Freaks," it did not even have the two titled monsters at all
until the last minute. They probably thought, hey, let's title it "Dracula vs.
Frankenstein" and we are guaranteed box-office revenues at the local drive-in. 
There is J. Carroll Naish as a wheelchaired Dr. Durea, also known as the last of
the Frankensteins. Poor Lon Chaney Jr., in his last film appearance, is bloated
and obviously drunk (or seriously ill) as Groton, Durea's punch-drunk, idiotic
assistant who goes around decapitating young women at Venice Beach (under
Durea's control of course). Zandor Vorkov is the bearded Count Dracula who looks
likes a frequent guest at Chiller Theatre - he is seeking a blood serum that
Durea has. Oh, how can we forget Frankenstein's Monster (John Bloom) who is
brought back to life for no discernible reason or purpose within the sloppily
patched together story. There is also the late Regina Carrol (Al Adamson's wife)
as a Vegas showgirl searching for her sister who was last seen at the beach! Oh,
and there is a love interest known as Mike (Anthony Eisley) who has the hots for
Carrol and appears to be an aging hippie! And how about Russ Tamblyn as a rough
biker (you must be joking!). Another biker!
 with a swastika patch! Angelo R
ossitto (memorable in Tod Browning's "Freaks") as a ticket-taker who charges one
dollar for admission at a creature emporium and then eats the bill! And, last
but not least, Forrest J. Ackerman as a Dr. Beaumont who appears in a cameo and
is then killed by the Monster, again for no discernible reason. 
"Dracula vs. Frankenstein" might have seemed like good fun at the drive-ins in
the early 70's for the teenage couples. I am sure it was more fun for them while
making out than watching such garbage transpire before their very eyes.   
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1971. Director - Al Adamson, Screenplay - William Pugsley & Samuel 
M. Sherman, Producers - Adamson & John Van Horne, Photography - Paul 
Glickman & Gary Graver, Music - William Lava, Visual Effects Design - 
Bob Le Bar, Electronic Effects - Ken Strickfaden, Special Makeup - 
George Barr, Art Direction - Ray Markham. Production Company - 
Independant International.
J. Carrol Naish (Dr Durea/Dr Frankenstein), Regina Carrol (Judith 
Fontaine), Zandor Vorkov (Count Dracula), Anthony Eisley (Mike Howard), 
John Bloom (Frankenstein Monster), Lon Chaney [Jr] (Groton), Jim Davis 
(Sergeant Martin), Anne Morrell (Samantha), Greydon Clark (Strange), 
Russ Tamblyn (Rico), Angelo Rossitto (Grazbo)
Plot: A singer's search for her missing sister leads her to a pier 
freakshow run by the wheelchair-ridden Dr Durea. But Dr Durea is really 
a descendant of the Frankenstein family and is injecting his dim-witted 
assistant with a serum to turn him into a monster to collect victims for 
his experiments in revivification of the decapitated. And at the same 
time Durea is coerced by Count Dracula into helping him revive the 
original Frankenstein monster.
It's one of the great title confrontations of all time, one that 
Universal in their various monster team-ups of the 1940s (`Frankenstein 
Meets the Wolfman' (1943), `House of Frankenstein' (1944), `House of 
Dracula' (1945) and `Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein' (1948)) 
somehow overlooked. And it was a popular idea too - there were at least 
two other films using the same title conflict that appeared the same 
year as this. But in terms of delivering on its title challenge, this is 
a thoroughly wasted opportunity. It's not just what an incredibly 
shabbily made film it is - it's that Dracula and Frankenstein seem 
irrelevant to the plot which is really about a girl searching for her 
missing sister who has been abducted into a mad scientist's ill-defined 
scheme that has something to do with decapitating and then reviving 
young women from the dead. Dracula and the Frankenstein monster do have 
a tussle at the climax to justify the title but it is poorly motivated 
confrontation.
The rest of the film is a mess. It is badly directed and the plot is a 
haphazard jumble (not surprising considering that it originally started 
out as a biker film and was turned into a monster bash to capitalize on 
the early 1970s classic monster revival). It is sad to watch genre 
veterans like an ageing and wheelchair-ridden J. Carrol Naish and an 
alcoholically wasted Lon Chaney Jr (in his last performance) reduced to 
playing in such impoverished surroundings. Forrest J. Ackerman is 
credited as technical advisor and has a small part as a doctor victim, 
something which demonstrates he should really stick to editing. Zandor 
Vorkov gives a performance that verges on the somnambulistic, making 
what is possibly the worst screen Dracula of all time.
Screening at the Christchurch 1998 Incredibly Strange Film Festival
Reviewed by Richard Scheib

