Title
Review for Rashomon (1950)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Toshiro Mifune, Machiko Kyo, Masayuki Mori, Takashi Shimura, 
      Minoru Chiaki, Kichijiro Ueda
Director: Akira Kurosawa
Producer: Jingo Minoura
Screenplay: Akira Kurosawa and Shinobu Hashimoto based on the stories 
      "Rashomon" and "In a Grove" by Ryunosuke Akutagawa
Cinematography: Kazuo Miyagawa
Music: Fumio Hayasaka
U.S. Distributor: R.K.O. Radio Pictures
In Japanese with English subtitles
     It wouldn't be a stretch to name legendary Japanese film maker 
Akira Kurosawa as one of the ten greatest motion picture directors of 
all time.  Kurosawa's brilliant work speaks for itself, and, with over 
five decades of movie making to his credit, he has more than earned his 
place alongside the likes of Alfred Hitchcock, Ingmar Bergman, Martin 
Scorsese, and anyone else who belongs in such lofty company.  And, like 
all of the best directors, Kurosawa did not produce his movies with an 
elite audience in mind.  Though always intelligent, his body of work 
plays as well to the "average" movie-goer as it does to the true 
cineaste.  That's the reason why Hollywood has plundered Kurosawa's 
pictures on a regular basis.  His THE SEVEN SAMURAI was remade into one 
of the greatest Westerns ever -- THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN.  YOJIMBO has 
received two American treatments -- A FISTFUL OF DOLLARS and LAST MAN 
STANDING.  THE HIDDEN FORTRESS was one of the inspirations behind George 
Lucas' STAR WARS.  And RASHOMON's unique approach to divergent 
narratives became a linchpin for COURAGE UNDER FIRE.  
     Kurosawa began his career in 1943 with a movie called SUGATA 
SANSHIRO, about a boy learning the meaning of life through judo.  Over 
the next several years, Kurosawa became one of his country most prolific 
and respected film makers.  In 1948, with the film DRUNKEN ANGEL, he 
first collaborated with actor Toshiro Mifune, beginning a director/actor 
partnership that would span decades and prove highly rewarding for both 
men.  RASHOMON, made in 1950, was the pair's fifth movie together, and 
the film that first garnered Kurosawa widespread international attention 
(it won the 1952 Best Foreign Language Film Oscar).  
     The story told by RASHOMON is both surprisingly simple and 
deceptively complex.  The central tale, which tells of the rape of a 
woman (Machiko Kyo) and the murder of a man (Masayuki Mori), possibly by 
a bandit (Toshiro Mifune), is presented entirely in flashbacks from the 
perspectives of four narrators.  The framing portions of the movie 
transpire at Kyoto's crumbling Rashomon gate, where several people seek 
shelter from a pelting rain storm and discuss the recent crime, which 
has shocked the region.  One of the men, a woodcutter (Takashi Shimura), 
was a witness to the events, and, with the help of a priest (Minoru 
Chiaki), he puzzles over what really happened, and what such a horrible 
occurrence says about human nature.
     In each of the four versions of the story, the characters are the 
same, as are many of the details.  But much is different, as well.  In 
the first account, that of the bandit, the criminal accepts culpability 
for the murder but refutes the charge of rape, saying that it was an act 
of mutual consent.  The woman's story affirms that the bandit attacked 
her, but indicates that she may have been the murderess.  The dead man's 
tale (told through a medium) claims rape and suicide.  The only 
"impartial" witness, the woodcutter, weaves a story that intertwines 
elements of the other three, leaving the viewer wondering if he truly 
saw anything at all.
     Many people watch RASHOMON with the intent of piecing together a 
picture of what really occured.  However, the accounts are so divergent 
that such an approach seems doomed to futility.  RASHOMON isn't about 
determining a chronology of what happened in the woods.  It's not about 
culpability or innocence.  Instead, it focuses on something far more 
profound and thought-provoking:  the inability of any one man to know 
the truth, no matter how clearly he thinks he sees things.  Perspective 
distorts reality and makes the absolute truth unknowable.
     All of the narrators in RASHOMON tell compelling and believable 
stories, but, for a variety of reasons, each of them must be deemed 
unreliable.  It's impossible to determine to what degree their versions 
are fabrications, and how many discrepancies are the result of 
legitimate differences in points-of-view.  It's said that four witnesses 
to an accident will all offer different accounts of the same event, but 
there are things in RASHOMON (namely, that each of the three 
participants names himself or herself as the murderer) that cannot be 
explained away on this basis.  And the impressions of the "impartial" 
observer further muddy the waters, because, despite his protestations 
that he doesn't lie, we trust his tale the least.  
     In the end, we are left recognizing only one thing:  that there is 
no such thing as an objective truth.  It is a grail to be sought after, 
but which will never be found, only approximated.  Kurosawa's most 
brilliant move in RASHOMON is never to reveal what really happened.  We 
are left to make our own deductions.  Every time I watch the film, I 
come away with a slightly different opinion of what transpired in the 
woods.  But not knowing remains a source of fascination, not one of 
frustration, and therein lies Kurosawa's greatest achievement.
     It's worth saying something about the style employed by the 
director.  The tone and approach of RASHOMON are radically different 
from anything Western viewers are likely to be familiar with.  The film 
is presented almost as visual poetry, paying a great deal of attention 
to sights and images while sound and dialogue have lesser importance.  
The cinematography is singularly evocative.  It would be possible to 
watch RASHOMON without subtitles and still capture more than a small 
fraction of its essence.  Likewise, this film could have probably been 
equally successful during the silent era.  Nowhere is this more evident 
than in one standout, 3 1/2 minute sequence:  a kaleidoscope of black-
and-white images accompanied only by Fumio Hayasaka's evocative score as 
the woodcutter makes his way into the woods and discovers the dead body.
     As has been true throughout his entire career, Kurosawa draws the 
best performances out of his actors.  As the brash rogue at the center 
of the controversy, Toshiro Mifune is wonderfully robust.  He shades his 
character differently in each of the four versions, presenting an 
individual who is unmistakably the same man, yet subtly different.  We 
see the bandit not only as he sees himself, but through the eyes of 
three others, as well.  That's the brilliance of Kurosawa's vision and 
Mifune's performance.  Equally good is Masayuki Mori as the doomed 
noble.  Depending on who is telling the story, he can appear good and 
noble or cowardly.  Once again, the differences serve to emphasize that 
this is the same person seen from different perspectives.
     The most striking portrayal, however, belongs to the radiant 
Machiko Kyo, whose mesmerizing, seductive character varies the most from 
narrative to narrative.  She can be wholesome, treacherous, sexy, 
sympathetic, or vicious.  Depending on who's painting her portrait, she 
is a victim, a manipulator, an innocent, or a vixen.  At times, she's 
"like a child trying to be serious"; at others, she's "fierce."  As good 
as Mifune and Mori are, they are constantly upstaged by Kyo.  In casting 
her, an unknown at the time, Kurosawa knew what he was doing.
     Today, nearly fifty years after it was made, RASHOMON has lost none 
of its fascination or power.  It's still a marvelous piece of cinema 
that asks unanswerable questions of great import.  Films like COURAGE 
UNDER FIRE may capture some of the spirit of RASHOMON, but no movie 
before or since has presented these issues in quite the same unique and 
intense fashion.  In every sense of the word, this is a true classic.  
It's hard to find a more rewarding way to spend ninety minutes.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A classic for many reasons; a movie that dares to ask questions
about the nature of truth, and that forces us to think. Kurosawa's best
early work.
The magic of a movie like RASHOMON, which has been so badly plagarized that
I make it standard-issue viewing for my friends who've never heard of it,
is that it works from the simplest and most tightly-constructed story to
create endless abysses of possibility. This is one of those movies you
watch with your breath held and then expel it for hours afterwards as you
argue about it with your friends.
RASHOMON gets its name from the gate in ancient Japan, a crumbling,
rain-sodden wreck, where three people have come to escape from the weather:
a priest, a woodcutter, and a vagabond. The woodcutter (the great Takashi
Shimura, veteran of so many Kurosawa movies) and the priest (Minoru Chiaki,
another Kurosawa regular) are both stunned when the vagabond arrives --
trying to make sense of a bizarre incident that has tested their
understanding of human nature: one afternoon while in the woods, the
woodcutter discovered some bits of a woman's outfit, turned them into the
police, and was later summoned as a material witness to a crime.
As it turned out -- according to the court -- the woman in question
(Machiko Kyo) and her husband were set upon by a bandit (a manic and
wild-eyed Toshiro Mufine), who raped the woman and murdered the man. The
bandit spells out the whole story for them, laughing derisively the whole
time. But then the woman has her say, and the story she tells is entirely
different. Worse, they summon the spirit of the dead man through a medium,
and his story (if it could be trusted at all) is equally contradictory.
Eventually it is revealed that more than one person is most definitely
lying, and the nature of everyone's lies bespeaks a lot more about them
than we would dare know.
What's best about RASHOMON is the way the confrontations and anguished
back-and-forthing between the characters comes naturally out of their
personas, and is not imposed by arbitrary plotting. This is one of the few
movies that manages to be about something in the deepest and truest sense:
when it's over, we've had our senses and sensibilities tested thoroughly.
Nothing's taken for granted.
Why is it so hard to make movies like this? I suspect it's for the same
reason it's hard to get into a good discussion about ideas like this.
People with a brain and a heart are rare enough -- which is what RASHOMON
itself seems to be arguing, anyway....

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Akira Kurosawa
Writers: Shinobu Hashimoto and Akira Kurosawa (based on the stories
"Rashomon" and "In a Grove" by Ryunosuke Akutagawa)
Starring: Toshirô Mifune, Machiko Kyô, Masayuki Mori, Takashi Shimura,
Minoru Chiaki, Kichijiro Ueda, Fumiko Honma
Watching Kurosawa's "Rashomon," I was reminded of the bits and pieces I
saw of the O.J. Simpson trial, or really any trial that goes on
forever.  The attorneys are all trying to dig up clues to what really
happened, brining in star witnesses to tell their side of the story, and
wouldn't you know it if most of them conflicted in some way(s) with the
others.  O.J. might have gotten off, but whether or not he did what some
people say he did is something we may never find out.  Truth may be in
the eye of the beholder, but nine-and-a-half times out of ten, it's not
the real truth.
"Roshomon," the breakthrough film for the incredible Japanese director,
Akira Kurosawa (who would go on to direct "The Seven Samurai,"
"Yojimbo," and "Ran," among many others), deals with three people
stranded at Roshomon, the gate of Japan in the medieval days, during an
intense rain storm.  They are: a woodcutter (Takashi Shimura), a priest
(Minoru Chiaki), and a nomad (Kichijiro Ueda).  The woodcutter is
ravaged due to a murder trial he witnessed, and proceeds to tell them
everything that occured for the duration of the storm.
Whilst journeying out to the woods, he stumbled upon a murder, went to
alert the police, and was dragged to the trial, which dealt with a
bandit named Tajomuru (the great Toshirô Mifune) who allegedly raped a
woman (Machiko Kyô), and killed her husband (Masayuki Mori).  His story
says that he wooed her and fought for her in a duel with the husband,
whom he then killed.  But her story is that she was raped, and
accidentally killed her husband because he could not trust her after she
was raped.  Two more perspectives are told, and each one ends up
conflicting with all the others.  Who is telling the truth?
That we don't find out.  Since only three to four people were involved
with it, either directly or indirectly, and each of them tells a
different story, there is no way of knowing the real truth.  Should we
pick one and say that is the general accepted truth?  Even a trial like
the one in this film can never truly discover what really happened.  We
will probably never know the real truth because whomever tells what
happens puts a personal spin on it for some personal reason.
The four stories are deftly written so to provide basis for the
characters who tell them.  They reveal so much about these people, that
it is obvious that none of these stories are the real truth, and that
whatever really happened is probably a composite of the four, with
different things right and wrong in each of them.  These people may be
suffering from guilt or some other personal problem, but each of them
cannot tell the whole truth for some reason, sometimes unexplained
blatantly, but disguised ingeniusly within the respective narrative.
The film is not only a landmark for being one of the most philosophical
and brilliant films of all time, but is also one of the most
entertaining.  At a short running time of 88 minutes (give or take a
second), the film is in constant motion, and is never boring.  Even
though we see the same story four times with different perspectives,
each time it's refreshing and as interesting as the last.  Not to
mention there is some really fun samurai action throughout - a staple of
Kurosawa's work.
Another out of the million things I love about this movie is how it
never explains what happens.  In "Courage Under Fire," we discovered the
truth, but that was for a different reason, although I can see it
actually being better if we never did.  This film presents us the facts,
but allows the viewer to debate over it.  And I don't know about you,
but I adore film as a form of debate.
With amazing direction, wonderful acting, and a deft screenplay, it is
no wonder to why it won the Oscar for Best Foreign Film.  "Rashomon" is
after all a fable of man's inability to tell the truth, and one of those
films which you discuss and rack through your mind over and over again,
looking for the truth.  My argument: the truth is not to be found.  And
that's the cold hard truth about man kind.
Homepage at: http://www.goecities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dennis Schwartz

RASHOMON (director/editor/screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa; screenwriter:
Shinobu Hashimoto/based on the short stories entitled "Rashomon" and the
first short story "In a Grove" by Ryunosuke Akutagawa; cinematographer:
Kazuo Miyagawa; cast: Toshiro Mifune (Tajomaru, the Bandit), Machiko Kyo
(Masago, the Wife), Masayuki Mori (Takehiro, the samurai husband),
Takashi Shimura (Woodcutter), Minoru Chiaki (Priest), Kichijiro Ueda
(Commoner), Fumiko Homma (Medium); Runtime: 88; 1950-Japan)
This is the director Akira Kurosawa's international breakthrough film,
garnering many  awards, including Hollywood's 1952 Best Foreign Language
Film Oscar and The Golden Lion Award, at the 1951 Venice film festival.
Rashomon became incorporated into the everyday language, and Japanese
films became a regular part of the western world's film culture mainly
because of this film. The strength of the film lies in its attempt to
show how the search for the truth is laden with traps, as all four
narrators of the horrid event depicted are supposedly telling the truth
according to what they believe they saw but their truths still turn out
to be veiled in mystery. In the intellectual scheme of this puzzler,
Kurosawa determines that the truth cannot be found because 'the truth is
relative.'
The film is blemished only by Kurosawa's backtracking at the conclusion,
coming up with an unconvincing and hokey humanistic ending to counter
his more potent argument that everyone lies for selfish reasons.
Set in the 12th century of the ravaged capital city of Kyoto, the film
offers four very different versions of an ambush, rape and murder in the
woods. What makes the film special besides its interesting philosophical
theme, is the high-powered performances, especially the one by Toshiro
Mifune as the manic bandit Tajomaru, and in the frenetic movements of
the camera (whether slow or fast paced) and the way it captured the
intensity of the film, giving it its sense of urgency. This was a unique
filming device used by Kurosawa, of zooming in on the character when
telling his or her version, as each had a different rhythm that the
camera underscored by revealing the particular mood of the storyteller.
Waiting out a rain storm in a decaying shelter, where there is an
ancient gate called Rashomon, three people: a woodcutter (Shimura), a
Buddhist priest (Chiaki), and a common man (Ueda), kill some time by
listening to a true story told by the priest and the woodcutter. The
story was recently told before a magistrate and it shocked both the
priest and the woodcutter, lamenting how evil mankind has become. The
common man is not surprised that mankind is selfish, as he takes a
cynical view of humanity, anyway, listening to the story as if it's just
a typical murder one.
The woodcutter tells how he found the body of the murdered husband and
then quickly ran back to report it to the police, telling them he just
found the body and didn't see what happened. Later on he will tell the
other two what he really saw, unable to contain himself anymore from his
version of the truth. This comes after he goes over again in his mind
the other three versions told from the viewpoint of the bandit, the
woman, and the murdered man through a medium, and he decidedly becomes
saddened that mankind has sunk to a new low level of morality, hoping to
speak out against that.
The captured bandit will freely confess to the police that he raped the
woman and murdered the husband in a gallant duel for her. He sets up his
story by blaming a breeze blowing that day for what was to take place.
When a beautiful veiled lady (Kyo) astride a horse, with her warrior
husband (Mori) walking alongside her in the woods comes into his view, a
breeze blows the veil away from her and he sees how beautiful she is and
decides he must have her, even if he must kill the husband. Though, he
says, his intention was not to kill the husband unless it was necessary.
He mentions how by greed he lured the husband away from his wife on the
main road, taking him deep into the woods by telling him he has buried
some valuable swords there, which he will sell to him cheaply. When he
gets to the isolated spot, he fights with the husband until he overcomes
him and ties him up, and then goes back for the woman. He admires her
for the spirited way she resists him but soon she encourages him to take
her, as he rapes her in front of her husband. She then insists, that to
protect her honor, he must fight a duel with her husband and whomever
wins will have her. He then kills the husband in an exciting duel for
her. But, she flees from the scene and the bandit claims that he didn't
run after her.
The woman's version is quite different, as each narrator tells a version
that makes them look good. Her version tells how she acted with courage,
honor, and dignity. She mentions that after the rape the bandit
mockingly laughed at her and ran off into the woods. There was no duel.
The husband looked at her coldly after the rape and wouldn't forgive her
for dishonoring him, as she accidently stabbed him with her dagger after
offering him the dagger to kill her. She asks the court, What should a
poor, defenseless woman like me do?
The murdered man's version is presented to the magistrate through a
medium. He mentions how after the rape the cunning bandit successfully
consoled his wife, who looked more beautiful than she ever looked
before. He told her that he loves her and she agrees to run away with
him, but not before insisting that he kill her husband. The husband says
this despicable act by his wife even revolted the bandit and he adopted
the same masculine code as the samurai by throwing the woman to the
ground and asking if he wanted his wife slain. He says he almost forgave
the bandit for acting honorable at that point. Meanwhile, the woman ran
away and the bandit unsuccessfully chased after her. The grieving
husband couldn't bear his suffering anymore and committed suicide with
the dagger.
The woodcutter then tells the men in the shelter his revised version of
what happened, which might be the closest we come to the truth since his
only motive for lying was greed, but even his version is also not
certain, as the woodcutter is a proven liar, having stolen the dagger
and therefore he covered up his part in the story he told to the police.
But he is now seemingly disgusted with the other three versions put
forth, which only made the presenter look good and made him wary of
mankind, and since his telling of the story is now more objective, the
greater is the chance that it is closer to the truth. He tells the story
after the rape and has the bandit pleading with the woman to run away
with him, saying that if she marries him he will give up being a thief
and get an honest job to support her. Her reply is not with words, but
to cut with her dagger the ropes that bind her husband, indicating they
must fight a duel for her. But instead of fighting the samarai chickens
out, calling his wife a whore, and saying she is not worth dying for.
The wife then gets up enough courage to taunt the two men for being
cowards, which gets them to reluctantly start their duel. Both men are
frightened and the duel is an awkward and cowardly one, with both men
stumbling and retreating, with finally the husband cringing out of fear
and begging not to be killed, as the abject bandit slays him and the
woman flees. The bandit soon staggers off bewildered in another
direction. The duel was seen as a parody: 1) Of how the brave samurai is
supposed to conduct himself. 2) Of how the bandit is supposed to be
fearless 3) Of how the woman is supposed to be virteous. All three
participants are shown to have poor character.
For Kurosawa, Rashomon is a film about the lies people tell to protect
their self-image. The truth is subjective and can't be believed in its
entirety because of each narrator's ego.
To soften the blow of all the cynicism in regards to the rape-murder,
Kurosawa suddenly has an abandoned baby conveniently wake up and cry
just as all the storytelling is concluded in the shelter. The crude
common man thereby steals the gifts the baby was left with and shows no
concern for the helpless baby, but the priest and the woodcutter reach
out to help the baby, with the priest clutching the baby, at first,
misunderstanding the woodcutter's gesture to help, but the woodcutter
seeks to adopt the baby as his seventh child. This contrived ending is
supposed to show that there are still those who will unselfishly reach
out to help others.
The film has not aged that well, though it seems to still be a powerful
picture but, in my opinion, not the masterpiece it was once thought of.
I think the same reevaluation will take place of Kurosawa's long and
distinguished career and he will be downgraded from being crowned as a
great director to a very good one. He seems to suffer in most of his
films from too much sentimentality and contrivances, though his strong
filming techniques and very muscular camera work, as exhibited in this
film, will remain his ultimate trademark.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Koller
The enthusiastic Western critical response to
"Rashomon" established Akira Kurosawa as the
most noted Japanese director.  More great films
were to follow, but "Rashomon" was the first.
Its influence was demonstrated by the usually
ethnocentric Academy Awards giving the film
a nomination for So Matsuyama's sets.
The story is set in Japan in the middle ages.
Notorious bandit Tajomaru (Toshiro Mifune)
sees a beautiful woman (Machiko Kyo) travelling
a road in the forest with her warrior husband
(Masayuki Mori).  The bandit decides that he
must have her.  He tricks the husband, ties
him up, then rapes the women.  The husband is
subsequently killed, and the woman escapes.
We hear varying versions of the story, from
the point of view of the bandit, the woman,
the dead husband (through a medium) and a
witness.  These versions are all quite different,
even disagreeing on who killed the husband.
The most interesting difference in the versions
is between the bandit's and the observer's.
Both end with a dramatic swordfight between
the bandit and the husband, but the bandit's
version is heroic and skillful, while the
observer's version is clumsy and desperate.
The story is framed by a later incident,
which has three men seeking shelter from a
heavy rain and recounting the incident.
The priest (Minoru Chiaki) and firewood dealer
(Takashi Shimura) are in shock over the
extent of man's evil, while the more cynical
man (Kichijiro Ueda) is not surprised at all.
Mifune is a great actor, energetic and
charismatic.  Mifune and other cast members
would show up in subsequent Kurosawa films,
such as "The Seven Samurai" and "Throne of Blood".
With "Rashomon", Kurosawa may be saying that
there is no absolute truth, that it varies according
to the pride of the observer.  His pessimistic
assessment of man's evil nature is tempered
by a somewhat artificial ending.  A baby has
been abandoned and begins to cry (fortunately
waiting until after all the story-telling has
ended).  While the cynical man has no sympathy
for the child, both the priest and the firewood
dealer are willing to care for the helpless baby,
with the resulting moral that perhaps humanity
is not so selfish and wicked after all.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Jude Wanniski
Number Two of Ten Movies That Shook Wanniski
Memo To: Website browsers, fans & clients
Author: Jude Wanniski ">http://www.polyconomics.com>
Re: Ten movies that helped shape my life: #2
"Rashomon." (1950) There are several foreign films I saw as a 
boy that made me think of how different people were in other 
parts of the world. Rashomon, from the Japanese director Akira 
Kurosawa, was about the universality of human nature  --  the 
elusiveness of truth everywhere in the world. There are four 
people involved in an event that occurs in the middle of a 
forest in 16th century Japan. There is a nobleman, his beautiful
 consort, a bandit, and a bystander. There is conflict, a sexual
 episode between the woman and the bandit, and a murder. The 
heart of the film consists of the same event played out four 
different ways, according to the recollections of the four 
participants. This troubling film taught me that there is no 
such thing as objective fact or pure objectivity and built upon
 the lesson of The Ox-Bow Incident. It made it easy for me to 
see how Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill told the truth, although 
their stories were 180 degrees apart. It also enabled me to 
appreciate the conflicting stories of President Clinton and 
Kathleen Willey. People sometimes remember what was in their 
mind at the time of a stressful situation because it really was 
in their mind. 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
