Title
Review for Runestone, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     By this point there is little original that can be done with the stale
plot that some myth about a fabled monster has a basis of truth and the
beastie is loose in a modern city.  And, of course, nobody believes that the
myth can be true.  It was even a weekly television series, KOLCHAK: THE
NIGHT STALKER.  THE RUNESTONE does just about the best that can be done.
First, it uses a genuine myth and, at the same time, not a myth that has
been over-used.  In Norse mythology the world end sin a battle between Aesir
and the powers of Hel, led by Loki.  One of Loki's children was the monster
wolf Fenrir.  It was really Fenrir and his wolf-cub children who bring about
Ragnarok, the great icy apocalypse of the world--icy because one of the
wolf-children stole the sun.  It is Fenrir who killed and devoured Odin.
Previously Tyr once allowed the gods to capture Fenrir, but at the cost of
his right hand--bitten off by the great wold.  Just what all this has to do
with modern-day New York is rather neatly set up in the plot of THE
RUNESTONE.
     Willard Carroll directed and wrote the screenplay based on a novella by
Mark E. Rogers.  The writing is actually very crisp and witty without
lowering itself to self-satire or camp.  These are several throwaway jokes,
some actually quite funny., but the main plotline is still taken seriously.
Because the script is so well-executed, the producers were able to attract a
surprisingly good cast.  Top-billed, though not quite the main character, is
Peter Riegert of OSCAR and CROSSING DELANCEY, playing Gregory Fanducci, a
likable sarcastic Italian policeman with a taste for Pez candy.  William
Hickey, who played the aging godfather in PRIZZI'S HONOR, has a decent-sized
role as an eccentric expert in Norse mythology who tries to straddle the old
gods' world and the modern world.  Alexander Godunov plays a clockmaker with
mystical ties to the old world.  And at the center of all the activity is
Joan Severance, playing young artist Marla Stewart.
     I do not know if this film has had a theatrical release.  After seeing
a positive review I rented it on tape.  Like last year's WARLOCK, this is
not a great film, but it is certainly a fun film.  Great for a Friday night
watch after a hard week.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
