Title
Review for Head On (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael Dequina
A simple "trick" is what young Gabriel (Christian Campbell) has in mind
after he picks up male go-go dancer Mark (John Paul Pitoc) one lonely
night on a New York subway.  But what they get is something more than
either of them bargained for: countless obstacles, from Gabriel's pushy
best friend Katherine (Tori Spelling) and his even pushier (straight)
roommate (Brad Beyer) to bitter drag queen Miss Coco Peru (Clinton
Leupp), prevent the two from sealing the deal.  However, that's just as
well; as their shared night grows longer and longer, Gabe and Mark
experience, as the press notes say, "something more gratifying than a
one-night stand."
Like last year's entertaining _Billy's_Hollywood_Screen_Kiss_, sexual
orientation is moot in first-time feature director Jim Fall's breezy,
single-day-spanning romantic comedy.  The point is not that the main
characters are homosexual but that they are, like anyone in the world,
searching for some type of human connection--not just with others, but
with themselves, for aspiring Broadway composer Gabriel must learn to
find the passion within himself to fuel his work.  Adding greatly to the
film's universal accessibility is the likable pair of leads and an able
supporting cast--yes, even notorious over-hacktress Spelling, who is
perfectly cast as the histrionic and pretentious off-off-off-Broadway
hacktress Katherine.
On the other hand, "accessible" and "likable" aren't exactly the words
I'd apply to_Head_On_, a dark 1997 Australian gay-themed drama just about
to receive exposure on this side of the Pacific.  The main character of
Ari (Alex Dimitriades) is about as unlikable as one can get: lazy and
selfish, he spends his days and nights indulging in drugs and reckless,
anonymous sex when not arguing with his strict (and completely oblivious)
Greek parents and anyone else who dare cross him.  Consequently, as
director Ana Kokkinos unflinchingly tracks one typically destructive
24-hour span of Ari's directionless existence, one watches with the same
emotional detachment with which Ari tackles his own life.
But there is a method to this madness, and a universal, if rather bleak,
message to the film.  "I'm not going to make a difference, I'm not going
to change a thing," concludes Ari late in the film, and while most people
are afraid to admit it, that's pretty much the futile fate of every
single person on this planet, regardless of what good one attempts to
make of one's life (a certain recent outside event has certainly taught
me that); it's just that Ari bears no illusions about himself or how the
world works.  It's a testament to the sheer gutsiness of Dimitriades's
uninhibited performance that the audience bears no illusions about Ari
either.  _Head_On_ is certainly a film more easily admired than enjoyed,
but there is much to admire in this bold, unsettling film.  (_trick_
opens July 23; _Head_On_ opens August 13)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Luke Buckmaster
HEAD ON
Cast: Alex Dimitriades, Paul Capsis, Julian Garner, Tony Nikolakopoulos,
Elena Mandalis, María Mercedes
Director: Ana Kokkinos
Screenplay: Andrew Bovell, Ana Kokkinos and Mira Robertson, based on the
novel 'Loaded' by Christos Tsiolkas
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
4 stars
My first reaction after viewing Head On was to take a long, deep breath.
Ana Kokkinos' fiery Melbourne-based film is a tense and bold character
study - one that is almost haunting in its realism.  Perhaps the most
daring of its production assets is the film's dramatic script, which
positions its protagonist in various off-putting homosexual,
confrontational and drug induced acts.  Disturbing stuff, that's for
sure - and Kokkinos knows it.  The reason why Head On is so
uncomfortable to watch is because its director knows how to use
unsettling images for intrigue, not for shock appeal.  This is a
powerhouse Australian film that is in many ways more confronting than
the likes of Saving Private Ryan, for the reason that it depicts issues
that are very real in today's society. Kokkinos boldly looks at
sexuality, ethnicity, drugs and gender in a raw and explicit manner.
With tight editing and a rigid, unusually urban cinematography, Head On
is a grating piece that explores the dissatisfaction of youth, and
society in general.
Ari (Alex Dimitriades) is a nineteen-year-old Greek bisexual, who is
confused by life and constantly searches for a path to happiness.  He
doesn't find it in drugs or alcohol, nor does he in regular and
unsatisfying sex.  The film chronicles one day in Ari's life, an intense
twenty-four hours full of pain and occasional joy.  Ari realizes the
pathetic state of his life but fails to do anything about it - one gets
the feeling that he is so far down and out that he will never quite be
able to regain status.  Ari has pushed on, day by day, meeting men and
women, and not thinking about what life might offer him.  He is too busy
taking everything a step at a time in the busy city of Melbourne (at one
moment, much to my delight, there are shots of Flinders Street Station
and Crown Casino).
Ari's character works because of the revealing screenplay (which was
adapted from the novel 'Loaded') and Alex Dimitriades' gutsy
performance.  I thought that Russel Crowe's choice of role in 1994's The
Sum of Us was game, but compared to this it looks ordinary. Dimitriades
is one hell of a brave actor.  Limiting the emotional success of this
story is its lack of characters; aside from Ari, there is really nobody
else the audience can relate with.  But perhaps this is done
intentionally, as Ari alone provides the basis for an intriguing
character study since he is such a complicated person.  His actions are
not always understandable - but that's how people are sometimes.
Whenever his life seems to be lightening up (if only for a few moments),
we are brought down once again into his depressing state of affairs.
Some of the final words spoken by Alex Dimitriades are cynical and
somber considering all that we have witnessed his character go through,
yet they express the moving and painful expression that this film
generates.  "I'm sliding toward the sewer, not struggling, I can smell
the shit - but I'm still breathing.  I'm gonna live my life.  I'm not
going to make a difference, I'm not going to change a thing."
If you're feeling brave, take a long, deep breath and watch Head On.


Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Ana Kokkinos, Cast :Alex Dimitriades, Paul Capsis, Julian
Garner, Tony Nikolakopoulos, Elena Mandalis, María Mercedes, Alex Papps,
Vassili Zappa, Damien Fotiou, Eugenia Fragos. Written by Andrew Bovell,
Ana Kokkinos, Mira Robertson, Christos Tsiolkas (novel).
HEAD ON is angry, noisy and confused like the highs and lows of a heroin
addict. This certainly isn't a heart warming, thoughtful movie and the R
in restricted, could easily be re-labelled Risqué. If anyone is
expecting this to be another episode of HEARTBREAK HIGH, think again,
don't be fooled by the ads – this is a kid on the fast lane to
self-destruction. Most people are probably not prepared for the shock
that comes with Alex Dimitriades' overnight change from straight, high
school heart throb, to blatant, sex obsessed homosexual.
There is a recurrent theme throughout this movie. The title of the movie
is aptly named HEAD ON. If you're wondering what it means, it isn't
about a simple head on concussion post fall, but full on oral sex. Oral
sex with an obese, Chinese grocery store man, oral sex with a dirty old,
Greek man, oral sex with a lesbian, and oral sex with a Caucasian hunk.
In fact there was so much oral sex one wonders whether this is something
more to sex, than just being oral?
The acting is mostly angry, and some of the sex scenes looked contrived.
I don't speak from first hand experience on either subject, but there
must be more to this movie than moans, groans and jerky movements,
identity crises, Greek self hatred, racism and addiction. Unfortunately,
this movie filled with St Kildaderish nightlife, may have too much to
say (or should I say show), for the sleepy residents of unglamorous
Melbourne. Perhaps a better choice of movies next time Alex Dimitriades
- the profile of angry, rebel, homosexual, drug addict will not
necessary boost your career, even if you did show your dick for the
world to see (a trick used too often nowadays by wannabe movie stars).
