Title
Review for Beyond Rangoon (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Patricia Arquette, U Aung Ko, Frances McDormand, Spalding Gray
Director: John Boorman
Producer: Barry Spikings, Eric Pleskow, and John Boorman
Screenplay: Alex Lasker and Bill Rubenstein
Cinematography: John Seale
Music: Hans Zimmer
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     In the late 1980s, when pro-democracy movements were springing up all
around the world, China was not the only nation to brutally squash
dissension.  Far from the glare of the television camera, similar events
were transpiring in Burma.  Peaceful demonstrations turned into bloodbaths,
prisoners were shot en masse, and over 700,000 men, women, and children fled
across the borders.  However, as the narrator of BEYOND RANGOON notes,
because of the lack of press coverage, for most of the world, it was as if
it didn't happen.
     One of the most difficult tasks a film maker faces when bringing to
life a story with a particular political or social point-of-view is
involving -- not isolating -- the viewer.  It's far too easy for a "cause"
motion picture to become dry and uninteresting.  With BEYOND RANGOON,
director John Boorman (DELIVERANCE, THE EMERALD FOREST) has taken the
situation in Burma and reduced it to a personal level.  He has placed a lone
American woman in the eye of the storm and, while the audience watches, she
is swept along by the violent currents of August 1988.
     That woman is Laura Bowman (Patricia Arquette), a young American doctor
visiting the Far East in hopes of finding escape from the recent tragedy
which has ripped apart her life.  One day in the not-too-distant past, she
returned home from work to find her house ransacked and her husband and
young son brutally murdered.  Since then, she has shut herself off to all
emotion, turning, in her words, to stone.
     One night while her tour group is staying in a Rangoon hotel, Laura
wanders into the streets and becomes caught up in a pro-democracy rally led
by charismatic activist Aung Sein Suu Kyi (who won the Nobel Peace Prize in
1991).  While there is tension between government forces and the student
demonstrators, no open confrontation takes place, and Laura returns to her
room unmolested.  The next day, however, she discovers that she lost her
passport the previous night and, since the Burmese government will not let
anyone leave the country without one, she is unable to depart as scheduled
with her sister and the rest of her tour group.
     After eventually acquiring a new passport from the U.S. Embassy, Laura
decides to spend some time exploring.  She soon locates an "unofficial" tour
guide (U Aung Ko), and enlists his aid in bribing her way through
checkpoints to meet people and go to places that no outsider normally sees.
However, the tour guide turns out to be a pro-democracy activist and, when
the Burmese government declares martial law, Laura becomes caught up in a
struggle she previously had no idea existed.
     Besides being an intelligent and gripping thriller with a solid
grounding in real, recent historical events, BEYOND RANGOON also gives
movie-goers a rare opportunity to watch a female hero.  These days, the
strongest roles for women are the ever-present femme fatales (like Linda
Fiorentino in THE LAST SEDUCTION) that populate film noir.  It's unusual to
find a solid, well-rounded character the likes of Laura Bowman, and, while
Patricia Arquette has a few awkward moments, she mostly does a credible job
with a part that requires emotional and physical range.
     The cinematography by John Seale is spectacular.  It's easily among the
best jobs of the year, and far more impressive than the usual approach of
"take the camera and do a few widescreen shots of the countryside."  Seale
plays with light and color, and uses Burma's natural beauty to highlight the
characters.  BEYOND RANGOON is a visual masterpiece, yet rarely does the
photography take away from the storyline.
     Boorman has succeeded in an arena where Oliver Stone so often fails.
By toning down the melodrama and manipulation, BEYOND RANGOON calls
attention to a situation without becoming overly didactic.  Rarely does this
film lose its edge -- the characters are well-defined and the pacing is
tight.  And the message comes across -- few who sit through this picture
will react quite the same way when a story about Burma airs on the nightly
news.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia) 
Directed by    John Boorman 
Written by     Alex Lasker & Bill Rubenstein 
Cast           Patricia Arquette, Frances McDormand, Spalding Gray, 
               U Aung Ko 
MPAA Rating    Rated "R" (presumably for graphic violence) 
Running Time   Approx. 100 minutes 
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh (22AUG95) 
     We could paraphrase Michelle Pfieffer's character in DANGEROUS
MINDS and say that BEYOND RANGOON starts with an "A."  That's fair
enough.  All movies, like all school children, should be given the
benefit of the doubt.  The chance to succeed.  After all, we like to
think that the right combination of talent and effort can do wonders.
Mountains can be moved, and good movies can be made.  Yeah right.
Children fail, as do films.  As does director John Boorman's latest.
     The success of BEYOND RANGOON hinges on the believability of
Patricia Arquette (ED WOOD, TRUE ROMANCE) as the busty
Westerner-in-peril wandering about 1988 Burma without a passport.
Though we can stomach the mild plot contrivances that get her there,
it's a tougher task to overlook the actress.  She's a lightweight.  As
the first scene (with narration!) demonstrates, she doesn't have
*nearly* enough range for the emotions that her character--a mother
fleeing the memories of a murdered husband and son--is supposed to
show.  She may give a stronger performance than, say, Keanu Reeves in A
WALK IN THE CLOUDS, by not by much.
     BEYOND RANGOON is a very physically appealing film, thanks to the
practiced craftsmanship of John Boorman (DELIVERANCE, EXCALIBUR, HOPE
AND GLORY).  He keeps the narrative moving, no matter how muddy the
story--or the heroine--gets.  Why he chose Arquette remains a
mystery, though.  Maybe he was thinking that the dramatic weight of the
story would overcome any casting deficiencies.  But even after an hour
of half-stated political statements and murky mass killings, we *still*
don't know enough of what's happening in this country to feel
distressed for the characters or their situations.  Empty exoticism.
     The technical credits in BEYOND RANGOON are a curious mix,
combining lush jungle photography with bad blue-screen work.  Also odd
is the obvious dubbing.  Done to make some of the foreign characters
sound less foreign?  And, is it my mistake, or do the same extras keep
reappearing as different soldiers??  Doo doo doo doo.  ["Twilight Zone"
theme, or opinion of movie.  You be the judge.]

Author
Eric Grossman
     John Boorman is a director who likes to take his audience on a
harrowing adventure to a place they haven't been.  Whether it's being
chased by hillbillies through the backwoods of Appalachia
(DELIVERANCE), following King Arthur as he fights for Camelot
(EXCALIBUR), or taking a trip back to his childhood during World War II
(HOPE AND GLORY), Boorman seeks out the exotic and pulls out all of the
stops to envelop us in his story.  BEYOND RANGOON, the director's
latest effort, is not as solid as many of his previous works but
despite its shortcomings, it is still an engaging picture.
     Set against the Burmese civil unrest of 1988, the story centers
around Laura Bowman (Patricia Arquette), a young American widower who
has traveled to Burma with her sister, Andy (Frances McDormand), to try
and put the recent murder of her husband and young boy behind her.
Despite playing tourist, Laura cannot get past her tragedy which has
left her in a state of emotional numbness.
     One night, while venturing through Rangoon, Laura witnesses a
protest led by Aung San Suu Kyi (the real life resistance leader played
by Adelle Lutz), who fearlessly faces down soldiers despite having
their rifles pointed at her.  This event ignites a spark in Laura and
she excitedly returns to her hotel where she unfortunately realizes
that her passport has been lifted.
     The situation in Burma quickly deteriorates and all tourists find
themselves expelled, except for Laura who cannot exit without her
passport.  With her sister forced to leave, Laura soon finds herself
alone in Rangoon.  Her adventure begins when she meets U Aung Ko (a
wonderful performance by a Burmese actor of the same name), a guide who
agrees to take her into the countryside.  There, through a series of
events, she becomes swept up into the anti-government movement and
through her struggles, finds the resolve to come to grips with her
past.
     The strengths of BEYOND RANGOON, are its interesting characters,
exotic locales and suspenseful action scenes.  Arquette gives a
surprisingly strong but restrained performance that is crucial in
keeping the film from becoming melodramatic.  The supporting cast
includes McDormand, who gives her usual credible performance, and
Spalding Gray in an small role as the tourist guide.  The real standout
is U Aung Ko, who with his mix of authenticity and charm, really hooks
us into caring about the warm-hearted ex-professor he portrays.
     Where the movie fails is in its aim to be a political statement.
Boorman, along with his co-screenwriter Bill Rubenstein, never
elucidate the Burmese political scene and they are content to leave it
at the level of army guys in green are bad, bald monks in robes are
good.
     While not one of his best films, BEYOND RANGOON still has many
of the qualities that have made other Boorman pictures so captivating.
We don't learn much about the reasons for Burma's problems but we
certainly learn that there is a problem.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is August, 1988, and Laura Bowman (Patricia Arquette) has lost
her husband and son to crime in the United States.  Shell-shocked and
feeling she has little left to live for, she has agreed to accompany
her sister on a tour of Southeast Asia.  In Rangoon she loses her
passport while visiting a mesmerizing pro-democracy rally.  Forced to
remain in Burma while her group goes on to Thailand, she finds herself
getting in deeper and deeper trouble until she is on the run across
country, chased by the military police.  Along the way she has seen
more of the day-to-day brutality of the Burmese government than the
military can afford to have her report to the outside world.
Accompanying her is a pro-democracy ex-college professor U Aung Ko
(played by U Aung Ko).
     When setting a story against a strongly political backdrop the
decision must always be made of how much of the issues to lay before
the audience.  BEYOND RANGOON may not be of the caliber of THE KILLING
FIELDS, an obvious film to compare this one with for more than its
Southeast Asia setting.  But BEYOND RANGOON is well ahead of the
cliched THUNDERHEART or A DRY WHITE SEASON.  For political films this
one is close to (and perhaps just a notch below) UNDER FIRE.  Yes, it
has a lot of chase scenes and hair-breadth escapes, but it also is a
fairly good introduction to the state of Burma under a military
dictatorship.
     Hans Zimmer can add one more exotic musical score to his resume,
and while this one is not as lyrical as some of his previous work, it
certainly works in the film.  Boorman's visual sense stands him in good
stead with a few small lapses in judgement.  One such lapse is a scene
involving mirrors that calls too much attention to itself.  Another odd
distraction has one character (a Burmese-speaking policeman who comes
to a hotel), whose words do not fit his lip movements, like in a badly
dubbed movie.
     Patricia Arquette seems to have the acting range of Keanu Reeves,
but as someone who has been through some trying emotional experiences
before and during the course of the film, that may be all that would be
expected of the character.  U Aung Ko has a likeable worldly air.
Since the actor and the character have the same name, one wonders if
the script told his real background.  Frances McDormand and Spaulding
Gray get second and third billing for what must have been contractual
reasons, though they are quickly out of the film.
     While one might question the depth of the political thought that
went into the scripting of this film, the film is certainly suspenseful
and should be pleasing for most viewers.  It should be noted that this
film did what a Nobel Peace Prize could not: it got the Burmese
government to free Aung San Suu Kyi.  I give this one a +2 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Pedro Sena
    Were it not that we already had seen films like THE KILLING FIELDS, to
which this one will always be compared, this would have been considered a
good film.
    As it is, this film comes off like another one of the same, and its
political edge is lost.  Had it been done ten to fifteen years ago, it may
have been considered a lot better.
    This is the story of an American tourist, or visitor, that gets caught
up in the political changes in Burma in 1988, when the communist government
was taking charge of the country through force.  And most of the foreigners
were trapped inside and efforts were made to make their life difficult.  The
leading character, an American, is having problems and is finding it
difficult to get out of the country, and with the help of her servants, and
their friends, she finally makes it.
    Although this film is not as poignant and powerful as the film it
copies, it manages to hold its own.  It does have some nice acting along the
way, Patricia Arquette, probably being the weakest of the lot, but still not
bad.  As is common in all other John Boorman films, both the music and the
cinematography are nicely done, and well designed coupled with odd camera
angles to add a larger feeling that something, someone is trying so hard to
escape, not only a political situation but a personal one as well, which is
the larger issue in this film.  Thus it's title.
3 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Ygdrasil's Film Newsgroup
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1996. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Christopher Null
     BEYOND RANGOON is absolutely typical of the way Hollywood can take a
compelling story, full of genuine characters and heartfelt emotion, then
hack it to tiny bits and put it back together, Frankenstein-like, into a
sappy, overwrought drama that is without a soul and without a point.
     The story is "based on actual events."  Patricia Arquette plays Laura,
an American doctor trying to find peace after the brutal murder of her
husband and son.  With her sister (Frances McDormand), they embark on a tour
of the exotic East, including a peaceful stopover in Burma, a war-torn
country ruled by military dictatorship (As they say, "In Burma, *everything*
is illegal.).  Laura's passport is lifted, and she finds herself trapped in
the capital city of Rangoon, while her sister and their tour group head off
to Bangkok.  The Burmese pick that time to revolt, and Laura finds herself
caught up in a civil war, which basically amounts to dodging bullets in the
jungle while covered in mud.
     Laura may have a medical degree, but she's also got the common sense of
a stick.  Any sensible person would have avoided this situation altogether.
When she can't sleep...she heads down to check out how the local
revolutionary rally is going, violating curfew.  When she loses her passport
and martial law is declared...she decides to leave Rangoon and sightsee in
the country--to hell with the law!  When her tour guide (U Aung Ko) doubts
they can get back to the city in time...she responds, "Let's risk it!"  In
the end, she gets what she deserves.  After all, she went to *Burma* didn't
she?
     It's hard to feel sorry for someone that acts so stupid, so often.  And
despite the constant threat of capture by the enemy, BEYOND RANGOON is
actually pretty boring.  Director John Boorman is much more concerned with
Laura's brooding over her dead son than with anything else.  Of course, this
is all part of the film's master plan: Toy with the viewers' emotions to the
point that they can't feel anything but horror when seeing the terrible
crimes of the Burmese.  If Laura wasn't such an idiot, that might have
worked.
     Another disappointment is the wholesale ripping off of THE KILLING
FIELDS, the Academy Award-winning film about a Cambodian refugee trying to
escape the Khmer Rouge during the Vietnam War.  THE KILLING FIELDS is one of
the best "on the run" pictures ever made, and BEYOND RANGOON borrows heavily
from it, even to the extent of casting Spalding Gray in a minor role.
Unfortunately, BEYOND RANGOON borrows bits and pieces, and can't replicate
the film's spirit.
     BEYOND RANGOON gets some points for at least having a noble premise,
which is a pleasant change from typical Hollywood fare.  U Aung Ko's tour
guide/revolutionary is very engaging, too, and almost makes the picture
worthwhile.  One thing still bugs me, though, and it's got nothing to do
with the sappy plot and hokey ending.  I keep wondering, just how much
numbingly repetitious, fluty woodwind music can one person stand, and where
was Zanfir hiding during the takes?
-Christopher Null / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)
