Title
Review for Heavy (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Dave Cowen
There's a sad magic in the feelings one experiences in the simple act of 
touching another.  A strange feeling of electricity or a thick feeling of 
ennui can seem to pulse or flow from one body to another, independant it 
seems, of our other senses.  The true magic of viewing a movie is that 
should a film engulf the viewer completely into the lives and minds of the
characters and the situations at hand, the viewer can truly feel as though 
they were experiencing firsthand the chemistry or emotions between the 
characters.
In a scene mid-way through HEAVY, Victor (Pruitt Taylor Vince) approaches 
his co-worker Callie (Liv Tyler) who is buckled over in sadness from a 
comment made by another co-worker, Delores (Debbie Harry).  Victor moves to
Callie slowly and cautiously, and then holds his hand to the side of her 
forehead.  Callie reaches up to hold his hand.  Soon after, as Victor leaves 
the room, he is grabbed by Delores who reaches out and holds him in a very 
similar way.  The difference is, we can _feel_ the longing and sadness of 
Victor and Callie pulse through the brief moment of contact that they make: 
but when Dolores reaches out to Victor, we feel nothing but the cold contact 
of flesh on flesh.  This is due to the fine direction and acting at the heart 
of HEAVY.
Victor is a "mama's boy" who works as a chef in the restaurant owned by his
mother Dollie (Shelley Winters).  Callie has been recently hired as a 
waitress, something that makes Dolores, the restaurant's other waitress, 
extremely upset -- Dolores believes Callie's hiring is intended as punishment
for sleeping with Dollie's husband years ago.  The tensions between Dollie, 
Dolores and Callie escalate as Victor is caught inbetween the three women: 
devoted to his mother, yet silently desiring Callie, and actively rejecting 
the advances of the flirtatious and slutty Dolores.  When Victor's mother 
dies, Victor can't bear to make the changes necessary to continue his life, 
flirting with his many options and rarely choosing to do anything.
While HEAVY is a film short on dialogue and plot it is unspeakably rich in 
the development and portrayal of the characters within it.  James Mangold 
infuses HEAVY with subtle visual cues to express the characters' emotions, 
and paces the film deliberately lugubriously.  Taylor Vince gives his 
character a wonderful, bittersweet air of repression, love and uncertainty -- 
nearly always having a facial expression that seems to not know whether it 
is a smile or a frown, and eyes that dart back and forth indicating uncomfort.
Liv Tyler and Shelley Winters both give authentic performances, and Debbie 
Harry does a spectacular job in a film much more demanding than the kind of 
drek she's typically present in.
HEAVY often feels so doused in emotional anguish that it feels like a fever
dream, the kind that can awaken you in a cold sweat and a panic.  Victor, 
when at the hospital visiting his mother, goes down to the lunchroom and 
tries to get a hot dog.  He is ignored by an apathetic server and goaded by 
a patient at the hospital who alternately seems crazy and the only one who 
can truly understand Victor -- it plays like a scene out of ERASERHEAD.  When 
the nightmarish aspects break, the viewer is left with emotionally agonizing
scenes such as one where Callie appears at Victor's house unexpectedly and 
notices a picture of her face that Victor had stolen hanging on his 
refrigerator.  Nothing captures the feel of HEAVY better than when the viewer 
watches Callie scan the kitchen with her eyes, not knowing the picture is 
there, and anticipating how she'll negatively react when she finally sees her 
picture hanging on the refrigerator, and what the impact of her seeing the 
picture (and the realization of Victor's longings) will be on Victor.  
Victor's repression is expressed brilliantly in one of the final scenes where 
he finally reveals the anger that has welled up in him throughout the 
movie -- only after an extremely long shot of him looking bewildered, as if 
he had suddenly come to the realization that he is allowed to express his 
anger and not hide it in his wince of a grin.  
Certainly, HEAVY isn't a film for everybody -- understandably, not everbody
enjoys going to a theater to see a film which portrays the sadness and 
longing of its characters and how they react to tragedies in life both big 
and small.  In a movie season of detached and dull films, however, the way 
that first-time director James Mangold sends these character's emotions 
beyond the screen and into the audience is nothing short of magic -- a magic 
unmatched by any other film I've seen this year.
-- 
signed: ESCHATFISCHE, david     h t t p : / /w w w . f i s c h e . c o m
(esch@fische.com) ------------------------------------------------------

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by James Mangold.
Cast: Pruitt Taylor Vince, Shelley Winters, Liv Tyler, Deborah Harry, 
Joe Grifasi and Evan Dando.
Release Date: December 29th 1995 (UK)
HEAVY is the story of Victor ( Pruitt Taylor Vince ), a painfully shy and
overweight chef and how his obsession with a beautiful young waitress,
Callie ( Liv Tyler ), invades his life and ultimately changes it forever.
The film is set in a quiet town in upstate New York, where Victor works 
at his mother's restaurant.  Victor's mother, Dolly ( Shelley Winters ), hires 
Callie ostensibly to help out her other waitress Delores ( Deborah Harry ) 
but with the hidden intention of matchmaking her with her retiring son. 
In the early hours of the morning, as Victor sits alone in a corner of
the then deserted restaurant playing cards, Callie sidles up to him and starts
to casually chat.  Victor is clearly stuck for words yet he manages to 
communicate with her and they proceed to play a card game together. 
This is the start of Victor and Callie's touching friendship.  Victor is 
clearly enamoured by Callie, but just as soon as such ideas start in his head,
he is immediately disappointed when their card game is interrupted by the 
arrival of Callie's guitar-playing mechanic boyfriend ( Evan Dando ), who 
turns up to take her home.  This will not be the last disappointment for Victor 
during the course of the film, and a far more tragic one is in store. 
James Mangold's film shows the frustrations of people who, for various reasons,
wish their lives were less routine and more exciting.  Delores, the older
waitress, clearly stuck in a rut ( as are virtually all the characters ),
is in a dead-end job and unmarried in her forties.  She has no shortage of men
she can "take home", but no one special to stay with her and share her life.
She resents Callie from the word go, and it's not hard to see why.  Callie is
young and beautiful and has her whole life in front of her, while Delores'
own future is anything but rosy.  Leo ( Joe Grifasi ) the resident barfly, 
spends every evening propping up the counter in the restaurant, drinking 
himself into a stupor, and clearly sees no future for himself either.  He gets 
so drunk one night that Victor and Dolly take him home, where he sleeps the 
drink off on a camp-bed in Victor's room. 
The whole film revolves around Victor and shows in great detail the life of a
man who, crippled by a lack of self-confidence, is trapped in a monotonous 
life and cut off from the world around him.  It is only the arrival of Callie 
and the genuine affection and warmth she shows to Victor that finally makes 
him realise that there is a world outside that he can be part of. 
If this all sounds terribly depressing and dull, then you'd be surprised at how
entertaining the film actually is. The main character Victor is not the sort
of character you normally see leading a movie.  Victor is a silent, giant of a 
man and not prone to snappy conversation. In fact, Victor speaks hardly at all
in the film, and rarely more than half sentences at any one time.  Yet Pruitt 
Taylor Vince's performance as Victor is so mesmerising that to take your eyes 
off him for one second would be to miss a subtle facial expression that 
illuminates Victor's soul and lets you see exactly what Victor is thinking 
and feeling.
Pruitt Taylor Vince gives a performance that would surely merit an
Oscar nomination were the film to be released in the US,  and I sincerely
hope that this will happen.  Liv Tyler also gives a very impressive performance
as the young Callie, a difficult role which shows that she has alot of talent 
and Shelley Winters is a delight as Victor's mother.
The writer and director James Mangold has created a wonderful film which 
distinguishes him as a great, and promising talent .  As a mark of his 
achievement, HEAVY was awarded the Special Jury Prize for Direction at 
the 1995 Sundance Film Festival.
Review written on Feb 17 1996 by Vince Deehan ( vince@deehan.demon.co.uk )

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
Release date: beginning 6/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:45
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
     The characters of James Mangold's debut feature, HEAVY, are the 
flotsam and jetsam of life -- men and women left scattered and forgotten 
on the beach of Pete and Dolly's Restaurant, a Hudson Valley roadhouse 
where a smile is just about the last thing anyone expects to see.  No 
one here is happy or well-adjusted.  Each character has problems, some 
of which we're told very little about, but the common denominator is 
that they all view life as something to be endured rather than 
experienced.
     The roadhouse is owned and run by Dolly Modino (Shelley Winters), 
an aging woman with a variety of health difficulties.  Dolly spends much 
of her time reminiscing about the past when her husband was still alive.  
For her, the present is almost as unpromising as the future.  Delores 
(Deborah Harry) is a frumpy waitress who has engaged in a fifteen-year 
war of words with Dolly.  Life-weary and looking for a little affection, 
Delores drifts from day-to-day, not seeming to care what comes next.  
Leo (Joe Grifasi) is Pete and Dolly's most loyal customer, a perpetually 
drunk loser who hangs around the roadhouse hoping that Delores will 
agree to take him home.  Callie (Liv Tyler) is the new employee, a 
college dropout in need of money who is saddled with a loutish boyfriend 
and may or may not be pregnant.  
     Then there's Victor (Pruitt Taylor Vince), the film's protagonist.  
Painfully shy and convinced that his overweight condition makes him 
unattractive, Victor lives in the shadow of his mother, Dolly.  He's the 
restaurant's cook and the object of Delores' affection.  But, with the 
arrival of Callie, Victor finds something to brighten up his days.  He 
is instantly smitten with her, and, when she has a few kind words for 
him and seems interested in a friendship, Victor is eager to oblige.  
Nevertheless, his feelings for Callie, which are clearly not 
reciprocated on the same level, will seemingly lead to inevitable 
heartbreak.  
     Where FORREST GUMP was the fantasy, HEAVY is the reality.  Victor 
is a Gump-like character -- slow-witted and likable.  However, while 
Robert Zemeckis' 1994 blockbuster gave us a triumphant fairy tale, HEAVY 
gives us a near-tragedy.  Forrest got Jenny; the closes Victor comes to 
winning Callie is in his fantasies.  Writer/director Mangold never 
compromises the integrity of his painfully-intense script.  There isn't 
one crowd-pleasing moment in the entire movie, except perhaps the last 
scene, which offers a flicker of hope.
     Much of HEAVY is about communication, or, more appropriately, the 
lack thereof.  Circumstances and choice have created walls of isolation 
around each of the characters.  At times, their inability to break 
through these barriers is maddeningly frustrating -- much as it was in 
1992's UN COEUR EN HIVER, the French film about a man who suppresses all 
of his feelings.  In HEAVY, we sense that Victor would like to express 
himself, except he either doesn't know how or is so insecure about 
himself that the fear of rejection keeps him quiet.  
     Dialogue is sparse in HEAVY, so it's left up to the actors to form 
and develop their characters with mannerisms and facial expressions 
instead of scripted lines.  Considering that the cast is not made up of 
"great" names, this is a daring move by Mangold.  Fortunately, it pays 
off, largely due to a gargantuan performance by Pruitt Taylor Vince 
(NOBODY'S FOOL), who creates a heartwrenchingly sympathetic man we can't 
help caring about.  Deborah Harry is also good, giving us the kind of 
waitress who would have made FRANKIE AND JOHNNY a memorable movie.  Liv 
Tyler (STEALING BEAUTY) gets by more on looks than ability, but she has 
her moments.  And Shelley Winters is refreshingly low-key.
     HEAVY is not the kind of film to view when you're looking for 
something upbeat.  It's too real, and, as a result, potentially too 
painful.  On the way out of the theater, I heard someone remark, "Why 
did I just sit through that film?  I've lived that story, and I don't 
need to be put through it again!"  Mangold captures the nuances of life 
perfectly, and, by never cheapening his vision through facile 
resolutions, he fashions a memorable cinematic portrait.  Ultimately, 
HEAVY's considerable weight has little to do with what the scale says 
when Victor steps onto it.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is a familiar viewpoint that color in a film actually distracts
the viewer and mutes the emotional impact of the film's camerawork.
What is less commonly observed is that dialogue may actually do much
the same thing.  We have seen the overly florid gesturing of silent
film acting, much of which looks silly today.  But some silent films
were extremely intense emotional pieces in their day.  Perhaps as much
of the emotional potential of film was lost with sound film as was lost
with color.  HEAVY is a color film, and a sound film, but it functions
very much as a silent film would.  Almost all of the story is conveyed
either in visual images or in single lines of dialogue, perhaps
appropriate to title cards in silent films.  Of course the film is not
lacking in dialogue, but the dialogue is almost never used to move the
plot along.  It adds a little color and background interest to the
film, but it is rarely used to advance the plot.  This is a film that
owes much more to the traditions of silent film than to those of the
sound era.  By forcing the viewer to carefully watch the characters,
very different information can be imparted to the viewer and the
technique focuses attention on the emotions of the characters.
     Most of the action takes place in and around Pete and Dolly's
Restaurant, a bar and restaurant in a small New England town.  Pete has
been dead for years and his widow Dolly (Shelley Winters) still blames
waitress Delores (Deborah Harry in a surprisingly textured role) for a
liaison with Pete.  When Dolly hires an attractive teenager Callie (Liv
Tyler) to help out there is immediate resentment from Delores.  Caught
between the two is Victor (Pruitt Taylor Vince), Dolly's son somewhere
in his 30s.  Victor is so stigmatized by his own obesity and so
dominated by his mother that it is all he can do to occasionally speak.
He is very much attracted to Callie but cannot bring himself to have a
conversation with her.  Instead he decides to try to reinvent himself,
taking up dieting and investigating a local cooking school.  But he
must fight the forces of his own inertia and that of his mother who
wants to keep him in his present job.  He fantasizes about being a hero
and saving Callie.  Soon Victor's life, which has been static for so
many years, starts to change violently.  His reaction and his behavior
when those changes come is totally unexpected.  Little of this are we
told about, it is almost all shown to us and Victor's quiet nature is
perfect for the visual style of storytelling.  The same story could
have been lightened by comedy but writer and director James Mangold
takes a very realistic approach and rarely strays from it.
     This is a very precisely directed film and it has many very nice
subtle touches.  As an example of the directing technique, to
underscore Victor's image of himself, there is a scene in which he
looks at a stack of photographs.  Gingerly he places each on a table
after looking at it.  When he gets to a picture of himself he puts it
down with a small slam.  Small and subtle touches do what another story
would simply tell with dialogue.
     In general the production values speak of a film made well on a
low budget.  The colors were not particularly rich, indicating a less-
expensive print.  But the performances are all very powerful.  Pruitt
Taylor Vince's acting gets more and more intense as the film goes on.
Mangold moves his story with a slow and deliberate speed, but
completely pulls the viewer into the lives of his characters and
particularly Victor's life.
     The usual way of saying it is that one "sees" a film, but for most
films much more of the story is conveyed in the dialogue than the
visuals.  HEAVY is truly a film one sees rather than hears.  Mangold's
experiment in visual storytelling may not have a lot of application to
other films, but it works extremely well in this film.   I would rate
HEAVY a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
HEAVY (1995, US release1996)*** 1/2  Directed and written by James
Mangold. Photography, Michael Barrow. Editing,Meg Reticker. Production
design,Michael Shaw. Music,Thurston Moore. Producer, Richard Miller.
Cast: Pruitt TaylorVince (Victor), Liv Tyler (Callie), Shelley Winters
(Dolly), Deborah Harry (Delores), Joe Grifasi (Leo), Evan Dando (Jeff).
A CFP release, 105 min. Not rated. (Nothing objectionable)
Decades ago, the  term "Theater of Silence" was applied in France to
plays in which rhetoric was replaced by restrained speech, where
dialogues comprised hesitations, where the subtext was more important
than the text. The appellation did not last long, yet found its
application in several theatrical genres, such as the work of Samuel
Beckett. 
Most people have forgotten this. James Mangold probably never heard of
it, yet his "Heavy" fits that category well. A first feature yet a true
original, it was rightly awarded the Grand Jury Prize for Best Direction
at the Sundance Film Festival in early 1995. A good guess of why it was
released in the U.K. in 1995 but had to wait for U.S. distribution until
past mid-1996, is that this a maverick work, serious, non-Hollywoodish
and not catering to immature audiences. 
Set in upstate New York in and around a roadhouse, the film has few sets
and even fewer characters. The tavern is named "Pete and Dolly's" after
the long-deceased Pete and his widow (Shelley Winters) who runs the
place. The sign ought to have changed to "Dolly's," but then time stands
still in this story. Regulars come and go as the diner also seems
isolated in space. We guess that it is near a town, but except for the
time when a hospital comes into the picture, "P & D" might as well be
miles from any urban agglomeration.
Molly's son, the thirtysomething Victor, is severely balding, heavy
(like "big" an euphemism for "fat"), 100 percent shy and 99 percent
silent. Not reserved, reticent, laconic. Not romantically taciturn. Just
silent. In the entire movie he utters just a few words, and when, under
stress, he does speak out, he breaks his record with two sentences.
That's near the end when he tells Delores  "You don't have to be nice,
only nicer" "Or what, Victor?" "I'll fire you." In a less restrained
movie you might feel like applauding.
The causes for this are not made known. One facile explanation goes that
Dolly is an overbearing mother --yet we don't see excessive control by
her, while her love for Victor is fairly obvious. There must have been
some sympathy for the heavy Victor character by Shelley Winters who went
from slim to...well, heavy. The Mama's Boy syndrome was much clearer in
"Only The Lonely (1991)"  a fine film where a Chicago policeman  (the
late, lamented, hefty John Candy) falls in love.  
The root of the trouble is more likely that Victor's poundage --tough
the man is far from  a monster of obesity --weighs heavy on his mind,
especially as he can't help eating  high-fat and junk foods. With
typical restraint, the film does not make a big show of this. But then,
to argue with myself, it is also clear that overeating can be a symptom
of other problems -- so we're back to square one.
In the meantime we might wonder at the increasing number of recent
movies that deal, directly or not, with food and sometimes with the
exclusively American problem of obesity. 
Let me only say that "Heavy" is a million times preferable to "Thinner." 
The film opens with Molly hiring pretty Callie as a new waitress, to the
silent jealousy of Delores, the older barmaid and only other employee.
She has been around the block before, semi-flirts with elbow-bending
Leo,the most regular of regulars,ever-present on his bar stool. Delores
just might have views of permanency also with Victor. The un-cliched
Delores, warts and all like Molly, comes through as likable. 
Callie is sweet, natural, none too talkative. He has an immediate,
silent crush on her and becomes even more conscious of his weight. The
rapport between the two, almost wordless, is immediate. But when, at
closing time, Callie declares :"My boyfriend is waiting," you can sense
the sky falling on Chicken Little.
There is little action and plot --as usually understood -- so that the
developments should not be divulged here. The film is, above all, one of
original, quiet yet minute observation of characters and relationships,
notably Victor's. It may, for some viewers, feel a bit heavy and in need
of some pruning, but on second thought, the same viewers might realize
that the length (not excessive by today's standards) allows the movie to
develop, so that several poignant, even heart-breaking passages
(Victor's mostly) can affect us as they do. Mind you, for the little
that is happening, a lot is happening too. What I mean by this paradox
will be understood by a sensitive public.
Lest one get the wrong idea, note that the beauty of "Heavy" is in its
details. The film is under the twin signs of naturalism and minimalism
in everything: script, direction, sets, the excellent photography and
editing, the music that does not obtrude and does the right thing at the
right moments. But naturalism does not preclude some very good scenes of
visions by Victor, including his first kiss with Callie -- as a
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. And  minimalism does away with
elaborations of unnecessary sights, such as details about the bar's
customers, or the guitar-strumming, singing Jeff, Callie's garage
mechanic boyfriend who is played by a member of the band "The
Lemonheads." 
It came as no surprise to learn that 32-year old James Mangold is the
son of well-known painters, that among his earlier works was a
documentary about his mother, and that his father is a minimalist
artist. 
Mr. Mangold has made no compromises. In its sympathetic but un-gooey
attitudes, the movie avoids the obviousness of melodrama, replaces
audience-pleasing but dishonest twists with real life (there is no
closure, for example), finds perfect interpreters in its cast.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HEAVY (director/writer: James Mangold; cinematographer: Michael Barrow;
editor: Meg Reticker; cast: Pruitt Taylor Vince (Victor), Liv Tyler
(Callie), Shelley Winters (Dolly), Debbie Harry (Delores), Joe Grifasi
(Leo), Evan Dando (Jeff), David Patrick Kelly (Grey Man in Hospital);
Runtime: 103; 1995)
This is an intense, brooding, slow-moving drama taking place at "Pete &
Dolly's" small roadside pizza restaurant, run by the widowed Dolly
(Shelley Winters) with help from her shy and obese thirtysomething son
Victor (Pruitt Taylor Vince) and the irascible waitress for the last
fifteen years, Delores (Deborah Harry-former lead singer of Blondie).
The self-development story is seen through Victor's lonely eyes as he
tries to come to grips with his sensitivities, his undeveloped
personality, his inability to be articulate, and his low opinion of
himself. This indie film is filled with many gratifying small touches,
as it takes its time developing and forces one to tune into the way
Victor sees things. It is set in a Hudson Valley, New York, small town.
We see the balding, hunched over Victor in the narrow confines of the
pizza kitchen, where he feels most wanted when making pizzas. This is
the kind of human interest story that Hollywood slicks up and can't make
in quite the same realistic way that a good indie film can be made, that
takes its time in bringing out a number of small truths, so that by the
time the story winds down, a big climactic ending is not needed, all the
pain and pathos has already been drawn out of it. James Mangold (the son
of famous artists) deservedly was awarded the Grand Jury Prize for Best
Direction at the Sundance Film Festival in early 1995 for this film.
The restaurant is barely surviving as a place passing truckers frequent
and a handful of regulars stop by, until young, beautiful, and lively
Callie (Liv Tyler-whose father is Aerosmith's Steven Tyler) gets hired,
despite her lack of experience. Dolly takes a liking to this vivacious
girl who is dropping out of college, perhaps thinking she could be just
right for Victor. Her hiring causes Delores to feel that she has a rival
for her job and reacts negatively toward the much younger waitress,
while Victor is absorbed by Callie's good looks and sexuality, and
fantasizes about her. He fantasizes that he is saving her from drowning
and that she has taken his mother's place at the breakfast table. He is
too bashful to tell her that he likes her, he is too self-conscious of
his appearance. When he tips the scales at 250-pounds, he decides to go
on a crash diet. His mother tries to cheer him up by saying, "You're not
fat, you're husky."
When Callie wonders why Victor doesn't go to the neighborhood fancy
Culinary Institute's cooking school, where he could learn to become a
chef, his domineering mother tells her, "Why pay for him to learn
something that he already knows!"
Regular customer and hanger-on, Leo (Joe Grifasi), is a heavy drinker
hiding his depressive state by acting superior to Victor. He is enamored
with the middle-aged Delores, but she mostly returns his affections with
stinging comments. Delores is an enigmatic figure, someone Dolly expects
had an affair with her husband and therefore harbors a resentment toward
her, but not enough to fire her.
When Dolly is hospitalizalized, Victor is asked to drive Delores home
and is surprised when she makes a pass at him, as they stop at the
airport to watch the airplanes take off. When he rejects her, she snaps,
"What, are you saving it for someone special?" Victor when asked later
by Callie for a ride home, takes her to the same spot, but she offers
him only her friendship. Her boyfriend is a handsome but obnoxious
garage mechanic and a guitar-strumming jerk (Evan Dando-lead singer of
the Lemonheads), who wants to control her and doesn't want her working
in the pizza place. In contrast to Victor's gentle nature, he's always
high-strung. It is clearly because of his looks that Callie goes out
with him, setting herself up for a life of disappointments and
loneliness.
The film slowly builds to its surprise ending, where we see Victor
sitting alone in his restaurant, having to face an uncertain future and
the music of loneliness forever, and we are left with a lasting
impression that is painful to perceive. The film works so well because
the performers are outstanding and the writer/director has come through
with a very touching debut effort. There is something precious about
this film, whether in Shelley Winters warm performance as a giving but
possessive mother, or from Pruitt Taylor Vince's priceless performance
of someone who hardly speaks and is a doting son, longing for love and
friendship, but who still hasn't matured, or from Liv Tyler's refreshing
role as the one who breeds life into the dead feelings of both mother
and son, giving them some hope for the future.
The musical score arranged by Thurston Moore helped set the quiet mood
needed for the story to gently unfold. Everything about this original
film was honest and natural. All the characters know what loneliness is,
even if they mask it better than the mama's boy does, and because of
that, it is easy to relate to their very demanding problems of
loneliness and how it has eaten away at them -- making some fat, others
blind to what they are, or bitter.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
