Title
Review for House! (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Warner Village (Birkenhead Conway Park)
Released in the UK by Pathé on May 5, 2000; certificate 15; 89 minutes; 
country of origin UK; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Julian Kemp; produced by Michael Kelk.
Written by Jason Sutton; based on an idea by Eric Styles.
Photographed by Kjell Vassdal; edited by Jonathan Rudd.
Bingo is one of the most boring and aimless pastimes there is. How it became 
popular with elderly people in this country is beyond me. They've had so much 
experience of life that surely they know of something to do that's more 
interesting, and less cheesy. Why do they spend their evenings in garish 
halls, listening to lounge performers calling out random numbers?
It's probably just as well, then, that the focus of "House!" is an attractive 
young lady named Linda, played by Kelly MacDonald, who you will remember from 
"Trainspotting" (1996). She gets our attention even in the ugly atmosphere of 
La Scala, a damp and creaky building that's been a music hall and a cinema, 
but now just caters to the bingo players.
The owner, Mr. Anzani (Freddie Jones), remembers fondly his days as a film 
projectionist in the same place, telling stories about the wonders of Fellini 
and Lang. "I'd still like to think we offer more than just bingo," he says, 
and indeed between games he engages the patrons in friendly chit-chat and 
cooks them spaghetti from a family recipe. But the personal touch just won't 
cut it: A quick drive away, a huge new bingo hall is set to open, with 
celebrity guests, bright lighting and a huge car park. La Scala offers dust 
and dry rot.
Linda, who works as an usher, is getting worried about whether the place can 
survive, when she discovers a sort of telepathic ability. In any bingo game, 
when she thinks of a number, it comes up! If she can use this to win the 
Ł1million star prize in an important national tournament, then her own 
security, as well as that of her place of business, is guaranteed. I don't 
know why she doesn't just play the National Lottery and bugger off to the 
Caribbean with the jackpot, but hey, to each his own.
The problem with "House!" is that its good parts cancel each other out and 
its bad parts are just plain bad. There are some involving passages of 
dialogue and glimpses at the drab locations -- the ambience of "The Full 
Monty" is achieved once or twice, if not the genius. Then again, one of the 
things which keeps the film interesting is exactly what spoils that drama, 
and that's the way the director, Julian Kemp, uses flashy camera and editing 
tricks to bring his picture to life. Consider an early, obligatory scene in 
which Linda speaks to The Guy She's Always Loved But Has Never Made A Move 
On, and Kemp flash-cuts between tiny hand and eye gestures. The technique 
turns a would-be clichéd conversation into something intense and passionate. 
Directing the story in the same manner, however, just causes obstruction.
It's also pretty hard to enjoy a movie whose climax hinges on a bingo game. 
It needs to charm our pants off before we set aside enough prejudice to put 
up with it. There's no way "House!" can do that when it's being cluttered by 
such annoying things as the performance of Mossie Smith. She plays one of 
Linda's co-workers, an obese woman in tight-fitting clothes who reminded me 
of those "You're too large to dress sexy!" episodes of Ricki Lake. Smith 
delivers her lines in a flat, rambling monotone without ever emphasising any 
particular word, with a combination of smug grin and miserable wince, and 
eyes stretched open to the size of tennis balls.
This could have been an okay picture if the filmmakers had cleared away some 
of the obvious dreck, and then decided what kind of movie they wanted to make 
-- hyperactive stylised piece or sweet British comedy? Interestingly enough, 
"House" was also the title of a very successful horror movie when I was 
growing up. If they'd thrown in some of THAT, things would really have been 
interesting! Consistency be damned!
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
