Title
Review for Arise, My Love (1940)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
ARISE, MY LOVE (1940) Directed by the often great Mitchell 
Leisen, this is one of the best American romantic adventures 
with comedy. Written by the terrific team of Charles Brackett 
and Billy Wilder from an original story (Academy Award) by 
Benjamin Glazer and John S. Toldy.  With Claudette Colbert, 
Ray Milland, Dennis O'Keefe, Walter Abel, Dick Purcell, George 
Zucco, Frank Puglia, Esther Dale, Ann Codee.  
Leisen said that he made this film  day by day from headlines, 
waiting to improvise as things changed.  In 1939 , when the 
Loyalists have lost the Spanish Civil War, reporter Augusta 
("Gusto") Nash (Claudette Colbert ) rescues American volunteer 
flyer Tom Martin  (Ray Milland ) from a Franco jail and 
execution, in a great, suspenseful,farcical  and 
black-humorous sequence. 
They hijack a plane, escape to Paris, have a wonderful 
interlude there. The sequence of Colbert in her hotel room, 
trying to be a professional first and resist her attraction to 
Milland is a gem. That's when, to force herself not to meet  
Milland who's waiting in a cafe across the street, she has the 
astounded hotel's night clerk lock all her shoes in the safe.  
Later, Gusto and Tom, respectively  on their way to  Berlin 
and Warsaw, don't make it as Hitler attacks Poland. Returning 
home on the S.S. Athenia which gets torpedoed, they survive 
and return to the Continent, she to cover the war, he to fly 
against Germany. Reunited after the fall of France they now 
will go to America to prepare flyers and appeal for an end to  
America's isolationism. There's definitely a resemblance 
between the end of this film and the pep-up broadcast to 
America by Joel McCrea Alfred Hitchcock's "Foreign 
Correspondent" of the same year, 1940.
Walter Abel, in of his very best supporting roles, plays 
Colbert's harried, frustrated editor who keeps repeating "I'm 
not happy; I'm not happy at all..." He has superb comic 
timing. 
Good, sophisticated touches of humor and sentiment  abound, on 
a then-delicate,tricky and ever-changing  political 
background. The camerawork (Charles Lang) and the score 
(Victor Young) were Academy nominated.  In 1988 Miss Colbert 
said it was her favorite film  because "it started out as a 
farce and became very serious."  
Joel McCrea was the original choice for the male lead and 
might have been better than Milland, whose harsh voice and 
sometimes monotonous acting are a mild liability. But Colbert 
is superb and the film is a delight.   
