Title
Review for Apostle, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I'd rather die today and go to heaven than live to be a hundred
and go to hell," earnestly proclaims the Pentecostal preacher.  With
that line coming from a fundamentalist Christian minister, Hollywood
has taught us how we should fill in the rest of the story.  He will be
turn out to be a scoundrel who has less actual belief in God than the
average American, and all of his preaching will turn out to be a
cynical ruse to extort money from his naive congregation.  From ELMER
GANTRY on, we have learned what to expect when the movies go to church.
     Well, think again, for THE APOSTLE, which Robert Duvall has wanted
to make for over a decade, does not take the usual tack of smearing the
minister, and by implication all, the rest of organized religion.
Instead it gives us a highly devout man, who certainly has his foibles,
but with an absolute dedication to his ministry and his God.
     And arguably just as surprising, the good-spirited film is no
comedy, even if it does have humorous moments.  Instead of levity the
picture takes a touchingly serious approach as it introduces us to a
world not normally seen in motion pictures.  When in the privacy of his
attic, Robert Duvall, as Texas preacher Euliss "Sonny" Dewey, argues
sternly with his Lord, the scene shares a kinship with Emily Watson's
character crying out for her God in BREAKING THE WAVES's most powerful
scene.
     The body of the story starts with Sonny's coming upon an horrific
auto accident, which is another part of life generally ignored by
modern screenwriters.  With his well worn Bible in hand, Sonny leaps
from his car so that he can go pray over and with the accident's dying
victims.  The scowling police officer orders him to go away, and, after
he has tried to work his miracles, Sonny leaves with a smile in the
confidence that he has done the Lord's work.
     Robert Duvall not only gives a moving and realistic performance
surely destined to receive an Academy Award nomination but is also the
film's director, writer, executive producer, and chief financier.
Rarely has a movie been such a labor of love.
     With a white suit, peach-colored shirt and tie, and dark
sunglasses, Sonny looks as much like a rock star as a preacher.  Duvall
has every movement down pat.  Even when he is walking down the street,
the ever strutting Sonny cannot contain his energy.  He dances and
claps all the way.
     Sonny's churches having more black members than white means that
he shares his preaching duties with many deep-voiced black orators, but
his rhetoric is always competitive.  "I may be on the devil's hit-list,
but I'm on God's mailing list," he shouts to the congregation in a
revival tent.  And they lap it up.  People jump up, scream, "Praise the
Lord!" and mean it.  The intensity of their shared religious experience
is palpable.
     But Sonny is no saint.  It turns out that he has a wandering eye,
which angers his wife Jessie, played in a remarkably controlled
performance by Farrah Fawcett.  Jessie gets her revenge by taking up
with the church's youth minister and conniving to gain control over
Sonny's church, leaving him unemployed.  Sonny, letting his temper get
the best of him, does something foolish, which causes him to have to
leave town and two beloved kids forever.
     The bulk of the film occurs in a small, predominately black church
in Louisiana, which he builds up from a derelict building with no
congregation into a remodeled church ("One Way Road to Heaven: Holiness
Temple") with an enthusiastic flock.  In this part he rebaptizes
himself as The Apostle E.F. The Apostle is a hard worker willing to
take on any odd job necessary to obtain the funds for his church.  He
asks his members to tithe, but he gives all of his money.  And his good
deeds extend to secret donations of food for the local poor folks.  A
man who can't stand to be still, he tells one of his friends, "I quit
school because I didn't like recess."
     In his new town he meets Toosie (Miranda Richardson), who, like
him, has a family that she hasn't seen in a while.  His romance with
the separated woman, like the rest of the film, doesn't follow the
standard patterns we have grown to expect from our movies.
     Billy Bob Thornton shows up one day playing a local racist and
general troublemaker.  His confrontation with The Apostle is yet
another of show's many surprising scenes, again breaking many rules and
conceptions about what approach deeply religious people might take.
     Although it probably couldn't have ended any other way, the movie
does wrap things up nicely.  And don't miss the sweet epilogue during
the film's closing credits.  A tour de force acting performance by
Duvall and a surprising and unrelentingly dedicated script makes for an
outstanding and moving film.
     THE APOSTLE runs a little too long at 2:12.  It is rated PG-13 for
mild profanity and brief violence and would be fine for kids eleven and
up.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Robert Duvall, Farrah Fawcett, John Beasley, Miranda
Richardson
Ingredients: Down-on-his-luck evangelist, church
Synopsis:
Sonny Dewey (Robert Duvall) is a tireless Texas Pentecostal preacher who
unexpectedly catches his wife (Farrah Fawcett) in bed with another guy.
In a regrettable crime of passion he takes a baseball bat to the guy's
head, and suddenly finds himself a fugitive for murder, and estranged
from his wife and two kids. To atone for his sins, Sonny flees to a
rural bayou town in Louisiana and baptizes himself as a new creature - -
the Apostle E.F. As the Apostle E.F. Sonny's main mission is to revive
an abandoned church community and preach the gospel at the local radio
station. Soon he sets about resurrecting the One Way Road to Heaven
Holiness Temple. But Sonny knows his time is short; one day the police
will find him.
Opinion: 
This movie is a thought-provoking look at an evangelist in real life
terms. I believe that Robert Duvall (who is the producer, director,
writer, and main star of THE APOSTLE) deserves an Oscar for his
performance as Sonny the religious crusader - - a performance which is
so complex and realistic it ranks as one of the finest acting
performances on film. Duvall's portrayal of a true believer is
authentic, superb, and inspired; it offers the audience a completely
honest look at Southern religion, as well as a portrait of a fallible,
complicated man driven by his beliefs. 
Incidentally, in real life Duvall was just as 'driven' in getting the
project underway. Since no major Hollywood studio wanted to risk
financing a complex movie about an evangelist, THE APOSTLE as a project
lay dormant for almost 13 years before Duvall was able to get it done,
paying for its production with his own money (about five million
dollars).
In terms of hard-hitting realism and character portrayal THE APOSTLE
would rank as one of the best movies of this decade, and I emphatically
recommend THE APOSTLE for connoisseurs of stage and fine acting on film.
Similarly, those with a steep background in Pentecostal Christianity
would find THE APOSTLE a thought-provoking experience.
On the other hand, THE APOSTLE's main strength - - Duvall's preaching -
- is also what limits THE APOSTLE's target audience. In terms of plot
and pure entertainment value, THE APOSTLE is definitely not for
everyone. Teenagers, action fans, comedy fans, and people who find
church completely boring should stay far away from this movie, since
three quarters of the film is watching Sonny preach at church. In other
words, THE APOSTLE is a four star performance, but with a very limited
audience.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) Sonny sees a car crash not as a tragedy but as an
opportunity. He's not a lawyer, though; he's a preacher. 
When we first meet Sonny, he is fortunate enough to come upon an accident
just after it happened. He grabs a Bible and runs to one of the cars. Sonny
is able to comfort the semi-conscious, bleeding occupant, and save his soul
before the cops chase him off. 
Thus opens THE APOSTLE, Robert Duvall's directing debut. Duvall also stars,
playing Sonny, a traveling Alabama preacher. Sonny is on the road so much
that his family is breaking up. His wife Jessie (Farrah Fawcett) has started
seeing another man, and she's ready for divorce. On top of that, she manages
to vote Sonny out of the church that he himself founded. 
Sonny still loves his wife and kids, so when Jessie's lover has the audacity
to stand between him and his own children, Sonny snaps. He beats the other
man to death with a softball bat. (In a culturally revealing echo from the
beginning of the film, the bystanders do not administer CPR to the dying
man, they collectively pray over him.) 
Sonny isn't stupid. He knows he lost his head and that he was terribly
wrong. But rather than stay in his own forsaken community and face the
music, Sonny ditches his car, his ID, and his name. He becomes "The Apostle
E.F." and sets off on foot looking for a sign from the Lord. 
He is led to a small town where he hooks up with the local preacher to found
a new church. 
That's it. That's the plot. If that summary makes it sound a little
open-ended, it is. Plotwise, a lot happens in the first third of the movie,
and then the pace changes drastically. When Sonny/E.F. settles in to his
newly adopted home town, the slow process of building a church begins. The
last two-thirds of the movie is relatively uneventful, giving the movie an
aimless, endless quality. 
When it comes time for the movie to end (about 20-30 minutes too late), it
comes from out of the blue. In fact, in an otherwise "realistic" film, it
takes a miracle (a kitchen radio changes stations unexpectedly) to bring
about the movie's conclusion. It's as though Duvall knows only how to direct
actors, and not how to handle a plot. 
Nevertheless, the movie has a lot going for it. Robert Duvall (the actor) is
very good in this film. In fact, it may be his best acting ever. He feels
natural in the role. When he's preaching, he is so caught up in the emotion
and the words, it's as if Duvall really is preaching and not acting. Even
when he's not preaching, Duvall captures the quirks and mannerisms of a
plain, friendly, extroverted man; the type of man that everyone likes and
nobody knows. 
Sonny has a healthy outlook for a movie character - for anyone - to have.
He's not in his job for the money, he's in it because he loves it. Sonny
knows his faults and prays forgiveness for his sins, but he doesn't dwell on
them. He simply lives each day as the Good Lord gives it to him. 
Also, in a refreshing twist, the film deals with religion without a hint of
cynicism or hypocrisy. One could infer some irony in that this preacher has
committed murder and fled the crime, but Sonny doesn't preach perfection, he
preaches repentance and salvation as an alternative to eternal damnation.
Given his character and the approach of the film, there is nothing
hypocritical in Sonny's chosen path. 
I can appreciate everything that was right in the movie, but unfortunately,
the whole experience didn't measure up. In spite of the interesting
characters and fresh look at southern religion, my overall impression is
that the movie was aimless and too long. That's too bad because I was really
rooting for Duvall. He is a good actor, and he's a good actor's director,
but it seems he's just not cut out for pulling a film together.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE APOSTLE
(October)
Starring:  Robert Duvall, Farrah Fawcett, Miranda Richardson, John
Beasley, Walter Goggins, June Carter Cash, Todd Allen, Billy Bob Thornton.
Screenplay:  Robert Duvall.
Producer:  Rob Carliner.
Director:  Robert Duvall.
MPAA Rating:  PG (adult themes, mild profanity, brief violence)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A moment of mild understatement:  people of Christian faith haven't
fared well in film.  When Hollywood was still afraid to offend, Christian
characters were flawless, salt-of-the-earth folks; later, as cinematic
taboos vanished through the 60s and 70s, religion became a sure sign of
either mental illness or hypocrisy.  Improbably extremes ruled, with few
film-makers bothering to delve into the complex middle ground occupied by
millions of Americans:  flawed human beings who are nevertheless
completely sincere and devoted to their faith.
     Pentecostal minister Euliss F. "Sonny" Dewey, the title character in
THE APOSTLE, may be the most wonderfully complex Christian character ever
depicted on film, and every ounce of credit for that creation goes to
Robert Duvall.  Duvall wrote, directed and stars as Sonny, a man with an
unfailing passion for his calling as a preacher.  Unfortunately he also
has an unfailing passion for women, leading his wife Jessie (Farrah
Fawcett) to throw him out of the house and engineer his ouster from his
church.  The short-tempered Sonny responds by taking a baseball bat to the
head of Jessie's new lover, then quickly taking it on the lam from his
home in Texas to Bayou Boutte, Louisiana.  There he re-christens himself
"The Apostle E. F.," dedicating himself to beginning a new ministry in his
new home.
     Duvall works wonders with Sonny, depicting every possible facet of
this complicated man's personality.  An early scene, in which Sonny stops
at the scene of an automobile accident to guide a critically injured young
man to salvation, depicts the single-minded, necessarily arrogant
conviction of the evangelist that everyone needs "saving" (as well as the
accompanying prideful glee when he succeeds).  Sonny's belief that his
work as a preacher supercedes all other obligations unifies every action,
from his rationalization of his infidelities to his decision to run from
the law.  Duvall even touches humorously on the reaction of others to
Sonny's fervor -- one man who offers Sonny hospitality also sleeps warily
with a shotgun by his side.
     If there's one major stumbling block in THE APOSTLE, it is that the
other characters in the film exist entirely to react to Sonny.  While the
performances are uniformly strong and naturalistic, the supporting players
rarely seem to have lives of their own.  From Jessie, to the young
mechanic (Walter Goggins) who becomes Sonny's close friend, to a racist
troublemaker (Billy Bob Thornton), all serve as spectators or functional
props in the story of Sonny's redemption.  Duvall commits so much energy
to making this one character completely real that he has little left to
spend on anyone else.
     You may not end up minding all that much, since that one character
becomes so fascinating.  Duvall has long been one of America's finest
actors, but this is the kind of role into which he disappears most
completely -- slightly roguish but unmistakably human souls like his roles
in TENDER MERCIES and LONESOME DOVE.  When Sonny gives his final sermon in
THE APOSTLE, in a sequence which lingers and builds in intensity, you
realize exactly what Duvall is aiming at.  It is possible for a man who is
quick-tempered, stubborn and unfaithful to his wife to change lives for
the better; it doesn't take a saint to be a good Christian.  Ultimately,
THE APOSTLE is a strange sort of character study, because Sonny doesn't
really change all that much.  Like most well-intentioned by imperfect
people, he just keeps trying to be better.

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Robert Duvall || Screenplay: Robert Duvall || Stars:
Robert Duvall (Euliss "Sonny" Dewey), Farrah Fawcett (Jessie
Dewey), Miranda Richardson (Toosie), Todd Allen (Horace), John
Beasley (Brother Blackwell), June Carter Cash (Sonny's Momma),
Walt Goggins (Sam), Billy Joe Shaver (Joe), Billy Bob Thornton
(Troublemaker) || MPAA Rating: PG-13
True faith and its expression through organized religion is a
difficult subject for a motion picture to tackle head-on, which
is probably why so few of them do it. Even the most religious
directors - like Martin Scorsese or Ingmar Bergman - usually
address issues of faith in implicit rather than explicit
religious terms.
So it's not hard to see why it took Robert Duvall fifteen years
to get "The Apostle" onto the big-screen. As a matter of fact,
even after fifteen years he still never managed to get financial
backing, and he ended up paying for it with $5 million of his own
money. He also wrote the script, directed the film, and starred
as the central character, a fiery Texas preacher named Euliss
"Sonny" Dewey. Few filmmakers have the courage and sheer audacity
to take on that kind of financial, technical, and creative
responsibility single-handedly, and it's testament to what an
intensely personal project this was for Duvall. And, thankfully,
every bit of that personal investment translates on-screen into
power and honest emotion.
Sonny is an energetic, Pentecostal preacher who has been speaking
(actually shouting) from behind the pulpit since he was twelve.
He spends much of his time traveling about the country,
evangelizing with other preachers at tent revivals. Unlike most
Hollywood characterizations of intense preachers, Sonny is not a
phony or a swindler, and the film's purpose is not to unearth
hypocrisy and sin in either Sonny or the church. Duvall makes it
abundantly clear that Sonny truly believes in what he says,
although like all humans, he has weaknesses.
One of his weaknesses become apparent when he finds out that, not
only does his long-suffering wife, Jessie (Farrah Fawcett), want
to leave him for another man in the congregation, but the two of
them have secretly plotted to remove him as preacher. Faced with
the loss of two things he loves passionately- his church and his
family - that same raw power that allows Sonny to get entire
congregations rocking and swaying transforms into a violent
temper. At his son's baseball game, Sonny snaps and smashes his
wife's lover in the face with a baseball bat, inflicting a wound
that may be fatal.
Not knowing what else to do, Sonny disappears. He throws away his
identification, drives his car into a lake, and takes a bus to
Louisiana, hoping to start over again. In the tiny, mostly poor
coastal town of Bayou Boutte, Sonny once again finds his calling.
After befriending a simple auto mechanic (Walt Goggins) and
tracking down the town's ex-minister (John Beasley), Sonny sets
up his own church, The One Way to Heaven Temple. Re-christening
himself as "The Apostle E.F.," he quickly draws together an eager
congregation, and together they realize real change in each
other's lives. But, always, Sonny's past is lurking a step behind
him, waiting to swallow his progress.
Duvall has made his intentions in making "The Apostle" clear. In
a recent article in "Newsweek," he wrote: "Filmmakers hardly ever
depict spirituality with such a strong emphasis on the Holy
Spirit, and when they do, it tends to be patronizing - full of
charlatans and snake handlers ... But what I really wanted to do
was try to understand what these preachers go through and what
they believe, and to portray it in an accurate way."
The strength of Duvall's convictions turn out to be the strength
of his film - "The Apostle" always rings true, even in the most
painful moments, because we know he's being sincere with the
subject matter. After fifteen years of traveling the country,
listening to all shapes and sizes of ministers and taking
studious notes on what they said, Duvall has captured the energy
and vitality of what it means to be truly spiritual.
His Sonny is a man who speaks directly to God and expects to be
spoken right back to. "I've always called you Jesus and you've
always called me Sonny," he says. When neighbors call and
complain that he is being too loud one night in one his rants
with the Man Upstairs, Sonny's mother (June Carter Cash) just
hangs up on them because she knows there's no sense trying to
interrupt him.
The main theme to emerge from "The Apostle" is the fact that good
can come from any situation. Sonny's act of violence toward
another human being is inarguably a horrific thing, and Duvall
never shrinks from that fact. However, that very same act of
violence is what brings Sonny to Bayou Boutte, where he finds
people whom he desperately needs and who desperately need him.
In his short time in Louisiana, he does a world of good, and when
the police finally show up to take him away, he goes quietly,
knowing that he deserves the punishment that is awaiting him.
And, as a scene during the final credits shows, he even turns his
punishment into a positive opportunity for change and betterment.
It is that strength in Sonny's character that makes him so
appealing and magnetic to others - he is flawed, but he is
powerful enough to overcome those flaws. Weak men are the ones
who simply accept their weaknesses and lack the desire to better
themselves.
Watching Duvall on-screen, it's not hard to imagine that he would
have been a magnificent preacher if he had chosen that vocation
over acting. As Sonny, he completely inhabits the character, and
his performance is certainly the best of the year. Because he
spent so much time absorbing the traits, methods, quirks, and
personalities of real preachers, Duvall was able to create a
complete character who always feels indelibly human.
As a director, Duvall feels that less is more. His camera simply
takes in what goes on in front of it, with very little intrusion.
There are no fancy crane shots or extended dollies or excessive
close-ups. Duvall knew that the power of the film's characters
(enhanced by the fact that he cast mostly non-professional
churchgoers and actual ministers) didn't need to be artificially
enhanced. In this way, "The Apostle" almost plays out like a
documentary, not only in its technical simplicity, but more
importantly, in its sense of reality.


Author
Steve Kong
The Apostle is a leisurely film.  It is leisurely in the way that it brings
us into the story.  It is leisurely in the way that it conveys to us the
story.  And it is leisurely in the way that it introduces us to the main
character, Euliss "Sonny" Dewey (Robert Duvall).
The Apostle is an independent film written by, directed by, and starring
Robert Duvall.  This film is Robert Duvall's labor of love.  The film opens
with an unforgettable shot: a swinging door and two pairs of legs-one of a
large African-American lady and the other of a young small white kid.  This
opening shot introduces us to Euliss Dewey and shows us how Euliss got
introduced to God.
So far this sounds like a typical Hollywood movie.  Will it take on the
typical against-the-church route?  Or will it take on the
super-religious-lets-convert-the-audience route?  Surprisingly, it takes
neither and this is what makes The Apostle so enjoyable.  The Apostle
focuses on Duvall's character.  His Sonny is not a flat movie character,
but is subtle and as human as the rest of us.  Duvall's script does not
falter when portraying Sonny.  Sonny always stays true to his humanity and
never slips off into the realm of just another movie preacher.
One night while on the road, Sonny sits in his bed.  He's thinking things
over and it dawns on him that his life is falling apart.  Another thing
dawns on him: his wife (Farrah Fawcett) is cheating on him.  So, he picks
up from the motel and drives back to town and finds his house empty.  He
then drives to the house of the new young preacher in his church and tosses
a baseball through his window.  Later the next day Sonny finds out that his
wife wants a divorce and to top that off she has secretly and legally
stolen his church from under him.  In a fit of rage, and under the
influence of alcohol, Sonny explodes and attacks his wife's new boyfriend
at a Little League game.  After this incident Sonny is forced to flee his
home state and change his name.  He takes up the name "The Apostle E.F."
E.F. travels for a while until he finds a small town and settles down to
start his new Pentecostal ministry.  E.F. needs some help though, and he
finds it in a retired preacher (John Beasley).  The church grows quickly
because of E.F.'s energetic revivals.  E.F. knows that he has done
something awful and he knows that he'll never escape from it.  So, he is
going to try as hard as he can to redeem himself and to help make people's
lives better.  He, and the audience, knows that he can do the latter, but
the former will eventually catch up with him.
Robert Duvall is one of the best actors alive and with The Apostle he shows
that he can do more than just act.  His performance in The Apostle is one
of his best yet.  But, it is his work behind the camera that is so amazing.
 His film relies not on camera tricks to bring us into the film; rather it
uses the characters to bring us in.  The film itself feels down to earth
without that slick Hollywood feel to it.  It's not the type of film that
makes you want to change yourself, like Good Will Hunting, but it makes you
think of what you can change about yourself.  Duvall's Apostle E.F. is an
unforgettable character.
Among the cast there are other performances worth mentioning.  Farrah
Fawcett gives a good performance as Apostle E.F.'s
angel-on-the-outside-but-sinner-within wife.  John Beasley gives a good
performance as the subtle preacher Blackwell.  Don't blink or you'll miss
Billy Bob Thorton's role as a racist ready to get rid of The Apostle E.F.'s
church.  And one of the most understated but memerable performances was by
Walt Goggins as Sam, the quiet young man who unconditionally accepts The
Apostle E.F. and helps him with the church.
The Apostle grows on you because of its leisurely pace.  In the first
half-hour things move a little slowly but stick with it; the reward is a
great character study.  What you don't get with The Apostle is standard
Hollywood fare.  This film is not embarrassed to do what it likes when it
likes.  The twists and turns in the film show up unexpectedly and the film
is not clichéd or predictable in any fashion.  Don't Miss The Apostle.
When the credits start to roll and the screen fades to black at the end,
don't pick up and leave; stay for a minute or so and see what makes the
character of Apostle E.F. so powerful and great. 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE APOSTLE (1997) *** Written, directed, executive produced by Robert
Duvall. Photography, Barry Markowitz. Production design, Linda Burton,
Editing, Steve Mack. Music, David Mansfield. Cast: Robert Duvall, Farrah
Fawcett, Miranda Richardson, Tod Allen, John Beasley, June Carter Cash,
Walter Goggins, Billy Joe Shaver, Billy Bob Thornton, Rick Dial, Mary
Lynette Braxton, Zelma Lloyd, Sister Jewell Jernigan. Released by October
Films. 133 minutes. Rated R (some violence, marital unfaithfulness).
Robert Duvall tried for 13 years to pitch his creation, "The Apostle." In
vain. Hollywood not being Holy Wood, cautiously stays away from "deep"
movies about religion, except for many Biblical epics, the life of Jesus
(such as the underrated 1961 King of Kings) and "safe" historical movies
(e.g. A Man for All Seasons). Babylon-on-the Pacific has produced a few,
also safe films, about phony evangelists (Elmer Gantry, Marjoe and Leap of
Faith come to mind) and the classic The Night of the Hunter with its
demented killer-thief fake preacher.
Abroad, meaningful films that deal with faith, its problems, crises and
quandaries, do not abound but do exist --by Ingmar Bergman (several),
Robert Bresson (Diary of a Country Priest, A Man Escaped).Carl-Theodor
Dreyer (The Passion of Joan of Arc, Ordet). Or the "political" A Man for
All Seasons, or else Becket, taken from the Jean Anouilh play Becket or The
Honor of God.
Finally, Duvall had to finance The Apostle himself. There's a catch with
this film. Religion is not its soul. The film is a showpiece for Robert
Duvall, at about age  66. Does he need this? He is an all-time great. In
34 years (his debut was as Boo Radley in To Kill a Mockingbird) and in all
of his 75 movies, he showed extraordinary talent  and versatility. At a
rock-bottom minimum he should be remembered for THX 1138, Mash, the
Godfather, the Great Santini, Apocalypse Now, True Confessions, Tender
Mercies, Lonesome Dove, Wrestling Ernest Hemingway, Sling Blade.
In The Apostle he plays (and plays, and plays) "Sonny" Dewey, a wild and
woolly Texas Pentecostal evangelist (since childhood), with wife and
children. He has genuine faith, devotion, love for God and His creatures,
but he is flawed by his temper and his womanizing.
Duvall's affection for his subject leads him into mysterious paths. In the
opening sequence Sonny and his mother stumble onto a terrible car accident.
With amazing eloquence the preacher proceeds to "save" willy-nilly a
still-alive victim, then  prides himself for scoring points with the
Almighty. Soon after come "then" --colorful preaching when Sonny was a boy
-- and "now": spectacles of revivalism, crowds, testimonials from the
stage, people (including Sonny) shouting, singing, dancing, prancing,
bouncing. Whether  planned that way or not, this comes out  as ambiguous
(is Sonny a faker?) and as an ironic look at a certain slice of Americana.
There is even a shot of mass arm-raisings by the faithful that recalls Nazi
or Soviet salutes.
Confusing too is the status of Sonny and his wife Jessie (Farrah Fawcett).
He loves yet neglects her as he puts his preaching first. He makes no bones
about his infidelities. Jessie has taken a lover, Horace (Todd Allen) a
young preacher junior in rank to Sonny. Jessie leaves Sonny. She is seen in
bed with Horace -- openly?  in a small town? there's something implausible
here. (Some fellow-viewers thought that Jessie had divorced Sonny, others
that she was already married to Horace, etc.)
In another bitter pill, Sonny learns that he has been deposed as leader of
his church by the trickery of Jessie and Horace. He becomes violent. Soon
after, when he finds "his beauties" (his boy and girl), playing softball
with other kids, plus Jessie and Horace, he totally loses control, smashes
Horace's head with a bat, leaves him moribund.
Suddenly, keeping a oddly cool composure, Sonny leaves town in his car. He
ditches it in a stream and eventually makes his way to the small,
predominantly black town  of Bayou Boutte, Louisiana. His energy is
literally incredible. He makes quick decisions, gets an instant job as  a
mechanic (he knows everything about cars), contacts aged black preacher
Brother Blackwell (John Beasley) who had retired after two heart attacks,
talks him into reopening a derelict church that belongs to the Brother,
renovates it with the help of others  (you expect him to say :"I coulda
been a contractor"), restores a wreck of a school bus, does regular
programs on the local radio, baptizes the cleaned up church "One Way Road
to Heaven," gets an increasingly large (considering the small population)
congregation,  fires away with his preaching. Whew!
In Louisiana, Sonny changes his name to The Apostle E.F.,  which is pretty
immodest and hubristic. The point of all  this is supposed to be that
fugitive Sonny is seeking redemption, but  seemingly only for his attack on
Horace, since other sins are not mentioned. Certainly not promiscuity, as
the Apostle also starts fascinating and seducing Toosie, the radio
station's secretary. She is played by Briton Miranda Richardson sporting a
credible accent and looking rather anorexically thin (The affair-to-be is
not consummated).
What motivates Sonny must really be powerful compulsion to preach and
organize. The sin that only whispers its name, yet of which Sonny seems
unconscious, is megalomania, ego-tripping. It is also the sin of actor
Duvall who is  so taken with his own performance and with he character he
plays that he does not know (as a writer-director) where to draw the line.
The movie is Duvall/Sonny from A to Z  for  its long duration, 133 minutes
( 7,980 seconds). There is so much of Sonny that it robs the picture of
opportunities to flesh out any other character.
Duvall's performance is anti-Consigliere. I refer to his famous role of
advisor (Consigliere) to Marlon Brando in The Godfather. As Tom Hagen, the
single non-Sicilian-American of the "family," he was a strong, quiet
presence. Here, as a strong but voluble presence, Duvall gives himself the
only role that matters while letting some other elements of the movie,
including continuity and editing,  fall where they may.
In Apocalypse Now, Duvall's  Lt. Col. Kilgore had the unforgettable line "I
love the smell of napalm in the morning! "  In The Apostle it feels as
though he's thinking "I love the sound of me around the clock!"  That he is
superb at whatever he does is a given. But enough is enough.
On the other hand, this work that drips with colorful Americana, by virtue
of its nature and locations is gratifyingly color blind and not class
conscious. There is no racism  except when redneck Billy Bob Thornton gets
into a fight with Duvall. But soon Duvall' s powers of persuasion will tame
Billly Bob. Bibles used physically, plus Gandhian non-violent exhortations,
make him end up lacrymously embracing Duvall. This is a strong sequence --
but it does smack of Hollywoodist theatricality.
The overall concentration on religiosity (not religion) and on Sonny go on
and on to the point of making some viewers count the minutes. Still, the
tour-de-force performance by the master actor does sustain the film and is
undeniably impressive.

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Apostle (1997) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Robert Duvall and Farrah
Fawcett. Written and directed by Duvall.
 In a lifetime of performances, Robert Duvall gives the performance of a
lifetime in The Apostle.
 Euliss "Sonny" Dewey is a man of God, but hardly a godly man. He is a
womanizer, and because of his long absences, his marriage is failing. His
wife has fallen in love with a younger minister. And, through the
instigation of his wife, he has lost his church.
 Added to his misery, "Sonny" gets drunk and smashes his wife's lover with
a baseball bat.
 Knowing the law will soon be after him, "Sonny" flees Texas for rural
Louisiana, sheds his identity and reinvents himself as The Apostle, E.F.
 He starts a new church and rediscovers his faith while gathering a flock
for his new endeavor.
 From his silent, but stunning film debut as Boo Radley in 1962's To Kill a
Mockingbird, through such unforgettable performances in such films as
Godfather I and II, the neglected, but powerfulThe Great Santini, M*A*S*H,
Apocalypse Now, Network, his Oscar-winning Tender Mercies, The Stone Boy
and A Family Thing, Duvall has earned the reputation of being America's
finest actor.
 In The Apostle, he continues his run of bringing to the screen characters
who are larger than life, yet flawed and fallable like the rest of us.
 Duvall's Apostle is no cynical Elmer Gantry. He does believe, does have
faith. But he also has feet of clay. He is good one day, not so good the
next. He may be a preacher, but he is no saint.
 What is most impressive about The Apostle  is Duvall's dedication to the
project. He not only stars, but produced, wrote and directed the movie.
With so much responsibility weighing on one individual, it is astounding
that he could focus so sharply not only on his character, but on the entire
milieu of evangelical preachers who can mesmerize as they proslatize.
 Duvall has written some powerful sequences that hold you rapt. Among them
is a first-reel soliloquoy in which he rants and vents his anger at God
while at the same time professing his love for his Lord.
 Toward the end of the film comes a wonderfully constructed confrontation
between The Apostle and a racist, played by Billy Bob Thornton, who
threatens to bulldoze the church. Using just the power of words, The
Apostle drains the hate from his antagonist as easily as green kryptonite
saps power from Superman.
 As a writer, Duvall has an ear for the cadance of these men of God, not
only the way they deliver their sermons, but the way in which they converse
day-to-day when not standing behind the pulpit. His ear also extends to
those in the region. His dialogue captures its flavor completely.
The Apostle has a few flaws. At almost 2 1/2 hours in length, it drags in a
some spots and tighter editing may have helped the flow. The opening
sequences of "Sonny" in Texas are a bit jumpy and disjointed.
 But once the locale moves to Louisiana, the story becomes smoother.
 As a director, Duvall draws fine performances from his cast, which is
comprised of professionals and non-professionals. In the small role of
"Sonny's" wife, Jessie, Farrah Fawcett proves (as she did in the TV movie
The Burning Bed) that she is more than a camp sex symbol of the '70s.
Thornton is effective and touchingly human in his small part
 The Apostle  is a movie that those who savor fine acting will appreciate.
It also is a testament to one man's vision and perserverence. It's an event
not to be missed.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
Ind. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Harvey S. Karten
THE APOSTLE
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 October films
 Director:  Robert Duvall
 Writer:  Robert Duvall
 Cast: Robert Duvall, Farrah Fawcett, Miranda Richardson,
Todd Allen, John Beasley, June Carter Cash, Walton
Goggins, Billy Joe Shaver, Billy Bob Thornton, Rick Dial
   According to Robert Duvall, who turns in a tour de force
performance as a dancing, shouting, hell-raising Pentecostal-
type preacher, Hollywood is generally afraid of making movies
with religious issues.  When such a picture does get a
released, the fundamentalist preacher fellas are either
patronized or ridiculed.  During the press conference following
a screening at the New York Film Festival, he might have
mentioned, as an example, Fredric March's depiction of the
William Jennings Bryan character in "Inherit the Wind," based
on the 1925 Scopes trial, in which the prosecuting attorney is
reduced to  babbling by the more rational Paul Muni,
succumbing to a heart attack after the trial.  In "The Apostle,"
by contrast, which is Robert Duvall's third directorial effort, the
director plays the role of preacher with such flair, such
authenticity, such downright dramatic impact, that we in the
audience are tempted to rise out of our seats and join the
congregation, whatever our religious convictions.
   Though religion appears to be its center, this story of an
individual who is a good person, however eccentric--who goes
bad for a spell and later restores his dignity and generosity--is
more about a man than about a creed.  Seldom does a movie
penetrate the soul of an individual in such depth, but Duvall
does exactly that, spending a solid two and one-half hours in
virtually every scene to gave his viewers a firm examination of
his every dimension.  He seems a bit different in each
vignette, experiencing a lifetime of a episodes in a short
period as he goes through his paces tending to a backwater
parish in the Louisiana bayous (actually filmed in that state's
Lafayette) which goes by the name Bayou Boutte.  Eulis
"Sonny" Dewey's whimsically erratic but essentially
conscientious and generous nature comes through in the very
opening scene in Texas where, driving with his mother
(played by singing legend June Carter Cash) he comes upon
a serious auto accident.  Hopping down a hill, he runs into a
mortally injured young man and, without regard to the victim's
creed or wishes, asks him to accept Jesus, whom he will
"soon meet."  Back at the ranch, however, things are not
going so well with his wife Jessie (Farrah Fawcett), who tires
of his absences and has taken up with a young minister,
Horace (Todd Allen).  Begging her not to ask for a divorce, he
gets drunk and, at a Little League game, clubs the boy friend
fatally in the head with a baseball bat.  Discarding his identity,
he flees Texas for the Louisiana bayou where he becomes
friendly with Rev. Blackwell (John Beasley), who left his
congregation because of health problems, and talks him into
helping re-create his church.  Working as a mechanic in a
garage owned by a radio announcer, he uses the free time he
is granted to advertise his new church, and slowly builds up a
sizable congregation of mostly black parishioners, who glory
in the man's dancing, shouting, and all-around enthusiasm.  
   You're in for a surprise if you think that a man in his
position leads a sedentary, relaxed life in a remote region,
inhabited by good-natured but essentially poorly-educated
people who take to gospel song and fire-and-brimstone
preaching like a terrier to a buried bone.  One day he raises a
voluntary crew of children to clean, paint, and assemble a
large sign for the old abandoned shack.  At another time, he
must fend off an attack by a racist provocateur (Billy Bob
Thornton) who, furious at the idea of an integrated house of
worship, is about to demolish the building with a bulldozer. 
He wins the hostile man over in a remarkable way.  At
another time he romances a southern belle, Toosie (Miranda
Richardson), who is separated from her husband and
fascinated by his company and distinct aura.
   Duvall excels not only in the movie's principal role but as its
director, building each scene skillfully on its preceding one
while welding a group of ordinary Louisiana citizens with a
cast of remarkable actors. Miranda Richardson has particular
merit, knowing just how to play a fascinating "date," mixing a
come-hither twinkle with a maybe-next-time prospect.  
   The picture is photographed in a straightforward way by
cameraman Barry Markowitz, featuring a soundtrack of
glorious gospel song, and allegedly has been pared down
with the use of a computer in Mr. Duvall's Virginia farmhouse. 
The picture is too long and could stand a shave, particularly
of Duvall's final sermon before his inevitable arrest for his
crime of passion.  Thirteen years in the making, this five
million dollar production is an obvious showcase for Duvall,
who will doubtless garner an Oscar nomination after the
picture is released--for that purpose--in L.A. this December, to
open nationally on January 30, 1988.  Not Rated.  Running
Time: 148 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Robert Duvall, Miranda Richardson, Farrah Fawcett, John Beasley,
Walter Goggins, Rick Dial, Billy Joe Shaver, Billy Bob Thornton, June
Carter Cash, Todd Allen
Director: Robert Duvall
Screenplay: Robert Duvall
Robert Duvall has approached dangerous ground with The Apostle.  Not
necessarily dangerous as far as ethnical and religious themes are
concerned, but rather his skill behind the camera.  Respectable actors
have had mixed results as directors in the past; Billy Bob Thorton
managed to hit the right note with last years Sling Blade, as did Mel
Gibson with Braveheart.  On the other side of the spectrum, Kevin Spacey
made the frivolous and rather dull Albino Alligator, and now Duvall has
failed to show substantial talent as a director with his gutsy attempt
at a character study.
Duvall plays Euliss "Sonny" Dewell, an intriguing Pentecostal preacher
with a wandering eye for women and booze. Flawed, yes, but he is
completely devoted to his faith and his church.  Perhaps a little too
devoted, since he clubs a younger man of the cloth (Todd Allen) on the
head with a baseball bat after he assists in taking the church away from
him.  Realizing that he's gone too far, Sonny flees town and seeks
refuge in Bayou Boutte, Louisiana.  He dubs himself as "The Apostle
E.F," and starts a new church named "The One Way Road to Heaven" with
the assistance of retired preacher Reverend Blackwell (John Beasly).
In its worst moments, The Apostle will serve as a reminder of how much
potential it had. But nowadays many films seem to thrive on potential
alone - recent examples Deep Impact, Welcome to Sarajevo and Sphere all
have fascinating concepts, but their finished product didn't quite go
the distance.  Such is the story with The Apostle, which has potentially
riveting subject material but is over worked and indefinable.
I never quite understood what Duvall's motives were - is he trying to
show us ironies of the Christian faith?  Is he giving us a lesson on
redemption, or merely pointing out that even devoted men have flaws?  Or
is the entire film just a study of human behavior?
None of these themes are explored adequately, no doubt due to Duvall's
lack of experience as both a director and a writer.  To his credit, he
does approach the film impartially and honestly; making clear that his
intentions are not to shock, intimidate or offend.  But even from a
technical view, it was evident to me that he simply doesn't have the
skill, or experience to handle such a hefty workload as anything except
an actor.  Many camera shots look second-rate and novice, and some
scenes go way, way too long (especially his final preaching message).
Still, The Apostle is far from a disaster.  Duvall's riveting, Oscar
nominated performance is amongst the best of his career, and
occasionally the film delivers some memorable moments.  In particular, a
scene in which Sonny converts a racist troublemaker (Billy Bob Thorton,
in a cameo role) is amongst its finest.
After being disappointed by The Apostle's lack of quality and distinctly
clouded motives, my message to Duvall is clear: let the actors do the
acting, and the directors do the directing.  Unless, of course, he
somehow manages to create another Sling Blade.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Frank Ochieng
starring: Robert Duvall, John Beasley, Farrah Fawcett, June Carter,
Billy Bob Thornton, Miranda Richardson
Director: Robert Duvall
   Oscar-winning actor Robert Duvall has directed, produced, and wrote
what very well may be the most intensifying, gut-wrenching, powerful
and complexed movies that has hit the big screen in ages in that of
THE APOSTLE, a poignant and perplexing portrayal of a man who finds
solace with God despite his own questionable weakness and peace of
mind. This riveting examination of an evangelical preacher Euliss
"Sonny" Dewey asks some bold questions about this tremendously flawed
human being: can a man who is supposed to represent the Almighty also
tackle his own demons?
     Duvall does an incredible job at introducing us to this paradoxical
preacher--a man who consistently battles his instincts, sexual urges,
convictions, and anger. Preacher Dewey is a problematic yet passionate
pariah who needs guidance but is willing to smother this feeling and
become a representative of God, therefore avoiding a cataclysmic
conflict within his own personal pain. A brilliant turn that has
landed Duvall his 1997 best actor National Society of Film Critics
credentials. And thank goodness Duvall and his movie can qualify for
Academy Award consideration for this year because this film definitely
deserves the recognition of being considered one of the best offerings
to potentially be honored.
     Duvall's Preacher Dewey is a lovable soul but his human heart
becomes congested when rage takes over after he discovers his wife
(Farrah Fawcett) and her young lover "in cahoots" with one another.
Disgruntled by the whole affair, Dewey--with the help of a baseball
bat and blatant jealousy, lands his wife's boy-toy in a serious coma.
With this act, Preacher Dewey has no choice but to move on and
discover an odyssey of peace and serenity that will compensate his
desirous and disastrous demons. Coming across a new path of sorts,
Sonny Dewey deems himself "The Apostle" and eventually teams up with a
black preacher (John Beasley) to help collaborate on building a new
church called "The One Way Road To Heaven". Now, The Apostle has
mostly black churchgoers who follow him and is eventually caught up in
the gospel high-spirited soul of these folks' religious rituals. He
actually cares and relishes his black congregation to the point that
he even challenges the racist antics of a passerby (Billy Bob
Thornton). The Apostle even has moments of wooing a separated married
woman (Miranda Richardson) and has no moral qualms about satisfying
that pleasure either.
      This film doesn't ask for sympathy for its complicated
protagonist in that of Sonny Dewey, a.k.a The Apostle, because it's a
much better movie than that. Instead, this film reinforces the notion
that man's consciousness is his own guidance and that he has the power
to choose what to do with it. Whether his intentions are disguised to
suit his soul or give credence to his ambiguous actions, the courage
for man to live and confront his moral code and human decency is
extensively demonstrated in this magnificent movie. What Robert Duvall
accomplished with THE APOSTLE is a brimstone of bravura that will
certainly show just how significant a breakthrough this film really
is! THE APOSTLE is an opulent, natural high!
http://www.vgt.com/atmovies.html

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"The Apostle" is one of the very few American movies I know of that is not
only about religion but seems to be informed by the very spirit of what it
studies. It doesn't make its subjects into easy, hypocritical targets or
strawmen.  Many people do believe in God without being the kind of
Bible-clutching psychotic characters that Hollywood loves to indulge in.  The
movie, which was written and directed by Robert Duvall as a labor of love,
does not indulge in such easy cliches.
Duvall's Euliss Dewey, or "Sonny" as he's known -- the apostle of the title
-- isn't just a man who talks to God.  He has out-and-out shouting matchines
with Him.  One of the early scenes of "The Apostle" has him pacing in his
room like a prisoner in solitary, bellowing at God, begging Him to let him
have his wife and children and ministry back.  His wife, you see, has been
cheating on him with another man, a youth minister, and she's now using
underhanded tactics to get Sonny voted out of the church.  Then the phone
rings and Sonny's mother answers, telling the angry neighbor on the other end
of the line that Sonny's been talking to God ever since he was a boy, and she
sees no reason to tell him to stop now.  And she hangs up with a gentle smile
on her face and goes back to sleep.
There's some symmetry here with an earlier scene, where Sonny and his mother
stop at the scene of a roadside accident.  Sonny pokes his head in the
driver's- side window of a car where a young man lies bleeding, and gently
asks him if he's ready to accept Jesus as his savior.  The man agrees.        In
any other movie this would be farce, caricature, borderline bad taste.        But
the way it's seen and played and directed here tells us, gently, that
everyone involved, from the victim to the cop who comes to shoo Sonny away,
takes this seriously.
Sonny is a charismatic Pentecostal preacher who tours and shouts and whips up
his congregations into jubilation.  He's fond of wild metaphors: "Tonight
we're going to short-circuit the Devil!  We're going to plug into a power
line that's wired straight into the Pearly Gates!"  But his marriage is
troubled, and his wife (a neurasthenic Farrah Fawcett) fears something in
him.  We get a hint of what that might be one day when Sonny confronts the
youth minister one day during a softball game and smashes him over the head
with a bat.
Sonny flees, heads to another state down South, and changes his name to "the
Apostle E.F.".        In one of the best scenes in the movie, he ingratiates
himself with a black man who lets him sleep in a pup tent on his property. 
One of that man's friends is a retired preacher, and E.F. hooks up with him
to start a small congregation of his own.
The congregation is tiny, but E.F. gets it going with sheer sweat -- working
odd jobs at the local garage (one of the mechanics dotes on him), getting
promoted on the local FM station ("We have a pay-before-you-preach policy
here," the program director informs him, having been stiffed too many times
before), and putting together Thanksgiving baskets for the poorer families.
He's redeeming himself -- not just in the eyes of the characters, but in OUR
eyes as well, because at first we're not really sure if he's just putting on a
good front of change, or is really changing.
Then other things start to happen, so casually we barely notice them creeping
up on us.  E.F. has a showdown with an almost compulsively angry bully (Billy
Bob Thornton) that does not end in the way we would anticipate.  E.F.'s family
back at home starts to ask about him.  And then there is the matter of the
youth preacher, for which E.F. will eventually have to answer.
The film is shot in a quasidocumentary style that feels almost like
eavesdropping.        No one reaches for affect or "acts".  The actors are all
unknowns, aside from Duvall himself, playing the preacher as though born to
the role, Fawcett, and Miranda Richardson as the radio station secretary. 
Because of this, we don't see a bunch of "Jesus freaks"; we just see people
with a deep and abiding faith that gives them a genuine community and
togetherness.  The whole film feels alive and spontaneous; it isn't just
another plot out of the Hollywood shrink-wrap factory.
Duvall's movie works on almost too many levels to list.  It's spiritual
without being smarmy or cloying; it's an affecting character study (E.F. is
far from being one-sided); it's great fun.  It only seems appropriate, in
today's climate, that he would have had no choice but to make the movie
himself.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Eric Lurio
 You can't really do one man shows in the cinema. Oh, people have tried, but on
 the whole it doesn't really work. so Robert Duvall doesn't bother in his
 latest opus. It's close, though.
 Duvall is The Reverend Euliss `Sonny' Dewey, a televangelist from Texas, who
 spends so much time on the job that he neglects his wife Jessie(Farrah
 Fawcett) and children. Jessie retaliates by having an affair with another
 preacher named Horace(Todd Allen), for whom she grabs control of the ministry.
 Upset at this turn of events, Sonny gets drunk and bashes Horace's head in
 with a baseball bat before fleeing.
 Justly wanted for murder, Sonny goes to Louisiana, where he takes the identity
 of The Apostle E.F. and begins his ministry anew.
 Along the way he meets a fellow who send him to Brother Blackwell(John
 Beasley), a retired minister who owns a derelict church which is restored by
 Sonny and where he starts his new ministry.
 While there is a failed romance with Miranda Richardson, who plays the
 receptionist at a local radio station, everyone else is just a prop for Duval
 to spout religion at and do his Billy Sol Hargus routine for.
 He's good at it, too. But the flaw(if you can call it that) here is the same
 as Scorcese's `Kundun,' unless you go in for that sort of thing, what's the
 point? It barely works as a character study.
 This is great performance, but alas, not a great movie.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Robert Duvall
Written by:  Robert Duvall
Producers:  Rob Carliner, Steven Brown (co-producer), Robert Duvall
(executive), Ed Johnston (associate)
Cast:  Robert duvall, Farrah Fawcett, Miranda Richardson, Todd Allen,
John Beasley, June Carter Cash, Walter Goggins, Billy Joe Shaver, Billy
Bob Thornton
Runtime:  148 min.
Production Company:  October Films
Rated PG-13:  Violence, thematic elements
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        If I ever again sit through a film about religion, I will compare it to
Robert Duvall's The Apostle.  The chances are, however, that it will not
even come close to the pure emotional power and honesty of this film. 
Duvall, who has spent years making this wonderful film, deserves every
bit of recognition he is now getting for it.   Whatever wait we had to
endure as the film slowly made its way into theaters, it is now clear
that it was worth it.  
        I knew from the first scene that The Apostle is a special film.  It is
at this moment that we are introduced to Euliss "Sonny" Dewey (Duvall),
a Texas preacher.  In this opening moment, he stops at a roadside car
wreck and sneaks out to a crashed car in which a mortally wounded man
and his supposedly-dead wife lay.   Within seconds, he has the young man
opening his heart to Jesus, and it becomes clear that the fear of death
has been wiped away in his acceptance.  Scene after scene feels just
like this one--this is a film of rare honesty.     
        Sonny, as everyone calls him, is well-liked in his community and
church.  At the time of the film, he has just lost the love of his wife,
Jessie (Farrah Fawcett), to a young preacher named Horace (Todd Allen). 
Not long after this, he loses the right to preach in his own church. 
One day, while under the influence of alcohol, he goes to his son's
baseball game and nails Horace with a baseball bat, putting the man in a
coma.   So, he flees Texas and heads to Louisiana, where he goes as "the
Apostle E.F."  With the help of local radio station owner Elmo (Rick
Dial) and retired preacher Brother Blackwell (John Beasley), Sonny
slowly establishes himself in the community by creating his own church.  
        There are so many things that I love about this film, but perhaps the
most important is its spiritual focus.  This is not a film about
accepting religion and doing good things to go to Heaven.  In fact, the
word "religion" is said only once in the film, and it's not in religious
context.  Sonny wants to tell people that Jesus loves them, and that
loving Jesus will make them happy.  He wants people to know that we are
to treat the Lord with respect, but still have a real relationship with
him.  
        My favorite scene in the film is at the height of Sonny's troubles in
Texas:  he is up in the attic of his mother's house, shouting at God: 
"I love you God, but I'm pissed at you!"  Then, when the phone rings,
his mother answers it to find an angry neighbor complaining about all
the noise.  Silently, she hangs up the phone and allows her son to carry
on.  This scene, like so many in the film, are both moving and subtle at
the same time, and they all point to one thing--these characters are
real.
        Sonny is one of my all-time favorite characters.  I like the guy so
much because he knows what he is, and he is not perfect.  He drinks and
commits violence and accepts that of himself; ultimately, he willingly
pays the price for his actions.   There's something so true about this
man--he is a man of God, and yet he still asks a beautiful woman, Toosie
(Miranda Richardson, doing one of the best Southern accents I've ever
heard--especially from a British actress) on a date.  During the date,
he acts just like anyone else would, and at the end of the date, he has
the same desires that the rest of us do.  And he's such a charismatic
man--the audience with whom I saw this film was swept away with Sonny's
sermons.
        Robert Duvall is this film; he is this character.  I am so pleased that
he has been nominated for Best Actor, for I can not think of a more
deserving man in 1997 for the honor.  Everything that I described above
is conveyed so clearly by Duvall, and I, for one, have never seen a
performance so energetic from a 67 year-old man before.   Each time he
opens his mouth, I forget that this is an actor trying to convince me.
        Not only is Duvall's on-screen talent fully recognized here, but his
work as writer/director couldn't be more effective.  I continually felt
absorbed in the film, never once having the urge to look at my watch or
anywhere else away from the screen.   Even though there isn't a
cut-and-dry story, the events that unfold and ultimately lead to an
astonishingly moving and memorable sermon held my interest at full-force
for the entire running time.  And there are subtly poignant moments
scattered about the film--Sonny befriends a young mechanic named Sam
(Walter Goggins), and the conclusion to this friendship is very
powerful.  And Billy Bob Thornton plays a trouble-making racist who
wants to bulldoze the church, though Sonny talks him down in a moment
that is extremely moving.  
        The Apostle is about an eccentric, maybe even crazed, individual who
thrives on doing things that many moviegoers might find "abnormal" and
"strange."  I think the catch is that Duvall wants us to think that
Sonny is over-the-top:  this adds not only to the sheer entertainment
that the film provides, but to the realism of his character.  Sonny,
while understanding his own sins, tries to atone for them by helping
others.  Everything in this film--from the colorful supporting
characters to the emotionally-extreme scenes throughout--has all the
spontaneity of real life.  Duvall has crafted one of the very best films
of 1997 here, a movie that I will think about and love for as long as I
love movies.  

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 13 February 1997 for $8.75 with Laura, Rob, and Michelle at the
Loews Village VII
"The hardest soul to save was his own," claims the tagline to *The
Apostle*, and it's true. Robert Duvall gives a towering performance as the
charismatic, convinced, and calculating Euliss "Sonny" Dewey, also known
as The Apostle E.F., accountable only to his Lord, Jesus Christ. Written,
produced, and directed by Duvall, *The Apostle* is a bit of a legend in
independent filmmaking. It's easy to see why. It's all about the deep
conviction held by Pentecostal Christians in the Deep South; in many ways
it's probably best for everyone, especially the audience, that Hollywood
had little or nothing to do with it.
*The Apostle* opens with Sonny visiting a Pentecostal church in 1939 as a
child. Fast-forwarding to today, to an auto accident, Sonny stops his car
and goes to the victim, near death, to bring him a chance of salvation in
Jesus Christ, regardless of the victim's faith. Sonny definitely has a
personal relationship with God, but as a human being, he is flawed. Unlike
many movies that always show preachers as hypocrites, Sonny is a man
driven by true faith, and by his emotions. Just as he rushes to bring
salvation to the unsaved, and to hug parishioners and tell him he loves
them, he also just as quickly cracks the man who cuckolds him with a
little league bat in front of his children, or beat up a racist man who
wants to demolish a church that allows blacks to attend. 
Without giving away too much, I can say that *The Apostle* is one of the
most original and different movies I have ever seen. Duvall's performance
dominates the film. As a gay non-observant Jew, it was fascinating to
watch him bring faith to people, while still entertaining his more basic
desires, and being very human. One of the high points of the movie is the
confrontation between Duvall and Billy Bob Thornton. In an era of
skepticism and harshness, it is interesting to see how people need
something to believe it, and the people who bring belief to them. The
subject matter is not approached in a judgmental way either, which makes
it rather original. Religion and faith are commodities usually held up for
ridicule in Hollywood, and hard to understand if you are not particularly
observant.
There are a lot of good actors in *The Apostle* but Duvall pretty much
overshadows them; but this is a necessary evil. *The Apostle* is all about
one man's faith and charisma, and what it can do. Farah Fawcett plays
Sonny's wife Jesse; Miranda Richardson is his newest love interest; June
Carter Cash is Sonny's mother. 
Mary Lynette Braxton, Jewell Jernigan, and Zelma Loyd are wonderful as The
Apostle E.F.'s parishioners, and Walt Goggins gives a subtle performance
as Sam. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Robert Duvall
Starring: Robert Duvall, Farrah Fawcett, Miranda Richardson, Billy Bob
Thornton, Rick Dial, Todd Allen, John Beasley, June Carter Cash, Walt
Goggins
So...Robert Duvall's labor of love has finally come out.  It's a film he's
been trying to make almost all of his life, and only until the whole Indy
spiel has become trendy now has he been able to get his funds together to
make it.  Is it a great film?  Sure.  It has one of the most intriguing
protagonists in cinema this year, and features a toss-up for the single
best performance of the year (tied with Ian Holm's brilliant acting in "The
Sweet Hereafter").  It has a very good message, one that isn't pummelled
into the brain but is reflected on slowly as the film opens up.  Is it
brilliant though?  Well...close but no cigar.
"The Apostle" of the story is a Texan man named Sonny (Duvall), a man who
seems to be like one of those people you see in airports or on the
religious channel on cable who preach the gospel like they wrote it and
swear they love God more than anything in the world, and also try to get us
to follow in their "holy" footsteps.  Sonny swears he talks to God every
night, and has the power to heal and all that stuff.  The thing is he
really can.  Elmer Gantry, he's not.
Unfortunately, Sonny is not perfect.  After all, he's not God.  He
sometimes drinks too much, has rigid relations with his also religious wife
(Farrah Fawcett - !!), and yeah, has a temper.  After discovering that his
wife has been carrying on an affair and wishes to leave him, kicking him
out of the church they founded, he goes a bit crazy, and in a fit of rage,
picks up a bat and beats the lover in public.  Not wishing to upset his
mother (June Carter Cash) and not wanting any legal interference, he drives
off, buries his car in the water, tosses his wallet away, and decides to
start anew.
With his past currently out of his way, he renames himself "The Apostle
E.F.," blessing himself in a river one day, and heading over to a Louisiana
Community.  There, with the help from an old minister (John Beasley), he
begins to rebuild their old church, now decrepit and dying, getting two odd
jobs to support himself, and preaching wildly at church and over the radio
waves of a station owned by a man played by Rick Dial, the same actor who
played the auto shop in Duvall's friend Billy Bob Thornton's "Sling Blade."
 And his church becomes more and more populated as the film goes on, and he
reaches more and more people.
Duvall's story is one about a man who's not a perfect man, but can
certainly do some very good things for people, most notably bringing people
together with belief in God.  This is not a pro-religion film, or a satire
on the way people can be brought together by faith alone, but a story that
shows that the better things a man does should outweigh the worse parts. 
In the end, do we really think of Sonny as a rage-filled man, who violently
beat a man with a baseball bat?  Or do we think of him as a man who brought
together a community by showing love for Christ?
But why isn't it perfect or even very brilliant?  The big problem with the
film seems to be that the supporting cast and anyone else other than Sonny
is horribly underwritten.  A romance between him and a secretary working at
the radio station (Miranda Richardson, in a convincing southern accent)
feels horribly edited, while a two scene ordeal between Sonny and a bigot
(Billy Bob Thornton) who wants to destroy the church because he "don't want
to pray with any niggas" is too short to really make any kind of emotional
feel.  While Sonny is fully realized, no one else is, giving it a feeling
of small incompletion.
In terms of more superficial problems, the film is incredibly slow-moving,
setting up everything at tortoise-like pace, but never actually registering
as "boring."  The film unfolds very nicely, getting to its message by the
finale instead of repeating the same thing over and over again.  It's not
one of the year's best films, but definitely one of the year's better
films.
But what makes it all worthwhile is the absolutely perfect-in-every-way
performance by Duvall, who makes Sonny into a likable, three-dimensional
human being, and is completely convincing the entire time.  Duvall's one of
the greatest actors working today, and this film is not really the
culmination of over three decades in the biz, but his acting is.  Of the
actors nominated for Best Actor at the Oscars this year, he totally
deserves it.  For the entire year, though, it's a toss-up between he and
Ian Holm (as I said), though I feel that Duvall would edge ahead of him
just slightly.  It's inspiring to see an actor like Duvall always giving
great performances; this is just his best.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Ryan Davis
        Watching Robert Duvall's newest movie is a incredible experience. As the
film progresses you will begin to see what, quite possibly, is one of the
most unique and thought provoking movie I have ever seen. To call this film
anything less than a fascinatingly intense character study would be, in a
word, sacrilege.  
        At the start of the film you get the idea this isn't typical Hollywood
fair, Sonny(Robert Duvall) tells a injured young man and his wife about
God, and comforts them in their moment of need. Sonny may not be the
typical minister. He admits that he is flawed and that he has problems with
drinking and faithfulness to his wife,  Jessie(Farrah Fawcett). His wife
has had enough of his cheating and has an affair with a young minister,
Horace(Todd Allen). Sonny gets a little drunk and goes to talk with Jessie
at their son's baseball game. When Horace tried to stop Sonny from taking
his family away from the part, Sonny strikes him with a bat and he is put
in a coma. Sonny, fearing legal repercussions, flees to Louisiana. He meets
a few people and starts a church, along with a fellow minister, Brother
Blackwell(John Beasley). He knows, and the audience knows, that
Sonny(re-baptized Apostle E.F.) will not escape the long arm of the law.
How he changes the lives of several people in the town, shows you can be a
good Christian and a sinner. 
        This film is easily one of the top five of the year, and a milestone in
Christian film making. Robert Duvall's performance is the best one I have
seen, since Billy Bob Thornton's incredible roll in Sling Blade. The script
it tight and the direction is great. I really loved this film's ability not
to be to preachy to the audience and doesn't force them to side with Sonny.
The movie's emotional look at the topic of religion and society is almost
refreshing. This is a triumphantly brilliant film, Duvall's performance is
the best of the year and deserves the Best Actor Oscar. Go see it!

Author
Curtis Edmonds
Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
I don't think that the rich are necessarily different from you and me,
but I think that people in the public eye are.  When these people are
out in public, they have to play the role, whether it's Handsome Actor
or Charming Politician or Beauty Queen, that we've assigned to them.
But the role is often a lie, which in turn breeds a curiousity about
their private lives.  This is why whenever you meet a celebrity, your
friends and neighbors want to know, "What's he really like?"  This is
why the National Enquirer stalks these people as they carry out their
private lives.  We all want to get a look behind the mask so that we can
see if these people are as we expect them to be -- and all too often,
we're disappointed.
In a small town, the preacher is in the public eye as well.  And just as
a short, vain actor can hide behind a likable screen persona, the pulpit
can hide all sorts of shortcomings and flaws.  And that's the initial
burden that Robert Duvall's The Apostle carries.  Duval plays a preacher
named Sonny who's a bit of a showman, a real "spirit-filled Holy Ghost
preaching machine", and immediately we're reminded of the Elmer
Gantry-style televangelists we're all familiar with.  There's a montage
that's supposed to establish Sonny as an evangelist.  We see him
traveling around the South, holding tent-meting revivals and speaking to
conferences.  He's wearing flashy clothes and he's more than a bit
over-the-top.  (There's a creepy bit in this montage where Sonny's
addressing a group of African-American men, and they're chanting
"Jesus", while doing the Black Power salute.)  But even though we see
who Sonny is and what he does, we don't know him.  We don't learn
anything about him from his first appearance on screen, where he stops
his car at the scene of an accident to lead two young victims to Jesus.
Is he grandstanding?  Is he doing this to tell the story to his
congregation?  Or is he really and truly sincere?  What's he really
like?
What makes The Apostle great is that we find out.
Sonny finds out that his wife (Farrah Fawcett, who delivers an
effective, subdued performace in an unglamorous and thankless role) is
having an affair with an assistant minister at his church.  It doesn't
take too long for Sonny's world to collapse.  He loses his wife, his
children, his church and his temper.  He has a screaming match with God
loud enough to wake the neighbors, and  vents his holy wrath on the
hapless assistant minister -- at his son's Little League game, in front
of the whole town.  He drives away, pausing just long enough to sink his
long white car into a Louisiana bayou -- but is it a sacrifice, the act
of a madman, or a means to keep the police from tracking him down and
filing assault charges?
The meat of the movie is Sonny's rebaptism and resurrection as "The
Apostle E.F.".  He shows up in a small Louisiana town, refusing to give
any other name, and opens a church.  And it's here that we learn about
Duvall's character and what sort of man he is when he's not behind the
pulpit.
To say more would be to spoil the experience, and this is a movie that
should be experienced.  This is Robert Duvall's movie -- literally, he
wrote, directed, and financed it himself -- he's in almost every frame,
and he's garnered a well-earned Oscar nomination for it.  He's almost
spookily effective as the Apostle.  He's got every nuance of the
character down, from the rapid-fire Pentecostal pulpit ranting to the
sweet way he deals with his congregation.  And in the movie's climax, a
fire-and-brimstone church service, he's hypnotic enough that he almost
draws the audience down the movie theater aisle to the mourner's bench
when "Softly and Tenderly" plays during the invitation.
Complimenting Duvall's star turn is an excellent supporting cast.  This
is one of those movies where the no-name actors upstage the name
actors.  Miranda Richardson puts her light under a bushel as the
Apostle's love interest, and Billy Bob Thornton looks as though he's
wandered in from another movie in a brief cameo.  But the Apostle's
congregation (interracial, and joyfully so) is a wonderful group of
people, from the retired black preacher, to the mechanic who lets the
Apostle sleep on his couch, to the bickering "sisters", to the
radio-station owner who moves from cynicism to spirituality.
The Apostle is a totally absorbing look at a man of faith and his
congregation.  It's extraordinarily well-written and acted.  It takes a
position on religion -- especially Southern evangelical religion --
that's honest, and not satirical or overly spiritually maudlin.  For any
serious communicant of the Church of Movies, The Apostle qualifies as a
singular miracle, crafted by the strong hands of Robert Duvall, Patron
Saint of the Character Actor.  If only the rest of Hollywood would go
forth and do likewise.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
Dennis Schwartz
THE APOSTLE (director: Robert Duvall; cast: Robert Duvall, Miranda
Richardson, Farrah Fawcett, John Beasley, Walter Goggins, Rick Dial,
Billy Joe Shaver, Billy Bob Thornton, June Carter Cash, Todd Allen,
1997)
This is Duvall's movie through and through, the one he had to make,
the one that crawled in his blood, the one movie that he prepared his
entire life for, where he has a role that fits him to a tee. He did
everything in this picture, including back it with his money. As for
me, I'm not partial to these Pentecostal preachers and their heavy
handed, pushy methods of self-righteousness. To watch a movie, which
almost imitates a church service in length and purpose, is not
particularly entertaining or spiritual for my tastes. What this film
does very well, is examine the character of the man preaching, and
what affect religion has on the people. In this case, it was mostly
poor black southerners who attended his services.
Duvall is Sonny, the apostle. He is a flawed character, who got the
calling to preach when he was 12, and has been doing the lord's work
ever since (oh my...!). He is basically a good hearted guy, with a bit
of a temper, and a strong belief that God communicates with him. If we
didn't live in a society where so many folks think like him and
mistakeningly and arrogantly take the letter of the bible as gospel,
then he would be considered a certifiable nut case. What makes him
more interesting than, let's say, a Billy Graham, that holier than
thou evangelist, the friend of presidents, is that he has the ability
to get hot and pick up a baseball bat against the head of the guy who
stole his wife (Farrah) and kids. As a result of this incident, he has
to flee Texas. In any case, Farrah has grown tired of his traveling
act, always on the road preaching and womanizing, and had lost her
love for him.
What Duvall has is zeal, he is a non-stop talker, always railing on
about Jesus and satan, quoting scriptures, offering up the whole
evangelical bag of tricks. That he is good at it, is not the
question. That he is annoying, except to those who need to be with
someone like him, someone who is demonstrative in his praise of God,
someone who can make them feel good about themselves, even if they are
a sinner and a lost soul, is another thing.  All he asks for them is
to believe in a personal God, Jesus. His mind-set is programed, never
getting off the Jesus wavelength. This guy would be a real bore at a
party, or a hellish parent to a child who is a free thinker.
Sonny lands on his feet in Bayou country, in a small Lousiana town,
where he talks a respected black pastor (Beasely) into backing him in
getting a small church. He wins the pastor over with his ability to
preach. He is now going under the name E.F., hiding his identity from
the police who are looking for him. He stirs up a little romance with
a radio station receptionist (Miranda). These unevangelical moments,
of him on a date with her, talking real talk, were gems, and these
scenes made the film a more enjoyable experience. It was fun to watch
Duvall try to handle himself with the lady, who was considerably
younger than his late 60ish age, and who was somewhat stand-offish of
him, yet at the same time was fascinated by him. It was revealing that
he couldn't talk about himself introspectively to her, everything
revolved around his God, it was as if he was not totally there, devoid
of a magnetic personality off stage. It was also fun to watch Duvall
smile, because as good an actor as he is, and he is one of the good
ones, his friendly smile always has a trace of cruelty around the
edges.  It seems he can only play parts where he is all wired up,
frenetically moving in every scene.
In this film, he has created a work that tries to be more than
entertaining, reaching for a more artistic film. It seems as if he was
born to preach. As for me, I live not to be preached to. What made the
picture dull for me, is the subject matter. But what excites me about
this film, is that I believe it has a truth to it, that can't be
denied; and that, Duvall has accomplished a virtuoso performance,
supported by some excellent actors in supporting roles and
non-professional actors giving the film an intimacy and a flavor to it
that is special.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert Duvall, Miranda Richardson, Farrah Fawcett, John Beasley, 
      Walter Goggins, Rick Dial, Billy Joe Shaver, Billy Bob Thornton, 
      June Carter Cash, Todd Allen
Director: Robert Duvall
Producer: Rob Carliner
Screenplay: Robert Duvall
Cinematography: Barry Markowitz
Music: David Mansfield
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     For Robert Duvall, THE APOSTLE was a labor of love.  It is said 
that every man or woman has at least one story to tell; this is 
Duvall's.  The film was in the making for over a decade, and, when no 
studio bought into it, Duvall put up the money himself.  The actor 
filled nearly every role imaginable on this production  in addition to 
financing it, he starred in it, directed it, executive produced it, and 
wrote it.  In his cross-country publicity tour to generate interest in 
the picture, he has been both eloquent and passionate when discussing 
what this film means to him.  For Duvall, THE APOSTLE is not just a 
movie, it is *the* movie.
     A relatively simple tale about a far-from-simple character, THE 
APOSTLE never falters in its portrayal of Euliss "Sonny" Dewey (Duvall) 
as a real, flesh-and-blood human being.  Unlike many movies that deal 
with religion and religious figures, THE APOSTLE does not set out to 
uncover corruption and hypocrisy or to attack deeply-held beliefs.  It 
does not patronize or satirize.  It is respectful without being 
reverential.  THE APOSTLE is a character study, and, like all motion 
pictures of this sort, its ultimate success depends upon how compelling 
the protagonist is.  As essayed by Duvall, arguably one of America's 
ten-best living actors, Sonny is the kind of complex individual we could 
watch for hours on end without ever losing interest.
     The film opens with a brief prologue in 1939 Texas that shows 
Sonny, as a boy, at a Pentecostal church service.  THE APOSTLE then 
fast-forwards nearly six decades.  Now, Sonny is an aging preacher who 
spends most of his time on the road, leading revivals all across the 
deep South.  His long-suffering wife, Jessie (Farrah Fawcett), grows 
tired of his never being home, and wants a divorce.  The already-
uncomfortable situation is further exacerbated when Jessie and her 
lover, a young minister named Horace (Todd Allen), use church by-laws to 
steal Sonny's congregation away from him.  In a moment of jealous rage, 
Sonny attacks Horace, and the result of that confrontation forces him to 
flee his home state and change his identity.  Bearing the name and title 
of "The Apostle E.F.", he soon re-surfaces in a small bayou community in 
Louisiana with the intention of starting a Pentecostal ministry.  His 
enthusiasm is so great that a respected, local black pastor (John 
Beasley) agrees to help him.
     Like many flawed heroes, Sonny is a good man who is haunted by one 
tragic mistake.  His entire life becomes devoted to redemption and 
atonement.  He cannot take back what he did, but he is determined to act 
in a manner that will bring good into the lives of everyone he meets.  
Sonny has moments of weakness, but his sincerity never wavers, even when 
his ministry flourishes and the temptation for self-aggrandizement 
grows.  He is a powerful, charismatic figure with a real gift for 
preaching.  Watching Sonny lead revivals, it's easy to understand the 
appeal of an energetic preacher, and how some of the most popular 
achieve a status not unlike that of a rock star.
     It is a testimony to Duvall's reputation in the business that he 
was able to gather such an impressive cast for a low-budget, low-profile 
motion picture.  In addition to Duvall, key roles are filled by Farrah 
Fawcett, Miranda Richardson (as Toosie, a woman who is drawn to Sonny's 
magnetic personality), country star June Carter Cash (as Sonny's 
mother), John Beasley, and Billy Bob Thornton (as a racist 
troublemaker).  These five actors, not to mention the rest of the 
troupe, are in top form, but none steals the spotlight from Duvall, who 
is truly at the height of his powers as Sonny.  In his long and 
distinguished career, only his Oscar-winning performance in 1983's 
TENDER MERCIES was this raw.  Duvall becomes Sonny.  The energy and 
passion of a preacher are all present.
     Duvall has devoted a great deal of time and effort into getting the 
details right.  To enhance THE APOSTLE's verisimilitude, he relied 
primarily on non-professional church-goers and evangelists (rather than 
experienced actors) in supporting roles.  For the picture's style, he 
admits to being inspired by the near-documentary quality of Ken Loach's 
films.  As a result, THE APOSTLE possesses a truer and more intimate 
feel than it would have with slick camerawork.  Warts and all, Sonny's 
character shines through clearly as he struggles to find a path that has 
meaning.  THE APOSTLE is not the kind of movie that provokes a profound 
change in the viewer, but it offers a balanced portrait of a unique 
personality.  Sonny is not easily forgotten and, when the Oscar 
nominations are announced, it's possible that Duvall won't be, either.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Michael Redman
Fanatics are odd birds. They eat, breathe and sleep their obsession and will
grab any possible opportunity to tell you all about it. Commendable in their
energy and devotion, they are usually best admired at a safe distance. Up
close and personal, they're too up close and personal.
Pentecostal minister Euliss F. "Sonny" Dewey (Robert Duvall) is full of the
Lord, full of fire & brimstone and he's also full of contradictions. Looking
like a rock star in his white suit and shades, he hits the revival circuit in
the deep south like a locomotive with a full head of steam. A devoted family
man, he hits the sheets with his conquests with the same passion. He's a man
of peace, but hitting comes natural.
In the middle of the night, he senses that something is amiss. Jumping in his
car and racing home, he discovers his long-suffering wife Jessie (Farrah
Fawcett) bedding down the local youth minister Horace (Todd Allen). 
Hot-headed Sonny doesn't take the situation well. Besides his philandering and
ignoring his wife in favor of his ministry, there are obviously other problems
in their relationship. Jessie's flinch reflex whenever he reaches towards her
is telling. In the business of saving souls, he has been unable to save his marriage.
To make matters worse, Jessie has manipulated the church bylaws to take his
congregation away from him. Seeing her and her lover together at his son's
softball game sends Sonny over the edge and in a fit of rage he takes a
baseball bat to Horace's head.
Realizing that he has done a _wrong_thing_, Sonny dumps his car and wallet in
a river. He is born again again, dubs himself "The Apostle E.F." and sets out
to redeem his life. Leaving Texas and lead by the Lord to Bayou Boutte, a
small Louisiana town, he meets up with Brother Blackwell (John Beasley).
Blackwell has retired from preaching after two heart attacks, but still has an
empty church. He is convinced of E.F.'s dedication and gives him the building
to use. The Apostle takes on his new church "One Way Road To Heaven" with a
vengeance: rebuilding the chapel, creating a church bus out of scrap and
gathering his flock. Soon they are singing, clapping and testifying.
This film is Duvall's baby. After attempting to get a studio interested in it
for over a decade, he put up the money himself. He also directed,
executive-produced, wrote it and is in every scene. In the hands of a lesser
actor, it would be a disaster. Instead, it is a masterpiece.
E.F. is a complicated man. Cinema's treatment of Christianity has generally
concentrated on one-dimensional squeaky clean folk or corrupt money-grubbing
evangelists with no room for anyone in-between. Duvall gives us a real and
certainly imperfect person. Sonny is filled with energy. He doesn't walk
anywhere: he struts, jumps and dances wherever he goes. Running away from or
towards something, he doesn't have to time to saunter. His enthusiasm for his
god is unmistakable as is the fact that he's a guy with some serious problems.
There ain't none of us saints.
With a strong cast (including June Carter Cash, Billy Bob Thornton and an
under-used Miranda Richardson) backing him up, Duvall shows us a personal tale
of a very flawed man. If there is a problem with the characters, it is that,
other than E.F., they are underdeveloped. Everyone exists only as a connection
to the preacher, but then, this is his story from his eyes.
Using church-goers and evangelists rather than professional actors as extras,
the film has an air of authenticity. The "Amen"s feel real. The revivals are
energized. E.F.'s final sermon is a wonder of ebullience.
I don't have much patience for religious snake-oil salesmen, but this film
isn't about religion. It's about the Apostle E.F. lost and found; redeemed but
tainted. As those preachers of a different faith said, it's a long strange trip.
[This appeared in the 3/5/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     For years I have thought that Robert Duvall is the best American
actor.  And his acting in THE APOSTLE is as good as ever.  But Duvall
has let his vanity run away from him in this film.  He has what could
be a moving story if he had taken the time to flesh it out.  Instead he
cut the story down to the bare minimum to allow for more time for his
preaching sequences.  The film comes in at a running time of 148
minutes, yet skimps on story-line for what should be a simple story to
tell.  One example of his skimping: Billy Bob Thornton goes through
some emotional changes and should be a major character, but his entire
presence in the film is reduced to two scenes,  And Thornton's changes
are too rushed, because the screenplay, written by Duvall give him only
the two scenes.
     Take all of the shouting and singling out of THE APOSTLE and what
is left is a rather simple and short story.  Sonny Dewey (Duvall) is a
charismatic Pentecostal preacher in both the common and the religious
sense of "charismatic."  He has been preaching in New Boston, Texas for
so long that religion has become an essential part of his being.  Every
moment of the day if he is not preaching he is hymn-singing.  If he is
not hymn-singing he is trying to convert somebody.  He seems to be
incapable of speaking three consecutive sentences without one of them
mentioning Jesus.  But his dedication to preaching is not enough.
Sonny's life starts to fall apart when his wife (Farrah Fawcett) and a
young minister cheat on Sonny together and then manage to oust Sonny
from his own church.  When chance brings together Sonny, the young
minister, and a baseball bat, Sonny unleashes his rage leaving the
minister in a coma.  Realizing that he is now in serious trouble, Sonny
flees to Bayou Boutte, Louisiana where he cannot resist the temptation
to start a new church.  Sonny takes a new name, calling himself "the
Apostle E. F."  But he still preaches in the style for which he was
known in Texas.
     It is redundant at this point to say that Duvall is good as Sonny.
That is really not the point.  He does a terrific job that won an Oscar
nomination and will very likely win the prize.  There is just more of
this performance than the film really needed.  Farrah Fawcett nicely
underplays her role as Duvall's wife.  It is hard to believe looking at
her worn hawk-like features that she was once a national pinup.  But it
is harder to believe that this is the same actress who seemed so
untalented in LOGAN'S RUN.  She deserved to be seen more in this film.
Fawcett has come a long way.  Miranda Richardson provides love interest
in the new life.  It would not be accurate to say, however, that Duvall
steals the film but that as writer and director he never gives it to
anyone else.  He gives the film very believable dialog and captures the
feel of the more rural sections of the deep South.
     Duvall is a good director and a better actor.  One can only
disagree with some of the choices he made in bringing together this
film.  This could have been an expose in the tradition of ELMER GANTRY.
After national scandals of clergy people being shown to be hypocrites,
it took some courage to make the hero of this film a preacher and a
hypocrite.  But Duvall does manage after a while to make his audience
feel for Sonny and want him to succeed.  The critics have mostly liked
this film better than I did.  I rate this film a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale
and 1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Sonny Dewey is the most richly enigmatic character Robert Duvall has ever
played - a Pentecostal preacher from Texas who sees himself as God's messenger,
yet he's also a sinner, a man prone to violence. "The Apostle" is Duvall's
third directorial effort, and it is an uncompromising effort but it is not as
successful a portrait of a torn man as I had expected.
At the start of the film, we see Sonny stopping to see the severe wreckage from
a bad car accident. He runs over to a badly wounded driver and tells him that
the Lord will save him. Somebody better tell Sonny that the Lord should save
him, too. Sonny's wife (Farrah Fawcett) is about to divorce him, although he
doesn't want to be separated from his kids. Eventually, Sonny takes out his
anger on his wife's lover, a pastor, whom he knocks out with a baseball bat at
his kids' baseball game. Knowing that he may face prison, Sonny skips town and
decides to rebaptize himself as E.F., the Apostle. In the process, he leaves
behind his old mother (country singer June Carter Cash) and his two lovely
children in Texas. 
Sonny migrates to a chiefly black bayou town called Lafayette in Louisiana
where, within minutes, he casts a spell on the entire population. A DJ already
knows him as "The Apostle," and lets Sonny advertise on the local radio station
about finding some followers, as long as he doesn't speak in tongues. A young
mechanic lets Sonny stay at his house and gives him a sports car. Sonny
eventually convinces a retired local minister (John Beasley) to rebuild a
church, and persuades many black churchgoers to join his congregation by giving
away food supplies and by chanting with great energy on the air waves. He's a
man impossible to resist and to dislike - a man eager to please God and all who
follow Him. A secretary (Miranda Richardson) is also struck by his charisma,
and begins dating him. 
Sonny's past, however, continues to intrude upon his escape. His mother is
dying, and his wife is ready to send the police after him since the pastor he
conked in the head is in a coma. But Sonny is not going to down without a fight
- he's on God's side and always asks Him for advice. 
The one question we're left with in "The Apostle" is just who is Sonny? As Kris
Kristofferson once put it, he's a walking contradiction. Sonny loves God and
seeks to carry out his Word, but he doesn't necessarily practice what he
preaches. For starters, he's a man prone to violence considering he knocks out
his wife's lover, and has a fist fight with a redneck racist (Billy Bob
Thornton) at his new church. There are obviously demons that Sonny has to
grapple with, but what are they? Where does his violent behavior stem from? I
have known some ministers to do wild things and go to prison as punishment -
they are only human, after all - but what kind of man is Sonny beyond his wild
acts of faith and his sermons? 
The problem lies not with Duvall's performance, but with the various plot holes
in the story. For one, why is he thrown out of his congregation in Texas when
everyone seems to love him? Did his wife actually run it? And why does his wife
leave him? There is something to suggest that Sonny is a philanderer but
writer-director Duvall never dwells into it, or Sonny's past.
"The Apostle" is an accomplished piece of filmmaking; it is well-acted and
well-staged. The scenes in the churches where everyone preaches and sings to
the Lord are dazzling and enticing to witness. An interesting sideline to the
film is that most of the supporting players are actual churchgoers in Lafayette
bringing a level of authenticity that Hollywood rarely reaches. Particularly
compelling is Robert Duvall who brings a certain dignity and humanity that
should not go unrewarded or unnoticed - he's always on the move, and always
dancing and praising the Lord with vigor. Also worth mentioning is the
ubiquitous Billy Bob Thornton as the redneck who has an incredible scene where
he threatens to bulldoze Sonny's church and, right before our eyes, Sonny
manages to convert him.
"The Apostle" is a fine film made in the same spirit and atmospheric look as
Billy Bob Thornton's own directorial effort "Sling Blade," another tale set in
the South. Both films succeed in documenting the people in the South without
condescending them or presenting them as stereotypes. "The Apostle," however,
is more likely to be remembered for Duvall's tour-de-force performance than
anything else. Like "Kundun," another film about a spiritual leader, "The
Apostle" leaves you with more questions than answers. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

The last book I finished is something discussing society's reactions to
apocalypse and millennium.  In particular, a good part of it is about
how evangelical Christianity is shaped by the idea of Christ's imminent
return: there's the various taxa of Biblical literalism, including
Pentacostalism, Seventh Day Adventism, and so on, and this odd division
between the usual fundamentalist Protestantism and the more
"charismatic" kind, which allows for such miracles as speaking in
tongues and physical manifestations of the Holy Ghost such as faith
healing.  (Yes, it's research on apocalyptic cults that I'm into right
now.)
So I took this odd ball framework for thinking about things into the
movie theater to see "The Apostle".  Did it help any?  I'm not sure.
After reading that book, you can see some of the beliefs that motivate
Duvall's character.  The "Great Commission" of evangelical Christianity
is the spreading of the Gospel to the four corners of the world.  That
God's word is heard in every land is one of the conditions for the End
Times, a necessary event for the Apocalypse and Millennium.  And, in
the film, the Apostle's life's work is the spreading of the word, and
the establishment of churches where there were none.  This evangelism
pervades the entire film, from the Duvall character, Sonny, as a child
listening bored to a preacher to the first scene with Duvall attempting
to convert the near comatose victims of a car wreck to the main act of
the film, the building of a church in a small bayou town.  This
evangelism would be expected in any film that dealt honestly with Bible
Belt Christianity.  Note that Duvall is terrific as a preacher,
absolutely believable.  I don't know what his religious background is,
but the character of Sonny the Evangelist comes to life in this film.
I'm not sure what this movie is "about" thematically.  (Arguably, there
are many themes, and I'm being silly trying to pin down one.)  There's
one theme of rebirth and redemption -- Sonny attempts to leave his past
behind -- and I think this is what the TV ads and movie theater
previews focus on.  Sonny has committed past crimes, and has tried to
atone for them by building a new church.  But this doesn't work for
me:  he's already a preacher, he's already built churches, and the
evangelism that forms the core of his life is unchanged.  He's God's
servant, whether settled in Texas, or scratching out a new life in
Louisiana.
There perhaps is the idea of the dichotomy of the awful, messy
day-to-day world, in which Sonny has to worry about church politics,
adultery, and, yes, murder, and the unambiguous spiritual world.  He
tries to escape one into another.  But this doesn't convince me: his
evangelical style is unchanged, and to a large part his spiritual world
dominates his material world.
More credibly is the portrait of a flawed man doing good work.  This
theme may be a return to basics, or at least the basics of
fundamentalist belief: we're all sinners, and we try to do what we can
in this world, in the time allowed to us.  Further, even though we're
sinners, we can do good things.  And so we have Sonny, never quite
escaping the problems of the day-to-day world, say, jealousy at the
sight of Miranda Richardson having lunch with her ex-husband, but also
never quite failing to do good things, in particular the church he
builds in the bayou.
And I think the idea of limited time animates the film.  We all know
Sonny's on the run, and that he expects the law to catch up with him
eventually.  We understand his presence in the church he builds is
provisional and temporary.  And so, we have his eagerness to get things
done, to do good work: he wants to build an orphanage as soon as
possible, even though his co-minister wants to take it one day at a
time.  And, perhaps the connection being entirely in my own mind, I
have to think of the book I'd read, and the description of evangelical
Christianity living in the shadow of the End Times: can I assume that
the film touches on this idea also, that everything is provisional?
Anyway, a couple bang-bang notes: the church is built next to a
graveyard.  This is perhaps unremarkable, but every panning shot of the
church shows these graves.  I'll argue that the small cemetery serves
the same purpose as the skull in still life paintings -- all the
delicious looking fruit (if the artist is any good) is just temporary,
and we're all mortal, and the skull reminds us of this.
I'm used to Billy Bob Thornton having really furrowed brows, but then I
only remember him from "Sling Blade".  I've seen other films with him,
but don't really recall him in them ("One False Move" is not a bad
film, though).
The film should be a reminder that our bicoastal perception of
fundamentalist Christianity is perhaps incomplete.  Living relatively
secular lives, as we do, we tend to see the fundies more as abortion
protesters and gay bashers.  We perhaps forget that, say, the civil
rights movement (and Abolition for that matter) was originally
spearheaded by evangelicals.  We may perhaps also throw in the
liberation theology of Latin American Catholics in the face of military
governments.  The complete picture has good parts and bad parts.

Author
W Waffle
Everyweek, WaffleMovies.com reviews an independent film or big studio picture
that deserves a second chance on video.  If you like this review, check out
Wafflemovies.com!
Robert Duvall has been in some of the greatest movies of our time, but
never seems to get the kind of recognition afforded to Jack Nicholson
or Robert Redford. Duvall's resume contains some of the greatest
movies in history: To Kill a Mockingbird, M*A*S*H, The Godfather and
The Godfather II, Apocalypse Now, Network, Tender Mercies, The Natural
and Sling Blade. Normally, a list like that would make you a Hollywood
legend, but Duvall has never been a megastar. He is a consummate
professional, a workingman's actor.  Instead of playing Robert Duvall
in every movie, he becomes the character. He blends into the work, but
would be vitally missed if he were not there.
In stunning contrast to some of his most famous roles, Duvall explodes
off the screen in The Apostle. With great skill, Duvall serves as the
writer and director as well as playing a difficult character.  Duvall
portrays Sonny, a flawed southern preacher. Since he was a little boy,
Sonny had the gift of preaching the Lord's word.  Unfortunately, he is
also a deeply flawed man who has cheated on his wife and may have even
stolen some money from the church collection plate.
Finally, his wife (Farah Fawcett) tires of Sonny's problems. She takes
away everything he holds dear, his children and his church.  After
being removed as pastor of his small Texas church, Sonny is lost. He
turns to alcohol and begs for God to give him a sign telling him what
he should do. At his lowest point, Sonny confronts his wife, Jessie,
and her new boyfriend. This leads to a struggle where Sonny kills
Jessie's boyfriend in a fit of rage.
Sonny realizes what he has done and flees. After communing with the
Lord, Sonny realizes that he must right the wrongs he has committed in
life. He realizes that he must preach the word of the Lord without
straying and committing sin, so he heads to a small Louisiana town to
start a new church. Will Sonny be able to bring salvation to this
small town? Will he be able to leave his sinful past behind?
There are some great moments in this film. Duvall's performance is
legendary. His preaching ability could bring atheists to their
feet. He creates a montage of fantastic scenes showing Sonny preaching
to many different audiences. In one scene, Sonny and his fellow
preachers engage in a preach-off, trading the microphone and
compelling each other to new heights. Duvall effectively uses
flashbacks to show the life Sonny has led and the events that
influenced him. He also creates a beautiful scene with Sonny praying
at the crossroads after he has killed his wife's boyfriend and one
scene showing the re-birth and baptism of Sonny. We get a good sense
of the desperation his character feels after breaking one of the ten
commandments.
There are some problems with the movie. When Duvall was writing all
those fantastic scenes for himself, he forgot about the rest of his
cast.  He dominates every scene in the movie. The movie would have
benefited from more character development for the secondary
characters. These characters could have helped to explain more of
Sonny's past and the sins he has committed. Unfortunately, the
audience is left to theorize what he has done.
Specifically, two actors put in fine performances, but should have
been used more.  First, Duvall does not use Billy Bob Thornton in an
effective manner. Billy Bob is fantastic in this movie, but serves no
purpose. His character has no motivation and we don't know enough
about him to understand his anger. He just shows up from time to time
with no rhyme or reason.
Farrah Fawcett also does a fine job in the movie. She isn't given much
to do, but does a good job playing Sonny's frustrated and fed-up wife.
The Apostle is a great film for actors to study Duvall. He was
deservedly nominated for an Oscar and a Screen Actors Guild award. He
won best actor from the Independent Spirit Awards, the LA Film Critics
Association, and the National Society of Film Critics.  The
Independent Spirit Awards also rewarded Duvall by naming the film best
film of 1997 and picked him as the best director.
