Title
Review for Fuori dal mondo (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     Giuseppe Piccione's Not of This World has won bucketfuls of  awards 
from the Italian academy and a number of international film festivals, 
and has the luck of the draw to be a nominee for Oscar's Best Foreign 
Language Film in the year that Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon is 
dominating the mix.  Still, as they say, it's honor enough to be 
nominated in such exalted company.
     Piccione has created what amounts to a high-end soap opera, but the 
emphasis is on high end.  A nun, Sister Caterina (Margherita Buy), has a 
foundling baby thrust into her arms on a walk through the park in Milan. 
 She takes him to the hospital, but she can't let it go at that.  She 
undertakes a bit of detective work to track down the baby's mother.
     Ernesto (Silvio Orlando) owns a dry cleaning establishment.  He 
doesn't much like his work, but he does it obsessively, to the exclusion 
of having a life.  On a night about nine months earlier he apparently 
had sex with a girl who was briefly an employee.  The girl turns out to 
be the mother of the abandoned baby, and Ernesto might be the father.  
The three lives, and particularly Ernesto's and Caterina's, come 
together.
     What is unusually appealing in this movie is its examination of 
choice and change.  Caterina is eleven months away from her final vows.  
She is sure of her calling, and  is a beacon and a rock of reassurance 
for the younger novices.  But the baby awakens something in her.  She 
becomes vulnerable to the lure of the possibilities offered by life 
outside the cloister, and to the taunts and questions of people who 
consider the veil a barricade behind which to hide from the dangers of 
the real world. 
     Ernesto is a closed, life-rejecting nebbish.  He takes dry cleaning 
seriously, but he can never remember the names of the young women who 
work for him.  For him, dry cleaning is an end in itself; he can't quite 
fathom these people who flit through it en route to more fulfilling 
lives.  He turns down invitations from friends, and advances from women. 
 He goes home at night and eats a solitary meal and reads a magazine.  
The most difficult thing to believe in this story is that he would have 
had a tumble with the pretty teenager who turns out to be the baby's 
mother.
     The baby - this inconvenient eruption of life - is the catalyst 
that brings together  Caterina and Ernesto and works change in their 
lives, and it is one of this movie's considerable satisfactions to watch 
these two superb actors express those changes.  The directions they take 
are not always predictable, but they make sense.  Neither are quite "of 
this world", one cloistered behind the veil, the other behind a loner's 
defenses, but life reaches in and prods them.
     The camerawork by Luca Bigazzi beautifully sets off Piccioni's 
intelligent screenplay and direction.  Ludovico Einaudi's score 
sometimes overwhelms the action - there is a subplot involving a 
false-alarm heart attack suffered by Ernesto as a result of stress, 
during which he complains that he can't breathe, and the music sometimes 
threatens to bring on a similar condition in the audience. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Intra Films
 Director: Giuseppe Piccioni
 Writer: Giuseppe Piccioni and Gualtiero Rosella Lucia Zei
 Cast: Margherita Buy, Silvio Orlando, Carolina Freschi, Maria
Cristina Minerva, Sonia Gessner, Alessandro Di Natale
   When a newborn babe is left in a trash can or a park
bench, that's sad; it's tragic.  When an unlikely person
discovers the baby, someone who seems not in the slightest
prepared to deal with the treasure, that's fun; it's comedy.  In
"Not of This World," winner of four Donatello awards (that's
the Italian Oscar) and Italy's entry into the American
Academy Awards competition, director Giuseppe Piccioni
successfully integrates comic undertones with a poignant
motif, giving his audience a marvelously layered tale of two
people whose lives are changed by this tiny bundle of joy.  
   How would the Americans treat such a theme?  In Charles
Shyer's 1987 comedy "Baby Boom," a supercharged business
exec's life is changed when she inherits a baby, in a sweet
comedy featuring Diane Keaton in top form, one which takes
aim at the self-centeredness of 1980s yuppies.  That same
year Leonard Nimoy turned out another comedy, "3 Men and
a Baby," about a trio of swinging bachelor roommates who
find themselves custodians of an infant--a movie that also
featured winning performances all around.  If you're satisfied
with mere comedy and you're not in the mood for getting
under the skins of your characters, you can't go wrong with
these.  But if you want a film that does not stereotype your
characters (Keaton as pure yuppie, Selleck as solid swinger)
but puts a human dimension even on the sort of woman who
would abandon her baby, go see "Not of This World." 
Featuring an unaffected sound track of Ludovico Einaudi's
marvelous piano music and a set of unpretentious
performances about people who in their separate ways are
unsure of themselves, "Not of This World" is so heartwarming
that unless you capito Italiano, you can't be blamed for
wanting to throw tomatoes at the technically miserable
subtitles which are virtually unreadable whenever they are
contrasted with a white background.
   In its special way, this movie takes off on the adage that
marriage doesn't make all that much difference in your life:
the big change comes when you're dealing with your first
child.  The story opens in Milan on an attractive nun, Caterina
(Margherita Buy--who resembles a young Catherine
Deneuve) who, while walking in the park, has a baby thrust
into her arms by a jogger.  (That the runner take a few puffs
on a cigarette makes you wonder whether Jim Jarmusch was
called in as a consultant.)  Instantly bonding with the little
tyke, Caterina takes her package to the local hospital.  As
she gazes upon the little kid who is to get the name Fausto,
she is thrown into doubts about her commitment to God. 
With eleven months to go before she is to take her final vows
and with her own mother insisting that Caterina is wasting her
life, the poor woman is faced by the conflict of her life.  Nor is
Ernesto (Silvio Orlando--who looks like a young Peter Sellers
and acts a nerdy Woody Allen)--about to continue his own
lonely, single existence unmoved by the needs of others. 
Having inherited a dry cleaning establishment from his father,
he has nothing but complaints about debts, does not
remember the names of the women who work for him, and is
generally considered a decent but unlovable guy.  Caterina
tracks down Ernesto through a sweater that served as the
baby's wrap, and while this unlikely couple--both assuming
that Ernesto is the father--seek out the woman who
abandoned the toddler, Piccioni treats us to a delicate,
believable, trenchant peeling away of their defenses.
   The title, "Not of This World," refers at first glance to
Caterina's commitment to the Church, a dedication that takes
her out of the usual mundane concerns of the Italian
citizenry.  Not for her the worries of making a living, or
keeping a family together, or successfully raising little ones. 
But on closer examination, we see that both of Piccioni's
absorbing principals are figuratively from outer space.  Both
have lost the usual links they might enjoy from their society,
having cast off the connections that ordinary people have to
home and family.  When Caterina shucks her habit for a day
and dons a plain burgundy sweater, heading off in Ernesto's
car to seek out Fausto's apparently callous mom, we in the
audience wonder whether these disparate personalities will
get together--Caterina declining to take her vows and Ernesto
finding the woman of his dreams.  But Piccioni--whose "The
Great Blek," "Condemned to Wed," and "Love, Money and
Philosophy" are little known to American moviegoers--is not
about to go for facile endings.  
   What's particularly captivating about the director's work is
not only the anticipation we feel as we watch the growing
alliance between Ernesto and Caterina, but the humanity he
shows of people about whom we'd never think twice.  The
nuns are a diverse and even fun-loving lot, enjoying their
weekly games of bingo, and the women who work in the
laundry have families and dreams and joys of their own--
hopes that Ernesto has all but ignored in treating them like
cogs in the pressing machines.  Marina (Marina Massironi),
the lonely and idiosyncratic girl in the bar who leaves her
phone number on napkins; the Mother Superior (Sonia
Gessner), who urges Caterina to reconsider her commitment
to the Church; Gabriele (Alessandro Di Natale), the boy friend
and probably father of Fausto; all seek human connection
and in doing so provide some of the gentle humor of the story
as well as the pathos.  Teresa (Carolina Freschi), the frail-
looking woman who had abandoned the child, is not a bad
person but rather one who is vulnerable and who has given
up a child for whom she feels inadequate to care.  "Not of
This World" portrays a little world of Milanese people who are
like the rest of us: they're lonely, they're happy; they're
conflicted, they're confident; they're moody, they're content. 
In short they really are of this world, and Piccioni lovingly
shows them to us with all their humanity.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 104 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Pedro Sena
This is reminiscent of a Spanish film also seen at this Film Festival a
couple of years ago. "The Cradle Song". But the similarity ends there.
The story in this film is rather interesting, and told with a certain amount
of dry wit that is difficult to get into, but eventually allows us a laugh
here and there. The subtleties are not quite obvious, until later, when at a
Bingo game, it becomes apparent what this film is really trying to
accomplish.
On a day when Sister Caterina is going to visit her own mother, we find that
she is handed a baby in a sweater. She does not know what to do, but she
takes it to the Hospital and then the story really starts. She begins
getting attached to the child. In the meantime, we come to see a two other
dysfunctional families. In one, a daughter is leaving home, and apparently
has been hiding -- the pregnancy and the baby she gave away. In the other,
Caterina's mother is upset that Caterina took on the vows of a nun. Well,
there is a third dysfunctional family. Ernesto's little laundry business has
several girls working for him, and his attitude is less than helpful at
times.
 Sister Caterina's only clue is a sweater that is given back to her by the
Hospital and she undertakes to go find its owner. It leads her to this small
laundry business. When Ernesto finds out he may have a child the film begins
its run. Sister Caterina is trying to find the mother of the child, and now
Ernesto is interested because he might actually be the father. In the end,
things get back to a semblance of normalcy, and as usual, the status quo
lives on, and those involved are distant from these things, with the
exception of the two parents that get to adopt this child. It's in between
these cracks that this film shines. Not as well done as "The Cradle Song",
but no less effective.
 Like the other film, this one spares no second thought about the coolness
and the viciousness of the church and its lack of respect for people
themselves, in lieu of their own order of things ... indeed, not of this
world at all, and the reason for the title. In between lie the emotions of
the young Caterina seeing things happen in her face that bring her to
question her own motives and ideas to herself. What is unusual in the end,
is that she does not renounce her rights, and affirms them even better, or
stronger. One can only hope that she will not have the cold heart of the
Mother Superior, who is not convinced that Caterina is made for the order,
as she has taken this affair with a maternal instinct, which the order
obviously wants to take out of all its nuns. A caring heart, means you can
not be motherly affectionate, or get involved in these things with a human
heart. A very serious theme and charge in general, which 30 years ago would
have had this film "banned" by many authorities, in ways similar to the
works of Luis Bunuel, the style of which this film is not reminiscent of,
but the spirit of the film and way it is delivered, which it is.
 Ernesto himself is a loner, and in many ways is a Bunuel'ian hero. He does
not have disdain for the women, but he has obviously been hurt enough that
his aloofness is an issue with women, with the exception of Sister Caterina,
to whom he has taken a serious liking (another Bunuel'ian subtlety), but
probably knows that it is impossible. he gets to witness Caterina's last
battles with herself, on her way to become a full fledged nun. But when
watching the atrocities of human behavior and ideas in action, she does the
one thing that we really don't want her to do. She leaves "this world".
 One really wants this film to turn around, I did. It isn't that I think
that compassion should always win over ideas and a commitment that may be
idealistic or futile in the end, but there are a lot of people in those
areas, whose heart is not in question, and they belong there. Ernesto's
indifference at the start, and his slowness into coming around, is in a way,
very similar to Caterina's doubts.
 A film that has its fine moments, with two very fine leads in  Margherita
Buy and Silvio Orlando, while not a stunningly well done film, it makes up
for it in spunk and doing. It plods along well, is well written, and though
one may find the end disappointing, it never the less makes it ok. We still
have a baby and an Ernesto to keep track of, I guess.
3.5 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 2000. All Rights Reserved.
