Title
Review for Save the Last Dance (2001)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
Wanting badly to be another ethnic dance movie in the spirit of SATURDAY 
NIGHT FEVER, SAVE THE LAST DANCE never rises above SATURDAY NIGHT COLD.
Starring two badly miscast leads, the film features Julia Stiles as 
would-be Julliard ballerina Sara Johnson and Sean Patrick Thomas as 
inner city black high school student and would-be future doctor Derek 
Reynolds.  Stiles (10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU) just does not have the 
body of a ballerina.  Would you cast Danny DeVito to try out for the 
NBA?  And Thomas (CRUEL INTENTIONS) has upper middle-class prep school 
written all over him.  Don't get me wrong, the only good part of the 
movie is their relationship together.  The problem is that they don't 
fit the script, and even if they did, this is not a movie worth making.  
Between its lame dance sequences is more dead air time than a radio 
station during a long power blackout.
The movie, directed by Thomas Carter and written by Duane Adler and 
Cheryl Edwards, never can decide what kind of movie it wants to be.  
Sometimes it's a sappy melodrama.  Sometimes it tries to be a hard 
hitting drama about jealousy among the races over interracial dating.   
Derek's sister Chenille (Kerry Washington) complains to Sara about her 
taking "one of the few decent men we have left after jail, drugs and 
drive-bys."  Sometimes it is about male bonding ("Blood is thicker than 
blondes.")  And sometimes, finally, we get around to dancing, but the 
choreography is so awkward and the editing so choppy that you probably 
won't care.
It all starts when Sara's mom is killed while rushing to Sara's Julliard 
audition.  Cue the harps.  Off Sara goes next to live with the man whom 
she calls Roy (Terry Kinney) but who once was her father.  Cue the 
violins.  He has all of the personality of the torn wallpaper that 
decorates the flea-bitten apartment where he lives.  This makes Sara 
almost the only white face in her new high school.
At this point, Sara refuses to dance anymore or even talk about it.  Of 
course, after she meets and falls for Derek, it's quickly Julliard or 
bust.
Along the way we are taught many dubious moral lessons.  Derek's sister, 
still in high school, has a son, but she shows more interest in her 
wardrobe than her son, whom she has palmed off on her mother like a 
batch of dirty laundry.  Needless to say, the boy's father is even less 
interested in his own offspring.  The kids all get fake ids and drink 
illegally in a fancy nightclub in elegant clothes.  Where does all this 
money come from since no one seems to work?
And then there's the issue of violence.   Malakai (Fredro Starr), with 
whom Derek unconvincingly claims to have once knocked over a liquor 
store, wants to go shoot up another gang's neighborhood in retaliation 
for a previous raid.  Yes, this whole script is lifted from lots of 
other films and plays, most notably WEST SIDE STORY.  But in those, the 
actions have some amount of credibility.  Here people are shot, but the 
dreamy background music makes it seem downright romantic and not 
especially painful.
I kept wanting to stop the movie, clear off the set except for the two 
leads, and begin anew with a completely different script and director.  
I like Stiles and Thomas together.  I did not like the movie in which 
they found themselves stuck.
SAVE THE LAST DANCE runs 1:53.  It is rated PG-13 for violence, sexual 
content, language and brief drug references and would be acceptable for 
teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, gave the picture just **.  He thought it was too 
slow, the whole Malakai character was unnecessary, and he didn't like 
Sara's relationship with her parents.  He did comment favorably on the 
two leads.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/

Here's a question for you: why should anyone care about what any critic
thinks of any movie? The answer: well, let's see. In my humble little
opinion, critics are basically just folks who happen to have soapboxes big
enough to voice their opinions onto the world. That's all that they really
are...people with pointed opinions. Opinions based on their own experiences
in life, their backgrounds, their demeanors on any particular day, their
personal preferences, etc... Okay fine, they are generally much better at
dissecting a film's particular strengths and weaknesses than most people,
but still...it's simply their opinion. Nothing more, nothing less (No
offense to critics, most of whom do good jobs, but my point is what it is).
So why give a rat's ass about my review vs that of any other person? Well, I
think it has to do with being able to read someone's review and deciding
whether or not to see the film, based on your previous
agreements/disagreements with said critic. All that to say that we have now
fashioned yet another way for JoBlo's opinion to mean something to you. The
new section is called "Where is JoBlo coming from?" and it will feature an
array of past films which are related to the one being reviewed, with
JoBlo's ratings attached. This is done so that you could read the initial
review, check out his previous ratings of other "similar" films which you
may have already seen, and determine whether or not JoBlo's opinion should
give you any reason to see/avoid the movie in question. Not sure if it'll
help anyone out there, but for some reason, it sounds kinda reasonable to
me.
Hope you all dig it! I know that I would LOVE to see this kind of thing on
all other critics' reviews as well. Let's hope that the rest of the world
takes a stitch of notice and my little idea spreads like wildfire (or at
least, a brushfire). Spread the love, people...spread the love!
PLOT:
A young white girl who just lost her mom to a car accident, must move in
with her dad in a predominantly black neighborhood. Having given up on her
ballet, the girl quickly integrates herself into the local hip-hop dance
scene, with the help of a young black boy whom she befriends at school. It
isn't long before the two get closer, other people get really uncomfortable
with their affection and the girl opens up to said dude.
CRITIQUE:
Surprisingly good. Other than the sucky title and the generally predictable
story line, this movie was actually interesting to check into, with
well-developed characters (for the most part), some fun hip-hopping, a cute
relationship and some tender moments? Yup, God knows I rarely shed a tear at
any flick, but when the dead-beat dad fixed up that room all right, I almost
broke the dam (when you see the movie, you'll understand). Then again, who
knows, maybe I was just a little "emotional" that day. But kudos to this
film's makers for avoiding the general stereotypical ventures of other films
based in the ghetto, and showing us that not everybody is addicted to crack
or busting caps up people's asses. Sure, problems like teenage pregnancies,
deadbeat fathers and gangs exist, but this film actually handles them with a
little humanity, and allows you to see some of the finer details beneath the
typical exterior. A great example is the deadbeat pop who is generally
portrayed as a straight-out A-hole in most other films. Well, in this movie,
and much like in real life, not everything is so cut and dry. As it was,
this film actually convinced me of most of these characters' humanity, and
that's what made this film work for me.
Sure, there is this whole "I gotta make it as a dancer" undertone going on,
which will likely keep the teens interested throughout, but believe it or
not, this film is much deeper than that. In fact, I think the trailer is
selling it too much like a simple hip-hop teen flick, when really it's
actually quite touching. And yes, the whole black/white relationship thang
is also handled pretty well, in my opinion. We see both sides of the issue.
Granted, a couple of the characters were a little stereotypical, like the
super-bitch at school and the gang-banger who can never seem to get out of
trouble, but then again, there are actually people like that in the world,
too. The film also might've wanted to cut out one of its few "side stories",
like the whole "sister having the child without the boyfriend sticking
around" thing, but that would only have been to trim some of the picture's
runtime, which went way past the general benchmark for these types of
movies. In the end, the better part of the film's story and personalities
captured enough of my attention for me to care about the movie as a whole,
and to wish most of the characters nothing but goodness in the end. Mind
you, I could see how some people might dismiss it based on its
predictability alone, but for me, the overall design clicked.
Note to Julia Stiles: Me thinks it's time for you to move beyond the teen
flicks and try to grab hold of some juicier parts. Don't follow the Freddie
Prinze Jr. route, girl!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Jungle Fever (8/10) - Center Stage (6.5/10) - Dance with Me (6/10) - 10
Thing I Hate about You (7/10) - Boys in the Hood (8/10)

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures
 Director: Thomas Carter
 Writer:  Duane Adler, story and screenplay
 Cast: Julia Stiles, Sean Patrick Thomas, Terry Kinney,
Kerry Washington, Fredro Starr, Vince Green, Bianca
Lawson, Marcello Robinson
   This is a movie about a romantic inter-racial relationship
that neither skirts the problems involved in such an affiliation
nor pretends that the black-white connection is the only issue
worth discussing.  "Save the Last Dance" is a film about two
people who like each other very much.  They're perhaps too
young to be in love (despite what Nat King Cole might tell us)
and who probably will not get together much after high school
graduation, but who make a impact on each other that will
remains with them for the rest of their lives.  In the story's
most telling piece of dialogue, a young white woman, Sara
Johnson (Julia Stiles) is sitting in a gruesome Chicago
emergency room with a black friend, Chenille Reynolds (Kerry
Washington) while impatiently awaiting medical attention for
Chenille's baby.  When Chenille warns that Sara does not
really fit into the world of African-Americans, Sara replies, "I
thought there was just one world."  "That's what you learned,"
replies Chenille caustically, "But we know different."
   While director Thomas Carter ("Metro," "Swing Kids") does
not portray the mostly African-American Chicago
neighborhood as the most desirable place to bring up a baby
or to go to school, the youngsters seem anything but
oppressed.  The ghetto high school is savored for the most
part by young people who are alive, vibrant, and involved in
the one class discussion that we witness (about Truman
Capote's "In Cold Blood" as taught by a hip black instructor
who is on his pupils' wave length).  While nothing in "Save
the Last Dance" could be called an innovation in the genre,
the film delivers a marvelous performance by the talented
Julia Stiles, who seems to be competing with Helen Hunt for
each year's most prolific actress.  
   Stiles performs here in the role of a talented woman
heavily involved in ballet, whose world crashes around her
when her mother dies in a highway accident.  She is
compelled to give up her spiffy suburban existence and move
into a mostly black neighborhood with her father, Roy (Terry
Kinney), who had abandoned the family some time back and
who ekes out a precarious living as a jazz trumpeter. 
Attending the local school, she meets a bright, seventeen-
year-old African-American student, Derek Reynolds (Sean
Patrick Thomas), who awaits word about his application to
Georgetown University and who has dreams of becoming a
pediatrician.  Each enters the other's milieu, although Sara
learns quite a bit more about the hip-hop generation than
Derek absorbs about the world of ballet and contemporary
dance.
   The scenes that will probably get the teens in the audience
giggling involve Derek's tutoring of Sara in the culture of
young blacks: how to sit, slouched over, legs wide; how to
shake your butt on the dance floor; how to deliver the
dozens.  Derek's lessons are supplemented by his sister
Chenille's advice to Sara on how to dress to avoid looking
"country."  Older members of the audience might wonder why
Sara would want to take on the unique polish of the African-
American since, after all, shouldn't one want to be herself as
the movie's tagline indicates?
   The film benefits mightily from the performance of Sean
Patrick Thomas as Derek.  His chemistry with Ms. Stiles is
palpable, convincing.  Side characters do not fare as well, as
Derek's friends Malakai (Fredro Starr), involved in drugs, 
Snookie (Vince Green), and the woman who envies and
dislikes Sara's incursions into her community, Nikki (Bianca
Lawson), are mere caricatures.  Nor are Peter E. Berger's
MTV-style editing of Stiles' dances conducive to more than a
headache, though presumably the fast cuts are necessary
since Stiles is not a professional dancer.  Overall, "Save the
Last Dance" profits from well-developed principals, an
vigorous sound track provided by Mark Isham, and a feel for
the grit and warmth alike of an otherwise impoverished
neighborhood.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 112 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Save_the_Last_Dance_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
At quick glance, Julia Stiles' filmography is far from impressive.  The
teen comedies _10_Things_I_Hate_About_You_ and _Down_to_You_.  Michael
Almereyda's woefully misguided Y2K-set adaptation of _Hamlet_.  Even the
one step she has seemingly taken in the right direction, David Mamet's
_State_and_Main_, is a decidedly subpar effort from its celebrated
writer-director.
But if one actually saw all of these projects, one thing is abundantly
clear: while the films as a whole do not deliver, Stiles always does. 
She gave _10_Things_ the sharp edge that the rest of the movie sorely
lacked; she radiated warmth and intelligence that was otherwise absent in
_Down_to_You_; and she more than kept up with the top-drawer ensemble
casts in _Hamlet_ and _State_and_Main_.  Stiles' latest starring vehicle,
_Save_the_Last_Dance_, continues this pattern: she rises to the occasion
in an enterprise that is beneath her game efforts.
After the death of her mother, Stiles' Sara Johnson moves to Chicago to
live with her errant father (Terry Kinney), with whom she has
relationship that's tense at best.  Sara has slightly less difficulty
finding comfort at her predominantly African-American high school, for
she is quickly taken under the wing of Chenille (Kerry Washington), an
outgoing single mother.  While Sara and Chenille quickly become best
friends, that soon pales in comparison to Sara's burgeoning relationship
with Chenille's ambitious brother Derek (Sean Patrick Thomas), who helps
reawaken her dream of becoming a dancer--a goal she abandoned after her
mother's untimely passing.
Unlike most teen-targeted films, _Save_the_Last_Dance_ cannot be accused
of not being about anything; in fact, it tries to be about too much.  In
addition to being the story of Sara finding her place and reclaiming her
dream, it's also about the Sara/Derek romance, complete with all the
outside stumbling blocks that come with an interracial union.  It's also
about Derek's criminal past, and whether or not he'll fall back on the
wrong side of the law with best friend Malakai (Fredro Starr).  And last
but certainly not least, it's about a lily white girl learning to put
some soul into her dance moves.  With so many balls in the air, director
Thomas Carter and writers Duane Adler and Cheryl Edwards are bound to
drop some, and indeed they do; their biggest slip comes in the hackneyed,
overblown climax.
What works best in _Save_the_Last_Dance_ is the Sara/Derek pairing, and
that's because Stiles and Thomas are so well-matched.  Not only are they
instantly likable and have a genuine, gentle rapport, they also have the
chops to bring real pathos to overly familiar dramatic situations.  But
with the title _Save_the_Last_Dance_, acting ability is somewhat
secondary to dancing ability, and Stiles and Thomas can definitely hold
their own on a dance floor.
Ultimately, this talented twosome can only do so much with a script that
continually lets them down at about every turn.  With yet another
impressive turn to her credit, Stiles has once again earned her stripes
as someone to watch.  But until someone puts her in a real movie, it'll
be hard to maintain the desire to keep watching.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Ross Anthony
Suburban raised Julia Stiles has no other dream than dancing her way 
into Juilliard Ballet School. All she needs is her mom's presence at the 
audition. Very early on in the movie her mother is killed in a car 
accident. The trauma causes her to give up dancing, but it's the 
logistics of guardianship, which lands her on a sofa bed at her somewhat 
estranged father's house smack dab in the middle of a black Chicago 
neighborhood. 
Actually, the tension between her and her jazz musician father 
oscillates nicely, though is never quite juiced. Imperfectly, he fumbles 
for her forgiveness regarding past events left unspecified but no doubt 
centering around his departure. She's not jumping into his arms too 
quickly. 
The real story is her relationship with a slick, bright, tough 
hip-hopster and her integration into the hood. 
Aside from a sweetly edited finale dance solo, Stiles doesn't exactly 
fill the ballet dancer shoes, though she has no problem stepping into a 
lead role and commanding the production. I like this actress. In fact, 
she choked me up in two separate scenes. And though charming and funny 
in other scenes, the lead male Sean Patrick Thomas, couldn't find the 
right angle to complement her tears, paling when the scenes get deeply 
emotional. Not that he has the best dialogue to work with. 
Teaching Stiles the finer points of hip-hop dancing, Thomas shines. 
Aside from the father angle, which was truncated mid blossom, this is a 
formula fish out of water, dancer flick. Not too schmaltzy, not too 
edgy. She should have saved the last dance for her father. 
Save the Last Dance. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Julia Stiles, Sean Patrick Thomas, Terry Kinney, Fredro 
Starr. 
*  Directed by Thomas Carter. 
*  Written by Duane Adler, Cheryl Edwards. Story by Duane Adler. 
*  Produced by Robert Cort and David Madden at MTV/Paramount. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 
