Title
Review for Soul Survivors (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Pete Croatto
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Two teen couples go to a church party, drink and then drive. They get into an
accident. One of the guys dies, but his girlfriend continues to see him in her
life, and has nightmares. What's the deal? Watch the movie and "sorta" find
out...
CRITIQUE:
A mind-fuck movie for the teen generation that touches on a very cool idea, but
presents it in a very bad package. Which is what makes this review an even
harder one to write, since I generally applaud films which attempt to break the
mold, mess with your head and such (LOST HIGHWAY & MEMENTO), but there are good
and bad ways of making all types of films, and these folks just didn't snag this
one correctly. They seem to have taken this pretty neat concept, but executed it
terribly. So what are the problems with the movie? Well, its main problem is
that it's simply too jumbled. It starts off "normal" but then downshifts into
this "fantasy" world in which you, as an audience member, have no idea what's
going on. There are dreams, there are characters coming back from the dead,
there are others who look like the dead, there are strange apparitions, there
are disappearances, there are a looooot of chase scenes, there are tons of weird
things that happen, and most of it is simply not explained. Now I personally
don't mind trying to unravel a film every now and then, but when all it does is
give me the same clue over and over again, I get kind of fed up after a while,
which is this film's biggest problem. It's obviously got this big secret to
hide, but it seems to want to hide it completely until its final five minutes.
And do they make things entertaining, thrilling or even engaging, in the
meantime? Not really.
The sad part is that the Arrow and I both dig on flicks like this, so we
actually figured most of it out by the half-way point, so all of the strangeness
after that did start to make a little bit of sense, but it still didn't the make
the film all that more entertaining. I guess the bottom line with movies like
this is that you should always make sure that the audience is "into it" even
before they are given the secret password to enter your world of understanding.
I mean, showing Melissa Sagemiller running away from visions for about 20
minutes throughout the movie is just plain lazy!! Okay, we get it...there are
people chasing her and we don't know who they are. Do we really need to see it
over and over again? How about giving us different scenes offering further
insight into all of the strangeness going down in the movie? Apparently, the
studio took this film away from its director and chopped it up themselves, and
it shows. There might've been a pretty decent teen mind-fuck movie in here
somewhere, but I guess "the suits" decided that turning it into a music video
with little edge, would make more sense. The actors are pretty good for the most
part, although Wes Bentley just seemed to be playing the exact same character
that he did in AMERICAN BEAUTY, only in a new neighborhood. But my biggest kudos
go out to Sagemiller, who holds her own throughout the entire film, and actually
has you feeling her character's unraveling.
Overall, the film doesn't stick because it doesn't entertain, it's confusing, it
rarely excites and it feels pretty redundant for most of its runtime, despite a
pretty cool ending and explanation to all of the craziness that came before it.
Oh, and by the way, this is not a horror or teen slasher flick...it's just
packaged to look that way because someone is apparently assuming that the genre
is still hot with the kids. It also wrapped production two years ago and has
been sitting on the shelves ever since. Whatever...skip it!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
A Nightmare of Elm Street 3 (7/10) - Blair Witch 2 (7/10) - The Crow (9/10) -
The Crow: Salvation (4/10) - Lost Highway (10/10) - Memento (10/10) - The Others
(9/10) - Stir of Echoes (8/10)

Author
Dennis Schwartz
In my opinion, a movie reviewer's most important task is to offer an
explanation for his opinion.  But with Soul Survivors, I'm so full of
critical rage that this review is liable to turn into a venomous,
uncontrollable rant, obligations damned.
However, protocol forces me to do otherwise.  Soul Survivors tells the
story of four college-bound friends:  Cassandra (Melissa Sagemiller) is
sweet and innocent.  Party girl Annabel (Eliza Dushku of Bring It On) is
dating world-weary Harvard student Matt (Wes Bentley).  Matt still has
feelings for Cassie, who is now dating Sean (Casey Affleck).
Driving back from a creepy, gothic party, the quartet gets into a
horrific car crash.  Sean dies, leaving Cassie crestfallen and guilty,
made worse because Sean saw Matt kiss Cassie just minutes after Sean
revealed his love for her.
As Cassie mopes through her classes, she sees the ghost of Sean all over
the place, urging her to follow him.  Along with being plagued by other
ghastly visions, Cassie is also followed by thugs from that strange
party.  Annabel and Matt try calming her down, but no one shares Cass's
visions.  She has to figure out this purgatory all by herself.
Rarely have I seen a director so thoroughly mishandle material.  In his
directorial debut, Steve Carpenter does nothing to provoke the audience
into feeling any emotion.  When the movie's camerawork isn't pedestrian,
it's clichéd.  Carpenter's need for close-ups, his camera following
Sagemiller from behind, drain the movie of any anticipation.  We already
know what to look for, so why should we be surprised?  And the sense of
scary atmosphere, which was recently done so well in The Others, is
nowhere to be found here.
Carpenter's script relies on random twists and turns with a minimum of
logic and loads of laziness.  This is a movie where the ending features
one character providing an explanation about the plot to another
character, which is one of the lamest screenwriting devices around.  The
second lamest device, of course, is the, "Oh, it was all a dream"
resolution.  And guess what?  This movie has both!
Not that the main body of the film, which has Sagemiller constantly
running in fear or having a nervous breakdown, is anything worthwhile. 
Since there's no captivating dialogue, no character chemistry exists
anywhere.  That's a huge problem, since the four main characters are
supposed to be couples.
Carpenter can't even get the smutty scenes right, which are becoming
more prevalent in PG-13 movies like Bring It On and Get Over It.  [The
film was recently re-cut from an R rating to get more kids in the seats.
-Ed.]  When Sagemiller and Dushku dance together at a club, he rarely
shows them in a full shot and he never keeps the camera on them for
longer than a second before relating to some Michael Bay-style quick
cuts.  And when Sagemiller and Dushku take a shower together after
getting covered in paint, they're fully clothed.  Regardless, any
sexiness in that scene is undercut by its stupidity.  Why wouldn't they
wash the clothes in the sink or in the washing machine?  Why would they
shower in their clothes?  What if they weren't covered in latex paint?
The cast, which will see better material in the future, would be wise to
leave this one off their resumes.  I felt sorry for Affleck, who I've
liked in other movies, and Bentley, who was great in American Beauty. 
Dushku, who possesses an alluring femme fetale quality, has got to stop
taking roles belonging to Rose McGowan.  As for Sagemiller (star of the
aforementioned Get Over It), I want to see her in a movie where she
plays a person, and not an object for gawking.  And I'm not even getting
into Luke Wilson's role as a priest.  At least he's friends with Wes
Anderson.
Bottom line: Soul Survivors is so awful I feel compelled to knock on
doors and warn people about it.
Director: Steve Carpenter
Writer: Steve Carpenter
Producer: Stokely Chaffin, Neal H. Moritz
Starring: Melissa Sagemiller, Wes Bentley, Eliza Dushku, Casey Affleck,
Luke Wilson, Angela Featherstone
http://www.soulsurvivors-themovie.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Soul_Survivors_ (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
        With its ripped-from-the-pages-of-_YM_ cast (Eliza Dushku, Wes Bentley,
Casey Affleck, and newcomer Melissa Sagemiller), at first glance
_Soul_Survivors_ looks just like the lot of teen-targeted horror films that have
infected screens the past five years.  However, those going in expecting the
usual slice-'n-dice will instead get something quite different.  But "different"
doesn't exactly mean "good," and this surprisingly sedate supernatural story
proves that point quite well.
        The focal foursome are introduced with a backstory knotty enough to fill
a season of _Dawson's_Creek_.  Sean and Cassie (Affleck and Sagemiller, who
perhaps not coincidentally has a Gwyneth-ish vibe about her) are in love, but
Cassie's ex Matt (Bentley), who also happens to be Sean's best friend, still
carries a torch.  Meanwhile, Cassie's freespirited best friend Annabel (Dushku),
who is apparently cozy with Matt, remains unaware--or at least pretends to
be--of his lingering romantic feelings for her buddy.  Got that?
        Actually, it doesn't matter, for one fateful night where Sean discovers
Cassie and Matt in a clinch becomes more dramatic when the quartet are involved
in an auto wreck.  The accident claims one of them, and while the other two
survivors appear to have escaped unscathed both mentally and physically, Cassie
is plagued by disturbing visions.  What is real?  What isn't?  Will you care?
        Not likely.  Between the accident scene and its conclusion,
_Soul_Survivors_ is an exercise in spinning wheels, a muddle of images, ideas,
and characters (such as Angela Featherstone's androgynous lesbian role) that
don't go anywhere, let alone make any sense.  Writer-director Steve Carpenter
was obviously going for a dream-like atmosphere, but even when taking such a
surreal bent, events should follow some sort of internal logic.  They don't
here; one scene has Cassie having a major row with a friend, and the next scene
has the friend cheering her on at a swim meet.  Cassie's visions are supposed to
instill horror, but would-be shocks such as a rather violent nosebleed and a
shot of blood going down a bath drain aren't exactly the stuff that nightmares
are made of.
        Artisan's much-publicized decision to recut the film from an R to a
PG-13 may have indeed diluted Carpenter's original vision, but when the
"meaning" behind _Soul_Survivors_ becomes clear, issues of explicitness become
moot.  That Carpenter didn't have the heart to come up with one halfway creepy
scene, even in PG-13 form, speaks of his true intent, which reveals itself to be
far more gooey and touchy-feely than one would have expected--and, hence, a lot
less fun.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SOUL SURVIVORS, written and directed by Steve Carpenter, the writer of BLUE
STREAK and the upcoming OCEAN'S ELEVEN remake, is a by-the-numbers horror movie
whose only real scare comes from the sudden blast of a starter's pistol at a
swim meet. The story is one of those in which it's never clear, until the end,
who is alive and who is dead and what is a dream and what isn't. Even the ending
explanation leaves plenty of plot holes to ponder. Well, it would if the movie
weren't so instantly forgettable.
Melissa Sagemiller (GET OVER IT), Wes Bentley (AMERICAN BEAUTY), Eliza Dushku
(BRING IT ON) and Casey Affleck (AMERICAN PIE 2) play young lovers Cassie, Matt,
Annabel and Sean. Students at Middleton College in the town of Middleton,
undoubtedly smack dab in the middle of America, the four kids form two love
triangles. One night, when an ominous full moon gives way to a torrential
downpour, the kids drive and argue along a slippery and twisting mountain road.
Not looking properly, they careen into another car of kids, and one or more of
them are killed. After that we have numerous flashbacks to the events
surrounding the accident as well as imaginary sightings of dead people and lots
of non-existent blood.
Along the way people say trite little things to encourage the survivors. As
Father Jude, Luke Wilson comforts one by saying, "It's difficult to be a
survivor, but it's up to God who lives and who dies."
About the only reason to see SOUL SURVIVORS is if you are desperate for a guilty
pleasure. Carpenter tosses in a few erotic scenes, but ones that are in no
danger of threatening his film's PG-13 rating. The most explicit of these has
two girls taking a shower together. Don't worry. They stay fully clothed at all
times.
Question number eight on one of the student's quizzes contains the phrase,
"Abandon all hope ye who enter in." This would be good advice for those who
decide to see this movie.
SOUL SURVIVORS runs 1:25. It is rated PG-13 for "terror/violence, sexuality and
some substance abuse," and would be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
The film opens in nationwide release today, Friday, September 7, 2001.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
