Title
Review for Chasers (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael J. Legeros
MPAA Rating   "R" (presumably for language, nudity, sex, and crew-cuts) 
Running Time  112 minutes 
     Sad is the day when a new film from Dennis Hopper-- the man who 
helped defined a generation with EASY RIDER-- is heralded with hardly any  
fanfare.  Granted, CHASERS is not exactly industrial-strength movie- 
making, but Hopper's first film (as a director) since THE HOT SPOT is an  
mildly agreeable road-pic about a pair of Navy men (Berenger and  
McNamara) who run into trouble escorting a military prisoner back to  
base.  Shades of THE LAST DETAIL?  Not exactly. 
     The story introduces Eddie Devane (McNamara)-- a swaggering smooth-
talker assigned to "chaser duty" on the day before his discharge. His 
orders are to report to gruff security officer "Rock" Reilly (Berenger) 
and assist in the transport of a "dangerous" prisoner from Camp Lejeune.  
What neither man knows is that their cargo (Eleniak) is female and better  
suited to the pages of Playboy than prison. That small surprise turns  
into a big problem when the boys discover that appearances are quite  
deceiving. 
     There isn't much of a plot to CHASERS, and the script's idea of  
sophistication is clogging a fuel tank with tampons. What little story  
there *is* disappears somewhere in the second hour, but that's no problem  
because the leads are okay and they keep the chemistry going when the  
plot isn't. 
     McNamara is the best of the bunch and the only one with anything  
resembling a character. He's fun to watch because he recalls a younger  
Tom Cruise with his doesn't-have-a-clue-and-doesn't-know-it smile.  
Berenger glares and growls through his "role" and Eleniak weakly smiles  
through hers. To be fair, the actress tries her hand at a couple moving  
monologues. Key word: *tries.* 
     They hit the road in Jacksonville, North Carolina, and start south 
on a trip teeming with local color. Hopper's hopper is filled with 
monster trucks and BBQ huts and sign after sign for yet *another* Baptist 
church.  Anyone who's travelled the length of coastal Carolina can 
appreciate a fist-fight staged on a tacky miniature-golf green. (Is there 
any other kind?) 
     The fringe also features a bevy of bit-parts including Hopper as a  
travelling salesman with more than just fabric samples in his trunk; Gary  
Busey as a Navy-hating marine; Dean Stockwell as a golf-playing Porsche  
salesman; and Crispin Glover as McNamara's nervous partner-in-crime. 
     Together, they make one happy family that keeps CHASERS from sinking  
lower than it should. 

Author
Tim Voon
Directed by Dennis Hopper, Written by Jon Batteer, John Rice and Dan
Gilroy Cast Tom Berenger William McNamara, Erika Eleniak, Crispin
Glover, Dean Stockwell, Gary Busey, Seymour Cassell, Federic Forrest,
Marilu Henner, Dennis Hopper
This movie is a poor excuse for a comedy. There is no plot and plenty of
running about with nothing better to do (I guess that's why they called
it CHASERS because there is no other relation to the plot that I can
see.)
The story revolves around two navy officers (Berenger and McNamara) who
are assigned to transport a beautiful, young female navy officer
(Eleniak) to her court martial. She tries to escape numerous times; they
fall in a pit where they all have to strip in order to escape; the
younger officer (McNamara) sleeps with his prisoner (totally unethical),
then falls in love with her and, the Captain (Berenger) takes pity on
them and helps them to escape to Mexico.
All this in the name of comedy? What utter rubbish!
At least my video recorder had a good work out with my constant
thumb-pressing on the fast forward button of my remote control.
