Title
Review for Love and Death on Long Island (1997)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Love and Death on Long Island (1997)
John Hurt, Jason Priestley, Fiona Loewi, Shelia Hancock, Maury Chaykin. 
Directed by Richard Kwietniowski. 93 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 4 stars (out of 5 stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
"Love and Death on Long Island" is being described as a comedy, which 
isn't the right term. The film has many funny moments, to be sure, but 
the dramatic themes are far more dominate than the humor. "Love and 
Death" focuses on obsession, compulsion, deception and shame as it 
presents a dark, absolutely riveting character study of a very lost man.
John Hurt, in the performance of a lifetime, plays Giles De'Ath, a stuffy 
British writer who seems to come from another era. The painfully reserved 
widower leads a quiet life, far removed from modern technology and pop 
culture. Early in the film, an interviewer asks him "Does the 20th 
century play any part in your life?" and the answer is clearly No. 
That is, until the day Giles locks himself out of his house and takes 
refuge from the rain at a neighborhood cinema. Instead of seeing an 
adaptation of an E.M. Forster novel, he goes into the wrong theater and 
finds himself watching a "Porky's" style adolescent sex romp called 
"Hotpants College II." Staring in disbelief at the puerile onscreen 
antics, Giles snorts in disgust and prepares to leave in a huff, until he 
catches a glimpse at the vision of actor Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestley.
) Watching the defeated Bostock lying on the counter of a soda shop, 
covered in ketchup by the bad guys, Giles is thunderstruck by the beauty 
of the young man and the pose, which to his eyes resembles Henry Wallis' 
romantic Pre-Raphaelite painting "The Death of Chatterton."
Desperately smitten, the author finds himself obsessed with all things 
Bostock. He shoplifts teen magazines featuring Ronnie, too embarrassed to 
purchase the gushy fan rags aimed at young girls. Determined to see the 
actor's other works, he is forced into the modern age, buying a VCR (the 
installer has to explain that Giles will also need a television set to 
use the device) and suffering the smirks of video clerks when he 
sheepishly asks for Ronnie's other two films, "Tex Mex" and "Skidmarks." 
Back at his stately home, Giles locks himself away from his housekeeper, 
clipping photos and articles on the actor and lovingly pasting them into 
a scrapbook, carefully hand-labeled "Bostockiana." 
Giles' obsession becomes all-consuming, leading him to travel across the 
ocean to the actor's hometown on Long Island. Over the course of weeks, 
he methodically tracks down Ronnie's girlfriend Audrey (Fiona Loewi) and 
befriends the bright young model, in hopes of building a relationship 
with the actor on his next home visit.
The film, based on a novel by British film critic Gilbert Adair, does a 
remarkable job of placing us in the mind of Giles De'Ath. Thanks to a 
fine script and Hurt's dead-on performance, it's easy to understand the 
exhilaration Giles feels as he is reborn through his one-sided romance. 
We share the embarrassment and shame as the closeted writer attempts to 
hide his orientation from others. 
The film presents a harrowing portrait of obsession, as Giles' world 
becomes increasingly focused on Ronnie, to the point where it obscures 
all else, including his integrity. Giles doesn't even attempt to justify 
the stalking and all the lies; they are simply tools in his quest. When 
his house of cards eventually comes crashing down and his comprehension 
finally returns, all he can do is gasp "What have I done?"  
Hurt's phenomenally detailed acting is complimented by Jason Priestley's 
earnest performance as Ronnie. Thankfully, Priestley doesn't play Ronnie 
as being dumb. Instead, Bostock comes across as well-intentioned, kind-
hearted and most of all, unfinished. It's possible that Ronnie may well 
become as important an actor as Giles claims he already is, but we can't 
tell for sure because Ronnie is a work in progress. The same is probably 
true of Priestley himself.
Fiona Loewi is impressive as Audrey, giving the character welcome nuance 
and intelligence. It would have been so easy for her to play Audrey as a 
stereotypical vapid model. Instead, she is the most perceptive character 
in the story. One of the film's most striking sequences comes when, in a 
moment of shivering realization, she casts away Giles' web of deceit, 
turns to him and says, in the starkest of tones, "God, you're good." 
All of this is not to discount the film's humor. "Love and Death on Long 
Island" is often a very funny movie, but there is so much more going on 
here that advertising the film simply as a comedy is not only inaccurate, 
it does a disservice to the depth of the story. Enjoy the laughs, but 
don't overlook one of the most compelling, and often disturbing, 
character studies to come along in quite a while.

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Richard Kwietniowsk || Screenplay: Richard Kwietniowsk (based on the
novel by Gilbert Adair) || Stars: John Hurt (Giles De'Ath), Jason Priestley
(Ronnie Bostock), Fiona Loewi (Audrey), Sheila Hancock (Mrs. Barker), Maury
Chaykin (Irv), Gawn Grainger (Henry), Elizabeth Quinn (Mrs. Reed) || MPAA
Rating: PG-13
Humans are strange, emotional creatures, and sometimes we react to each other in
unexpected ways. It is easy for a person to become caught up, fascinated with
someone else, often blurring the line between interest and obsession. With the
advent of movies and television, it has become even easier, because the screen
gives us a plethora of beautiful, fascinating subjects to observe and wonder
about. What else explains all the fan clubs, teen picture magazines, fan mail,
Web sites, and girls who cry when they see Leonardo DiCaprio?
"Love and Death on Long Island" is about this very subject, but it goes about it
in a peculiar and surprising way. The object of affection is a B-movie star
named Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestly), who stars in cheesy flicks with titles
like "Hotpants College II" and "Skid Marks." The person who is so taken with him
is a stuffy, British intellectual author named Giles De'Ath (John Hurt), who
discovers Ronnie only because he accidentally goes into a theater showing
"Hotpants College II," instead of the latest adaptation of an E.M. Forester
novel.
Giles is a secluded man, a reclusive widower who has buried himself in his
mahogany office, surrounded by books. As a man resistant to change, he doesn't
so much despise technology as he ignores it. He doesn't own a television, a VCR,
a microwave, or an answering machine. He refuses to give interviews, and spends
all his time hand-writing long, probably unreadable books about distant academic
subjects. He is the last man in the world who would become obsessed with a bad
American actor, which is what makes the entire premise of the film both
hilarious and poignant. Here is an unreachable man whose armor is cracked in the
most unexpected way.
Giles' obsession with Ronnie is never fully explained, nor should it be. Some
will narrowly interpret it as homosexual love, but I think it's bigger than
that. There is never an instance in the film where Giles seems interested in sex
- he is simply fascinated by Ronnie. He returns to the theater to see "Hotpants
College II," and then begins to research. He discovers Ronnie's picture
plastered all over fan magazines like "Sugar," the title of which proudly
declares it "The #1 British girls magazine." Giles is so embarrassed about
buying it, he wraps it up in another magazine to hide it.
Giles then looks up Ronnie's other movies on video, which prompts him to buy a
VCR. When the delivery boy arrives with the new machine, he is quite surprised
to find that Giles doesn't realize the necessity of a TV to make the VCR work.
After seeing the other two movies Ronnie has starred in as well as a really bad
sitcom, Giles decides to find the man himself. As part of the trivia gleaned
from the fan 'zines, Giles learns that Ronnie lives on Long Island in New York.
There's an amusing dream sequence where Giles imagines that he's on a British
game show, answering trivia questions about Ronnie "life work," such as what his
dog's name is and what he has a weakness for (pizza with extra anchovies).
"Love and Death on Long Island" is an odd, but thoroughly insightful, touching,
and entertaining film. The first half is funny in a goofy kind of way. We watch
Giles hide the teen fan magazines from his maid and watch bad straight-to-video
movies with the misguided interpretive eye of a Shakespearean critic. There's
another funny sequence when he's supposed to be lecturing on "The Death of the
Future," and ends up rambling on a tangent about the subtleties of acting (with
Ronnie in mind, of course).
The second half of the film is more thoughtful and pointed, when Giles finally
meets Ronnie and his fiancee, a likable model named Audrey (Fiona Loewi). Giles
tries to convince Ronnie that he can be more than what he is, that his career
deserves better than the next sequel to "Hotpants College." But, even as Giles
is saying the words, we know as surely as Ronnie does that it's not right. No
matter how intense Gile's fascination is, Ronnie is not a great actor and
probably never will be.
The strength of the film is in its cast, especially John Hurt. He creates a
wonderfully memorable character in Giles - a dignified man of superior intellect
who finally discovers his weakness. Hurt's performance simply embues intellect,
distinction, and a disdain for all things non-academic. In his tweed jackets and
wide ties, Hurt is utterly believable when he still refers to the movies as
"pictures."
As Ronnie, Jason Priestly displays a fine knack for serious acting, even if he
is essentially parodying his own teen stardom from eight years of "Beverly Hills
90210." But, let's not forget that Johnny Depp got a cinematic jump-start in
John Waters' "Cry-Baby" (1990), parodying his stardom from "21 Jump Street."
Priestly certainly holds his own during the film's most important moments near
the end of the film, where much is said but not spoken between Giles and Ronnie.


Author
Matt Williams
An obsessive stalker seems an unlikely comedic hero, but the recent
comedy Love and Death on Long Island actually manages to pull it off, to
a little extent.  Though it gets awkward at times, the film is mildly
amusing.
Giles De'Ath (John Hurt) is a reclusive London author who has eschewed
most modern conveniences in favor of a simpler life.  However, a
disruptive set of circumstances sets Giles off to watch the latest E.M.
Forster film when he stumbles upon a trashy teen flick, Hotpants College
II. Dismayed at first by his mistake, Giles is soon transfixed by the
actor in one of the film's smaller roles: teen heartthrob Ronnie Bostock
(Jason Priestley).
At first it seems just a passing fancy, but soon Giles' desire to know
all things Bostock turns into an obsession.  He sets out for Long
Island, where he begins to stalk (though with good intentions) the teen
idol and his supermodel fiancee, Audrey (Fiona Loewi).
John Hurt gives a delightful performance of a confused man faced with an
inexplicable obsession.  He has two wellsprings of humor: his
unfamiliarity with the modern conveniences of life, as well as the
convolutions he must go through to self-justify his crush (watching him
expound on the artistic merit of such Bostock classics as Tex-Mex and
Skidmarks is a hoot).
For his part, Jason Priestley gives a richer performance than you
expect, even though he's playing a vapid teen idol with little talent
beyond his looks.  His Ronnie Bostock is a limited actor who doesn't
quite understand his limitations, and yearns for more.  Priestley adds
subtlety to a role which could easily have been a simple stereotype.
The script, written by director Richard Kwietniowski, is at its best
when it is light and comical.  But, given the subject of a film like
this, you know it can't end well.  Given that, Love and Death on Long
Island pulls out a better ending than you might expect, but it is still
an uncomfortable one.
But, though it has its share of faults, there are several amusing
moments throughout the film.  It's probably not worth hunting down in
it's limited release theater, but as a second-choice video rental, this
one might fit the bill.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Jon Popick
Two time Academy Award nominee John Hurt (Midnight Express and The
Elephant Man) and two time Golden Globe nominee Jason Priestley (Beverly
Hills, 90210) have finally joined forces to make a film.  Given their
powerful fan base and undeniable charisma, it was certainly bound to
happen sooner or later.
Hurt plays Giles De'Ath (insert joke here), an uptight London recluse
who only communicates with a few snooty friends and his housekeeper.
One day, De'Ath locks himself out of his apartment during a thunderstorm
and, while waiting for a spare key to arrive, notices a billboard for
the latest film adaptation of a E.M. Forester novel.  To keep dry, he
goes to the local multiplex, but accidentally stumbles in to the theater
showing Hot Pants College 2.  Instead of being turned off by the
disgusting American filth, De'Ath finds himself strangely and
inexplicably transfixed to actor Ronnie Bostock (Priestley).
Unable to erase Bostock's image from his mind, De'Ath starts to collect
teenybopper magazines featuring his image.  He carefully clips the
photos and puts them into a scrapbook titled `Bostockiana'.  De'Ath also
buys tapes of Bostock's previous work, but has no TV or VCR to watch
them.  In a particularly funny scene, he takes a trip to the local
mega-appliance store and inadvertently mistakes a microwave for a
television before a bewildered employee.
The next `logical' step in his obsession is to travel to the sleepy Long
Island town where Bostock lives.  He befriends Bostock's live-in lover
(Fiona Loewi), who is impressed by De'Ath's remarkable knowledge of her
boyfriend's relatively unimpressive career.  The two finally meet in a
strange mismatch of age and culture.  Talk about an unconventional
story!
Writer/Director Richard Kwietniowski has certainly crafted an unusual
feature film debut.  He has given Hurt, who is probably best known for
having the Alien burst from his chest, his best role in years.  I was
going to say his strangest role in years, but then I remembered the
wealthy freak he played in Contact, which wasn't too long ago at all.
The perpetually sideburned Priestley, on the other hand, may or may not
be acting as the idiot American hunk.  His part must have been written
for him or some dolt just like him.
Love and Death garnered Kwietniowski a Golden Camera nominee (for
direction) at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival and also won praise at the
Chicago International Film Festival.  It will probably find a larger
audience (and onto more screens) in Canada, where Priestley calls home.
I wouldn't hold my breath waiting for the commercial during 90210.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Richard Kwietniowski
Cast: John Hurt, Jason Priestley, Fiona Loewi, Sheila Hancock, Maury
Chaykin
Screenplay: Richard Kwietniowski
Producers: Steve Clark-Hall, Christopher Zimmer
Runtime: 103 min.
US Distribution: Cinepix 
Rated PG-13: brief strong language, sex, thematic elements
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I think many will miss the point of Love and Death on Long Island.  I
do not say this condescendingly; I say this because I think that, in
order to completely understand what the characters do in this film, you
almost have to have been there yourself at some point in your life.  And
I'm not sure that everyone has the capacity to do what the main
character, Giles De'Ath, does here.  If you watch carefully, though, and
digest all that the picture has to offer, perhaps you'll find yourself
understanding something that you might not have even considered before.
Love and Death is a beautiful, touching film--intelligently funny,
perfectly acted, and absolutely realistic in every sense of the word. 
It had me deeply interested from the very beginning, and it's the kind
of film that manages to surprise you with realism and character
development.  This is also the kind of film that engages themes and
ideas in such a complete way that you'll be discussing and thinking
about the film long after it's over.
John Hurt, in what is perhaps the best performance of his lengthy and
distinguished career, plays aging British writer Giles De'Ath.  He's one
of those detached artists who refuses to acknowledge anything that has
to do with progress and technology; consequently, he doesn't know the
difference between a microwave and a VCR.  One day, after locking
himself out of his house, Giles decides to take shelter in a movie
theater, where he thinks he's going to see a film based on an E.M.
Foster novel.  He stumbles into the wrong theater, and is subjected to
Hotpants College II, a puerile film that obviously doesn't interest him.
Just as he's getting up to leave, he sees an actor that catches his
eye;  his name is Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestly).  Giles instantly
develops a fixation on the young man.  He buys magazines intended for
teenage girls to find pictures of and articles about him, which he
organizes into a a scrapbook.  He buys a television and a VCR just so he
can rent all of Ronnie's films.  Giles even dreams about him at night,
fantasizing that he's a participant on a game show that asks questions
specifically about Ronnie Bostock.  
After he's had enough of this, Giles finally heads overseas to Long
Island.   Through a series of actions that come dangerously close to
stalking, he finally meets Ronnie's fiancée, Audrey (Fiona Loewi). 
Audrey is fascinated with Giles, and invites him to meet Ronnie.  When
Giles and Ronnie finally meet, Giles explains his belief that Ronnie has
rare talent, and that he has a screenplay in mind for which Ronnie would
be perfect.
Even on the surface, there's nothing familiar or tired about Love and
Death on Long Island.  Written and directed by Richard Kwietniowski
(based on the novel by Gilbert Adair), the film is packed with of
details and intelligent subtleties.   Kwietniowski is clearly a man who
has been in a position similar to Giles', and his understanding of what
Giles feels is key to the success of this film.  At first, Giles
understands his obsession is ridiculous:  he's terribly concerned that
people may see him pick up a copy of Sugar at the magazine rack; when he
goes to see Ronnie's film over and over again, he can't even bring
himself to say the name of the picture.
But Giles' burst of emotions near the end of the film is not the
slightest bit difficult to accept or understand:  here is a man who has
been married for almost his entire life, and, suddenly, he has
inexplicable feelings towards a man of less than half his age.  Hurt's
performance here is dignified and extremely moving; he brings grace and
incredible comic timing to each of his scenes.  He delivers his clever
dialogue the way only a pro can manage.  He ornaments the performance
with physical and verbal nuances that help to create the round and
fascinating character that Giles is.
Priestly also gives a great performance as the disgruntled actor;  he
manages to satirize his own previous Beverly Hills, 90210 image in
playing a teen idol who stars in second-rate films, including Tex Mex
and Skid Marks (which gets its title from this line of dialogue: 
"You're the skid marks on the underpants of life!").  
The film is profoundly funny in its dry, British way.  When a diner
owner (Maury Chaykin) finds out that Giles is from London, he wonders if
Giles has ever run into a guy named Stan Brickowski.  A line like this
is initially funny because of its obvious absurdity;  when you think
about it, though, you realize that you, too, have probably asked someone
from a different region if they know someone that you know from that
particular region, even though the chances of it are essentially
non-existent.  It takes clear insight into the minds of people to be
able to make jokes out of this kind of material.
But what sends Love and Death beyond the threshold of greatness is its
themes.   This is a film that recognizes the true, uncontrollable chaos
of love.  It realizes that love makes no sense, and that it can occur
between any two people.  It ignores social trappings and gender
stereotypes, and deals with Giles in such a way that we can understand
him despite the uniqueness of his situation.  This film is so deeply
successful in illustrating its themes that it's impossible to walk away
from the picture without carrying new insight into the varied dynamics
that human relationships often have.
There are some standard genres of comedy into which Love and Death
would easily fit -- the film is so potent and intelligent as a comedy
that one could ignore its themes and enjoy it simply for the
entertainment it provides.  But this is a film that does so much more
than entertains:  it clearly illustrates a part of human nature that a
vast majority of the world ignores entirely.  It takes genius to realize
such a theme and create a funny and moving film to put forth the ideas. 
Love and Death on Long Island is a wonderful film that everyone should
see and take seriously down to its most subtle detail.  

Author
Greg King
From first time writer/director Richard Kwietniowski comes
this droll, delightfully entertaining and dry fish out of water tale.
Based on Gilbert Adair's cult novel, long thought to be unfilmable,
Love And Death On Long Island is also a contemporary, lightweight
reworking of Death In Venice, albeit with a far more comic bent.
Giles De 'Ath (John Hurt) is a reclusive, high brow British
novelist, who disdains much of the technology of the twentieth
century.  His home is devoid of many of the devices that most of us
take for granted, and he still punches out his stories on an old
manual type writer.  "I'm a writer.  I write.  I don't process words,"
he says tartly in a rare radio interview.  But he is reluctantly
dragged into the twentieth century when he sees a dreadful American
teen movie by mistake.
One day when he accidentally locks himself out of his flat,
Giles wanders into the local multiplex, hoping to see an E M Forster
adaptation.  He wanders into the wrong cinema and instead finds
himself watching Hotpants College II, a dreadful adolescent comedy
that makes Porky's look sophisticated.  He is about to walk out when
he sees Ronnie Bostock (Beverley Hills 90210's Jason Priestley) in a
bit part.  He becomes obsessed with the handsome young actor.  Before
long, Giles is tracking down his earlier films, with equally dire
titles like Skid Marks and Tex Mex, and learning everything he can
about Bostock from reading teen magazines.
Eventually he makes an uncharacteristic decision, and flies
off to Long Island to try and track down Bostock.  It is the beginning
of a strange and unusual, but ultimately doomed, friendship between
the articulate and witty De 'Ath and the handsome but gormless Ronnie.
Giles also tries to prevent Ronnie from marrying his long time girl
friend Audrey (Fiona Loewi).
Love And Death is a poignant and comic fable about a
magnificent obsession.  But the film also explores the clash of
cultures - between the older generation and the young, between Britain
and America, and between the literary world and the shallow
pretensions of the movie industry.  There are some wonderful scenes as
De 'Ath comes to terms with the bewildering technology of the
twentieth century.  There is another hilarious scene when the
supercilious author wanders into a video store to check out some of
Bostock's previous works, much to the bemusement and glee of the
clerk.
But the film seems to come to an abrupt, almost unsatisfactory
conclusion, and it seems as though Kwietniowski had no idea how to
resolve this painfully doomed mismatch.
Hurt has made a career of playing eccentrics, and he is
magnificent here.  His usually pained expression works a treat, and
gives his least mannered performance for quite some time.  He seems to
revel in the sly, acerbic dialogue.  And while the pompous Giles finds
himself in some embarrassing situations, Hurt never allows him to
become a ridiculous figure.  Priestley's film career has not exactly
been a success, but he seems quite comfortable with his role as the
male bimbo, and enjoys this opportunity to send up his own image.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Thomas Mann's short intense psychological novel DEATH IN VENICE is
unlikely material for a contemporary comedy-drama.  And while nothing
in the credits or publicity acknowledges the connection, that would
seem that that is the basis for this updated story taking place in
London and Long Island.
     Giles De'Ath (played by John Hurt) is one of the great living
English authors, his ivory tower insulating him from anything modern,
just the way he likes it.  An unlikely series of events puts him in a
movie theater showing a cinematic trifle called HOT PANTS COLLEGE II.
Giles is about to turn away from the film in disgust when he notices
Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestley).  Bostock is an attractive young actor
who simply put infatuates Giles.
     Now Giles has a reason to get interested in the technology of the
20th Century.  He wants to see all of Bostock's films.  Like a fish out
of water he wades in to try to understand the intricacies of renting
films and of understanding the home video revolution.  He wants to see
every film ever made by Bostock.  And an unpromising assortment it is.
But Giles is unsatisfied by worshipping from afar.  Instead De'Ath
takes a holiday and hops a plane for the United States to find the
actor and then to insinuate himself into Bostock's life.  First he has
to find where Bostock lives.  Then he approaches first Bostock's live-
in girlfriend, Audrey (Fiona Loewi).  And finally he will move in on
Bostock himself.  None of this is easy for the man in both an
unfamiliar place and time.  Audrey is impressed by the stature of this
famous writer so fascinated by her boyfriend, but she little guesses
the trouble it can cause.
     The major attraction of the film is John Hurt's performance, which
manages to combine sinister and pitiable aspects.  He is a stalker
bedeviled by his ignorance of the modern world.  The film is an uneasy
mix of the resulting comic situations with the tragedy of the Thomas
Mann novel.  It is not clear how much comic potential this story could
have had, but Richard Kwietniowski's screenplay and direction seem
leaden.  The humor is just a bit off somehow.  Jason Priestley plays a
callow but empty actor whose questionable career echoes his Priestley's
own.  Fiona Loewi has a little more depth to her part, but it clearly
is Hurt's film for whatever he can salvage from it.
     The film is shot by Oliver Curtis who manages to give three
distinct visual styles to the film, one for London, one for Long
Island, and a third one for the excerpts we see of Bostock's crude
filmography.

Author
Michael Rich
Directed by: Richard Kwietniowski
Written by : Richard Kwietniowski, based on a novel by Gilbert Adair
        Love and Death on Long Island, based on a novel by Gilbert Adair, is the
story of an eccentric
British author, Giles De'ath, played by John Hurt, who is completely
disconnected from the world around
him. He understands neither the simple conveniences of modern life nor the
interactions which a modern
man makes with those conveniences. To him, a microwave oven may as well be a
VCR, and the necessity
of a television in order to watch a videotape is a surprise.
        The movie begins with a voice monologue by De'ath, who informs us that
he is about to tell a
story, but he doesn't know how to start because he already knows the end and we
do not. So, he begins
with the end of another story. Or so he says. We initially see Giles
participating in his first radio
interview, and making a fool out of himself by the comic extent to which he is
out of touch with reality.
        Fortunately, this modestly humorous beginning does not foretell the rest
of the movie. In fact,
while the fish out of water episodes that dot the movie do provide some comic
relief, the idea of someone
trying to come to terms with the modern trappings of society is an age-old tale
and thankfully does not
provide the centerpiece here. Instead, this is the story of a man coming to
terms with loneliness and
isolation, and the way he finds an escape from it.
        The vehicle for Giles' transformation is teen heartthrob Ronnie Bostock,
played by Beverly Hills
90210's own Jason Priestley. Giles first encounters Bostock while attempting to
see his first film in years,
a screen adaptation of E.M. Forster's work. Through a mix-up, De'ath ends up in
the wrong movie, a teen
flic in the spirit of Meatballs and Revenge of the Nerds. About to  leave the
movie in disgust, Giles sees
Bostock, covered with ketchup, tragically splayed out on the counter. De'ath is
fascinated, and proceeds to
purchase, steal, and rent anything he can to immerse himself in "Bostockiana."
Finally, at the urging of
his agent, worried about his client's detachment from his work, Giles decides to
take a vacation to
Chesterfield, Long Island, home of Ronnie Bostock and his girlfriend.
        To tell anything more would be to ruin the story, but let me simply say
that Giles' fascination
with Bostock is intense, complete, and brilliantly painted. Giles wants to take
control of Bostock's career
and take him to the top of the film world. He sees in Bostock a talent analogous
to Shakespeare's and
believes that his talent will be wasted without Giles' close guidance.
        In the hands of any other actor, Giles' obsession with Bostock may have
come across as
incomprehensible. All logic argues against his feelings, but Hurt's completely
believable and subtle
performance renders Giles' unquestioning love real. Every tic and every facial
expression fleshed out the
character of Giles De'ath. By the end, I felt for De'ath like I would a real
human being, and I can hope for
nothing more than that from any great performance.
        While the movie is without question a one-man show, Priestley managed to
impress me by his
portrayal of Bostock. Possibly drawing on his own desire to become a "serious
actor," Priestley solidly
depicts Bostock's hopes and aspirations. In fact, the complexity of his acting
in the crucial, climactic
scene showed me that he might be able to make it on the big screen in more meaty
roles. As Bostock's
girlfriend, however, Fiona Loewi gives only a serviceable performance, but the
script never allows her
character never gets off the ground.
        In the end, Love and Death on Long Island is a character study. We watch
as De'ath comes to
terms with the death of his wife years before and, through his entirely
misplaced, yet entirely genuine,
love for Bostock, realizes that he not only can but must continue to live in the
world around him. Giles
travels through an arc not uncommon in movies, but on the strength of Hurt's
performance, his story rings
true with touching hope.
        Note that this is not a perfect film. Much of the humor is unnecessary,
and all the characters
beyond Bostock and De'ath come across as either cardboard cut-outs or murky
shadows. However, the
focus of the film remains so firmly on De'ath that these distractions are
ultimately unimportant. For those
willing to enjoy lots of dialogue and little action, the rewards of this film,
and John Hurt's performance,
are well worth it.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Hurt, Jason Priestley, Fiona Loewi, Shelia Hancock, 
      Maury Chaykin
Director: Richard Kwietniowski
Producers: Steve Clark-Hall, Christopher Zimmer
Screenplay: Richard Kwietniowski based on the novel by Gilbert Adair
Cinematography: Oliver Curtis
Music: Richard Grassby-Lewis
U.S. Distributor: Cinepix Film Properties
     Everyone knows someone like Giles De'Ath:  stuffy, arrogant, set in 
his ways, and at war with anything that could in any way be associated 
with "progress."  Giles is a writer, but the product of his typewriter 
is the kind of scholarly stuff that is immediately put onto library 
stacks where it can gather dust until some graduate student needs 
another reference for his or her thesis.  His house looks like an 
immaculate museum  with no television, microwave, word processor, or 
other technological gadgets, only the electric lights betray that he's 
living in the twentieth century, not the nineteenth. 
     This is the kind of role that could easily be turned into a flat 
stereotype, but John Hurt, in what is certainly his best performance in 
a decade and possibly the most impressive of his long and distinguished 
career, turns "erstwhile fogy" Giles into a three-dimensional human 
being.  Despite his tunnel vision, it's impossible not to like the man, 
especially after his entire being is transformed by that singular 
affliction to which no one is immune:  love.  And, as Giles discovers 
during the course of this amusing, warm-hearted motion picture, it's 
possible to find the object of one's affection in the most unusual 
places.
     Giles, who is a widower and a recluse, does not frequent the 
cinema, but when he learns that an E.M. Forster film is playing at the 
local theater, he screws up his courage and decides to go.  What he 
doesn't realize is that the movie house is showing two films:  the 
Forster adaptation and a teen exploitation flick called HOTPANTS COLLEGE 
II.  A nonplused Giles ends up sitting in a darkened room watching buff 
male and female bodies in various states of undress.  Just as Giles is 
about to leave, however, he notices Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestley), 
and, suddenly, it's love at first sight.  Giles is enraptured, and the 
moment HOTPANTS COLLEGE II is over, he beings to scour stores for 
Bostock memorabilia, including teen magazines and video tapes.  (In 
order to watch those tapes, Giles must buy a VCR, but he initially 
doesn't realize that he needs a TV to use the VCR.)
     Eventually, not satisfied with being the world's foremost authority 
on Bostock, Giles boards a plane and travels to Long Island, where his 
idol's home is located.  Bostock is away when Giles arrives, but the 
wily Englishman manages to befriend Ronnie's supermodel girlfriend, 
Audrey (Fiona Loewi).  Eventually, the actor arrives home and, impressed 
with Giles' demeanor and intelligence, he begins to rely on the older 
man's advice.  But, while Giles' affection runs deep, Ronnie's feelings 
are less constant.
     LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND is a comedy, and a very funny one at 
that.  In fact, for its first half, the film is nearly-perfect.  It 
suffers a fall-off once Giles reaches New York, and the ending, with its 
none-too-subtle homosexual overtones, is a little too overbearing for 
the lighthearted material that precedes it.  In his gently satirical 
approach to popular culture and movie stardom, writer/director Richard 
Kwietniowski, adapting from the novel by Gilbert Adair, is 100% on-
target.  In the process, he not only creates a truly likable and 
memorable character in Giles, but says a few things about the 
transforming power of love, even if it is unrequited.
     From start to finish, this is clearly Hurt's movie  he's in almost 
every frame.  It's a role that the veteran actor must have relished, 
because he makes Giles an unforgettable motion picture figure, and does 
so by means of dialogue delivery, body language, and ever-changing 
facial expressions.  Jason Priestley, cashing in on his BEVERLY HILLS 
90210 image, is surprisingly effective as the shallow Ronnie.  He is 
charismatic, and it's not hard to understand why Giles is attracted to 
Ronnie.  Meanwhile, solid support is provided by the appealing Fiona 
Loewi and the always-reliable Maury Chaykin.
     LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND is many things wrapped into one: a 
social commentary (it tackles the thorny issue of film as pure art 
versus film as mindless entertainment), a buddy picture/love story 
(Ronnie and Giles have one of the most interesting relationships found 
anywhere on a movie screen these days), and a "fish out of water" tale 
(Victorian relic Giles forced into the modern world).  Yet, despite the 
many laughs LOVE AND DEATH offers, it never takes cheap shots.  It has a 
vibrant, beating heart  and that makes the comedy all the more 
worthwhile.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Scott Renshaw
LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND
(Lions Gate)
Starring:  John Hurt, Jason Priestley, Fiona Loewi, Maury Chaykin.
Screenplay:  Richard Kwietniowski, based on the novel by Gilber Adair.
Producer:  Steve Clark-Hall.
Director:  Richard Kwietniowski.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In one scene from LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND, protagonist Giles
De'Ath (John Hurt) articulates the film's theme fairly blatantly.  A
widowed British author who studiously avoids all things modern -- or, more
precisely, all things _period_ -- De'Ath has recently had a completely
inadvertent life-changing experience.  Intending to see the latest E.M.
Forster adaptation at the local cinema, he wanders instead into "Hotpants
College II."  Just as he is preparing to walk out of the teen sex romp in
disgust, De'Ath spies one of the film's secondary characters, played by
actor Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestley).  Immediately De'Ath becomes
obsessed with the young star, collecting photos, reading fan magazine
articles and even purchasing a VCR to watch other Bostock gems like "Tex
Mex" and "Skid Marks."  It is this infatuation which prompts De'Ath to
remark to his agent about "the discovery of beauty where no one ever
thought to look for it.
     I'm sure that message was not meant specifically for film critics,
but it's a shoe which may fit anyway.  Much of the humor in the first half
of LOVE AND DEATH -- and this is, it should be clear, a very sharp comedy
-- comes from De'Ath's embarassment over the object of his interest.  He
locks his clippings away in a drawer out of sight of his housekeeper; he
goes to see "Hotpants College II" a second time yet can't bring himself to
utter the title to the box office attendant.  The whole business seems
even more shameful to a man of letters who should know better than to
watch a film described in a critical summary as having "no redeeming
qualities whatsoever."  Ronnie Bostock, in the popular parlance, is a
"guilty pleasure."
     It's the whole idea of a "guilty pleasure" which LOVE AND DEATH takes
to task.  Though it doesn't take a literary scholar to realize that
"Hotpants College II" isn't E. M. Forster, it isn't E. M. Forster who
pulls De'Ath from his self-imposed exile from the world.  When he launches
into a tangent on film acting at a lecture, he may simply be swooning over
Ronnie, but he is also attacking a subject with a passion.  As perfectly
geared towards satire as the phony films-within-a-film may be (complete
with familiar grainy photography and credits like "A Huck Murphy Film"),
you're forced to move past mocking giggles to acknowledging the genuinely
intense response De'Ath feels.
     The credit for that belongs largely to John Hurt, who gives a career
performance.  It's a role which must be perfectly pitched to be
sympathetic, because De'Ath is, to be frank, a celebrity stalker.  His
eventual encounter with Ronnie, in which he builds the middling thespian
into "a young Olivier," could have come off as the manipulative lies of a
man trying to seduce the object of his obsession.  Hurt makes De'Ath
absolutely sincere, even if he is the only one who could possibly see
greatness in Ronnie.  In LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND, a man finds
greatness in a place he never thought to look, in "Hotpants College II."
There's a lesson in there for those who too quickly dismiss the passionate
response of others towards an artistic work, especially when they don't
share the passion.  Such epiphanies are too rare to restrict to the places
we're _supposed_ to find epiphanies.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Love and Death on Long Island sounds like the title of a Woody Allen movie.
 Instead, it's a story of one man's journey to self-discovery through the
liberating powers of popular culture.
 Giles De'Ath is an uptight, isolated English writer ill at-ease with the
20th century and most of its advances, especially those electronic.
 For the first time in almost 20 years, Giles decides to see a movie, an
adaptation of an E.M. Forster novel, or so he thinks. He accidentally buys
a ticket for Hotpants College 2, a mindless American comedy. And it is the
experience of watching this film and its teen-age star, Ronnie Bostock,
that changes Giles' life.
 Giles becomes obsessed with Ronnie and begins, furtively, acting like a
hot-blooded teeny-bopper. He buys all the teen-age fan magazines and learns
everything there is to know about the young actor.
 He then takes the bizarre step of catching a trans-Atlantic flight to New
York to somehow connive to meet Ronnie, who lives in the small, secluded
town of Chesterton on Long Island.
 When the two do connect, it changes both their lives.
 As Giles, John Hurt has latched onto his best role in years. His Giles is
priggish, a bit snobbish and uncomfortable with contemporary society. He is
clueless about and suspicious of technology. Only after he sees Ronnie's
movie does he tentatively crawl into the modern age.
 Hurt's performance is a wake-up call to how fine an actor he is. Hurt has
not had such a meaty role since The Elephant Man. His characterization is
full of inspired touches. The scene in an electronics store where he
mistakes a microwave oven for a VCR is only topped by his incomprehension
after purchasing a videocasette player and realizing he also needs a
television to make it work.
 His encounter with a video store clerk also has a deft comic feel, as he
learns about rentals and pizza coupons.
 Jason Priestley is a bit dense, yet likable as Ronnie. He is flattered by
the attention of the famous writer from England, not comprehending
everything Giles is trying to communicate to him, but knowing enough to
listen.
 First-time director Richard Kwietniowski, whose screenplay is based on a
novel by Gilbert Adair, has blended comedy, obsession and a bit of pathos
to offer a winning movie.
 This is not a film for the frivolous filmgoer. The movie is slow, with
lots of talk and not much action. It's a character study, a look at a man
dealing with an identity crisis and coming to terms with it.
 If you can be patient, you will appreciate Love and Death on Long Island.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND (director: Richard Kwietniowski; cast:
John Hurt, Jason Priestley, Fiona Loewi, Maury Chaykin, 1997-UK)
Without John Hurt's magnificent performance, he appears in every scene
and is very apealing, this film would have fallen flat on its face. He
plays a reclusive, stuffy Londonite, scholarly writer, in scorn of
modern society, living in an immaculate library-like house that has none
of the modern everyday technology most people take for granted in
America and Great Britain, such as a TV, VCR, microwave, computer, and
so on. He is stubbornly set in his ways. And as we are introduced to
him, we find him to be a bit arrogant, as well as someone who is out of
touch with reality.
He goes by the name of Giles De'Ath, which fits the prudish image this
recent widower conveys, his name also comes awfully close to being
pronounced as death is. Oddly enough, he never goes to the cinema (I
could not even imagine anyone living without going to the cinema). But
his life changes drastically after he gives a BBC interview and begins
to open up a bit; and, after talking with a colleague, he daringly goes
to see a film based on an E.M. Forster novel that is playing in a
multiplex theater. Since he has no clue about how these theaters
operate, he mistakenly ends up seeing something called HOTPANTS COLLEGE
11. Lo and behold, he at first thinks he is watching the Forster movie
and is disgusted with it, but as he is about to exit he suddenly falls
in love with one of the male stars of this soft core porn film, an
aspiring actor (Ronnie Bostock), engagingly played by Jason Priestley.
This changes his life, as he decides to become the foremost expert on
Bostock's life, researching all the films and magazine interviews he has
done. It is like he becomes a teen-ager again, hiding the filthy
magazines from his housekeeper and somehow managing to buy a VCR to
watch these films. It is amusing to see that when he gets home, he
doesn't realize that he has to have a TV to see the videos.
But this is not enough of a challenge for him, so he decides to fly to
Long Island where Bostock lives with his girlfriend, the glamorous
model, Audrey (Fiona). He uses his charm to get to meet her, and will
soon meet Bostock when he returns from L.A.. We get a tour of Long
Island (ugh!). And we watch how Giles changes, seemingly becoming a more
gentle and sensitive person, but his love is not returned by Bostock in
the physical way he wishes it returned, who handles himself with dignity
over Giles's mistaken advances. What remains interesting to ponder
further is the relationship between the two males. It is the old
opposites attract syndrome; in this case, it is trashy pop star meets a
scholar from a former century, and only the scholar falls madly in love,
as the trashy pop star is only interested in the class and knowledge
that the scholar exudes.
The comic effects of the film seem light enough, that is until the
homo-erotic pulsations become overbearing, and we are left, in the end,
with a rather awkward drama being played out, that is somehat unnerving
to behold, made plausible only by Hurt's presence as a commanding
performer. Yet it is tastefully done, but not as biting as Thomas Mann's
film version of  the same theme, DEATH IN VENICE. The message of LOVE
AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND could fit either pop or aesthetic culture,
coming to the conclusion that love is strange. I believe Mickey and
Sylvia had a 1950s hit song about that theme.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Cinepix Film Properties
 Director:  Richard Kwietniowski
 Writer:  Richard Kwietniowski
 Cast: John Hurt, Jason Priestley, Fiona Loewi, Sheila
Hancock, Maury Chaykin, Gawn Grainger, Elizabeth Quinn,
Linda Busby, Bill Leadbitter, Ann Reid
   In one scene of this film, Giles De'Ath (John Hurt)
announces its theme in a conversation with teen idol Ronnie
Bostock (Jason Priestly): "You can discover beauty and love
in unexpected places."  The central conceit is that two
opposites can form a bond of sorts, even a love however
unrequited.  "Love and Death on Long Island" features a tour
de force role for John Hurt, perhaps his best film ever.  He
seems to have cameraman Oliver Curtis on a long-chain set
of handcuffs: Hurt appears in virtually every scene.   His
performance is so professional--at once amusing and 
poignant--that we in the audience cannot tire of him, even if
the object of his affection, a teenaged movie store, ultimately
does.
   Yet another story of culture clash, a theme we have seen
recently in "The Edge" (the scholarly and passive Anthony
Hopkins teaming up with the dashing and sportive Alec
Baldwin) and in "Going All the Way" (the nerdy Jeremy
Davies finding a soulmate in the outgoing Ben Affleck), "Love
and Death" binds a duo who are radically different from each
other.  Yet you can't help believing the match.
   John Hurt inhabits the role of Giles De'Ath, a London-based
writer of scholarly books and lecturer in the museum circuit,
who enters a movie house to catch an adaptation of an E.M.
Forster novel.  Instead, the screen shows a vapid, teen-
targeted exploitation work, "Hotpants College II."  Befuddled
and bemused, De'Ath looks at his watch and is about to leave
when he catches its impossibly handsome young star, Ronnie
Bostock (Jason Priestley), and it's love at first sight.  The
aging widower shucks off his research into ethereal matters
and begins to collect what he calls Bostockiana--the star's
videos, magazine articles such as one about "Hollywood's
Most Snoggable Fellas!!" and assures his housekeeper
(Sheila Hancock) that he is too busy to have her cleaning his
room.  Flying to Long Island to meet his new hero on his
home ground, he flatters Bostock's supermodel girl friend
Audrey (Fiona Loewi) to gain entrance to Bostock's home in
Chesterton, meets the idol, and tries to persuade Ronnie to
eschew banality and return with him to Europe to pursue
arthouse fare.  "If Shakespeare were alive today, he'd be
writing 'Hotpants 3'," he assures the incredulous young man.
   "Love and Death on Long Island" scores most in its first
portion, before De'Ath leaves his London residence for the
states, in its sendup of a nineteenth-century sort of man who
is at bay with modern technology.  To capture Bostock's
movies, he buys a VCR--though he at first believes a
microwave machine can display movies--but has to be
convinced that he needs a TV set to hook it up with.  Asked
in an interview whether he has a word processor, he replies
indignantly, "I write: I do not process words."  When he sets
up an answering machine in his home, we know that the man
is driven by irrational impulses.  
   Maury Chaykin has a delightful role as the owner of the
Chesterton town dive, a salt-of-the-earth American who
assures his guest from London that he has "the best hash
browns you ever had."  "That goes without saying," responds
the newly-energized intellectual, taking a break from his
bangers and mash.
   "In Europe film can change the way people think," De'Ath
contends.  A clever and thoroughly entertaining "Love and
Death on Long Island" proves his point. Not Rated.  Running
Time: 93 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "It is difficult to know where to begin since, unlike you, I
already know the ending," John Hurt intones with his rich and melodious
voice in the opening narration to LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND.
     Filmed by Oliver Curtis with a warm autumnal palate in color
shades reminiscent of an old home movie, the film feels as old as its
protagonist while the sets remind us that the picture is set in the
present.
     John Hurt plays a British writer and widower whose name is the
easy to mispronounce Giles De'Ath.  Giles hasn't "been to the pictures
in quite some time."  Actually the entire Twentieth Century, especially
the technological revolution, seems to have skipped his house.  He
mistakes microwaves for VCRs and doesn't understand that you need a
television as well as a VCR to be able to play a video tape.
     One day he ventures into the cinema, and his life is forever
changed by a inane teen flick about "buck-naked babes" that is named
HOTPANTS COLLEGE II and is as stupid as it sounds.  The local newspaper
calls it a "puerile romp without a single redeeming feature."  (I'm
sorry to report that I've seen a lot of those lately.)
     Giles obsession with the picture has nothing to do with its
asinine plot and everything to do with one its stars, a teen idol named
Ronnie Bostock, played with bright-eyed naivete by Jason Priestley from
the television series "Beverly Hills 90210."  Giles takes one look at
him and is smitten by cupid's arrow for this "mega-dream boat," as the
teen fan magazines have labeled him.
     Soon Giles becomes obsessed with renting every one of Ronnie's
mediocre movies.  The awful dialog from these videos will elicit many a
chuckle from the audience even if no big laughs.  ("You're nothing but
a skin mark on the underpants of life."  "Hey man, don't grief out on
me.")
     The story's second act occurs on Long Island where Ronnie lives
with his girlfriend, a model played by Fiona Loewi.  Giles manages to
"accidentally" bump his way into their lives so that he can be near the
object of his affection.
     A romance with a comic veneer, the touching film meanders along
like a slow running brook with small delights, albeit no big ones, all
along the way.
     Typical of the movie's dry humor is the message that Giles puts on
his first-ever answering machine.  The caller is instructed to leave a
brief message, but only if it is extremely urgent.  The unstated
implication being that, otherwise, as Giles would say, the caller
should just "bugger off."
     LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND runs 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for
brief strong language, thematic elements and some sexual references and
would be fine for kids around 12 and up.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LOVE AND DEATH ON LONG ISLAND (Canada-UK, 1997) *** 1/3  Directed and
written by Richard Kwietniowski, based on the novel by Gilbert Adair.
Photography, Oliver Curtis. Production design, David McHenry. Editing,
Susan Shipton, Music, The Insects, Richard Grassby-Lewis. Cast: John Hurt
(Giles De'Ath), Jason Priestley (Ronnie Bostock), Fiona Loewi (Audrey),
Sheila Hancock (housekeeper Mrs. Barker), Maury Chaikin (Irving
Buckmiller), Gawn Grainger (Henry), Elizabeth Quinn (Mrs. Reed), Linda
Busby (Mrs. Abbott), Bill Leadbitter (Eldridge), Ann Reid (Maureen). A
Lions Gate release. 93 minutes. PG-13
The source novel by talented British writer and film critic Gilbert Adair
was a rather parodistic reworking of the Thomas Mann novella "Death in
Venice" told in the first person. Writer-director Kwietniowski (London-born
in 1957) reworked that reworking intelligently, sympathetically, with a
strong sense of visuals, editing and benevolent irony.
Before this, he had made about six gay-themed short films shown in several
festivals. "LDLI," his first feature, at the 1997 Cannes Fesival, received
a nomination for a Golden Camera and a special mention, as did John Hurt,
from the International Critics Association.
John Hurt is present in just about every scene. The thespian has a
marvelous track record, mostly in roles as different from one another as
they are from deja vu. Among them, in "A Man For All Seasons,"" Midnight
Express, ""The Elephant Man" (title role),"1984,""The Hit,""White
Mischief,"" Scandal,"" Rob Roy." He looks like no one else and can act like
nobody's business. Now in his  late 50s, he has the age of Giles De'Ath in
"Love and Death on Long Island."
British writer De'Ath lives in contemporary London but not in this century.
A widower (significantly, his wife was older than he, and they had no
children), he inhabits a world of books in a posh, old-fashioned apartment
where his housekeeper follows the man's clockwork routines without
intruding into his reclusive habits.
He gives no interviews, but when he is finally talked into an appearance on
BBC-Radio, it is  hilarious. Giles is befuddled by the questions, the
interviewer by the replies. De'Ath is truly out of the 20th century in
every way. "Do you use a word processor?" "I am a writer" he snaps," I
write words, I do not process them." Not that he has the foggiest about
what a processor is. Or even a typewriter.
A notation in the BBC ledger shows us just two words about the man: "fogey"
and "cult." This nagged me throughout the movie. If Giles has not a clue
about life-at-large, we don't have any about the kind of writing he does;
or why he is a figure in the literary Establishment; or what kind of cult
surrounds him, and why. Nonetheless, Giles is a hoot.
The radio interviewer had pointed out to Giles, who had not been to the
pictures in ages, that films have been made of the novels by E.M.Forster.
Later, locked out of his apartment and caught in the rain, Giles notices
such a film on a movie-house marquee and goes in. But unaware that there
are such innovations as multiplexes, he wanders into an American teen
flick, "Hotpants College 2." With comic slowness it dawns on him that
"this is not Forster." He  stands up to leave, but sees on the screen a
young performer (Jason Priestley) and  is entranced by him. Giles gets a
"coup de foudre," his first ever love-at-first-sight  and undoubtedly his
first  love ever, at any sight. The heart is a mysterious thing.
A major fixation is born. The besotted writer sees the picture again,
acting at the box-office like the traditonal, funny kid who wants to buy
condoms in a drugstore. Tracking down the name of the actor (it is Ronnie
Bostock) in comically awkward ways, he loads up on teen magazines which he
buys and disposes of as though they were pornography. He reads and
memorizes all about Ronnie, starts a cut-and-paste "Bostockiana" album.
Giles further enters pop culture by renting (more comedy here) all the
Bostock videos possible. He purchases a video-player, after first mistaking
microwave ovens for such machines, has it delivered by a stupefied young
man who explains to Giles' surprise that a TV set is required to watch the
tapes.
Passion escalates. After more research, howlers and howl-making episodes,
Giles takes off for the USA, to the Long Island village where Ronnie and
his supermodel girlfriend Audrey live by the sea. Giles, the innocent at
home, becomes the innocent abroad. But by now, the comic tone of the first
part acquires a lining of pathos, though without losing various funny
delights.
The second, American (though shot in Canada) half, has Giles take a room in
a motel where mostly couples meet furtively; be obsessed by his wanting to
meet Ronnie; resort  to a series of investigations and stalkings that
involve everything, from Ronnie's dog, his Porsche ragtop to  Giles'
becoming a regular at the greasy spoonish establishment owned by Irv. It is
called "Chez d'Irv," which somehow sounds like "chef d'oeuvre" (French for
"masterpiece") --a most unlikely bilingual pun, given Irv's
simple-mindedness
Love is the mother of inventions. The hitherto very low-key Giles  goes
energetically through loops and hoops, contrives a supermarket "accident"
to meet Audrey, turns on the charm, makes friends with her while waiting
for Ronnie to return from California. Finally, he meets him.
De'Ath's task is vastly aided by the small community --including the young
couple-- being one of naive people with little or no culture.No denizen had
ever heard of De'Ath, perhaps even of   literature. But all are hugely
impressed by having an English author in their midst. Dull, duller, dullest
Giles becomes an exotic creature.  It reminds me a bit of the newly rich
vulgarians who mistake Bob Hope for an Earl in "Fancy Pants."
Hurt's performance is probably his best, along with his Quentin Crisp in
"The Naked Civil Servant." In speech, expressivity, body language, timing,
he is impeccably in character, ludicrous and absurd yet believable, quasi
farcical yet touching. Wide-eyed Priestley, sporting Elvis  sideburns that
make him look even dimmer, performs with restraint a persona that's partly
an un-blatant send-off of his "Beverly Hills 90210" heartthrob, partly that
of a young actor who confusedly feels that there are things to do higher
than his teen-junk movie roles. The ground is fertile for Giles to lay on
with a trowel compliments, bold and bald statements about  Ronnie's talents
and potential, the imaginary film script Giles is writing for him. All
this, of course, leads to implanting the idea that things can go better,
not with Coke but with De'Ath as a mentor. To what extent Giles believes
what he says remains an open question.
Ronnie's is a supporting role to Giles' and Audrey's (well played by a
relative newcomer) is one level below this. The balance of the cast are
sub-supporters to the top trio, yet all appearances, down to the tiniest,
are sharply sketched out. Throughout the film, Kwietniowski also fleshes
out ambiances through light, economical, amusing touches in the
peripherals, from TV watching to weather predictions, not to mention
telephone answering machines or faxes.
November's attraction to May is something common. So is the mismatched
attraction of persons widely separated by social class, taste, intellect,
culture. Examples abound in movies, from  Somerset Maugham's novel "Of
Human Bondage" (the good version was filmed with Leslie Howard and Bette
Davis) to "Citizen Kane" and beyond.
In the case of " Love and Death" all this acquires new twists and an
outcome that I cannot disclose. But I can reveal that there is no sex,
there are no caricatures. Instead, we get heartfelt sentiment and much
humor at the expense of the nadirs of pop culture, teen adulation, as well
as of stuffy "high art."
No closure in its fullest sense comes at the end. Certain things are left
in the air, with an upbeat last-moment hint about Giles.There is audience
manipulation here, since the title's "Death" is a red herring. The name
De'Ath (pronounced Deh as in Irish or Italian names) does really exist, but
used without the apostrophe, it suggests to the unprepared public dire
events rather than a verbal joke.I'll grant you though that it is a good
mnemonic device.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Kwietniowski
Writer: Richard Kwietniowski (based on the novel by Gilbert Adair)
Starring: John Hurt, Jason Priestly, Fiona Loewi, Sheila Hancock, Maury
Chaykin, Gawn Grainer, Elizabeth Quinn, Bruce Filmore, Tom Hurst
One day, reclusive British Writer Giles De'Ath (John Hurt) locks himself
out of his flat, and stumbles upon a poster advertising a screening of a
film adaptation of an E.M. Forster novel.  Arriving there, he's shocked to
see that it's not really E.M. Forster, but instead a teen schlock film
called "Hotpants College II," and that the Forster film was the prior week.
 But as he's getting up to leave, he stops, and the camera pulls in on his
shocked face, which is frozen on the screen.
What he's seen is an actor on the screen who mesmerizes him for some untold
reason.  He sits down and watches the rest of the film, and when the
credits come up, the film highlights the actor's name: Robbie Bostock
(Jason Priestly - yes, THAT Jason Priestly), and Giles becomes completely
obsessed with this man, awkwardly buying teen magazines, renting his films
(with titles like "Tex Mex" and "Skin Marks"...but alas, no "Hotpants
College I").  He even tells his maid that she is no longer allowed to clean
in his study so that he can secretly watch his films, and make an album of
cut-outs and what-not just like some pre-pubescent Leo DiCaprio-freak.
It's the alienated Giles messy attempt to re-enter society that this film
is about, and, in fact, most of the film plays like a giant
Fish-Out-of-Water film with substance.  The film is a semi-comedy,
semi-philosophical drama which gets most of its laughs from bits like Giles
ordering a VCR but not understanding that you need a television to watch
the tapes on, but also has the guts and brains to make something out of all
this.
The first half of the film deals with his obsession with Robbie, but the
second half has him taking a "vacation," if you will, in Chesterton, Long
Island where Robbie apparently lives.  There, he sets out on a quest to
track down Robbie, and get to know him or something.  Eventually, he does
meet him, and he desperately tries to make it sound like it's really his
fictitious niece who is in love with him, but can't help but tell him
repeatedly how great he is.  Things get generally uncomfortable from here.
"Love and Death on Long Island" has been said to have been based on certain
themes in the novel "Death in Venice" (which I have yet to read, but yeah,
it's next on my long list of books I have to read now), and I can only
guess that some of those themes are the negative parts of seclusion,
worshipping false idols, and alienation in general.  But the film deals
with all of these in mostly comical ways, making the film easier to digest
and also more fun to discuss later on.  As I watched the film, I was
laughing a lot of the time at everything, but afterwards, I was thinking
what the film was trying to say about everything.
Giles, who's brilliantly played by John Hurt (relatively unknown, unless
you bring up the fact that he was the guy in "Alien" who had the alien pop
out of his chest, and that he was the Elephant Man once, but you couldn't
recognize him in the latter anyway), is portrayed not as a mere stupid man,
but as one who is completely out of touch with reality.  He has built an
emotional and philosophical shield around himself, so much that when
someone asks him in an interview if he owns a word processor, he just
stares at her and says "Am I in the business of just processing words?"
That's why his obsession with Robbie is so great.  We don't fully
comprehend his obsession, although I doubt it's the homosexual obsession
many people may find (he was married to a woman once, but she died, and we
don't know his past or anything), but whatever it is, it's so huge that it
grows out of control.  By the time he's in Long Island and searching for
his house by foot, we are near cringing everytime he gets closer to his
target.  And when he literally runs into Robbie's gorgeous model wife
(Fiona Loewi) at the supermarket and gives her a false story, we can't
believe he's gone this far.
But all of this is handled lightly, so as not to talk down to people.  The
film is just hilarious to watch, filled with lots of great quick comic
moments, like a scene in a taxi where he rudely disses a cabbie's attempts
to get him to put out a cigarette, or just weridly subtle characters, like
a diner owner named Irv (Maury Chaykin, who's really making his rounds
these days) who describes absolutely everything as "very attractive."
The performances are quite amazing as well.  John Hurt gives what may be
his best performance, which is a tough thing to beat, in my opinion.  And
Jason Priestly nails his performance.  I really liked how his character
wasn't a self-mockery or anything - it almost seems that this is exactly
how Priestly is in real life, or at least used to be.  I'm almost afraid to
say this: he's great.  Also giving great performances are Loewi as
Priestly's wife, and Chaykin, who's humerous in every way, not just in his
choice of hair cuts.
All this makes "Love and Death" a really fun film to watch, although some
of it is uncomfortable in the same way "King of Comedy" is (although not
that much, to tell the truth).  It's a film that could be passed off as
mere FOOW (Fish Out Of Water) material, but afterwards it can be looked at
philosophically.  Like the way Giles can look at something that seems
kiddie and find something redeeming in it, you can look to this film with
its false facade and find something even more redeeming.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David N. Butterworth
        The central theme of "Love and Death on Long Island" is that love
can sometimes be found in the most unusual of places, and it's a
refreshingly warm-hearted tale at that.  But the film's distractions are
many and director Richard Kwietniowski's unsure touch is what finally does
it in.
        Dominating the film is John Hurt, who plays a stuffy and reclusive
British writer, Giles De'ath (pronounced day-ath).  Giles, a widower,
rarely leaves his London home, either to give interviews or do lectures,
but has reached a point in his life when he feels the need to do something
new.  Happening out to "the pictures" for the first time in years to see an
E.M. Forster adaptation, Giles accidentally winds up in the adjacent
theater showing the sophomoric comedy "Hotpants College II" (a terrific
title, by the way).  As he is about to leave, he catches sight of a boyish
stud playing a pizza boy and, if you believe in such things, it's love at
first sight.
        Giles' interest in Ronnie Bostock (Jason Priestley) turns into an
obsession.  He starts a scrapbook (which he labels "Bostockiana") replete
with cut-outs of the teen idol from juvenile magazines sporting such
headings as "Hollywood's most snog-able fellas!"  He rents Ronnie's cheesy
videos--"puerile romps without a single redeeming feature"--like "Tex Mex"
and "Skidmarks."
        And, on the advice of his agent, who suggests Giles take a trip, he
heads to Chesterton, Long Island in the hope of meeting the object of his
affections.
        It's a nice idea, and Hurt plays Giles to the hilt.  But although
Hurt is good, he can't keep this "erstwhile fogey" from bordering on
cliché.  That's because the writing and direction are sub-par; we've all
seen the eccentric Englishman in strange environs before and the
fish-out-of-water situations that are meant to be humorous actually dilute
the film.  "In America you ask for the check and pay with a bill while in
England you ask for the bill and pay with a check?"  It's true, I'm afraid.
Having a video clerk yell out embarrassing-sounding movie titles to the
stock boy in back is also too familiar.
        Ultimately, it's hard to believe that Giles has been so reclusive
that he can't tell a microwave from a "video player," or that you also need
a television set in order to preview the original "Hotpants College."
        When Giles gets to Long Island he locates Ronnie's supermodel
girlfriend, Audrey (played stiffly by the Courtney Cox-esque Fiona Loewi),
and uses her to wrangle a meeting with Ronnie.  Slowly--and the film is
extremely slow paced--Giles get to know Ronnie and finally confesses his
love for him in an awkward scene in which Priestley's acting ability is
severely tested.
        One central difficulty with this unashamedly sweet love story is
that Giles' initial crush on Ronnie is entirely superficial, and the scenes
where he comes to "know" him are unconvincing at best.  Dudley Moore
learned his lesson in "10," but poor Giles never catches on: there's more
to love than hotpants.
        "Love and Death on Long Island" has its funny moments and is
unquestionably a fine vehicle for Hurt, but its lightweight predictability
makes it hard to recommend.
