Title
Review for 2 Days in the Valley (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Danny Aiello; Greg Cruttwell; Jeff Daniels; Teri Hatcher & Glenne
Headly
2 Days In The Valley is more or less a Pulp Fiction knock off. It basically
involves how a bunch of quirky characters in the Los Angeles area end up
having their lives become intertwined in some very unusual ways. I'm not
going into much greater detail than that, since it would take forever to
explain, and quite frankly, I'm not willing to spend any more time on it
than the 2 hours that I've already wasted.  While it tries very hard to be
Pulp Fiction, 2 Days In The Valley falls way short. This is quite a
condemnation considering the cast includes Danny Aiello, James Spader and
Jeff Daniels.
While the story isn't much, and the dialogue and characters rate only
marginally better, 2 Days In The Valley does have a couple of bright spots.
James Spader's character, while not much better than the rest, is at least
fun to watch in a sick sort of way. And we do get to see a nice cat fight
between uber babes Teri Hatcher and Charlize Theron (in her first role). You
know a movie isn't that good when the highlight is a brawl between two
women. Even if they are both gorgeous.
I will give the writers some credit for the fairly clever ways in which they
managed to intersect the lives of this group of characters that would have
otherwise never interacted. But marveling at that ingenuity is a far cry
from actually enjoying the result. While some of the characters and their
respective stories are fairly interesting, they inevitably are brought down
as they intersect with the other half of the characters that I really cared
absolutely nothing about. If I were to put a number on it, only about half
of the story and half the characters in this movie were particularly
interesting or otherwise enjoyable to watch.
This is the sort of movie that only a huge fan of one or more of the cast
members should rent, and even then prepare for disappointment. Not even
Charlize Theron being naked would get me to sit through this movie again. Or
at least not all of it anyway.

Author
Steve Kong
2 Days, 1 Murder, and 10 people.  How does this all tie together?  A skier, 
a hitman, a tramp named Helga, two vice detectives, a suicidal movie 
director, a nurse, an art dealer with a stone, and others.  2 Days in the 
Valley is a movie that takes these lives and threads them together into one 
cohesive and highly entertaining film.
The problem with bringing this many characters and individual stories to a 
movie is the fact that some audience members will get lost after the first 
few are introduced.  Writer/Director John Herzfeld does a good job of 
inter-cutting between the stories and making everyone known.  Some of the 
stories are not tied up well, like the story of Jeff Daniel's dejected cop, 
but most of them do end up well.  Also, there are some nagging points that 
are brought up and never really cleared up  the biggest being the Korean 
thing, which confused me.
The one thing that 2 Days in the Valley reminded me of was a Tarantino film 
because its structure is so complex, the events that happen so different, 
that it feels like watching Pulp Fiction on drugs.  2 Days in the Valley is 
more interested in the characters than it is in the crimes that bring the 
characters together.  We see little pieces of each character, some of these 
events are out of the blue, some are explained, but all are part of the 
puzzle that is put together at the end of the movie.
To try to explain the story and what happens is going to spoil the 
film.  The movie does evolve around a murder.  Around this murder events 
start to happen and they all tie together.  The characters include a washed 
out hitman named Dosmo (Danny Aiello); the ex-wife of the murder man, Becky 
(Teri Hatcher) who is obsessed with winning gold in the skiing events at 
the Olympics; a scheming couple, the maniacal Lee (James Spader) and the 
sex-kitten Helga (Charlize Theron in her debut film); a suicidal movie 
director who hangs his toilet paper on a long won Emmy, Teddy (Paul 
Mazursky); a nurse that in a cemetery, Audrey (Marsha Mason); two cops, one 
who is gung-ho for his job (Eric Stoltz) and one who is not (Jeff Daniels); 
an arrogant art dealer who has kidney stones (Greg Cruttwell) and his 
hapless assistant (Gleane Headly); and a few others.  If you had a hard 
time keeping track of the people here in the review, don't worry, it's all 
clear in the movie.
Kudos to writer/director John Herzfeld for putting together such an 
entertaining movie.  It has its small flaws, but those are easily 
overlooked.  I would like to find out just how Herzfeld put this story 
together.  If he started from the end and then plotted towards the 
beginning or if it just all happened to fall together one day as he was 
looking out the window.  The story and characters are magnificent.  Don't 
Miss 2 Days in the Valley.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     Ever since PULP FICTION, there's been a flood of hip crime-story
imitators, none of which have managed to be as intelligent or compelling
as Quentin Tarantino's original. 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY is mildly
entertaining on its own, though, with a cast that includes Danny Aiello,
Jeff Daniels, Teri "Lois" Hatcher and Eric Stoltz. It's got a good Miramax
feel to it even though it came from HBO, who must have decided it was
good enough to bypass pay cable and go straight to theaters. 
     The movie seems a mess at the beginning, with three or four
subplots that don't seem to be going anywhere. On one hand you've got
Aiello and James Spader (who is a dead ringer for kid in the hall Dave
Foley here) as two criminals listening in on a sleeping Teri Hatcher. As
her ex-husband wakes her up and tries to win her back, Spader and
Aiello come inside, shove a hypodermic into Hatcher's panty-clad butt
(bet there was quite a fight over which one got to perform the injection)
and kill the husband. 
     Cut to Stoltz, who is getting a massage from a beautiful Asian
woman who offers to massage something else. Stoltz decides not to and
gets back in Daniels' car, where we find out they're two cops planning to
bust the parlor for prostitution. Stoltz changes his mind after realizing
the woman is nice enough, and Daniels changes his mind when a bloody Teri
Hatcher comes running into the path of his car. 
     So those two paths have intersected, while we see a suicidal
writer / director (played by writer / director Paul Mazursky) whose only
goal is to give away his dog before he kills himself. Around the same
time, Spader decides to double-cross Aiello. He shoots him and gets in
model Charlize Theron's car as his own car blows sky-high. But surprise,
surprise, Aiello was wearing a bulletproof vest and got out of the car in
time. 
     He ends up in the nearby mansion of eccentric British art collector
Peter Horton and his underappreciated assistant, Glenn Headly. Horton's
character is defined by two things -- overall English snootiness and
having to pass a kidney stone -- so he's not really essential to the film,
although Headly is always fun to watch. Meanwhile, Mazursky is in a
cemetery and runs into Marsha Mason, who actually liked one of his
movies. She gives him a ride, but first has to visit her brother-in-law,
who coincidentally turns out to be Horton. 
     That's more paths crossed, and all the paths eventually come
together, as Spader comes after Aiello and Stoltz tries to solve the case.
2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY has a brain to it, but not nearly as much
entertainment value or clever dialogue as Tarantino's masterpiece, the
film by which all imitators are measured. It will go down in history for
its five-minute catfight between Hatcher and Theron, the stuff 14-year-old
boy fantasies are made of. 
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Over 750 detailed reviews with a comedic flair.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: "Quirky" sums up this neat little movie about a gallery of
disparate characters whose lives collide over the course of 48 hours in Los
Angeles. The proper meaning of "Tarantino-esque".
If you tried to map out the coincidences that took place in your real life,
you'd have material which would strain the plausibility of most
mystery-readers. 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY contains one insane coincidence after
another, but that's okay, for two reasons. One, it contains a wealth of
intriguing and intelligently-written characters, and two, it's *about*
coincidences as much as it *contains* coincidences. It's "Tarantino-esque"
in the right sense of the word: it extends on the kinds of things Quentin
Tarantino introduced into a movie without becoming redundant or insulting.
Without spoiling anything, let me try to list as many of the people as
possible in this movie, as well as how they start off. We have an estranged
husband and wife, who have two hitmen walk in on them. We have an art dealer
and his secretary, who are later taken hostage at gunpoint by one of the
hitmen -- who really, REALLY hates dogs. We have the other hitman's icy
Nordic girlfriend, who has a way of being able to tell you you're screwed
simply by smiling at you. We have two vice cops who stumble into a murder
scene and get a lot more than they bargained for. We have a washed-up,
suicidal television director and the nurse he meets in a cemetary when he
tries to give her his... yes, his dog. And even *there* I think I've missed
a few.
The movie works by subtly defeating our expectations about what movies
normally do. In one scene, we switch from one conversation to another in
mid-sentence -- without even the rhythm of the shots changing. Slowly the
threads of the movie converge -- in a way that only makes sense at the end,
and even then it's completely off the wall -- but by that time the movie has
declared its territory: it's about characters, not plots.
This movie grows on you. I thought it would be too self-consciously arty for
my taste. It comes on more like a good friend whom you suddenly discover has
a thing for sleight-of-hand and card tricks, and surprises you in more ways
than you might think.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Last year Robert Altman brought us his delightful SHORT CUTS.
That film is formed out of a set of seemly unrelated stories that find
their way together.
     Similarly in 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY, writer and director John
Herzfeld weaves us a tale of strange and apparently unrelated
characters.  Herzfeld's characters border on the bizarre, and yet each
is endearing.  The context that will bring them all together and
provide the hook for the audience is a murder.  The mystery is why was
the person killed.
     By midway you have learned the mystery's answer, but by then you
are wrapped up in the story and must know how all of the mini-dramas
that have burst forth will be resolved.  In short, the characters are
all compelling, and except for the one completely bad guy, you
empathize and care about them all.  As for the one pure villain, he is
carefully drawn and quite effective.
     As the movie starts, many parallel stories begin to blossom.  In
the first, two hit men, Lee (James Spader) and his partner Dosmo (Danny
Aiello), break into Roy Fox (Peter Horton) and his ex wife, Becky Fox's
(Teri Hatcher), bedroom in the middle of the night.  Lee is fond of
sticking his stop watch in front of people's eyes and giving them
exactly one minute to do whatever he tells them.  Roy flunks the one
minute pop quiz about Korean espionage and is terminated.  Becky has
been drugged into unconsciousness and thus is unable to help him with
the answers.
     At the same time vice cops Alex (Jeff Daniels) and his partner Wes
(Eric Stoltz) are trying to bust a massage parlor, but Wes develops too
soft a heart so the bust is a bust.  Alex wants to be a homicide
detective but has been stuck in the wrong jobs in the police department
for the last ten years.
     Lee goes back to his motel room where his girlfriend and
coconspirator Helga (Charlize Theron) are staying.  They engage in some
very impressive sex which again features his infamous stop watch.
     Across town art dealer Alan Hooper has a kidney stone attack in
the middle of the street.  When no one will come to his aid, he is
finally rescued by a car thief who is stealing a new car with the
license plate RIDEME.
     A despondent, highly unsuccessful, but extremely sweet writer and
director, Teddy (played by real life writer, director and actor Paul
Mazursky), is trying to find someone to take care of his little dog.
You see, Teddy has secret plans to commit suicide.  He is helped by
nurse Audrey (Marsha Mason) who says his dog can come to live at her
brother Alan's house since he is an art dealer and has lots of room.
     Dosmo ends up holding the art dealer and his secretary (Glenne
Headly) hostage.  Dosmo is a sensitive hit man, and Headly thinks she
recognizes him from somewhere.  At any rate, Dosmo fixes everyone some
pasta using his favorite recipe.
     Back at the crime scene, our vice cops get to help out until Doug
(Keith Carradine) comes along.  Doug is a real homicide cop so he sends
the amateurs away.
     This all happens in the first ten minutes or so.  The rest of the
picture has all of these characters revealing themselves and getting
more and more intertwined.
     The script is great.  The art dealer is a real pain.  He tells his
personal secretary that she needs liposuction and perhaps some silicon
implants, and he would be happy to pay for it.  This is not a come on,
he is just a fastidious type.  He has already paid to have her nose
fixed.  If you are rich enough, the moral seems to be that even your
middle-aged secretary should be flawless.
     When Doug finds a planted clue he tells his partner, "I know we're
Valley detectives so we're not all that bright, but how stupid does he
think we are?"
     Every character has a story to tell.  None are one dimensional.
We learn that Becky Fox is an Olympic skier with an obsessive training
program, but she has never finished higher than fourth place.
     The acting is excellent.  One of my favorite small scenes is at
the cemetery where Teddy is about to blow his brains out, but his cute
little dog just keeps looking at him with complete love and adoration.
The dog's innocence and ignorance is so poignant.
     This intricate story all comes together nicely.  The overall
mystery is not predictable nor are a lot of the minor dramas.  The
parts of the show that are predictable are still compelling.  Although
I thought the picture was weird when it began, I soon got into its
rhythms and loved it.  I got to know a fascinating group of people, and
what more should one ask of a movie.
     2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY runs about two hours.  It is rated R.  There
is sex, nudity, violence and bad language.  On an offensive scale, they
would all score pretty low, and I think the film would be fine for most
teenagers.  I recommend this quirky but rewarding little mystery and
character study to you, and I give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     If you've seen the trailer, the #1 question on your mind about 2
DAYS IN THE VALLEY must be:  Is it a PULP FICTION rip-off, or is it a
*bad* PULP FICTION rip-off?
     Well, the answer is this:  Yes, it's a shameless PULP FICTION
rip-off (more like PULP FICTION meets SHORT CUTS), but it's actually
quite entertaining, in its own quirky little way.
     In fact, 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY is the best (and possibly the last
[hint, hint]) of these knockoffs to come down the interstate.  The only
problem is that writer/director John Herzfeld forgot one critical part: 
a cool soundtrack!  The main difficult with 2 DAYS is an uncommonly
lousy score that kills the suspense and the comedy with equal ability.
     But let's talk about the good parts, those mainly being the rich
characters Herzfeld has created to act out his play.  (Please pay
attention.)  It starts with Peter Horton (gets shot early on, a very big
plus) as a deadbeat husband to downhill skier/aspiring scam artist Teri
Hatcher.  James Spader (by far the most fun of the film) and newcomer
Charlize Theron as Hatcher's partners in crime.  Danny Aiello as an
aging hitman working with Spader.  NAKED's Greg Cruttwell as Aiello's
whining hostage.  Glenne Headly as Cruttwell's bookish assistant. 
Marsha Mason as Cruttwell's nurse/half-sister.  Paul Mazursky as a
suicidal Hollywood has-been who is picked up by Mason.  And Jeff Daniels
and Eric Stoltz (the only PULP veteran in the show) as hapless cops on
to all of these characters.  (Plus there are at least three good
cameos.)
     Whew!  D'you catch all that?  It's easier than it sounds, trust me
-- in fact, the fun of 2 DAYS is watching all the pieces come together
via a mixture of slapstick comedy, generally witty dialogue, and blackly
comedic gunfights, fistfights, dogfights, catfights, and any other kind
of fight you can think of.  All the while, Herzfeld manages to weave in
unexpectedly powerful themes of bygone happiness, greed, and
desperation... and The Valley.  And Herzfeld manages to pack all of this
into a very tight 105 minutes.  There's very little wasted footage on
the screen, which is hard to say about many directors today.
     It winds up as a solid picture that is probably accessible to a
wider audience than PULP FICTION was -- there were plenty of squeamish
girly types in the crowd, and no one walked out.  And I was actually
expecting a bad movie!  Go figure.
     [Food for thought:  When was the last time you could get gas in Los
Angeles for $1.07, as is seen in the film?  Talk amongst yourselves.]
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Written by: John Herzfeld
Directed by: John Herzfeld
Produced by:  MGM (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer) [aka MGM-UA] / 
                         Redemption / Rysher Entertainment
Cast:  Danny Aiello, Greg Cruttwell, Jeff Daniels, Teri Hatcher, 
          Glenne Headly, Peter Horton, Marsha Mason, Paul Mazursky,
          James Spader, Eric Stoltz, Louise Fletcher, Natasha Henstridge.
Runtime: About 107 minutes
Rating : ** out of *****
 There are movies that pose a question in its first five minutes
and spend the rest of the time trying to answer it. Then there are
movies that spend the whole time posing questions and try to answer it
all in the last five minutes. Writer-director John Herzfeld's Two days
in the valley falls into the latter category.
Weaving together a grabbag of seemingly unrelated characters,
Herzfeld's tries very hard to keep the audience guessing with a
Altmanesque series of parallel stories. Hitmen Lee (James Spader) and
his partner Dosmo (Danny Aiello) pop a guy in bed while leaving his
drugged wife Becky Fox (Teri Hatcher) lying next to him showing the
audience where on her behind she got nicely pricked. An understandeably
shocked Becky runs out of the house the next morning before hailing down
a couple of vice cops, (Jeff Daniels) and Wes (Eric Stoltz). A murder is
not vice territory, flirting with asian prostitues is, but Wes would
rather play inquisitive detective.
Meanwhile, washed-up director, Teddy (Paul Mazursky) is about to end his
life. But before he can do that, he must find a good home for his dog.
Enter nurse Audrey (Marsha Mason), who takes the dog and Teddy for a ride.
Stuffy art dealer, Allan Hopper (Greg Cruttwell) has kidney stones. While struggling about his fancy house, he switches between moaning in self-pity and dropping condescending hints about his loyal secretary's (Glenne Headly) plain appearance.
Don't be surprised if you find yourself asking more than once just
what the hell is going on. You might like that feeling of cluelessness. 
Herzfeld does answer all the questions in the course of time and pieces
it all rather neatly in the last five minutes.
The jigsaw puzzle assembled isn't stunning by any means though. The
characters lack the stature or moral complexity of Altman's real-life
heroes in Short Cuts, even though they are interesting and funny. Funny,
that is if you aren't comparing them to the likes of Tarantino's Pulp
chcaracters. The tie-up is tidy but nowhere near the squeaky clean
resolution of (director's name? guy who also did last seduction) Red Rock
West.
Two days isn't a bad movie but there isn't much else to it than the
screenplay novelty of the linkage of seemingly unrelated characters.
It'll keep you guessing alright but you won't remember the answers five
minutes after the credits.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Danny Aiello, Greg Cruttwell, Jeff Daniels, Teri Hatcher, 
      Gleanne Headly, Peter Horton, Marsha Mason, Paul Mazursky, 
      James Spader, Eric Stoltz, Charlize Theron
Director: John Herzfeld
Producer: Jeff Wald and Herb Nanas
Screenplay: John Herzfeld
Cinematography: Oliver Wood
Music: Anthony Marinelli
U.S. Distributor: MGM
     If this is what it's really like to spend a couple days in the San 
Fernando Valley during the hottest time of the year, then, like W.C. 
Fields, I'd rather be in Philadelphia.  Actually, for a movie that's so 
precise about time (one of the characters is constantly using a 
stopwatch), the title's a little inaccurate.  Unless I'm completely 
confused about when things started and stopped, it's not so much 2 DAYS 
IN THE VALLEY as it is about twenty-four hours.
     What we have here is actually four individual stories that 
occasionally intersect, often in the most odd and unpredictable of ways.  
One of the best aspects of 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY is the clever manner in 
which the narrative has been assembled.  While things aren't nearly as 
elaborately-connected as in PULP FICTION, I like the way paths cross, 
characters just miss each other, and everything comes together during 
the climactic ten minutes.  While the plot of 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY isn't 
a masterpiece of intrigue or intricacy, it kept me involved and 
entertained, and that's about the best you can hope for from this sort 
of motion picture.
     The film opens with two hitmen, Desmo (Danny Aiello), an old-timer 
who's washed up, and Lee (James Spader), a cool-as-a-cucumber sociopath, 
staking out the house where a notorious womanizer, Roy Foxx (Peter 
Horton), is making the moves on his ex-wife, Becky (Teri Hatcher).  
Desmo and Lee have a contract to kill Roy, but who's paying the bill?  
And, unbeknownst to Desmo, Lee is preparing a little surprise for him 
once the night's work is done.  In the end, Desmo ends up alive and on 
his own, and is forced to take hostages.
     Meanwhile, a wealthy art dealer, Allan Hopper (Greg Cruttwell), 
suffering from an acute case of kidney stones, has to be rushed to the 
hospital.  His personal assistant, Susan (Gleanne Headly), brings him 
home afterwards.  To reward her for her loyalty over eight years of 
service, he offers to pay for breast implants and liposuction, claiming 
that if she took care of herself, she might get a man.
     Two vice cops, Alvin (Jeff Daniels) and Wes (Eric Stoltz) are 
staking out a Japanese massage parlor, intending to bust the employees 
for illegal sexual activities.  However, when Wes goes inside to get a 
first-hand experience, he feels sorry for the girl who services him, and 
walks out without making an arrest.  Alvin, who's going through a series 
of tough personal problems, is furious at his partner, who shows more 
interest in playing homicide detective than doing his job.
     Finally, there's Teddy Peppers (Paul Mazursky), the Emmy-Award 
winning director of ARTHUR'S LAST HOPE.  But that was four years ago, 
and, since then, he's had nothing but bombs.  His life is a wasteland 
and his finances are in disarray.  So, after finding a woman (Marsha 
Mason) who's willing to take responsibility for locating a new home for 
his beloved dog, he decides to end it all with a gun.  Fate intercedes, 
however -- but not just in Teddy's life.  In one way or another, the 
wheels of destiny bring nearly all of these characters together, 
although not always at the same time and in the same place.
     2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY has a penchant for the outrageous, with 
generous helpings of dark and ironic humor.  There are a number of 
laugh-aloud lines, but the film works best when the comedy is of the 
"wink-wink-nudge-nudge" variety.  For example, there's a scene where 
Alvin and Lee, cop and killer, are parked side-by-side at a traffic 
light.  Then there's an incident where a bystander saves Allan by 
hotwiring a car to transport him to the hospital.  Or, in one of my 
favorite scenes, Dosmo, ever the cordial hostage-taker, offers to cook 
pasta for his captives.  
     Teri Hatcher fans will be pleased.  The actress has a fair-sized 
chunk of screen time, and, although she keeps all her clothes on, she 
gets involved in a nice little cat fight with a statuesque blond, 
Charlize Theron (who does not keep all her clothes on throughout).  Most 
everyone in the cast does a good job, but the standouts are Aiello, who 
is hilarious as the toupeed, down-on-his-luck, dog-fearing hitman, and 
Spader, playing against type, as his emotionless partner.  Keith 
Carradine, Louise Fletcher, Austin Pendleton, and Lawrence Tierney all 
have cameos.
     I enjoyed 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY.  It's pure entertainment -- nothing 
too serious, nothing too deep -- with an artistic sensibility.  It's 
rare for movies these days to recognize that their audience has an 
intelligence, and even more unusual for them not to talk down to us.  2 
DAYS does both.  So, if you're looking for some smart fun, John 
Herzfeld's feature is a worthy choice.  And you don't need two days -- 
just two hours.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY (1996) ***  Written and directed by John Herzfeld.
Photography, Oliver Wood. Editing, Jim Miller, Wayne Wahrman. Production
design, Catherine Hardwicke. Music, Anthony Marinelli. Producers, Jeff
Wald, Herb Nanas. Cast: Danny Aiello (Dosmo Pizzo), Greg Cruttwell (Allan
Hopper), James Spader (Lee Woods), Teri Hatcher (Becky Foxx), Charlize
Theron (Helga), Jeff Daniels (Alvin), Eric Stoltz (Wes), Glenne Headly
(Susan), Paul Mazursky (Teddy Peppers), Louise Fletcher (Evelyn), Marsha
Mason (Audrey), Keith Carradine (Detective Creighton), Austin Pendleton
(Ralph), Peter Horton (Roy Foxx), Kathleen Luong (Midori) et al. A Rysher
Entertainment/MGM Credit Lyonnais release. 105 minutes.Rated R (violence,
sex, language)
About one dozen characters meet naturally or fortuitously (read: pretty
artificially) in California's San Fernando Valley where dark deeds are done
in a violent yet comic film that parodies noir films.  Not in the
extra-broad, burlesque style of Mel Brooks ("Blazing Saddles," "Young
Frankenstein," " High Anxiety"), or the "Airplane!" and "Naked Gun" movies
and such, but in "serious" yet tongue-in-cheek fashion.
The characters have a strong family resemblance to the creatures of Quentin
Tarantino, with a nod to David Lynch, but they are relatives, not clones.
They criss-cross paths in a choreography that recalls (from a lot to
somewhat) those of Robert Altman, Robert Rodriguez ("El Mariachi,""
Desperado") Richard Linklater ("Slacker"), Wayne Wang ("Smoke") and other,
mostly newish filmmakers.
The cast has James Spader as a diabolically sadistic killer, so chilling
that he makes many other cold assassins look like ice-cream;  Dany Aiello
as a very Italian-American hitman on the skids who is employed and
exploited by Spader; Becky Foxx as a divorcee would-be victim; the Brit
Gregg Cruttwell (whose feature debut was in the marvellous "Naked") as an
obnoxiously self-centered art dealer with acute kidney-stone pains; Glenn
Headley as his ill-treated secretary; Paul Mazursky as a has-been, suicidal
Hollywood writer-director; Marsha Mason as the art dealer's sister; Jeff
Daniels and Eric Stoltz as a pair of mismatched vice detectives. Others
flesh out the story.
The film's kernel is a devilishly convoluted, outlandish yet clear plot
that deals with money, a stash of $30,000. This is a sum too small by
today's standards to justify so much mayhem, but then, to it is added an
unknown, presumably larger amount of insurance money.That other money is
dragged into the tale in a most improbable way. I won't let the cat out of
the bag, but when you see the film, think of the status of the beneficiary
and you'll see what I mean.
Then again, logic is not the movie's purpose. Beyond some very unlikely or
far too coincidental meetings there is a whole list of items ranging from
the improbable to the impossible. Among them: a bulletproof vest, a person
who is immune to a humongous car explosion,  kidney stones used as a red
herring, shoot-outs as weird as those in some Westerns, skylophobia (fear
of dogs), unexpected cinephilia (the Mason character), a Norwegian spandex
queen who sounds as Scandinavian as Marilyn Monroe  ... I'll stop here for
fear of giving away the story.
Crazy though it is, the story is suspenseful , entertaining in its bloody
way, and bloody well played. The actors ham it up (or down) skillfully. In
his despair, Paul Mazursky (the director and occasional actor), is actually
touching. His love for his dog adds to the pathos. The underworld figure
Aiello is irresistibly simpatico, funny (especially when he cooks for his
captives), surprisingly kind and decent. Headley's sparse dialogue and
reactions quickly establishes her as a natural sweetheart (no saccharine
here).  The insufferable Cruttwell reminds me of the cynical editor in TV's
"Dream On." Teri Hatcher, always a bridesmaid but never a bride in winter
sports, is miles away from her Lois Lane of TV's "Los and Clark." Jeff
Daniels, bearded twice in succession (after "Fly Away Home") is credibly
cast against type as an overbearing policeman on the psychotic side. Eric
Stoltz has a warm presence. And so on down to incidental characters. Louise
Fletcher, in a mere walk-on role, creates a likable character in a matter
of seconds. With more lines but still in a supporting role, Austin
Pendleton delivers a creepy-funny performance.(He is the jerky, talky
small-time actor who, meeting Mazursky in a park, jokingly and cruelly
twists in him -- figuratively speaking-- the knife of failure). Even
Mazursky's terrier Bogey and Cruttwell's pit-bull Marc deliver. When you
accept the fact that this is more fantasy than realism, every creature in
the cast has its function.
Theirs is not true ensemble acting since characters don't bounce all that
much off each other, yet, within the oddball combinations and permutations,
it is good, skilled professional  playing. There is also a savvy, ironic
feel  for the Valley, one that should affect viewers familiar with the
place though not the many who have merely heard of the Valley's malls and
the Valley girls.
The dialogue is lively, the sets are eye-catching, the cinematography by
Oliver Wood ("Mr. Holland's Opus") is excellent, minimally showy,
ungimmicky, often lyrical in  unexpected ways, as when Mazursky walks his
dog. His sense of camera placement is clever without being showoffish or
gimmicky. The  frequent  close-ups and extreme close-ups reinforce  people
and events. For this type of picture, you could almost call the photography
subtle.
"2 Days" is instant gratification. What it will look like ten years from
now is anybody's guess. I say "instant" because, in a manner that is
typical of most U.S. films --whether Hollywoodian or Independent -- there
are no residues or reverberations that stay on in the viewers' hearts or
minds.
While the characters function very well, there is no  real depth or
dimensionality to them. Typically, character complexity is replaced by
character colorfulness, This can entertain but has limited staying power.
Making his feature-film debut here is writer-director John Herzfeld who has
much TV experience. When he says: "For me the entire movie is about
redemption--how someone can save  another person, and thereby save
themselves" he is merely spouting pretentious hokum by trying to add a
subtext to a film that is all surface.
The movie fits a certain new current which will increasingly beget
imitations. This is dangerous, since, in showbiz parlance, topping a gag or
a situation often works,  but topping the topper, like a trapeze act
without a net  can lead to disasters. Think of wise Johnny Carson who would
make a joke, top it, then sometimes try to go himself one better. Generally
this third stage was greeted with friendly audience boos. A masterfully
sheepish Carson would tell them :" I know, I shouldn't have tried for
three."
That said, whatever the future holds, I must admit that when I left "2
Days" I was thinking in terms of  a  ** 1/2 rating.  Later though, with
harder reflection, it was easy to upgrade it to  ***.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(MGM/Rysher)
Grade: B+ / Worth a Ticket
Starring:  Danny Aiello, James Spader, Paul Mazursky, Teri Hatcher, Glenne
Headly, Eric Stoltz, Greg Cruttwell, Charlize Theron, Jeff Daniels.
Screenplay:  John Herzfeld.
Producers:  Jeff Wald, Herb Nanas.
Director:  John Herzfeld.
Running Time:  100 minutes.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, sexual situations, nudity)
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The thing that goes dreadfully wrong with so many twisty-turny
suspense yarns is that they operate under the mis-guided impression that
they need nothing _except_ twists and turns to be engaging, a perfect
example being the recent THE RICH MAN'S WIFE.  It is a variation on the
kind of lazy, cynical film-making which produces action films like
TWISTER, in which the writers and directors hope that they can keep
jerking us around to the point where we don't notice that there aren't any
people in their films.  I expected 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY to be that kind of
film, yet another hipper-than-thou exercise in violence and vacuity.  But
writer-director John Herzfeld has put together a complex plot in which --
get this -- the characters actually matter, and which has more great roles
for actors than a dozen recent Hollywood films put together.
     The valley in question is Southern California's San Fernando Valley,
where several people will find their lives intertwined.  It begins with a
partnership in crime, as washed-out mobster Dosmo Pizo (Danny Aiello) is
hired by a shady character named Lee (James Spader) to help with a hit.
But it turns out that Lee is not to be trusted, and once the job is done,
Dosmo is forced to hide out with Alan (Greg Cruttwell), an obnoxious art
dealer, and his assistant Susan (Glenne Headly).  Meanwhile, an ambitious
vice cop named Wes (Eric Stoltz) discovers the scene of the crime, as well
as the victim's distraught ex-wife Becky (Teri Hatcher); also involved is
Teddy (Paul Mazursky), a once-promising film-maker now contemplating
suicide.
     There are some aspects of 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY which are reminiscent
of other recent stabs at hard-boiled avant garde, and for a while they
concerned me.  Yes, there are characters whose defining quirks seem
contrived for effect, like Lee's penchant for giving his victims a minute
on a stopwatch, or Dosmo's uncooperative hair-piece; yes, there are
characters like Wes's on-the-edge partner Alvin (Jeff Daniels) who don't
pay off.  Yet as John Herzfeld's story unfolded, I began to find myself
drawn into his characterizations, and to realize that this was one of
those rare films where even minor players seemed to have a life of their
own.  One of the most hilarious scenes features Austin Pendleton as a
former actor in one of Teddy's movies who runs into him in a park and
takes vicious glee in detailing Teddy's recent flops.  That one scene
speaks volumes about Teddy, about the embittered actor, and about
Hollywood's loathing of failure, and it is typical of the economy with
which Herzfeld is able to deliver fully-formed characters.
     Mazursky's Teddy is one of the two pivotal characters in 2 DAYS IN
THE VALLEY, and his performance is superb, particularly early in the film.
His relationship with his dog makes for one of the most touching scenes I
have seen this year, as his life is saved quite literally by the love of
his pet, and Mazursky's puffy, defeated demeanor is perfect.  Danny Aiello
is equally sharp as a wiseguy with something to prove, and a bigger heart
than anyone expects.  They are surrounded by winning performances -- even
Spader achieves a surprising level of capricious menace -- but Mazursky
and Aiello are always at the center of a film which gives you the
opportunity to care about the people in it.
     I should make something very clear at this point:  2 DAYS IN THE
VALLEY is smartly plotted, with enough unexpected detours to satisfy the
most die-hard lovers of cinematic guessing games.  It never strays
particularly far from the conventions of gritty pot-boilers, including
plenty of gratuitous sex and violence, and even one heck of a brutal
cat-fight between Hatcher and Charlize Theron as Lee's ice queen
girlfriend..  What is surprising about 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY is that after
every twist has played itself out, it is not the twists which are
memorable.  It is a genuinely human redemption story wrapped in a dark,
violent thriller.  If Herzfeld leaves a few loose ends, I was willing to
forgive him because he trusted an audience with a character-driven film in
a plot-driven genre.  That is a twist I was not expecting.

Author
Brian Takeshita
2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY starts out like most movies, and introduces you
to a couple of main characters.  Then it introduces you to a couple
more main characters.  But then it introduces you to a couple more
main characters.  Then a couple more.  Then....well, you get the
picture.  This film has a large playbill with no less than 11
significant roles; often a recipe for disaster.  Having too many
characters means less time spent with each, which means the audience
does not get to know them well, which means the audience doesn't care
about what happens to them.  There goes one of the first rules of any
kind of fiction:  People have to care about your characters.  Many
movies have a hard time achieving this with only a few main
characters.  The writers of 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY should not have been
so ambitious.
See if you can follow me.  Lee and Dosmo are professional hit men who
kill Becky's husband Roy.  The murder is preceded by framing Roy in an
affair with Lee's fiancee, Helga.  Meanwhile, Teddy, a washed-up
director, is getting ready to end his dead-end life until he meets
Audrey.  Enter Allan, who is an obnoxious boss who constantly
mistreats his assistant Susan.  Back to Lee and Dosmo.  Lee tries to
frame Dosmo for the murder of Roy, but Roy gets away and stumbles upon
Allan and Susan.  Across town, Wes and Alvin are vice cops who are
going to raid a "massage" parlor, but en route find Becky, covered
with blood from the murder of Roy.  We later find out that Becky is
part of the plot to kill Roy, although she didn't know about the
affair with Helga.  Hard to follow?  You've just experienced the
second pitfall of the large cast:  Too many subplots in order to
involve all of the characters in the main plot.
Since the characters come from such disparate backgrounds, you know
that it's inevitable they're going meet each other in one way or
another.  The problem with this movie is, you wait a long time for
this to happen.  It isn't until about 45 minutes into the movie that
the first meet cute occurs, and even then some of the characters don't
join the merry band until the very end of the film.  In order to keep
track of everyone, you have to keep cutting back to those characters
who haven't yet met, and this slows the film down considerably.
The ensemble cast includes Danny Aiello, Greg Cruttwell, Jeff Daniels,
Teri Hatcher, Glenne Headly, Peter Horton, Marsha Mason, Paul
Mazursky, James Spader, Eric Stoltz and Charlize Theron.  Only the
character played by Daniels is anywhere near complete.  Daniels plays
Alvin, the hardened vice cop who's been assigned a new partner (Eric
Stoltz) who only transferred into vice as a way to get promoted into
homicide.  Alvin has been at the job a long time and truly believes in
what he's doing:  He's protecting his neighborhood.  However, the
years of fighting society's ills has gotten to him, and he's being
driven over the edge.  He's also a divorced father, and now lives in
an empty house.  We really feel for him because we know he's doing the
best he can.  He's also a guy you might know in real life.  Director
John Herzfeld does a nice job acquainting the viewer with Alvin and
why he is the way he is.  Unfortunately, we don't see him anymore
after the first half of the film.
There's another character worth mentioning, but this one's only
halfway complete.  Paul Mazursky plays Teddy, the washed-up director.
His plight is very moving in the first half of the film, as we see him
driven to the brink of suicide.  The scenes where he's got a gun
pointed to his own head (there are two such scenes) are quite
poignant, and adding his little dog watching him makes those moments
near tear-jerkers.  However, all that changes when he meets Audrey
(Marsha Mason).  His attitude changes, but inconsistently.  At some
points, you feel he has a new zest for life.  At others, he's the guy
who's got nothing left to live for and will take the ultimate risk.
The movie definitely loses something tangible in the second hour by
forgetting about Alvin and by not rounding out Teddy's life.
While not a great film, 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY does have its moments.
My favorite line was when Dosmo (Danny Aiello) chastises Allan (Greg
Cruttwell) for being so mean to his assistant.  Allan responds with,
"I wasn't born with a silver spoon in my mouth.  I grew up in a
trailer park....I may be an ass, but I've worked hard to become one!"
Particularly moving was a scene of Alvin making out a birthday card to
his daughter from her "First Daddy", then reading a letter notifying
him of his suspension from the force.  There's a slow pull back
through his house's picture window which had been broken earlier that
day by a golf ball from the course across the street.  Framed in that
broken window, Alvin is the picture of a man who has had it with the
world.  Unfortunately, that near perfect scene is ruined by a shaky
camera.
One thing this movie does have is one hell of a cat fight.  Becky
(Teri Hatcher) and Helga (Charlize Theron) really go at it, perhaps
more enthusiastically than in any other movie I've ever seen.  Not the
usual pounding, pushing and scratching motions, but fists flying left
and right.  Being so original, it was too bad it had to end in the
unseen gunshot cliche.  You know how it goes:  They struggle with the
gun, and you know it's going to go off at any minute, but then the
camera cuts away to the outside of the room and >bang

I'm not sure what Herzfeld was going for with the camera work.  It
seemed as if the style changed with each scene.  In one scene, extreme
close-ups would be used.  In another scene, point of view shots.  In
the dialog exchange between Becky and Helga just before they come to
fisticuffs, the camera shifts between them with that fast pan with the
blur in between.  The kind that has a >whoosh

Finally, there's the music.  There are a lot of good tunes in this
film that will get you tapping your feet.  The problem is, almost none
of them fit the location.  Like any other place in the world, the San
Fernando Valley has a certain style, so to hear blues played over a
shot of a car pulling up in front a suburban home just doesn't click.
There are enough references to the environs that it's obvious Herzfeld
wants you to remember the setting throughout the film, so the music
should have been chosen to reflect this.  My advice would be to go out
and look for the soundtrack.  You'll be able to listen to it without
getting thrown off by watching the movie.

Author
Dave Cowen
The fact that this film's own promotional materials and private
reviews provide almost constant comparisons to PULP FICTION didn't 
keep me away from 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY is pretty sad: a comparison 
with PULP FICTION is nearly as much a kiss of death these days as 
knowing that a film was not shown to critics for review.  Perhaps 
MGM was trying to recreate the promotion of GET SHORTY, a tepid film 
that through the constant comparison of Elmore Leonard's dialogue 
with Tarantino, along with the presence of the ubiquitous John 
Travolta, made the film a commercial success.  The only link that 
2 DAYS has with Pulp Fiction is that there are small-time gangsters, 
and occasionally those gangsters do funny things.  To that end, I
offer my own comparison: "It's like PULP FICTION with PRATFALLS!"
James Spader plays hit man Lee Woods, a man obsessed with a single
unit of time, and who, with the help of Swedish sex bomb Helga 
Svelgen (Charlize Theron) and small-time thug Dosmo Pizzo
(Danny Aiello) murder the ex-husband of Becky Foxx (Teri Hatcher).
Soon after, an unsuccessful writer/director (Paul Mazursky), a 
snobbish art-dealer (Greg Cruttwell), and a homicide-department 
wannabe (Eric Stoltz) fall into the mix.  
What grounds 2 DAYS IN THE VALLEY is the mistaken sense of 
sentimentality it presents: director/writer John Herzfield tries
to evoke as much sympathy for these characters in as broad a manner
as possible -- Mazursky's suicidal writer can't bring himself to 
kill himself because of the stares of his lovable dog, Aiello's 
small-time thug also happens to be a great cook, Stoltz's character
doesn't want to bust a massage parlor because of his affection for
one of the massage-girls.  Too many scenes play as being ridiculously
maudlin: the characters are those good-hearted sensitive types who
get things wrong at first but redeem themselves at the end.  You
know the kind of character I'm talking about -- and if you're like 
me, you've never met one in real life.
Not only has this film been compared with PULP FICTION, but also 
Robert Altman's SHORT CUTS.  While Short Cuts offers an entirely
unsentimental look at the same community -- offering a glimpse into
the lives of real people and the way they are interconnected and
then cutting off from them without resolution -- 2 DAYS is compelled
like a bad TV movie to wrap everything up neatly in the last 
few frames.  The good guys win, the bad guys lose, everyone gets 
over their neuroses by carrying around guns and dropping their 
hairpieces for two days.
The film isn't entirely irredeemable, however: Greg Cruttwell's 
performance is lifted directly from his performance as the 
overpowering, abusive Jeremy in Mike Leigh's Naked, and his 
over-the-top histrionics are a lot of fun throughout the first
half of the film.  Ultimately, though, the schtick is played for 
too long and his character is dumped violently from the script by 
the end of the movie.  Also suddenly dumped, puzzlingly, is the 
partner to Eric Stoltz's character... who leaves the story in a 
strangely unsympathetic way. 
Throughout the film, the Mazursky character talks about his film
"Lights Out", which was supposed to be a drama, but then suddenly
introduced an elephant into the mix for comedy.  The pratfalls in
this film seem equally overwheming: the comedy doesn't blend with
the rest of the film.  Amazingly, the comedy is not the kind of 
smirking Gen-X pop-culture humor we see so much of these days... it's
actually worse!  It's bonafide physical humor lifted from a million
bad films from the 50's, with double-takes, mistaken identities,
crazy animals, and every other old trick in the book.  Some of it 
works: Danny Aiello goes "UHHHH!" and almost shoots a sculpture of a 
dog with the face of Greg Cruttwell's character when entering a room.
Most of the rest of the comedy is, amazingly enough, much more broad
and little of it works at all.  Did I mention Danny Aiello's 
hairpiece keeps falling off?
It's not PULP FICTION, and it's not SHORT CUTS -- and it's nowhere 
near the calibre of those two films.  It's really pretty bad.  I 
wanted to give up long before these 2 DAYS were over.
