Title
Review for It (1927)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Clara Bow's film career peaked in 1927 with two
highly successful silent classics.  One was "Wings",
the aviation drama that was the first film to win
the Academy Award for Best Picture.  Her other
great success for that year was "It".  For the
rest of her short career (her last film was in 1933)
Bow would be known as the 'It' girl.
"It" was loosely based upon Elinor Glyn's pulp
novelette, which defined 'it' essentially as a code
word for overwhelming sex appeal.  Paramount cleverly
used Glyn and her 'it' concept, to promote Clara
Bow as the epitome of 'it'.  This led to Glyn
being paid $50,000 for a brief appearance in the
film, and to proclaim Bow as the 'it' girl.
"It" is also noted for having an early screen
appearance by Gary Cooper, who has a brief role
as a newspaper reporter.  Cooper was reportedly
one of Bow's many conquests.  Scandals, both
real and fabricated, helped drive Bow out of
Hollywood.
"It" is one of the best preserved silent films
that I have seen.  There are no dancing lines
or exploding white dots, no orange-yellow tones,
and no obvious missing frames.  Such problems
are endemic to most 1920s films, but not this one.
The storyline would probably annoy feminists if
the film was made today.  Betty (Bow) works as an
impoverished salesgirl in a large department store
owned by dashing but humorless Waltham (Antonio
Moreno).  Betty's best friend is troubled unwed
mother Molly (Priscilla Bonner), whose baby is
the target of meddlesome social workers.
Betty works hard to catch the eye of Waltham,
whose fiancee Jacqueline (Adela Van Norman) is
attractive but boring.  Betty uses grinning
fop Monty (William Austin) to get access to
Waltham, who doesn't stand a chance.  Bow's
vivacious, flirtatious personality struck
a chord with film audiences who saw her as
emancipated from the restrictive moral code
that preceded the Jazz Age.
Yes, but how good is the movie?  Producer Adolph
Zukor's attention ensured a big budget with good
sets.  The characters are all stock, but the
film has its charm, no doubt supplied more by
Bow's presence than by Clarence Badger's
direction.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
