Title
Review for Guinevere (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GUINEVERE (director/writer: Audrey Wells; cinematographer: Charles
Minsky; editor: Dody Dorn; cast: Stephen Rea (Connie Fitzpatrick), Sarah
Polley (Harper Sloane), Jean Smart (Deborah Sloane), Gina Gershon
(Billie), Carrie Preston (Patty), Paul Dooley (Walter), Francis Guinan
(Alan Sloane ), Sandra Oh (Cindy), Grace Una (April), Jasmine Guy
(Linda), Emily Procter (Susan Sloane), 1999)
A totally unbelievable coming of age love story told from the female's
perspective. It takes place in San Francisco and is about a bohemian
photographer in his fifties, Connie (Rea), who exploits younger women
who live with him while he teaches them to be artists. Connie meets the
shy girl, who'll be 21 in a few months, Harper Sloane (Polley), at her
sister's wedding, where he is the wedding photographer. She feels
awkward being there and the photographer does his best to make her feel
at ease. She tells him that she does not want her photo taken, which
becomes his way of gaining her confidence, by not including her picture
in the wedding party.
Connie has taken one alluring photo of her at the wedding, which she
picks up at his studio apartment, and he signs it to my Guinevere. He
sweet talks her, calling her Guinevere (for some inexplicable reason he
calls all his lovers that), and finds that she is vulnerable and dying
for romantic attention. She is very unhappy in her affluent but chilly
household of lawyers, where she is expected to follow suit and go to
Harvard law school, a school she has been accepted to but tells her
parents that she was rejected from. Dad is a lawyer, her older sister
and her sister's husband are lawyers.
It's unbelievable that her parents will not catch this lie about her
rejection from law school and it is even more unbelievable of her moving
in with the photographer but telling them she is living with her
girlfriend Patty without her parents checking this out.
Her brief romance with Connie, for less than a year, helps her overcome
her inadequacies, and gives her a chance to sexually develop. Connie has
a history of being with young girls he trained by his live-in
arrangement method. She meets his other girls, sees that they all have
photos taken of their breasts also, and she becomes friendly with them,
sharing their stories and experience. Everything about these
girl-to-girl conversations seemed forced. Gina Gershon, in a very slight
part, is the one who distinguishes herself most of all the girls, by
being her closest confidante.
The most praiseworthy scene takes place some sixty minutes into the
film, when Mrs.
Deborah Sloane (Jean Smart) appears in the lovebird's nest. Mrs. Sloane
is an elegant, articulate woman, in her forties, who is not afraid to
tell Connie what she thinks of him. She does not make a loud scene, but
rather lawyer-like presents her case against him. She tells
Connie:"You're even older than me, and you're f*cking my daughter." She
also adds, that no woman who is not physically perfect would dare show
her flesh to the experienced eyes of Connie. And she then comes to her
main point, "I know exactly what my daughter has that I haven't got. It
is Awe." Connie- whose reaction is of visible hurt, replies "You're
quite a woman, Deborah." But she puts him down with "Mrs. Sloane. I am
Mrs. Sloane," and she departs. This simple truth hurts the
photographer's pride significantly. And that's the gist of the movie.
Though it does drag on for an excrutiatingly embarrassing forty more
minutes, until it predictably shows Harper overcoming her problems of
feeling inadequate.
The film heads down a road of corn ball contrivances, that kill any
chance for this story to be taken seriously. Connie has to be
hospitalized for detoxification, and he is also broke. Therefore, the
couple drive from San Francisco to Los Angeles where he hopes to sell
some of his pictures. Sadly, he is reduced to getting a handout from an
old friend. Then in a restaurant he loses some false teeth while eating
and to pay the dentist they pawn his Nikon camera. While staying in a
motel room, he sends out Harper to buy liquor and leaves her there with
enough money to get back to San Francisco, too humiliated to face her
again. Four years later, Harper is now a successful photographer and
returns to see the dying Connie, whom she always had a kind opinion of,
joining the four other Guineveres who are heaping praise on their soon
to be departed lover and guru, in a fantasy scene that is sickeningly
pointless.
It was very difficult to watch these talented performers saying all this
soap opera mush, which trivialized what could have been an interesting
film about a woman learning to become a woman through sex, if in the
hands of a more capable director/screenwriter. Polley is a fine actress
and her performance when first encountering sex, is one of nervous
apprehension and childish giggles. It was the only thing about this film
that felt real, of a young girl coming to terms with her sexuality and
waking up to all the possibilities that she was a woman. But that brief
scene, as powerful as it was, was not enough to save this mawkish film
for first-time director Audrey Wells.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews "
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
In recent years, onscreen romantic pairings of older men and much
younger women have become more and more commonplace (Michael Douglas and
Gwyneth Paltrow, Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta-Jones, to name two
noteworthy examples).  However, rarely, if ever, do films make an issue
of vast age difference, even when the audience is slightly discomfited by
the fact that these man can, indeed, be these women's fathers. 
_Guinevere_ is a film far removed from the Hollywood mainstream that
perpetuates that trend, but its intelligent examination of the girl-man
romantic dynamic is a refreshing change of pace.
No female character in _Guinevere_ actually shares her name with the
legendary queen of Camelot, but the pet name is given to Harper Sloane
(Sarah Polley), a directionless recent college graduate, by Connie
Fitzpatrick (Stephen Rea), a photographer whom Harper meets at her
sister's wedding.  Connie is much older than Harper, and not exactly the
most handsome man out there, but his way of making her feel special and
wanted makes for the ultimate attraction.  But as Harper soon finds out,
she is only the latest in a long line of Guineveres.
Although the point of view of the film is distinctly female (the
writer-director is a woman, Audrey Wells), _Guinevere_ doesn't stack the
deck against Connie; in fact, the treatment of the relationship is
surprisingly evenhanded.  While there is no doubt that Connie takes
advantage of Harper's youth and naivete, he also helps her and his past
Guineveres find their ambition and direction in life (in Harper's case,
photography).  The extent to which he exploits the young women and that
to which he helps them is left open to debate, but there is no doubt that
the inspiration he gives his "students" is more than sexual.
But that doesn't mean there aren't darker edges to the character of
Connie, and Rea, while always exhibiting a layer of vulnerability that is
crucial to the film's success, also doesn't downplay the somewhat
unsettling mystery about him.  When Harper's uppity mother (Jean Smart)
cuts him down in a most refined yet menacing manner (it's a terrific
scene that could very well win Academy attention for Smart), while one
hates her bitchy attitude, one can still see where the objections are
coming from.  But the film isn't called _Guinevere_ for nothing, and
Polley is the clear standout of the impressive cast.  Not only is she
never less than convincing as both a a girl at the beginning and a woman
at the end, she believably develops into the latter as the film
progresses.
Unfortunately, Wells isn't able to come up with a wrapup that matches
the impact of Harper's journey.  The final scene is a nice and
interesting one, but it seems a bit too sugary to really feel of a piece
with the rest of _Guinevere_--which is smart and compelling enough as a
whole to overcome that comparatively minor misstep.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Guinevere
Starring Sarah Polley, Stephen Rea, Jean Smart, Gina Gershon, Paul
Dooley, Carrie Preston, Jasmine Guy
Written and Directed by Audrey Wells
website: www.miramax.com
Didn't we see enough magazine articles about Hollywood's predilection
for teaming older actors and way too young for them actresses ad nauseam
in the past year? At least in the case of Guinevere the perpetrator is a
female, the writer of the most excellent The Truth About Cats and Dogs,
Audrey Wells. Wells makes her directorial debut with Guinevere, which is
a straight romance without any of the gentle humor found in Cats and
Dogs.
To call Harper Sloane (Sarah Polley) anything other than wallflower
would be an exaggeration. She hides behind closed doors, bottle in hand,
at her sister's wedding; Asks the wedding photographer to leave her out
of the photographs; Doesn't understand why the shutterbug, Cornelius
"Connie" Fitzpatrick (Stephen Rea) calls her "Guinevere". As we will
discover, it's an opening line that Connie has used many times before.
Connie's sole claim to fame is his one published book, "Street Glory,"
which connected him with his own patron (Paul Dooley), who bought
Connie's photographs as art. In between, he shoots weddings to pay the
end of the month rent on his industrial loft. Which brings us full
circle.
Like the mentor/student story of artists Alfred Steiglitz and Georgia
O'Keefe, referenced in the flick, Connie takes unfocussed young chicks
under his wing and puts them to work, discovering their creative sides
in photography, art, painting, or other creative processes. It's a good
thing to be a mentor, to guide the young on a path towards some
manifestation of enlightenment and, if you get a little on the side, or
in the darkroom, or on the roof, so much the better . . .
Stephen Rea brings his droopy dog-eyed look to the screen and Sarah
Polley is occasionally flitty, but why the pair connect on an emotional
level is quite beyond me. There's no sense that Connie is the proverbial
"dirty old man" though, as we meet earlier Guineveres (including Jasmine
Guy and the more prominent Gina Gershon) a pattern emerges. Harper's
family, believing that she is away at college, is initially deceived.
When Mom (Jean Smart) discovers the relationship, she reacts with a cold
fury and a savage verbal deconstruction as to Connie's motives. This
scene alone is worth the price of a ticket and earns Smart a place on my
end of year "best" list.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Guinevere, he would have paid...
Pay per view level. Guinevere is just an OK flick for the indie arthouse
circuit.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GUINEVERE (1999) ** 1/2. Directed and written by Audrey Wells. 
Photography, Charles Minsky. Editing, Dody Dorn. Production design, 
Stephen McCabe. Music , Christophe Beck. Cast: Stephen Rea (Connie 
Fitzpatrick), Sarah Polley ( Harper Sloane), Jean Smart (Deborah 
Sloane), Gina Gershon (Billie), Paul Dooley (Walter), et al. 
Producers :
Tani Cohen, Boaz Davidson, Danny Dimbort, Dody Dorn, Beau Flynn, 
Julia Ganis , Todd Gilbert,  Jonathan King (III), Avi Lerner, 
Claudine Magre , Trevor Short, Stefan Simchowitz, Bob Weinstein, 
Harvey Weinstein, Brad Weston (II). A Miramax production. 104 
minutes. R (sex)
Reluctantly, I'll have to spell out much of the plot. "Guinevere" is 
a May -October love affair. Bohemian photographer Connie Fitzpatrick, 
is played by Irishman (b.1949) Stephen Rea. Harper Sloane, is played 
by Sarah Polley (b.1949). We meet them at her sister's wedding in 
July 1991., in San Francisco.
The Sloanes are an upper middle-class family, at least in income: Dad 
is a lawyer, Big Sister is a lawyer, her husband is a lawyer. There's 
symbolism here, but it is not especially exploited, except that 
Harper, a recent college graduate, has been accepted at the Harvard 
Law School and appears to be less than enthusiastic about it.
At the wedding she  seems to feel awkward, restless and uninvolved 
--until she meets its photographer Connie. The turning point comes 
later, when the pictures he took arrive. He's framed them so as to 
miss Harper, but the lot includes a presumably "catch the real 
person" picture of her, solo. The enchanted girl rushes to visit him 
in his proletarian studio-plus-apartment. He impresses her with his 
persona, she impresses him with her youth, things heat up and she 
moves in with Connie while lying to her family by saying she is had. 
in fact, not been accepted by Harvard and that she is now staying 
with a girlfriend. The Sloanes -- defying  logic --somehow accept 
both alibis.
Connie seduces Harper both physically and mentally, makes her his 
assistant and teaches her photography. You smell  immediately the 
Pygmalion thing --with a difference: it's like Rex Harrison going to 
bed with Audrey Hepburn first, and only then drilling her in the art 
of speaking. Here this is visual language, with a Nikon camera. 
Harper does well, but too soon for viewers  who are "au courant" with 
the skills of photography. Still, it is an interesting relationship, 
even though neither he nor she are interesting per se.
Following a mixed bag of small episodes, some fifty minutes into the 
film, Mrs. Deborah  Sloane appears in the twosome's abode. She is a 
handsome 40-year-old woman (Jean Smart, b.1959) who might have made a 
more appropriate mistress than her daughter. Ms. Smart steals the 
show in a rather short sequence. She does not throw a tantrum, does 
not recriminate, but coolly dissects the situation. She tells Connie 
:"You're even older than me, and you're [word deleted] my daughter." 
She also analyzes, with a clever subtext of regret, the fact that no 
woman who is not physically perfect would dare show her flesh to the 
experienced eyes of Connie. And she hits the nail on the head with "I 
know exactly what she [Harper] has that I haven't got. Awe" which she 
explains lucidly.  Connie- the-seducer's reaction is "You're quite a 
woman, Deborah." But she puts him down with "Mrs. Sloane. I am Mrs. 
Sloane" and departs.
This sequence is the best in the movie, especially as the 
well-sketched Mrs. Sloane can be at the same time a haughty 
socialite, a flutterhead,  a bitch on wheels., and wise.
The movie is, in part, about Harper's belated (she'll be 21 in a few 
months) coming of age. Now she is thinking of moving out and having 
her own small apartment near Connie's. He counters with "this is no 
time to go" adding that in five years' time she will know when that 
time comes. Nonetheless, Harper returns to her parents' home. At the 
dinner table, Deborah has the cowed group (her husband, two daughters 
and son-in-law) play a perverted fame involving fortune cookies. The 
young woman has had it. She returns to Connie who is throwing a 
surprise party for her 21st birthday. It is a bohemian affair, in 
which the various types seem to be as dull and stereotyped as the 
buttoned-up bourgeois.
Some time passes. The movie, neutral until now, takes a serious, sad 
swerve. Connie has to be hospitalized for detoxification. (We knew he 
was a hard drinker but the movie had not warned us that he was an 
alcoholic). More bad news: Connie is also broke. The couple drive 
from San Francisco to Los Angeles where he hopes to sell some 
pictures. Humiliation sets in when he has to get a handout from an 
old friend,. It increases when soon after, Connie, looking his age, 
loses some false teeth while eating. To pay the dentist they pawn his 
Nikon camera (there is abundant product placement for this brand 
throughout). In a motel room, he sends out Harper to buy booze. What 
follows should evoke in  cinephile minds a variant of "A Star is 
Born." It is not, however, the end. This comes four years later, when 
Harper, now a successful photographer, returns to the dying Connie, 
joining a quartet of former lovers and at the very end describing 
death to the man via a montage of fantasies. Both sequences are 
corny, dumb  stuff that goes against the movie's realism.
Technical credits are good. The principals' performances are 
convincing, credible (except for a silly, too-young number of Connie 
on a rooftop), and  Stephen Rea handles ably a non-Irish accent : I 
heard just one brief Irish lilt in his intonation.
The main supporting role, of Billie (Gina Gershon, whose small part 
in the recent "The Insider" was memorable) is underwritten. The rest 
of the characters are insignificant sub-supporters.
Guinevere is the name the photographer gives all his mistresses. The 
why of it escapes me. I see no connection to King Arthur's wife 
Guinevere, or to Sir Lancelot, her lover.
The movie is the first one directed by Audrey Wells, the writer of 
"The Truth About Cats and Dogs." It makes its points, several of them 
sharp, others rather vague. I wonder what was the input, if any,  of 
its army of producers (see the credits above).

Author
Allan Jenoff
Harper is the younger daughter of a family of lawyers.  She is
about to head off to Harvard law school and is attending her
sister's wedding.  She meets the wedding photographer who is the
only person there, including her family, to pay any attention to 
her.  Although he is 30 years older than her, soon she is spending
time with him and secretly moves in with him, after telling her parents
she didn't get into Harvard after all.
Connie, the photographer, insists she learn to do something 
artistic and decides to teach her how to take photos.  Harper soon
learns that she is not the first young woman Connie has educated
in this fashion.  And she doesn't seem to mind.  But this is the
kind of relationship doomed to failure and how it fails is what 
interests us.  As Harper says, if you learn from your mistakes,
this was a great learning experience.
Polley is brilliant in this role, playing a naive girl who grows 
into a self-confident woman.  Rea does a great job as the fragile
older man who seduces younger woman not merely for the obvious
physical reasons but for much deeper psychological purposes.  And
Jean Smart gives a staggering performance as Harper's mother, who
can't really do anything to stop her but who knows exactly what is
happening and why.  Her confrontation with Connie is the highlight
of the film.
This is a movie packed with strong character development and 
great scenes.  Funny scenes like the fortune cookie reading at
Harper's birthday dinner at her home, to tragic scenes like
the final parting between Harper and Connie.  Unfortunately, some
of the minor roles (Gina Gershon as an exlover of Connie's) are
rather weak.  And it seems unlikely that Harper would be so 
artistically talented. But this is compensated for by the 
insights into Harper's family, who bring new levels of meaning
to the word dysfunctional, and into Connie's psychology.
The age difference between Harper and Connie has you seeing Connie
as a dirty old man.  And he is.  But by the time the movie ends,
you've come to forgive him his seductions and realize he is as
much a victim as anyone.  The young women he seduces will leave him
and go on to greater things.  But he is stuck with who and what he
is.
This is not as great a film as Polley's previous film The Sweet
Hereafter.
But it does give her an opportunity to stretch further as an 
actress and to play a complex and interesting character.  I'm 
really looking forward to what she does next and even if you're 
not a fan, you should see this film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Harper Sloane (Sarah Polley from GO and THE SWEET HEREAFTER) is the
unhappy product of a family of lawyers.  ("My family, none of us, can do
anything except doodle on legal pads.")  This being the movies, her
family is hopelessly dysfunctional, so she leaps at the opportunity to
abandon her chances at Harvard in order to take up with a photographer,
Connie Fitzpatrick (Stephen Rea from THE CRYING GAME), who is older than
her father.
Writer and director Audrey Wells's GUINEVERE suffers from a paucity of
ideas.  After setting up the plot of an older man becoming the mentor
and lover to a Lolita-style character just beyond the age of consent,
Wells has trouble finding ways to make the predictable story interesting
and to give her characters any credibility or depth.  The result is a
film that is as dull as dishwater.
Having just left a screening (ROMANCE by Catherine Breillat) in which
the filmmaker took great risks but failed spectacularly, I found that
even that film was in some ways preferable to GUINEVERE.  At least
Breillat tried.  Wells, on the other hand, makes a movie that's as inert
as outer space.  Better to swing at the ball than just stare at it with
the hope that the pitcher will walk you.  GUINEVERE, except for a few
random scenes that are sharply written, quickly becomes tedious.
One of the good scenes, which pales in contrast to similar ones in
AMERICAN BEAUTY, happens at the Sloane's dinner table.  Harper doesn't
participate in her family's intellectual jousting match, offering no
opinions on the subject at hand.  "How does one get into Harvard without
opinions," her father (Francis Guinan) asks in disdain.  "That's what
she gets there," her mother (Jean Smart) retorts.  "They'll teach her
plenty of opinions."
Surreptitiously, Harper moves in with Connie, who calls her his
Guinevere.  Viewing himself as a one-man art institute, he wants her to
take up any artistic endeavor and commit to stay with him for 5 years.
This turns out to be a tradition.  Gina Gershon plays Billie, one of his
previous Guineveres.
Soon he is manipulating Harper with false compliments and fake emotional
outbursts.  He lectures her constantly about photography and dedication
to her art.  "You take pictures when it hurts so bad you can't stand it
any more," he instructs her -- an example of the film's typically
stilted dialog.
"I've been thinking," Connie tells Harper in one of their many low
points together.  "You know what we need?  What we really need here is
some fun."  And so does the audience.  Needless to say, the fun does not
materialize.
"You call me if anything happens," Billie says towards the end.  My
sentiments exactly.  I'll be in the lobby.
GUINEVERE runs 1:44.  It is rated R for strong language and sexuality
and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GUINEVERE' (Miramax Films)
            What do you do when you're 20 years old, the youngest in a
wealthy San Francisco family of over-achieving attorneys, and you've
just been accepted at Harvard Law School? If you're awkward, insecure
and confused like Harper Stone, played by Sarah Polley ("The Sweet
Hereafter"), you run off with a passionate photographer more than
twice your age. Especially if he's a carefree, charming, ruggedly
attractive Irish bohemian like Stephen Rea ("The Crying Game"). But
Harper's not the first naive young girl he's seduced. No, there are a
bevy of "Guineveres," as he dubs them. But this is not the usual
May-September romance in which the worldly guy boosts his sagging ego
by recapturing his youth with an inexperienced girl - despite what
Harper's urbane mother (Jean Smart) says in a scathing, devastating,
accusatory encounter. Instead, it offers a sensitive insight into what
the nubile girl gets out of such a rite-of-passage relationship -
things like self-confidence, knowledge, and experience, even if the
mentor's an alcoholic. Writer Audrey Wells ("The Truth about Cats and
Dogs") makes her directing debut with this $2.6 million independent
feature that juxtaposes the formal elegance of snobbish Pacific
Heights with the impoverished yet exuberant existence of the grungy
inner city with its scruffy intellectual and artistic community. While
it's hard to take an aspiring photographer-who-never-takes-a-picture
seriously, the conclusion, which contrives to reunite the Guineveres,
seems too fanciful and out of context. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Guinevere" is a fresh, vibrant and engaging 8, commanding
attention from start to finish.

Author
James Sanford
         "Guinevere" is a movie that's likely to hit home with a lot of
viewers, even those who haven't personally been involved in either side
of an older man/younger woman relationship. You don't necessarily have
had to walk in the shoes of 21-year-old Harper Sloane to understand why
she took the path she did or why she willingly put up with a lover most
women her age would have steered clear of in the first place.
 It all comes down to acceptance. For many people in their teens
and early 20s, that's something that's surprisingly hard to find in
their homes, in their schools, even in their own peer groups. As
adolescents struggle with their changing bodies, attitudes and emotions,
most of them look for some kind of confirmation that they're on the
right track and they're not nearly as awkward or uncouth or stupid as
they often feel.
 Sometimes this kind of reassurance comes from an understanding
teacher or an older friend. Or it may come from someone who doesn't
necessarily have the young person's best interests at heart. In Harper's
case, it comes from a man named Connie Fitzpatrick, who is more than
twice her age and who may or may not be a positive force in shaping her
life.
 Harper is played by Canada's answer to Jodie Foster, the
radiant Sarah Polley. She first came to prominence as a child star in
movies such as "One Magic Christmas" and director Terry Gilliam's "The
Adventures of Baron Munchausen," and in the 10 years since, she's become
an exceptionally versatile actress who's particularly good at getting a
handle on characters who rise above their circumstances. She was a
schoolgirl who slept with her father's friends to pay the bills in
director Atom Egoyan's "Exotica," a crippled survivor of a near-fatal
accident in "The Sweet Hereafter" and, perhaps to show she can lighten
up a bit when she needs to, she gave a saucy, funny performance as a
savvy grocery store clerk who successfully marketed chewable aspirin as
a designer drug for the rave set in director Doug Liman's terrific
sleeper "Go."
 Here, Polley immediately zeroes on Harper's insecurities and
quiet fears and brings them delicately to the surface. Despite her
intelligence and poise, Harper feels utterly out of place among her
wealthy family and does her best to fade into the wallpaper as everyone
she knows gathers to celebrate her sister's wedding. Connie (Stephen
Rea) has been hired to photograph the reception and he and Harper bond
immediately. He sees the unexplored potential in Harper and draws her
into his life. She follows willingly, and he christens her "Guinevere."
 Not long afterward, Harper will find out she's the latest in a
substantial string of Guineveres. In some movies -- and in a lot of
romances -- that would be the end of the story, but not here.
Writer-director Audrey Wells realizes these two still have much more to
learn about -- and from -- each other.
 Wells previously wrote the wonderful 1996 comedy "The Truth
About Cats and Dogs," in which Janeane Garafolo was cast as a young
woman who hid behind jokes and sarcasm in the hope no one would see her
romantic side. "Guinevere" offers the flip side of that story. Instead
of hiding from love, Harper is starving for a little bit of art and
idealism after having grown up in a house full of cynics. Garafalo's
character in "Cats and Dogs" was ultimately softened up by her first
brush with passion, but we know Harper will experience just the opposite
effect.
 Wearing his bohemian air as comfortably as an old sweater, Rea
makes Connie likable, even though we may question his motives and
morals. Harper may be Guinevere, but Connie is not the dashing Lancelot,
nor is he the dream-driven Arthur. He's just a middle-aged man who wants
someone to look up to him, and Harper's mother (Jean Smart) nails him
down perfectly when she tells him the one thing Harper can give that the
50ish Connie can't get from a woman his own age: that sense of youthful
awe.
 When Connie and Harper are together, you don't get a sense of
great passion, but rather a feeling you're watching a couple of people
who are getting what they need from each other at this particular
moment. That kind of reciprocity may not be the basis for a timeless
love story, but it's exactly what you'll find in a lot of friendships,
relationships and marriages. As this resonant movie clearly illustrates,
many of us don't find that elusive Camelot, especially not the first
time out. James Sanford

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some time back Diogenes searched high and low in his
part of Greece, looking fruitlessly for an honest man.  If he
were alive today, he'd probably search another lifetime for a
middle-aged man who has never entertained a fantasy about
a relationship with a 20-year-old woman (or man, depending). 
For guys who live strictly in a fantasy world, there's nothing
like a solid movie for an awesome vicarious experience of
that specifically human fancy. "Guinevere" realizes the vision
better than any other film has done this year to date. 
"Guinevere," which is both written and debut-directed by
Audrey Wells ("The Truth About Cats and Dogs") is a
remarkable accomplishment, ministering to our need for a
mature film filled with humor and pathos.  The cast is a
crackerjack ensemble of actors with Stephen Rea as 40-
something bohemian photographer Connie Fitzpatrick and
Sarah Polley as Harper Sloane, his 20-year old lover and
devotee.  "Guinevere," a slickly-made yet incisively-drawn
portrait of a May-September romance, was a hit at last
January's Sundance Festival, featuring much higher
production values than the typical indie programmed in that
Utah showplace each year.
   Particularly appealing are the shades and nuances of
feeling experienced by the two principals, each of whom has
ambiguous feelings about the affiliation while both are
unquestionably gaining impressively from their connection. 
Essentially this is a story of a young woman just out of
college who is the oddball in her haute bourgeois family, has
no idea what she's good at or even whether she has
potential, and who is culled right out of her husk by an older
man who showers attention and enlightenment on her.  As
she transforms from a shy, antisocial individual who despite
her beauty may never have had a boy friend to a romantically
fulfilled and professionally competent human being, she is in
turning contributing a great deal of gratification to the roue
who has taken her in and given her a life.
   The affair begins as ruggedly good-looking wedding
photographer Connie Fitzpatrick (Stephen Rea) plies his
trade at the plush wedding of Harper's sister.  After spotting a
candid and particularly penetrating picture of herself, Harper
visits the photographer at his bohemian digs in a run-down
San Francisco neighborhood and is seduced by his
seemingly passive but obviously confident invitation to spend
the night.  Moving in with the man after experiencing the joys
of both the flesh and the mind, Harper is prodded to study
the field that interests her the most and is plied with books,
attention, and the company of Connie's artistic friends. 
Awkward at first (at one point she spills wine on a stack of
Connie photos but is told "That's OK, I've got another bottle"),
she soon develops all the grace of a assured, fulfilled woman.
By the end of the affair, both parties have obviously grown
emotionally, both delighting in each other's company and
riding out the inevitable periods of friction and rage.
   Audrey Wells excels in both direction and scripting,
especially in getting Harper to convey nuances of emotion by
simple frowns, pouts, and subtle twists of her necklace. 
Wells also jackets the film in a variety of moods, most striking
in the concluding moments when she converts Connie's
studio into a surreal vision of heavenly light.  The director
charges the movie with witty dialogue throughout, in one
showstopping scene presenting a knockout demonstration of
putdowns from the lips of Harper's mom, Deborah (Jean
Smart), who sharply and amusingly challenges the artist's
ability to relate to a mature, experienced woman.  (One
writer who was present at Sundance exclaimed that this
scene "brought the house down.")
   Wells peppers the story with the little gestures that mean
so much in turning what could have been yet another
romance into a compelling, believable story.  There's the
entirely hilarious rich mom played with pizazz by Jean Smart
who instructs the family not to bother asking for Harper's
opinions at the dinner table: "Don't bother her...she's digging
a hole in her bread."  There's the envious middle-aged guy
sitting at a table a few yards from Connie and Harper who
quickly gives a thumbs-up sign to the would-be Humbert
Humbert.  There's the bevy of women who have "graduated"
from Connie course, each spending two or three years with
the seductive photographer, each nicknamed Queen
Guinevere by the charming fellow.  
   The flaws are minor, virtually unnoticeable, none distracting
from the momentum of the story.  Harper, for example,
considers herself unfit for anything.  She is not sociable, she
has no interest in any craft and no intellectual pretensions. 
Yet we are told that she has been admitted to Harvard Law
School.  But who's worried?  We've been made privy to the
pain that lies beneath the surface of Connie's bonhomie and
the potential possessed by Harper that needs only a catalyst
to secure its release.  All insights are put over with a good
deal of humor and love making Guinevere a winning choice
for September movie mavens.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
The seamstress down the hall has seen it several times before. A young
girl, usually in her early twenties, walks into the room of the 50
year old man. Before long, she has brought her belongings and moved
in. In a few weeks, she emerges screaming, frustrated, angry. We never
see all these women come and go, but in `Guinevere', Audrey
Wells' transfixing directorial debut, we know it all from one look
at the seamstress, an inconsequential character without a single line.
The 50 year old man is Connie Fitzpatrick (Stephen Rea), an Irish
photographer who is hired to document a wedding for an upscale family
of San Franciscan lawyers. During the proceedings, he meets Harper
Sloane (Sarah Polley), a family member who has been accepted to
Harvard Law, but has neither the self esteem nor the will to attend.
Later in the week, Harper goes to Connie's apartment/development
lab to pick up the wedding photos, and she falls deeply under the
spell of this seductive older man.  Harper, who is admittedly
camera-shy, is admitted to Connie's exclusive school for young
women, in which he shares his wisdom and art in exchange for
love. Harper is a naive nymphet, and she moves in with him.
As we learn through Harper's voice-over, Connie was the worst and
the greatest man she ever knew. For reasons which she doesn't know,
Connie refers to her as Guinevere.
However, when Harper visits with an old friend of Connie's, she
realizes that she isn't the only Guinevere who was drawn in to this
world of romance and photography, and she begins to fear the
mysterious older man. But Connie's seductive charms lure her back,
and this Lolita romance continues on. There is a scene, later in the
film, when Harper's affluent mother (Jean Smart) finds out about
the improper relationship, and she addresses the two with blunt
honesty. It is one of the more powerful scenes of `Guinevere',
and it is from that point that the romance, and the film itself,
begins to wind down.
Audrey Wells, who wrote `The Truth About Cats a nd Dogs', has
crafted a beautiful, clever film that manages an entirely new spin on
a May-December relationship. However, `Guinevere's' final
third is amateurish, and the conlusion is unsatisying compared to what
has preceeded it.
With `Guinevere', Sarah Polley finally has the leading role she
deserves, after star-making turns in Atom Egoyan's `The Sweet
Hereafter' and Doug Liman's `Go'. To Harper, she brings
the right mix of naivete and experience, and her character grows to
become three dimensional. Stephen Rea is eerily good as Connie, and
Jean Smart has a small but vital role as Harper's mother.
Despite being excellent for most of its running time,
`Guinevere's' wildly uneven conclusion is weird and
depressing. Wells doesn't know when to end the film, and the result
is like a bad dream.
However, Audrey Wells instills enough chemistry between Polley and Rea
to make `Guinevere' is still a very pleasant surprise. To me,
Sarah Polley is one of the leaders of a group of young actresses
destined for superstardom (Chloe Sevigny is another one). She has the
range to be choosy, and she can bring depth to any role.
In `Guinevere', subtlety plays the biggest role, and maybe on a
second viewing, I can see more through the seamstress' eyes. In the
end, `Guinevere' does falter, but it does so beautifully.


Author
Ron Small
Author: iysmall@aol.com (Ron Small)
Starring: Stephan Rea, Sarah Polley, Jean Smart, Paul Dooley, Gina Gershon,
Sandra Oh, Jasmine Guy, Francis Guinan, Carrie Preston
When Robert Redford courts Kristen Scott Thomas in THE HORSE WHISPERER, the
dynamics of age are conspicuously absent from the proceedings. They're ignored
or accepted for the purposes of fantasy, but GUINEVERE does neither. The most
refreshing bits of the film center on how and why these relationships come to
fruition. It gives us some low key humor and dollops of the kind of gloomy
romantic angst that those French seem to enjoy so much (yes, that is a broad
generalization). But it also rather refreshingly challenges the male half of
the older man\ younger woman equation. Unfortunately it loses focus when it
isn't dealing with that issue.
In Tinseltown it's expected that aging hunks like Warren Beatty and Sean
Connery romance women young enough to call them grandpa. Though whenever we see
such a couple on the street we immediately assume that the man in question must
be a damn Rockefeller and the women in question must be a gold digging tart who
would gladly appear on WHO WANTS TO MARRY A MILLIONAIRE? Only in Hollywood (a
mythical region where hotties like Lara Flynn Boyle throw themselves at baldies
like Jack Nicholsen) is such an oddity looked upon as normal. As I type this
Katie Holmes is wooing Michael Douglas (a man so old his wrinkles have
wrinkles) in multiplexes everywhere. Interestingly enough after filming WONDER
BOYS (in case you were curious) Douglas gets to enact the fantasy that Katie
Holmes presented by going home and banging the stunning (and just of diapers)
Catherine Zeta Jones. (Though I'm assuming the fantasy ended when Douglas
accidentally, again my own interpretation, impregnated the mighty Zeta. Oops).
In GUINEVERE's most effective scene, an effete snob (well played by Jean Smart)
confronts her 21-year-old daughter's middle aged lover: "What do you have
against women your own age?" she snarls. Connie, the middle aged man in
question, is photographed beneath her as if shamed by her bluntness. She
doesn't let him answer; instead the woman provides a contemptuous monologue
that's also painfully correct: Connie seeks out young, inexperienced women
because they look up to him as a noble savant. He's like rogue artist with much
wisdom to impart, a man who ever so romantically shuns the rich and lives for
his art in a ratty little apartment. And he believes in them, pushing them to
their full potential the way nobody else cared to do. But he wants something
from them in return. Connie wants more than respect, he wants them gaze upon
him with gooey eyes full of awe, and they do. He draws these pups in by giving
them the adoration that they've lacked in their lives. Connie is a predator,
though too sad to be malicious, he's the kind who rationalizes his faults by
"helping" his prey while simultaneously hurting them.
Harper (Sarah Polley) is a rich, shy young woman, unfairly picked on by her
family of elitist snobs. She isn't as out going, charming, or obedient enough
to be loved by them. Harper is like a modern day Cinderella with her presumably
more beautiful sister getting all the adulation. She finds the parental love
she lacks in Connie (Stephan Rea), the middle aged photographer who fancies
himself an artist. He treats her like a goddess (Queen Guenivere he calls her).
For her, this is new; nobody has ever given her this much affection. And before
long she has moved into his apartment and become his assistant as well as
lover. And Connie is in ecstasy. He is a man that enjoys the act of falling in
love rather than being in love and clearly this is the start of a new cycle.
The scene between Connie and Harper's mother is so psychologically captivating
that I wish the film had retained more of that edge. GUINEVERE's biggest flaw
is its reluctance to follow through on its most enthralling bits. However it
provides some nice understated psychological moments between Connie and Harper.
At one pont he somberly asks her "Whose my good little girl?" to which she
replies (after a stunned glance) "Me". It's sadly touching that her need for
that kind of affection puts her in the position of a helpless little child. If
someone asked me if I was a good little boy (or a good little girl for that
matter) I doubt that I would stick around after my stunned glance no matter how
down on myself I felt. Harper not only stays but basks in his misguided love.
She is his good little girl.
Sarah Polly, as Harper, is extraordinary at playing a self-conscious young
woman just as effectively as she played a wild child in GO. Her face is a
myriad of simplistically complex expressions; facile looks and gestures take
you inside her character's mind. At other times she's less subtle, but just as
effective. In scenes where Connie tends to become overly intense she breaks
into giddy fits of laughter. It reminds us that for all the grown up postures
she attempts that Harper is still an insecure child.
Stephan Rea is stoic, appearing like an emotionless brick of a man, too
self-conscious to let any emotions bleed through his sturdy exterior. Though
his guard is pummeled down in one scene where an angered Harper rapidly snaps
off pictures of him, using her Nikon camera like a weapon. Rea is the kind of
actor who tends to fade into the background. He isn't commanding (at least not
in a typical movie star way) but understated which sometimes both helps and
hurts his roles. Rea played the lead in THE CRYING GAME, where he appeared in
nearly every scene with the same placated self he presents here. As such I
found it difficult to get into his character (a character that lingered in the
background when he should have been in the foreground) in that film. In
GUINEVERE his minimalist style works more effectively because he's playing a
cerebral character who expresses himself through photographs, not outward
charm.
Unfortunately the screenplay lacks the edge that the film's actors bring. It
feels a little too safe. Writer director Audrey Welles (she wrote the
screenplay for THE TRUTH ABOUT CAT'S AND DOGS) has clearly tapped into
something personal but I don't think she had the balls to take it further into
darker places. She also flounders a bit in a silly denouement that feels
awfully forced (and one that steals liberally from ALL THAT JAZZ). It includes
a supposed sisterly connection that is formed between all of the various
Guienvere's Connie has cultivated (or maybe they cultivated him), and an absurd
fantasy sequence that's both poignant and, well, absurd.
At its best GUINEVRE is a thoughtful exploration of why these
O'Keefe\Streiglitz relationships begin (and how they end), at its worst it's a
Lifetime Television Special gloss on the obsessions of Woody Allen. I seriously
doubt Michael Douglas would recommend it.
 http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Audrey Wells, the screenwriter behind THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS,
returns to some familiar thematic ground for her directing debut
GUINEVERE.  Like CATS AND DOGS, GUINEVERE is a tale of a young woman's
self-realization through photography; also like CATS AND DOGS, and much to
its advantage, it's a story elevated by a radiant lead performance.
It's almost too easy to use the film's title for emphasis, but it's also
true: in a film that runs out of gas before it runs out of time, Sarah
Polley shines like cinema royalty, making it far easier to overlook
GUINEVERE's tactical errors.
     Polley stars as Harper Sloane, a 20-year-old recent college graduate
plagued by feelings of inadequacy in her over-achieving upper class
family.  Enter Connie Fitzpatrick (Stephen Rea), the 40-something 
photographer at Harper's sister's wedding.  Connie appeals to Harper with
the suggestion that she has the potential for artistic self-expression,
and offers himself as both lover and mentor.  The relationship becomes
complicated not just by their age difference, but by Harper's growing
concern that she's not the first young woman to experience Connie's
tutelage.
     There's no question that Polley -- who dazzled in THE SWEET HEREAFTER
and stole the multi-character GO -- is turning into one of the most gifted
actresses of her generation.  Like Janeane Garofolo in THE TRUTH ABOUT
CATS AND DOGS, she makes insecurity genuinely affecting instead of merely
affected, doing things with her mouth and her eyes that make your heart
want to break.  There is a scene involving Connie's first sexual advances
that has been played in any number of films with a soft-focus earnestness;
Polley giggles and shifts with nervous energy, finding the awkwardness at
the heart of initial intimacies.  She is ably complemented by Rea -- who
takes an alcoholic lecher and manages to make him as sympathetic as he is
slimy -- and Jean Smart -- a caustic delight as Harper's mother.
     Something about GUINEVERE, however, begins to feel forced.  The tone
grows unnecessarily "heavy," turning a frisky coming-of-age piece into one
of those "I was never the same after that summer stories."  Wells also
plays her ace too early, making a revelation about the nature of Harper
and Connie's relationship that turns much of the film into a waiting game.
While it's bitterly funny watching Mrs. Sloane dissect Connie's motives,
it provides too simple an explanation for the complex dynamics of a
potentially interesting relationship, and ultimately shifts the balance of
the film away from Harper and towards Connie.  Though Wells' GUINEVERE has
a lot going for it in the way of sharp dialogue and finely crafted
character moments, the film-maker stumbles when she doesn't realize that
the best thing she's got going is Polley.  In this bright young actress's
capable hands, this story of lessons in love earns solid marks.
