Title
Review for Quiet Man, The (1952)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
John Ford wanted to direct a film about an
American boxer's return to his Irish roots,
but couldn't get any studio to bankroll it.
John Wayne had agreed to star in the picture,
and his name was box office gold, but the
studios suspected that the American public
would be indifferent to Irish culture.
Of all the Hollywood studios, Republic Pictures,
best known for their awful low-budget westerns,
ended up producing the film.  They were rewarded
with an Oscar nomination for Best Picture, while
Ford won Best Director and Winton C. Hoch won
for the rich color cinematography.
Wayne's boxing career in the states ends when
he kills a man in the ring.  He retires to the
Irish cottage where he was born, and weds fiery
red-head Maureen O'Hara.  But O'Hara's brother,
bullying Victor MacLaglen (apparently a much older
brother!) refuses to pay the dowry, forcing a
physical confrontation with Wayne.
"The Quiet Man" benefits greatly from the presence
of two of Hollywood's best character actors, Irish
curmudgeon Barry Fitzgerald and the hulking,
cantankerous McLaglen.  McLaglen would be nominated
for Best Supporting Actor for his performance.
O'Hara is radiant as always.  Wayne once again plays
himself, but he does it so well.
I don't know if the early 1950s depiction of rural
Ireland is accurate.  Apparently, all of the buildings
have stood for centuries, and in the taverns serving
black beer, there is always a fellow with an accordion
singing Irish ballads.  Horse and carts are still
common.  Whether this is an accurate portrayal or a
fantasy isn't important, however, as the viewer will
gladly accept this colorful world of rolling hills
and Irish brogues.
The film's ultimate message, that it is necessary to
confront bullies in order to prove your manhood,
bothers me a little.  (It is a wise policy to ensure
the odds are in your favor first.)  Also, there is a
scene where Wayne is pushing, dragging and even kicking
O'Hara, to an approving audience.  One woman even gives
Wayne a stick "to beat yer lovely wife with".  This is
supposed to be a comic scene, but I can't say that I
approve of it.
Still, a highly entertaining film, with excellent
performances especially by Fitzgerald and McLaglen.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
