Title
Review for Legends of the Fall (1994)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Stan Sawyer
     I am entirely infuriated.  I have just watched the movie LEGENDS
OF THE FALL.  This is by far the worst movie I have ever seen.  Not
that the cinematography had any problems.  Just the scriptwriter and
the director who thought that this was any more that a reflection of
the worst of our own time.
     Here is Tristan, a rugged individualist, who cares nothing for
anyone but himself and his own grief.  Now, don't get me wrong here:
he has plenty to grieve in the death of this brother and the loss and
regain of a mate.  But his answer is self-pitying revenge and
mourning.
     I understand the necessity of mourning as much as any man.  Yes,
I mean man since it is men in our society who have this particular
problem with grief.  I have been as stuck in my own grief as anyone I
know.  I am certain that my desire to move beyond this grief into new
relationships and self-understanding is at least one of the reasons
that I find this movie so revolting.
     Tristan, refuses to face his own grief.  Instead, he first is a
good student, then good at his vocation (rancher?), then ignores the
problem (to the point of totally ignoring triggers like the cow caught
in barbed-wire), then throws himself into his sadness (by throwing
himself into the arms of his dead brothers mate), then runs away in
search of distractions from his mourning, then gets caught up in
enterprise.  Finally, his "bonded males" (in this case a father and a
brother) rescue the man who is still a boy, allowing him to run away
one more time from the grief he should be facing.
     Tristan asks his father if he has damned everyone around him as
well as himself.  His father cannot say "no."  Only that "I won't allow
that."
     Yes, I'm pissed off.  I'm tired of a society that allows for two
types of men: the business-like ones who ignore their "feelings" and
the sensitive ones who totally immerse in the grief and pain of life.
It's time to wake up, men.  Don't let this sort of media/societal
affirmation encourage you to remain stuck in the doldrums of life.
Life into and through these experiences.  Don't let them be a part of
your stuckness!  Let them be a part of your healing and awakening to
the newness of more complete, less self-absorbed relationships.  Let
them give rise to a new you who can "be all that you can be" in ways
that you never imagined.
     Tristan wrestles with a bear in the final scene.  The narrator
tells us that this was a good death.  He is wrong.  Wrestling with our
"nature" in our own death throes is not good.  Good would mean some
manner of comming to resolution with our own sense of self.  Leaving
the nature-wrestling, self-absorbed, dying self behind and becoming the
fullness of the nature-loving, self-fulfilling, living self who
recognizes now as now and then as then.
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL is about losing self.  Don't accept this
encouragement to die while we are alive.  LIVE.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL is a soap opera set on a ranch in Montana at
the turn of the century.  It goes from the age of cowboys and Indians
with everybody on horseback to World War I and beyond.  It is a large
movie painted on a vast canvas ultimately spanning almost a century.
At the core of the piece is the story of a young man, played by
heartthrob Brad Pitt, his family, friends, and lovers.
     The movie starts with his dad (Anthony Hopkins) fighting for
Indian rights by quitting the army in protest.  It then immediately
switches to an isolated ranch in some of the most beautiful Montana
landscape you have ever seen.  At the ranch are his two brothers (Aidan
Quinn and Henry Thomas) and an old, wise, trusted, and heavily cliched
Indian friend (Gordon Tootoosis).  Eventually, there are two girlfriends
(Julie Ormond and Karina Lombard) as well plus lots of other minor
characters.
     The biggest attraction for the movie is watching the visuals.  The
landscape chosen was stunning.  The cinematography was perfect with 90%
of the outdoor scenes carefully filmed in the last twenty minutes of
twilight and always with the actors' hair back-lit by the setting sun.
The indoor scenes were dark with the glow of candles or with light
streaming in from the outside.  Travelogues never looked better.  I
expected to see someone selling land in Montana in the lobby after the
show!
     Unless you are a big fan of seeing hearts cut out of the bodies of
animals and people or unless you feel you must see all of Brad Pitt's
movies (he is major handsome), I can see no reason to see this film
other than as a long travelogue.
     The biggest problem I had with the movie was the script (written
by Susan Shilliday and Bill Wittliff) and to a lesser degree the
directing (by Edward Zwick).  There are so many ridiculous and
unbelievable things these characters do that I ran out of fingers and
toes counting them.  Totally unbelievable.  I did not care about any of
them.
     After forty-five minutes, I was looking at my watch hoping it
would get better (it actually got worse), and wondering when it would
end.  Sad to say it ran for an incredibly long 2:13.  Perhaps they are
going to make it into a TV mini-series which is what it looked like
anyway.  It is correctly rated R for heavy violence.  If your teenager
wants to see it, buy her a poster of Brad Pitt instead for her room and
suggest she pass on the movie.  I recommend this movie only to those
interested in relocating to Montana.  I award the movie * 1/2 and
suggest all of the proceeds of the show be paid directly to the
cinematographer.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: January 20, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Rich Siege
Starring:   Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Aidan Quinn,  Julia Ormond,
            Henry Thomas
Directed by: Edward Zwick
Produced by:  Edward Zwick, Bill Wittliff, Marshal Herskovitz
Screenplay by: Susan Shilliday, Bill Wittliff (based on a novella by Jim
               Harrison)
Director of Photography: John Toll
Music: James Horner
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL would have made a good silent movie.  Its
well-worn story of a family divided by the love of a woman is sustained
primarily by images and music.  The epic sweep of  LEGENDS, which takes
us from a Montana ranch, to the battlefields of World War I, to the
South Seas and even to urban back alleys complete with gangsters, is
perfect camera fodder.  The actors provide the longing looks of
unrequited love, the writhing death scenes and the frail quiverings
of old age.  In the broader strokes of the silents, this would have
been first-rate material.  However, now, it all seems rather
overwrought and anachronistic.
     Brad Pitt, Aidan Quinn and Henry Thomas portray the three sons of
a former Union Army Colonel (Anthony Hopkins), who, after being
outraged by the treatment of  Native Americans during the Indian Wars,
resigns his commission and starts a cattle ranch in Montana.
     Early on, Director Edward Zwick paints an idyllic portrait of the
life of this gentleman-rancher and his sons growing up in the wilds of
Montana (Recollections of BONANZA are unavoidable during the early part
of this film.).  The film patiently, almost reverently, depicts the
love and respect the boys have for each other and their father  (Their
mother, early on, departs for a less rugged environment.).  When we
first see Pitt,  Quinn, Thomas and Hopkins their characters seem to
have some genuine warmth and depth.  When the youngest son, Samuel
(Henry Thomas), arrives home from college with his bride-to-be, the
subtle sense of impending conflict amidst the brotherly camaraderie is
apparent.  Their harmonious life is about to about to come apart.
     When Samuel announces his plan to join the Army to fight the
Kaiser in the Great War and we see Tristan (Brad Pitt) comforting
Samuel's fiancee Susannah (Julia Ormond) when she learns of his plan,
we pretty much know where this story is headed: Samuel is doomed and
Tristan and Susannah will fall in love.
     LEGENDS is fairly routine melodrama.  Not that there's anything
wrong with that.  But in this case, once the stage is set and the main
conflicts defined, the film fails to lives up to its early promise of
rich characterizations and story.  Instead, Pitt and Quinn retreat
into, what for them, are becoming stock characters:  Pitt plays
Tristan--riddled with guilt at the death of Samuel and his love for
Susannah--as the same brooding, haunted soul he portrayed in INTERVIEW
WITH A VAMPIRE.  He unvaryingly expresses a sort of impenetrable
detachment throughout most of the film;  After years of traveling the
world as an adventurer and big-game hunter--which, on screen, is
depicted in a long, awkward section of narration and montage--Pitt's
character returns home with virtually no hint of change or maturation,
as if he'd been gone for a long weekend  (except for a beard that makes
him look remarkably like Val Kilmer's Jim Morrison from THE DOORS.).
     Quinn, also reverts to his predictably long-suffering,
self-righteous character that he has used before in films such as BENNY
AND JOON.  Despite his character's success in business and politics--he
becomes a Congressman--he can't shake that perpetual hurt and betrayed
look.
     Anthony Hopkins provides the appropriate strength and dominance to
the role of the Colonel until his character is reduced, by a stroke, to
a jumble of facial tics and mumblings.
     Despite these flaws however, the film isn't a complete loss.  The
power of John Toll's cinematography and James Horner's lush,
occasionally overbearing, score--which, at times, seems to be
sustaining the film by itself--saves LEGENDS from disaster.  The
beautifully photographed settings of the Montana countryside  (actually
shot in Alberta, Canada) dominates this film.  Even in close ups, the
richness of the backgrounds occasionally upstage the actors which, in
this case, is no great loss.
Rated (R) violence, sexual situations, brief nudity, language.

Author
Gregory Lavery
     The first thing that came into my mind as I was watching LEGENDS
OF THE FALL was, when was Henry Thomas going to die? Not that I have
anything against Mr Thomas at all, it's just that I could tell from the
first thirty seconds what his fate was going to be.  The timing, of
course, was to be a bit harder to guess.
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL is Brad Pitt's latest film and it is quite
obvious that it is desgned to specifically to revolve around his, not
undeveloped, chest.  The story, such that it is, concerns three
brothers, Tristran (Pitt), Samuel (Thomas, as already mentioned) and
Alfred (Aidan Quinn) who live with their father (Anthony Hopkins) in a
secluded part of the American Frontier in the earlier part of this
century.  Samuel, the young idealist, feels it his duty to go off to
fight in the war in Europe conveniently quickly after he brings his
Bride-to-be, Suzannah (Julia Ormonde), home to meet the family.  Pitt
and Quinn, being more worldly wise than their younger brother, decide
to accompany him to the trenches in an attempt to keep him out of
trouble.  Strangely, circumstances arrange themselves in such a manner
as to create a situation in which young Samuel is sadly killed within
the first twenty minutes of the film.
     When the brothers return to their home and to their father,
Anthony Hopkins, the emotional battle begins for the hand of Suzannah
who, quite obviously, couldn't see Samuel's death coming.  The rest of
the film charts the emotional tossing and turnings of the relationships
between the brothers and the woman which, of course, ends in a way that
I could see coming from the first ten minutes of the film.
     From the above synopsis and my opening comments it may wel
appear that I did not like the film that much.  This would be true, to
a certain extent, but not the whole story.  Rather I enjoyed it
immensely because I saw the comedy in it.  I laughed, as everyone else
did in the cinema, at the film's attempts at emotional manipulation, of
a forlorn tugging on my heartstrings that were both pitiful and
comical.  From the point at which Pitt performs the bizarre ritual of
cutting out his brother's heart and putting it in a box to take home to
America, I was utterly astounded at what they would try to use as
shortcuts to an understanding of the character's psychology.  It
suddenly went beyond stereotype and into grotesque parody when we were
supposed to get a feeling of the 'animal' nature of Pitt's character
trying to preserve the 'spirit' of his dead brother.
     Being familiar with all of those movies made in the vein of
AIRPLANE!, it is obvious that most of the comedy of this genre of films
revolves around their exploitation of old movie cliches.  Conventions
like 'We'll head them off at the pass' and 'It's not what you think, I
can explain everything' crop up all the time and we laugh at them
because we know, in these cases, that they are there to be laughed at.
It is here that the most brilliant aspect of LEGENDS OF THE FALL comes
to light, here that every movie cliche is brought out for our
inspection and here that the greatest joke of all lies.  The people who
made this were being utterly serious when they did it.
     It is hard to remember a film in which so many movie cliches are
paraded about without any sense of irony in it all, the saving grace of
the AIRPLANE! genre.  The director, Ed Zwick, worked on the series
'Thirtysomething' and this background in soap operas would directly
point to where all these cliches creep in.  Does this mean that Zwick
is a bad director? Not necessarily.  It would be more correct to say
that he is totally unsuited to this kind of film, as it requires
something in addition to an overinflated sense of melodrama that he
quite obviously and abundantly possesses.  The main thing that this
movie required was subtlety, an understanding of how small gestures can
mean so much in a relationship, of how world events are always mirrored
in the tensions across even the smallest family scale and that
suffering may not always manifest itself in tear ridden angst and howls
of wolf-like pain.  It would seem obvious then that here, Zwick simply
doesn't understand how this story should be constructed, the film
becomes an epic that simply shouldn't be an epic.
     As a better example of how to direct this type of film, Zwick
would have been well advised to watch something like DW Griffith's
Birth of A Nation.  In this film, the events of the American Civil War
are made more personal by showing the viewer how it affects the day to
day lives of two families on differing sides of the conflict.  It
carries the epic scale of the events to the viewer by showing how the
'real' person would react.  This firm grounding of the story in reality
creates a better empathy between character and viewer in that what is
shown on screen takes on a life of it's own, the characters become like
our friends and the result is that we care for them that much more.
     Also, because the story doesn't reflect any major events, even,
one suspects, that the war in Europe is used only as an excuse to kill
Henry Thomas off, the story doesn't really fit with it's epic
production.  A lot of the time the screen is filled with wide open
vistas of the American Praries and some of the story events don't
really have any relevance to the main story, even in the most tenuous
fashion.  What results then, is a lot of baggage which shouldn't really
be there, wasted time from a story point of view and yawn inducing
nonsense for the viewer.
     The main story itself is also somewhat oddly organised in that it
really is difficult to predict how the ending will be constructed from
the events which are unfolding.  With most Hollywood movies the climax
will be quite obvious from the first few minutes of action, perhaps a
killer will be caught or a couple will romantically get together.  Of
course, how this will be done takes it's cue from those events unique
to that film.  Usually though, the circumstances will be immediately
obvious to the spectator.  In this film the ending is not quite as
clear cut as this and when viewed in conjunction with the the vast
amount of excess story 'baggage', the viewer can't help but become lost
and irritated when it just seems to go on and on.
     There are several other aspects of the film which are worthy of
attention, favourable or otherwise.  The first is the performance given
by Anthony Hopkins as it really does deserve some sort of award.  When
watching him play the old fashioned patriarch in the first stages of
the film he is utterly convincing, a performance up to his usual
standards.  However, one gets the feeling that approximately halfway
through the shoot he got bored, or realised what the film was going to
turn out like, and started to ham up the performance to an utterly
hilarious degree.
     At one point his character suffers a stroke which leaves half of
his face paralysed and his temper doubly magnified.  Speaking
logically, it would be quite difficult for Hopkins to mentally disable
half of his face, even though he may be a great actor, so the solution
arrived at would never quite be 'realistic'.  The way he got around
this was to turn himself into a kind of Elephant Man on Speed, a
caricature so grotesque that it turns Donald Duck into an eloquent
thespian.  From this point on it is impossible to take him, or anyone
else in the film, seriously.  I'm sure that faithfulness to the source
novella was in Zwick's mind while making the film but, with all respect
to artistic integrity, a film is a translation of the source text not a
direct copy.  For reasons of credibility, and actorial feasibility,
perhaps a change from a stroke to some other non-fatal debilitating
ailment would have been a better course of action.
     The ending of the film, when if finally arrives, also deserves
praise as the masterpiece of cliche and predictability it unashamedly
is.  Without revealing anthing I'll just say that you'll never guess
who manages to save Brad Pitt from almost certain death, just in the
nick of time!
     Of course, it's very easy to be cynical about films such as this.
They aren't really made to be torn apart in the manner that I've done
above and most films these days would fall apart under any great
scrutiny.  So, to finish off I'll give ratings in several categories
that are more illustrative of the film itself.  As a challenging film,
a 2.  As a brainless entertainment film, a 5 and as a comedy in the
style of AIRPLANE!, a 7.  Just bear in mind though, anyone who has ever
see any film before will be able to predict what's going to happen
right from the first few seconds.  Henry Thomas has got to die!

Author
Rory Mackay
THE CREDITS: Directed by Edward Zwick  Starring Brad Pitt, Anothony
Hopkins, Aidan Quinn, Henry Thomas, Julia Ormond
THE VERDICT: Grim and unyielding, but nevertheless a powerful and striking
epic.
You know it's often the case that while the majority of films keep you
occupied (hopefully even entertained!) for their duration, afterwards
you're often left with a feeling of indifference. A really good film should
have the ability to either stir your senses, engage your mind or touch your
heart. Every so often you come across a film like LEGENDS OF THE FALL, a
film which not only succeeds in doing the above, but also quite literally
punches you in the stomach! It's not a very pleasant sensation, but by
heck, it means the film-makers are doing something right!
LEGENDS OF THE FALL is a downbeat tale about three brothers, spanning the
American Indian Wars through the First World War and beyond. It's an epic
in the true sense of the world - spanning several years (and several hours
in real-time!). Director Edward Zwick does a masterful job coaxing terrific
performances from his all-star cast, and milking the beautifully location
scenery and passing events for all they're worth.
There are, however, some problems with the plotting. First of all, it's a
very grim tale - with not even a particularly happy ending, either. I can't
actually think of any real moment of happiness throughout the entire film -
there may be the odd glimmer, but I assure you it's a given that tragedy
will be lurking around the corner. There's also a rather tenuous connection
with the Native American Indians which isn't fully capitalised on. The
story is related by an Indian friend of the boy's father, One Stab, played
by Gordon Tootoosis. Other than that there seems little point to this plot
element other than glamour, which is a bit of a shame. There seems to be a
conscious attempt to somehow elevate the tale to almost "legend" status,
hence the title of the film. Sometimes it works, but generally it just
seems a bit superficial. It's a family drama, which occassionally veers
into melodrama, but is bolstered by the talent of its cast and director.
That's about it; I don't really buy into any deeper pretensions the film
may have about itself.
Kudos must be paid to the actors, who elevate a script which may have
otherwise descended into melodramatic hokum. Brad Pitt does a marvellous
job as the film's lead, the intense, disturbed Tristan. Pitt's performance
very effectively conveys a tortured soul, and with the focus primarily
resting on him as the film progresses, he carries the film nicely.
Unfortunately, Anthony Hopkins seems rather wasted as the father,
particularly as he spends half the film paralysed from a stroke and unable
to speak! But if he is only window dressing, then he's first class window
dressing at that! Julia Ormond also gives a strong performance as the
lovely Susannah, who finds herself torn between the brothers. Acting wise,
this is top of the range, and very often the performances elevate many a
scene from maudlin to emotionally poignant.
As I believe I mentioned above, director Zwick does a brilliant job
bringing to life a potentially tricky film. Whilst some lesser efforts
easily trip up when they try to do sweeping epics that span many years, for
the most part LEGENDS OF THE FALL flows effortlessly. The cinematography is
utterly beautiful, and the location work in the gorgeous hills of Montana
spectacular. Oh, and also to be highly commended is James Horner's
bombastic, majestic score - this guy knows how to score a film!
So, summing up then, a flawed but sufficient script is beautifully
performed and executed. It gets the thumbs up, but I would warn anything
thinking of watching it that it is certainly not feel-good viewing. It's a
grim and depressing tale, but brought to life by its magnificient acting,
directing and production values.
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
For more regularly-updated Film and TV reviews, check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
-*-*-*-*-*-*-*-*- 
Review written by and (c) Rory B Mackay, 1998

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Brad Pitt, Aidan Quinn, Julia Ormond, Henry Thomas,
Anthony Hopkins.
Screenplay:  Susan Shilliday and Bill Wittliff.
Director:  Edward Zwick.
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL is a big, dumb bassett hound of a movie.
It stares at you with big sad eyes, slobbers all over you and
practically begs you to like it.  It's muddled, bombastic, and often
gets by purely on style points, yet for some reason, inexplicably,
it also manages to be occasionally entertaining.  I could spend days
listing all the things that are wrong with LEGENDS OF THE FALL, and
still I'd be left with the fact that something worked.  And perhaps
that something comes down to two words: Brad Pitt.  Radiating the
kind of charisma that screen actors just don't seem to have any
more, he single-handedly makes LEGENDS OF THE FALL watchable.
     Set in turn-of-the-century Montana, LEGENDS OF THE FALL is the
story of the Ludlow family, whose patriarch (Anthony Hopkins) is a
career soldier who moves the family when he retires in disgust over
the government's policy towards Indians.  The main action begins in
1914, when youngest son Samuel (Henry Thomas) brings his fiancee
Susannah (Julia Ormond) home to meet the family.  Her introduction
into the family proves extremely unsettling, as oldest son Alfred
(Aidan Quinn) falls for her, while she finds herself drawn to wild
middle son Tristan (Brad Pitt).  Soon all three brothers head off to
fight in the first World War, where a tragedy claims one of the
brothers, sending the other two into a life-long battle with
Susannah in the middle.
     For about half an hour, LEGENDS OF THE FALL is more than simply
passable; it's a grand, beautifully filmed family drama with
tremendous potential.  All the performances are perfectly tuned, the
interactions between the brothers are convincing and the story is
well-paced.  Then the brothers are off to Europe, and the story
veers off-track, and never fully recovers.  A film which had been
moving along at a confident and leisurely pace suddenly goes into a
dead sprint that seems to get faster and faster, until by the end I
felt quite relieved that it was over.  Along the way, we get detours
into a globe-spanning guilt-quest undertaken by Tristan, a scrap
with bootlegging Irish gangsters and not one, not two, but _three_
funerals.  When combined with the framing of the story as a kind of
Native American legend, complete with a mystical brotherhood between
Tristan and a bear, it almost becomes comic.
     Fortunately, the film's technical credits are spectacular.
Director Edward Zwick scored a successful screen melodrama with
GLORY, and he appears to use many of the same tricks in LEGENDS.  In
fact, the war scenes here might easily have been the same scenes
from GLORY with different uniforms added by computer.  But John
Toll's photography of the Canadian locations (substituting for
Montana) is wonderful, and one shot of Susannah reading a letter as
she walks among tall trees is a thing of beauty.  The score is by
James Horner, and as usual he lays the strings on thick as syrup,
but it works in LEGENDS.  As the narrative becomes more and more
stream of consciousness, the look and sound of LEGENDS OF THE FALL
actually seem to improve.
     For all that, the best thing that Zwick puts on the screen is
Pitt.  Freed from the suffocating gloom of Louis in INTERVIEW WITH
THE VAMPIRE, Pitt commands the screen from his first appearance.  He
is asked to slog through several melodramatic moments in LEGENDS OF
THE FALL, but his dark intensity keeps them from being as overblown
as they might have been, and he may be as convincing a crier as any
male actor in many years.  The problem is that for long stretches,
he disappears from the narrative entirely, while other members of
the Ludlow family and Susannah take center stage.  When that
happens, LEGENDS OF THE FALL comes perilously close to putting the
audience to sleep.  Then Zwick comes through with an exceptional
final fifteen minutes, including a retribution montage which might
strike some as a bit too reminiscent of the GODFATHER films yet
works in its own right.  LEGENDS OF THE FALL is by no stretch of the
imagination great filmmaking, and occasionally it's flat-out silly.
However, when you put an ascending star in an old-fashioned Western
epic, anything is possible.  And for LEGENDS OF THE FALL, it's just
enough.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     Because I am married, sometimes I have to see films that I'm pretty
sure I'm not going to like.  Such is the case with LEGENDS OF THE
FALL, which seeks to cash in on Brad Pitt's status as the new
"murderously handsome" young male star.  But at least I get to write
this review.
     The story is, as I think the New Yorker put it, a kind of Monty
Python version of "Bonanza."  A father (played by Anthony Hopkins),
with a commendably strong sense of justice and minority rights,
especially in those days, has three sons, at least one of whom (Brad
Pitt) looks adopted, or perhaps the secret cause of the estrangement
between husband and wife.  They live on a range at the base of some
really impressive mountains that I think we don't get to see enough of
(given the senselessness of the rest of the movie.)
     One of the sons (played by Aidan Quinn) brings home a beautiful
fiancee, played by Julia Ormond, and she stays on to totally wreck the
somewhat peaceful if odd family life formerly led.  She falls in love
with the wrong son, naturally the one played by Brad Pitt, hence his
name, Tristan.
     The movie is one of those epic melodramas, extending over a
generation or more, telling the story of this tempestuous, strangely
motivated, family.  In a way it evokes another extended story, Proust's
A LA RECHERCHE DU TEMPS PERDU, in that a normally inanimate property of
the story takes on a significant role--in Proust's case time, here Brad
Pitt's hair.  Watching it grow and with the marked addition of facial
hair at certain critical moments of the story gives one a sense of
progress in the film towards its inevitable conclusion: grayness.
     There are a lot of really odd things in this film.  For example,
theres a significant scene early on in the film where the sheriff and
some other scurrilous characters, justice being on the side of the
rebel in this film, come riding up to look for a man named Lloyd
Cutler.  Tony Hopkins and someone else say he's not here, and we never
hear from him again (I think he is the man with the Native American
wife, but what he did is never brought up again.)  One gets the feeling
that at some stage in the progress of the film from screenplay to
projection quite a bit of the film was mysteriously lost.
     I really liked Anthony Hopkins portrayal later in the film, after
the stroke.  It is so over the top, and Hopkins such a good actor, that
he must have been hamming it up for the delight of the crew.
     Brad Pitt's near silence and impressive hair makes one think of
Fabio: in fact, I think that with a few rewrites Fabio could have done
the role nearly as well, without requiring months' delay in the
production schedule for hair growth, and having better chest
development besides.
     In summary, go if you have to, but if you do go look for those
little bits of strangeness that make this film bearable, and treasure
them.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Much too rarely seen these days are the big, sprawling historical
epics with beautiful scenery well photographed, and with big brash
scores.  That's what LEGENDS OF THE FALL is.  This is a story of
Montana going through the transition from its more wild frontier past
to so-called civilization.  It is the story of the three sons of a
ranch family: Tristan (Brad Pitt), a wild remnant of the frontier
culture; Alfred (Aidan Quinn), who chooses ties with the coming civic
world; and the young idealist Samuel (Henry Thomas).  The head of the
family is Col. William Ludlow (Anthony Hopkins), an alienated and
disillusioned retired cavalry officer who grew to hate all government
after he was ordered to help preside over the destruction of the Plains
Indians.  From his early youth Tristan forms a bond with OneStab
(Gordon Tootoosis), Col. Ludlow's Indian scout who now lives on the
ranch.  OneStab introduces Tristan to Indian mystical ways.  The boys
grow with a seemingly unbreakable bond.  But when Samuel first brings
home a fiancee, Susannah Finncannon (Julia Ormond), then convinces his
other two brothers that the three should enlist to fight in the Great
War breaking out in Europe, he sets in motion a train of events that
were to change completely all the relationships in the family.
     The storytelling is occasionally just a bit rushed and sketchy in
LEGENDS OF THE FALL.  The plot has a lot of territory to cover and
while the film is 134 minutes long, it could easily have made good use
of another half hour or more.  Though the story that formed the basis
was of only novella length when published in ESQUIRE, the film has an
epic sweep.  John Toll's camera work can admire the foothills of
Montana or show the chaos of a battlefield in France with equal grace.
On the other hand, however, there are some noticeable visual mistakes,
including a child of thirteen who when seen three or four years later
still looks like a child of thirteen.  The narrative could have fallen
into melodrama with its fraternal romantic conflicts, but Zwick
generally keeps the story on a higher level.  The one concession to
melodrama that bothers is in Tristan's practicing of Indian ritual,
often in unlikely places like a battlefield in France.
     Following close on the heels of INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, we
have a very different sort of role for Brad Pitt.  Considering that in
1992 he was still getting thankless roles like the minor one in COOL
WORLD, his is becoming a major name in films.  While his is the
character of greatest interest, the most demanding role is probably
Aidan Quinn's.  Anthony Hopkins gets second billing, but has a
distinctly secondary role.  An actor of less stature would probably not
gotten second billing for this role as written.
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL is a thoughtful and occasionally powerful epic
film.  It is unusual to see film makers taking a risk on this type of
film any more, but this one deserves to pay off.  I rate it a low +3 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Brad Pitt, Aidan Quinn, Julia Ormond, Anthony Hopkins, 
          Henry Thomas, Karina Lombard, Gordon Tootoosis 
Director: Edward Zwick 
Producers: Edward Zwick, Bill Wittliff, and Marshall Herskovitz 
Screenplay: Susan Shilliday and Bill Wittliff based on the novella by 
            Jim Harrison 
Cinematography: John Toll 
Music: James Horner 
Released by TriStar Pictures 
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL is the sort of epic melodrama that only 
Hollywood can do this well.  It's a spectacle more than a show, with 
soaring moments of triumph and tragedy.  Words like "restraint" and 
"subtle" are meaningless in this context.  The latest offering from 
Edward Zwick, the director of GLORY, is the kind of movie that doesn't 
require much effort to surrender to and enjoy. 
     At the center of Susan Shilliday and Bill Wittliff's script are the 
three Ludlow brothers:  Alfred (Aidan Quinn), the oldest and most 
straightlaced; Tristan (Brad Pitt), the middle child with a special 
affinity for nature; and Samuel (Henry Thomas), the youngest and most 
idealistic.  The family's patriarch is Col. Ludlow (Anthony Hopkins), an 
officer who left the U.S. army when he disagreed with the treatment of 
the Indians.  The four men, along with an assortment of friends, live in 
the Montana Rockies, away from the trappings--if not the presence--of 
civilization.   
     It would be difficult to find any more affectionate and caring 
brothers than Alfred, Tristan, and Samuel--until one woman turns all 
three lives upside down.  Hailing from Boston, Susannah (Julia Ormond) is 
engaged to Samuel.  However, the impending marriage can't prevent both of 
his brothers from falling for her, and she for at least one of them.   
     America's entrance into World War One--and the consequential 
bloody price--concludes the introductory portion of the film and 
unwraps the real meat of the drama.  Beyond this point, tangled passions 
rise in a tide of betrayal and jealousy.  Few crimes, whether of the 
heart or the body, are left unavenged.  There are deaths--some expected 
and some sudden--and births.  Lost opportunities give rise to mournful 
reflections on what might have been.  And, at the end of it all, exists 
one final catharsis. 
     There is nothing deep about LEGENDS OF THE FALL.  Its few themes 
(such as the innate corruption of government) are kept in the background, 
giving prominence to characterization and storyline.  Needless to say, 
this is an extravagant production, with sumptuous visuals (credit 
cinematographer John Toll) and a rich score (by James Horner).  In look 
and feel, it is much like DANCES WITH WOLVES and THE LAST OF THE 
MOHICANS.   
     Brad Pitt, a modern-day James Dean, brings a wealth of melancholy to 
his role of Tristan, the fulcrum for at least three of the film's major 
tragedies.  The character's comings and goings represent the openings and 
closings of chapters.  Even when Tristan isn't on screen, the movie is 
invariably about him.  It takes little guessing to realize that his love 
affair with Susannah is central to everything that transpires. 
     Supporting Pitt is a fine cast, including Anthony Hopkins, Aidan 
Quinn, and newcomer Julia Ormond, whose role here offers a taste of 
things to come (she's in a lot of upcoming films, including a remake of 
SABRINA and the latest Camelot retelling with Sean Connery and Richard 
Gere).  However, all of these actors, regardless of how respected, must 
(and do) surrender center stage to Pitt when he's on hand.  The spotlight 
is his. 
     Manipulation is a part of any melodrama, and LEGENDS OF THE FALL is 
no exception.  In this case, however, the entertainment offered far 
outweighs any momentary recognition that the director is tweaking our 
emotions.  A film maker who can pull this off once--not to mention 
twice (here, as in GLORY)--deserves both respect and admiration. 
     It seems that there are perennial attempts at this sort of grand-
scale motion picture, each with ambitions as big as the mountains that 
form the backdrop.  Because it's so easy to overdo melodrama, successes 
are rare.  Thankfully, there are few missteps in LEGENDS OF THE FALL.  
You don't have to be a critic, or even have a critical perspective, to be 
entertained by this film. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
