Title
Review for Lost in Yonkers (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Neil Simon built his reputation on warm, whimsical comedies with
occasional pieces of real drama mixed in, as long as they do not threaten
too much to spoil the play or movie-goer's day.  LOST IN YONKERS is not
typical Simon.  There is some whimsey here, certainly, but there is also
some tragedy and some authentic human pain.  A lot of people may be
disappointed by LOST IN YONKERS; I certainly was not.
     It is the summer of 1942 and Eddie Kurnitz, a widower, needs to have
someplace to leave his two sons Jay and Arty (played by Brad Stoll and Mike
Damus) so that he can make some money to pay his debts.  Reluctantly he's
decided to leave them with his mother, the family matriarch.  Grandma
Kurnitz (played by Irene Worth) loves nobody and is herself unloved.  Her
family has always lived in fear of her and it has never really functioned as
a family.  This is the story of the boys and that summer, but even more,
this is the story of the boy's Aunt Bella, who lives with her mother.  Aunt
Bella has always seemed a little out-to-lunch to the boys (and everybody
else), and the idea of spending a summer with both the aunt and the
grandmother is less than promising for Arty and Jay.  This is the story of
how the boys come to love their aunt and understand their grandmother, but
the telling is not pat.  Understanding does not always bring forgiveness.
While there is hope by the end of this story, there is also some
disappointment.
     Receiving top billing is Richard Dreyfus as the boys' uncle who is
fooling around on the shady side of the law.  He has double-crossed a flashy
hood and is using his mother's house to hide out in temporarily.  While he
gives a little panache to his role and some action to the film, his part is
really mostly distraction from the main plotline.  In the end he is just
there to show one more way Grandma Kurnitz's personality has damaged the
lives of his children.  I may be one of the few people in the world who was
not bowled over by Mercedes Ruehl in THE FISHER KING, but LOST IN YONKERS is
a good film and it is mostly due to her.  She has already won a Tony Award
for her role as Aunt Bella on Broadway and she may get an Oscar nomination.
     Martha Coolidge's direction is engaging and the feel of 1942 is well
conveyed, considering that it depends mostly on one house, a street, and a
candy shop.  Critical comment seems very mixed on LOST IN YONKERS, but I am
inclined to think it is because it has been so long since we have seen real
human drama on the screen that we may have forgotten how to react to it.  I
give LOST IN YONKERS a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 7.8 out of 10 (B, **1/2 out of ****) 
     It's the early 1940s in New York and the country is at war.  When
the father of young Jay (Brad Stoll) and Arty (Mike Damus) has to go on
a prolonged business trip through the southern states (he fell heavily
in debt paying his dying wife's hospital bills and now he has to find a
way to make enough money to keep the loan sharks from killing him), he
leaves his sons with his mother (Irene Worth), who owns a candy store
in Yonkers.  Grandma is a cold, cruel person who believes that boys
should not cry and metes out punishment with an iron fist, and both of
her grandsons quickly learn to fear and hate her.  Also living in the
house is Bella (Mercedes Ruehl), the boys' childlike, wacky aunt who
wants nothing more than to have someone to hold and love.  Stopping in
for a few days is Bella's gangster brother, Louie (Richard Dreyfus), a
small-time operator who teaches his nephews a few lessons about life.
     As is often true of stories penned by play-and-screenwriter Neil
Simon, this is a simple tale about simple people.  No momentous or
earth-shattering events take place, and there's nothing that one would
normally believe worth making a movie about.  In fact, for about the
first third of the film, it looks like the decision to finance this
project was a mistake.  Except for a few humorous vignettes, this part
of LOST IN YONKERS is dull and unspectacular.
     Richard Dreyfus has top billing, but he's not in much of the
movie.  Nevertheless, despite limited screen time, Dreyfus' Louie is a
pivotal character, giving impetus to the story.  LOST IN YONKERS is
almost half over by the time Louie makes his first appearance and he's
gone before the final quarter.  Yet the character, fleshed out by a
powerful performance, is the center-point of the picture, a marvelous
mix of anger, greed, and likableness.
     Mercedes Ruehl's performance, like the development of her
character, goes through a transition as the film progresses.  Near the
beginning of LOST IN YONKERS, Bella is completely unconvincing,
presenting a wide-eyed facade of sheer idiocy that few viewers are
likely to accept.  It doesn't help that Ms. Ruehl goes over-the-top
during these scenes.  However, as the film moves forward, not only does
Bella become more believable, but the actress finds her rhythm.  It can
be argued that the transition of the character is difficult to swallow,
and while that may be true, I find the problem more to be where Bella
starts, not where she ends up.
     Although Simon has set this story in the 40s, LOST IN YONKERS is a
rare example of a period piece that doesn't strive for nostalgia.  The
costumes and settings are right, but the script isn't laden with the
too-common sense of longing that makes the audience look back fondly on
days gone by.
     The pacing of LOST IN YONKERS is off.  The first half of the movie
is relatively light, with frequent bursts of humor.  Later, however,
the movie becomes an emotional experience, with almost too many intense
scenes.  The two children, who are clearly at the forefront during the
movie's first hour, get lost for a while as the conflict between Bella
and her mother is highlighted.
     The story of LOST IN YONKERS is mostly solid and doesn't suffer
from the "everything must be happy" Hollywood-type ending, but the
uneven tone hurts the screen adaptation of Simon's
Pulitzer-Prize-winning play.  Something has definitely been lost in the
translation, and as hard as the movie works to keep its audience's
attention, it's only partially successful.  Dreyfus is magnetic, but
this is really Mercedes Ruehl's movie, and she's only occasionally up
to the job.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
