Title
Review for I'm the One That I Want (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
I'M THE ONE THAT I WANT (2000)
Not Rated; running time 96 minutes
Genre: Comedy (concert)
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0251739
Official site: http://www.margaretcho.com/movie_news/movie_news.htm
Written by: Margaret Cho
Directed by: Lionel Coleman
Performer: Margaret Cho
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsmctheone.html
...and speaking of not judging a book by its cover...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Margaret Cho, a standup comedian, had the "honor" of headlining the
first Asian-American sitcom - ABC's ALL-AMERICAN GIRL - on American TV.
But that "honor" soon turned ugly, when Network Suits tried to make Cho
into something she was uncomfortable being, and quickly cancelled her
show.  In I'M THE ONE THAT I WANT, Cho humorously discusses that
tumultuous time in her life, and touches on the affinity she has with
the gay community in her hometown of San Francisco and beyond.
The Upshot:
I'll be honest [am I ever not in my reviews?  But I digress]: I'M THE
ONE THAT I WANT started off slow, and almost lost my interest.  I think
my Issues with hearing Black comics use the term "nigga" so freely,
transferred over to Cho's liberal use of "faggot", as a term of
endearment.  My cross to bear?  Perhaps.  Certainly, Cho seems to have
the general support of the gay community, so more power to her, I guess.
But still, except for a few chuckles here or there during the opening
part of her show - her "B*tch, it's not that hot" chiding to fashion
designer Karl Lagerfeld for constantly fanning himself, had me rollin' -
I just couldn't Get With her humor at first.
But when Cho started in on the issues surrounding all the things she had
to deal with regarding her TV series, her comedy transformed from being
Just (sorta lame) Jokes, to being something much deeper, something which
I could easily identify with on multiple levels - and I was hooked.
Cho used humor as a method of catharsis in recounting how numbnut TV
network producers and such admonished her to be "more Asian" - and I
could relate, having heard the same thing from some "well-wishers"
who've suggested I be "more Black" in my writing.  So too did I Feel Cho
when she spoke of having been dissed by fellow Korean-Americans for
being "*too* Asian" - after all, critics of my downhome writing style were
one of the reasons why I created "the Bammer Blactionary".  And I gave a
silent Amen when Cho chronicled, with ironic humor, the painful times
she went through in trying to gain acceptance by an increasingly
unaccepting audience, especially as applied to her "weight problem".
After all, what non-svelte American woman - of any race - hasn't had it
up to here with being told that their shape makes them unattractive in
some demographic's eyes?  As Cho blended humor with the obvious anger
that came with being pushed and pulled in multiple directions to become
something she was not, the Black Factor, the Female Factor - the Regular
Person In An Irregular World Factor - made me want to scream "preach,
sista!" throughout.  In many ways, Cho's struggle had been my struggle;
for until one learns to Show Them The Hand, who doesn't want to be
accepted?
Cho put me in mind of John Leguizamo, whose one-man shows on HBO have
shown a talent hidden behind stereotypical thug parts he's had in flicks
like REGARDING HENRY (not to mention the total waste of time that was
SUPER MARIO BROS, ewww) - and more to the point, Cho, like Leguizamo,
laid herself bare for the audience, all the while keeping us laughing,
and thinking.  Cho doesn't quite have Leguizamo's range (hmmm...maybe I
should do a review or two of some of his works), but the message behind
her madness, came through as loudly as did his.
Laughter being the best medicine, she seems to have healed herself from
the destructive behavior stemming from her experiences after struggling
with her weight and still having her show be cancelled.  Don't be
fooled: she's no sweet lotus blossom.  If you spend an hour or two
watching I'M THE ONE THAT I WANT, any preconceived notions you might
have of what Asian Chicks Are Like, will quickly evaporate.  And in my
book, that's most def A Good Thing.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
If you're looking for The Asian Original Kings Of Comedy, you're looking
in the wrong place: this Margaret Cho piece has more akin with John
Leguizamo's heart-wrenching monologues, than with the Kangs' jokes.  But
listen to Cho tell you why she's gonna keep Rockin' The Mike, and about
the pathos that comes with being a Minority expected to Fit In in dese
hea' United States, and you'll know why I hung in there after her
somewhat slow beginning.  Like the drag queens who "raised" Cho might
say, You Go Girl...
I'M THE ONE THAT I WANT (rating: greenlight):
  "Is there a KKKmart?"...ha!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Exuberant stand-up comedian Margaret Cho clearly enjoys her routines as 
much as her uproarious audience.  A self-described "trash-talking fag 
hag," she is a chubby Korean-American bisexual with a lot on her mind 
from sex to diets.  She's in favor of the former and against the latter 
since "the first thing you lose on a diet is brain mass."
Lionel Coleman's documentary, I'M THE ONE THAT I WANT, records Cho doing 
her routine in front of her hometown audience in San Francisco.  As a 
documentary, it is the most basic, just point-the-camera-at-her variety.  
Unlike Spike Lee's wonderful THE ORIGINAL KINGS OF COMEDY, in which Lee 
incorporates audience reaction shots, Coleman slavishly confines his 
camera almost exclusively to either full-body or just head shots of Cho.  
We hear the audience laughing profusely but rarely see them.
Cho's material, which has some biting social commentary, is undermined 
by her fingers-scraped-across-the-blackboard style of delivery.  Her 
comedic grammar requires every funny line to be screamed with such 
ear-piercing shrillness that your soda container would break were it 
made of glass rather than plastic.  Repetition also plays a large part 
in her syntax.  The more a piece of dialog is repeated, the funnier it 
is supposed to be.  With her high-pitched scream, she repeated one 
unprintable line 16 times in a row.  A printable one -- "Lesbians like 
whale watching!" -- is screamed over half a dozen times and isn't 
particularly funny even the first time.
Reviewing I'M THE ONE THAT I WANT is like covering most Adam Sandler 
movies.  As I sat there unimpressed and never laughing, my audience was 
busting a collective gut.  Sandler crowds are like that too.  My job 
reviewing films is not to tell you what someone else's reaction is but 
to tell you mine.  Still, it is hard to stare silently at a picture when 
everyone else is in stitches.  Guilt sets in, and you subconsciously 
worry that your fellow moviegoers may vote you out of the theater for 
inappropriate behavior.  (The converse, of course, is even truer.)
Cho does have boundless energy.  She bounces onto the stage like a pudgy 
basketball player ready for the big game.  She is proud of her girth, 
and many of her jokes involve television executives who have dared 
suggest that she slim down.
Cho spends long segments on her distaste for straight men, saying "I am 
heterophobic," and on her preference for gay men.  (Still, she later 
describes numerous heterosexual episodes and only a single homosexual 
one that she has had.)  Continuing on her gay vs. straight theme, she 
reveals the reason that the men in gay porn are so much better looking 
than those in straight porn.  It is so that the men watching straight 
porn won't accidentally have "a homo moment."  Her exaggerated delivery, 
as always, destroys what should have been a good joke.
Cho likes to ask herself questions.  "Am I gay?" she screams shrilly and 
rhetorically.  "Am I straight?  And I just realized that I'm just 
slutty."  Although she can do cute facial contortions and exaggerated 
accents and can write some good material, Cho is a comedian whose 
grating delivery made me want to cheer only once -- when the credits 
rolled and the theater doors opened.
I'M THE ONE THAT I WANT runs 1:36.  It is not rated but would be an R 
for strong language and sexual humor and would be acceptable for high 
school seniors and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
