Title
Review for Budbringeren (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
     When one thinks of Scandinavian movies, the name of Ingmar Bergman 
leaps to mind.  The great Swedish director's films were almost always 
austere, beautifully-made, and intellectual (sometimes to a fault).  As 
a result, those whose expectations for JUNK MAIL are based on Bergman, 
are in for something of a shock.  This movie, the product of Norwegian 
first-time director Pal Sletaune, owes more to David Lynch and Denmark's 
THE KINGDOM than it does to the work of Bergman, Troell, or any other 
notable Scandinavian film maker.
     Most of the film takes place in the seed, dirty, and dreary 
backrooms and alleys of Oslo, and the characters are like rejects from 
Terry Gilliam's BRAZIL.  And, although JUNK MAIL threads its way through 
a series of potentially-serious issues, Sletaune keeps the tone comical 
(albeit darkly so).  In many ways, this is a strange movie; I liked it 
in spite of the characters, who could charitably be called unpleasant 
losers, and in spite of the grungy atmosphere, which seems to have 
soaked into the bones of everyone populating the picture.
     JUNK MAIL generated an incredibly strong buzz at last year's 
Toronto Film Festival (where I had originally planned to see it).  It 
tells the story of the laziest, most inept mailman in the world, a 
weasel named Roy (Robert Skjaerstad).  Roy doesn't take his job very 
seriously - he opens letters, throws away mail, and does everything 
possible to invade the privacy of his the men and women he is supposed 
to serve.  Instead of faithfully delivering parcels and envelopes to 
their rightful destinations (see Kevin Costner's THE POSTMAN if you want 
this kind of mentality), he dumps about half of his load so he can spend 
hours loafing.  One day, however, his curiosity gets him into a 
precarious situation.  While snooping around the apartment of Line 
(Andrine Saether), an attractive-but-deaf girl he has fallen for (and 
who unwisely left a set of keys where Roy could get his hands on them), 
the mailman becomes involved in a complicated crime that involves 
robbery and murder.  And, although Georg (Per Egil Aske), the main 
villain, is inept, he is also extremely dangerous, and willing to kill 
without compunction to obtain the results he desires.
     Not surprisingly, the standout performance in JUNK MAIL belongs to 
Robert Skjaerstad, who manages to make a worm like Roy seem believable.  
>From time-to-time, we actually find ourselves feeling something close to 
sympathy for him.  Andrine Saether is pleasant as Line.  Per Egil Aske 
plays Georg as a cross between a conscienceless sociopath and a bumbling 
idiot.  He's deadly, but a little too stupid to be truly frightening.
     This edgy, entirely original movie succeeds for a couple of 
reasons:  it isn't afraid of breaking the rules (the lead character is a 
pathetic loser who never finds redemption) and it never overexplains 
itself to the audience.  It's a fresh, quirky picture that will appeal 
to anyone looking for something that, as MONTY PYTHON put it, is 
completely different.  The only real downside is that the conclusion is 
a little too open-ended to be fully satisfying.  Up to that point, 
however, JUNK MAIL is an entertainingly offbeat experience.  It's 
unclear whether this will get any kind of widespread U.S. distribution, 
but it has already become, and will likely continue to be, a film 
festival favorite. 
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
James Sanford

 The phrase "going postal" has come to mean freaking out, or engaging in
fits of bizarre behavior. It's a term that's an unfair generalization about
American postal workers but perfectly applicable to Roy (Robert Skjaerstad),
the anti-hero of writer-director Pal Sletaune's "Junk Mail," a clever little
comedy that heads off in one direction, only to confound our expectations.
 Roy is exactly the kind of mail carrier no one would want to entrust their
letters to. He sees nothing wrong with steaming open potentially interesting
envelopes and rifling through the contents, or wandering into unlocked
apartments and checking out the furnishings. In addition to being lazy,
sloppy and quietly creepy, Roy is also a voyeur who spends his spare time
stalking Line (Andrine Saether), a hearing-impaired woman who works at the
neighborhood dry cleaners.
 But just when Roy looks thoroughly repulsive, it turns out there's more to
the picture than meets the eye. When he sneaks into Line's apartment to take
a mid-day nap while she's at work, Roy learns Line is not quite what he
thinks she is. She's got some unsavory secrets of her own.
 "Junk Mail" comes from Norway, the country famous for giving us the heavy,
haunting movies of Ingmar Bergman, but Sleutane's film is much closer to the
quirky, underrated comedies Alfred Hitchcock made, such as "The Trouble With
Harry" and "The Family Plot." All of the characters are eccentrics, from Roy
to Georg (Per Egil Aske), the closest thing to a villain in the story, a
derelict who's so nasty he almost throttles an old woman who makes the
mistake of weeping in his presence. No one is particularly likable, but
everyone is intriguingly quirky and unpredictable.
 The humor is often broadly played, including a sequence which proves once
and for all that karaoke lounges are scary places, no matter what country
they're in. What sets "Junk Mail" apart from most American comedies is how
much of it takes place in silence, as Roy finds himself in slapstick
situations reminiscent of Rowan Atkinson's "Mr. Bean." At one point, Roy is
mugged by street thugs trying to steal his mailbag; Roy would gladly give it
up, but he gets tangled up in the strap and can't hand it over.
 For his supposed bravery, Roy is honored by his employers and hailed as a
hero. Such twisted circumstances are common in "Junk Mail," which breezes
along for 83 minutes and quickly wraps up before Sleutane runs out of
twists.
James Sanford

Author
Jun Yan
Written by: Johnny Halberg and Pal Sletaurine
Directed by: Pal Sletaurine
Produced by: Petter Boe and Dag Nordahl
Actors: Robert Skaerstad, Andrine Saether, Per Egil Aske
There are two kinds of movies that are easy to do, but very hard to do
well -- romance and comedy.  Movie audience are given weekly doses of
unfunny, contrived and ugly comedies from the movie-making industry.  I do
not remember the last time I laughed so hard *after* I saw a comedy upon
merely the thoughts of some scenes.  This time, the success in this
difficult genre is the small Norwegian film "Junk Mail," made by the
first-time director Pal Sletaurine.  Even now, as I recall some of the
details of this film, I cannot help laughing.  
        One would certainly have a hard time finding a more unlikely hero
than that in "Junk Mail."  His name is Roy Amundsen (played by Robert
Skaerstad), a total and complete loser with little redeming merit.  He is
a bored mailman who would throw away mail and open letters on the job when
he feels like it.  He lives in a shabby and dirty (as dirtiness can be)
little apartment in a part of the city not unlike the worst part of
downtown LA.  He eats out of canned food and does not seem to wash the
pile of dishes left in the sink for weeks.  The last time he washed his
clothes or himself might well be years ago.  "What are you good at?" joke
his coworkers in the cafeteria while he responds with embarrassed silence.
"Walking" was all his female coworker can come up with.  
A coincidence leads him to Line (played by Andrine Saether), a
good-looking deaf girl to whom Roy becomes attracted.  She makes the
mistake of leaving her keys in the mailbox, so he gains access to her
apartment, and accidentally saves her life when she attempts suicide.
Soon enough he becomes involved in her life as well as a mess of crimes
and some stolen money.  As clueless as he is, he somehow manages to defeat
Line's violent and psychopathic boyfriend Georg (Per Egil Aske), who does
not appear to be much more intelligent than Roy.  
As pathetic and unattractive as Roy is, somehow we tolarate him as the
protagonist of the movie, because there is a boyish innocence about him.
His actions may not be heroic, but are by no means mean-spirited or
malicious.  He is only trying to do whatever his feeble judgment can come
up with, like a boy ill-equipped with the wisdom to deal with life
situations.  In the mean time, it's not like he is surrounded by smart
people either.  His coworkers, bosses and everyone around him are no
Einstein to say the least.  It certainly shatters our false impression
that there are no idiots or losers in Norway.  The movie succeeds in
maintaining Roy's personality and capability throughout without letting a
word of remote intelligence pass through his lips.  Robert Skaerstad gave
a very effective performance as a loser stumble through a series of
adventures with limited resources.  And much to our amazement, we do
gradually feel like rooting for him after a while.  The other supporting
actors are quite good too, with numerous hilarious moments.  
The plot twists seem rough and not very well-thought, and the whole crime
business and where the money came from are never really explained.
However, the jokes are so effective and within characters that we laugh
nevertheless.  It is not an ambitious project, nor is it trying to preach
anything.  The characters are original and amusing. I thoroughly enjoy it
for its off-beat and unexpected humor.  Many critics call it dark or
brooding.  I just didn't see it, but find it rather cute and sweet in a
very strange way.  It is difficult to many people laugh and even harder to
make them laugh still hours later after they see it.  This movie does it
effortlessly.  

Author
Dennis Schwartz

JUNK MAIL (director: Pal Sletaune; cast: Robert Skjaerstad (Roy),
Andrine Saether (Line), Per Ergil Aske (Georg), Eli Anne Linnestad
(Betsy), 1997-Norway)
This Buster Keaton wannabe movie is supposedly a comedy/romance about an
inept, morose Oslo mailman, Roy (Skjaerstad), who is not respected by
his fellow workers and shows he is not satisfied with his job, somehow
taking this frustration out by not delivering heaps of mail, which he
dumps out regularly at some railroad underpass and by steaming open
other letters and reading them. He is a sleaze, a frequenter of porn
book shops and lowlife night spots. His life is a dreary, loveless mess.
As if all that is not bad enough, certainly grounds for dismissal from
the post office, someone who would upset me, if he was my mailman; but,
to top that off, he is also a voyeur, finding the keys to a deaf (she
wears a hearing aid) woman's apartment that she left in the mailbox, and
using the key to enter her apartment when she is at work at her dry
cleaning job, to go through her things and steal a photograph of her. It
seems he finds her attractive, but doesn't know how to get to tell her
this. She is played in a low-key manner by Andrine Saether (Line).
This film is noted for showing the slum side to beautiful Oslo, where we
see crime, ugly buildings, the subway, and problems outsiders do not
associate with this peaceful and scenic country. The crime we see is Roy
being robbed of his mailbag, but his strap gets caught and he can't even
get robbed properly, later on saying he would have gladly given up the
bag and avoided the beating the three muggers gave him, that
hospitalized him and made him out to be a postal hero for not wanting to
give up the bag. The film spends most of the first half of the movie
showing him to be a screw off, everything he touches he fouls up, a
complete loser-- there is a long tradition of Hollywood comedians who
have exploited that avenue of comedy. His comic effect, is a deadpan
expression, that absorbs all criticism that comes his way. His fellow
postal workers rag him about what he is good for, and a lady postal
worker who wants to stick up for him, can only say that he is a good
walker, which causes a round of snickers from the postal workers ragging
him. What is funny, is the way he looks at us, as he looks at the
camera, showing us his hurt feelings and pathetic nature, emphasizing to
us that he is a natural screw up.
But the picture has darker ulterior motives than that, it will chuck out
all the work it did setting up the film as a fluff piece of comedy and
go for the criminal aspects to the story, a decision that has to change
how we approach seeing this film, we can no longer be content to relax,
laughing at this inept mailman, we have to now see how he handles
himself under fire, while the director, also, tries to bring romance
into the story.
The romance that comes to this film, comes in a surprising way, as Roy
is trapped in Line's apartment when she comes home unexpectedly, and he
watches her nude as she goes to take a bath, but what she is really
doing is committing suicide. Roy saves her by reviving her and calling
for an ambulance, leaving the house before she knows that it was him
that saved her. There is a dark side to her that is now disclosed, she
is involved with a strong-arm thug, Georg (Per), who beat a security
guard senseless in a robbery and gave Line the money to hold for them.
As far as I am concerned, the film loses track of what it is capable of
doing at this point of the story, and it becomes a different film, where
one contrived situation after another occurs to keep the story
suspenseful, with the buffoon-like Georg menacing Roy. Roy is now the
subject of a film that doesn't know if it wants to be viewed as a
suspense or romance yarn, or just as a plain comedy. Roy still acts with
the same deadpan expression, as a result, everything becomes muddled and
ridiculous. The laugh situations seem forced, the romance absurd, and
the suspense unreal.
At best, I found this film to be a modest effort at comedy, that results
in a modest film, barely being less than annoying, but redeemed by
showing me the darker side of Oslo, a side that I have not seen before
on screen. So I think that this first time director, who is guilty of
trying to come up with too many different twists to the story, and by
relying on a hero to carry the film who is not very likable, and a story
line that is very thin, has defeated the comic efforts that he was
successful with during the first part of the film, but by the end of the
film, wears down to a barely passable effort at comedy.
=A9 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If the eponymous goody-two-shoes of Kevin Costner's "The
Postman" gives you a warm, fuzzy feeling inside, "Junk Mail"
is the antidote.  In this Norwegian entry helmed by Pal
Sletaune in his feature directorial debut (Norway's Academy
Award submission), Roy (Robert Skjaerstad) is a letter carrier
who reads other people's mail, throws out what he doesn't
feel like carrying, and is disliked by everyone.  He's nothing
like Isabelle Huppert's character, the vile letter carrier in
Claude Chabrol's "La Ceremonie," because in his debut as a
feature film director, Pal Sletaune keeps a light touch on his
story, making even one dastardly, violent criminal into the
object of humorous pathos.
   The movie is an corrective, as well, for those who believe
Norway is a kind of Shangri-la, a nation not bothered by
outsiders since 1945, a fairy-tale land of fjords and happy
salmon where everyone has a lovely, gingerbread home. 
Sletaune's people are not munchkins: the neighborhoods
could make any tourist scream in dismay.  The part of Oslo
which his cameraman, Kjell Vassdal, focuses on is as seedy
as Times Square, featuring run-down housing with barely-
running water, neighborhood bars patronized by losers, and
dark corner inhabited by barbarous muggers and the forlorn
homeless.  You wouldn't expect a civil servant, a postman, to
live in a tenement in this district: you'd figure he's have a flat
more like the spacious one inhabited by the good-looking
woman, a dry cleaner, whom he meets and who changes his
life.  Roy (Robert Skjaerstad), is a pathetic postman, a
morose mailman who leaves his dirty dishes in the sink for
weeks on end, eats whatever is available, which is likely as
not to be canned spaghetti, and like a terrier, puts in his
mouth assorted objects he comes across which belong to
other people--chocolate, Kellogg's Frosted Flakes, even
sedative capsules.
   Roy is not a nice person.  Verbally abused in the mail room
(one bully of a co-worker taunts him by asking rhetorically,
"What are you good at?"), he takes out his frustrations by
regularly dumping half the mail in a subway tunnel and
opening and reading what looks like love letters.  When he
picks up a set of keys left in a mailbox by its attractive owner,
Line (Andrine Saether), he enters her home and falls upon an
adventure which alters the course of his life.
   Combining humor and anguish with suspense and danger,
Pal Sletaune's movie--which was co-written by Jonny Halbert
and which won the International Critics Week award at the
1997 Cannes Festival--is a decidedly small one of the kind
you'd see on an artsy TV channel.  Acted with deadpan grace
by Robert Skjaerstad, with a fixed, bemused look by Andrine
Saether as the hard-of hearing Line, and with comic charm by
the criminal George (Per Egilaske), "Junk Mail" is a modest
effort, predictable in its outcome, with a script that at times
seems improvised (and in fact was developed from a series of
improvisations by the performers).  It introduces Robert
Skjaerstad to a wide public, an actor who resembles Dustin
Hoffman in "Midnight Cowboy," and shows us the seamy side
of Norway's principal city.  Per Egil Aske's role as George is
hard to swallow, though.  The man is a violent criminal who
almost kills a security guard in order to gain possession of a
key (which the guard swallows), yet turns into a guy who
resembles Curley or Moe in his comic escapades.  "Junk
Mail" is, perhaps by its own admission, not a first class movie
but a pleasant enough parcel suitable for some laughs and
insight into a region of Europe less traveled than others.  Not
Rated.  Running time: 80 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
