Title
Review for Dadetown (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DADETOWN (director/writer: Russ Hexter; screenwriter: John Housley;
cinematographer: Bill Gorman; editor: David Kirkman; cast: Bill Garrison
(Bill Parsons), Jim Pryor (Tom Nickenback), Jonathan Shafer (Bill
Bowers), Stephen Beals (Dan Barlitz), Valerie Gilbert (Joanna Barlitz),
Frankie Earle (Susan Chambers), Fred Worrell (Ed Hubbell ), Ford Slater
(Tom Dooley); Runtime: 105; Big Ol' Productions; 1996)
Warning: the review includes an important spoiler in the first and last
paragraph.
There's a surprise that is revealed during the end credits: this
fascinating documentary turns out to be a mock-documentary, after it
hits you over the head with the problems facing many American workers
during the changing times of the 1990s and spends the entire film
looking like a real documentary. The film depicts a dramatization of
this fictional all-American small town called Dadetown, a seemingly
peaceful town that becomes polarized into fractions of yuppies versus
blue-collar types.
Russ Hexter, the 27-year-old writer-director, unexpectedly died of an
aortic aneurysm shortly after shooting the innovative film, cutting
short a possible brilliant career.
Prosperity and the virtues of living a quiet family life, in a sleepy
town in rural upstate New York, suddenly changes after the town's main
industry, Gorman metal works, once a renown manufacturer of airplane
parts, but due to declining economic circumstances, now unexcitingly has
come down off its high perch to make paper clips and staples in order
for the plant to remain open. A high tech company dealing in imaging
communication, called American Peripheral Imaging (API), has just moved
to town after getting tax breaks and finding the idealized small town it
was seeking for its workforce. The workforce is better paid, more highly
educated, and the workers come from the more sophisticated urban places,
which creates a cultural separation from them and the locals. To make
matters worse, the aim of API is to do away with the need for paper
products, which happens to be the exact opposite business aim of
Gorman's.
The documentary filmmakers originally came to Dadetown to do a 15-minute
PBS documentary about the small towns of America and stayed on for
months to cover the impending labor crisis that was growing worse. To
show you the attitudes of the town, they interview many of the locals
and newcomers: including, town council members, workers at Gorman's, and
managerial spokesmen from API.
The chasm between the locals and the newcomers is enormous, being caused
mostly by a cultural clash. Even as API tries to fit into the community
by donating a playground, they still can't win the locals over. The new
workers want changes in the town, such as more upscale shops, a bagel
shop and a modern movie multiplex. The longtime councilman, Bill
Parsons, the most beloved figure in town, who arranged for API to come
here in a secret sweetheart deal for the new company, suddenly dies.
Soon, because of downsizing, Gorman's lays off over a hundred workers
and the remaining workers fear the plant will close due to competition
because of cheaper labor from Third World countries.
Looking to blame someone at hand for their troubles, the layed off
workers start random violent acts against the newcomers, such as
throwing paint on their mailboxes, breaking house windows, trying to
scare an API homeowner living in a luxury house by leaving a gutted deer
on his front steps, and the local kids vandalize the gift playground.
The documentary filmmaker while trying to be objective and have his
cameras be everywhere, is accused of being intrusive and bias by the
locals.
The general problems covered are what is happening across America. And,
the new town industry, a Silicon Valley high tech company, brings about
a renewed prosperity due to the need for more luxury housing and the
changing way the town looks, but is one of the underlying causes for the
bad times the workers at the old plant are going through. The tragedy
lies in the old workers who lose their jobs and can't afford to live in
town anymore unless they get retrained and are lucky enough to get work
in the new industry.
That it was not for real, does take away a lot of the film's impact and
poignancy, but still it leaves the viewer with a sense that it cut
through something perplexing that is currently happening, that is part
of the human drama that causes some strange behavior to emerge. Hexter
has thrown open a look at all the social, political, and economic
factors involved in the evolution of a small town, and he has done a
nice job in showing the human tragedy above all else as being the most
important thing to consider, even though in the bigger picture things
might look like they are working out, there's still a face you have to
put on someone who loses his job.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
Running Length: 1:33
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Profanity, slaughtered deer)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/5/96, 5/7/96, 
      and 5/10/96
     DADETOWN is a "meta-documentary" about small-town America in the 
1990s.  Is a rural, close-knit community still the "American dream", or, 
with the closing of factories, has it become a kind of American 
nightmare?  A stunning first feature from director Russ Hexter, DADETOWN 
leads to an unforgettable revelation during the closing credits.  
Hexter, at the age of 26, has made a film that puts to shame the work of 
directors many years his senior.  Sadly, this will be the only movie 
from the NYU grad.  Two days before he was scheduled to accompany 
DADETOWN to the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, Hexter died.
     "The small town is the backbone of America," asserts one of 
Dadetown's residents in the interview that begins the film.  Indeed, 
Dadetown, NY is one of many nameless, faceless American towns where 
family and religious values define the community.  In a place that 
doesn't have a mall or a theater, the church is the social center.  
Everyone buys their groceries at the same small store, and the Mayor is 
on a first-name basis with each of his constituents.
     All is not right in Dadetown, however.  When Hexter and his film 
crew arrive to make a "15 minute documentary for PBS", the town is in a 
state of flux.  Gorman Metal, the industry which has employed most of 
Dadetown's men for decades, is downsizing.  The factory, which once made 
fuselages for WWII planes, has been forced into the production of paper 
clips and staples, and now cheaper foreign companies are driving them 
out of business.  The result is unemployment.
     Even as Gorman's fortunes decline, a new corporation, American 
Peripheral Imaging (API), relocates to the upstate New York community, 
bringing more than one-hundred employees from places like Buffalo and 
Philadelphia.  These newcomers, with fancy houses and yuppie lifestyles, 
don't mesh well with the "hick" longtime residents of Dadetown, and a 
cultural schism develops.  The Gorman layoffs fuel resentment against 
the API newcomers, with violence as the inevitable result.
     DADETOWN is the most thought-provoking examination of the collapse 
of a community since ROGER AND ME.  Absent here is Michael Moore's 
sarcasm -- DADETOWN opts instead for a more serious account of events.  
The result, partially achieved through effective editing, is a 
compelling and emotionally-stirring account of cultural friction and how 
mass unemployment damages the psyche of a town.  Hexter gets into the 
minds of the residents, and the candid nature of some of his interviews 
is amazing.  No one seems to have problems opening up to the film maker.  
Everyone has something to say, but, despite all the questions, there are 
no answers.
     DADETOWN highlights a problem afflicting communities and 
individuals all across the country as the face of business undergoes a 
change.  We can no longer rely on our employers to provide for us.  No 
jobs are safe.  Whether in Dadetown or New York City, the bottom line 
worker is always the first victim of middle-management judgment errors 
and upper management selfishness.
     Yet there is another issue addressed with unexpected force by 
DADETOWN --  the intrusiveness of documentary film makers when producing 
their features.  Do they merely record events or do they become part of 
what they're filming?  ROGER AND ME, BROTHERS' KEEPER, and numerous 
other films, despite never addressing this topic, make us wonder.  
DADETOWN takes matters to the next level, however, with a unique 
punchline that calls into question the role and responsibility of 
documentary film makers.  Whatever you do, don't leave before the final 
credits have rolled.  DADETOWN's most startling surprise is reserved for 
them.  Only then will you recognize the true brilliance of Hexter's 
film, and what the movie world has lost as a result of his unexpected 
death.
