Title
Review for Rhythm 'n' Bayous: A Road Map to Louisiana Music (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rachel Gordon
What starts out as a monotonous talking-head musical history lecture
turns into a rich land of Louisiana discovery, as Robert Mugge
adventures into the various landscapes of that colorful state.
Three different sections of Louisiana are documented along the journey,
northern, southern, and southwestern Louisiana, separated by maps and
cutesy subtitles.  The latter two are the best installments, in that
they allow the charismatic performers direct camera time without the
interference of a boring onscreen interviewer.
Each county has a different character, style, instruments, and sound,
all distinct in their origins, as local experts tell us, and Mugge
respectfully picks up these discerning traits.  Where one town declares
that race isn't an issue, the other shows how racial tensions actually
aided in black and white musicians inspiring one another.  Southern
Louisiana has a strong Cajun/Creole base, while northern Louisiana leans
towards guitar and a cappella singing.
As a whole, this documentary is well layered with performance and
testimony but could easily have been shorter and made the same impact on
an audience.  In the first section especially, numerous concert
performances run superfluously through an entire song, with the camera
panning to and fro, looking for something to do.
Every person put in front of the camera is introduced, but only half the
multitude leave much of a mark.  The Director of the Louisiana Folk
Festival expounds on the glories of Louisiana's past for an interminable
period of time, but most of what he says goes in what ear and out the
other.  On the other hand, there's a remarkably short section devoted to
a 28-year disc jockey veteran, Sister Pearlee Tolliver.  She spends her
two hours on the radio exclaiming commercials in a gospel voice, with a
couple of records thrown in, and she amuses too much to forget.
As standard documentaries go, the expected talking heads are mixed in
with live concert performances.  But most endearing are the discussions
with actual performers about their influences and playing style, and
reminiscences about their colleagues.  These interviews, juxtaposed with
the local connoisseurs, provide a solid foundation for the musically
ignorant and die hard fan.
One of the best portraits is that of Kermit Ruffins, a local favorite in
southwestern Louisiana.  He takes the historical roots of jazz and blues
and mixes them with his own modern experiences growing up in the
streets.  Popularity hasn't blown his ego either, as once in a while he
barbeques for his audience out of the back of his truck.
Other details compliment this musical voyage.  The first record store in
Louisiana, Floyd's, is renowned for shipping impossible-to-find music
all over the world.  The original owner still runs it and helps to
promote new talent such as Rosie Ledet.  Rosie was a housewife who
taught herself how to play the accordion and she now sings and tours
with her husband's band.  At once mousy and humble, this lady has gone
on to break ground for female artists in the zydeco field.
Before walking into to this film, one might think that all of Louisiana
could be clumped into a simple stereotype.  It takes a while to be
interested in the material, but once the filmmaker moves onto southern
Louisiana, it's hard to look away from the screen.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
