Title
Review for Gamera 3: Iris kakusei (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
R.L. Strong

TOHO COMPANY LTD. PRESENTS A DAIEI MOTION PICTURE COMPANY PRODUCTION
A SHUSUKE KANEKO FILM
"GAMERA 3: THE REVENGE OF IRIS"
SHINOBU NAKAYAMA      AI MAEDA      AYAKO FUJITANI     SENRI YAMASAKI
CINEMATOGRAPHY  BY  JUN'ICHI TOZAWA
EDITED BY ISAO TOMITA
SOUND DESIGN BY YASUO HASHIMOTO
EXECUTIVE PRODUCERS  TSUTOMU TSUCHIKAWA, KAZUHIKO ISHIKAWA &  NAOMASA TSRUTA
DIRECTOR OF SPECIAL EFFECTS  SHINJI HIGUCHI
VISUAL EFFECTS  HAJIME MATSUMOTO
MUSIC  KOH OHTANI
ASSOCIATE PRODUCERS  SEIJI OKUDA  NAOYA FUJIMAKI
PRODUCERS  TSUTOMU TSUCHIKAWA, NAOKI SATO & MIYUKI NANRI
SCREENPLAY BY KAZUNORI ITO & SHUSUKE KANEKO
DIRECTED BY SHUSUKE KANEKO
There's something to be said about a movie with a man in a rubber monster suit
that manages to thrill and enthrall an audience more than any of the summer's
big budget blockbusters. At a premiere screening at the American Cinemateque in
Hollywood at the famous Egyptian Theater, I was witness to a new breed of
Japanese monster movie.
As everyone who grew up in the 60's and 70's will remember, television here is
the U.S. was riff with the likes of Godzilla, King Kong and assorted denizens.
One of these humorously contrived creatures was the Giant turtle Gamera. Having
the lowest budgets of any of monster cousins, Gamera had to have something a
little different to gain any sort of appeal. Well, give him the ability to fly,
by spitting fire out of his legs and have him spin like a flying saucer and
you've got one heavy-duty childhood favorite on your hands. Now to be certain,
Gamera was never aimed at adults, in fact most folks under the age of 10 could
barely stand the critter. But with the release of 'Gamera 3: The Revenge of
Iris' (the third in a series), all that has changed.
1999. Japan has just survived another protective onslaught from Gamera. But the
military looks upon the monster not as savior but as a destructive force that
must be contained. There are much political rambling about what must be done
about the beast, as his appearances throughout Japan have caused millions of
dollars in damage and thousands of lives.
We are introduced to Ayana Hirasaka (newcomer Ai Maeda); a teenage girl whose
parents were killed in 1995 during Gamera's battle with a giant bird like
creature called Gyaos (pronounced guy-ohs). Ayana holds a bitter hatred for
Gamera. Having no immediate family, she and her little brother must live with
her Uncle on a Small Island community outside of Japan. The other children on
the Island treat Ayana as an outside. In an effort to avoid any more abuse, she
accepts a dare to enter a cave, once a shrine to a demigod protected by a local
family.  Walking into the cave, Ayana comes across a strange rock that glows
under her touch. Removing the rock, she unearths a 12-foot egg. As the egg
hatches, Ayana befriends the tentacled creature, naming it Iris after her
parent's cat. Her nurturing of the creature takes on darker tones as it is
learned that the creature is vampiric, feeding off of her hatred of Gamera and
developing a psychic link with Ayana, that will shortly become more than
psychic.
In the meantime, a new species of Gyaos have appeared all over the world. Gamera
attacks two of the creatures over Tokyo, causing tremendous damage, as the Gyaos
is destroyed by Gamera's fiery breath. The military will stand still no longer.
Gamera is a tremendous liability and must be countered.
I haven't given away a lot of the plot details, just the basic premise. There is
so much to enjoy within this film that  to reveal all of the film's charm would
be a great disservice. This is (believe it or not) one of the most tightly and
intelligently scripted monster films since the 1950's.  The performances by the
young cast is notable for it's professionalism and underplaying in roles that
could have been played campy or over the top. Shinobu Nakayama (Jet Li's Fist of
Legend) stars as Mayumi Nagamine, an ornithologist involved with Gamera is
wonderfully photogenic and sincere in her performance.
Ayako Fujitani (Steven Segal's Daughter) return as Asagi Kusanagi from the first
Gamera film in this series. Her character once had a psychic link with Gamera,
but now has lost it. Still, she honors the beast as a protector of Earth, an
idea that may or may not be true. Her performance is nicely toned with a
respectable demeanor, suitable to a girl who is still finding her way in life.
Ai Maeda as Ayana is wonderful in her performance, having to express teen angst
and despair. Her slow realization that the monster Iris is indeed evil is
painfully touching. A nice performance from this newcomer.
Director Shusuke Kaneko and screenwriter Kazunori Ito have drafted a marvelously
complex tale of monsters and the human condition. In fact, 'Gamera 3' eschews
most of the monster action in favor of the human story which is more than
compelling. The mystery of Gamera always remains in the background, though. The
series of events unfold naturally, leading the viewer from one marvelously
apocalyptic scene to another, but always keeping us grounded in the human story.
And what would a monster film be without special effects, not much of a monster
to be sure.
The scenes of battle and destruction have a marvelously composed look and style
to them. One is immediately reminded of some of the classic films from the
1930's like 'King Kong' with its wonderful atmosphere. Or more recently 'What
Dreams May Come', wherein the style and look of the visuals bring the film into
a whole new arena. 'Gamera 3' does that with spectacular energy and drama.
You'll forget soon into the movie that the creatures are fake and made of rubber
and foam. The design of the beast is both attractive and frightening. A sense of
awe surrounds these beasts in a way that you must experience yourself.
"Gamera 3: The Revenge of Iris" is without a doubt one of the best monster films
to come out of Japan, or anywhere for that matter. A film that does not talk
down to it's audience, nor takes them for granted. For those who enjoy giant
monster you'll have to seek this one out. For those of you could care less,
you're in for a surprise if not a conversion.
On a scale between 1 to 5, 'Gamera 3: The Revenge of Iris" rates a monstrous 4.
Parents should be forewarned, this film is (as of yet) unrated and does contain
scenes of destruction and human suffering. While there is no bloodshed or gore,
the violence of the film makes it unsuitable for very young children. Japanese
Language with English Subtitles.
Copyright 1999 R. L Strong
All rights reserved Nothing in this article may be quoted or
re-printed without the express written permission of the author.
