Title
Review for Ciudad, La (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Julia Levin
The people of David Riker's The City (La Ciudad) are easily
recognizable: poor destitute Mexican immigrants living in listless
boroughs of New York City.  And the director's careful, patient
examination of their incessant, daily struggle to survive by taking any
job they can get constitutes most of what the film is about.
The City is comprised of four short vignettes, all very poetic in their
open-endedness. In the first one, Bricks, a group of Mexican laborers is
taken to the field of nearly ruined buildings.  They are left in the
middle of nowhere and promised 50 dollars a day for cleaning up bricks. 
When the ruins of a demolished building collapse and kill one of the
workers, the rest can't even explain to the ambulance where they are.
Home, the second story, offers another look at the immigrant dilemma.  A
young man, Francisco, while searching for his distant relatives,
stumbles into a party and ponders about his choice of coming to America
to a woman he meets.  He doesn't know anyone in the city and all his
possessions fit in one bag he carries with him.  The moment of comfort
he obtains by sharing his sorrows with a woman from his native town in
Mexico is fleeting -- he is lost on his way from a grocery store back to
her apartment.
The protagonist of The Puppeteer is a loving father, who lives with his
daughter in a car and survives by performing puppet shows to the local
kids in the neighborhood.  They watch the moon at night while the father
reads fairy tales to his daughter, hoping that some day she will be able
to go to school with the other kids.  She won't, as it turns out,
because he can't provide a receipt proving that his daughter lives in
the city.
The final and the most desolate is the story of Seamstress, a woman who
comes to America to earn money for the family she left behind.  She is
devastated to find out that her daughter is sick, but, as in the
previous three tales, her situation is hopeless: The sweatshop owners
keep promising to pay, but it's obvious that the woman, as well as the
other desperate workers, will not get a cent for their labor.
The stories of this spare, reserved documentary-like black-and-white
film give face to the faceless, to those aspects of urban and, most
importantly, human experience we usually avert our eyes from.  Riker
turns to traditions of Italian Neorealism, a genre whose premise was to
bring real people and contemporary social problems into focus.  Like
most films of that era, The City expresses no hopes for deep social
change and is thus an incredibly inert film.  It is authentic, somber
and tragic, and the poverty it depicts could have been captured anywhere
in the world.  The fatalism that pervades the lives of Riker's
characters calls for a depressing conclusion: that nothing will ever
change for these people.  When a seamstress demands to be paid, other
workers stop working and stare at her breakdown in the agonizing
silence.  Not being paid for weeks, without any security in their lives,
will they express solidarity with her?  Probably not.
David Riker does nothing to pull your heartstrings, which is why the
film is so honest and devastating.  But it is the absence of any kind of
inner force in the film that disturbs me more than its morbid subject
matter.  I remember John Huston's Fat City, about two fighters from
Stockton: one is aging and paunchy, who had his moment of glory but
whose next stop is Skid Row; his young counterpart has chosen the same
fate, despite the living lesson before his eyes.  Stockton is not New
York -- no one in their right mind will ever go there, and Fat City
isn't about immigrants, but about failure and poverty.  It is a brutal
and bleak picture, but the way Huston depicts his characters is
dramatically different from Riker: It is a film about people who are
beaten before they start, but who never stop fighting.  Their despair
has the smell of liquor, unmade beds, and cheap hotels, but they
obstinately bounce back and refuse to take defeat for granted.  It is
perhaps the passivity of La Ciudad, both in content and style, that
makes this film a bittersweet disappointment.
Director: David Riker
Producers: Robin Alper, Andrew J. Hurwitz, Doug Mankoff
Writer: David Riker
Starring: Anthony Rivera, Joseph Rigano, Miguel Maldonado, Cipriano
García, Leticia Herrera, José Rabelo, Stephanie Viruet, Silvia Goiz,
Taek Limb Hyoung, Jawon Kim, Antonio Peralta
http://www.zeitgeistfilm.com/current/the%20city/city.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
