Title
Review for Miss Congeniality (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Brandon Herring
Miss Congeniality  * * * out of * * * *
Starring: Sandra Bullock, Michael Caine, Candice Bergen, William Shatner, 
Benjamin Bratt, Ernie Hudson, Heather Burns.
Directed by: Donald Petrie
Running Time: 109 minutes
Rated PG-13: sexual humor, language, violence.
Movies are made to entertain, some movies are made to give messages, Miss 
Congeniality goes into the entertain category, its a very funny, well made, 
well acted comedy that is quite predictable, but so enjoyable and so fun to 
watch that in the end you forgive all it's flaws. Sandra Bullock gives one of 
her best roles to date, possibly outdoing her role in "While You Were 
Sleeping". 
Gracie Hart is a 30-ish FBI agent, she is single and doesn't have much of a 
love life, when the FBI is trying to figure out the riddles a serial killer 
is sending them, Gracie tries her best as well, they find out that it has to 
do with the Miss United States Pageant, and they want to get their best agent 
to go undercover, and save the girls from this killer. Of course the person 
they pick is Gracie Hart, at first she is doubtful about it, but after she is 
made up by stylist Victor Melling (Michael Caine), they don't think twice 
about it.
Now Gracie Hart must become a lady, and try to blend in with these girls the 
best she can, making friends, and making enemies. The shows two hosts Stan 
Fields and Kathy Morningside (William Shatner and Candice Bergen) are a bit 
skeptical at first, but soon find out Gracie may be able to pull it off. With 
a lot of misadventures and plenty of laughs in between, "Miss Congeniality" 
pulls itself off with its cleverly written dialogue and great performance by 
Sandra Bullock.
Of course "Miss Congeniality" has it's share of flaws, first it is very 
predictable, and the ending is awfully conventional. Aside from these major 
flaws, the movie presents for plusses than minuses. There was times where I 
laughed out loud, which is almost a rarity these days, and the last time I 
laughed even close to this hard was in last summers "Scary Movie". 
The characters are well written out, and the supporting cast Benjamin Bratt 
as Gracie's love interest Eric Matthews, Michael Caine as the flamboyant 
Victor Melling, William Shatner in a great and funny role as Stan Fields, and 
Candice Bergen in full force as Kathy Morningside, along the great Sandra 
Bullock this is definitely a great cast. Donald Petrie's direction really 
shows especially in the end, with the climax of the pageant. 
In the end "Miss Congeniality" is a rewarding romantic comedy, with a flair 
to it. There is never a dull moment in the film, and the jokes come fast and 
furious, and the dialogue very clever and funny. Just don't think too much of 
it, because "Miss Congeniality" is one of the best comedies of 2000.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 1/8/01. (C)

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I love movies, but every now and again, a stint of films comes along and I
just wonder why it is that I love movies so much. This past week was a
little like that, as I sat to watch THE EMPEROR'S NEW GROOVE, WHAT WOMEN
WANT and MISS CONGENIALITY with very little enthusiasm invested in any of
the three films. But surprise, surprise, I really loved the Disney animated
movie, and an even bigger surprise, I didn't completely hate this movie
(okay, so two out of three ain't bad). So why is it that I continue to love
movies so much? Well, it's simple. When even the lesser films can actually
entertain me from time to time, the joy of movie-watching is reinvigorated
once again, even if it is just on a very, very fluffy level. Bottom
line...entertainment. This movie was just that...fluffy, cute entertainment.
PLOT:
A smart but clumsy female FBI agent, who happens to be a huge tomboy, has to
go undercover in a beauty pageant in order to investigate a serial psycho
case. Opposed to the idea at first, the "ugly duckling" eventually begins to
appreciate some of the finer points of being a lady during her
transformation, while continuing to work on the case.
CRITIQUE:
This movie is all about Sandra Bullock. If you like her, like her
personality, her vibrancy, her humor, her goofiness, then you will more than
likely enjoy this fluff-piece. She's extremely adorable in this movie as she
trips over stuff here and there, kicks guys butts there and here, and
actually has us forgetting about the incredible dumbo plot-line of the
movie. It's actually the perfect "Sandra Bullock" role. She fits the
character like a glove. And don't you think that I will try to defend this
film's "Scooby Doo" mystery here, folks, because I will leave that chore to
anyone else who cares. I was cracking up pretty consistently throughout this
entire movie, so ho-hum plot-line aside, this movie worked for me. In fact,
Bullock pretty much had me at "hello". But before I continue to gush all
over her some more, allow me to try and make some more sense out of this
movie. Granted, the basic story's been seen a million times. First of all,
there's a crazy psycho out there who sends cops enigmatic clues about his
next big crime. Woo-hoo, unoriginality police...lock these guys up! Then of
course, you've got the whole "ugly duckling" transformation scenario, with
every possible "fish out of water" joke that you could imagine, topped off
with the typical beauty pageant jokes. But what can I tell you, little ol'
Sandy had me the whole time. But to be fair, I also enjoyed Benjamin Bratt's
performance, who is great as usual, but is now in definite need of a "real"
role to show the world his range. I mean, all of these "great looking guy
with a heart" roles are fine to pay the bills, dude, but you gotta break out
of that mold. Show us what you're really made of, you sexy bastard!
I'd also like to tip my cap to Michael Caine who glides into this goofy
comedy and actually comes out smelling pretty gosh darn sweet. Here's an
"Oscar" winner delivering some really hokey lines and pulling it
off...completely! I really liked his character, he was sincere, assertive
and even more importantly, funny! This movie is actually a perfect "video
movie". One of those films that you check out for the evening, turn off your
brain, sit back and laugh out loud. And please don't try to dissect this
goofy movie's mystery because it's so obviously NOT about that! The
"villain" in this movie is so ridiculous, that you just want to slap the
screenwriters silly for having watched too many Saturday morning cartoons.
This film is about Sandra Bullock and her cuteness...end of story. This
movie is also funny and a crowd-pleaser. It's got a lot of easy laughs and
plenty of well-intentioned hilarity all around. I usually lace into films as
such, especially when it's so obvious that not much ambitiousness was put
into the project, but you know what, this movie is a comedy and the bottom
line is...was it funny? Did it make me laugh? And the unequivocal response
to both of those questions is a resounding "yes", so if you take this movie
on its light, fluffy, cutesy, poopsy level, you will more than likely enjoy
it as much as I did. But please Hollywood (whoever you are), no more beauty
pageant comedies!!! For the love of God...

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./Castle Rock Entertainment
 Director: Donald Petrie
 Writer:  Marc Lawrence, Katie Ford, Caryn Lucas
 Cast: Sandra Bullock, Benjamin Bratt, Michael Caine,
Candice Bergen, William Shatner
   Beauty pageants are so silly that their very existence could
make one think that their producers are poking fun.   They're
an ideal target for lampooning by the movie industry, whose
best shot in that area is Michael Ritchie's 1975 work, "Smile"-
-which dealt with the behind-the-scenes activity at a California
"Young America Miss" pageant which Ritchie presents as a
symbol of American middle-class emptiness.  "Miss
Congeniality" doesn't come close in quality to that gem, partly
because the genre is overdone and somewhat because
Donald Petrie's film ultimately sentimentalizes the industry by
pointing out its benefits--at least to the contestants and their
families and cheerleaders.  Ritchie's aim appears to use Marc
Lawrence, Katie Ford and Caryn Lucas's screenplay--based
on Lawrence's story--to showcase Sandra Bullock's talents in
the role of an FBI officer assigned as an undercover agent at
the San Antonio contest, which is presumed to be a target for
mysterious terrorists who challenges the FBI to find them by
sending cryptic notes.
   Fresh from disappointing roles in Betty Thomas's "28 Days"
shown earlier this year (about an alcoholic writer who pratfalls
at a wedding while drunk) and Bronwen Hughes's "Forces of
Nature" (a thin story about an unpredictable woman traveling
with a stranger by land after their plane crashes), Bullock
scores at least moderately well this time around.  Despite
taking two or three cascades to the ground too many (bound
to evoke laughs nonetheless by fans of physical humor), she
turns in a credible role thanks to a solid, amusing script with
whodunit dimensions and director Petrie's skill with comic
timing.
   The story opens on a scene unrelated to the remainder of
the story except to show the clumsiness and independent
spirit of FBI Agent Gracie Hart (Sandra Bullock)--who violates
the rules by giving a mobster a Heimlich maneuver and
thereby puts another agent's life in danger.  Threatened with
a hearing by a review board, she is assigned as to
undercover work as a contestant in a Texas beauty pageant
which is presmed to be the target of a terrorist's evil plans. 
Petrie mines the obvious comic territory: a klutzy woman
whose skill in martial arts and generally masculine endeavors
who has cared nothing about her personal appearance is
forced to accept manicures, pedicures, bikini waxes, and
lessons in carrying herself gracefully--the last performed by
none other than Michael Caine in the role of beauty
consultant Victor Melling.  
   Much of the glee is evoked from the conflict of gamin and
guide, each with a wholly distinct agenda, as Agent Hart is
molded Pygmalion-style from kung-fu practitioner to a comely
contestant.  The two become as testy with each other as
Eliza Doolittle with Henry Higgins: when Gracie insists that
she can perform an exercise for the talent show that she took
up when she first learned how to ride a bike, Melling replies,
"You will NOT perform sex on the stage."
   While the growing romance between Gracie Hart and her
assistant, Eric Matthews (Benjamin Bratt) is the least
convincing aspect of the story, Petrie gets credible work from
a smashing-looking Candice Bergen as Kathy Moringside, a
former beauty queen with twenty years' experience as host,
and from Star Trek's William Shatner in a self-mocking role
as co-host.  
   "Miss Congeniality" does not pretend to be more than a
sitcom, but with its swift banter, its credible use of a whodunit
element, and some good ensemble work by the swim-suited
representatives of several American states, you could do a lot
worse during the holiday season than this sparkling,
congenial tale.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 111 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ross Anthony
It's an average film, packing some good Grace-Harty laughs while others 
gags fall off the mark. The most difficult to swallow being the film's 
premise that Sandra Bullock (as FBI agent Grace Hart) should somehow be 
unattractive without lipstick and nail polish.
Tomboy Grace Hart must go undercover as Miss New Jersey in the Miss 
United States beauty pageant (oh, sorry, make that "Scholarship 
pageant"). She's one tough lady sincerely unaccustomed to manicures and 
high heels. Therein lies the film's strongest hits - rugged Bullock 
trying to look sweet, elegant and giddy - all the while gritting her 
teeth in disdain. Unfortunately, some of the punch relies on our 
believing that Bullock isn't already beautiful. Such a presupposition 
leaves audiences feeling a tad insulted.
After a fine opening sequence the film moves quickly into a cheesy 
detective bust scene, compromising the momentum. Though it seems to be a 
cop movie, "Miss Congeniality" is essentially a "Cinderella" comedy. 
Since the slim climax relies on FBI plotting, it's authority wanes for 
lack of substantive action.
Still, Bullock and Michael Caine (as the beauty expert in charge of 
"transforming" this hardened agent into a queen) are marvelously 
charming, clever and fun together. Some of the dialogue here takes the 
crown.
Benjamin Bratt performs respectively. You'll also enjoy Candice Bergen 
and William Shatner as the co-hosts of the pageant.
Miss Congeniality. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Sandra Bullock, Michael Caine, Benjamin Bratt, Candice Bergen, 
William Shatner, Melissa De Sousa.
Directed by Don Petrie.
Written by Marc Lawrence, Katie Ford, Caryn Lucas.
Produced by Katie Ford and Sandra Bullock at(C)2000. Rated PG.
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Susan Granger
 To bury this lackluster loser in the Christmas rush is folly
but, then again, it was postponed from earlier this year.  Sandra
Bullock plays a cynical, rough-and-tumble FBI agent who, since
childhood, has been a tomboy.  So when a terrorist sends a cryptic
threat that the Miss USA Pageant in San Antonio may be the next
target, her boss (Ernie Hudson) and partner (Benjamin Bratt) rig it
with the pageant director (Candice Bergen) to insert her
behind-the-scenes by going undercover as Miss New Jersey. Problem is:
she's such a klutzy mess that her pompous beauty consultant (Michael
Caine) is aghast: "There's no way I can get this woman - dirty Harriet
- ready in two days. I haven't seen a walk like that since 'Jurassic
Park'!" Nevertheless, within 48 hours, a furious, reluctant Bullock is
"Entering Barbie-town." As for the swimsuit competition, "The last
time I was this naked in public, I was coming out of the uterus," she
wails in her pink Gottex two-piece. Despite occasional laugh lines,
the film fails because producer Bullock, director Donald Petrie and
writers Marc Lawrence, Katie Ford & Caryn Lucas can't make up their
minds whether to satire or be sympathetic to beauty pageants, going
first in one direction, then another. With their perfectly clothed and
coifed contestants, beauty pageants are tacky by nature, so how do you
do one tastefully? Cliches abound - from the ugly duckling-into-swan
routine to mocking the talent show to the eating disorders. Candice
Bergen has the good sense to look uncomfortable, as does hapless
William Shatner, cast as the local Bert Parks. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Miss Congeniality" is a pathetic, misguided
3. Sandra Bullock still has that winning smile but little
else. Someone should give this misguided star/producer some sound
career advice.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Sandra Bullock, as FBI field agent Gracie Hart, is nothing short of 
incredible in MISS CONGENIALITY by director Donald Petrie (MYSTIC 
PIZZA).  With large, messy dollops of self-deprecating humor, Bullock 
makes herself into a real slob.  And then in this Pygmalion story, she 
is transformed into a beauty who is still sometimes a crude klutz no 
matter how glamorous she appears.  Tapping inner reservoirs of comedic 
talent that even her fans probably weren't aware of, Bullock hits every 
joke out of the park like she is Mickey Mantle at a Little League game.  
Since this film is easily Bullock's best since SPEED, one can hope that 
this hilarious charmer won't get buried in an avalanche of holiday 
releases and that moviegoers who aren't in the mood to watch Tom Hanks 
converse with a volleyball will give themselves the holiday treat of 
MISS CONGENIALITY.
When we first meet the feisty Gracie (played when young by Mary Ashleigh 
Green), she is a girl of about 11 who puts up with no guff on the 
playground.  Standing up for the downtrodden and for herself, she slugs 
anyone who doesn't play fair.  Rather than appreciate her spunky 
defenses, kids shun her.  
We cut to the present, in which Gracie (Bullock) has grown up to be a 
"Dirty Harriet" type of agent.  On the bureau's practice mat, she can 
take down any male agent in a heartbeat, but she is a loner and a 
workaholic.
Most lacking in Gracie is any sign of grace.  She approaches eating with 
the finesse of a lioness gnawing on a fresh kill.  Her laughs are 
snorts, and she hasn't a clue as to the purpose of napkins.  The 
side-splittingly funny script by Marc Lawrence (FORCES OF NATURE), Katie 
Ford and Caryn Lucas parcels out sharp lines to everyone, but saves some 
of the best for the story's star.  Although known to love her beer and 
pizza, Gracie's passion runs to the fattening.  "I'm going to get 
chip-faced," she tells her coworker and temporary boss, Eric Matthews 
(Benjamin Bratt, RED PLANET), at a bar as she devours a whole pint of 
Ben and Jerry's ice cream.
In her work, Gracie is known to be a screwup, even if she can run mental 
circles around everyone in her office.  When a serial killer leaves a 
cryptic note threatening violence at the Miss United States Pageant, she 
is asked to go undercover as Miss New Jersey.  Since this is an honor 
she dreamed not of, Gracie initially says, "No way!"  After all, she 
doesn't even own a dress, and she views beauty contestants as pathetic 
airheads.
The pageant's leader (Candice Bergen) and its master of ceremonies 
(William Shatner) can hardly believe their eyes when told that Gracie 
would make a credible undercover contestant.  Slouching in her chair and 
scrunching her mouth, Gracie would appear to be an absolutely hopeless 
candidate for a makeover.  Michael Caine is wonderful as Victor 'Vic' 
Melling, a beauty contest consultant called in to perform a miracle 
transformation.  His version of Professor Henry Higgins and Bullock's 
version of Eliza Doolittle are delightful and original.  Watching Gracie 
stroll down the sidewalk, Vic tells her, "Oh my God, I haven't seen a 
walk like that since JURASSIC PARK!"  After he bans sweets from her 
diet, she keeps trying to smuggle donuts in her bra.
When Gracie Hart is transformed into Gracie Lou Freebush -- a name 
rather like Pussy Galore from GOLDFINGER -- she becomes gorgeous.  In a 
skin-tight, short dress, Gracie looks like a million dollars.  But she's 
still the same Gracie underneath, so she frequently trips in her spiked 
heels and falls flat on her face.  As she views a recording of previous 
awards ceremonies, Gracie mocks the mentally-challenged constants with 
the WIZARD OF OZ line, "If I only had a brain."
Once at the pageant, she makes friends with some of the ditzy dames, 
most notably Miss Rhode Island (Heather Burns, YOU'VE GOT MAIL).  Poor 
Miss Rhode Island can't even answer softball questions.  When asked 
about her favorite date, her reply is not dinner, dancing or any other 
activity but simply "April 25"?
Probably the easily part of a beauty pageant to spoof is the "talent" 
contest.  What is surprising about MISS CONGENIALITY is how they manage 
to come up with humor about the talent contest that is not only funny 
but fresh as well.  Too bad real-life pageants aren't this much fun.  If 
they were, then maybe the World Wrestling Federation might want to form 
a beauty pageant subsidiary.
MISS CONGENIALITY runs 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual references 
and a scene of violence and would be fine for kids around 9 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, laughed hard and often and gave the film *** 
1/2.  He found the movie imaginative, especially the paint scene.  He 
liked the way that Gracie's character develops, and he thought Sandra 
Bullock's acting was great.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
James Brundage
It takes some doing to make a beauty pageant flick that features an
intellectually vapid caper plot while being a slap in the face to
feminism.  When asked (within the movie, I mean) to defend pageantry
from this accusation, Sandra Bullock simply shrugs it off and says,
"Well, they're not all airheads, and I've made some friends."  Forget
the fact that nine out of ten women in the film act like vicious bitches
to Sandra's character -- a New Jersey FBI agent named Gracie Hart -- and
shrug off the fact that each of the contestants is painted to have all
of the intelligence of a Pokemon character on a good day.  Never mind
all that.  Sandra has learned that beauty pageants are really
scholarship contests and really aren't harmful to feminism.
Miss Congeniality starts out with Gracie as a New Jersey kid kicking ass
on the playground and getting the obligatory "ugly duckling" bit when
she slugs a guy to protect a potential boyfriend -- only to be shunned
because she was too tomboyish.  Of course, the ugly duckling grows up to
be an adult tomboy (though a dead sexy one at that).  The portrayal is
stereotypical: frumpy hair, two dates to her name, a punching bag, and a
penchant for pints of Ben and Jerry's.  To her credit, Sandra Bullock
pulls off the deal pretty well, but how she can live with herself after
playing such an odious role is beyond me.  (She gets paid a lot of
money, that's how. -Ed.)
Gracie works at the FBI and, after a sting operation that goes slightly
sour after she saves a Russian mobster from choking, she's placed on a
desk job until a letter from a Unabomber-like terrorist called "The
Citizen" arrives, threatening the Miss United States beauty pageant. 
The horror!  Gracie promptly gets shipped off to Austin, Texas, where,
with the help of pageant consultant (imagine that on your business card)
Vincent (Michael Caine), she is turned into a prim and proper lady who
investigates the pageant by going undercover and becoming fluent in
Ditz.
Of course it isn't only the women in Miss Congeniality that get the
barbs.  All the male FBI agents are painted as ogling idiots, whereas
all of the other men in the story are either gay, androgynous, or
psychotic.  Think of it as Stereotypes for Dummies.  Hell, they even
throw in a finalist being pulled off the stage for admitting her
lesbianism.
To give the devil its due, Miss Congeniality may be just about the most
offensive flick of the year, but it also has something of an acrid wit. 
Bullock is actually watchable (unlike her normal tour de crap), and the
movie does have its share of barbs directed towards beauty queens, but
this is far outweighed by the fact that Miss Congeniality is just plain
nasty.  If you're going to be this offensive in a comedy, you know,
Chris Rock or John Leguizamo offensive, you have to attack the
stereotypes, not embrace them.  And it better be damn funny, too.  And
that Miss Congeniality ain't.
What the hell; if you're at your local multiplex and everything else is
sold out, why not brainwash yourself by revisiting the gender/role
stereotypes that people have been trying to kill for decades and watch
Miss Congeniality.  Or actually use your brain for once and see
something a little more intelligent.  Maybe try the Discovery Channel.
Director: Donald Petrie
Producer: Sandra Bullock
Writer: Marc Lawrence, Katie Ford, Caryn Lucas
Starring: Sandra Bullock, Benjamin Bratt, Michael Caine, William
Shatner, Candice Bergan
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Robin Clifford
An infamous psychopath, called "the Citizen," has terrorized the nation
with a rampage of bombings, shootings and arson. His next chosen target is
the hallowed home of American beauty, the Miss United States Pageant, and
it's up to the FBI to stop him. Enter Special Agent Grace Heart (Sandra
Bullock), pretty but lacking, shall we say, in the social graces, who is
chosen to go undercover as a contestant in the national beauty contest and
nab the felon in "Miss Congeniality."
Sandra Bullock has come a long way since her star-making debut in 1994's
blockbuster, "Speed." Since then the actress has turned producer and "Miss
Congeniality" is the product of that change. Working from a script by Marc
Lawrence, Katie Ford and Caryn Lucas, the film is a combo of crime caper
and "Pygmalion," with Bullock as a super cop crossed with Elisa Doolittle.
A Unibomber style nutcase is terrorizing the country with his senseless
mayhem. When another of "the Citizen's" cryptic letter arrives at the FBI,
Special Agent Eric Matthews (Benjamin Bratt) is put in charge of the case.
The letter is deciphered and shows that the Miss United States Beauty
Pageant is the target for his next nefarious crime. The only way to uncover
the madman, the plan and his victim is to place an agent into the pageant
as a contestant. The only agent that fits the bill (read that: looks good
in a swimsuit) is Grace Heart. There is only one problem. Grace acts more
like a guy than the guys around her do.
The Bureau hires a master beauty pageant consultant, Victor Melling
(Michael Caine), to turn the sow's ear that is Grace into a silk purse.
Henry Higgins has nothing on the challenge that Vic must face in trying to
change the uncooperative agent not just into a beautiful woman, but one who
is good enough to make it as one of the pageant's final five contestants.
Special Agent Heart is against the plan and refuses to join a "bunch of
bikini stuffers who only want world peace." But, her career is on the line
and, reluctantly, she undergoes the make over that will turn her into Miss
New Jersey.
This is all a cute premise for a film and the story takes the direction
that one expects. As Grace undergoes her metamorphosis from bedraggled,
cynical and tough law officer to sleek, poised and elegant national beauty
contestant, she realizes that changes are happening within her, too.
Against her prejudiced will, Grace begins to get to know the other
contestants and realizes that they aren't the bikini stuffers she thought
they were. In particular, Cheryl (Heather Burns), Miss Rhode Island, takes
a liking to Grace and, against the agent's will, she makes friends. Grace's
mission to protect her, now, friends takes on an even greater urgency when
she learns that pageant organizer and former contestant, Kathy Morningside
(Candice Bergen), is a prime suspect. You can take it from there.
"Miss Congeniality" has a hard time getting past its by-the-numbers,
routine plot that pulls in the usual chestnuts of undercover cop tale, "My
Fair Lady," fish-out-of-water story and, for good measure, a romance. It
also attempts to show the makings of a big-time beauty pageant and how they
are really scholarship programs and not just swimsuit shows. There is a lot
of stuff going on here and it gets muddled as the story progresses.
This is the likable Sandra Bullock's show. The writing focuses of Grace and
her gruff personality that you know will undergo a change the same way her
whole look is altered by artiste Victor Manning. The camera never leaves
the actress for long as we see her go from mannish FBI Agent Grace Heart to
megababe and beauty finalist Gracie Lou Freebrush. Bullock has the
personality and a comic ability to hold the center of the film, but this is
virtually a one-woman show. The only exception is the funny, fey
performance by Michael Caine as the mysteriously blackballed pageant
consultant. Caine gets the only chance to steel the star's limelight and is
an epiphany in a nicely developed comic role.
The rest of the cast, including Benjamin Bratt, get little to do but fill
the screen around Bullock. Bratt is handsome enough and may have talent,
but he has yet to get a role that is a break through. Other characters are
generic and unmemorable. William Shatner is wasted as Stan Fields, the long
time pageant emcee who is being fired because he is "too old," a la Bert
Parks and the Miss America pageant. Nothing ever happens with the character
or his dilemma in a poor piece of story crafting. I could not watch Candice
Bergen without thinking, "Murphy Brown."
"Miss Congeniality" doesn't bring you any closer to the world of beauty
pageants. Nor does it deliver more than a few chuckles as we see Agent
Grace stumble and fall repeatedly because of her high heels. It worked
once, maybe twice, but not six or seven times. There could have been a
better film in there. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
An infamous psychopath, called "the Citizen," has terrorized the nation
with a rampage of bombings, shootings and arson. His next chosen target is
the hallowed home of American beauty, the Miss United States Pageant, and
it's up to the FBI to stop him. Enter Special Agent Grace Heart (Sandra
Bullock), pretty but lacking, shall we say, in the social graces, who is
chosen to go undercover as a contestant in the national beauty contest and
nab the felon in "Miss Congeniality."
Sandra Bullock has come a long way since her star-making debut in 1994's
blockbuster, "Speed." Since then the actress has turned producer and "Miss
Congeniality" is the product of that change. Working from a script by Marc
Lawrence, Katie Ford and Caryn Lucas, the film is a combo of crime caper
and "Pygmalion," with Bullock as a super cop crossed with Elisa Doolittle.
A Unibomber style nutcase is terrorizing the country with his senseless
mayhem. When another of "the Citizen's" cryptic letter arrives at the FBI,
Special Agent Eric Matthews (Benjamin Bratt) is put in charge of the case.
The letter is deciphered and shows that the Miss United States Beauty
Pageant is the target for his next nefarious crime. The only way to uncover
the madman, the plan and his victim is to place an agent into the pageant
as a contestant. The only agent that fits the bill (read that: looks good
in a swimsuit) is Grace Heart. There is only one problem. Grace acts more
like a guy than the guys around her do.
The Bureau hires a master beauty pageant consultant, Victor Melling
(Michael Caine), to turn the sow's ear that is Grace into a silk purse.
Henry Higgins has nothing on the challenge that Vic must face in trying to
change the uncooperative agent not just into a beautiful woman, but one who
is good enough to make it as one of the pageant's final five contestants.
Special Agent Heart is against the plan and refuses to join a "bunch of
bikini stuffers who only want world peace." But, her career is on the line
and, reluctantly, she undergoes the make over that will turn her into Miss
New Jersey.
This is all a cute premise for a film and the story takes the direction
that one expects. As Grace undergoes her metamorphosis from bedraggled,
cynical and tough law officer to sleek, poised and elegant national beauty
contestant, she realizes that changes are happening within her, too.
Against her prejudiced will, Grace begins to get to know the other
contestants and realizes that they aren't the bikini stuffers she thought
they were. In particular, Cheryl (Heather Burns), Miss Rhode Island, takes
a liking to Grace and, against the agent's will, she makes friends. Grace's
mission to protect her, now, friends takes on an even greater urgency when
she learns that pageant organizer and former contestant, Kathy Morningside
(Candice Bergen), is a prime suspect. You can take it from there.
"Miss Congeniality" has a hard time getting past its by-the-numbers,
routine plot that pulls in the usual chestnuts of undercover cop tale, "My
Fair Lady," fish-out-of-water story and, for good measure, a romance. It
also attempts to show the makings of a big-time beauty pageant and how they
are really scholarship programs and not just swimsuit shows. There is a lot
of stuff going on here and it gets muddled as the story progresses.
This is the likable Sandra Bullock's show. The writing focuses of Grace and
her gruff personality that you know will undergo a change the same way her
whole look is altered by artiste Victor Manning. The camera never leaves
the actress for long as we see her go from mannish FBI Agent Grace Heart to
megababe and beauty finalist Gracie Lou Freebrush. Bullock has the
personality and a comic ability to hold the center of the film, but this is
virtually a one-woman show. The only exception is the funny, fey
performance by Michael Caine as the mysteriously blackballed pageant
consultant. Caine gets the only chance to steel the star's limelight and is
an epiphany in a nicely developed comic role.
The rest of the cast, including Benjamin Bratt, get little to do but fill
the screen around Bullock. Bratt is handsome enough and may have talent,
but he has yet to get a role that is a break through. Other characters are
generic and unmemorable. William Shatner is wasted as Stan Fields, the long
time pageant emcee who is being fired because he is "too old," a la Bert
Parks and the Miss America pageant. Nothing ever happens with the character
or his dilemma in a poor piece of story crafting. I could not watch Candice
Bergen without thinking, "Murphy Brown."
"Miss Congeniality" doesn't bring you any closer to the world of beauty
pageants. Nor does it deliver more than a few chuckles as we see Agent
Grace stumble and fall repeatedly because of her high heels. It worked
once, maybe twice, but not six or seven times. There could have been a
better film in there. I give it a C+.
Special Agent Gracie Hart (Sandra Bullock) despises all things culturally
regarded as feminine and is considered one of the guys by her male 
coworkers at the F.B.I.  When she makes a wrong choice during a bust,
she's passed over for an operations lead to nab the infamous "Citizen"
bomber.  That honor goes to her competitive coworker Eric Matthews (Benjamin
Bratt, "The Next Best Thing"), who doesn't have a clue where to start.
Gracie figures out from the Citizen's clues that he intends to hit
the Miss United States pageant in San Antonio, and before she can say
'high heels', she's picked to go undercover as a contestant in "Miss 
Congeniality."
This Sandra Bullock produced vehicle is just that - a Sandra Bullock vehicle
and nothing more.  The film is completely derivative (see "My Fair Lady,"
"Never Been Kissed," etc.).  It also suffers from 'traileritis' in that
there are very few laughs outside of what's already been presented in its 
marketting.
The screenplay, by Marc Lawrence ("Forces of Nature"), Katie Ford and Caryn
Lucas, features F.B.I. agents who act like a pack of frat boys (their mission
is named Operation Thong), an unappealing love interest, the heroine stumbling 
over her heels over and over and over, an easily detected false suspect, and 
forty-eight contestants with no personality (Heather Burns as Cheryl, Miss 
Rhode Island, is the only one who's the least bit fleshed out).
The Bureau hires pageant consultant Victor Melling (Michael Caine) to transform
the klutzy, dishevelled Gracie into Miss New Jersey, which he does in short
order in an airplane hanger with a huge staff.  Once this segment is completed,
the comedy deflates.  We're introduced to Miss Morningstar (Candice Bergen),
the head of the pageant, her inept assistant Frank (Steve Monroe, "The Nutty
Professor"), and long-time emcee Stan Fields (William Shatner) and surprise -
all have axes to grind.  Then the film just goes through its paces as Gracie
gets in and out of scrapes, cozies up to Matthews (a character presented as a
shallow, juvenile womanizer who's not too good at his job either), saves 
the day and realizes that beauty contestants are people too.  Yawn.
Bullock should be commended for shining as much as she does with this material.
Her comic abilities are firing on all cylinders and Gracie gets the audience
on her side quickly.  Physically, she's convincing wrestling a man or diving
onto a suspect.  Bullock also really adds sizzle when the material gives
her something to work with.  Her only support here comes from Michael Caine as 
a humorously sarcastic Henry Higgins.  The rest of the cast is shrill or bland.
Technically the film is of commercial standards.
Bullock fans may be happy with "Miss Congeniality," but those in search of
a real comedy should look elsewhere.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
MISS CONGENIALITY (2000)
PG-13; running time 110 minutes
Genre: Comedy/Action
Seen at: Celebration Cinema (Lansing, Michigan)
Official site: http://www.misscongeniality.net/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0212346
Written by: Katie Ford, Marc Lawrence, Caryn Lucas
Directed by: Donald Petrie
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Benjamin Bratt, Michael Caine, Candice Bergen,
William Shatner, Ernie Hudson, Wendy Raquel Robinson, Heather Burns,
Melissa De Sousa, Diedre Quinn, Asia De Marcos, Steve Monroe (Frank)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamscongeniality.html
After being completely underwhelmed by Sandra "Speed" Bullock in
forgettable flick-lites like SPEED 2, 28 DAYS, and the completely
unentertaining THE NET, I figured MISS CONGENIALITY would be a total
bust.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
>From the time she was a young girl growing up in New Jersey, Gracie Hart
(Sandra Bullock) was what's commonly referred to as a "tomboy".  Young
Gracie felt she had an obligation to protect and serve those who
couldn't do so for themselves.  Naturally, that obligation led her to
become an FBI agent, under no-nonsense supervisor McDonald (Ernie
Hudson), who was wary of Hart's hard-edged, gung-ho tactics.
His wariness was proven out when rough-and-tumble Hart went against his
orders, endangering the lives of fellow FBI agents, including Handsomely
Rugged Eric Matthews (Benjamin Bratt); because of this, McDonald makes
Hart cool her jets at her desk.  But when Matthews gets assigned to run
his own Ops in pursuit of the terrorist known as The Citizen, Matthews
convinces McDonald to let Hart be used as bait when they learn of The
Citizen's next target: the Miss United States Beauty Pageant.
Excuse me, I meant "Scholarship Contest".  Or so says Cathy Morningside
(Candice Bergen), pageant...er, contest sponsor, aging ex-beauty queen,
and co-host, along with the equally aging Stan Fields (William Shatner).
The idea is for Gracie to be planted in the contest as Miss New Jersey,
alongside fellow contestants including Miss Rhode Island (Heather
Burns), Miss California (Wendy Raquel Robinson), Miss New York (Melissa
De Sousa), Miss Texas (Diedre Quinn), and Miss Hawaii (Asia De Marcos).
Only one problem: this Miss New Jersey is a slob.  Enter Victor Melling
(Michael Caine), a pageant consultant with Issues.
The Upshot:
No one was more surprised than I was to hear myself laughing throughout
the movie MISS CONGENIALITY - and at appropriate times, no less!
Sandra Bullock was a delight to watch from start to finish; not since
SPEED has she seemed so Lucille Ball-esque in her mixed of roughneck
charm and physical humor, blended with a natural beauty that shined even
under all the grit.  It was nice to see some of the qualities in her
that made SPEED such fun to watch.
But contrary to the views of some of my fellow critics, Bullock didn't
have to carry this flick alone; she was ably assisted by the almost
always-brilliant Michael Caine as disgruntled diva-maker Victor Melling,
flat out hilarious in yet another good role.  The quick wit sparring
between Bullock and Caine was as good a bit of acting, editing, and
writing as I've seen in any mainstream comedy this year.  Add Candice
Bergen to the mix as an acerbically funny ex-beauty queen, and Benjamin
Bratt as the ObStud, and you have a recipe for a purty darn good flick.
Strangely enough, William Shatner's campy pageant queen, Stan Fields,
did nothing for me; I went in expecting Shatner to chew up scenery in
classic Captain Kirk With-A-Twist mode, but he just fell flat.  In fact,
other than the need for having a separate groomsman and show host,
Shatner's Fields was an unnecessary duplication of efforts; Caine
could've more than ably handled playing the host (though I would've
sorely missed his showing Gracie how to "glide".  Nah, the tradeoff
wouldn't have been worth it at all).
Don't think too much about the obligatory (for FBI involvement)
"mystery" of The Citizen; that part was all smoke and mirrors.  At
heart, it's the interplay between Bullock and Caine, cute teasing from
Bullock and Bratt, and catty, but fun overall, flow between all of
Gracie's fellow pageant entrants, that made this flick surprisingly
good.  I'm no fan of beauty cattlecalls...er, I mean, pageants...but the
chicks of MISS CONGENIALITY - along with their cohort, Michael Caine -
made the fictional Miss United States Scholarship Contest, a winner.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
Diva and I often talk about Spot in our reviews - you know, that one
Black person that you know was included as Diversity Filler, just to
show that Lead Character X Has Black Friends, Too.  The Black pageant
entrants in MISS CONGENIALITY - Miss California (Wendy Raquel Robinson)
and Miss New York (Melissa De Sousa, late of THE BEST MAN) - showed no
signs of Spottage; they looked and acted like they belonged right where
they were.
And speaking of De Sousa, look for a funny spotlight on her late in the
movie.  By that time, I thought all the laughs were over.  I was,
fortunately, wrong again.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
MISS CONGENIALITY brought out the humorous best in Sandra Bullock,
Michael Caine, and believe it or not, Candice Bergman.  I haven't seen
Bullock this slap-my-knee funny since SPEED.  Nope, I take that back:
she was even better in "Miss".  I'm going to see it again when it opens
next week.
MISS CONGENIALITY (rating: greenlight):
Any woman that can toss a man around in evening wear and come up
smiling, is One Kewl Chick in my book!
