Title
Review for Ulzana's Raid (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Robert Aldrich western finds Burt Lancaster in philosophical mood as
McIntosh, a scout hired by the cavalry to track down a renegade Apache
chief who has left an Arizona reservation to go on the rampage with a
small band of followers.  As is usual with these movies, Lancaster
knows the terrain, and the Indians, better than any other man around. 
And, as is also usual, he has an inexperienced young lieutenant (Bruce
Davison) to `educate' along the way.  But Davison isn't as feckless as
we might assume.  Actually, he holds up pretty well considering the
violence he is witness to.  Besides, Lancaster can't reply to anything
Davison says without making a snappy remark, leaving the young officer
to work things out for himself most of the time.
All conversations between characters are thoughtful, clear.  Davison
can't help comparing Apache values with Christian ones in his attempt
to understand Ulzana's way of thinking - or is he trying to
rationalize it?  Most revealing is Ulzana's excuse for his attacks on
the scattered settlers.  It is not simply a case of exacting revenge
for white colonization of his land.  Rather, he equates the
reservation with impotence - he wants to possess and assimilate the
spiritual power of those outside it.  It's up to Lancaster, Davison,
and their cavalry troop to second-guess Ulzana's every move and stop
him before he kills again.  Film's storyline suits a
cop-vs-serial-killer formula better than a western.  There's also
enough tension and gore to make it effective enough as a horror movie
(an ambush scene early in the story has an unexpected, shocking
moment).  Bearing in mind the year of production, film can be
interpreted either as yet-another-Vietnam parable (Ulzana's band are
as nameless and hidden as the Viet Cong), or a call-to-arms to
preserve the identity of Native Americans, which were then seen
politically as a growing part of the counter-cultural revolution.  But
I'm sure Aldrich really only wanted to make a western.
