Title
Review for Specialist, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Alex Siegel
     In THE SPECIALIST, Sylvester Stallone plays a ex-CIA demolitions
expert, who is now a kinder, gentler hitman.  Sharon Stone plays the
femme fatal, and James Woods plays the buddy gone bad.
     Let me start by saying that this was a really bad movie.  I'm not
kidding around here, I've seen my share of lemons in my day, and this
one was a true dog.  What, you may ask, made it so bad?  A whole lot of
things.
     First off, the script was laughable.  Rambling, incoherent,
uneven, it badly needed a few more passes through the typewriter.  In
particular, the dialog was criminal.  It's been a long time since I've
heard so many wooden lines strung together within the space of two
hours.  Ironically, the only character who came off as vaguely real was
the drug lord.  At least he had more than one emotion at his disposal.
     The acting was was also poor, which is surprising considering that
this is a veteran cast.  Stallone, who has never had great range, was
particularly uninteresting here.  Even in the action scenes, he seemed
tired and bored.  Woods demonstrates a range of emotion: from vague
hostility to full temper tantrum.  Stone looks somewhat distressed from
beginning to end, and never breaks into a smile.  Maybe she was
thinking about what this movie will do to her fragile career.
     But there's more.  The production values were very uneven.  In
almost every scene, the lighting was bad, or the sound was off.  Even
the explosions (and there were plenty) seemed half-hearted.  At times,
it looked downright amateurish.  Maybe they were under a tight
deadline, or maybe they just didn't care.  In any event, the director
should start looking for another line of work.  It's interesting that
Ed Wood opened on the same night.  Just a coincidence, I suppose.
     A few bits in particular deserve honorable mention.  There is a
long love scene in the middle that almost had me laughing out loud.
The only word that fits is "comical."  If real people had sex like these
two, there would be a lot fewer babies in the world.  The low point of
the movie had to be the fight on the bus.  Embarrassing.  Throughout
the scene, I couldn't shake the sensation that I'd seen it before, in
about a thousand other cheap action flicks.  Whoever decided to include
the pregnant woman should be shot.
     It's hard to think of another movie to compare this one too.
CABIN BOY, HIGHLANDER II, BARBARIAN QUEEN, THE PERILS OF GWENDOLYN.
These too were a frontal assault on our intelligence.  Maybe some of
the "Sea Quest" episodes.  The mind boggles, and the stomach churns.
     That's enough ranting.  To conclude, THE SPECIALIST is bad,
boring, and bad.  Don't see it, ever.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Not entertainment. A new form of slow torture.
Sometimes I wonder if I should be more faithless. I have a strange
wellspring of faith in me that tells me that Sylvester Stallone, with the
proper script and direction, would be great to watch. COPLAND went a long
way towards proving that. THE SPECIALIST, on the other hand, may very well
forever kill off what faith I did have.
Stallone plays a demolitions expert, formerly with "The Agency". In the
first scenes, he's been assigned to blow up a bridge in South America, the
better to kill a drug lord in a jeep. His associate (James Woods) and he
squabble when they learn there's a kid on board. The bridge blows up, a
fistfight ensues, and the scene ends so clumsily that it forgets to have
Stallone actually try and follow through on his promise to kill Woods.
Never mind. The flick has bigger fish to fry. It drags in (probably kicking
and screaming, although I bet they cut all that footage) Sharon Stone as a
woman with no apparent job or means of support who wants to pay Stallone
piles of money to blow slimy Eric Roberts into lots of itty bitty pieces.
Why? Because when she was young, she saw Roberts murder her father. Thus are
burning motivations born. Both actors look thoroughly Novocained. Given the
lines the/y are condemned to read, I suspect such treatment would have been
merciful.
Stallone and Stone spend most of the movie listening to recordings of each
other's voices. This doesn't just slow the movie down to a crawl; it makes
us shake our fists at the screen and scream, "Go meet somewhere and spare
us!"
THE SPECIALIST as a whole is an uninteresting succession of fights,
explosions, chases, sex-as-contact-sport, more explosions, and bombs with
convenient red LED timer displays. Nothing remotely surprising, interesting,
unique, or funny happens -- except for James Woods, who is always creepy and
over-the-top in everything he does. But aside from him, the film plays like
a catalog of everything that should be shot on sight in a movie.

Author
Croal, NGai
     In his heyday, Alfred Hitchcock always searched for the
flesh-and-blood incarnation of the perfect blonde ice queen: first
Tippi Hedrin, then Kim Novak and finally Janet Leigh, shaping and
molding them into approximations of his fantasy. The tough-as-nails
exteriors of Hitchcock's blondes were simply a front; inside, they were
all vulnerable little girls waiting to curl up next to the right man.
But as twisted as the master of suspense's mind was, he would never
have dreamed up Sharon Stone, who couldn't play vulnerable if her life
depended on it. Everything about her screen persona is carefully
calculated, but not with the classically trained intelligence of a
Jodie Foster or the street smart cunning of a Juliette Lewis. Rather,
Stone radiates the bitchy confidence of someone who's taking a
difficult exam but managed to get hold of the answers in advance.
Coupled with a model's face and a pinup's body, it's no wonder
Hollywood is falling all over itself to cast her: she's the mother of
all ice queens.
     The only person who knows how to best use Stone is Dutch director
Paul Verhoeven. He understands that we desire her, but can never
sympathize with her, which makes her the perfect villain; a Barbara
Stanwyck for the '90s.  In Verhoeven's TOTAL RECALL, it took an AK-47
divorce at the hands of Arnold Schwarzenegger to put her down. But her
magnum opus was BASIC INSTINCT. Her performance as Catherine Trammell
embodied straight male paranoia: smarter, sexier and more lethal than
anyone else, her unabashed bisexuality meant that men and women were
equally disposable. Michael Douglas was ostensibly the lead, but she
stole the part from under his nose. His hard-boiled cop was no match
for Stone's audaciously seductive brand of evil--her swaying body,
come-hither eyes and throatily profane voice turned him into a
quivering, horny mess. We knew Douglas' dick couldn't measure up to her
ice pick, so even Verhoeven's sell-out ending couldn't erase the fact
that we had seen an ovaries-out star-making performance from Stone.
     Since then, she's been smart enough to try to avoid typecasting,
but not smart enough to understand her considerable limitations.
SLIVER was a failure from its inception because Stone played the
helpless victim instead of her natural calling, the omnipotent killer
(imagine Sharon Stone as a rich voyeur-murderer and William Baldwin as
a naive neo-virgin who falls under her spell; now that would have been
trash worth seeing). Instead, the film died a quick death, as did
INTERSECTION, which made the mistake of putting Stone in the role of
the wronged wife instead of the other woman.  With her career
disappearing faster than her clothing, she hot-footed it into an
as-yet-unreleased western THE QUICK AND THE DEAD and Martin Scorsese's
upcoming gangster drama, CASINO. Unfortunately for Stone, THE
SPECIALIST came out first, and even its $14 million opening weekend
can't erase the stench that this stink bomb leaves behind.
     It's no longer possible to make a good film with Sylvester
Stallone; an veteran bomber in real-life, he now feels compelled to
play one in the movies. At the start of the film, Ray Quick (Stallone)
and Ned Trent (James Woods) are sent by the CIA in the mid-'80s into an
unnamed South American country to take out an evil drug lord by blowing
him up as he drives across a bridge. After Stallone plants the bomb, he
sees that the criminal isn't alone--the man's daughter is in the car
as well. When Woods refuses to deactivate the bomb remotely, Stallone
races out to stop it from exploding.  He fails, of course, leaving us
to ponder whether life is imitating art or vice versa.
     When we cut to the present, Stallone is already involved in a
series of tape-delayed phone-sex conversations with May (Stone).  Her
parents were murdered by another drug lord (Eric Roberts) and his
henchmen, so she's sworn to get even with them, even if it means
sleeping with Roberts to get close enough to do the job herself. She'd
like to hire Stallone, but he refuses for some unknown reason --
perhaps he needs to follow her around and watch strange men run their
hands all over the body he lusts for to psyche himself up. When he
finally gets angry and starts blowing people up, the Cubans bring in a
bomb expert of their own to defuse Stallone. I'll bet you can't guess
who that might be.
     The film is cobbled together from several different movies, one
for each actor. Sylvester Stallone models himself after Gene Hackman's
existentially morose loner from Francis Ford Coppola's THE
CONVERSATION, James Woods reprises his fast-talking arrogant bastard
from Oliver Stone's SALVADOR and Stone tries on a helpless Lana Turner
impression--circa 1946's THE POSTMAN ALWAYS RINGS TWICE--for
size.  Rod Steiger, as a Cuban godfather, struggles to imitate Al
Pacino's tour de force Cuban accent in SCARFACE, but he misses wildly,
overshoots even Pacino's lackluster Puerto Rican accent in CARLITO'S
WAY and lands somewhere next to Lucille Ball imitating Ricky Ricardo.
     At some point, writer Alexandra Seros and director Lluis Losa
should have tried to bring the actors into the same film; as it stands,
everyone seems to be working from a different script, none of which is
any good.  Seros takes a SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE approach to suspense,
which means that none of the three main characters meet until late in
the film. There's a hotel room love scene between Stallone and Stone
that's supposed to be explosive, but it's so sluggishly choreographed
that they seem to be suffering from narcolepsy.  Stallone's legendary
physique was never meant to be seen completely au naturel; someone
should tell him that veins popping off of one's ass isn't very
attractive. At least the scene doesn't last very long, which befits the
last name of Stallone's character, who seems to be saving his sexual
energy for his work.
     Since Stallone and Stone play the film as though it were a
production of "Hamlet," Woods is left to carry the film, which he very
nearly does. He isn't content to chew the scenery; by the end of the
film, he's devoured the camera, the lights, the props and Stallone's
elevator shoes to fuel his ferociously hammy performance.  Woods has
always been a volatile performer, and here he lets that side of him
hang out, playing Ned as a natural-born control freak who gloats when
things go his way and throws fits when they don't. Several of his
scenes seem to have been included only to show how scummy he is, but
his go-for-broke style makes them welcome diversions from the plot. By
the time Woods pushes a fat tourist out of an elevator with the
admonition, "Get a new shirt," we're rooting for him to kill off the
entire cast so that he can continue his one-man show without
interference.
     Bad movies are nothing new, particularly for Stone and Stallone.
But whenever we're watching a bad movie, there comes a point at which
we stop worrying about whether or not it's going to improve; in fact,
we pray fervently for it to get worse, to become so spectacularly bad
that it becomes perversely entertaining: a classic ode to the power of
misguided intentions. It's a measure of the witlessness of the creators
of THE SPECIALIST that by the film's end, they can't even achieve
that.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Luis Llosa
Writer: Alexandra Solos (based on the novel by John Shirley)
Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Sharon Stone, James Woods, Rod Steiger,
Eric Roberts
Sylvester Stallone has made some crap films in his lifetime, but this
has got to be one of the worst.  A totally dull story that thinks it can
use various explosions to make it interesting, "The Specialist" is about
as exciting as an episode of "Dragnet," and about as well acted.  Even
some attempts at film noir mood are destroyed by a sappy script, stupid
and unlikable characters, and just plain nothingness.  Who knew a big
explosion could be so boring and anti-climactic?  Unless you saw "Blown
Away"...
"The Specliast" of the title is none other than action star Sylvester
Stallone (in comeback #19, I think), who plays a quiet, hermit-like
bomber who was once a bomb expert with the army or something, but who
suffered a change of heart when he and his assistant (James Woods, who
shows us exactly what over-the-top is, other than another bad Sly film)
accidentally killed some innocent people during a job.  His credo is
killing bad people, not innocents.  And that's why he makes big bombs.
So anyway, into his life steps the seductive Sharon Stone, who is
basically the girlfriend/moll of the stupid son (Eric Roberts) of a
cuban/Miami kingpin (Rod Steiger, in an indecipherable accent, which is
sometimes cuban, sometimes Brando, sometimes Scottish, etc).  Turns out
Sharon is actually using her boyfriend so she can kill him, since he
killed her parents when she was young.  So she calls Sly, leaves
messages with him, sends him e-mail, etc, about planting a bomb to kill
Roberts, which Sly listens to obsessively, and while he works out
naked.  Yea.
Also into his life, though again, comes Woods, who has been tipped off
by Stone to catch Sly.  Using the cops, he tries to set up traps, none
which really work, so when Sly calls him, he goes ballisitic on his ass
over the phone, getting so worked up by saying his must-be-improvised
speeches that he seems to pop the vein in his head wide open.  These are
the most exciting scenes in the film, and Woods becomes the only ounce
of entertainment in the film.
The film tries to offer us a moody film noir, except with explosions,
but comes up completely snake-eyes.  It's just a pretend film noir,
making it a big waste of time.  And for action buffs, the action scenes
are pretty lame, with some really unrealistic-looking special effects (a
penthouse being blown off of a hotel looks like a piece of cardboard
falling into a tub).  Then there's the much-discussed sex scene between
Sly and Stone, which are about as mispaired a couple as Rachel and Ross
on "Friends."  Their sex scene is more nauseating then sexy, because it
shows us more of Sly than Stone.  Now let's guess who WE'D rather see
naked, okay?  Stone's small but perky breasts, which we've seen more
times than Harvey Keitel's dick, or Stallone's veiny ass, which isn't
usually shown for a very good reason?  I know I can't really judge it as
a flaw of the film, but come on.
The worst flaw of the film is this: it's boring.  I mean, I was on
caffeine when watching it, but my friend fell asleep only to be woken up
by James Woods ranting.  But a good movie does not James Woods going
nuts make.  If you're in for some fun action, rent Sly's earlier
"Demolition Man," which sucks too, but in a much more entertaining
fashion.  Skip this dull film, unless you want to see Woods, or make fun
of Steiger's accent, or see Stone's breasts again.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There are moments in this job when one is faced with separating
the "so-bad-it's-entertaining" from the "just-plain-awful."  At those
times, I wish I could become Joe Bob Briggs, and make the
recommendation to "check it out" based simply on explosions, naked
breasts and Cuban gangster-fu.  But THE SPECIALIST doesn't deserve such
consideration.  Ponderous, pretentious and acted with astounding
indifference, THE SPECIALIST is a big fat bore with a couple of nice
explosions.  It's too somber to work as camp, and too tedious to work
as anything else.
     Sylvester Stallone stars as Ray Quick, a former CIA demolitions
expert now haunted by his past and hiring out his skills with
explosives freelance.  He is contacted by May Munro (Sharon Stone), a
woman obsessed with the murder of her parents at the hands of three
thugs led by Tomas (Eric Roberts), the son of a Miami drug lord (Rod
Steiger).  Ray is unsure whether he wants to take the job, until he
becomes a bit too personally interested in May's attempts to get closer
to Tomas.  He also discovers that the drug lord's head of security is
Ned Trent (James Woods), Ray's former CIA partner.  Trent carries a
ten-year grudge for Ray's part in having him thrown out of the Agency,
and plans to use May's vendetta to exact a little vengeance of his
own.
     Much as one might expect, THE SPECIALIST is being hyped on the
pairing of box-office heavyweights Stallone and Stone.  Unfortunately,
both of them spend most of the film looking as though they've just done
a NyQuil highball.  Stone swaggers through discos in slow motion,
wanders through her inexplicably massive house in slow motion, has sex
in slow motion.  At some point, director Luis Llosa needed to explain
to Stone that "haunted" and "bored" are entirely different emotions.
Stallone is even more comatose, conveying Ray's deep reservoir of
anguish and guilt through drooping eyelids and jaw muscle isometrics,
as well as speaking in what can only be described as an impersonation
of Henry Kissinger with a head cold.  Perhaps that was one of the
reasons behind a scene in which Stallone dispatches a group of young
hoods on a bus, which was added after test screenings:  they needed at
least some evidence that he had a pulse.
     The rest of the cast is nearly as bad.  James Woods tries to cut
loose as the demented Trent, but he never makes for a particularly
threatening villain.  He's better when humiliating a bomb squad
commander or making off-handed insults about a loud shirt.  Eric
Roberts, typecast for most of his career as a lout-mouthed sleazeball,
plays...well, a slightly more sedate sleazeball, delivering lines like
"What I want, I take" straight out of the Introduction to Basic
Machismo Handbook.  And Rod Steiger, who was given to overacting even
in his Academy Award-winning heyday, is appalling as the Cuban
Godfather, doing an accent which rivals Kevin Costner's Robin Hood as
the worst in recent memory.
     There are a couple of moments in THE SPECIALIST which are worth
unintentional giggles.  One is the ill-advised scene in which Stallone
and Stone stand together in a hotel room, undressing each other while
Stone stares down at the top of the 5'8" Stallone's head.  Another is
trying to understand how Stone's May, who looks about ten years older
than Roberts' Tomas, was supposed to be a young girl when an adult
Roberts helped kill May's parents.  But THE SPECIALIST is simply
brain-dead from top to bottom.  There are almost too many examples of
stupidity to single one out, but my personal favorite involves May
faking her own death by tossing her wallet in with a 60-year-old
corpse.  Apparently they don't have photos on ID in Florida.
     I have to hand the pyrotechnics team credit for blowing up a hotel
suite; it's a fairly impressive piece of work.  But that's when I
should have left.  Come to think of it, I wish that's where I'd come
in, too.

Author
Raymond Johnston
     Once upon a time Warner Bros. churned out B gangster movies at an
incredible rate.  Some of these were punishment films.  A popular star
would get the notion he or she could refuse scripts or ask for more
pay, and he or she would be forced to star in a B film.  This told them
who was boss, the studio.  They would work with a group of standard
Warner contract actors and studio hack technicians on some left over
sets.  Cut in some  stock footage and in a few weeks the studio had a
violent genre piece, based on some trash novel the studio bought at
bargain prices.
     It is fitting that Warner Bros should be behind this overwrought
action misfire.  It plays like a punishment picture.  The dialogue is so
corny and the plot so transparent, that you can hardly believe A-list
stars are in it.  Character development is like examples from a
how-to-write-good book.  Sly Stallone is sensitive, show him adopting a
stray cat.  Sly Stallone is un hombre mas macho.  Show him throwing a
radio-weilding punk out of a bus window.  Show him flex for no real
reason.  Sharon Stone is a femme fatale bent on revenge.  Give her blue
tinted flashbacks, over and over again.  Give her peek-a-boo costumes
and let her walk into exclusive parties without an invitation.  Give her
double entendre dialogue about the heat from Sly's controlled
explosions.  Hype her nude scene all over TV and magazines for months.
That and the explosions are really all the film is about.
     The supporting B-film cast is on firmer ground doing what they do
best, trying to breathe some sense of life into ridiculous dialogue and
ponderous scenes.  They try but lose an uphill battle.  The big book on
how to make bad films highly recommends casting people to play the most
distant ethnic group from their real one.  Rod Steiger is a master at
this.  He discovered long ago that when cast to play a Latin American,
all one needs to do is say words like "djoo" and "leesen" for "you" and
"listen."  Add to that the crowning touch of always fidgeting with a
gold crucifix, and there you have it, aging Latin American drug lord..
James Woods manages to be a creepy ex-CIA guy very well.  That is his
bread and butter role.  He is given such ridiculous scenes, such as
having a breakdown yelling at a tape recorder, that one ponders why he
isn't simply committed by his friends for the safety of all.  Eric
Roberts plays a creepy character as well.  He is remarkably good at it.
So good that it is, well, creepy.
     The title refers to Sly Stallone's character being an explosives
expert.  This is the biggest fumble of the film.  He has a talent for
"focused explosions."  Somehow he can set off a big wad of plastic
explosive in a busy night club and kill only the one person in a room
that he targets.  He hangs around to watch his success. (1) How does the
bomb know not to send debris into innocent people? (2) If he's going to
hang around, why not just shoot the one guy with a sniper rifle? How he
manages to set up some of the more elaborate "controlled" explosions is
never made clear.  A major plot point involving an explosion victim is
also never explained, leaving one of the biggest plot holes in recent
film memory.  It does provide James Woods with one stray truly funny
scene.
     The stars' clothed and unclothed bodies (Rod Steiger excepted)
provide something pleasant to look at, and Miami provides some nice
scenery.  If you demand more than this from a film, then THE
SPECIALIST is not for you.  It is at times so overdetermined an example
of macho film making that it might qualify as a guilty pleasure, but a
very guilty one indeed.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Phrase "high concept" are profanity in the vocabulary of
many of today's film critics. But even such, most despised
category of Hollywood bad movies has certain layers of
sub-categories. There are "high concept" movies based on a
single idea, or single storyline or plot. In case of THE
SPECIALIST, 1994 action thriller directed by Luis Llosa
there wasn't even such original idea. High concept was
simply in pairing two popular actors of the time - action
superstar Sylvester Stallone and blonde bombshell Sharon
Stone. Result was, of course, predictable, but hardly anyone
expected the critics to massacre film with such ferocity.
Stallone here plays Ray Quick, CIA bomb expert who retired
after accidentally killing innocent people and now lives in
Miami with his cat. Sharon Stone plays May Munro, beautiful
woman determined to avenge the deaths of her parents, killed
by Miami crime lord Tomas Leon (played by Eric Roberts). Two
of them never meet, but they exchange messages through BBS.
Ray agrees to use his talents in order to help her get her
revenge and begins the bombing campaign against the bad
guys. That bombing campaign would bring the attention of
Ray's old and corrupt colleague Ned Trent (James Woods), who
is ready to mobilise entire Miami police force to get him.
Later, it would turn out that May's motives aren't so clear.
Based on the novel by John Shirley, the screenplay by
Alexandra Seros offers standard, formulaic plot with
cardboard characters and couple or predictable plot twists.
The actors aren't very interested in their roles - Stallone
is wooden, and Sharon Stone (unlike in her future roles)
offers nothing more than her good looks. Speaking about
later, film also features steamy sex scene between two
protagonists, the element almost obligatory in any major
production Ms. Stone had during the particular period of her
career. The scene was well-done, but bellow the standards
set by Verhoeven in BASIC INSTINCT. Other actors are also
rather unispired, to say the least - Roberts plays standard
cardboard villain, and veteran Rod Steiger is laughable as
Latino godfather. The show is stolen by James Woods whose
overacting scenes actually brings some life into this dull
and predictable motion picture. The explosions are, however,
well-done, although some of the special effects seem corny.
Not interested in plot and characters, director Llosa, who
used to do much better work in SNIPER, tries to make
impression by providing noirish atmosphere of Miami. That
effort partially fails, and the musical score by John Barry,
which is good as always, only reminds the audience that
there were much better films out there. There are, of
course, much worse films out there, and this film perhaps
didn't deserve its horrible reputation, but very few people
should have to endure watching THE SPECIALIST just in order
to come to such conclusion.

Author
James Berardinelli
     If I were in a kind mood, I might say that THE SPECIALIST attempts
to be an atmospheric, dramatic thriller.  On the other hand, if I
wanted to be truthful, I could note that this film has two obvious
assets (both of which are used to maximum advantage): Sylvester
Stallone's biceps and Sharon Stone's breasts.  Everything else,
ultimately, is superfluous, as becomes apparent the moment you actually
start to think about the story line.
     Stallone is Ray Quick, an ex-CIA explosives specialist.  Stone is
May Munro, a woman bent on avenging the deaths of her parents.  When
she was a girl, she saw them murdered, and her whole reason for living
has been to kill Tomas Leon (Eric Roberts) and his two cohorts in
crime.  To do this, she has recruited Ray.  They talk on the phone and
communicate by e-mail, but they never meet.
     May, however, is not entirely on the level.  She has made a deal
with an old enemy of Ray's, Ned Trent (James Woods).  Ned's motives are
a little foggy, but it's clear that he wants to do something unpleasant
to Ray, and he wields enough clout to get almost the entire Miami
police force behind him in his search for the elusive specialist.
     This movie is excruciatingly dumb.  And, given the releases of
SPEED and BLOWN AWAY this summer, there's no dearth of explosion-based
motion pictures.  The only twist this one offers is that here, the
bomber is the good guy (and he only blows up bad people--Ray has a
creed about never catching an innocent bystander in a blast).
     The atmosphere of THE SPECIALIST is peculiar.  It's almost gothic
in nature, with dark settings, dim lighting, and a grandiose John Barry
score (which might have been impressive somewhere else).  The
cinematographer clearly has a sense of style far in excess of what's
warranted for this movie.  Several scenes take place in misty
surroundings, and the overall mood is relentlessly grim.  No one
appears to be having fun, least of all the actors.  All of them, that
is, except James Woods.
     To say that Woods goes over-the-top would be to vastly understate
what he accomplishes in this "performance."  His acting is as far
overboard as the director allows, and that's quite a distance.  This
sort of manic display is actually entertaining to watch, primarily
because everything else offered by THE SPECIALIST is so bland and
dreary.
     It's always a bad sign when the most impressive feature of a
motion picture is its visual effects.  In this case, the memorable
moments (if you ignore a scene where Woods literally foams at the
mouth) occur when buildings blow up.  Unfortunately, they don't take up
much screen time, and to get from one to another, you have to endure
the so-called plot that moves events along.  No amount of pyrotechnics,
bare flesh, and flexing muscles is worth that price.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
