Title
Review for Un été inoubliable (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: varies (early 1995)
Running Length: 1:22
MPAA Classification: None (Nudity, violence, mature themes)
     AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER addresses the same themes and transpires in
the same region of the world as Milcho Manchevski's BEFORE THE RAIN.  AN
UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER doesn't have the same stylish photography or
non-chronological narrative, and it takes place in 1925 rather than in
the present-day, but both films address the tragic results when
intolerance (tribal or racial) and political expediency take precedence
over simple, human compassion.
     Most of AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER takes place on the
Romanian/Bulgarian border where Capitaine Petre Dumitriu (Claudiu Bleont)
has been posted by a commander (Marcel Iures) who bears him a grudge.
Together with his wife Marie-Therese (Kristin Scott-Thomas) and three
young children, Petre leaves the city for the virtually-untamed wilds.
There, while he assumes command of his ill-trained and often
insubordinate troops, Marie-Therese does her best to make a happy home
for her family, despite stray bullets that shatter mirrors.
     When eight of Petre's men are killed by bandits, the captain is
forced to take a group of Bulgarian peasants hostage.  Although initially
frightened by these men, Marie-Therese eventually takes pity on them and
invests time and effort into getting to know them.  They soon become more
than just political pawns to her, and when her husband is ordered to
execute them, she is devastated--and doesn't intend for this to happen
without a struggle.
     The story underlying AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER is simple and stark.
Not so straightforward are the questions of conscience posed by Lucian
Pintilie's script.  The basic impotence of the characters only emphasizes
the real-world difficulties faced by peacemakers.  It's seductively easy
to kill a bunch of scapegoats and conveniently sweep any dissidents under
the nearest rug.
     Despite a fine performance by British actress Kristin Scott-Thomas
(best known for the role of Fiona in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, and
displaying trilingual abilities here), her character doesn't have much
real depth, and that's one of AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER's glaring
weaknesses.  In fact, as tenuous as the audience's connection is to
Marie-Therese, it's even less certain where Petre is concerned.  At
times, the captain is too cold and distant to court favor from any
viewer.
     AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER is getting very limited distribution, but
for those who have an opportunity to see it, the movie makes an excellent
companion piece to BEFORE THE RAIN.  If nothing else, these two pictures
taken together underline the unhappy truth that, in the Balkans, little
has changed over the past seventy years.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Wayne Citrin
AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER (Romania/France, 1994, 80m)
     Although the festival went all the way through Monday evening, and
was an opportunity to catch some of the films we has missed, we really
only had time for one film since Deborah had work the next day and we
wanted to get home at a decent hour.  We chose the film AN
UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER, which was described by one of the festival staff
as "one of the jewels of the festival."  He was also enthusiastic about
the short, which I'll describe later.  AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER is an
historical piece about a Romanian army captain and his wife in the
1920s. In order to protect his wife from the advances of his commanding
officer, the captain, a staff officer at the time, requests a transfer,
and is transferred to a bleak border post in the Romanian east.  He and
his wife adapt, but they eventually find themselves in a situation
where the moral solution is the one that will destroy them.  The film
shows how two decent, honest people can find themselves in a no-win
situation.  The film is presented on a small scale and, ironically, is
told through the eyes of the young son, who simply remembers this as
"an unforgettable summer," possibly the best summer he ever had.  I'd
say that this is one of the four best things we saw: ONCE WERE WARRIORS
was the best, then LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD, and then a toss-up between this
and MURIEL'S WEDDING.
     Before AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER, we were shown the hilarious and
wonderfully strange English short "Franz Kafka's IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE"
(England, 1994, 25m).  In the film, we see Kafka, in his room at the
top of a castle, attempting to write "Metamorphosis" on Christmas Eve,
while dealing with disturbances by his various neighbors.  Kafka
wrestles with the decision of exactly what Gregor Samsa is transformed
into ("a banana?"), and eventually learns that he has friends who love
him.  I chuckle just thinking about it.
     Here's a quick list of the other things that played at Telluride
this year.
     This included a showing of THE NEW AGE (described in part 1), plus
a compilation of Davis clips.  I heard that Davis seemed quite shy, and
was relieved to get her medallion and disappear.  Apparently she
doesn't like a lot of her early work.
THEY SHOOT HORSES, DON'T THEY (USA, 1969, 125m)
     A new print of the Sydney Pollack film.  Selected by John Simon,
the 1994 Guest Director of the festival.
     Apparently the most requested film of the festival, although I
didn't speak to anyone who had seen it.  A silent movie, and a love
story.
     Live conversations with two screenwriters who worked for
Hitchcock, along with excerpts.
     A tribute to Ken Burns, director of the PBS documentary THE CIVIL
WAR, and the new 18-hour documentary BASEBALL.  Everyone who saw him
said how wonderful he was.  The tribute included the fifth part of the
nine-part series (it concentrates on the Negro leagues and is apparently
the part he's most proud of) and the rest of the documentary premiered
on local Telluride cable TV in 4-hour segments over the course of the
festival.  I caught the fourth part (on Babe Ruth and the 1920s) and it
was pretty good.  This will appear on PBS later this month.
VANYA ON 42ND STREET (USA, 1994, 115m)
     A new film by Louis Malle, with Andre Gregory and Wally Shawn.  A
sequel to MY DINNER WITH ANDRE?  Not quite - it's a film about the
rehearsals of a production of Uncle Vanya on Broadway.  It sounded
intriguing, but I couldn't work it in.  One person told me it was
"talky" (what would you expect?) and said that it made her husband
realize that he didn't like Chekhov.
     Another choice of John Simon.  Didn't see it, and didn't speak to
anyone who did.
     A tribute to the Swedish actress who worked with Ingmar Bergman.
Included a compilation and a "rare screening of the uncut, uncensored
MONIKA."  Didn't hear anything about it.
     A retrospective of the work of the 1950s Cuban musical star and
sex goddess Ninon Sevilla.  Included a showing of the film AVENTURERA
(1949, 95m).  Didn't hear anything about it.
SILENCES OF THE PALACE (Tunisia/France. 1994, 127m)
     A film about the lives of female servants in a privileged Tunisian
family.  I wanted to see it but couldn't fit it in.  Heard it was
good.
"Black Daisies for the Bride" (England, 1993, 50m)
     TV film by British poet Tony Harrison.  Shown with another short
film "A Maybe Day in Kazakhstan" (England, 1994, 26m).  Didn't hear
anything about it.
     A forum for films by aspiring directors - in the former case, film
students, and in the later case, people from other positions.  People
seemed to like the program.
"Music for the Movies: Toru Takemitsu" (USA/France/Japan, 1994, 58m)
     A documentary about the film music composer.
     Mini-retrospective of Ed Wood films, in conjunction with the
showing of Tim Burton's ED WOOD.  Films shown were GLEN OR GLENDA (USA,
1953, 61m) and PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE (USA, 1959, 79m).
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WORLD INTO MUSIC (Germany 1994, 90m)
     A new documentary by Werner Herzog on the Wagner festival in
Bayreuth, Germany.
     Film about a young neglected girl who kidnaps another girl in
order to be the mother she never had.  Heard good thing about it.
     New film by director Errol Morris (THE THIN BLUE LINE) about a
parrot that may have witnessed a murder.  Shown with CROWS.  Supposed
to be good.  Morris also demonstrated his INTERROTRON system, a new
system to improve interviews by projecting the interviewer's image on
the camera lens, thus causing the subjects to look directly into the
camera rather than off-camera.
     A comedy about a film grad who becomes an assistant to a studio
executive.  I wanted to see it but couldn't fit it in.  People liked
it, and were impressed by the fact that it was shot in 18 days, but
some said that it was too much like THE PLAYER.  I hope it gets
theatrical release, so I can see it.
MEMORIES AND DREAMS (Australia, 1994, 58m)
     Animated reflection on the life of a Czech journalist who
emigrates to Australia.
     Shown with MEMORIES AND DREAMS, about Arthur Stace, a drunken hobo
who found Jesus in his 40th year and spent the next 40 years writing
the word "Eternity" across the streets of Sydney.  For a long time,
nobody knew who was writing the word, which became a cultural icon.  It
sounded interesting.
     A story about Amerasian orphans in Vietnam, by Rachid Bouchareb
(dir.  BATON ROUGE and CHEB).  I heard good things about it, and wanted
to see it, but couldn't fit it in.
WE, CHILDREN OF THE 20TH CENTURY (Russia, 1994, 85m)
     A documentary on marginal children in St. Petersburg by Vitali
Kanevski, director of FREEZE DIE COME TO LIFE.  Sounded interesting but
I couldn't fit it in.
"Zinky Boys Go Underground" (England, 1994, 25m)
     Another selection by John Simon.  More interesting was the short
that showed with it:
     "Ingmar Bergman directed these TV soap commercials, never before
seen in the US."
ARIZONA DREAM (France/USA, 1993, 120m)
     Supposedly a big hit in Europe, this is the first American film by
Yugoslavian director Emir Kusturica (WHEN FATHER WAS AWAY ON BUSINESS,
TIME OF THE GYPSIES).  People liked it, but said that it was very
strange.  What would you expect with a cast that includes Johnny Depp,
Jerry Lewis, Faye Dunaway, and Lili Taylor?  I wanted to see it, but
couldn't fit it in.  It'll probably play in art theaters, so I'll get a
chance to see it.
     Shown with ARIZONA DREAMS.  Treat Williams' directorial debut.
     Another Signoret film.  I heard that the new print looked great.
Popular enough to merit a repeat showing.
     Signoret won a Best Actress Oscar for her English-speaking role in
this film.
     The world premiere of Woody Allen's new film; a surprise entry not
in the original program.  I didn't see it since I figured I'd have the
chance to see it shortly.  I heard mixed things about it.  Some people
thought it was very funny, while other people thought that the joke was
kind of thin for a full-length movie.  About the Mafia financing a
Broadway musical in the 1920s.
     Another surprise entry, the world premiere of Tim Burton's new
film on the cult director, starring Johnny Depp.  Again, I didn't
bother to see it, since it will be playing theaters shortly, and since
it showed fairly late in the festival, I didn't get a chance to talk to
anybody who had seen it.
-- 
Wayne Citrin     citrin@soglio.colorado.edu citrin@cs.colorado.edu
