Title
Review for I Got the Hook Up (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
With a title like I Got the Hook Up, you should immediately be worried.
I mean, when was the last time that a black comedy that didn't feature
at least one Wayans brother was watchable, let alone good?  Sure,
there's always the chance that it could be the next She's Gotta Have It,
Hollywood Shuffle or Fear of a Black Hat, which respectively launched
the…errr…'successful' careers of Spike Lee, Robert Townsend and Rusty
Cundeiff.  These three films, in addition to Christopher Scott Cheron's
upcoming gem Hav Plenty, are certainly rare exceptions in this
specialized genre of 90's film.
Hook Up stars Master P, who is apparently a popular rap star.  This may
or may not be true, but since I don't run with that type of crowd, I'll
just have to believe what I read.  Don't get me wrong – I'm down with
the family – I just don't get why these rap guys can suddenly call
themselves actors.  Actually, now that I think about it, it probably has
something to do with rap being a whole lot of bullshit posturing.  But I
digress…
P, who starred in the direct-to-video sleeper I'm ‘Bout It, joins
stand-up comedian A.J. Johnson (Woo) as the main characters Black and
Blue.  Don't ask me which is which because I have absolutely no frigging
idea.  These two knuckleheads run some sort of junkyard Wal-Mart,
selling everything from broken appliances to stolen stereo equipment.
When they stumble on a vanload of cellular phones, you just know they're
gonna get busy with some phat bankrolls.
Through some type of elaborate scheme with a horny telephone employee
(Gretchen Palmer, Wishmaster), the Black and Blue are able to activate
and sell the phones to all of the neighborhood homiez.  And I say
`elaborate' only because I didn't understand what was happening.  I
consider myself to be fairly bright, but I didn't quite comprehend how
they kept getting the phones delivered to them after they sold the first
shipment.
At one point, P blurts out the memorable line `It can't get no worser
that this' and damn if he ain't right.  There are a few very funny
scenes involving a funeral catfight, a retard drive-by shooting and a
secret stash of dildos and chocolate syrup.  But these moments are very
far and few between.
It's not as bad as Booty Call, and that's the nicest thing that I can
think of saying.

Author
James Sanford
        In some respects, ``I Got The Hook-Up'' could be accurately
described as an incredible film.
  It is, for example, incredible to think that anyone involved
in this production received a paycheck for his participation: Rank
amateurs rarely receive compensation.
  It's equally incredible to discover that this film was the
work of an African-American writer: You'd have to attend the Ku Klux
Klan film festival to find more degrading images of blacks in one
sitting.
  The shiftless, trash-talking heroes of ``I Got The Hook-Up''
are Black (Master P) and Blue (A.J. Johnson), a pair of ghetto
hustlers who sell suspect goods out of their broken-down van. Though
the task of continually showering their perturbed customers with
profanity and insults takes up most of their working day, Black and
Blue still manage to take time out to steal a few boxes of cellular
phones from a geeky deliveryman.
  But, here's the big joke: The phones don't work
properly. Now everybody's mad at Black and Blue, and everywhere they
go, people chase them and yell.  Imagine what a stitch that is.
  You could get as many laughs staying home and listening to a
dial tone for 90 minutes.
  But if ``Hook-Up'' were merely unfunny, that wouldn't be a
serious offense. Instead, the screenplay by Master P incorporates such
knee-slapping elements as violence against women (one gets throttled
by thugs, and another is told by her boyfriend, ``Remind me when we
get home to whup your ass''), racism against Asians, anti-Caucasian
wisecracks, jokes about how funny it is to torment the developmentally
disabled, and generous helpings of homophobia as a transvestite hooker
cruises for clients.
  Not every female character in ``Hook-Up'' is a drug addict,
a hooker or a stripper: Some of them are merely promiscuous airheads
wanting to be taken advantage of.
  If representatives from either NOW or GLADD bothered to
watch this film, You can bet ``Hook-Up'' distributor Dimension Films
would be getting plenty of free bad publicity. One would hope the
NAACP might join them in their protest. The American Society of
Cinematographers might even want to chime in, since it's a rare film
that manages to include so much out-of-focus photography.
  Considering that its star-studded soundtrack is featured
prominently in the movie's opening credits - and would seem to be the
only conceivable reason for the movie's existence - it comes as a
surprise to find the music is generally buried under the ineptly
improvised repartee of Master P and Johnson. Almost all of it consists
of derogatory nicknames for women and plenty of creative usage of that
popular 12-letter synonym for family closeness that's sometimes used
as a term of endearment by rappers. The lame interaction of the duo
makes one wistful for the comic stylings of Dr.  Dre and Ed Lover in
``Who's The Man.''
  It's a telling sign that a movie is beyond redemption when
it can't even keep the attention of kids who've sneaked into the
theater hoping for some R-rated fun. Sure enough, after less than an
hour of ``Hook-Up,'' a trio of pre-teens in a Wednesday afternoon show
at United Artists Westmain began complaining loudly about the film's
lackluster content (OK, granted, they didn't exactly phrase it that
way) and bolted for the exit. The other half-dozen people in
attendance seemed jealous of the youths' initiative.
