Title
Review for Margaret's Museum (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In the show's recurring theme the siren in the little mining town
of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, goes off, and the day-to-day activities of
its inhabitants stop.  As their hearts sink into their stomachs, the
townsfolk rush to the mine to see whose men were killed this time in
the pit.
     Set in the late 1940s, MARGARET'S MUSEUM stars Helena Bonham
Carter as Margaret MacNeil, a free-spirited woman who is derided as a
"snot-nosed whore" by the local kids.  We see the perpetually runny
nose part, but the other part is only hinted at.  Margaret's fiery-red,
wind-blown hair resembles a tumbleweed more than a coiffure.
     MARGARET'S MUSEUM is a slice of life story featuring Carter in one
of her rare roles in a non-costume drama.  Margaret can barely keep her
clothes on properly in the movie.  Her sweater keeps falling off her
shoulders and her dress keeps riding up due to her inability to sit
without slumping and fidgeting.
     Carter, who has given a host of stunning performances in her
career with the most recent being THE SIGN OF THE DOVE, never
adequately connects with her character.  She gives Margaret obvious
idiosyncrasies but little depth.
     Just as Jennifer Jason Leigh recently tried her hand with limited
success in a costume drama, WASHINGTON SQUARE, so Helena Bonham Carter
attempts the role of Margaret with equally limited success.  Leigh and
Carter should have traded places with each doing the other film.
Neither gives a bad performance, but both try hard to do something the
other does so naturally and beautifully.
     Margaret lives with her bitter mother, Catherine, played by Kate
Nelligan in one of her lesser performances.  Catherine hates everything
to do with the mines.  Always keeping her black outfits pressed and
ready, she complains about the local band of widows that "we feed off
each other like buzzards".
     One day Margaret meets a handsome miner named Neil Currie --
actually an ex-miner since he was fired for speaking Gaelic in the
pits.  ("I got fired on purpose," Neil confesses to her.  "I'll never
go underground again."  "What'll you do?" asks a confused Margaret.
"There isn't anything else.")  Neil is played with charisma by a
dashing Clive Russell.
     Eventually Neil secures one of the few non-mining jobs in town,
working as a dishwasher in a Chinese restaurant, but he loses it when a
cousin of the owner shows up from Shanghai
     The movie consists of little vignettes punctuated by hauntingly
beautiful Irish music plus the sound of Neil's bagpipes, which Margaret
ridicules as sounding like a screeching cat.  Overall, the movie is in
dire need of a more compelling and substantive story.
     Many of the smaller stories are only hinted at, including a mine
owner who refers to the strikers as Communists and a love affair
between a couple of teenagers, Jimmy (Craig Olejnik) and Marilyn
(Andrea Morris), from both sides of the tracks -- miners and
management.  Neither teenager is believable.
     Most of the people have spent their wholes live in the area.  A
wise old miner named Angus (Kenneth Welsh) gives advice to Jimmy.  "Do
you know there are some places in the world where they pay you to
think?" he tells a disbelieving Jimmy.  Jimmy cannot conceive of such a
concept, but Angus can since he brags of having been as far as Toronto.
     The story has a quirky ending which is really no more than a plot
device to give the film its name.
     This eccentric movie would have worked much better as a short.
With the padding removed, its paucity of ideas would not have seemed so
limiting.  As it is, it is a sweet, little picture with the emphasis on
little -- a nice but uninvolving story of forlorn miners that you've
heard many times before.
     MARGARET'S MUSEUM runs 1:54.  It is rated R for profanity, brief
nudity and sex.  It is a mild R and would be fine teenagers.


Author
Froilan Vispo

From bigfoot.comDELETE THIS!vispo@govonca3.gov.on.ca Tue Feb 18 10:13:53 EST 1997
Article: 5242 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.lucent.com!not-for-mail
From: bigfoot.comDELETE THIS!"vispo"@govonca3.gov.on.ca (Froilan Vispo)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: MARGARET'S MUSEUM (1995)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 18 Feb 1997 13:54:45 GMT
Organization: Aspiring Dilettantes
Lines: 49
Sender: eleeper@lucent.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: eleeper@lucent.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: bigfoot.comDELETE THIS!"vispo"@govonca3.gov.on.ca (Froilan Vispo)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtvoyager.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #06922
Keywords: author=Vispo
Originator: ecl@mtvoyager
Xref: nntphub.cb.lucent.com rec.arts.movies.reviews:5242
Status: O
X-Status: 
Treasure to be found in MARGARET'S MUSEUM 
Those familiar with Helena Bonham Carter from Merchant-Ivory films may
be mildly surprised by her transformation from her previous prim and
corseted roles to the drably dressed but earthy lead in MARGARET'S
MUSEUM, a romance set in a 1940s Nova Scotia coal mining town.  The
gothic conclusion offers a shock seemingly disparate from the gentle
melodrama, but consider it an emphatic reclamation of love lost and
proclamation thereof. 
Bonham Carter does admirably as Margaret, a self-described "snot-nosed
whore" whose candid working-class humour conceals the loss of her father
and older brother from a coal pit accident.  Margaret's mother, played
by Kate Nelligan in the film's best performance, is instead soured by
their deaths and she makes the social rounds at the frequent funerals
more out of self-interest than actual grief.
Death is a frequent visitor to Glace Bay's coal mines, and each time an
accident occurs the town, alerted by sirens, gathers at the mine
expecting familiar victims.  The residents seem resigned to a fate
linked with the mines, by far the town's largest employer, but Margaret
has had enough and is defiant in her wish for a rosier future for
herself and her younger brother, whose own blossoming romance is
stiffly-handled and is the film's minor flaw.
Margaret meets Neil (Clive Russell), a gentle giant of an Irishman
skilled with the bagpipe and many things Gaelic.  His disdain for
working in the coal mines echoes hers and he is set head and shoulders
above the miners to Margaret.  Theirs is a down to earth romance,
refreshingly blunt and uninhibited.  When the reality of their meagre
finances hits home, Neil is forced to reconsider his aversion to the
mines, and Margaret becomes reluctant about the return to a life where
death is an everyday unrelenting threat. 
And what will you find in Margaret's museum?  Expect to find evidence of
lives lost to the coal mines.  Most importantly is that those lives have
been reclaimed from the mines and returned to those who continue to love
them.
Review completed February 12, 1997.
Address e-mail for Froilan Vispo to: vispo@bigfoot.com
