Title
Review for Going Nomad (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
[Screened at the Cinequest Film Festival 9, San Jose]
The "asphalt nomads" are a subculture that enjoy spending nights driving
around Manhattan in their 70's era large American cars. One of these nomads
is El Cid Rivera. El Cid lives in New York City and has an insular life,
bounded geographically by the island of Manhattan, and restricted socially
to his former grammar school friends who also have no reason to explore the
world outside the Big Apple. His friends include Telly, a part-time
professional wrestler, The Rev, a former priest and current toll booth
attendant with a weakness for women, Chuckles, who helps people find
apartments downtown, and Eddie, whose only real passion in life is the
maintenance of his hair. The other character involved in the story is
Officer Geraldine Fusco, with whom El Cid had a fight in fourth grade, and
who has had a grudge against him ever since. Although their relationship
mainly consists of her trying to run him down to seek her revenge, it has
obvious romantic potential.
This film has much in common with the film Swingers. While that film was
about a group of guys and their relationship with Los Angeles, this film
also has a motley group of young male friends and it explores their
relationship with New York. Anyone who is charmed by the physical beauty of
New York City is rewarded by many picturesque views of the Manhattan
skyline, and is almost made to feel jealous of the main characters in their
possession of it in their daily lives. The city itself becomes a character
in the story. Like a loving parent, the city nurtures and provides
everything that the characters need, but as El Cid finds, there is a time
when a person must leave home and establish a relationship with the greater
world. Ultimately the story is about El Cid's relationship with New York,
his surrogate mother, and his desire to live a more meaningful, independent
life.
At regular intervals, the film takes the approach of presenting other
"nomads" in almost a documentary style of them speaking directly to the
camera defining and explaining various aspects of the nomad subculture.
Although these characters are not really involved in the main narrative of
the film, they provide a significant depth to the story by coloring the
characters of El Cid and the city. There is the feeling that the other
nomads are given a little too much screen time and their views are
repetitious, but their extended monologues over superbly selected music
provide a pleasant, reflected respite from the comedy of the main story.
Besides El Cid, none of the characters are fully developed. In fact, some of
his gang remain shallow, and almost appear to be stereotypical eccentrics.
However, the story is solely about El Cid, and it is quickly apparent that
his gang of friends are merely a manifestation of the light, colorful, and
comic side of his life, while the nomads represent his deeper, reflective
self. Although El Cid is in his 30's, this is actually a coming of age
story, with the summation being El Cid moving on to a more mature stage of
life.
Highly recommended. This is not a perfect film, but is actually rather
ambitious, and mostly successful. Although much of the humor is of the silly
variety, the story is able to deliver genuine laughs throughout.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
