Title
Review for Whatever (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Amy Dawes
One can only imagine that something was lost in the translation when
first-time filmmaker Susan Skoog turned her vision for ``Whatever''
into a movie.
Meant as an unvarnished look at what it's like to be a teenage girl
growing up in America, it's gritty and depressing without being
illuminating or the least bit memorable. 
Set in a style-less, nowheresville burg in blue-collar New Jersey, the
film gets its only real energy from a loud and liberally used
soundtrack with 1980s gems by the Ramones, David Bowie, Patti Smith
and others. That and the title - which is more clever and contemporary
than the movie - are likely to be the sole selling points when this
low-budget indie makes its brief appearance in movie theaters. 
``Whatever'' is one of those movies that bungles the first few scenes
and only rarely redeems itself during the rest of its running time.
Two girls in their final year of high school spend a lot of time
together but seem to have nothing in common except downbeat prospects
and plenty of attitude. Brenda (Chad Morgan) is bound for big-time
trouble as a nymphomaniac who spends all her free time in search of
fast company and more sex; Anna (Liza Weil) is her dazed, passive pal
who's meant to be more sensitive and creative, based on her
androgynous clothing and her application to art school in Manhattan.  
But if art is at all exciting and inspiring to her, it doesn't come
across; she merely falls for losers who babble about painting and
passion, while her friend falls for losers who babble about
motorcycles and drugs. Social life consists of teenagers in divey
houses getting blasted on drugs and booze, all of which is graphically
depicted. 
But while Richard Linklater captured these rites of small-town passage
with wit and enjoyment in ``Dazed and Confused,'' Skoog directs with a
much heavier hand and a sense of desperation and doom. There's no
denying that this can be ``what it's like,'' especially for young
people as directionless and contemptuous of adults as these. But Anna,
the central character, is too adrift to provide much hope for escape;
what little redemption the movieoffers comes as too little, too late. 
         (np: Best Of Bowie 74/79)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
WHATEVER ** 1/4 Written and directed by Susan Skoog. Photography, Michael
Mayers and Michael Barrow. Editing, Sandy Guthrie. Cast: Liza Weil (Anna
Stockard), Chad Morgan (Brenda Talbot), Frederic Forrest (Mr. Chaminski),
Kathryn Rossiter (Carol Stockard), Marc Riffon (Martin), Dan Montano (Zak),
John G. Connolly (Woods), Gary Wolf (Eddie), Tony Torn (Mr.Stanley), Trey
Compton (Sam), et al. A Sony Pictures Classics release. 112 minutes. R
(Teen-age drugs, drinking, sex; non-graphic violence; neglect of school
work). At the Art Theater.
The information on this film quotes Susan Sontag addressing a Yale
University graduating class: "You may think you've just experienced the
most important phase of your life, but you're wrong. The most important
experience of your life was high school."
It this is true, it is very sad, assuming that high school in the U.S.A, as
seen on celluloid-- whether in Hollywood productions or, as in the case of
"Whatever," independent films-- is a time of no brains, no learning, and no
interest beyond physical gratification and self-absorption.
There has to be more to school than that, but it is not evident in this
first feature made by Susan Skoog, who was born in Red Bank, New Jersey,
graduated from New York University's Tisch School of the Arts in 1987, and
has since had quite a bit of experience writing, directing and producing
for TV.
"Whatever" is set in some anonymous town or suburb in New Jersey, in the
early 1980s. The filming actually took place in Wheeling, West Virginia. In
a low-budget way, it has the look of the times as well as its pop music
(the Pretenders, Jam, the Ramones, Blondie, and so on), but it is not a
piece of nostalgia. Far from that, it is a sad, dolorous variant of
coming-of-age pictures, and feels, if not partly autobiographical, at least
like first-hand knowledge of its subject.
The subject is young people who are at loose ends and come from families
(mostly lower middle class) upon which the filmmaker casts a jaundiced eye.
The focus is on Anna, who says "I'm almost eighteen," which means 17. She's
presumably bright, rather quiet and reserved, not a good student but
interested in going to art school, specifically to New York City's Cooper
Union. Her one "friend" on the school's staff is Mr. Chaminski, the art
teacher. A former New Yorker whose past is none too clear, he may well be a
failure as a painter and one of those cases of "those who can't, teach." In
any case, he encourages Anna.
He is played by Frederic Forrest, the only familiar face in the crowd.
Forrest has been in several indifferent movies as well  in some major ones,
notably Coppola's The Conversation, Apocalypse Now, One From the Heart,
Tucker. He was also the lead in Wim Wenders's Hammett. The last time I saw
him was in a colorful role in Falling Down (1993). In "Whatever" his role
is undistinguished, yet, if you look closely, Forrest adds clever touches
as someone who semi-consciously lusts after Anna.
Anna actively chain-smokes, semi-actively rebels against school,
semi-passively attends backyard or al fresco booze-busts-cum-substance
abuse. These are your familiar affairs, complete with gross-outs (for $20
would you drink beer with spit in it?), with the class nerd who wears
glasses, with the fattish wallflower who is by herself, with raucous kids,
seniors who philosophize sophomorically, and other cliches. Mercifully, the
camera spends little time on those particular deja vu shots. It
concentrates on Anna, who is dazed and confused.
With AIDS unknown though incubating around the corner, libido runs high,
everyone is ready to copulate, many do. Not Anna. She is a virgin, Brenda
is certainly not. She's Anna's  slutty, overpainted, best friend Brenda. To
a physiognomist, Brenda looks common and unintelligent, while Anna looks
sensitive. To anybody, Brenda is  a tramp, while Anna suggests some hidden
depths. The pair is mismatched. What they do have in common is attitude and
dysfunctional families.
"Whatever" does not have a "real" story. It is built episodically on
tableaux and situations, realistic, grungy, but often vague too. The
observation can be graphic and sharp but the factual, social and
psychological backgrounds are fuzzy. The adults either are caricatures or
verge on them.
Anna lives with her young brother and a mother. Why is there no father? Why
does Ma drink, neglect her kids and the house, and date a succession of
creeps, the current one being the affluent idiot "Fat Howard"? Why is
Brenda defying her father? Or is he her father? (No, he is her stepfather
and much younger than his wife). Is the English teacher a joke, a
semi-joke, a sadist or what? Who are those people?  It gets a bit clearer
by the end, but some audience fatigue has preceded it.
In the meantime, Anna and Brenda have met two somewhat older guys that had
done time for dealing dope; Anna loses her virginity to her best boyfriend
Martin, who later proves unworthy; the two girls make a wide-eyed visit to
the Big Apple and end up on some silly yuppies bed and sofa; they return to
Jersey where Brenda is abused (beaten and most likely raped) by her
stepfather; a group retaliation against the abuser ensues and is possible
but improbable; a temporary escapade that has Anna returning home is both
sad and inconclusive; the final scenes put a smile on Anna's face and a
happy way of riding her bicycle, but  this new found upbeat "balance" is
neither explained, justified or convincing.
The film is  overlong long and often gratuitous. It relies essentially on
the portrait of Anna. In spite of holes and loose ends, first-timer Liza
Weil's role, well-played and well-directed, can and ought to move you. The
best aspects of the movie deal with her reactions.The quiet scene,
un-graphic, un-shocking, unsensational (there is no frontal nudity with
Anna, anywhere) of her losing her virginity is striking for its observation
and sensitivity. In distant ways it reminds me a bit of the couple's visit
to a small island in the river in the 1930s film by Jean Renoir,  Une
Partie de Campagne (A Day in the Country).
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
James Sanford
WHATEVER (Sony Pictures Classics)
Directed by Susan Skoog
"I hope the film I made tells the truth about what it is to be a
seventeen-year-old girl, what it's like to lose your virginity to the wrong
guy, to experiment with drugs, to lose your best friend, to forgive your
mother ... The excitement and wonder of adolescence goes hand-in-hand with
the anxiety and disappointments," notes writer-director Susan Skoog in the
production notes for her film "Whatever." Admirable goals, to be sure, and
"Whatever" reverberates with earnestness. "Excitement" and "wonder," well,
that's another story.
Set in a colorless New Jersey neighborhood in the spring of 1981
"Whatever" centers on Anna (Liza Weil), an aspiring painter who's
prematurely jaded, perhaps because of living with her worn-down mom (Kathryn
Rossiter) who offers advice along the lines of "don't expect so much; it
makes things easier" in between dates with married men. Though she smokes,
drinks and drugs with the best of them, Anna hasn't yet discovered sex, much
to the consternation of her best friend Brenda (Chad Morgan), a regular
Pass-Around Patty whose evenings often end with her searching for her
underwear.
The movie's Reagan Era setting works against it, summoning up
comparisons to many similar, superior teen movies that came out of the early
1980s: Anna's loveless sexual initiation calls up memories of Jennifer Jason
Leigh in "Fast Times at Ridgemont High"; her desire to transcend her
blue-collar upbringing through sheer talent is reminiscent of "Flashdance";
her feelings of shame toward her loser family seem to have drifted in from
"Pretty In Pink." The presence of Frederic Forrest as a hip art teacher
serves to remind us he once co-starred with Nicolas Cage and Deborah Foreman
in the 1983 sleeper "Valley Girl."
While Skoog loads the soundtrack with such can't-miss classics as
the Pretenders' "Mystery Achievement," Patti Smith Group's "Dancing
Barefoot" and Blondie's "The Hardest Part," too much of her sluggish
screenplay brings to mind another Blondie song, "Will Anything Happen?".
When "Whatever" eventually does get rolling, it heads straight down the
highway to Clicheville, as trampy Brenda teases her way into danger and
Anna's heart and spirit are almost shattered by the cruel whips of fate.
If "Whatever" connects on any level at all, it's because of Weil,
whose knowing eyes and sad smile give Anna a haunting quality. Most of the
other performances are one-note, although it's hard to determine if that's
the fault of the actors or Skoog's graceless directorial style, which makes
too much of this teen-angst tale feel like a 1981 "Afterschool Special"
rather than the bittersweet slice-of-life it so badly wants to be.
James Sanford
