Title
Review for Bob Roberts (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Brian L. Johnson
107 min., R, Comedy/Documentary, 1992
Director: Tim Robbins
Cast: Tim Robbins, Gore Vidal, Alan Rickman, Giancarlo Esposito,
      Ray Wise, Susan Sarandon, James Spader, Fred Ward, John Cusack,
      Peter Gallagher, Kelly Willis, Fisher Stevens, Lynne Thigpen
     Tim Robbins plays Bob Roberts, a folk singing senatorial candidate.
He travels around singing songs about the problems with America.  As his
campaign goes on, some people start to turn against him.
     BOB ROBERTS starts off with a good idea, a folk singer who pops
into a government race and then doesn't do much (remind anyone of Ross
Perot).  The problem that hurts this film is that the film isn't that
funny.  Too many of the jokes fail.  Tim Robbins can't sing very well
either, which is not good when his character is a singer.  I don't
recommend that you see this film in the theater.  Instead, if you wish
to see it, wait for the video cassette.  This film is worth viewing for
a very cheap rental.  I give BOB ROBERTS a two on a scale of zero to
five.  BOB ROBERTS is rated R for explicit language and violence.
     The biggest problem that I noticed in this film is that Bob
Robert's music videos were not funny.  I think that they were supposed
to be funny, but they certainly didn't turn out that way.  The videos
weren't well done, and didn't hold my attention.  Some of the songs that
Tim Robbins sang were well done, but in my opinion, Tim Robbins can't
sing.  Those songs that were well written ended up being butchered by
Robbins.  The rest of the songs fell into the same category as the music
videos.
     What I think Tim Robbins tried to create was a pseudo-documentary
showing some of the problems with America today.  The film's basic
problem is that Tim Robbins didn't stick entirely to documentary format
in this film.  Some of the scenes were shot as a movie, and the others
were shot as a documentary; then the two were combined.  I didn't think
that this style worked.
     This film isn't entirely bad.  Most of the cast did a very good
job.  The actor that I think gives the best performance in this film is
Alan Rickman.  He seems to stand a little above the rest of the cast.
The actor that I think does the worst job was Gore Vidal.  He doesn't
seem to be with the film very much.  Some of the scenes (especially the
live television show part) I thought were well done.

Author
Jon Webb
     Tim Robbins plays a right-wing Christian fundamentalist folk singer
who is running for Senator from Pennsylvania.  The movie is supposed to
be funny (it started as a "Saturday Night Live" skit), with Robbins
singing songs like "Times are Changing Back" and "Complain, Complain,
Complain" (about welfare recipients).  But it's also supposed to be a
serious attack on our present political structure, as it raises several
familiar issues: for example, the import of drugs into this country to
finance the Contras and diversion of money from failed S&Ls into
right-wing causes.
     The problem with this film is that it never quite gets to be either
a parody or an "enhanced" documentary, like JFK.  You have on the one
hand Gore Vidal (as the incumbent senator) railing against the NSC
secretly running the country, and on the other hand song lyrics
something like "We marched for the poor, we marched to be free, we
marched for self-interest..." and "This land is my land, this land is
our land...."  It's a little too serious to be funny, and a little too
funny to be serious.
     It's still fun, though.  Giancarlo Esposito is great as the
anti-establishment reporter who follows Bob Roberts around and digs up
the dirt connecting him with a failed S&L and drug-running (somehow he
seems to have avoided being caught up with INSLAW, unless one of his
employees was discussing it in German or Japanese).  Tim Robbins himself
has just about the right blend of passion and humor that a right-wing
folk singer would have.  Some of his followers acquire the hypnotized
eyes of youth before an idol, and that's fun too.  The MTV videos are
quite good, blending the kind of quirkiness that would appeal to the
young with right wing passion.  And there are a lot of cameo
appearances; it's almost as if this film had the same kind of appeal for
stars wanting to make as statement with a day or two of work that JFK
did.
     But I wish that Robbins (who directed the film) had either
restrained himself and made the movie as an ironic send-up of right-wing
politics, or really let himself go, the way Oliver Stone did, and really
tried to convince us that all this was true, more or less.  These days,
with Bush all but defeated, in significant part because of the
prominence of right-wing fundamentalists during the Republican
convention, simply raising the spectre of the right wing doesn't provide
enough scare value to drive a film.

Author
Frank Maloney
     BOB ROBERTS is a film directed and written by Tim Robbins and
produced by Fred Murray.  It stars Tim Robbins, Gore Vidal, Giancarlo
Esposito, Ray Wise, Alan Rickman.  It is rated R for mature themes.
     BOB ROBERTS is Tim Robbins's nearly perfect debut as a
writer-director-star.  The debut takes the form of a devastating,
mock-documentary satire of new-right politics, a satire inspired by the
rise of David Duke.  Robbins has acknowledged THIS IS SPINAL TAP (1984)
as his primary inspiration.  Like SPINAL TAP, BOB ROBERTS begins with
the music industry, but the new film quickly leaves most of that behind
as it takes up and develops a chronicle of a too-true-to-be-funny
Pennsylvania senatorial campaign.  Roberts is a Young Conservatives'
version of Bob Dylan, a folksinger who trades foreign currencies between
gigs and whose songs praise getting rich and denounce the poor and
disadvantaged as the enemy.  His opponent is a patrician veteran, played
wisely and humorously by Gore Vidal (he improvised some of his own
dialog), an old-fashioned liberal who is cynical about the political
process even while remaining passionate about his vision of government
and the American spirit.  The campaign takes place in the months before
the outbreak of the Gulf War.
     The comparison with Dylan is explicit in Roberts's album cover art
and music videos, but with titles like "The Times They Are A-Changin'
Back" and "This Land Is Made For Me."  A lot of people, especially young
whites from privileged classes, are shown idolizing Roberts, but some
other folks see through him.  His slipperiness and his uncanny ability
to defang his attackers is only a hint of his dark determination to win.
     Even darker is the presence of an eminence grise played by Alan
Rickman, a shadowy backer with even more shadowy connections to the CIA
and the savings-and-loan scandal.  Rickman is excellent in his
single-minded and frightening grimness.
     Giancarlo Esposito plays with growing hysteria and fatalism the
persistent investigative reporter for the counterculture press.  His
performance merges seamlessly with Jean Lepine's cinema-verite-style
camerawork to create a convincing illusion of a sensational story
unfolding before us.
     Other performers of note include Susan Sarandon, James Spader, and
Pamela Reed, who wittily play news-anchors down to the last blow-dried
hair.
     But, of course, it is Tim Robbins who carries the movie and the
day.  Fresh from the triumph of THE PLAYER.  He has created a funny
black comedy, a convincing character study, and a first-rate
political/paranoia conspiracy movie.  The aim as well as the
accomplishment goes far beyond that of SPINAL TAP.  I was intensely
impressed by the pacing of the story, as we move from Life Styles of the
Rich and Politically Ambitious narrated by a British documentary maker
through increasingly disturbing questions about the goals and methods of
the Roberts campaign until we end in a morass of the worst sort.  Yet
never does Robbins allow the documentary conventions to slip (like ZELIG
and unlike CITIZEN KANE).  The only time we see Roberts "off-camera" is
when he is tricked into thinking the all-seeing red eye was off.  It
means that the film has to exploit irony to a degree seldom seen in an
American film.  Alternate points of view come through talking heads, not
through dramatic situations, generally.  And Robbins, himself, has to
put in a less strenuous acting job and can glide largely on his natural
charm, thus taking some of the pressure off him as writer and director,
to say nothing of composing and performing Roberts's horrible songs.
     I simply cannot recommend BOB ROBERTS too highly to you.  It is
original, fully realized, entertaining, smart, and chilling.  Pay what
you must but see it.

Author
John Newman
     BOB ROBERTS is a quirky, biting satire on modern politics and the
"new conservative" movement.  The title character, Bob Roberts (played
by Tim Robbins), is a stockbroker, folk singer and amateur fencer who
runs for a U.S. Senate seat from Pennsylvania.  He does not represent any
single political figure, but viewers will see in him traces of many
real personages, from Pat Robertson to (most definitely) Ross Perot.
The film sprays abuse in all directions, from pandering politicians to
poll-obsessed reporters to fanatic camp followers.  I recommend BOB
ROBERTS to anyone who intends to vote this November, and I recommend it
even more strongly to anyone who presently doesn't.
     The film presents itself as a mock-documentary, following in the
footsteps of THIS IS SPINAL TAP.  The rarely seen hand behind the
camera follows candidate Bob Roberts's campaign in his satellite-linked
tour bus, where Roberts' aides simultaneously manage his campaign and
his speculative stock dealings.  Interspersed with this campaign
commentary are interviews with Roberts' parents, fans, incumbent
campaign opponent, and a bedraggled heckler from the alternative press 
who badgers his campaign with accusations about alleged links with
Iran-Contra, misuse of government funds, and other half-paranoid,
half-believable claims.
     BOB ROBERTS also mixes in two not-quite-funny faux MTV music
videos, and a distressing amount of Roberts' smug folk music, such as
his paean to his scapegoats, lefty college students and lazy welfare
bums, "(They'll) Complain and  Complain and Complain."  This music was
written by David and Tim Robbins, and sung without much talent by Tim
Robbins.  A fellow film-goer told me that no soundtrack will be
released, to prevent the music from being (in the film-goer's words) 
"misused";  Robbins isn't much of a singer though, and I can't imagine
that anyone would want to hear this music ever again.
     Tim Robbins in the title role holds center stage, not surprising
given that he also wrote and directed BOB ROBERTS.  There are, however,
a number of big names in supporting roles and cameos.  Notable among
these is Alan Rickman as Roberts' shady power-behind-the-throne,
fighting congressional inquiries on Iran-Contra and the S&L bailout as 
he guides his protege's campaign.  James Spader and Susan Sarandon
appear as toadying TV news anchors, and Ray Wise (Leland Palmer in TWIN
PEAKS) plays one of Robert's campaign aides.
     Another presence to note is novelist and political pundit Gore
Vidal (!), who turns in an excellent and heartfelt performance as
Roberts' rival in the campaign.  Vidal is playing himself here, and
uses this platform as an opportunity to rail against the "real
government," the National Security Council.  As such, he does slip a
bit off the edge of believability for a character who is supposedly a 
30-year Senate incumbent.  Still, his performance certainly compares
favorably to William F. Burroughs' weakly acted cameo in DRUGSTORE
COWBOY.
     While I did enjoy and appreciate BOB ROBERTS, I must admit that
this film did, quite literally, make me sick.  The film's "documentary"
pretext implies hand-held-seeming camerawork, and the constant shaking
and weaving hold little appeal for the eye, still less for the inner
ear.  If you don't have your Dramamine handy, you might try sitting
toward the back of the theatre.
