Title
Review for Crimson Tide (1995)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Eric Grossman
     Every summer, there are usually two or three "big" movies that
people just can't wait to see.  This summer, which is filled with
sequels and movies from television shows, the E-ticket ride I was
looking forward to was CRIMSON TIDE.  Why?  Well first off, it had a
great trailer that showed Denzel Washington and Gene Hackman, two of my
favorite actors.  It had a plausible and frightening premise: a Russian
radical gains control of nuclear missiles and threatens to launch
them.  Finally, to top it off, it took place on a American nuclear
missile sub, a place where many of us would love to visit but few
actually can.  Sure, it reminded me of a lot of other films and maybe
it should have been called, MUTINY ON THE HUNT FOR RED TOP SUB, but I
was hooked.
     Hackman plays the captain of the U.S.S. Alabama, Frank Ramsey, an
old seadog, warrior-without-a-war type who, when given the order to
launch his nukes, is contradicted by his executive officer, Lieutenant
Commander Hunter (Washington).  Hunter, a highly educated but untested
officer, tries to stop Ramsey until they can confirm a half-received
message fragment that may be a stand down order.   Ramsey will have
none of Hunter's doubts and continues to proceed to launch position.
With no other option, Hunter relieves  Ramsey of his command and then
it becomes musical mutinies.  Ramsey and certain sympathetic crew
members get their hands on some weapons and then they retake control of
the ship.  But wait, Hunter does not give up so easily.  He and his
mutineers grabs some guns and then....
     Produced by Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer and directed by Tony
Scott (the team gave us the frothy but entertaining TOP GUN),  I
expected CRIMSON TIDE to be, if nothing else,  a crowd pleaser that
would go like gangbusters and have an explosive climax.  I was right
about the first part, wrong about the second.
     There is a lot of excitement as we watch the superb performances
by Hackman and Washington.  Pulse raising side-plots such as an attack
by a renegade Russian sub and a scene where the Alabama nearly sinks
are the stuff that great submarine pictures are made of.  These give us
enough thrills to make up for the fact that there are some deep
problems in the hull of CRIMSON TIDE that eventually sink it in the
last twelve minutes.
     The producers, director, executive producer Lucas Foster and
screenwriter Michael Schiffer, created a great set-up, however, they
did not have the courage (a rare commodity in movies these days) to
make somebody the bad guy.  This is a film with no real villains.  Yes,
there is the mad Russian who wants to launch his missiles but he
doesn't count because we never see him except in a newscast and more
importantly, we know he isn't going to launch his missiles, so there is
no suspense there.
     The real conflict and source of tension is on the submarine and
the main question that has to be answered is: who is right, Ramsey or
Hunter.  The filmmakers essentially "wimp" out however and ultimately,
no man is completely wrong or right.  It is a good choice to give both
characters sympathetic qualities but this is not an art film, one of
them has to be the bad guy, or else there is nothing tangible to defeat
and we leave the theater unsatisfied.
     CRIMSON TIDE is worth seeing for the performances, hardware, and
stunning production values.   Tony Scott and cinematographer Dariusz
Wolski provide a tons of eye-candy and editor Chris Lebenzon keeps the
pace cracking.  The underwater effects by Dream Quest Images are far
superior to the last big sub picture, THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, (RED
OCTOBER was a much better story) and Hans Zimmer's score is effective.
The best part is the sound.  I saw it at the Cinerama Dome and that
deep base.  Wow!
     If you want a ride, CRIMSON TIDE delivers.  If you want a great
high-tech thriller, you might have to wait until next summer.

Author
Stephen Rafferty
Directed by Tony Scott
Starring: Gene Hackman, Denzel Washington, George Dzundza, Vitto Mortensen.
Written by Michael Schiffer
     There is a much respected poem which is often used on graduation cards
which has an all important theme: that the journey's end is not as
important as the journeying itself.  This age old saying has never been
more true than with the new thriller CRIMSON TIDE.  Even though the end
may not have as an emotional impact as expected, it is not so bad as to
spoil the brilliance of what has come before it.
     The prologue to this story is simple, and one which causes concern due
to how believable a situation it creates.  A group of Russian rebels has
split from the regular army to follow an ultra right-wing leader who is
threatening the use of nuclear weapons.  Upon noticing this on television at
his daughter's birthday, chief naval officer Hunter (Washington) is called
away from home.  Washington interviews with the commander of the USS
Alabama, Capt. Ramsey (Hackman) to serve as XO (senior officer) of the sub.
 This si a tense but eventually successful interview for the XO.
     Once underway, CRIMSON TIDE becomes part submarine action thriller
and part character study.  Early on in the ships mission we are given a
sense of foreshadowing of what will become the films main conflict. 
Captain Ramsey, at dinner with his supervisors, asks the XO about his
beliefs regarding war.  Again, although calm on the surface, there is a
gripping sense of tension as Washington disagrees with Hackman.  Both
actors are 1st rate in their roles, especially Hackman who seems to shine
when playing villains these days.  His Captain Ramsey is methodical yet 
boisterous and ferocious in his grip of the ship.  He smokes his cigars
with the elegance of a statesman, but never loses the edge that he could
blow up in a split second.  Washinton's XO is cool and collected.  He sees
the men's moral and situation sink, pun intended, and tries to help with
humour and authority mixed.  
     After completing a trial run of the ships emergency weapons procedure
and some intense technical problems, the sub receives a message to eproceed
to Def Con 2: put the ships nuclear warheads on standby, ready to fire! 
Now the main problem ensues: the Captain wants to go ahead with the
launching of the weapons to beat the Russian rebels who are in the process
of fueling their nuclear weapons, and the XO wishes to find out what a
second emergency message sent which was cut off, means.  The two now are at
odds but the captain needs XO Hunter in order to properly launch the subs
missiles.  At this point, the already well paced action becomes breakneck
and tremendously engaging.  Captain Ramsey is arrested and the XO takes
charge, but a core group of officers find themselves at odds with the XO
and release the Captain and take over the ship once more.
     Director Tony Scott does a great job of never letting the pace slip
beyond a furious speed.  We are rushed along the ships galleys and up and
down it's stairs.  We are plunged into the different areas of the sub and
are quickly assimilated into their functions.  Cinematographer Doriusz
Wolski creates a memorable and stylish atmosphere with great shadow and
intense colour.  All the supporting cast are brilliant, especially Viggo
Mortensen who plays the ships weapons officer.  
     We know where this film is going, but getting there is what this story
is about.  The script is incredibly intelligent, and does not create such a
right and wrong that we loose touch with either of the main characters. 
The secondary characters are developed much better than in most films of
this nature, and are only helped as i said by really fine acting.
     Too much publicity around this film has compared it to THE HUNT
FOR RED OCTOBER.  Whether it is better or not I'm not sure, but on its
own it is a first rate thriller and one I recommend highly.

Author
Steve Kong
Looking at some of Tony Scott's movies (Top Gun, Days of Thunder, and The
Last Boy Scout) it is hard to accept that Crimson Tide is a movie of his.
It is even harder to accept that Crimson Tide is a Jerry Bruckheimer and
Don Simpson production. As you look at the visual style of Crimson Tide it
is obvious that this is a Tony Scott movie and it is a Bruckheimer and
Simpson production.
Why do I say that it is hard to accept that Crimson Tide is a Tony Scott
movie? Because Crimson Tide is so intelligent, so character focused, and
the action so tight that it seems anomalous to previous
Scott/Bruckheimer/Simpson productions. In previous Tony Scott movies, such
as Top Gun, the action was wildly over-the-top and the characterization
mere one-dimensional -- enough to keep the movie going and enough to keep
the action coming. But, this anomalous movie, Crimson Tide, from Tony Scott
shows that he can do a movie that is all gloss but filled with characters
that we care for and are truly dimensional and layered.
Gene Hackman is Captain Frank Ramsey, captain of the nuclear submarine
Alabama. His XO, executive officer, is out with appendicitis, and he needs
a new one. Why? Because his boat is about to set sail to take care of some
hostile rebels in Russia who have seized a military base and is threatening
a missile attack on the US. The new XO that Ramsey picks is Lt. Commander
Hunter, played by Denzel Washington. These two men are exact opposites.
Ramsey is a simple man that follows orders without having to know why.
Hunter, a Harvard trained officer, wants to know why before doing
something. This puts the men at odds when trouble arises. And trouble
arises when they are forced to consider firing their nuclear missiles. It
is a broken EAM (Emergency Action Message) transmission that puts these two
men at odds. Should they fire their missiles? Or should they get confirmation?
The script by Michael Schiffer gives the audience many things to think
about when all hell breaks loose on the Alabama. Both Ramsey and Hunter are
correct in what they are doing on the ship -- but in the same sense both of
them are also completely wrong in what they are doing. Ramsey and Hunter
cause a mutiny aboard the Alabama and the crew is split between the two
head men. Both men believe that they are correct and in my eyes I believe
that they are both correct also. So, there lies the dilemma proposed by
Schiffer: Who is right onboard a nuclear missile submarine when there is no
chain of command left? And following this why is the chain of command
important?
Early in Crimson Tide, it boldly mentions other great sub movies as if to
taunt the audience to compare those classics with Crimson Tide. And, if one
were take the challenge up and compare Crimson Tide to the movies mentioned
--The Enemy Below and Run Silent, Run Deep -- Crimson Tide would stand
proudly next to them. Instead of putting out a completely mindless action
movie where the two men battle it out with flying bullets and fists,
Crimson Tide is the battle of will between the two men. The film makes the
audience think with the two men, about the consequences of their actions
and who is really right. Though I was more sympathetic and understanding to
Washington's Hunter, Hackman's Ramsey was not all wrong either.
Washington gives a great performance as Hunter. He presents Hunter as a
strong willed man who is not afraid to take a stand -- against even a
superior -- when he believes that he is right. Hackman also does a great
job with Ramsey. Hackman gives a layered performance, putting a happy easy
going exterior to Ramsey, but showing the darker interior from time to
time. It is the performances of these two that carry Crimson Tide. But, the
supporting cast also gives great performances. These include Matt Craven,
Rocky Carroll, Danny Nucci, and Lillo Brancato. The strongest supporting
actor in Crimson Tide would be a toss up between Viggo Mortensen as the one
man that holds the second set of keys to the nuclear missiles and George
Dzundza as the by-the-books Chief of the Boat.
Crimson Tide has a lot of action in it; but surprisingly enough the action
is not the main focus of the film. Rather the focus of the film is of the
two main characters and of the two ideologies that these characters carry
with them. The action is handled well by Scott, but it seems that Scott has
a newfound way of integrating the action with the characters.
By all means, Crimson Tide is one of the most enjoyable films made. It is
well directed, well acted, and well scripted. Tony Scott knows how to build
up emotions throughout the film and does it well. The film will not only
makes you think, it will also entertain you. Crimson Tide is a film that
works on two levels: One while you're in the theatre gasping for breathe
along with the sailors on the screen when they are in danger. And the
second when you leave the theatre it works on a level that makes you gnaw
over what was presented to you. Sure, this doesn't feel like a Tony Scott
film at first, but you'll get used to it. And I hope Tony Scott can put out
more great films like Crimson Tide. Don't Miss Crimson Tide.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/12/95 
Running Length: 1:55 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, language) 
     CRIMSON TIDE is a white-knuckler with a cop-out ending.  It's a 
thrill-a-minute ride that concludes with a whimper, like a roller-
coaster that has all the drops and twists early.  Make no mistake, this 
is a good source of early summer fun, but with a little extra 
imagination, it could have been a whole lot more.  There seems to be a 
mentality in Hollywood to settle for something once it reaches a certain 
acceptable entertainment level.  Why take a chance and "push the 
envelope"?  CRIMSON TIDE is a perfect example of this sort of thinking. 
     There's a lot happening in this film.  It opens with a quick 
synopsis of the current political situation:  Russia is in the midst of 
a civil war and the anti-American rebels have taken control of a nuclear 
base.  The USS ALABAMA, commanded by Captain Ramsey (Gene Hackman), is 
ordered off the Asian coast as the "front line and the last line of 
defense."  Since Ramsey's usual XO has appendicitis, he must chose a new 
right-hand man.  At the top of a short list is Ron Hunter (Denzel 
Washington), an officer who doesn't necessarily agree with his captain's 
no-thought, gut reaction method of commanding.  Tension builds as orders 
from land make it apparent that war is imminent.  A Russian sub -- 
possibly hostile -- is sighted nearby, and the crew is ready to mutiny 
when a fissure develops between the two men who must co-authorize a 
nuclear launch. 
     Michael Schiffer's script (as doctored by an uncredited Quentin 
Tarantino) works hard to incorporate elements from the likes of THE HUNT 
FOR RED OCTOBER and DAS BOOT, weaving them into his story of mutiny on a 
nuclear vessel.  In some ways, trying to do all these things almost 
overburdens CRIMSON TIDE.  So much is going on that no single element 
gets the screenplay's full attention. 
     Denzel Washington and Gene Hackman are both in top form, and their 
multiple confrontations are some of CRIMSON TIDE's best moments.  With 
these two actors going toe-to-toe, everything else fades into the 
background.  There's little doubt that Hunter is the hero -- the guy the 
audience is supposed to identify with -- but he's shown to have a fault 
or two.  And, while Ramsey is the obligatory human antagonist, he has 
his redeeming qualities, and his position on the to-launch-or-not-to-
launch issue is not without merit.   
     The underwater battle scenes are marred by surprisingly poor 
special effects.  CRIMSON TIDE's models look like the sort of thing that 
could be assembled from a store-bought kit.  Fortunately, these 
sequences don't comprise a large portion of the running time.  Most of 
the action takes place within the boat, and these claustrophobic scenes 
are far more believable, realistic, and effective.   
     Because of the contained environment, submarines make great 
settings for thrillers, with the throbbing of the engines sounding like 
a pulse.  CRIMSON TIDE is no exception -- the atmosphere alone is 
sufficient to keep the audience on edge.  There's not a lot that's 
remarkable, ground-breaking, or earth-shattering about the production, 
but director Tony Scott (TOP GUN, TRUE ROMANCE) shows a flair for the 
visual, and the result is an optimistic beginning to 1995's summer movie 
season. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Vince Deehan
Director: Tony Scott
Cast: Gene Hackman, Denzel Washington, George Dzundza, Viggo Mortensen, 
Matt Craven
I'd heard that CRIMSON TIDE was a classy action film, a cut above the rest, 
a tense white-knuckler. Boy, was I misled.  Whilst I appreciate that for 
alot of people CRIMSON TIDE was all of these things, I personally found 
the film very disappointing.
The plot is simple. Too simple. Gene Hackman plays Lt. Commander Hunter, 
in charge of a US nuclear submarine and Denzel Washington plays his second 
in command, Captain Ramsey.  When Hunter decides, without authorisation, 
to launch a nuclear missile at an attacking Russian submarine, it starts
a battle of wits between Hunter and Ramsey - who knows that Hunter is acting 
recklessly and is about to start a nuclear war without confirmation from his 
superiors.
Where is the tension in this film?  I certainly felt none as I watched it. 
The scene where Hunter and Ramsey come to blows has been screened too often 
in trailers for this film, for it to have any real impact on the screen. 
The characters of Ramsey and Hunter were so thinly written that it was 
frankly hard to side with either of them.  Hunter (Hackman) was basically a
hard-headed unthinking man who did what he was told and questioned nothing. 
Whilst Ramsey was a University-educated man who had learned to think things 
through and to question everything.  We knew next to nothing about these 
two men, yet we are expected to sit through two hours of them bashing 
their heads against each other. 
The beginning of the film where the conflict which led up to this point is 
explained, is frankly bewildering.  A CNN news reporter rattles through the 
history of the conflict, while a barrage of real footage from recent wars is 
flashed up on the screen.  Did anyone follow any of this ?  Am I just 
exceptionally slow, because I couldn't make any sense of it.
It would have helped if we had seen the "enemy". I realise that for those 
on the submarine, all they can see is blips on a screen, but surely we as 
a viewer could have been shown the men on the other submarine.  When all 
you can see on the screen is a few blips heading for the US submarine, 
it really is hard to feel the actual danger of the oncoming missiles.  
There are shots of the actual torpedoes heading through the water, but I 
would have preferred to have seen a glimpse of what was going on from the 
other side.
The only scene where I felt any genuine tension was when Lt. Paul Hellerman 
(Rick Schroder) was being commanded to close an airlock which would trap 
two other crew members in a flooding hull.  The theory being that two 
lives being lost would be preferable to the whole submarine being flooded 
which would kill everyone.  The panic in Hellerman's voice as he 
bravely dared to ignore his instructions, in an attempt to give his 
colleagues a chance to escape the hull, was brilliantly conveyed. 
The dialogue was interesting. "Aye, aye Captain", was heard frequently. 
I was amazed that they still say this. Very quaint, but quite encouraging 
that things like this endure amidst all the high-tech equipment of a modern 
submarine.  At least, I assume that people still say this and it isn't just
sloppiness on the part of the scriptwriters.  I gather Quentin Tarantino did 
some writing in this film.  Could it be possible that the ludicrous 
references to the Silver Surfer and Star Trek originate from Tarantino's pen. 
I really don't know.  The Silver Surfer reference occurs in a scene where a
young naval officer admits that this was the cause of a fight he has just 
had with another man. In a better film this may have been funny, but here 
it just seemed totally out of place.  It was clearly meant to be funny, 
but it wasn't.  The Star Trek reference is used by Ramsey to calm down an 
electronics man who has to quickly repair the radio receivers. The Scotty
and Kirk analogy used is desperately patronising and dumb, and would be 
better used to placate a small child and not a grown man.
Gene Hackman and Denzel Washington turn in good performances, performances 
that are far better than the script deserves. They really are wasted though, 
because they are not stretched by the one-dimensional characters and the 
dull writing.
Review written on Mon 11 March 1996 by Vince Deehan (vince@deehan.demon.co.uk)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When I went into see CRIMSON TIDE, I knew it had a lot going for
it.  I had seen the trailers which were charged with excitement.  I
knew it had one of my absolute favorite stars in Denzel Washington and
with another favorite in Gene Hackman.  The story appeared to be a Tom
Clancy style military thriller.  All this notwithstanding, I was not
adequately prepared for what was to unfold in front of me.  This show
was phenomenal!
     Going into the movie, I was already prejudiced.  I knew it was
about some Russians threatening to launch nuclear missiles at the US.
In the post-Cold War era, I felt it would be hard to worry about that
anymore and so the axiom the movie was built upon would have
questionable credibility.  From the first CNN scenes in CRIMSON TIDE of
Russia fighting a civil war in one of their breakaway republics and
then Russian nationalists taking over part of the military, I realized
how close this was to the real news reports from over there that we are
all naively been ignoring.  The rebel leader looked just like the real
live Russian nationalist and demagogue Vladimir Zhirinovsky who has
indeed threatened the West with nuclear weapons if he ever got into
power.
     In CRIMSON TIDE, the Russian rebels have taken over some of
Russia's nuclear intercontinental ballistic missiles and some of their
subs.  The US navy dispatches our subs to the Pacific.  This movie
takes place almost totally aboard the USS Alabama skipper by seasoned
Captain Frank Ramsey (Gene Hackman).  Ramsey chooses Lt.  Commander Ron
Hunter (Denzel Washington) as his executive officer since his current
XO has appendicitis.  Ramsey is hell on wheels.  He eats XOs for
breakfast and has been through a half dozen in the past year his
officers tell Hunter.
     Well, as you have seen in the trailers, the rebels get the code to
launch, some confusion sets in, and the top officers lock horns.  More
than that I will not tell you.  You will have to endure the suspense
yourself.  If you have a weak heart or suffer from hypertension, you
should be require to get a release from your physician before being
admitted.
     There is so much excellent about this picture it is hard to know
where to begin.  The four best parts, and all were equally superb, were
the acting of the two leads, the directing, and the intense
cinematography.
     Let me deal first with the acting.  I would be happy to see both
stars get Oscar nominations, but Washington was the best.  His piercing
stares when angry were almost lethal.  His every scene was compelling.
His part was tricky.  It would be easy to overplay it whereas
Washington plays it quiet reserved but with absolute authority.  He is
openly vulnerable and yet has tremendous courage and convictions.  The
audience becomes one with Hunter, and the identification with him
becomes complete.
     Hackman has the harder part, and he is match for it.  Ramsey is an
extremely demanding skipper who feels that he must push his men to the
limit.  Hackman plays Ramsey in a way that you never hate him even when
he becomes the bad guy.  Hackman makes you doubt who is right and who
is wrong no matter the logic of the script.  Two tour de force
performances by both.
     Although this was really a two person play, it was populated with
many interesting minor characters (Lillo Brancato, Rocky Carroll, Matt
Craven, James Gandolfini, Jaime Gomez, Michael Milhoan, Viggo
Mortensen, Rick Schroder).  My favorite was Cob (George Dzundza) who
was shown as Ramsey's right hand man at the start of the movie.
Dzundza made a minor part with few lines say a lot.
     The directing by Tony Scott was to give us a movie that was at a
fever pitch from start to finish.  Scott has shown in previous movies
(TOP GUN, DAYS OF THUNDER, and BEVERLY HILLS COP II) that he could do
this but only in spurts in a show.  Here this movie is about to explode
it is so hot and this intensity stays from the very start until, but
not including the epilogue.
     The most surprising part is the character development by the
director and somewhat by the screenwriter (Michael Schiffer).  This is
not merely an action thriller a la SPEED or TRUE LIES; this is a
character study reminiscent of THE CAINE MUTINY.  The life aboard a
submarine was as realistic as DAS BOOT thanks to great set decoration
by Michael White, but the lead characters here were much more alive and
interesting.  Actually, the movie that comes to mind immediately is THE
HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, but CRIMSON TIDE is much better.  Scott had me
griping the seat most of the film.  Almost like the experience I had
when I saw ALIENS for the first time.
     The cinematography by Dariusz Wolski (who did THE CROW) has to win
an Oscar.  Watch the initial scenes in a torrential downpour as Ramsey
addresses his crew football coach style.  The luminescent steel gray
rain covering up the sailors so they became almost eerie ghosts was one
good example.  The spray of the sub as it dove was another.  The best
however was the way the camera created and enhanced tension by extreme
close-ups inside the sub.  Watch the harsh light providing strong
contrast to the shadows aboard ship.  Words can not describe the
overall effect he was able to create.  Finally, the music, especially
the religious piece song by a chorus at the start and the conclusion
was very moving and effective.
     For a show I loved so much, I do have exactly two criticisms.
First, the epilogue was unnecessary, and if they felt the need to have
one, this was not the one.  It had the appearance of being added by
someone in the marketing department who wanted to soften the picture to
improve its box office take.  Make like the epilogue was not there; I
did.  On a more minor note, the screenwriter looses control and gives
one character some cliched racist lines to say in one scene that are
not in character and are not of the same intelligent writing quality of
the rest of the script.
     Choose a theater with the biggest screen and the best sound system
in your town, and go early and get a good seat.  Don't wait for video.
You want to see this show in all of its glory - upfront and personal.
Be sure and go to the restroom in advance.  You do not want to miss a
minute of this show.
     CRIMSON TIDE runs 1:53, and there is not a wasted minute in it.
It is rated R for quite mild violence and a little bad language.  It
would be fine for anyone able to watch an intense thriller.  I actually
think kids 10 and over would love it.  This is a **** picture in my
book, and it is my first top ranked film in a half a year since I try
to be very careful with my highest ratings.  See this movie now before
it migrates to the smaller screens.  Don't miss it!
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
An American submarine is set out to sea after instability in Russia leads to
the possible threat of a nuclear attack. Nuclear devices aboard, the crew is
suddenly poised to launch the missiles after an emergency message advises of
an imminent Russian strike. Unfortunately, the last message received is cut
off halfway, so the crew is suddenly unsure of their mission. The Captain of
the ship believes that they should launch the missiles, while the XO thinks
they should wait for confirmation. Tensions rise and mutiny abounds.
CRITIQUE:
Thrilling, entertaining, claustrophobic, interesting, tense, are only a few
of the words that I can use to describe this successful submarine thriller
solidly anchored by the superior performances from two of today's top actors
in the prime of their form, Denzel Washington and Gene Hackman. Despite an
overload of technical terms, this film still managed to capture my attention
and interest with a plausible situation, credible actors (Mortensen rocks!),
an environment about which I knew very little and spitlets of comic relief.
The buildup of the film was also managed quite dramatically with a
burgeoning tension as it moved along at a rapid pace. Who would have thought
that a film set almost entirely in a submarine could capture my attention to
the point that it did? Credit goes to director Tony Scott for this
accomplishment and the effectiveness of the story.  This film is not about
action either, it's basically about being in a situation where two people
may be right, but a decision has to be made, and the fate of a billion
people may lie in its wake. Pretty tense, no?
All in all, this film is an excellent nacho-plate movie, waiting to be
enjoyed by groups of people who enjoy high-energy, macho thrillers brimming
in mood, excellent actors and a unique environment.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Gene Hackman's role was originally offered to Al Pacino.
Blink or you'll miss 'em roles: Pay close to attention to this film and you
will see actor Ryan Phillippe in his first motion picture role as Seaman
Grattam, Steve Zahn in one of his first roles as William Barnes and Rick
Schroder (?), that's right l'il Ricky Schroder, in one of his few screen
roles, as Lt. Paul Hellerman. Schroder's character has to follow one of the
grimmest orders in the entire film. Pay close attention. There is also an
uncredited cameo by Jason Robards at the end of this film.
Quentin Tarantino was an uncredited "polish" writer for this film, managing
to include such pop-fare as the whole "Silver Surfer" debate, and surely the
"Star Trek" references as well. Another Tarantino-ism can be found in the
character name "Russell Vossler" which is a reference to Rand Vossler, a
friend of Quentin's from his days working at the Video Archives video store.
Vossler was also used in PULP FICTION. It was one of the names on the
marquee of Bruce Willis' boxing match. Director Tony Scott once directed an
entire film out of Quentin's own script called TRUE ROMANCE (10/10). One of
my favorite films of all-time.
Other well-known screenwriters were also used to punch up the script
including Robert Towne and Steve Zaillian who also contributed key scenes,
including the "Von Clausewicz" scene having to do with the essential nature
of war, which Towne apparently added.
The name of the submarine in this film is the "Alabama". The University of
Alabama's football team is called "The Crimson Tide", and their coach's
nickname is "Bear", which is the name of the Alabama's captain's dog in this
film. Coincidence or major conspiracy?? :)
Among the many factual errors in this film, the Lippizane horses do have
some Spanish descent, but are essentially bred at the Austrian Imperial Stud
at Lippiza.

Author
Christopher Null
     CRIMSON TIDE is a new action/psychodrama about a mutiny aboard a U.S.
nuclear submarine.  When World War III is about to erupt thanks to Russian
coup-artists, the USS Alabama, helmed by Captain Frank Ramsey (Gene
Hackman) is sent to prepare for the worst.  When the order to launch comes
in, Ramsey's executive officer, Lt. Commander Ron Hunter (Denzel
Washington), clashes with the Captain over a last-minute, incomplete order
which could recall the missile launch.  The result is mutiny, with half the
ship siding with the Captain's single-minded, stubborn decision to fire,
half standing with Hunter, who wants a confirmation before blowing up the
world.
     Sound thrilling?  Well, after about 45 minutes of the two principals
philosophizing about life and war, trading quips, and smoking cigars,
*then* the action part of the film comes to life.  Unfortunately, this
prologue does little more than develop the characters like this:  Captain
Ramsey is a obstinate military man, Hunter is a thoughtful peace-lover.  In
fact, most of the lengthy dialogue is arranged to show just what a great
guy Hunter is, and that Ramsey is on the verge of being a Captain Ahab,
hunting the Russkies like they're a latter-day Moby Dick.
     When the action sequences do finally come up, they start with a
nonsensical galley fire (no one can put it out except Hunter, who--get
this--actually pushes a button on the wall to save the day).  Then there's
a flooding bilge bay, and on this ultra-high-tech ship, the preferred tool
for repairing a flooding sub is none other than a monkey wrench.  When the
radio breaks, the crew is fast at work soldering together enough wire and
circuit boards to control the U.S. telephone system.  All this talk about
the film making the military look bad isn't quite right; instead, it just
looks ridiculous.
     This all may be quibbling, but the pure silliness of some of the film
really detracts from the bulk of it, which is a gripping and tense thriller
with two armed factions of men trying to either launch or stop the launch
of ten of the Alabama's nuclear missiles.  The chemistry between Hackman
and Washington, while kept basically predictable, is still full of tension
and repressed anger as the characters are forced to maintain a surface
civility despite an obvious dislike underneath.  The set constructed to
recreate the USS Alabama and the sub combat scenes are incredibly realistic
and make the film worth watching all by themselves.
     Much has been made of the similarity between this film and movies like
THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, TOP GUN (directed and produced by the same team
that did TIDE), and other genre pictures.  While the inevitable
similarities are apparent to some extent, they certainly don't overshadow
the picture, and like the flaws discussed above, they don't keep CRIMSON
TIDE from being a worthwhile film.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Almost the entire film takes place aboard a U.S. submarine
equipped with long range nuclear missiles.  What the film makes clear
is that a nuclear war is a nuclear holocaust for the whole world; there
would be neither winners nor losers of such a war.
     When the Nationalist Russians tangle with the rebellious Russians
as to who will have control of Russian nuclear missiles, the U.S. fleet
is put on alert.  At all costs, the rebels, who have already declared
the U.S. an enemy, must not be allowed to get control of the missile
site.
     Captain Frank Ramsey (Gene Hackman) who has been the commander of
the sub, the Alabama, for many years, and his very intelligent but new
Executive Officer, Lt. Commander Ron Hunter (Denzel Washington) are in
charge of the sub.  When an Emergency message comes over the wireless
to get missiles ready if they have to be fired should the rebels take
over the missile site, everyone on the sub realizes what could lie
ahead for the world.
     The Navy rule is that both the Captain and the Executive officer
have to be in agreement before the missiles can be fired.  At that
point another message comes through saying (paraphrased) "Have the
missiles ... " but the radio is down and the rest of the sentence
does not come through.  It is at this point that the Captain and
Executive officer get into a fierce disagreement which turns to
mutiny.  The Captain wants the missiles to be fired; the Exec officer
wants to wait until they can read the rest of the message.  What if the
message read "Have the missiles taken off the ready.  There is no
longer a crisis"?
     Mutiny, encounter with a Russian sub that is firing at them while
both subs spot each other under the water, and the radio out of
commission, all make for a thrilling film.  If it were not that in 1981
I had seen another submarine film, the German DAS BOOT (which was many
times better), I would give CRIMSON TIDE a higher rating.  In addition,
some of the CRIMSON TIDE's crucial endings are predictable.
     My suggestion then is to see CRIMSON TIDE but be sure to get a
video of DAS BOOT (The Boat), preferably in German with English
subtitles.
Others in the cast include Matt Craven, George Dzundza, Viggo
Mortensen, James Gandolfini and others.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the week following WTC bombing, many commentators
couldn't fail to notice that America, same as many other
countries in history, had its military prepared to fight the
past rather than the future war. Same thing can be said for
Hollywood, since in many 1990s films Russians continued to
be convenient villains and the source of greatest danger for
Western world, all that despite the collapse of Soviet
Empire and its would-be successors being pathethic losers
unable to restore the Evil Empire even in their back yard.
One of such examples can be found in the plot of CRIMSON
TIDE, 1995 submarine thriller directed by Tony Scott. The
story begins with civil war erupting in Russia and
anti-Western rebels seizing nuclear base in Vladivostok.
American nuclear submarine "USS Alabama", commanded by old
and experienced Captain Frank Ramsey (played by Gene
Hackman), is sent to Pacific in order to watch over the base
and retaliate in case of rebels launching nuclear strike on
America. In the last minute his XO is replaced by Lieutenant
Ron Hunter (played by Denzel Washington), intellectual whose
humanist ideas of waging war create discomfort in
no-nonsense Captain. Two of them are going to settle their
differences, at least temporarily, as their vessel
approcahes hostile waters and gets engaged in conflict with
Russian renegade submarine. As a result, the communication
equipment is damaged, but not after receiving the order to
launch nuclear strike. This order was, however, followed
with another one, which is interrupted and can't be
deciphred. While Captain Ramsey wants to follow the order
and launch the strike, his XO is convinced that the next
message represents the cancellation of the original order.
Not wanting to risk start of nuclear exchange over
communication failure, Hunter starts a mutiny aboard the
submarine.
CRIMSON TIDE is not the film that should enter Top 100
lists, but it nevertheless represents one of the brighter
spots in the career of Jerry Bruckheimer and Don Simpson.
The reason for that can be found in the script by Michael
Schiffer that manages to rise above the cliches and
predictability of action film formula, and this
accomplishment is even more impressive when we consider that
CRIMSON TIDE in its original form became the object of
script-doctoring by numerous writers like Robert Towne,
Steven Zaillian and Quentin Tarantino. Usually the
screenwriting by committee produces disastrous results, but
not this time. The suspense and the action in this film is
clearly constrained within the framework of the plot and
terrible dilemma facing the main characters - whether to act
and risk starting nuclear holocaust or show restraint and
allow mother country to be anihillated. Even more
interesting thing about CRIMSON TIDE is that this film
doesn't take sides in this debate - both viewpoints are
shown to be valid and justifiable under the circumstances.
Good direction by Tony Scott and strong acting performances
by Hackman, Washington and numerous character actors (among
which Viggo Mortensen and George Dzundza are the most
impressive) guarantee that this film is going to be as
entertaining as it was thought-provoking. Even the usual
Hollywood cop out ending and sometimes too boring musical
score by Hans Zimmer aren't enough to diminish generally
positive impression given by this film, one of the rare
1990s action films that is going to be as engaging now as it
was half a decade ago.
Review written on September 19th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Andrew Hicks
     Ever since moving in with a gun- and war-obsessed ROTC college
roommate I've found myself despising anything associated with the
military, so when I saw the opening of CRIMSON TIDE, with a bunch of
naval drills and military stereotypes, I wasn't prepared to like the
movie. I fully expected to give it a bad review, letting it join the
ranks of other movies I've sat through for the pleasure of ripping them
apart later in the form of a written review.
     But I got a different kind of pleasure out of CRIMSON TIDE--and
I'm not talking about what Pee Wee Herman does while watching movies
either.  No, I actually found myself liking this movie. Sure, it's got
a very slow start.  After watching it for half an hour, I was thinking
Review be damned, I'm not sitting through this boring movie.  That's
when it grabbed me (and, again I say, this has nothing to do with Pee
Wee Herman).
     CRIMSON TIDE is a well-crafted thriller (except for those first
thirty minutes) with plenty of drama and suspense. Gene Hackman plays a
submarine captain called into action when a Russian revolt attempt
poses a global nuclear threat. Denzel Washington plays the first mate
(forgive me if I don't know the technical term for his position--I'm
sure my roommate could tell you if he ever talked). The two come into
disagreement when an Emergency Action Message dealing with their
impending launch of missiles at Russia is cut off midway through the
message.
     Hackman, itchy macho trigger finger intact, wants to launch the
missiles without full confirmation. Washington, however, realizes such
an action would doom the earth to full-scale nuclear holocaust, so it
might be worth waiting a few minutes to find out for sure whether or
not they'll be ending history as we know it with the touch of a
button.  After that, the rivalry between the two takes off. You know,
mutiny, death, fist fights, the stuff tense action movies are made of.
And CRIMSON TIDE is a good one.

Author
Steve Kong
Taking a look at some of the movies that Tony Scott has put out (Top Gun,
Days of Thunder, The Last Boy Scout) it's hard to accept that Crimson Tide
is his movie.  It is even harder to accept that this is a Jerry Bruckheimer
and Don Simpson production.  As you look at the visual style of Crimson
Tide, it is obvious that this is a Tony Scott movie, and it is obviously a
Bruckheimer and Simpson production.  Fortunately, though the visual style
reflects the directorial and production people, the film itself does not.
Why do I say that it is hard to accept that Crimson Tide is a Tony Scott
movie initially?  Because Crimson Tide is so intelligent, so character
focused, and the action so tight.  In previous Tony Scott movies, such as
Top Gun, the action was wildly over-the-top and the characterization mere
one-dimensional.  But, this anomalous movie from Tony Scott shows that he
can do a movie that is all gloss but still filled with characters that we
care for and are truly dimensional and layered. 
Gene Hackman is Captain Frank Ramsey the captain of the nuclear submarine
Alabama.  His XO, executive officer, is out with appendicitis, and he needs
a new one.  Why?  Because his boat is about to set sail to take care of
some hostile rebels in Russia.  The new XO that Ramsey picks is Lt.
Commander Hunter, played by Denzel Washington.  These two men are almost
exact opposites.  Ramsey is a simple man that follows orders without having
to know why.  Hunter, a Harvard trained officer, wants to know why before
doing something.  This puts the men at odds when trouble arises.  And
trouble arises when they are forced to consider firing their nuclear
missiles.  And it is a broken message that puts the men at odds.  Should
they fire their missiles?  Or should they get confirmation?
Early in Crimson Tide, it boldly mentions other great sub movies as if to
taunt the audience to compare itself to them.  And, if one were to compare
Crimson Tide to the movies mentioned, The Enemy Below and Run Silent, Run
Deep, it would stand proudly next to them.  Instead of putting out a
completely mindless action movie, where the two men battle it out with
flying bullets and fists, Crimson Tide is the battle of will between the
two men.  The film makes the audience think with the two men, about the
consequences of their actions, and who is really right.  Though I was more
sympathetic and understanding to Washington's Hunter, Hackman's Ramsey was
not wrong at all either.
Washington gives a great performance as Hunter.  He presents Hunter as a
strong willed man, who is not afraid to take a stand against even a
superior when he believes that he is right.  Hackman also does a great job
with Ramsey.  Hackman gives a layered performance, putting a happy easy
going exterior to Ramsey, but showing the darker interior from time to
time.  It is the performances of these two that carry Crimson Tide.  But,
the supporting cast also gives great performances.  These include Matt
Craven, Rocky Carroll, Danny Nucci, and Lillo Brancato.  The strongest
supporting actor in Crimson Tide would be a toss up between Viggo Mortensen
(who you can catch right now in G.I. Jane) and George Dzundza.
By all means, Crimson Tide is one of the most enjoyable films made.  It is
well directed, well acted, and well scripted.  Tony Scott knows how to
build up emotions throughout the film, and does it well.  The film will not
only make you think, it will entertain you while making you think.  Sure,
this doesn't feel like a Tony Scott film at first, but you'll get used to
it.  And I hope Tony Scott can put out more great films like Crimson Tide.
Don't miss this one.

Author
Gregory N. Bond
- A great techno-thriller with some huge plot holes.
     Russia has disintegrated into civil war, and the ultra-nationalist
rebel leader has captured a far-east submarine base and missile base.
U.S. nuclear missile submarines are sent off the Russian Pacific coast
as a deterrent.  Then the news comes through that the launch codes on
the Russian missiles have been compromised and the rebels are
threatening to level Japan and North America.  So the order is sent
out, a pre-emptive strike on the rebel-held missile bases.
     Gene Hackman is the Captain of a U.S. Boomer, a good ol' boy
redneck, the last of the learn-it-at-sea captains with combat
experience, and he eats XOs for breakfast.  Denzel Washington is his
new XO (Executive Officer, 2nd in command on the Sub), recruited just
in time for the emergency deployment, Hackman's previous XO having
suffered "appendicitis".  Washington is Academy-trained, a Harvard
graduate, modern, sensitive, has no combat experience and is as close
to a pacifist as you could get in a nuke. So the clash of personalities,
politics and morality is signalled well in advance.
     These tensions are increased a hundredfold when the order to
launch a pre-emptive strike is sent, and explode into boiling point
and armed rebellion when, just as the firing is about to start, another
order that may or may not be a retraction is garbled in reception.
There follows a knife-edge thriller that is basically a two-man play.
Here are two men, dedicated to their task, carrying a burden that might
just be the end of the world, each believing the other is selling their
country into nuclear holocaust.  Passions are high and tensions higher,
faces sweating and jaws clenched.  And we sweat and clench right along
with them.
     After a bit of scene setting, the remainder of the movie is set
inside the boomer.  And a perfect location it is.  Despite being larger
than a WWII-era aircraft carrier, these boats are *cramped*, and the
very tight, intimate locations are used to excellent effect to create
the high-strung tension.  This gives a feeling of tension and
claustrophobia that is unmatched since the seminal submarine movie, DAS
BOOT.  And unlike THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, to which CRIMSON TIDE is
inevitably compared, we in the audience really feel like we're sharing
a very cramped steel coffin, bringer of Armageddon and target of
opportunity.
     The two leads do a very credible job.  I've liked Hackman since he
was Lex Luthor, and if you have fond memories of Superman then you will
have a good handle on his character here.  Washington seems to be
typecast as the sensitive, modern guy, and (to the great credit of the
script), the fact that he is black is just not an issue.  What is at
issue is the whole concept of Nuclear deterrence, and how the chain of
command ultimately depends on people.  The support cast have few lines
and are mainly required to stand around, sweat a lot, and look very,
very stressed.
     The worst part of the film is that it asks for a *huge* suspension
of disbelief, and (despite all they get right), they mess up a lot of
technical details they *really* ought to have got correct.  I suspect
that we are supposed to agree with Washington, consider Hackman to be
the villain, and decide that the whole concept of nuclear war is just
too horrible to contemplate.  But for my money, such moralizing is way
too late by the time the launch order comes, and I was on the Captain's
side right up until the end.  And the ending was a major wimp-out.
     In all, A roller-coaster ride and a great techno-thriller.
--
Gregory Bond  Burdett Buckeridge & Young Ltd Melbourne Australia
[more reviews: http://www.bby.com.au/~gnb/Reviews.html]
Some of the things they got wrong (AFAIK - no doubt the sci.military
pedants will jump all over me where I am wrong):
  >> The opening and closing broadcasts from the French carrier
  Foch - which they pronounced "foash" rather than "fock" - all the
  while showing shots of the USS Enterprise! (The Foch is a
  through-deck carrier with ski-jump; only the U.S. has angled-deck
  carriers.)  It was nice that they at least gave lip service to the
  rest of the world when they called it a French carrier.  And if he
  really was on the flight deck during launch operations, there is
  *no way* you would ever hear a word he said - those jets are
  LOUD!
  >> The ELF is just one of the many radios aboard a boomer - it has
  almost useless bandwith (measured in seconds per character) and is
  used only to transmit a short (3-character?) message telling the
  boomer to come up and talk to a satellite.  There is no way they get
  any sort of orders by ELF.
  >> And no way that they could decrypt half a message, or have the
  message blink in and out like a TV with a busted aerial.  You either
  get a message that decrypts or you don't.  This was just plain
  stupid.
  >> While I have no access to nuke secrets, I can't believe that
  the scenario of withdrawing a launch order within 15 minutes of
  giving it is ever likely, especially to a boomer.  The doctrine is
  basically, once you send a launch order, WW-III is started.  If
  you're not damned sure that you want a war, don't send it!  The
  basic crux on which the whole drama is based is flawed, because the
  system is set up to assume boomers don't get messages reliably.
  >> Given this, I could not believe that Washington's position ("What
  if they've changed their minds?") is reasonable.  They had orders to
  shoot, and they should have launched.  You don't question orders
  like that in *any* branch of the military.
  >> Nor can I believe that this sort of situation isn't covered,
  in very deep and gory detail, in the training the officers receive. 
     Not to mention that the conclusion was a terrible cop-out.  Being
Hollywood, there was little chance that the movie ends with the world
being destroyed (even though IMHO a much more powerful ending would be
that the missing message is a launch confirmation, and they wind up
launching then wondering what happens next).  But for the captain to be
made out as the villain and for the XO to be promoted for what is in
effect mutiny is unbelievable.  Being proved right after the fact is no
excuse!  At the very least he would have been decommissioned.
