Title
Review for Beavis and Butt-head Do America (1996)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Christopher Null
     I realize, right from the start, that absolutely *nothing* I say
about BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA is going to sway you at all, one
way or another, about whether or not to see the film.
     Nevertheless, I'm going to comment, mainly out of habit.
     If you've read this far, I just have to wonder -- what are you
expecting from this film?  A work of genius?  A breakthrough performance
for the two delinquent boys made famous by MTV?  What kind of a bunghole
reads a review of a Beavis and Butt-head movie without knowing from the
start exactly what's coming???
     BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA is exactly what it claims to be --
no more, no less.  It's about 78 minutes of spare animation, butt jokes,
rock & roll music, and enough Technicolor slapstick to... um, well,
um... hu-huh... I said "stick."
     Okay, now *I've* got Mike Judge's grating characters on the brain,
so I've got to give him credit.  Who would have thought that in the time
it takes to eat lunch, two kids who do nothing but watch TV all day
could get involved with a tale of a stolen biological warfare device,
hitmen, ATF agents, and the collapse of Hoover Dam, and live to watch TV
again?  Far-fetched, you say?  It's a *cartoon*, people.
     Well, the film is already destined to be a cult classic, I'm sure,
so I guess you'd better see it too.  For the record, the jokes are above
average for typical B&B material, there are a number of celebrity voice
cameos that I won't spoil for you, plus enough movie spoofs to entertain
even a non-fan of the show.  And, it's only 78 minutes long -- it's
like, you can either catch the movie, or you can watch an episode of
"Baywatch."  Take your pick.
     In the end, I was relatively amused and entertained.  Beavis and
Butt-head "do" America -- in every sense of the title -- and the movie
is simply a fine homage to a movie whose parts add up to less than its
whole.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Brian Koller
Beavis and Butt-head Do America (1996)
If you had never seen MTV and ran across this title, you
would think that it was among the worst ever, possibly
even a porn movie.  Mike Judge has reached mainstream
acceptance with his FOX show "King of the Hill", but
his earlier characters Beavis and Butt-head are not for 
everyone.  If you have seen and enjoyed the MTV shorts, 
however, the film "Beavis and Butt-head Do America" will
not disappoint.
Beavis and Butt-head are about fifteen years old.  They
are stupid, naive and depraved, and have spent most of their
lives watching television.  From a societal point of view, 
they have no redeeming qualities.  This doesn't prevent them
from being hilarious, as their very weaknesses reflect
the base feelings and actions that everybody has.
Our animated anti-heroes wake up to find that their beloved
television set has been stolen.  A search to find a working 
TV set gets them (as always) into increasing trouble, which
they remain oblivious to.  Somehow Beavis and Butt-head
are taken for professional killers, get a biological weapon
implanted on their clothes, and are sent on a cross-country
mission to "score" with a femme fatale arms trader.
Meanwhile, fanatical government agents are on their trail.
Mike Judge directed and wrote the script.  His gifted 
vocal chords voice the major characters.  He pulls no
punches when it come to satire.  Beavis and Butt-head,
who assumedly represent young america, are hopelessly
stupid, shallow and clueless.  Stereotypes of the liberal
middle school teacher and the relentless federal agent
(who has a thing about deep cavity searches) are lampooned.
The opening credits slam Godzilla movies, and 1970s
TV detective shows.
The animation is merely perfunctory, even ugly.  This does
not detract much, as it suits the mood of the film.
The story isn't always credible, such as the sudden
change of status for Beavis and Butt-head from America's
Most Wanted to hero.  The dumb-dumbs also survive a
definitely fatal jump from a moving vehicle, and are
not arrested after re-joining their tour bus.
Bruce Willis and Demi Moore provide the voices of the
arms trading couple.  David Letterman, who is a big
fan of Beavis and Butt-head, also has a voice
characterization.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Huh huh huh. Heh hmh hmh. If you're not already snickering at the
prospects, this probably isn't the movie for you, but there are many, many
laugh-out-loud moments.
First, a confession: Beavis and Butt-head, those neo-Chaucerian Harlequins
of MTV, make me laugh. They're absolutely on target. We've seen their kind
before, in the backs of every classroom we've ever had to waste our lives
in, behind convenience stores and maybe even in our own homes. (Jeez, I
hope not.)
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" takes the basic premises of the
censor-infuriating TV series, stretches them to movie-size, lights the
fuse, and gets the heck out of there, leaving us to enjoy the blast wave as
it slams our tuchis to the ground. It's not the funniest movie ever made,
but it's amusing for most of the time and there are moments where I laughed
harder than anything in recent memory. (One of the best jokes involves a
running gag about cavity searches -- just so you know what to expect.)
The plot, what little there is of it, is a gag on which to hang an endless
series of complications -- most of them centering around the Dimwit Duo's
infallible stupidity. The movie opens with their TV being stolen, and the
way this is introduced to the audience and then the protags (dare we call
them that?) is a little masterpiece of timing.
The two hit the streets to find their TV, and in the process get embroiled
in a very strange plot to go kill someone for money. The way in which their
instructions are misinterpreted gets one good laugh after another --
leading to a great mini-punchline when the woman who is to be killed offers
them even more money to go back and kill their employer. (I am treading
carefully here to avoid ruining anything.) From there they get embroiled in
an even weirder plot that centers around a stolen chemical weapon sewn into
the seat of Beavis's pants. And so on.
I had (and won, I think) an argument with someone after the movie when they
said it was stupid. No, I said -- it's ABOUT stupidity. That's why it's
funny: it points out things about them that a less-ambitious movie would
never get it in its head to attempt. It's not enough that Beavis and
Butt-head are about as repulsive to women as a pair of cold corpses. It's
that they try to use stale pick-up lines, and can't even get them straight,
or tell dirty jokes and botch the punchlines. In short, it's about an
attitude. If Beavis and Butt-head do nothing for you but try your patience,
you'll probably get more yuks elsewhere, but my only criterion for whether
a comedy works is: Did it make me laugh? Sure, I did.

Author
Adam Joyce
Very few people would be unaware of Beavis & Butt-head (both created and
narrated by Mike Judge). They are the two animated MTV characters who have
the most annoying laughter know to human kind. You may have seen them on
their television program, as they snigger and make lude remarks about
women, anything related to sex, and the music film clips that they watch.
In Beavis & Butt-head Do America the pair finally make their big screen
debut, to the delight of some, and the deplore of others.
Beavis & Butt-head (yes, those are their real names), are two very ugly
teenagers with extremely warped minds driven by raging hormones. They live
their lives in front of the television. The worst possible event occurs to
the pair when their television is stolen. This happens as they sleep, and
when they awake it takes them a few minutes just to decipher that the
television has gone. Beavis even tries to use the remote, though there is
no television there. The two spot a van outside and two sinister looking
men carrying a television. Even at this point they have no idea what has
happened. They look around, seeing all the evidence, but are completely
oblivious to the fact that these men have just stolen their television.
Before the movie I knew that they were stupid, but I didn't realise just
how stupid. This is typical of their behaviour throughout the film.
Eventually they realise that their television has been stolen, so they
leave their sofa to go search for a television. Luck would have it that
they stumble into a hotel room (looking for a television) where a man is
awaiting two guys whose task it is to kill his wife. This man, thinking
that Beavis & Butt-head are the assigned killers, tells them that they can
have $10,000 if they "do his wife". Beavis & Butt-head, being the ignorant
fools that they are, think that he is offering them $10,000 dollars to have
sex with his good looking wife. They are taken to the airport where they
fly to Las Vegas to "do her". To them, this is the best day of their lives.
Not only are they going to lose their virginity (one of their lifelong
aims), but most importantly, they will have enough money to buy a big
screen TV.
Inevitably they become caught up in a huge crime, and unbeknown to them,
are tracked across the country by the FBI. Oddly enough, it is their
complete stupidity that spares them from being caught, as a result the FBI
is convinced they are criminal masterminds. They end up travelling right
across America, visiting places such as the Hoover Dam and Washington DC.
The irony is that although they visit so many grand and spectacular
locations, their one time out in the big world away from their television,
they are completely oblivious to it. At Old Faithful they are far more
fascinated with the infra-red operated urinals than with the geyser itself.
Beavis & Butt-head essentially have the journey of their lives. They even
get to meet the President. But all they care about is getting their
television back, and losing their virginity. This is one of the many
reasons that the film is so funny - it's unbelievable just how stupid they
are, and how they can be so oblivious to everything around them. The humour
is certainly crude, but then Beavis & Butt-head are just that; crude, lude
and rude. In the end you can't help but feel sorry for them, a pair of
anti-social couch potatoes whose life is television. In this respect, and
also with regard to authority (such as the FBI) Mike Judge is quite
critical of Amercian society. If you are easily offended, or find this pair
particularly annoying, steer clear. Otherwise, it should keep you laughing
the whole way through. 
One note of warning: don't take friends who like to imitate Beavis &
Butt-head.....you'll never hear the end of it!
PLEASE VISIT MOVIE MANIA AT http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Author
Paul Miller
Okay, let me first say, this is a BEAVIS AND BUTTHEAD movie.  If you do
not like BEAVIS AND BUTTHEAD, DO NOT go to see this movie!!!!!  However,
if you do like them, I recommened you get out right now and go see it.  
The movie starts off with the boys wondering what happened to their TV.
They notice that it has been stolen and they vow to find it.  This wind
their way through America searching for Dallas (she is a woman).  They
look for her because as they are searching for the TV, they find a drunk
who wants them "to do" his wife.  Well, of course they think he wants
them to score with her when actually he wants them to kill her.  And the
fun starts their.
This movie is a mix of funny gags that anly Beavis and Butthead could
pull off.  It is quality entertainment that only fan of Beavis and
Butthead would enjoy.  I enjoyed this movie alot because Mike Judge knew
how to keep pace.  Even when they were crawling through the desert and I
thought the movie started to lag, he manages to keep the laughs coming. 
If you expecting changes from the show keep looking.  The same
character, the same voices, the same everything from the show and that's
what makes it good.  You might think with a movie from a TV show, you
can change a few things.  Often times this spells disaster for films
because the film makers veer away from what made the show popular in the
first place!

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
is MTV's second foray into feature films with their dynamic idiotic
adolescent duo who we're used to seeing commenting on music videos.
None of that here as the film begins with the theft of their beloved
TV. As they search for a replacement, they're mistaken for the hitmen
sent to 'do' somebody's wife in Las Vegas.  Thinking that they're
being paid to score for the first time with the buxom blonde, they
excitedly take off only to end up as dupes in a plot to steal a
germ-warfare device, become named the most dangerous men in America
and wreck havoc with nuns and senior citizens across the U.S.A. 
While I've only caught Beavis and Butt-head on MTV a few times and was
barely just slightly amused, I must admit that "Beavis and Butt-Head
Do America" made me laugh (in fact, I'm still giggling)! 
The animation for the feature length film is a cut above what's used
on TV - in fact, it reminded me of Ralph Bashki's animation ("Fritz
the Cat", "American Pop").
What's appealing about the film isn't stylistic tough - it's the
dumber than a plug humor.  Beavis and Butt-Head are intellectually
stunted adolescents who look for sexual innuendo in everything that's
said (i.e., translating 'entertain us' into "He said 'anus'."
heh-heh-heh. Just imagine Butt-Head's delight when a commercial
jetliner pilot tells him to 'get out of his cockpit'!
Beavis had me in stitches when, after consuming a vast and varied
amount of pills from a senior citizen's handbag, he freaks, wears his
t-shirt over his head and jammers "I am Cornholio - give me teepee for
my bunghole."  Silly?  Vastly.  Funny?  Well, at least I though so...
Besides this idiocy we also get our two lads mistakenly thinking
church confessional stalls are porto-potties (with hilarious results),
an FBI agent (voiced by Robert Stack) with a penchant for full cavity
searches and a couple of old-timers with a camper who never avoid
crossing paths with their nemeses.
It should be noted that Beavis and Butt-Head are all about sex and
drugs and rock and roll and, while there is no animated nudity or bad
language used, they may not be suitable for small children.
"Beavis and Butt-Head Do America" is good dumb fun and a movie that
definitely does not suck.
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" creator, Mike Judge, may not have
aimed very high with the brand of humor used in this film, but he sure
succeeds in hitting his comic target a very high percentage of the
time.
The humor put forth in "B&BDA" consists almost entirely of body parts
(mostly female), being naked (all female), sluts (the female kind),
boobs (guess which gender), poop, anti-authority, and TV. You can see
that this is not the kind of film intended to appeal to the art-house
crowd. 
BUT, if theres a side of you which appreciates extraordinarily
low-brow humor, done successfully to excess some of the time, then
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" will attract you.
I have only seen a few minutes of the MTV series, but what I saw
turned me off from seeing the movie. Biting  the bullet, I went, I
saw, I laughed.
The B&B characters are so clueless that Mike Judge is able to draw two
completely different worlds - our normal world, and the one lived in
by our duo. Judge parallels these worlds well, with collisions - all
B&B instigated - of these worlds taking place all along the way.
Beavis and Butt-head, in their overwhelming desire to score, succeed
in breaking the Hoover Dam, blacking out Las Vegas, causing a massive
traffic accident on the Washington D.C. beltway, taking over the US
Senate PA system, and forcing the Strategic Air Command to go to
DEFCOM 4. All this in 80 minutes!
Technically, the animation is of surprisingly high quality - beyond
B&B, that is. Mike Judge populates his story with a number of colorful
characters, such as Dallas and Buddy (voiced by Demi Moore and Bruce
Willis), a couple of gun-runners; a lunatic ATF agent (Robert Stack)
who demands that everyone, victims included, be given a full body
cavity search; and, a nice old couple, whose camper B&B commandeer
from time to time for privacy when the urge to whack off comes upon
them.
The repetitive nature of B&Bs low-grade humor works pretty well here,
especially when Beavis gets jeeped up on caffeine stimulants and
sugar, turning in to his alter ego, Cornholio. Judges pushed
Cornholios hijinks far past the point of good taste, but still gets
consistent laughs.
The music video numbers, from Isaac Hayes' rewriting the "Theme to
Shaft" for our boys, to the Red Hot Chili Peppers "Love
Rollercoaster", are a good melding of music and animation. Very
entertaining.
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" is a solid, comic film, filled with
humor and wittiness at a gutter level rarely achieved in film.
No sequel, please, but, I still give "Beavis and Butt-head Do America"
a B.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Yes, three years after everybody stopped caring about the 
show, out comes the "Beavis and Butt-head" movie, an animated ode 
to the onslaught of stupidity the teenagers of America eagerly 
embrace. If you can allow yourself to embrace it for 78 minutes or 
so, you'll find a lot of entertainment in Beavis and Butt-head 
Do America. It's no intellectual satire of the times, but it does 
have its moments. And let's face it, creator/director Mike Judge 
could have released a blank screen and still made 100 million 
bucks.
        I'm assuming that you, as a literate person, have at least 
some idea of the premise behind the "Beavis and Butt-head" show 
and its ensuing movie. Over 100 half-hour episodes have chronicled 
the exploits of these two teenagers, Beavis the stupid blond-haired 
one, Butt-head the stupid dark-haired one. Both of them high school 
freshman, they go through life watching music videos, laughing at 
every possible double entendre phrase in the book, and hoping 
against hope that one day they'll score with a chick.
        The show has its share of critics, but nearly every teenaged 
boy gets hooked into it at some time or another. I fell victim to the 
show over three years ago, at the age of 15, before the show became 
clich  and I grew up at least a little bit. I've seen about every episode 
since but can't really call myself a fan, as I doubt anyone with a 
100+ I.Q. can. I was still looking forward to seeing Beavis and 
Butt-head Do America and, believe me, it didn't disappoint.
        What's the plot? Stupid question, but here goes anyway... 
Beavis and Butt-head wake up one morning to discover their TV's 
been stolen. They set out to find another TV to watch, first 
attempting to steal one from school, then walking into a hotel room, 
where some guy who talks like Bruce Willis offers them $10,000 to 
"do" his wife. They jump at the chance because not only would 
they 
get to score with a chick, but they could also buy themselves 
a big-screen TV with that kind of money.
        Thus begins the adventure, as Beavis and Butt-head board 
a plane to Las Vegas, where they participate in a few hijinks and 
Beavis gets to become Cornholio for the fourth time. In Vegas, they 
find the wife, who talks like Demi Moore. In a RED ROCK WEST 
plot twist, she offers them $20,000 to go back where they came from 
and "do" him, a concept that doesn't appeal to the boys for some 
reason or another. As police close in on the hotel, Demi slips a 
top-secret chemical weapon into Beavis' pants, where a top-secret 
chemical weapon apparently already resides.
        Once this happens, Beavis and Butt-head have all manner 
of federal agents (headed by a cavity-search obesessed Robert Stack) 
chasing them across the country. Over the course of Beavis and 
Butt-head Do America, we see how the two brain-dead 
cartoon characters react to the Hoover Dam, the Grand Canyon, 
Yellowstone Park, the Capitol Building and even the Oval Office. 
They even meet two men who are very probably their fathers.
        This movie probably isn't for anyone who doesn't already 
like the show. If you do like the show, though, this is the best 
episode yet. It gets the two main characters out of the same 
neighborhood and the same boring routine we've seen them engage 
in for four seasons on the TV show, but it still manages to work in 
the best recurring characters from the show. Beavis and Butt-
head Do America does not suck.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    Doesn't suck, but isn't entirely cool, either.  The MTV morons go in
search of their stolen television set and end up at a flea-bag motel,
where some sleaze thinks they're a pair of hitmen (!) and offers them
ten grand to "do" his wife.  Believing that they'll finally score-- the
only action that these two see is of the, uh, self-inflicted variety--
Beavis and Butt-head accept the offer, which lands them on cross-country
chase involving international terrorists, biological weapons, and
full-body cavity searches by rubber-gloved ATF agents.  (After one of
which Butt-head admits "I think I just scored.") As expected, there's
enough concentrated juvenile humor here to keep any audience giggling,
and not just those fans of the show.  (The bits are, at times,
priceless.  While touring the Hoover Dam, Butt-head asks "Is this a God
dam?" And don't miss what they say after spotting a defecating donkey at
the Grand Canyon.)
     Unlike the television series, no music videos are played, except
for a psychedelic sequence set to White Zombie (one of many rockin'
bands on the soundtrack) and inspired by the designs of those old Rat
Fink cars.  (More amusing is a Vegas montage set to a Red Hot Chili
Peppers cover of "Love Rollercoaster.") BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA
is only eighty minutes long, but the last twenty are tiresome.  By then,
the hilarity has largely petered out.  Uh huh huh huh huh, I said peter.
Great voice work, though.  In addition to director/co-writer/series
creator Mike Judge, who voices several characters including the Two Cool
Guys, listen for Robert Stack, Cloris Leachman, someone who sounds like
Bruce Willis, and another person who sounds an awful lot like Demi
Moore.  And, yes, I believe that's the voice of Mr. Letterman in one of
the more, uh, explosive scenes. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Phil Curtolo
What do you get when you combine two ugly cartoon characters with the
voices of some of today's most talented actors? You get MTV's newest
production Beavis & Butthead Do America.
The moronic duo set out to find their stolen TV and end up as the most
wanted people in America, as they are chased across the country in an
old folks touring bus by a perverted FBI director.
Along the way, they get mixed up with Muddy Grimes, a man who want to
pay them to "do" his wife, Dallas. They misunderstand and instead of
trying to kill her, they try to have sex with her. Well, she's on to
them and slips them a deadly chemical weapon, which they end up taking
to the White House to create mass hysteria and chaos. In the end, they
end up pinning the whole thing on their neighbor, Tom Anderson.
The celebrity voices in the film were amazing, including Demi Moore,
Bruce Willis, David Spade, Greg Kinnear, and David Letterman. Also
featured were Cloris Leachman, whose "oh, that's nice" line appears in
the trailer and Unsolved Mysteries Robert Stack, who played the FBI
director who constantly asked for "full cavity searches"
In their first trip to the big screen, Beavis' memorable Cornholio
still was a favorite, as he walked around in his underwear chanting,
"You will give me T.P. for my bunghole!" and "Are you threatening me?"
The film or the television show couldn't have come together without the
voice and mind of Beavis & Butthead creator, Mike Judge. He provides the
voices for the title characters, Tom Anderson, their fruity teacher Mr.
Van Dreesen, and the nervous Principal McVicker. His abilities made the
entire production possible.
Don't get me wrong here, this is not a movie for people who liked The
English Patient. It is short, sweet and to-the-point, allowing a stupid
but funny plot to complete itself and end the movie with the audience in
hysterics. If you like the TV show, then the movie is a must see. If you
don't, then you shouldn't waste your time.
Grade: B-, *** out of *****

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1996, PG-13, 81 minutes [1 hour, 21 minutes] 
[animated - comedy]
Featuring the voices of: Mike Judge (Beavis, Butt-Head, Mr. Anderson, Mr. Van
Driessan, Principal McVicker), Robert Stack (ATF Special Agent Flemming),
Bruce Willis (Muddy), Demi Moore (Dallas), produced by Abby Terkuhle, written
by Mike Judge, Joe Stillman, directed by Mike Judge.
>From the concept alone "Beavis And Butt-Head Do America" sounds like it
would be the stupidest thing ever made (and it pretty much is), but it's
still good. 
The film wastes no time in showing us just how dumb B&B (both voiced by
Judge, among other characters) are when we see the living room window has
been broken, the TV is missing, footprints lead out the door, and somehow the
two are unable to figure out what happened to the magical box. "This sucks
more than anything that has ever sucked before" says Butt-Head. It's this
kind of exaggeration of the characters' idiocy that makes for the offbeat
comedy.
As the two look for another TV they somehow stumble upon Muddy (Willis), a
typical villain who mistakenly thinks they are hitmen he hired to "do" his
wife Dallas (Moore). Of course they misinterpret his words and think they're
"finally gonna score." So the film essentially becomes a "road trip" and
"fish-out-of-water" comedy, and it actually works.
In the spirit of "The Naked Gun" and "Dumb And Dumber," the jokes here are
quick, weird, and close together. It would take too long to give examples of
specific jokes but they all pretty much revolve around the concept that they
are too dumb to understand anything. When they act in the way they think is
appropriate it's just so insanely stupid it's hilarious.
The two travel with a senior citizens tour bus from Texas to Las Vegas to
Washington, D.C., causing mass hysteria in the process because unbeknownst to
them, they are carrying a government-made virus that Muddy's wife Dallas
sewed into Beavis' shorts. Robert Stack co-stars as the voice of the
investigator, Agent Flemming, using much of the same serious-but-funny
attitude he displayed in "Airplane!" and constantly ordering cavity searches.
It's that mix of the serious, the idiocy of B&B, and the overall satirical
theme of the movie that makes it good. This animated film is much funnier and
better made than many live action comedies that rely on cliche after cliche
to tell a story and make for gags. I'll have to admit there's nothing cliche
to this movie. It's unlike anything I've ever seen before.
I'm sure there's a case waiting to be made that Beavis and Butt-Head are not
simply moronic cartoon characters, but a genius, comedic manifestation of
American apathy, especially that of Generation X. Why would two,
weird-looking teenage boys obsessed with television, pornography, and
bathroom functions be so appealing? I can't answer that question, but what I
do know is they are funny because they are so weird and stupid. It takes a
lot of talent to create, and write for characters this stupid because they
live in their own reality, and a detailed one at that.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
David Wilcock
The two thickest, rudest and sex desperate teenagers on MTV
finally made there way to the movies with this uneven, but usually
funny road movie. The film opens with Beavis and Butthead (both
voiced by Mike Judge) waking up to find that they television has
been stolen. While searching for it, they stumble into Muddy's
(voiced by Bruce Willis) motel room. Muddy mistakes Beavis and
Butthead for two murderers he hired to 'do' (i.e kill) his wife
(voiced by Willis' real life wife, Demi Moore) Naturally, the boys
mistake 'do' for 'have sex with' his wife, and go to 'do' his wife.
When they finally reach the wife, she tells them to kill Muddy, and
also hides a deadly virus into Beavis's pants, which the F.B.I are
after. Soon, our heroes have Muddy, the wife, and the F.B.I all
trying to kill them. 
Beavis and Butthead prove to be their normal irritating, yet
strangely likeable selves. There are some good movie references,
such as King Kong (1933) and every single blaxploitation film
ever made (such as the classic Shaft (1971)) The voices are
good, with Bruce Willis and Demi Moore delivering fine
performances, and an resonable funny Robert Stack (1941
(1979), Airplane! (1980)) as a cavity searching obsessed F.B.I
officer. 
But although the performances are good, the jokes are hit and
miss. I have never watched Beavis and Butthead on MTV, so this
was the first time I was introduced to their world. Some of the
gags are great (such as an hippy teacher singing 'Lesbian Seagull,'
before being flattened by a door) yet some are pretty awful (such
as Cornholio, which, although funny at first, started to grow on my
nerves.) Thankfully, though, the film is not particulary long (about 1
hour 20 minutes) so when the gags do start running out, the film is
about to end anyway.
Fans of the television show will probably enjoy this far more than I
did, but I would still recommend this film to people who are
unfamiliar with Beavis and Butthead. There are some good jokes
in there, and the film is resonably good fun. Overall, then, this a
enjoyable, if not particulary smart, comedy.

Author
Jerry Saravia
They represent the ostensibly gross, stupid, stoned and horny teenagers of America. They are Beavis and Butthead, the popular animated duo from MTV (created and voiced by director Mike Judge) whose only form of vocabulary is "Huh, huh, huh, huh. That was cool." A half-hour of these two nitwits is one thing, but a full hour-and-a-half!
Now, I did watch a couple of episodes of their MTV show during 1994 when they were quite popular. Their act was mildly funny, but it was also an accurate portrait of the dumb and dumber set of teens in the 1990's. They were nihilistic to the max! They rarely went to school, and they didn't care about anything or anyone except...watching TV, particularly music videos. 
This movie has the duo looking for their stolen television set. They get on a "DreamAmerica" bus, and are inadvertently branded as hitmen by the media. The FBI is pursuing them trying to retrieve a stolen device hidden in Beavis's shorts! All the naive Beavis and Butthead want to do is score by bedding down with a tough chick named Dallas (voiced by Demi Moore). 
Beavis and Butthead Do America is repetitious and boring warranting only a few mild chuckles. The PG-13 rating defuses a lot of the jokes, and the movie suffers from too many bland gags and not enough social commentary on today's teens. The best scene is towards the end where Beavis overdoses on caffeine pills and coffee and, literally, goes berserk as he becomes "Cornhoolio." I also like the scenes with B & B trying to score with Dallas. It is also a pleasure to hear Robert Stack's voice as the FBI Agent Fleming, but he even he gets monotonous. Beyond that folks, there's not much more. Hearing and listening to Beavis and Butthead's limited vocabulary for an inordinate amount of time is not what I would call good comedy or good satire. Wayne and Garth rule, if you ask me. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
If you have any questions, comments or complaints, e-mail me at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I'm sure there are people out there who view BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO
AMERICAN as yet another sign that the end-times are upon us; they are
probably the same folks who have condemned from day one the MTV series on
which it is based as a celebration of violence, stupidity and lack of
respect.  Speaking as an admittedly defensive some-time fan of the show, I
think "Beavis and Butt-Head" is much smarter and more self-aware than its
detractors give it credit for being.  Mike Judge created a series for MTV
which takes aim at the generation of youth MTV helped create:  kids
without the attention span to sit through an entire music video.  Do young
viewers of the show sometimes delight in the anarchy and low humor
without appreciating the sub-text?  Probably, but the same statement is
true of "The Simpsons," and no one would accuse "The Simpsons" of not
being smart.
     Then again, Bart Simpson is only ten; Beavis and Butt-Head are
teenagers, scrawny packages of surging hormones and attitude, and BEAVIS
AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA captures them at their worst, which is to say
their best.  The story finds our heroes (both voiced by creator/director
Judge) discovering that their beloved television has been stolen, and
setting out to find it or any acceptable replacement.  Instead, they find
Muddy Grimes (an uncredited Bruce Willis), a shady character who thinks
Beavis and Butt-Head are the two guys he's hired to "do" his duplicitous
wife Dallas (an equally uncredited Demi Moore).  The boys don't interpret
"do" as "kill," however, and head for Las Vegas where thy think they are
finally about to score.  Dallas has other ideas, though, and uses the
dim-witted pair to transport a stolen military germ warfare weapon to
Washington D.C.  As Beavis and Butt-Head make their way across America,
they are chased by ATF Agent Fleming (Robert Stack), a hard-nosed Fed with
an unusual fondness for body cavity searches.
     There's no point in pretending that BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA
doesn't traffic in plenty of below-the-belt gags -- and above-the-belt,
where women are concerned -- because that is the level of Beavis and
Butt-Head's sense of humor.  Sex, masturbation, gas and other toilet
functions all send the twosome into paroxysms of their trademark immature
snickering, yet Judge stages many of these moments with a knowing wit.  A
stylized montage of high-rolling Vegas action, which in most films would
find the heroes living it up and enjoying the big time, instead finds
Beavis and Butt-Head unable to stop staring at a bare-breasted ship's
figurehead; another scene has them missing a bus thanks to their
fascination with auto-flush urinals.  While Beavis and Butt-Head find only
sexually suggestive town names worth noting on their trans-continental
trek, Judge allows the audience to recognize that he too understands how
idiotic they are.
     That is not to say that a little Beavis and Butt-Head doesn't go a
long way.  Even fans of the series might find 80 minutes of their antics
getting repetitive, particularly when connected to a standard "mistaken
identity" premise in which morons take such bizarre actions that they are
assumed to be brilliant.  The series also benefits from the commentary on
music videos which breaks up each episode's plot, and that commentary is
missed in BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA.  Its absence removes the rare
opportunities you have to witness how selective their obliviousness can be
as they analyze the cliches of videos.  Judge tosses in some clever bits
unrelated to the series, including a great opening credits sequence scored
to a "Shaft"-like Isaac Hayes tune and voice cameos by Cloris Leachman and
a fellow credited as "Earl Hofer" (David Letterman's nom-de-cinema in
CABIN BOY), but most of the gags are directed squarely at fans of the
show.  The uninitiated might find themselves baffled at the applause which
goes up for Cornholio, Beavis' caffeine- and sugar-fueled alter-ego.
     A keen grasp of reality prevents me from attempting anything like a
conversion of "Beavis and Butt-Head" haters.  Hard-core opponents consider
them not just annoying but actively evil, an animated pair of
potty-mouthed Pauly Shores sucking the collective will to think out of the
heads of America's impressionable youth.  But BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO
AMERICA, crude though it may be, is more genuinely inventive than SPACE
JAM and 101 DALMATIANS combined, and less insulting to the intelligence of
younger viewers.  All it takes is a very funny moment which underscores
the futility of Butt-Head trying to piece together a rather elementary
crime scene to point out that dumb characters don't have to mean a dumb
movie.  BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA overcomes its fundamental dopiness
to provide entertainment for those prepared to laugh with its
self-absorbed protagonists _and_ those prepared to laugh at them.

Author
kefka@tyrell.net
First of all, if you are a Beavis and Butt-head fan, you will love this movie, 
if you aren't you will probably hate it.  It's like a 80 minute episode with 
no videos, better than average content, some surprises, and good animation.
This movie was partially made really un-enjoyable because of talk of Beavis 
masturbating.  There is also a scene where he walks into a neighbors camper to 
masturbate which I did not find funny but disgusting.  Also in the desert 
scene they see two buzzards having sex.  The show usually does not have 
content like this and I did not excpect this.
On the plus side, it has above average jokes, likeable small parts and some 
suprisingly dramatic content.
The movie opens with giant Beavis and Butt-head monsters destroying the city 
and then they wake up and Beavis notices the TV is gone, after studying the 
broken window, the tracks on the ground, the missing TV, and the door hanging 
open Butt-head makes the assumption that "this sucks".
They go searching for there TV they end up in a trashy motel and find a 
drunken guy who thinks B&B are the people he hired to "do" his wife.  B&B 
thinks that he will pay them 10,000 dollars to have sex with his wife who is 
in Vegas. 
After the movie begins beavis and butthead are heading towards washington, 
unknowingly carrying an unstable biological weapon with the ATF hot on their 
trail led by some guy who is voiced by robert stack.

Author
Walter Frith
The teenaged no brainer duo of Beavis and Butthead are not for all tastes but
they're kind of like Wayne Campbell and Garth Algar a.k.a. 'Wayne's World' in
the fact that once you get to know them they grow on you and are definitely
an acquired taste.  I would describe 'Beavis and Butthead Do America' as one
of my guilty pleasures and I have no problem admitting this because I
actually admire in many ways the message that their creator Mike Judge is
sending out.  He has obviously fashioned these characters after the real life
situations many teenagers become involved in namely ignorance, sexual
curiosity and just being naive of the world around them.  Some clever visions
are realized by Judge who serves as this film's director and the sub text of
his movie is to be realized as an underlying message of recognition for young
people in these situations everyday throughout the world.  Judge of course
takes it one step further for the purposes of entertainment and makes the
plot of 'Beavis and Butthead Do America' one in which the comic duo become
involved with an estranged couple of involved in crime (voiced by Bruce
Willis and Demi Moore) who have murder and espionage on their minds.  B+B
quickly become the two most wanted men in America by federal law enforcement
agents and they float through the situation unknowingly all the while hoping
to finally lose their virginity.  It will be an outrageous and intolerable
film for many to accept especially those over the age of 25 but if you go
with what it's intended to be you will be entertained and its crude and
sometimes vile presentation is a sign of the times for the 1990's in the way
'The Simpsons' and 'Ren and Stimpy' are.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: December 20, 1996 (wide)
Running Length: 1:20
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, crude language)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Featuring the voices of Mike Judge, Robert Stack, Cloris Leachman, 
      Eric Bogosian, David Spade, Demi Moore, Bruce Willis
Director: Mike Judge
Producer: Abby Terkuhle
Screenplay: Mike Judge and Joe Stillman
Music: John C. Frizzell
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD may well be America's most misunderstood and 
falsely maligned cartoon.  No, I'm not a fan of the MTV show, but I have 
seen it enough times to recognize that rather than being a proponent of 
the couch potato society (of which its characters and probably a 
significant portion of its fan base are card-carrying members), it's a 
sly attack on it.  BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD is sublimely subversive in its 
approach to the illiterate, glassy-eyed culture that its parent network 
has helped to develop.
     So, while I appreciate the idea of BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD, and, upon 
occasion, have enjoyed its execution, my feelings about the movie are 
mixed.  An old saying states that too much of anything isn't good, and 
this is a prime example.  Eighty minutes is too long.  A half-hour TV 
program is right for this pair; a full-length animated feature is 
overkill.  I enjoyed the first third of BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA, 
found myself fidgeting a little throughout the middle segment, and was 
longing for the closing credits down the home stretch.  Simply put, the 
concept can't support the running length.
     The premise is pretty basic.  One day, our intrepid heroes, Beavis 
and Butt-Head (both voiced by series' creator, Mike Judge), discover 
that their most prized possession, the TV, has been stolen.  It's not 
something that they realize at once, but, after staring blankly at the 
space where the set used to be, they eventually figure out that 
something isn't right.  In their words, "this sucks more than anything 
that has sucked before."  Once identifying the problem, they come up 
with a solution.  Since they don't have the money to buy a new TV, they 
decide to take one.
     Their quest leads them to a seedy motel, where a grungy looking 
fellow (uncredited voice of Bruce Willis), mistaking the duo for hit 
men, offers them $10,000 to "do" his wife.  Of course, Beavis and Butt-
Head have a different definition of what it means to "do" a woman, and 
eagerly accept.  A bus trip later, they encounter their buxom quarry 
(uncredited voice of Demi Moore) in Las Vegas, but, before they can 
carry out their commission, she makes a counter-offer.  After planting a 
secret weapon in Beavis' pants, she lures the boys to Washington D.C., 
where she plans to sell the weapon.  Meanwhile, a gaggle of ATF agents 
(led by a man who sounds an awful lot like Robert Stack) are tracking 
Beavis and Butt-Head, thinking that they're actually dangerous 
criminals.
     The are times when BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA is bitingly 
funny.  Aside from the simple fact that Judge is using this medium to 
make a searing statement about society, these two morons are so stupid 
that there are times when you just can't help laughing.  Beavis and 
Butt-Head are also the ultimate expression of the backlash against 
political correctness.  They're the WAYNE'S WORLD characters in cartoon 
form, and, thankfully, they don't they suffer from the "family values" 
mentality that affects almost every other animated film.  That in itself 
is a refreshing characteristic.  The animation isn't polished, but it's 
the perfect style for these two.  They cry out for this sort of crude 
rendering, and Judge has delivered.  No one is ever going to confuse 
this motion picture with something produced by Disney.
     On the cleverness scale, the opening credits sequence, done in MOD 
SQUAD style, is far above anything else the film has to offer.  There 
are a large number of masturbation, breast, and bodily function jokes 
(some would argue that this is the point of BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD).  
These grow progressively less amusing and more tiresome as the film 
wears on.  
     I have the feeling that a fair number of BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD 
viewers don't get the joke.  They take the show at face value and don't 
realize that it's actually mocking them.  The basic attraction for this 
sort of person is similar to what made DUMB AND DUMBER a big hit.  
BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA isn't likely to capture many new fans -- 
it's too narrowly focused.  Those who have learned to enjoy the duo on 
MTV (for whatever reason) will welcome this as a holiday treat.  
Everyone else will have a better time if they stay away.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
