Title
Review for Testimone dello sposo, Il (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   One of cinema's eminent romantic scenes occurs in Mike
Nichols's 1967 film "The Graduate," when Dustin Hoffman
snatches Katharine Ross from the chapel in which she is to
be married to the wrong man.  The French under
Jean-Charles Tacchella aimed for something similar when two
cousins, Marie-Christine Barrault and Victor Lanoux, already
married to others, decide to go beyond the usual cousin-like
kissing.  Truffaut's "The Story of Adele H" posits a young
woman obsessed with a soldier who does not return her love. 
When the man of her dreams marries someone other than
she, the title character dons wedding attire and simulates a
marriage ceremony with him.  And now the Italians come into
the game with "The Best Man," Pupi Avati's tender tale of a
stranger who is called on to rescue a bride from marriage to
the inappropriate male.  
   Directed by Avati with all the sumptuous splendor of a
Merchant-Ivory production, "The Best Man" is an altogether
satisfying tale about class and caste in Italy during the final
days of the 19th century.  More important, it flirts with the
motif "Does love exist and, if so, is there such a thing as love
at first sight?"  The birth of the 20th century is a time in which
people around the world wonder whether humankind will
reach the moon and whether the century will study war no
more.  Pupi Avati, however, is more concerned with love
which, he holds, actually received its birth as the year 1900 is
ushered in.
   What does Avati mean when he suggests that love was
born only yesterday?  Simply this: in Europe, the common
belief--at least among those disappointed in marriage--was
that love does no exist.  The landed gentry continued to
arrange their children's marriages, and nuptials were
essentially business propositions, merging the assets of the
families concerned.  So when the final hour approaches for
the marriage of the beautiful twenty-two year old Francesca
Babini (Ines Sastre) with the bald, aquiline, and much older
Edgardo Osti (Dario Cantarelli), she panicks like a character
in Neil Simon's "Plaza Suite" and rushes from the altar at
the very moment she is expected to say "I do."  When a
handsome and mysterious person who has been appointed
best man, Angelo Beliossi (Diego Abantantuono), appears at
the ceremony, Francesa takes one look and falls instantly in
love, belying all the advice her mother had given her about
the nonexistence of that pleasant ache.  Pressured by her
family to marry the rich Edgardo, yet prompted by her passion
for Angelo, she takes her vows to Edgardo while looking at
Angelo, thereby considering herself wedded to the best man.
   This lush fin-de-siecle drama, a meditation on love which
sets aside ample time for humor, highlights Francesa as the
new, modern, 20th century woman.  She has her own mind,
believes in the most romantic notions of the storybooks, and 
is willing to risk her family's enmity and
the ostracism of the community for self-fulfillment.  Her family
despite an outward display of wealth, are actually deeply in
debt and dependent on Edgardo to bail them out.  A refusal
by Francesca to marry as father planned could drive him out
of business and force her brother to lose his place at the
university.  Even her eccentric aunt, it is rumored, might hang
herself if the marriage did not take place.  It's no wonder that
during the three-day ceremony gossip spread like a horde of
hungry people around a table of antipasto that Francesca is
unwilling to marry because a) she is not a virgin, b) she is
pregnant, c) her new husband is "light in his loafers."  For his
part Angelo, despite his reputed millions, did not earn the
money by his own hard work in America as the adoring
guests believe but is actually an untalented person who
inherited his affluence and, to top it off, has been too shy to
make a dent on the women in his life.  Writer-director Avati,
then, plays with one of the most popular of all literary themes,
the gap between illusion and truth.
   But the movie is in no way mired in the literary. 
Photographer Pasquale Rachini hones in on the lavish gifts
which have been proferred to the bride and groom, each
present ostentatiously announced by its description and its
donors.  He evokes humor from his display of some of the
cultural norms of the day, norms which appear quaint to us
today just a century later.  When the bed is to be prepared for
the bride and groom to take their obligatory nap between the
wedding and the lavish reception, it must be readied by
virgins, and since few women could claim the status, the
job would fall to the young man who is the brother of the
bride.
   Diego Cantarelli, in the role of a womanizer who is
experienced in business and wishes his best man to invest in
a land scheme, turns in a dramatic portrayal of a man who
represents the old order; one which is soon to be toppled by
a growing democratic and feminist movement.  Francesca
Babini, a Spanish actress whose beauty can be compared to
that of Catherine Zeta-Jones ("The Mask of Zorro"), is
believable as a representive of emerging feminism, while the
melancholy and awkward title role is performed subtlety and
discrimination by Diego Abantantuono.
   "The Best Man," called in Italian, "Il Testimone Dello
Sposo," was Italy's submission to the Academy for Oscar
consideration and received a Golden Globe nomination as
best picture.  Almost profligate in its splendor, the
picture serves as a deeply resonant analysis of class,
love, and illusion in a world which was soon to be radically
changed by its first Great War.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Poignant would be a good one-word description of this love story which
takes place in Italy just as the 1900s is coming to an end.   It is a
time when most women had no idea of what love can be.   While they made
excellent mothers, and even very good wives, they thought that being
obedient, faithful, dutiful to their husbands was what marriage and love
were all about.  Great emotion escaped them.
In THE BEST MAN, however,  Francesca (the Spanish actress Ines
Sastre) a young lady who is to be married to somene chosen by her
parents, is suddenly, uncontrollably attracted to her husband's best
friend. At the wedding, she pledges in her own mind, even as she says
the vows, that she is really marrying Angelo (Diego Abantantuono),
who has just returned from the United States after being away for 15
years, now a wealthy, handsome man.
Francesca hardly cares who knows her feelings but Angelo cautions her
that this infatuation will ruin her life.   Although Angelo reciprocates
her love, he is able to be more sensibly prudent. Nevertheless they share
a stolen, passionate kiss.  Even Angelo's confession that he did not earn
the money but inherited it from his hard-working brother does nothing to
change Francesca's love.
Husband Edgardo (Dario Cantarelli) has found an old flame of Angelo's,
Olimpia (Valeria D'Obici)  and surprises him by inviting her to his home.
Angelo tells Francesca there is no alternative, he cannot stay with her
as it would be a scandal, so he must leave with Olimpia.   Francesca runs
away to a church where she lives and teaches, never forgetting her true
love.   Need I add that the story does not end there?
