Title
Review for Metropolitan (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Writer and director Whit Stillman, who manages to raise
shallowness among rich, white kids to an art form, started the first of
his famous trilogy in 1990 with METROPOLITAN.  In his first film the
kids refer to themselves, derogatorily, as preppies, but by the last
picture, THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO, they have been rechristened yuppies,
even if none of them will admit to being one.  (For the record, the
middle picture is BARCELONA, and my personal favorite is THE LAST DAYS
OF DISCO.)
     Stillman films, with their acerbic humor, are perhaps best on the
second and third viewing.  With their rapid-fire approach and their
subtle dialog, it is easy to miss many of the lines the first time
around.  Subsequent looks are also helpful since one of the failings of
Stillman's casting and his costuming is that most of the actors look
alike and, to a lesser extent, so do the actresses.  It may be halfway
through before the audience learns to tell them all apart.
     METROPOLITAN, we are told in the credits, is set in "Manhattan.
Xmas Vacation. Not so long ago."  A dilettante group of debutantes and
their collective beaus are meeting for one of the many private parties
during the social season.  After the official balls, they gather to
make small talk about large issues and generally gossip among
themselves.  They argue the fine points of 19th century socialism,
while living a life of absolute luxury.  They are all elitists, united
in their agreement that they hate pretentious people and that they
certainly aren't ones themselves.
     Although they are cynical to varying degrees, none is more so than
Nick Smith, played as the perfect rich snob by Christopher Eigeman, who
has starred in all three of Stillman's films.  While others worry about
the possibility of failure, he plans on it, and, with his lack of
ambition, it seems likely.  "I've always planned to be a failure
anyway, that's why I plan to marry an extremely wealthy woman," he
announces to no one's surprise.
     The odd man out is their resident radical, Tom Townsend (Edward
Clements), who is the only one without independently wealthy parents
and the only one in - aghast! - a rented tux.  Tom, not very
convincingly, goes on and on discussing his worries about the
downtrodden in life, which upsets Nick.  "It's a tiny bit arrogant of
people to go around worrying about those less fortunate," Nick royally
declares.
     Audrey Rouget (Carolyn Farina) has her eyes set on Tom, who pines
instead for the extremely popular and unobtainable Serena Slocum (Ellia
Thompson).  Tom ridicules Audrey for liking Jane Austen's Mansfield
Park.  He points out that, even though he's never read it, it is
universally agreed to be a mediocre book.  "You don't have to read a
book to have an opinion," he argues.  He goes on to say that he doesn't
read any novels but prefers to read literary criticism instead.  "That
way you get both the novelists' ideas as well as the critics'
thinking," he reasons.
     "Playing strip poker with an exhibitionist somehow takes the
challenge out of it," Nick complains after one of the women throws a
hand so she can take off another item of her clothing.  As they slowly
undress, they alternatively talk about trust funds and class struggles,
but Stillman cuts away before the scene gets the least bit risque.
     Using dreamy jazz music in the scene transitions, Stillman makes
the story go down as smoothly as a white wine.  His characters may get
on your nerves sometimes, but he remains hopelessly in love with them
and all of their foibles.  Like all his movies, METROPOLITAN has the
stagy talkiness of a play, but a fascinating one.
     The story's only serious scene occurs when the group plays a game
of truth, in which the loser must answer any question, no matter how
embarrassing.  "People see the harm in what excessive candor can do,"
Audrey argues correctly, knowing that someone could get hurt and that
that someone could be her.
     When one of their ranks, Jane Clark (Allison Parisi), dares to go
out on a date alone, the rest are dumbstruck.  Used to nothing but
group social activities, they worry that their lifestyles are changing
forever.
     As in THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO, in which the leads lament disco's
demise, the characters in METROPOLITAN figure that this may be the last
season for debutante balls and the end of an era.  "Men are dates, date
substitutes or potential dates," Fred Neff (Bryan Leder) complains of
their new world order.  "I find that dehumanizing."
     METROPOLITAN runs 1:38.  It is rated PG-13 for some profanity and
for adult themes, and it would be fine for teenagers.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  An outsider gets involved with the
     tinder of the vanities, a clique of young, chic, semi-
     intellectuals who talk like the ATLANTIC MONTHLY but whose
     lives are just as mis-managed as anyone else's.  Walt
     Stillman's dialogue is the main reason to see METROPOLITAN.
     Rating: +1.
     There is a separate sort of film I think you would have to call "the
dialogue film."  It is a concept parallel to that of "the special effects
film."  A dialogue film is built around and shows off its dialogue the way a
special effects film is built around and shows off its visual effects.
While films one would classify as dialogue films have been more common in
Europe than in the United States, obvious American dialogue films include
RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN, THE BIG CHILL, and especially MY DINNER WITH
ANDRE.  METROPOLITAN has marginally more plot than the former three films,
but it probably still qualifies.
     In METROPOLITAN, Tom Townsend (played by Edward Clements) gets politely
kidnapped to a debutante party populated by young, wealthy, sophisticated
intellectuals and pseudo-intellectuals.  They call themselves the SFRP
(Sally Fowler Rat Pack) and representatives of the UHB (Urban Haute
Bourgeoisie).  Tom's background is not quite so haute as the others but he
can talk the talk and with a little help from the others he can walk the
walk, in a second-hand tuxedo.  But it is talking the talk that is the main
thing and while on an intellectual level Tom has objections to this young
tinder of the vanities--Tom believes himself to be a Fourier socialist--he
nonetheless finds himself repeatedly drawn to their company.
     The plot of METROPOLITAN is only very slight as one of the quieter
members of the rat pack, a literature fan named Audrey Rouget (played by
Carolyn Farina), takes a liking to Tom, though Tom is still in love with
former girlfriend Serena Slocum (Elizabeth Thompson).  But this film's fine
point is not so much the plot as its view of this young aristocracy and the
often funny and always engrossing dialogue.  Writing credit for the dialogue
(as well as most of the rest of the credit) goes to writer/director/producer
Walt Stillman who, according to VARIETY sold his Manhattan apartment to help
finance the film.  He probably will not get rich making films like
METROPOLITAN, but he should be able to get another apartment.  I rate this a
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ed Nilges
     METROPOLITAN is about a group of TwentySomethings, self-described
as "Urban Haute Bourgeois."  However, it's not yet another movie about
rich people.  Most movies made today, *unless* they are explicitly about
an underclass or a Dark Side, are made about fictional characters with
enough money to decorate a set.  The makers of movies, for the most
part, lack the imagination to see that there is any sort of interesting
freedom in characters explicitly constrained by the need to earn money.
This is perhaps because the lives of such people have a highly iterative
character (get up, catch the bus, work, go home: da capo): but a
Minimalist composer such as Phillip Glass has made something out of
sheer iteration, and the film My Dinner With Andre has as a secondary
character one who (quite unusually) practically makes an appeal for
personal financial salvation in his own movie.
     Although the characters in METROPOLITAN are not immediately worried
about paying the rent, there is an interesting tension between their
elite background (shopping at Brooks Brothers) and the rather humdrum
prospects they enjoy.  The movie makes the point that even an expensive
education is no guarantee of self-fulfillment, or even of an interesting
or rewarding job.  One of the best scenes in the film takes place at
T. J. Melon's, an East Side watering hole where two of the main
characters meet up with a semi-failure in unfashionably wide lapels and
a Princeton tie.
     More poignantly, one of the characters of the film is the son of
divorced parents.  Divorce, of course, introduces steep decline in the
lives of the ex-wife, and the children, who usually stay with the
ex-wife.  It's hard for the characters in this situation not to at least
try to keep up appearances, and the note of shabby gentility is a new
element in American film.
     For films up to now have been stories of social ascent, whether
legal or illegal (cf. THE GODFATHER).  Somewhat more innovative are
stories of recovery (as in POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE) where a character
finds that her decline is due to character flaws which she can herself
change.  Any decline undergone by the characters in METROPOLITAN is not
due to character flaws.  The people in this film are noble in a fashion
that reminds the viewer of Jane Austen, a writer discussed in the movie.
The men, in particular, clumsily try to behave as paladins in a way
thought outdated even in F. Scott Fitzgerald's time, which is decried
as "sexist" by the women, but which provides the (slightly
disappointing) resolution of the movie.
     Underneath the modulated voices, the chivalry, I sensed a low key
and smoldering anger in METROPOLITAN.  This is an anger at fathers who
absented themselves from families in their own search for self-
fulfillment.  Unlike the modal fathers of my generation (I'm 40), who
came home to their families and who exhausted themselves meeting their
needs, the father of the generation of METROPOLITAN is presented as one
overly concerned with his own needs...who moves, for example, to New
Mexico without telling his son, and who leaves his son's old toys in the
street for his son to stumble upon (Manhattan is a small place in its
way.)
     Since it's too hard to confront the Father directly, we get instead
a large, aristocratic figure in a pony tail who is the same age as the
characters in METROPOLITAN, but who comports himself, according to one
of them, in a despicable way.  This involves treating women as sex
objects.  Although the male characters, in making this charge, are
themselves charged with sexism by the women in the film, they are
obviously reacting to the economic sexism of fathers who left their
families in the financial lurch in a way described by Barbara Ehrenreich
(see her books THE HEARTS OF MEN and THE WORST YEARS OF OUR LIVES).  A
hundred years ago, the character who confronts Lord PonyTail would have
charged him with toying with the affections of women.  I half-expected a
challenge to a duel in one drawing-room scene.  Now, the charge is that
Lord PonyTail is treating women as sex objects.  Are the two charges
actually equivalent?
     But Lord PonyTail (whose long hair now marks him as Out Of The
Past) is not *really* the hero's father, any more than the gun the hero
pulls is a real gun.  Audrey is at once amused, and impressed by her
parfit, gentil knight's assault on The Dark Tower.  Perhaps this leaves
room at the end for forgiveness of the *real* father.  Can the *real*
fathers of that generation redeem themselves?  Question for discussion:
is the *real* father that generation which treated child support as a
non-starter for much the same reasons they treated energy conservation
as a non-starter?  That generation which has several divisions of
TwentySomethings in the Persian Gulf at risk as I write, for this
reason?

Author
Murali Krishnan
Most of us are outsiders to the high-society debutante subculture, and so is
Tom Townsend. The association with some of his friends leads to an encounter
with some members of this group and he begins to associate with them more.
He not a complete stranger to this world, but his life in a simple Manhattan
apartment with his mother is much different than the more opulent lifestyles
of his new friends. However, money is not an issue with this group, so he
does not have trouble fitting in.
Although the film at first glance may seem to be an exploration of the
society subculture, it really is not. It is really about the interactions of
the members of the group, and the characters are very well developed. Tom is
initially befriended by Nick, who encourages him to continue his association
with the group even though Tom claims to despise the ideals that are
represented. Essentially, Tom is no more or less deep than these people who
are often described as shallow. In fact, being members of the upper classes
(or Urban Haute Bourgeoisie, as one character names it) make the people no
more or less interesting, they just hang out at different places.
Highly Recommended. The film has an array of intersting characters, and is
wickedly funny in many places.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
