Title
Review for My Fellow Americans (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Steve Rhodes
     One of the greatest pleasures in being a film critic is finding
unexpected gems.  MY FELLOW AMERICANS was just such a movie for me.
     First, let me give some background on my tastes.  All movie goers
have preferences whether they admit it or not.  There are always those
actors whom they seldom like and certain genres that are their least
favorites.
     I rarely like James Garner or Jack Lemon although I know they both
have talent.  Most recently I saw James Garner's in MAVERICK (1994) and
Jack Lemon in HAMLET (1996), and I did not care for either of their
performances. Lemon is the only actor among a large cast that I did not
like in the phenomenal four hour HAMLET.  As far as genre, old men
buddy pictures rank right along with dumb teenager flicks among the
ones I try my best to avoid.
     So it was that I approached the press screening of MY FELLOW
AMERICANS with much trepidation.  That Dan Aykroyd is in it, further
heightened my concern.  He is an actor I once liked, but who seems to
have lost his way of late, playing in such disasters as FEELING
MINNESOTA (1996).
     Well, let me cut to the chase.  I laughed, and I laughed hard from
start to finish while watching MY FELLOW AMERICANS.  Garner and Lemon
are on the screen roughly eighty percent of the time and usually they
are alone.  The movie consists of one put down after another,
frequently double entendres.  The script by Jack Kaplan, Richard
Chapman and Peter Tolan is full of high spirited and intelligent
comedy.  The show pulsates with energy and the fast paced music by
William Ross just adds to the fun.
     As the show opens, Republican Russell Kramer (Lemon) is elected
president over his hated rival Democrat Matt Douglas (Garner).  Four
years later Douglas defeats Kramer.  Then four years later still,
Republican William Haney (Aykroyd) beats Douglas.  The story takes
place three years into the Haney administration.  There is a scandal
about Haney, but Haney's people plant evidence throwing the blame to
Kramer.
     After a murder, the government has hit men after both Kramer and
Douglas.  The body of the story is a long chase where the government
assassins after them.  If it seems far fetched, it is, but the beauty
is that director Peter Segal manages to make it seem just plausible
enough that the audience does not feel insulted.  Segal has a deft
touch so that the comedic barbs are delivered with perfect timing.
     In a show that manages to ridicule both parties, John Heard plays
Haney's bumbling Vice President Ted Matthews, who is designed to be a
Dan Quayle clone.  He even says, "Funny thing is everybody thinks I'm
this big idiot, and its all a big facade."  He mispronounces facade as
fah-sid.
     Haney is a president who smiles constantly in front of the
cameras, but behind the scenes is trying to hide the crooked deals he
was involved in before he took office.  You can guess whom the
screenwriters had in mind when they created his character.
     Most of the show is about the long chase of Kramer and Douglas.
When Kramer accidentally says something complimentary, Douglas is
repulsed and barks back, "Let's stop talking.  We're about to bond.  It
will make me vomit."  Usually Kramer has nothing but insults for
Douglas.  When Kramer finds a way out of the forest, he taunts Douglas
with, "As usual, the Republicans come up with a plan while the
Democrats wander aimlessly in the woods."
     When they get a ride with some poor people who have lost their
jobs and live in their car, the woman of the family tells Douglas, "I'm
sorry, but we're Republicans."  Not missing a beat, Douglas replies,
"At least you admit it.  That's the first step to recovery."
     The show has a great gay hero who calls himself Dorothy when they
meet him.  His role is a small but crucial one.
     If you are looking for some good old fashioned humor, MY FELLOW
AMERICANS is the genuine article.  Not the best show out this Christmas
season, but the most pleasant surprise.
     MY FELLOW AMERICANS runs a fast 1:41.  It is rated PG-13.  There
is no sex or nudity.  There is a little violence and some bad language.
Given the level of sexual humor, the show would be appropriate only for
kids say ten and up.  I had a great time at the film.  I recommend it
and can easily give the picture ***.  I almost rated even higher.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MY FELLOW AMERICANS *** 1/4. Directed by Peter Segal. Produced by Jon
Peters. Written by E. Jack Kaplan,Richard Chapman,Peter Tolan. Story by
Kaplan & Chapman. Photography,Julio Macat. Production design,James Bissell.
Editing,William Kerr. Music,William Ross. Costumes,Betsy Cox. Casting,
Karen Rea. Cast: Jack Lemmon(Russell P. Kramer),James Garner (Matt
Douglas),Dan Aykroyd(William Haney),John Heard(Ted Matthews),Wilford
Brimley(Joe Hollis),Lauren Bacall(Margaret Kramer),Sela Ward(Kaye Griffin),
Everett McGill(Col. Paul Tanner),Bradley Whitford(Carl Witnaur),James
Rebhorn(Charlie Reynolds),Esther Rolle(Rita),Conchata Ferrell(Woman Truck
Driver), Jach Kehler(Wayne),and many others. A Warners release. 101 min.
PG-13 (language).
No, it's not the Holidays spirit that makes me give "My Fellow Americans"
three and a quarter stars, a rating higher than those of other reviewers.
It's simply because the movie is more funny and entertaining than anything
else I have seen this season.
Its brio never flags."MFA" opens with the acceptance speech of G.O.P.
President-elect Kramer (Jack Lemmon), a silly peroration that includes his
trademark "Dreams are like children..." speech. Standing behind him are his
wife (Lauren Bacall) and his Vice-President Haney (Dan Aykroyd). Cut to the
next elections, won by Democrat Matt Douglas (James Garner), and the
following ones which elect the Republican ticket of Haney and Matthews
(John Heard).
Kramer and Douglas are still alive and well. Kramer is a tightwad who helps
himself to the vodka of hotel-room minibars, then fills the miniature
bottles with water, as his spouse delivers mordant comments. He adds to his
income with speechmaking that invariably includes his "Dreams are like
children..." refrain, no matter what the public is. His hilarious
appearance before a crowd of Japanese insurance people is crowned by an
unwilling dance with a man in a giant panda suit. Kramer also writes books,
probably not as money-makers but,we learn later in a slightly touching
confession, as reminders to others that he is still around.
Douglas looks considerably younger, more fit and smarter than Kramer, but
like him, during his tenure, he went for expediency rather than ideals and
principles. The hallmark of now divorcing Douglas is total dedication to
womanizing. Listlessly, he is now writing his biography... and sleeping
with his blonde editor, truly a President's Choice beauty. I bet you that
among the 90% politically incorrect male audiences, her looks will
exonerate the mega-philandering of Douglas. Within the White House, he
knows too about the "Kennedy Door," a secret escape for Presidents in
compromising situations.
A possible scandal (code-named Olympia) surfaces. It's about Presidential
kickbacks to current President Aykroyd, when years ago he was Lemmon's
Vice-Prexy. To cover his tracks and save his skin ( stronger words are
actually used), Aykroyd and cohorts dream up a cover-up that will put the
blame on Lemmon, then Garner. Yet both men, whatever their many faults, are
innocent of this Olympiagate.
Complications result in an assassination and a plot whereby the National
Security Agency is charged with killing both ex-Presidents. Not to reveal
the ever-inventive twists, the two men, while loathing each other and
constantly waging a war of insults, somehow find themselves stranded,
penniless and hunted down.
The film becomes a sort of road-movie as the odd couple flee from danger.
Hitherto insulated from real life (even former Presidents are shadowed by
the Secret Service), they encounter a little bit of the "Real America."
These glimpses include getting involved with celebrity impersonators;
meeting a traveling, jobless family (an update of "The Grapes of Wrath"?);
stumbling on a Gay Parade complete with "Over the Rainbow" played in
march-time; getting helped by "Dykes on Bikes"; sharing a truckload of
illegal immigrants; stealing into Lemmon's  Presidental Library, and much
more. All the while, killers under wonderfully diabolical Colonel Tanner
(he of the scary, impassive face) are after them.
Those peripatetic conditions may remind you of "Sullivan's Travels" by the
great satirist Preston Sturges. Or of Frank Capra's beloved "little people
who speak out" --the masses that those in power know nothing about. Wisely,
both satirical and pathetic elements are kept down to fit both the film's
lightness and its awareness that today's public has a much more jaundiced,
unromantic and cynical perception of politicians.
Instead, the concentration is on Lemmon and Garner. No matter whom they
play, they are two of the most likable actors in the history of American
cinema. The script and direction do not  sentimentalize them, in fact they
keep a certain distance from them. Yet there is a kind of sympathy for the
bumbling Lemmon, who gets to look so much like a hungry bum that a kindly
African-American cafe owner offers him free pie --and addresses him as
"old man." There is separate and equal sympathy for the fast-talking,
fast-thinking Garner who at age 68 is still a charmer.
The ill-assorted duo make beautifully ironic music together.It is
preordained that some variant of friendship will eventually emerge,
somewhat along the lines of the Lemmon-Walter Matthau comedies or the
ever-funny Matthau-GeorgeBurns "The Sunshine Boys."  Yet cleverly, when at
one point Lemmon says "Let's stop talking. We're about to bond. I hate
this," he defuses the bond issue.
Among the joys of the film is the smart casting and use of supporting
roles. Quality counts, not the length of onscreen time. No performer is
wasted. All are good:  Bacall's  ex-First Lady;  Wilford Brimley's
political mover and shaker;  Sela Ward as a witty, influential TV
personality; a Marilyn Monroe-ish girl who,believing that Garner is a
President Douglas look-alike, tells him she had slept with the real Douglas
(her report is not flattering).The  other performers too are just right.
John Hurt as the current Vice-President is a howl. Whether or not you read
Nixonian, Bushian,Clintonian,even Johnsonian allusions in the main
characters (LBJ was the most vivid utterer of "My Fellow Amurrricans"),
Hurt's Dan Quayle impersonation is such a four-star, true imitation that it
goes well beyond the spoofing stage.
At a droll Presidential golf game, Hurt's hits an African -American man
with a ball. He solicitously tenders several gauche, unconsciously
insulting apologies. One is about "Your people" who can't play golf because
they don't belong to the good clubs. He tops this with  "You people are so
good at so many sports that you should leave one [golf] for us whites."
Technically,the studio reconstructions of Washington and the uses of
location shooting are impeccable. They could fool you. What does not fool
you are the several improbabilities -- but then this is neither a
sentimental nor a serious film with a message. There is no need to apply
rationality and logic to a movie-movie that is overall a comedy plus
part-mystery, part-thriller, part-slapstick, part-expose. And part-fantasy,
except for its full-time raunchy (and most amusing) language which those in
the know will tell you was and is quite realistic among most of our elected
leaders and their subalterns.

Author
Adam Joyce
When a scandal is about to be revealed with the potential to force the U.S.
President from his position, a devious plan is put into action whereby two
ex-Presidents will take the blame, and for this to happen they must be
killed.
It could be a serious political thriller, but it's not. Especially not when
you bring Jack Lemmon and James Garner into the picture. Jack Lemmon and
James Garner play those two ex-Presidents, one Republican, the other
Democrat. It should come as no surprise that they despise one another, with
a passion. It is from this animosity that `My Fellow Americans' draws its
laughs, because it is after all a comedy.
It had been intended by President Haney (Dan Akroyd) that ex-Presidents
Russell Kramer (Jack Lemmon) and Matt Douglas (James Garner) be sent to
their deaths in a tragic helicopter accident. Unfortunately for President
Haney, Kramer and Douglas demand to be set down on the ground when they
discover that their destination is different from that which they had been
told, and the unknowing pilots set them down moments before the helicopter
explodes. So commences ex-Presidents Kramer's and Douglas's journey across
the heartland of the United States, constantly in comical conflict, but
relying on each other to escape from the President's hit-men.
As the dubious duo travel cross-country in an attempt to find evidence to
prove the White House scandal, they come across all kinds of people, the
people who voted for them. This leads to one of the film's sentimental
moments where they realise what they didn't do while in office, and are
consequently brought back to reality after years of the good life . Despite
the serious sounding nature of this realisation, the film is very much a
comedy, and features scenes such as the ex-Presidents catching a lift with
the `Dykes on Bikes' and travelling with your all-American family in the
run-down station wagon. 
Throughout the entire film Kramer and Douglas are hunted down by the
President's hit-men. In this respect `My Fellow Americans' becomes an
action/comedy, swinging from one genre to the other. Comedy should be drawn
from the action scenes, but it seems that the director, Peter Segal, has
chosen to make some of the action scenes exempt from any comedy. This
leaves one wondering, at times, whether the film was in fact meant to be a
comedy at all. However, Lemmon and Garner work well together, with
competent performances from others - although Lauren Bacall barely puts in
a word as Lemmon's wife. The film is entertaining, with plenty of punch
lines and derogatory comments like, "Let's stop talking, we're about to
bond--that'll make me vomit.". But in the end `My Fellow Americans' is a
soft-edged comedy, that is worth a few laughs now but which will never have
a permanent place in our minds like `Grumpy Old Men'. 
PLEASE VISIT MOVIE MANIA AT HTTP://WWW.HOME.AONE.NET.AU/JOYCE/ADAMFRAME.HTM

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jack Lemmon, James Garner, Dan Aykroyd, John Heard, Sela Ward, 
      Wilford Brimley, Everett McGill, Lauren Bacall
Director: Peter Segal
Producer: Jon Peters
Screenplay: E. Jack Kaplan, Richard Chapman, and Peter Tolan
Cinematography: Julio Macat
Music: William Ross
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     The presence of Jack Lemmon isn't the only reason why MY FELLOW 
AMERICANS could be dubbed GRUMPY EX-PRESIDENTS.  Here, with James Garner 
filling the Walter Matthau role (while Matthau was busy filming his own 
alternate take on THE ODD COUPLE, I'M NOT RAPPAPORT), the barbed, 
pseudo-hostile banter is familiar.  Ultimately, this is a buddy movie, 
and if you can't guess the outcome ten minutes into the film, you're 
just not familiar enough with the formula.
     What makes MY FELLOW AMERICANS watchable -- although there are 
times when it verges on not being so -- is the humor.  The screenplay is 
lame when it comes to action and drama, but a fair share of the comedy, 
though it may be bawdy and in poor taste, is actually funny.  No matter 
how tiresome you find the material, MY FELLOW AMERICANS is almost 
guaranteed to provoke a few, hearty laughs.  If only the framing story 
was better...
     It's a simple enough premise.  Jack Lemmon plays Republican ex-
President Kramer, who was voted out of office seven years ago after 
serving one term.  James Garner is Democrat ex-President Douglas, who 
succeeded Kramer, but, like him, only survived for four years in the 
White House.  Since their ouster from office, both men have been 
struggling to find things to do.  Kramer writes cookbooks and makes 
inspirational speeches for private corporations.  Douglas tries to pen 
his memoirs, but has more fun sleeping with his editor.  
     Dan Aykroyd plays the current Commander-in-Chief, Republican 
President Haney (Kramer's former Vice President).  When a scandal 
surrounding his administration gets out of control, Kramer and Douglas 
are unwittingly pulled into it.  Suddenly, these two life-long enemies 
are on the run together, with a crazed hitman (Everett McGill) on their 
trail.  Their goal:  locate and go public with information discrediting 
the current administration before they are eliminated.  Their trek takes 
them from the Blue Ridge Mountains in North Carolina to Cleveland and 
Washington D.C.
     Lemmon and Garner slip comfortably into their roles, not that 
either is given particularly challenging material to work with.  Kramer 
is a feisty old man with a reputation as a conservative and a skinflint.  
Douglas, despite his advancing age, still lives up to his old nickname 
of the "Washington Love Machine."  At this advanced stage of his career, 
Lemmon keeps coming back to THE ODD COUPLE formula, and this is just 
another example.  What drags MY FELLOW AMERICANS down, however, isn't 
its reliance upon buddy movie conventions, but its failed attempts to 
inject embarrassingly trite melodrama and recycled action sequences into 
the story.  It's pleasant enough to watch Kramer and Douglas engage in 
verbal sparring matches (even though the dialogue isn't brilliant, the 
writers deserve credit for some good one-liners), but that enjoyment 
evaporates when we're forced to watch them jumping off of trains, 
galloping around on horseback, or reflecting on how they never made the 
difference they wanted to.  
     Since the film stays with Lemmon and Garner for the majority of its 
running length, no one else has much screen time.  In the case of Dan 
Aykroyd, that's probably a good thing, since his Haney isn't interesting 
or funny when he is around.  John Heard plays a bumbling Vice President 
who makes Dan Quayle look competent (listen for his pronunciation of the 
word "facade").  Sela Ward is a reporter seeking the truth behind the 
latest Washington scandal.  In full grandfather mode, Wilford Brimley 
takes on the part of the head of the Democratic National Party.  And 
Lauren Bacall has a cameo as Kramer's wife.
     MY FELLOW AMERICANS contains some political satire, but all of that 
material is weak and obligatory.  From an ideological point-of-view, 
both Republicans and Democrats take a beating, although neither party is 
as viciously skewered as it could (and perhaps should) have been.  MY 
FELLOW AMERICANS seems unwilling to take real chances, choosing instead 
to stick to the kind of gentle lampooning that will generate chuckles 
without risking offense.  There are times when I laughed, but, as a 
whole, this particular buddy film really isn't worth the price of 
admission.  Besides, if you want to see stupidity and silliness on a 
presidential scale, all you really have to do is turn on the news.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Adam Joyce
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm
When a scandal is about to be revealed with the potential to force the U.S.
President from his position, a devious plan is put into action whereby two
ex-Presidents will take the blame, and for this to happen they must be
killed.
It could be a serious political thriller, but it's not. Especially not when
you bring Jack Lemmon and James Garner into the picture. Jack Lemmon and
James Garner play those two ex-Presidents, one Republican, the other
Democrat. It should come as no surprise that they despise one another, with
a passion. It is from this animosity that 'My Fellow Americans' draws its
laughs, because it is after all a comedy.
It had been intended by President Haney (Dan Akroyd) that ex-Presidents
Russell Kramer (Jack Lemmon) and Matt Douglas (James Garner) be sent to
their deaths in a tragic helicopter accident. Unfortunately for President
Haney, Kramer and Douglas demand to be set down on the ground when they
discover that their destination is different from that which they had been
told, and the unknowing pilots set them down moments before the helicopter
explodes. So commences ex-Presidents Kramer's and Douglas's journey across
the heartland of the United States, constantly in comical conflict, but
relying on each other to escape from the President's hit-men.
As the dubious duo travel cross-country in an attempt to find evidence to
prove the White House scandal, they come across all kinds of people, the
people who voted for them. This leads to one of the film's sentimental
moments where they realise what they didn't do while in office, and are
consequently brought back to reality after years of the good life . Despite
the serious sounding nature of this realisation, the film is very much a
comedy, and features scenes such as the ex-Presidents catching a lift with
the 'Dykes on Bikes' and travelling with your all-American family in the
run-down station wagon. 
Throughout the entire film Kramer and Douglas are hunted down by the
President's hit-men. In this respect 'My Fellow Americans' becomes an
action/comedy, swinging from one genre to the other. Comedy should be drawn
from the action scenes, but it seems that the director, Peter Segal, has
chosen to make some of the action scenes exempt from any comedy. This
leaves one wondering, at times, whether the film was in fact meant to be a
comedy at all. However, Lemmon and Garner work well together, with
competent performances from others - although Lauren Bacall barely puts in
a word as Lemmon's wife. The film is entertaining, with plenty of punch
lines and derogatory comments like, "Let's stop talking, we're about to
bond--that'll make me vomit.". But in the end 'My Fellow Americans' is a
soft-edged comedy, that is worth a few laughs now but which will never have
a permanent place in our minds like 'Grumpy Old Men'. 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by     Peter Segal
Written by      E. Jack Kaplan, Richard Chapman, and Peter Tolan 
Cast            Jack Lemmon, James Garner, Dan Aykroyd, John Heard, Sela
                Ward, Wilford Brimley, Everett McGill, Lauren Bacall
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    101 minutes
Reviewed at     Six Forks Station Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (07DEC96)
     This is crap, but, honestly, what older American audience is going
to be able to resist seeing Jack Lemmon and James Garner as bicker- ing
ex-Presidents?  Especially when their supporting players in- clude Dan
Aykroyd as the current Commander in Chief, Lauren Bacall as a former
First Lady, and John Heard as the Dan Quayle-ish Vice President.  Yup,
you're talkin' pre-sold property here and, for Warner Brothers, the
perfect fit into their now-ritual GRUMPY OLD MEN holiday slot.  For the
non-discriminating viewer, MY FELLOW AMERICANS is fine.  The raw star
power alone will have audiences applauding this atrocious political-
thriller road-comedy.  (They did in mine, heaven help us.)
    For the rest of us, the movie is immediately tiresome.  The tone is
terrible and the banter is worse.  Forget wit-- Lemmon and Garner merely
exchange profanities through most of the movie.  (Has anyone counted the
number of First Penis references?) Sure, some of the bits are absurdly
funny, including a men's room Macarena joke, the appearance of an Elvis
impersonator on a trainload of Tarheels, and an All Dorothy Marching
Band performing "Over the Rainbow" at a gay men's march.  The get there
from here, though, you have to submit to one of the most offensively
overbearing musical scores of all time.  Judas Priest, is there a single
moment of silence in this film?  Even the dialogue gets drowned out.
What a waste.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
C.J. Webb
   Cast: Jack Lemmon (Russell P. Kramer), James Garner (Matt Douglas), 
         Dan Aykroyd (William Haney), John Heard (Ted Matthews), Wilford
         Brimley (Joe Hollis), Everett McGill (Col. Paul Tanner), Lauren
         Bacall (Margaret Kramer). Directed by Peter Segal.
        In what was termed Grumpy Old Presidents eons before it ever came 
out, My Fellow Americans does not outdo the Jack Lemmon-Walter Matthau 
comedies.  It does not fade in their presences either.  Lemmon is now teamed
with James Garner, and the vulgarisms and infantile behavior still abound.  
Garner, though, replaces Matthau's carmudgeon with vigor.  In fact, Lemmon 
takes the Matthau role as the seemingly older fellow.
        Kramer and Douglas are ex-presidents, but current rivals, who are 
trying to hold onto past glories.  The United States must be in pretty 
bad shape as Kramer beat Douglas only to lose to him four years later, 
who subsequently is replaced by William Haney (Dan Aykroyd), who was 
Kramer's former vice president.  We are taken to the third year of Haney's 
term, when he is alerted of a past scandal that could land him in hot 
water.  Haney's obvious choice is to place the blame on Kramer, who 
being the honorable and reputable Republican and conservative would never 
have been involved in such crimes.  Meanwhile, at a reception, both 
Kramer and Douglas learn of the wrongdoings.  
        Hoping to land himself back in office, Douglas takes the 
challenge of finding if the blame can land on Kramer.  Douglas, a 
verile and newly-divorced man, is the liberal Democrat.  This is a nice 
touch, since Garner looks and sounds like Bob Dole, while Lemmon is an 
older Bill Clinton, and this came out during the Presidential race of 
1996.  
        In their efforts to find out the truth, Kramer and Douglas wind 
up being marooned and need to trek across a few states together, though 
reluctantly.  This is where the high-jinks begin, and the zingers fly at 
a mile-a-minute.  And believe it or not, its simply histerical.  My 
Fellow Americans does not break any new ground, but it rests comfortably 
in its predecessors shoes: the Grumpy Old Men series with the witticism 
of the Naked Gun series.  
        Lauren Bacall and Wilford Brimley put in small, but entertaining 
parts.  John Heard plays a dumber-than-Dan Quayle vice-president, who 
does have some smarts it turns out.  All in all, this is a highly 
entertaining and charming comedy that will make a good rental.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Jack Lemmon, James Garner, Dan Aykroyd, John Heard, Wilford
Brimley, Everett McGill.
Screenplay:  E. Jack Kaplan & Richard Chapman and Peter Tolan.
Producer:  Jon Peters.
Director:  Peter Segal.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, sexual situations)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     MY FELLOW AMERICANS is a buddy comedy.  It is a bickering buddy
comedy.  It is a bickering-buddies-on-the-road comedy.  In short, MY
FELLOW AMERICANS has about as generic a basic premise as there is in
Hollywood.  So how does it end up so improbably entertaining?  Because
when it comes to film-making, story isn't even half the story -- execution
is king.  MY FELLOW AMERICANS uses the familiar plot as a starting point,
adds a script with just enough lively turns, and casts two consummate
professionals in the lead roles.  The result is a simple but engaging
studio comedy, energized by the wonderful pairing of Jack Lemmon and James
Garner.
     Lemmon plays Russell Kramer, a one-term Republican president now
spending his retirement giving speeches at corporate luncheons and writing
cookbooks; Garner plays Matt Douglas, Kramer's Democratic successor and
long-time adversary.  Three years after losing to Kramer's one-time V.P.
Bill Haney (Dan Aykroyd), Douglas finds himself with another shot when a
scandal prepares to break involving a kickback to the Kramer-Haney
administration.  The party's support awaits Douglas if he can get evidence
to nail his old foe, but Kramer is equally keen to prove he knew nothing
about the deal.  Both men discover that the plot is thicker than they
realized when a key witness turns up dead, and a helicopter they were
supposed to be on blows up over North Carolina.  With no one they can
trust but each other, the two ex-presidents make their way towards
Kramer's presidential library in Ohio for evidence implicating Haney and
find that only a bi-partisan effort will get them there alive.
     You're going to see a lot of critics referring to MY FELLOW AMERICANS
as GRUMPY OLD PRESIDENTS, and it's not just because Jack Lemmon is on
board that comparisons to the GRUMPY OLD... films are appropriate.  The
most notable similarity is that MY FELLOW AMERICANS also bases much of its
humor on the notion that senior citizens spewing forth profanities are
intrinsically hilarious; no fewer than nineteen separate expletives season
the dialogue of Lemmon and Garner.  It is an unfortunate decision, if for
no other reason than that it is unnecessary.  Political rivals should have
more personalized gibes at their disposal, and indeed the script features
a few nice zingers aimed at the stereotypes of each party.  It would have
been nice to see more -- and more pointed -- barbs, particularly like
those aimed at Haney's dim-witted vice-president (John Heard), whose
mispronunciation of a single word may provide the film's biggest laugh.
     Insult humor only goes as far as the slingers of the insults, though,
and MY FELLOW AMERICANS rises well above its material simply because
Lemmon and Garner bring out the best in each other.  Lemmon's Kramer is
the more complete character, a politician who so desperately needs
approval that he has become an over-eager joke.  While Kramer is the guy
you can be sure promised everything to everybody, Garner's Douglas is the
charismatic charmer who probably didn't have to.  Garner has long been one
of the best actors around at playing the put-upon grouch, and it is a
delight simply to see him in a leading role on the big screen again.  When
he growls out a withering one-liner in his gravelly baritone, it is
delivered with unteachable timing, and Lemmon matches him with his best
Felix Unger disdain.  The two are both perfectly matched and perfectly
mis-matched; there is something about their veteran interaction which
makes the most mundane situations sing with comic confidence.
     Director Peter Segal (who put Chris Farley and David Spade through
similar buddy-bonding paces in TOMMY BOY) keeps the pace at a brisk clip,
which counters some uninspired situations, like a journey on a University
of North Carolina rooters train which provides little more than something
to jump off.  There isn't much Segal can do with the sentimental angle in
the script, as the ex-presidents' encounter with an average American
family leads them to ask the "Duh"-inspiring question of whether 
politicians may be out of touch with their constituents.  All these
problems MY FELLOW AMERICANS has, yet I laughed harder than I had any
reason to expect.  Handed the sow's ear of a standard buddy-caper script,
Jack Lemmon and James Garner were able to turn it into a purse...perhaps
not silk, but surprisingly smooth nonetheless.

Author
Walter Frith
In recent years we have had some humourous and uplifting films dealing
with the highest office in the world.  'Dave' (1993) and 'The American
President' (1995) are examples of movies done with the look of a Frank
Capra classic i.e. 'Mr. Smith Goes to Washington.'  In an age of the
anti-politician, 'My Fellow Americans' is the perfect lampoon on the
men who often seem out of touch with the people they represent.
Republican one term President Russell Kramer (Jack Lemmon) and
Democratic one term President Matt Douglas (James Garner) are
inadvertently thrown together in a survival for their lives after they
uncover a scandal in the current White House where a present day
Republican President (Dan Aykroyd) sits.  Some great one liners and a
few nifty stunts make for good entertainment and it would have been
appropriate to entitle this 'Grumpy Old Presidents' as the humour is
similar to that of 'Grumpy Old Men' (1993) and 'Grumpier Old Men'
(1995) both starring Jack Lemmon.  As the movie progresses we see some
very serious moments as Kramer and Douglas are put in touch with real
Americans who are given the opportunity to explain how their lives have
been ruined because of policies the Presidents implemented when they
held office.  Surprisingly, Jack Lemmon is upstaged by the relaxed and
hilariously moody performance turned in by James Garner who settles
into his character almost with poetic ease while Lemmon plays his role
with stiff uptightness but both profiles work on a professional actor's
level and the contrasting personality of the two is convincingly
executed.  It's the perfect holiday movie which goes overboard at times
by being extremely silly but its redeemed by an entertaining climax and
a good ending.  It's fun watching two actors like Lemmon and Garner who
can hold their own with anyone in Hollywood but who have the sense of
humour not to take themselves too seriously from time to time.

Author
Michael Redman
After watching this film, I can't get the phrase "The Odd Grumpier Old
Presidential Couple" out of my head. Jack Lemon and James Garner make an
engaging pair in this latest incarnation of quarreling buddies on the
run films. =
The film features more US presidents than you can shake a stick at.
Garner is former Democratic president Matt Douglas, a charming ladies
man who desperately wants another run at the office. Lemon plays former
Republican president Russell Kramer who keeps in the public eye by
writing cookbooks  and making appearances at the drop of a hat. Their
nemesis is current president and Kramer=92s former VP William Haney (Dan
Aykroyd). Haney's second in command and presidential heir apparent Ted
Matthews (John Heard) is a dim bulb that you know couldn't spell potato.
Douglas is promised his party's backing if he can get the goods on a
kickback charge against Kramer. He's disappointed when it turns out that
Kramer is being set up by Haney and then investigation takes a nasty
turn when government agents kill his only witness. =
Their luck deteriorates when the helicopter in which the former chief
executives are traveling explodes out of the sky. Lost in the wilds of
North Carolina, the two are hiding out from the killer G-men as they try
to prove their case.
There aren't many better actors around than Lemon and about the only
more likable screen presence in existence than Garner is Wilfred Brimley
(who has a small part as Demo party chairman). When the two are on the
screen together the movie sings. But when anyone else intrudes into the
scenes, the song turns sour.
Although the film pokes fun at both parties, what passes for political
satire is far too mild. The possibilities are passed by. Especially
tedious is an extended episode where they are given a ride by "ordinary
Americans" who proceed to demonstrate how out of touch politicians are
with the people. Heavy hitting stuff here.
The two hitch a ride on a train full of sports fans which is as
unhumorous as it sounds. Of course there's the obligatory car chase as
they bang into things and knock down even bigger things. All road films
lend themselves to short episodes in various locales. Here they go from
bad to worse.
As good as Lemon and Garner are together, Aykroyd is a stiff. His career
was on fire during his stints at "Saturday Night Live" and as a Blues
Brother, but recently his movie roles have lacked any life. Almost
anyone could have been casted here and been better.
The two stars demonstrate some chemistry together and do the best they
can with a script that could have used some extensive work. This is a
prime example that there are some works of literature so lame that
nothing can make them shine.
[This appeared in the 12/19/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Paul Miller
My Fellow Americans is a movie that at first glance looks to have little
substance (or a movie that we've all seen a million times), two lifetime
rivals thrown together and then the fun begins.  This is exactly what
happened in this movie, but fortunately, they managed to do it in an
interesting and funny way.
The movie starts with a quick (and I do mean quick) glance of two
presidents Russell Kramer (Jack Lemmon) and Matt Douglas (James Garner).
William Haney (Dan Aykroyd) and Ted Matthews (John Heard) are the new
President and Vice President.  There is a scandal that arises involving
a kickback from a contractor and Haney is positive that he buried that
years ago.  He finds a scapegoat in Kramer and now everyone wants Kramer
and Douglas dead.
This movie was exceptional for many reasons.  One being that they found
people (Lemmon and Garner) that have good chemisty together.  They
worked very well as a unit and they mirrored each other perfectly, one
being a ladies man and one being the old man (I'll let you fiqure which
is which).  Also, they found people that know their parts as govenment
officials well.  It seemed to me that Garner played almost exactly the
same role that he played in The Distinquished Gentleman (except then he
was a Congressman).  Experience counts for a lot!!

Author
Rory Aronsky
Starring: Jack Lemmon, James Garner, Dan Aykroyd, John Heard, William
Brimley, Everett McGill, Lauren Bacall
Political scandals and impeachment all go through today's political
market. I simply get tired of this, so I decided to take a break to
watch My Fellow Americans on HBO.
        This movie has to be one of the best political-comedy movies I have
seen in a long time. Jack Lemmon simply shines in his role as Russel
Kramer (Former Republican ex-President). James Garner plays Matt
Douglas, a Democratic successor and a long-time rival of Kramer. Three
years after losing to Kramer's V.P., Bill Haney, Matt Douglas finds
himself with another chance at being Commander-in-Chief when a scandal
prepares to blow involving Olympia (A kickback to the Kramer-Haney
term). The demoractic party's support awaits Douglas to see if he can
get evidence to get his old foe back, but Kramer knows enough to prove
he knew nothing about Olympia. Both ex-Presidents discover the plot
thickens when a witness turns up dead, and a helicopter they were on,
blows to smithereens over the Blue Ridge Mountains in North Carolina.
        After these actions, Kramer & Douglas have to get to Kramer's
presidential library in Ohio for evidence that would bring Haney down. 
        This movie has to be one you have to rent for a weekend. There are some
excellent parts in here. Notice the part in the bathroom stalls with the
redneck guy trying to shake Douglas's hand, but Douglas refuses and
says, "I have to keep my hands on the First Penis". As soon as the guy
leaves, Kramer asks, "The First Penis?". Douglas shoots back, "Yeah,
that is what I am thinking of naming it from now on. Isn't that right,
Blinky?". 
        This movie really gets good when both men find themselves escaping from
the Government agents out to assassinate them. They go into a parade,
only to realize they are marching in a Gay Pride March. They meet
"Dorothy", not a big character in the movie, but a crucial part.
("Dorothy": President Douglas, are you coming out? Douglas: I've always
supported Gay Rights, but I am not coming out. (Points to Kramer): He
is, however). 
        This movie teaches you that there is a funny side to politics. During
their journey to their Presidential library, they meet up with a
homeless couple who lives in their car, they march in the Gay Pride
parade (Already mentioned), plus they stop at Long John Silver's for
coffee. Watch for the part in the bathroom stall with Douglas in there.
There is a hilarious Macarena joke included in that scene.
        Many people refer to this movie as "Grumpy Old Presidents, without
Walter Matthau (Who was shooting I'm Not Rappaport at the time this
movie was being filmed). It is not that way. It is just plain funny. At
the end of the movie though, you will be quite surprised.
        Go rent this movie whenever you can. As for me, I might as well buy it
(That'll make 22 videos in my video drawer at least). Believe me, if any
of our Presidents were this way, this country would be in much better
shape.
