Title
Review for Como agua para chocolate (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Lon Ponschock
     Here is a romance which is bittersweet like the chocolate
mentioned in the title.  The title refers to the emotions one feels
during the film.  It's a romance you know, and you are supposed to
become excited by it ... hot ... Like Water for Chocolate.
     It is the story of Pedro and Tita and Tita's mother.  Tita is the
last born so she must care for her mother until her mother no longer
lives.  She cannot marry Pedro for this reason and therein lies the
story of the film.
     More and more I see less and less in American releases ...  the
fineness and rhythm of language are just not there ... there is nothing
to learn from the experience and the viewer does not touch *humanity*.
     In LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE we *do* touch this humanity and this
is why it is a special film.  It is in Spanish and subtitled.  And in
this particular film the English goes by quite quickly.  This is the
first time I have rerun the film to catch all the dialog.  And only in
works by such masters as Wim Wenders can the art of language be
compared.  So take some time with this one.  It's worth it.
     I was reminded of a previous film which I wrote about more than a
year ago.  What is said of Babette in BABETTE'S FEAST could apply to
Tita in the current film as well:
     (There are so many similarities between BABETTE'S FEAST and LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE that I have reprinted the previous item so that the
reader might know more about BABETTE.  See the item which follows.  It
is not written to the same style ...  but then again, I rarely write to
the same style or the same reference.)
     I have seen a number of romances lately: ROBIN AND MARIAN was one
such.  I did not post a review of that because, well it's an old
picture from the 1970s directed by a master.  Richard Lester has
directed some high comedy such as the early Beatles films and HOW I WON
THE WAR starring John Lennon.  But ROBIN AND MARIAN, while touching,
fell prey to the cliches which have been exposed by John Cleese, Graham
Chapman and the rest of Monty Python's Flying Circus.
     So I did not comment on ROBIN AND MARIAN.  It was unintentionally
humorous.
     But here in LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, the proper amount of the
willing suspension of disbelief: that quality which one needs to view a
work of the imagination to find the truth therein ...  with enough of
that, this film can be a grand experience indeed.
     Perhaps I am getting soft.  Perhaps I am getting old.  Perhaps I
am getting old and soft,  but I enjoyed LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE
immensely.  Maybe it is because I learned that I was still able to cry
myself.  There is great sadness and great happiness in the film.  But
to choose which was in greater supply I would have to say sadness even
if, in so doing, this skews the idea of what a good romance should be.
     We have spoken of good double bills in the past (and I'd like to
see some new recommendations too.)  So here I would recommend LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE and BABETTE'S FEAST to be viewed as a double bill.
Get both of them together and enjoy the rich experience; that satiation
which only food and romance can provide.  To have one without the other
puts me in mind of a closing quote taken from LIKE WATER FOR
CHOCOLATE:

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Relatively often we see Canadian films in the United States.  With the
length of the border we share with our neighbor to the south, it is
surprising that so few Mexican films ever get seen in this country.  With
the exception of some low-budget horror and science fiction films, few
Mexican movies ever make it north of the border.  Many that do come north
are popular only to make fun of.  Films like THE WRESTLING WOMEN VS. THE
AZTEC MUMMY or SHRIEK OF THE MUTILATED can hardly represent the best that
Mexico has to offer.  A reminder of that fact is LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, a
pleasant shaggy-dog romance story told in the genre of magical realism.  In
magical realism, bizarre fantasy mixes with the everyday and is taken very
matter-of-factly.
     The story takes place in northern Mexico and southern Texas and centers
on Tita (played by Lumi Cavazos), her mother (played by Regina Torne' John),
and her two older sisters.  Tita grew up in the kitchen as a master cook.
The time comes when Tita falls in love with Pedro.  But Tita's mother
forbids Tita to marry then or ever.  Family tradition is that the youngest
daughter cares for the mother until the mother's death.  This arrangement
precludes any personal life for the daughter and reduces the daughter to
involuntary servitude.  At the insistence of the willful mother, Pedro
cannot have Tita, so he settles for Tita's older sister Rosaura.  But the
marriage is at first only a ruse.  Pedro is really using the marriage as an
excuse to remain close to Tita.  Tita is forced to prepare the wedding feast
for Pedro and Rosaura.  But the supernatural shows its hand in Tita's
cooking.  Tita expresses herself in her exquisite cooking only too well.
Eat what Tita has prepared and you will feel what Tita was feeling when she
made the dish.  The misery she feels while making  the wedding feast is
inexplicably spread to all the guests.  But its when Tita cooks a REALLY
happy meal that things start to happen.  Told against the background of a
Mexico in revolution in the first third of this century, this is a story of
anger and vengeance, yet it never loses its whimsical feel.
     At 144 minutes, LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE may be a bit long to sustain
interest through its entire length.  Still, the style is refreshingly
different from anything the American film industry is turning out.  It is
directed by sometime-actor Alfonso Arau with a screenplay by Laura Esquival
based on her own novel, which combines magical realism and recipes for the
dishes around which her story is built.  The title, incidentally, refers to
an anger as hot as the boiling water used for hot chocolate.  I can
recommend this one and give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE is a wonderful, magical movie from
Mexico.  It is a tragedy of Shakespearean proportions.  As I watched
it, I keep thinking it reminded me of Shakespeare's play Romeo and
Juliet and of Wager's opera Gotterdammerung.
     The basic plot of the story is that there is a family in Mexico
during the early part of this century where they have always had a
tradition that the youngest girl must take care of her mother and never
marry until her mother dies.  The movie is about the youngest daughter.
Her mother is cruel and dictatorial.  The young girl falls in love with
a boy, but her mother says she can not marry him and so he marries the
girl's sister instead.
     Within the confines of the basic plot setup is the heart of the
movie.  The youngest girl learns how to do a sort of magic with food.
Try to imagine what she does.  You will not be near as imaginative as
the author (Laura Esquivel) was.  I can only say: Wow!  This food magic
is the heart of the movie.  I will not give any of it away, but I will
say this.  If your sweetheart seems to love cooking above all else and
is extremely talented at it, then watch out!
     The cinematography (Steve Bernstein and Emmanuel Lubezki) and the
set decoration are very moving.  It is set on a ranch.  Even the
outhouses, outdoor sleeping areas, and bathtubs play key roles.  Most
of the action however happens in the kitchen and the dinning room.
Watch the lighting especially.  The nights scenes are all candlelit and
have a wonderful dark radiant glow.  The day scenes inside have the
natural light pouring in with a different beautiful lighting effect.
     The director (Alfonso Arau) knew exactly what he wanted to do and
did it flawlessly.  The casting of the lead girl (Lumi Cavazos) and the
bitter mother (Regina Torne) was perfect.  I liked the way the girl was
kind of cute but mainly homely.  Her acting was just about perfect.
The mother's was as well.  Very easy to hate the mother.  I thought the
acting of the guy (Marco Leonardi) she falls in love was minimal.  He
seemed to be relying on his good looks to carry his part.
     LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE is in Spanish with easy to follow English
subtitles.  The movie is a short 1:53.  It is rated R for a few scenes
of full nudity of both sexes, but I think PG-13 would have been more
appropriate.  I think it would be an excellent show for teenagers to
see.  Oh yes, the ending is excellent.  I recommend you see it and have
no trouble awarding it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     In the early years of the Twentieth Century, on a small ranch in
Mexico, the story of three sisters and their repressive mother
unfolds.  Tita (Lumi Cavazos) is the third and youngest daughter of
Mama Elena (Regina Torne) and as such, because of a family tradition,
she is forbidden to marry or have children until after her mother's
death.  Tita is agreeable to this situation until she falls in love
with the dashing young Pedro (Marco Leonardi).  When Pedro learns that
he cannot marry Tita, he agrees to an engagement with her older sister
Rosaura (Yareli Arizmendi) in the hope that by marrying her, he will be
given ample opportunity to spend time with his real love.
     An admittedly unusual title for a film, LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE
fits the mood of the movie--odd, playful, and sweet.  It equates the
boiling point of water for hot chocolate with the height of passion in
male/female relationships.  With occasional surrealistic fantasy
sequences interspersed between the commonplace goings-on of regular
lives, the film has a way of enchanting the viewer--until a
disappointing end.
     Although it deals with some potentially-weighty subjects--death
being a prevalent theme--LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE is surprisingly
light-hearted.  It manages to find the funny side of almost any subject
or event.  That isn't to say that darker emotions are not expressed,
because they certainly are, but they are kept from dominating.
     There's a lot of passion expressed in LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.
Love and the rebellion of youth are two of many subjects tackled by the
film.  The tragedies and ecstasies of both are confronted.  We are
given an opportunity to see how the attitudes of the characters change
over time and how true love, once revealed, can never be held back.
     The greatest weakness of this movie is its ending--and not only
the final scene, but the ten-minute "epilogue."  The last part of LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE takes place twenty years beyond the rest of the
film.  The transition in time is jarring--I was momentarily
disoriented, and the ultimate thrust of these final events seems a
trifle silly.  While they don't destroy the movie, they reduce its
overall impact.  Many will find a natural sense of closure in the way
that Arau has chosen to conclude his film, but it's a little too hard
for me to swallow.
     A recurring metaphor in LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE is food (the
title is a good tip-off of that).  Hardly a scene goes by without
someone eating or preparing a meal and some of the film's more
hilarious sequences surround a pair of banquets.  Each of these scenes
has a meaning beyond the obvious, however.  Food is equated with life
and vivacity, two subjects into which this movie delves.
     One of the best films to come out of Mexico in years, LIKE WATER
FOR CHOCOLATE is in every sense an "art film."  Possessing an
almost-ethereal quality, it is not every man's "cup of tea."  However,
those with a penchant for these sorts of films--offbeat, quirky, and
subtly emotive--will almost certainly accept LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE
as something of a rare treat.  Too bad the ending couldn't have been a
little better grounded.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
Some stories are meant for movies, but then again, there are times when I
wish some stories remained stories, unless we had a French film director do
them.  Laura Ezquivel's novel is a treat.  It stays with you as a fine
dessert, or a fine food, and she knows it so well, and revels in it.  In the
film version, this gets lost because it can not translate.  The twelve
recipes for each month get reduced to an occasional side story.  In the
novel, it is the food that brings about the results, and Tita has learned to
make the most of the secrets of the culinary delights.  The movie couldn't
possibly show us how Tita and her mentor ever decided the reasons why such
and such a dish were done for whatever occasion.
This loss reduces the richness of the story into a film that is missing a
third dimention, but never the less, it is still good.
Tita, is the last girl born in a family, and as is the tradition, she is
destined to be the slave daughter to take care of the mother.  This Tita
rejects, and because of it, she becomes one of the slaves and reduced to
kitchen servant.  But her downfall into the kitchen has placed he in the
hands of an old maid that really knows her food, and discusses it as the
greatest love affair and event on the face of the earth.  To the maid,
the food is the monumental moment when one can place her mark on the world.
Tita learns well, and goes better.  Gertrude cooked.  Tita has learned to
affect changes in people because of her choices.
Sometimes the food is sad.... the whole table has a tremendous cry upon
eating such a magnificent dessert.  Other times the food is so hot that the
older sister has to leave to cool off, which is not enough even after a cold
shower.  And trot off she does in the hands of a military opposite to what
the mother stands for.  Tita's revenge is working.
But it doesn't work.  Tita is in love with the young man, who loves her, but
is forced to marry her older sister, because Tita is marked to take care of
the mother.  Pedro never really loves the older sister, and as they get
older, and the sister gets uglier, the thing between Tita and Pedro never
really cools off, and eventually is answered.
Tita has grown, and a good man, an American comes along and he relieves the
suffering she has, but he is no match for her desire and love for the one
man she has been wanting all her life since that one night.  Tita confronts
the ghost of the mother one more time, and returns.
Finally free to meet and enjoy Pedro, they finally do.  And we will keep it
this way for all the viewers.
I, personally, love the writing of Laura Ezquivel, much better than I do the
movie version.  But I think that much of this problem may have been because
I saw a version that was DUBBED and the voices were repetitive, unemotional,
and so glaringly
bland, that it ruined what looks like a good film.  It also appears to have
taken away the food part of the whole story, which is as tasty as anything
else.... it matches the desires
in all the film, but then, that must have not been the reason to make a
film, or to distribute it to other nations.
Superb performances, if you can get by the lousy translations and often
screwy sub-titles.  Read the novel first, and then watch the film without
the voices.
But a great novel, nonetheless... see it and read it afterwards.
