Title
Review for Grand Hotel (1932)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Grand Hotel" is an early talkie, one of the first
to feature an 'all-star' cast.  The film won
the Academy Award for Best Picture, and has been
considered a classic ever since.  Except for Greta
Garbo's camping, the performances are good,
especially by Lionel Barrymore and Wallace Beery.
Seen today, however, the story and script seems a
bit melodramatic, and the characters too narrowly
defined.
Based on the novel "Menschen" by Vicki Baum, the
story takes place in a luxurious Berlin Hotel
that teems with staff and guests.  Garbo, who
was an enormously popular actress at the time,
gets first billing as a famed but egocentric
ballerina.  Wallowing in self-pity, her suicide
attempt is aborted by John Barrymore, a Baron who
has turned to hotel thievery to repay his gambling
debts.
The Baron is the central character around which the
others revolve.  He befriends terminally ill bookkeeper
Lionel Barrymore, who has withdrawn his life savings
for a final fling.  Lionel's employer is disagreeable,
beefy Wallace Beery, who is attempting a liason with
young stenographer Joan Crawford.
Garbo, while beautiful, gives a campy performance
of her affected ballerina character.  Her arm gestures,
long pauses, and the tight close-ups on her face
are reminiscent of the silent era.  She delivers
her famous line "I Vant to be alone" on three occasions.
John Barrymore coasts through his role, as the outwardly
placid and pleasant aristocrat who is in fact desperate
for funds as his life has been threatened by mobsters.
He also manages to smoke about a pack of cigarettes
during the movie.
Beery's character subtly changes from stiff autocrat,
burdened by business troubles, to belligerent tyrant,
bullying the Barrymores and nearly scoring with Crawford
(who has promised to be 'very nice' to him).  At no
point is his character sympathetic, even early in the
film when he professes to be a family man and an ethical
businessman.  However, this unsympathetic portrayal
suits the film well.
Lionel Barrymore gives the best performance as the
mousey bookkeeper, finally able to tell off his boss
and assume a gregarious, benevolent disposition.
He tries to pack a lifetime of hedonism into a
single day, knowing that it could be his last.
His character is the most sympathetic, more so than
his brother's, since his troubles are not of his
own making.
"Grand Hotel" was remade as "Weekend at the Waldorf"
in 1945, and later became a Broadway musical.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
