Title
Review for Mulholland Falls (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     CHINATOWN it ain't.  Nick Nolte, Melanie Griffith, and Chazz
Palminteri are some of the big names in this terrible, top-heavy
train-wreck of a thriller from New Zealand director Lee Tamahori (ONCE
WE WERE WARRIORS).  Nick, Chazz, Michael Madsen, and Chris Penn play an
elite team of LAPD detectives (based on the real-life "Hat Squad")
investigating the murder of a beautiful young woman (Jennifer Connelly).
The often-gruesome trail-- she was found with all of her bones broken,
as if dropped from a great height-- leads into the desert, into a
conspiracy involving the Atomic Energy Commission.  Yawn.
     The period detail is a pleasant distraction-- enough hats, suits,
and old cars to keep one's mind off the contrived and often confounding 
plot.  MULHOLLAND FALLS also features an impressive array of prominent
players, none of whom, though, makes much of a dent.  Ms. Griffith-- as
Nolte's character's wife-- registers no better than Madsen, Penn,
William Petersen, Bruce Dern, or Treat Williams.  Even a cameo by Rob
Lowe is wasted.
     Stick with it, though, and you'll have plenty of time to ponder
such imponderabilities as:  how does the exceptionally endowed Ms.
Connelly keep from falling forward?  Does she wear a special brace?  If
Sean Penn in DEAD MAN WALKING is the current incarnation of Elvis, then
is his heavier-set brother a representation of the King's, uh, "later
years?" And, of course, will the unfortunate Chazz Palminteri still have
a career after the four consecutive howlers JADE, DIABOLIQUE, FAITHFUL,
and, now, MULHOLLAND FALLS?
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MULHOLLAND FALLS **  Directed by Lee Tamahori. Written by Pete Dexter. 
Story by Pete Dexter and Floyd Mutrux. Photography, Haskell Wexler. 
Editing, Sally Menke. Production design, Richard Sylbert. Costumes, Elle 
Mirojnick.Music, Dave Grusin. Producers, Richard D. Zanuck & Lili Fini 
Zanuck. Cast: Nick Nolte, Melanie Griffith, Chass Palminteri, Michael 
Madsen, Chris Penn, Treat Williams, Jennifer Connelly, Daniel Baldwin, 
Andrew McCarthy, and John Malkovich. An MGM release. 107 minutes. Rated 
R (violence, sex, language)
All you wanted to know about the "Hat Squad" and then some. In the early 
1950s, there really was within the Los Angeles Police Department a "Hat  
Squad" of four tough and independently-minded cops. They were a good 
example of the truism that sometimes just the thinnest of lines 
separates lawmen from gangsters or vigilantes.  As per the movie, they 
dressed with gangster chic and used gangster methods.  
At the start, led by Nick Nolte (overcutely named Max Hoover),  they 
roughhouse, arrest a gangster, take him for a drive "to the airport."  
Soon the captive says "this ain't the way to the airport," which, if 
you've heard once, you heard a thousand times in movies. 
The next bit is better. When the man understands that he's a candidate 
for the final solution, he protests "You can't do this. This is 
America." Nolte replies "This isn't America, Jack. this is L.A." Then 
they throw the fellow over a Mulholland Drive cliff.
This was just a mood-setting hors d'oeuvre.  The main course is  about 
what happens when Nolte investigates the murder of a young woman. Movie 
cliches spill out all over.  Most of them don't travel well.  Director 
Lee Tamahori, the New Zealander who made "Once Were Warriors," must have 
watched hundreds of American police, gangster and "noir" movies. He 
can't resist any  genres conventions,   adds to them several  
post-modern ellipses that may not hurt, but annoy, and embroiders to the 
point of obfuscation, absurdism and arbitrariness.   
"Mulholland Falls," in the hands of the writer and the director turns 
into an occasionally interesting but mostly mushy compendium of the old 
roles held by Humphrey Bogart, Dick Powell, Robert Mitchum and the like. 
Above all, you sense the desire of this movie to emulate "Chinatown." I 
does not. " Last year's underrated "Devil in a Blue Dress, " set in 1948 
L.A., beats "Mulholland" hollow in every way, acting included.
Using generous doses of flashbacks and other devices, the movie throws 
in bucketfuls of coincidences, improbabilities and impossibilities. The 
dead girl was for a while the mistress of Hoover-Nolte. She was also the 
mistress of a bigwig. Someone had taken (but how?) very sharp pictures 
of sexual activitity.  The Atomic Energy Commission gets into the game, 
with dark, private as well as Governmental secrets.  The Untouchable 
(and one suspects, rather mad) Hatters do things that defy logic. 
Just one example. Nolte (forget about the mistress part) is happily 
married with Melanie Griffith. She primps at length while waiting for 
her man to come home, presumably to make love. Now (somehow) Nolte has 
in his possession a 16mm film of the dead girl, when she was very much 
alive and was having sex with Nolte. Nolte gets home and finds a 
shell-shocked, pitiful Melanie. She (somehow) had stumbled upon the film 
(in her house! ). .She (somehow) has a movie projector on the premises. 
She (somehow) knows how to run it. Anyhow, it is a very sad, pitiable 
spouse who now faces Mr. Hoover. (Griffith's role is tiny, of use only 
as a name on the marquee). 
Nolte, the hard-boiled egg, mumbles and goes from no facial expression 
to level 2 on the scale of 10.  Best buddy Palminteri is around for 
camaraderie as well as comic relief, but he is so dumb that he's not 
funny, so dumb that you wonder about the entrance requirements to the 
Hat Squad.
The loss is not total. Early on, a bar  singer does a nice job of 
"Harbor Lights," the song we associate mostly with John Ford's  movie 
"The Long Voyage Home." Talented people contributed the camera work, 
sets and costumes. Between yawns, you could be impressed by the visuals. 
From null@filmcritic.com Wed May  8 11:35:41 EDT 1996
Article: 3333 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.att.com!not-for-mail
From: null@filmcritic.com (Christopher Null)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: MULHOLLAND FALLS (1996)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Date: 7 May 1996 17:12:16 GMT
Organization: Null Publishing Co.
Lines: 58
Sender: ecl@mtcts1.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: ecl@mtcts1.att.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: null@filmcritic.com (Christopher Null)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtcts2.mt.att.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #05150
Keywords: author=Null
Originator: ecl@mtcts2
Xref: nntphub.cb.att.com rec.arts.movies.reviews:3333
Status: RO
     Just so you know, there are no waterfalls in Los Angeles.  The
titular MULHOLLAND FALLS refers to the smarmy practice of taking a
criminal to the high point of the mountainous Mulholland Drive and booting
him off, only to catch up with him sometime later at the bottom.
     MULHOLLAND FALLS is the preferred method of ridding 1950s L.A. of
unwanted baddies, and it is most often used by a foursome of elite cops: 
Nick Nolte, Chazz Palminteri, Chris Penn, and Michael Madsen.  Their
newest mission:  to find the murderer of Allison (Jennifer Connelly), a
girl whose bizarre death leads the gang to a General (John Malkovich) at
the Atomic Energy Commission and his number one thug (Treat Williams).
     Could have been interesting, but it unfortunately isn't.  The main
problem appears to be substantial meddling with what likely started out as
a good script.  Instead, there are no surprises here at all.  The plot is
formulaic and leaves nothing to the imagination, and it moves at a snail's
pace.  Also, important expository scenes have been cut out to apparently
give more screen time to the many big-name stars paraded through the film.
     The most noticeable flaw in this regard is Melanie Griffith's
character, playing Nolte's estranged wife, whose role is a complete
throwaway but is used to try (and fails) to develop sympathy for her and
her poor hubby.  Almost as bad are Andrew McCarthy, as a stereotypical
homosexual informer, and Connelly, who we see only in flashbacks.  Note: 
when we do see her, we are treated to generous portions of
surgically-enhanced cheesecake.
     Still, the movie has its moments.  The quartet is mostly entertaining
when they interact among themselves, particularly Nolte and Palminteri. 
There are a number of nice lines of dialogue that really imbue the film
with a sense of the macabre.  And placing us against the backdrop of
nuclear testing is somewhat thought-provoking and interesting.  As well,
director Lee Tamahori, who last did ONCE WERE WARRIORS, is as capable here
as can be expected given a lackluster script.
     The bottom line is that MULHOLLAND FALLS runs in circles pretty
slowly.  You might expect a little more from an American film, but as
Nolte's character puts it, "This isn't America; this is L.A."
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Christopher Null
     Just so you know, there are no waterfalls in Los Angeles.  The titular
MULHOLLAND FALLS refers to the smarmy practice of taking a criminal to the
high point of the mountainous Mulholland Drive and booting him off, only to
catch up with him sometime later at the bottom.
     MULHOLLAND FALLS is the preferred method of ridding 1950s L.A. of
unwanted baddies, and it is most often used by a foursome of elite cops:
Nick Nolte, Chazz Palminteri, Chris Penn, and Michael Madsen.  Their newest
mission:  to find the murderer of Allison (Jennifer Connelly), a girl whose
bizarre death leads the gang to a General (John Malkovich) at the Atomic
Energy Commission and his number one thug (Treat Williams).
     Could have been interesting, but it unfortunately isn't.  The main
problem appears to be substantial meddling with what likely started out as
a good script.  Instead, there are no surprises here at all.  The plot is
formulaic and leaves nothing to the imagination, and it moves at a snail's
pace.  Also, important expository scenes have been cut out to apparently
give more screen time to the many big-name stars paraded through the film.
     The most noticeable flaw in this regard is Melanie Griffith's
character, playing Nolte's estranged wife, whose role is a complete
throwaway but is used to try (and fails) to develop sympathy for her and
her poor hubby.  Almost as bad are Andrew McCarthy, as a stereotypical
homosexual informer, and Connelly, who we see only in flashbacks.  Note:
when we do see her, we are treated to generous portions of
surgically-enhanced cheesecake.
     Still, the movie has its moments.  The quartet is mostly entertaining
when they interact among themselves, particularly Nolte and Palminteri.
There are a number of nice lines of dialogue that really imbue the film
with a sense of the macabre.  And placing us against the backdrop of
nuclear testing is somewhat thought-provoking and interesting.  As well,
director Lee Tamahori, who last did ONCE WERE WARRIORS, is as capable here
as can be expected given a lackluster script.
     The bottom line is that MULHOLLAND FALLS runs in circles pretty
slowly.  You might expect a little more from an American film, but as
Nolte's character puts it, "This isn't America; this is L.A."
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Nick Nolte, Chazz Palminteri, Michael Madsen, Chris Penn, 
      Melanie Griffith, Treat Williams, Jennifer Connelly, 
      Daniel Baldwin, Andrew McCarthy, John Malkovich, Bruce Dern
Director: Lee Tamahori
Producers: Richard D. Zanuck and Lili Fini Zanuck
Screenplay: Pete Dexter based on a story by Pete Dexter and Floyd Mutrix
Cinematography: Haskell Wexler
Music: Dave Grusin
U.S. Distributor: MGM
     Following several release delays, MULHOLLAND FALLS has finally 
reached theaters.  Usually, when a distributor keeps putting off a 
film's opening, it's a sign that there's something wrong with the 
production, and, about halfway through MULHOLLAND FALLS' one-hundred 
seven minute running length, we figure out what that "something" is:  
the plot, to put it charitably, is shaky.  This is a great looking film 
with a fine cast, but, when all is said and done, the storyline doesn't 
cut it.  It's convoluted, contrived, and, worst of all, has a 
disappointing payoff.
     Don't blame veteran cinematographer Haskell Wexler (WHO'S AFRAID OF 
VIRGINIA WOOLF?) for MULHOLLAND FALLS' failings, however.  This is one 
of the most visually striking films to come out this year.  Everything 
is gorgeous, from the scenes of downtown LA in the '50s to a panoramic 
view of the city at night.  There is also one truly awe-inspiring moment 
when four men stand at the lip of an atomic crater and gaze into its 
maw.  That image will be remembered after everything else in this movie 
is forgotten.
     Because of its tone and subject matter, MULHOLLAND FALLS recalls 
CHINATOWN, albeit incompletely.  Nick Nolte is Max Hoover, the head of 
an elite group of four LA cops (based on the real life "Hat Squad") 
whose job is, simply put, to "get rid of gangsters and criminals."  His 
partners are Coolidge (Chazz Palminteri) and the one-dimensional duo of 
Hall and Relyea (underplayed by those two RESERVOIR DOGS, Michael Madsen 
and Chris Penn).  These are hard-bitten guys with tailored suits who 
aren't bothered by anything -- when a mobster comes into their town, 
they take him out for a spin in their black Buick convertible, then 
throw him off a cliff somewhere along Mulholland Drive.  One day, 
they're called to investigate the murder of a young woman (Jennifer 
Connelly), who is found crushed to death a few miles outside LA.  Clues, 
including a damning reel of salacious film, point to the involvement of 
a high-placed U.S. government official (John Malkovich).  The case 
unsettles Max, however, since he had recently ended a six-month affair 
with the girl.
     For a while, MULHOLLAND FALLS looks like a solid noir thriller.  
The plot, which generates a certain degree of tension, builds slowly.  
How did the girl die?  What was a sliver of radioactive glass doing in 
her heel?  How is the atomic energy commission involved?  And will 
Hoover and his three partners get to the bottom of things before someone 
gets rid of them?  Unfortunately, as each of these questions is 
answered, the story becomes progressively less interesting and harder to 
swallow.  By the end, we're left feeling cheated, as if the writers 
squandered a number of promising ideas.  
     The acting, like so much else in MULHOLLAND FALLS, is uneven.  
Nolte presents an effective portrait of a blase cop who suddenly finds 
his once-stable world turned upside down.  On the other hand, 
Palminteri, who excels at playing New York gangsters, is all wrong for a 
West Coast cop (even though Coolidge asserts that he's from Jersey).  
Madsen and Penn, like most of the supporting characters, are window 
dressing. Malkovich is suitably creepy in limited screen time.  And 
Jennifer Connelly is sultry and appealing, even though she appears 
exclusively in flashbacks.
     MULHOLLAND FALLS isn't a bad film, but it definitely is 
disappointing, especially coming from director Lee Tamahori, who brought 
the powerful ONCE WERE WARRIORS to the screen.  Tamahori's direction is 
inconsistent, but, ultimately, this movie is undermined by its 
screenplay.  Certain aspects are laudable, but, all things considered, 
those elements aren't enough to keep MULHOLLAND FALLS from slipping over 
the edge into mediocrity.

Author
Scott Marcus
Cast: Nick Nolte, Chazz Palminteri, Chris Penn, Michael Madsen,
Jennifer Connelly, Melanie Griffith, Treat Williams, Andrew McCarthy,
John Malkovich, Bruce Dern, Louise Fletcher, Daniel Baldwin
Director: Lee Tamahori
Writers: Peter Dexter, Floyd Mutrux
Running Time: 107 minutes
Grade: B-
     One word review: unsatisfactory. This is a movie that that could
have been much more than it is. From top to bottom, the cast is good.
Every part, large or small, is filled with a name actor. None of the
performances stand out as either extremely good or extremely bad.  The
dialogue is okay, though it tries to be more hip than it should,
considering that the film takes place in post-World War II LA
MULHOLLAND FALLS tries to be too much; it alternates  between the
gritty, conspiratorial atmosphere of CHINATOWN, and the in- your-face
violence of PULP FICTION, and it can never make up its mind about which
to be.
     Just how many Baldwins are out there, anyway? In this film, one
that I havent seen yet pops up; in every movie I see, it seems that
another unfamiliar Baldwin shows up. Its almost like deja vu, as they
all sound alike, and resemble one another; it just remains to figure
out if Ive seen this one before.
     Four cops, Nick Nolte, Michael Madsen, Chazz Palminteri and Chris
Penn, make up a special unit in the LA police force. They are charged
with keeping LA clean for the upstanding citizens the city needs wants
to attract. A young girl shows up murdered, under vaguely strange
circumstances. It turns out that one of the cops is acquainted with the
victim, and solving the homicide becomes the focus of the film.
     Along the way, there are pornographic home movies, villainous Army
officers, obnoxious FBI agents, atomic bomb tests, and hats--lots of
extremely stylistic hats. Style seems to be the main reason the film is
set in the late 40s or early 50s; so that the group of buddy-cops can
drive around LA in period outfits with neat-looking hats, and exchange
witty banter.
     The four main characters, the cops who make up the special unit,
are definitely the most interesting part of the film. When theyre
together, MULHOLLAND FALLS works. None of the other characters, with
the possible exception of General Timms (John Malkovich) is very
interesting. The murder victim, Allison (Jennifer Connelly), seen in
flashbacks, is beautiful (and she has some rather impressive
attributes), comes the closest to holding our attention--but thats
probably only because Im a heterosexual male. Melanie Griffith, Treat
Williams and Andrew McCarthys characters are all uninteresting, despite
being fairly well developed. The story is nothing special; the solving
of the murder, while ostensibly the point of the film, becomes almost
an afterthought.
     This is a near-miss; with a little sharper plotting, and more time
spent with the four cops, MULHOLLAND FALLS could have a very good film.
As it is, it is only slightly worthwhile.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MULHOLLAND FALLS is a cop show set in LA during the 50s.  It is
about an independent team of four LA cops, Maxwell Hooper (Nick Nolte),
Elroy Coolidge (Chazz Palminteri), Eddie Hall (Michael Madsen), and a
fourth cop played by Chris Penn.  These cops form a quasi-vigilante
force to keep the town clean, and they answer only to the Commissioner
so that they can do whatever they want like kill and beat up the bad
guys without having to bother with any messy paperwork.  The
Commissioner is played by Bruce Dern who is made up to look old and
senile.
     In the opening scene, a Mafia mobster named Jack has come to town
so the four cops take him to Mulholland Falls.  Jack realizes that LA
has no falls, and they are going to push him over the edge of the
mountain to try to kill him.  He tells them they can't do that because
"this is America."   Lieutenant Hooper replies, "This isn't America
Jack.  This is LA."  They then push him down the mountain.  From the
first snappy dialog by Peter Dexter, you know this movie is in major
trouble.  The cliched music (Dave Gruso) of loud, thumping, staccato
piano notes is a another clue that it is not going to be a pleasant
time at the picture show.
     The four cops ride around in a great looking black Buick
Roadmaster convertible from the mid-50s.  They all wear large hats in
the car and in most other scenes as well.  Since these four musketeers
are all extremely large men with broad shoulders, they fill the car
almost to overflowing.  Every scene with them driving around in the car
is a lot of fun albeit totally ridiculous; they look like a bunch of
cartoon characters.  The movie can be humorous at times and the small
talk they make among themselves about how they always sit in the same
spots is cute.
     Oh, I forgot to warn you.  You are required to check your brain at
the theater entrance.  There are so many parts of the story that either
make no sense, are ridiculous, or are telegraphed in advance like neon
signs that you will go crazy if you try to think about what you are
seeing.  The reality gaps range from the small to the large.  For
example, have you ever tried talking in a normal voice from the front
seat to the back without turning around.  Not too hard, you say.  Well,
how about in a convertible driving across a desert going 60 miles an
hour?  Does wind noise allow you to hear anything?  Ever worn a hat in
the back seat of a convertible for long distances at high speeds?  Did
the hat blow a little bit?  In this movie, we have no wind, no noise,
and all hats stay nicely in place without any movement whatsoever.
I'll get to the big errors later.
     Since it is the 50s, you probably have already guessed that our
government is up to some sinister plot.  It seems that a girl played by
Jennifer Connelley has turned up dead.  She has a link to General Timms
(John Malkovich) who is the head of the Atomic Energy Commission.  The
general is the inventor of the atomic bomb and lives in a mansion close
to the testing site in a desert near LA.  General Timms propounds such
sentiments as "A hundred die so that a thousand may live."
     The girl also has a link to Max.  In a truly awful performance,
Melanie Griffith plays Max's wife Catherine who gets drawn into the
link as well.  Griffith looks terrible in the movie.  So sad, she could
once light up the screen, see, for example, WORKING GIRL.
     Now on to some of the larger preposterous parts of the film.  Lets
say it is the 50s and every one is scared to death of the A-bomb.  Do
you want to break in and drive around on the proving ground where they
test the bomb?  If so, do you want to pick up and put in your pocket
what clearly appears to be radioactive material?  Do you believe that
cops in full view of others will kill bad guys with the bad guys'
drugs?  Do you believe that the cops would go after the FBI and beat
them up over a turf battle?  Do you think police will slug people in
their eyes when they are wearing eyeglasses.  I could go on and on with
these.
     For the worse acting award in this movie, Griffith actually loses
although she does come in third place.  In first place is Andrew
McCarthy playing a scumball by the name of Jimmy Fields.  His acting
grates on your nerves it is so pathetic.  In a close second is Treat
Williams as Colonel Fitzpatrick and the second in command to the
general.  He is totally unbelievable.  His last scene in the picture
comes way too late.
     Nolte vacillates between a withdrawn and sad look and an angry and
violent one.  He is an uneven actor that needs a good director with a
strong hand to keep him under control.  The weakest part of the team of
this movie was the director, Lee Tamahori.  He had a talented cast that
was horribly misdirected.
     The are some good parts to the movie other than the funny car
scenes.  When our heroes stare down into a gigantic hole carved out by
an atomic bomb, it is funny.  Bruce Dern gives an off-the-wall
performance as a police commissioner who should have retired years
earlier.  He hates these "little ivy league types" from the FBI who
come in and try to tell him what to do in his town.
     There is other good acting as well.  Chazz Palminteri is given the
best part and does a good job with it.  John Malkovich is given a
terrible role that is poorly written and yet manages to make it
interesting to watch nevertheless.  That he could do anything with it
is a minor miracle.
     MULHOLLAND FALLS runs 1:40, and it drags a lot.  It is rated R for
major amounts of totally gratuitous blood and gore - from horribly
disfigured bodies with radiation poisoning to faces and guts blown
about.  There is also some sex and nudity.  I would only let quite
mature teenagers see the film, but I do not recommend this show to
anyone.  For some of the laughs and for a few good performances in an
otherwise awful movie, I give the film a single *.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Well, somebody must have believed in this script.  I am not sure
why.  I suppose the reason may be that it is a murder mystery that has
a setting of post-war Los Angeles and environs.  And the plot has to do
with political conspiracies and sex.  Perhaps someone thought this
could be the new CHINATOWN.  MULHOLLAND FALLS has terrific photography
by Haskell Wexler, one of the great cinematographers.  There are a
surprising number of name actors even in tiny roles.  This is a film
that was given every advantage the Zanuck organization could give it.
But it was all to bring to the screen an amateur script that often
verges over into the Idiot Plot, the plot that moves forward only
because somebody, usually the villain, acts like a complete idiot.
("Mr. Bond, this is the reactor keeps my whole island running.")
     Max Hoover (played by Nick Nolte), Coolidge (Chazz Palminteri),
Eddie (Michael Madsen), and Relyea (Chris Penn) are the kind squad of
cops that give the Los Angeles Police Department the reputation it
enjoys after the Rodney King and O. J. Simpson cases.  They come on
like the Untouchables (in the movie) and have no respect for hoods,
gangsters, or due process of law.  After an initial sequence that shows
just how far beyond the law that they are willing to operate, they are
called in on a mysterious case.  A woman has been found dead in the
desert, and Max obviously knows the woman, but is keeping that to
himself.  The woman was found actually imbedded IN the desert as if she
had fallen off a cliff, but there are no cliffs around from which she
could have fallen.  From the dialogue it is clear that our squad of
deep-thinking policemen cannot figure out how that is possible.  To
their credit, nobody in my audience shouted the answer at the screen,
but we are just a few minutes into MULHOLLAND FALLS and it is clear
this was not going to be a mind-stretching film.  And it certainly is
not.  Multiple times there are scenes which do not make sense, such as
characters being frisked by experts who somehow miss little things like
eight-inch blackjacks.  The logic of this film is on the level of a bad
James Bond movie with the bad guys making major and stupid errors in
judgment.  That is actually a shame because both the police enforcement
squad and the secret they uncover individually have a basis in truth.
What is far- fetched is the scripting and not the basic plot.
     Why Nick Nolte's agent let him play opposite Chazz Palminteri is
anybody's guess, but it certainly was a mistake.  Playing a scene
opposite James Earl Jones, Howard da Silva, Chazz Palminteri, or Rin-
Tin-Tin, you are in a battle for the audience's attention and you are
probably going to lose.  Nolte is okay, but Palminteri manages to make
his own every scene in which he plays.  Palminteri is really along
mostly for comic relief from a tension that rarely manages to
materialize.  Second billing goes to Melanie Griffith in a decidedly
secondary part as Max's wife.  Her character is not even a major
character in the story, though she does get some opportunity to act.
John Malkovich does have a pivotal role as a general as well as a
scientist working for the Atomic Energy Commission who was involved
with the murdered woman.  The casting department seems to have gone out
of its way to get name actors in even some of the tiniest roles.
People like Bruce Dern, Brad Pitt, and Louise Fletcher show up for
parts as small as three sentences and then are seen no more.  Direction
is by New Zealander Lee Tamahori who directed ONCE WERE WARRIORS.
     With a few good revisions on the script by Pete Dexter this could
have been a major film and worthy of the attention that was lavished on
it.  As it is this is a film that has great style, but weak substance.
I rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
