Title
Review for Charley Moon (1956)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Roger Mellor
Charley Moon  (Director:Guy Hamilton) is a pleasant, if simple minded movie,
designed as a vehicle for Max Bygraves, and clearly aimed at children and
the 'family' audience. It never shies from milking easy sentiment. Its main
interest now is that much of it is set in the lost world of 1950s provincial
variety theatres (theatrical digs, with signs outside saying "Actors Taken
In", touring nude revues) and also 1950's West End revues. This aspect of
the film is rather good, albeit with some rather overdone satire at the
expense of theatrical agents (the Solly Silvers character) and managers,
'false' West End people and values, epitomised in the Mary Minton character
played by Florence Desmond, and the extended Queens Theatre musical
sequence'The Fabulous Golden Boy' performed by Max and the dancers, in which
he does quite a successful impersonation of Noel Coward, and sends up the
new (for 1956) world of British commercial television.
The musical numbers are by Leslie Bricusse and Robin Beaumont and include
'Out of Town' (The big hit number, performed twice by Max. Firstly on the
stage of the Queens Theatre (commencing on an underground carriage set) and
then at the end, in the country, to his real true love (Patricia Driscoll) ;
'Fingers Crossed' (Max sings to the Circus Children, led by Benesta played
by young Jane Asher, who he meets riding the wagon of a travelling circus);
'It Isn't That One' (Max, in variety) ;'The Fabulous Golden Boy' (Max in the
Queens Theatre revue sequence); 'Three Wishes' (Max sings to Shirley Eaton);
'Head Over Heels in Love' (Max, Florence Desmond) and  'He's Got a Heart,
The Same As You' (Max and Dennis Price  in variety. The musical staging is
by Vida Hope (assisted by George Erskine-Jones) and the musical arrangements
are by Wally Stott
Michael Medwin gives solid support at Max's old army pal, who becomes a
loyal fan, and gets into a fight with another audience member (Eric Sykes)
when the latter won't keep quiet. Blonde Shirley Eaton is a glamorous panto
star, whose song rendition is ruined. Dennis Price appears as a panto goose
and in drag as an ugly sister. There are also some nice images of rural
England ,complete with a hearty, extrovert vicar (Reginald Beckwith).
Unfortunately the film has  dull muddy Eastman Colour transfer - with
decent, bright colour remastering, it would be very watchable. Made at
Shepperton Studios by  Colin Lesslie Productions and released through
British Lion.
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com
