Title
Review for To Be or Not to Be (1942)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"To Be or Not To Be" is an outstanding comedy
and drama.  Better than Chaplin's "The Great
Dictator", it is surely the best Nazi satire.
While it moves freely between suspense and
comedy, the scenes with Jack Benny are generally
the comic ones.  The quality of the script
is extremely high, and the film makes the point
of praising Polish resistance and condemning
Nazism with much humor and without becoming
strident.
Joseph Tura (Jack Benny) and his wife Maria
(Carole Lombard) lead a troup of actors in Poland,
before and during the Nazi occupation.  Maria
conducts a liason with bomber pilot Lt. Sobinski
(Robert Stack, so young that he is nearly unrecognizable).
Sobinsky, part of a Polish squadron based in England,
suspects Professor Siletsky (Stanley Ridges) of
being a Nazi spy.  Siletsky returns to Poland to
deliver a list of members of the Warsaw Underground,
and Tura's troupe is recruited to prevent him
from doing so.
Jack Benny's character must impersonate Siletsky,
generating suspense and getting him into much trouble.
Benny was a great comedian with perfect timing,
facial expressions and vocal inflections.  It helps
that he is given great lines, particularly during
his interviews with blustering Colonel Ehrhardt
(Sig Rumann).
It is difficult to find problems with "To Be or Not
to Be."  Nothing comes of a suicide note that
Maria forges for Siletsky, and Benny's frequent
references to that "Great, great Polish Actor
Joseph Tura" are funny but unlikely.  Any problems
that the film has are irrelevant given the quality
of the script (Edwin Justus Mayer) and direction
(Ernst Lubitsch, who also produced).
"To Be or Not to Be" was only nominated for one
Academy Award, for the Werner Heymann score.  The
Oscar snub may have been due to Lubitsch being a
German.  It was the final film for Lombard, who
died in a plane crash shortly after production.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
