Title
Review for She's Gotta Have It (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Andrew Hicks
        "What exactly does the 'it' refer to?" my mom asked in an 
accusatory tone when I brought the SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT video 
home. "Commitment," I replied, to get her off my back, but that 
couldn't be further from the truth. The 'it' in SHE'S GOTTA HAVE 
IT is S-E-X, a topic Spike Lee usually puts on the back burner in 
favor of his usual favorite topic: race. But in his debut film, 
directed with labored shots in artsy black-and-white (and one 
brief color sequence), race is a barely-mentioned factor in a story 
of relationships. Of course there are no white people in the movie -- 
you know if Lee could have possibly been able to film the movie in 
just black instead of black-and-white to make a metaphorical point, 
he would have.
        Nona Darling (a made-up name if I've ever heard one) 
is a successful woman in her 20's who is juggling purely physical 
relationships with three men who want more. There's average 
working man Jamie, rich conceited oreo Greer and immature 
pint-sized Mars (Lee himself, naturally). She sees them as parts 
of one big, well-rounded man and doesn't want to choose between 
them or settle down with any one of them. In her words, she's got 
a job and an apartment and doesn't want someone leeching off of 
her, little Mars in particular because, as Dr. Ruth has pointed out, 
one can never have a fully satisying relationship with anyone 
named after a planet (sorry, Jupiter).
        SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT isn't like most other Spike Lee 
films. Besides the absence of white (people) and color (film), nearly 
all the characters are likeable (except Greer, who actually uses the 
phrase, "The minute you get fat, I'm leaving you"), even Nona's 
friend Opal, one of those devastatingly beautiful Hollywood 
lesbians who tries to pull all of their friends into the web of 
experimentation. That storyline is never resolved, but then neither 
is the overall one, which keeps in the tradition of a woman who 
wants the bellboy but doesn't want him carrying any emotional 
baggage.
        Overall, there's not too much meaning in the movie and 
it's about as believable as the Ace of Base "All that she wants is 
another baby" song. We know 95% of men in the world would 
jump at the chance to get the sex without the commitment, but 
what percentage of women out there would want a similar 
arrangement? And how many of those would actually want to 
see Spike Lee pantsless? I guess it's all part of the Hollywood 
lesbians believability package.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
Chris Loar
At a time when so-called independent cinema appears to be
experiencing something of a renaissance, it's refreshing to
turn back the clock and look at a few _really_ independent
films -- shot, edited, and marketed without any support or
guidance from the major corporate players in the film industry
on budgets that sound more like household budgets than public
works outlays.  These films, not surprisingly, don't always 
have the cut and dried spit and polish tidiness of even a more
low-key Hollywood production, but what they lack in grace they
often make up for in originality, wit, and energy.  All this
could certainly be said of Spike Lee's first feature, _She's 
Gotta Have It_, which he shot with mostly amateur actors for
less than $200,000.  The film has countless flaws -- I certainly
won't bother to recount them all here, since most of them are
immediately obvious and none of them take anything away from the
things that make the film worth seeing -- the freshness and 
energy it draws from its independence and originality.
The storyline of _She's Gotta_ is fairly straightforward; girl 
meets boy, girl meets another boy, girl meets yet another boy,
girl enjoys the company of all three and refuses to give any of 
them up.  In this case the girl is Nola Darling (a charismatic
performance by Tracy Camilla Johns), an independent-minded, free-
spirited graphic designer living in a spacious apartment in Brooklyn
with lots of candles and a bed where she sleeps every night -- rarely
alone.  As the film opens, she's narrowed her stable of men down to
three regulars -- the shallow, narcissistic Greer Childs (John Canada
Terrell); the goofy, juvenile Mars Blackmon (played without much
stretching by Spike Lee himself); and the stable, committed Jamie
Overstreet (Tommy Redmond Hicks).  Nola finds satisfactions in each
of her lovers, seeing them as somehow parts of one whole.  She is
consistently straightforward and honest with all three men about where
they stand:  she will not part with any of them.  As she puts it, "It's
really about control, my body, my mind. Who was going to own it? Them?
Or me? I'm not a one-man woman. Bottom line."  
This, in a nutshell, is the film's plot.  The narrative isn't
emphatically linear; the primary tension is located more in short jolts
and sequences which drive the males' (rather ironic) desire for monogamy
into the immovable force of Nola's libido.  Nola will not give in, not
even for Jamie, the only one of the three for whom she feels a real
adult
love.  The results often walk along that fence that divides comic
territory
from tragedy, as when Nola invites her three partners over for
Thanksgiving
dinner.  The proceedings, spiced up by Greer's hysterical parody of
self-
satisfaction and Mars's comedy of insecurity, are often sharply funny,
but
Jamie's more straightforward pain combines with Nola's earnest desire
for
peace and harmony to season the comedy with genuine pain and a sense of
loss.
In the end, it's not clear that all this laughter and pain add up to a
great
deal.  Lee here hasn't yet mastered his storytelling skills, and the
film's
conclusion, in particular, feels arbitrary -- a cop-out in which
tensions are
resolved and then magically un-resolved again.  But the way Lee
constructs
individual scenes is a real pleasure to watch.  Much of the story is
told in a
series of pseudo-documentary flashbacks, with actors often addressing
the
camera directly to explain their point of view.  This technique gives a
flavor
of authenticity to the film -- it feels "real" -- and gives the film a
touch of
informality and looseness, inviting us to relax and stop worrying --
after all,
we're all just talking here, right?  Indeed, even the film's failings
(the 
rough-hewn acting, the sometimes clumsy writing) enhance this feeling of
informality, leaving the impression of something less processed and less 
sterile than the typical Hollywood market-tested product.
