Title
Review for Evita (1996)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Phil Curtolo
By Phil Curtolo
"Madonna - Antonio Banderas - Jonathan Price - in an Alan Parker film -
with music from Andrew Lloyd Weber - and lyrics by Tim Rice -   Evita."
Now I have to admit, the trailer for this rock-opera-turned-major motion
picture is almost breath-taking for some. The soundtrack is wonderful to
listen to. So why wouldn't the movie be wonderful to see. Simple, a
little over 2 hours of constant singing can almost drive you insane.
The story of Eva Duarte (Madonna), Evita is full of drama that's
trapped inside by all the notes and chords. She was an orphaned child
who ends up becoming a hooker, then goes into the field of acting, and
finally meets Juan Peron (Price), the soon-to-be first President of
Argentina. They fall in love and eventually marry. Sounds pretty good,
doesn't it. Well the story gets better, as Eva goes on the "Rainbow
Tour" across Europe, trying to win respect. Eva Duarte was a wonderful
lady.
However, all of the drama-packed moments above were never understood
because the actors and actresses sang to fast to be understood.
I went into Theater 4 at Magic Cinemas with the attitude that Evita was
going to be terribly boring and I left with happy, because I was right.
They only thing that kept me awake during the movie was the loud bangs
of the drums and strums of the guitar.
Although it did come off as dull, the beautiful cinematography is
eye-catching, as was Madonna's performance. As the "spiritual leader of
Argentina," Madonna would have definitely been an Oscar-contender had
she spoken a single line. But her chance was taken away with the
stubbornness of making an exact replica of the Broadway musical a film.
Don't get me wrong and don't look at my grade. I am not a big fan of
musicals on the big screen. If you're going to pay to see a movie, you
want to see a movie. Now I have to admit, it's a lot cheaper to pay $5
than $200 plus to see the play, but that's what did me in. 
All this review contains is my opinion and my grade was set before I
even saw the movie. Now you may be saying, "What kind of critic is he?,"
and you're right. As a critic, I should have given the movie a chance.
But as a 17-year old Quentin Tarantino fan, it was way too hard.
Grade: F-, 0 out of *****

Author
Froilan Vispo
EVITA begins with the announcement in a movie theatre of Eva Peron's
death and is quickly followed by a most sublime scene of Argentinian
sorrow, that of couples dancing a lifeless tango set to their secret
grief.  The sight impresses, as does the rest of EVITA's visuals. 
Unfortunately, EVITA doesn't go much further than the surface.  With its
emphasis on the illustration of celebrity, as opposed to an explanation,
using displays of grandeur and admiring masses of humanity, the
mythology of Eva will remain an anonymous one after watching EVITA, I'm
afraid.  Then again, one should probably not assign such weighty baggage
to a movie based on a Broadway musical.  
The musical is the source of most of EVITA's weaknesses.  It alludes,
but does not convince, on Eva's allure, likely because this Eva is a
sanitized version.  Madonna's own fearlessness and determination could
have conveniently filled this rather glaring void, but she keeps herself
in check - oddly the same reason why her Eva convinces - and regrettably
holds too much back, revealing only flashes of her perverse appeal. 
Madonna gives her best performance yet, acting very capably and singing
at her best, but this Evita comes short of undeniable appeal and
charisma.   
The musical assigns Eva's determination and her championi-ng of the
lower class descamisados to her own illegitimacy and consequent
exclusion from her middle class father.  Her ticket to Buenos Aires, the
South American Big Apple, comes from a teenage liaison with a marginal
celebrity, and thus begins a succession of upwardly mobile trysts that
eventually lands her Juan Peron.  Jonathan Pryce's Juan plays the
necessary cipher to Evita's myth and little else, a man so emasculated
by the musical one is left wondering how he managed to rise to the top
of the military ranks.  Nevertheless, Pryce plays the thankless role
with note-perfect grace.
Much more macho is Antonio Banderas as the omnipresent Che, our
narrative middle man and Brechtian commentator who goes through at least
as many costume changes as Madonna.  Banderas' range of voice and facial
expressions are limited, all knitted brow and curled lip, but he sings
and swaggers with malevolent gusto as he peppers sarcastic asides on
Evita's life.  In the end Che also succumbs, unexplainably, to her
absent appeal, almost dutifully, as if being a witness to her presence
was all it took to be a follower.  Perhaps that is how it was, but EVITA
leaves me unconvinced.
In spite of its faults, Alan Parker will impress with the movie he has
made.  Expect to be entertained.  EVITA describes itself well with the
following line: "She didn't say much, but she said it loud."  It is lush
and grand and the expert attention to details obvious.  The music is
entertaining and appropriately overproduced to complement Parker's
accompanying visual spectacles.  In spite of the overproduction, the
lyrics come across clearly, move the film quickly and, since threadbare
on fact, are undemanding and should be unproblematic for those
unfamiliar with EVITA.  Together, the visuals and the engaging music
make EVITA easily entertaining.
Parker isn't blameless, however.  I grant that the lack of substance may
have forced his hand, necessitating his use of glorious explosions,
banner headlines and sudden riots to illustrate Argentina's problems. 
However, his choice of montage is questionable when a single scene would
have been more appropriate to the accompanying song and more effective. 
"You Must Love Me," EVITA's one new song, is the most obvious example
here.  In the preceding scene, Juan has just informed Eva that she is
dying, and their exchange, sung live with no music, is among the most
effective scenes in EVITA, a stark contrast of barebones drama against
the constant exhibition.  This would have packed even more emotional
punch had Madonna then continued to sing "You Must Love Me," but instead
Parker plays the song as background to another montage of an obviously
ill Eva surrounded by worried caretakers, the by now too familiar device
of people reacting to an illusive Eva.  The song urges us to love her,
but Parker here wastes his easiest opportunity to make us care.  With
such little effort, you are left indifferrent, neither loving nor hating
her.  
If anything, EVITA confirms the existence of that dubious sect of the
cult of celebrity that requires its icons to have lived splendidly and
that they leave a beautiful corpse.  It will earn few converts.  EVITA
entertains and awes with all its fuss but you may leave the movie
theatre wondering why the fuss happened in the first place.      

Author
Cooper Redwine
Starring: Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce, Jimmy Nail. 
Director: Alan Parker. Screenplay: Alan Parker, Oliver Stone. 
Music: Andrew Lloyd Webber. Lyrics: Tim Rice. 
Producers: Alan Parker, Robert Stigwood, Andrew G. Vajna. 
MPAA Rating: PG (adult themes, mild profanity). 
Running Time: 135 minutes.
To my way of thinking, EVITA is a good, but not a great, film in which 
Madonna gives a good, but not a great, performance. The movie looks 
very corporate to me. It's as though, after the major roles were cast, 
every artistic decision was made based on the criterion of least risk, 
and the result is a work of high craft with a muted emotional impact. 
However, considering that the film stars a controversial leading lady 
and is based on a popular stage musical about a controversial 
historical figure, it is no small feat that the makers of EVITA have 
produced an entertaining and inoffensive movie. Perhaps the outcome is 
the best that could have been expected under the circumstances, but 
somehow I had hoped for more.
Many people have seen some stage production of EVITA over the past 18 
years, and it seems to me that the sort of review of the movie such a 
person would like to read is not at all the sort of review desired by 
someone who hasn't seen the stage show. Hence, I'll break the rest of 
my review into two parts, with each part tailored to a specific 
audience.
I found the movie version of EVITA to be highly entertaining, although 
I enjoyed it slightly less than any of the three stage productions I 
have seen. It seemed to me that the music was better in the film than 
in any of the stage productions, but the drama was not so engrossing.
The music is extremely well done in the film. Madonna, with her 
wonderful voice and graceful moves, is ideally suited to play Eva 
Peron. Antonio Banderas, in the role of the narrator Che, has an 
excellent singing voice and gives what I thought was the most 
appealing performance. Jonathan Pryce is fine as Juan Peron, and Jimmy 
Nail is adequate as the tango singer who takes the 15-year-old Eva to 
Buenos Aires.
Considered as drama, however, the film is very uneven. On the one 
hand, there are some powerful scenes, such as when the big screen 
shows huge crowds of people and the digital sound system fills the 
theater with music. On the other hand, most of the interior scenes 
where individual characters sing are not particularly involving. 
Somehow the music and drama are not consistently smoothly integrated, 
and this significantly reduces the overall emotional impact of the 
film.
The film version of EVITA makes only a few minor changes to the 
stage show, the most important of which combine to present a kinder, 
gentler Eva Peron than is usually depicted in stage versions. I went 
to the movie expecting to see a conniving spitfire who would stop at 
nothing to acquire fame, wealth, and power. But Madonna's highly 
restrained portrayal softens Eva's rough edges and left me with the 
impression of a psychologically needy woman desperately seeking 
acceptance. This impression is strengthened by the interpolation of a 
scene early in the film showing how the 7-year-old Eva had been 
forbidden to attend her father's funeral because of her illegitimacy. 
And the impression is further reinforced late in the film by having 
Madonna sing "You Must Love Me," a song not present in the stage show. 
For me, these changes make Eva Peron a less compelling character and 
weaken the overall dramatic structure of the story.
There are other minor changes as well, but they don't affect the 
fabric of the story much. One of these is to take the song "Another 
Suitcase in Another Hall" away from Peron's mistress and give it to 
Eva, presumably to better showcase Madonna, who, as with all of the 
musical numbers, performs the song extremely well. Another change, 
perhaps motivated by an inability to find a suitable cinematic 
equivalent, is the deletion of the memorable stage scene where 
Peron and other military officers are seen in rocking chairs, one of 
which is removed every time the music stops, until there is only one 
chair left, occupied by Peron. Finally, in the original stage 
production, it was claimed that the narrator Che was based on the 
Latin American revolutionary Che Guevara, but this claim appears to 
have been dropped in the movie version. 
EVITA is a musical drama where almost all of the dialog is sung, 
making it a form of opera. However, nearly everything is sung in 
English, even though the story is set in a Spanish-speaking country. 
The style of the music might be described as combining elements of 
1970s rock, pop Latin rhythms, Broadway show tunes, and folk songs. 
It's important to understand that for 2 hours 15 minutes the movie 
EVITA bombards its audience almost continuously with the music of 
Andrew Lloyd Webber, a composer whose best tunes have been enjoyed by 
millions, but whose music is thought by a sizable number of people to 
be insufferable.
EVITA is based on a true story. The major events take place in the 
1940s and early 1950s in Buenos Aires, the capital of Argentina. The 
central character in the story is the historical figure Eva Peron. (In 
Spanish, "Evita" is a familiar form of the name "Eva.") Eva was an 
illegitimate child who was raised in humble surroundings in an obscure 
town in Argentina. By age 15 she had become the lover of a tango 
singer named Magaldi, whom she cajoled into taking her to Buenos 
Aires. In the capital she used her good looks and willingness to 
establish sexual relationships to achieve success as a model, radio 
personality, and film actress. Eva eventually became the mistress, and 
finally the wife, of Juan Peron, a powerful man in Argentina's ruling 
military regime. When Eva was only 26, Juan ascended to the 
presidency, and she became a highly visible and politically active 
First Lady. Adored by the poor and the working class, but hated by the 
aristocracy and the army, Eva presided over a period during which 
Argentina regained national pride and enjoyed renewed optimism. But 
after seven tumultuous years as First Lady, she died of cancer at age 
33, plunging the nation into deep national mourning.
Madonna sounds terrific singing the Lloyd Webber music, and her acting 
in the role of Eva Peron is convincing enough that I was often not 
conscious of the fact that I was watching Madonna. Yet when I think of 
great singer-actresses in great roles, I think of Liza Minnelli in 
CABARET and Barbra Streisand in FUNNY GIRL, but I don't think of 
Madonna in EVITA. The shortcoming appears to be unrelated to 
Madonna's capabilities, but rather seems to reflect a decision about 
the way that Eva Peron should be played. Madonna gives us a 
restrained, not-very-fiery, not-very-sexy Eva, a sort of an 
Evita-lite. However, it should be kept in mind that this movie will 
presumably be shown in Argentina, where part of the population still 
thinks of Eva Peron as a saint while another part thinks of her as 
"La Gran Puta" ("The Great Whore").
Aside from the title character, there is only one other major role in 
EVITA, and that is Che, a student living in Buenos Aires during the 
Peron regime. This character is essentially a ubiquitous floating 
theatrical device, at times acting as narrator, at times serving as 
cynical observer, and at times directly confronting Eva with 
criticism. In the film Antonio Banderas steals the show by playing Che 
with Latino swagger and snarling cynicism, and it turns out that 
Banderas has a pleasing singing voice as well. However, I should 
perhaps mention that Banderas is a Spaniard whose English is 
accented, and experience leads me to expect that some Americans will 
complain that he is hard to understand, although I had no trouble with 
this.
Except for Eva and Che, there are only two other characters of any 
consequence: Jonathan Pryce's acting and singing in the supporting 
role of Juan Peron is excellent, and Jimmy Nail is good enough in the 
minor role of the tango singer Magaldi, Eva's lover when she was 15 
years old.
Although the movie is not completely successful in its portrayal of 
individual characters, its skillful presentation of visual spectacle 
almost makes up for this shortcoming. The pageantry surrounding Eva's 
state funeral is powerful, and the scenes of huge crowds around the 
Casa Rosada (Argentina's Presidential Palace) are stunning. Yet EVITA 
does not reach its full potential because of its failure to better 
integrate the slick music and images on the screen with the natural 
operatic drama of the story.

Author
Brian Koller
"Evita" is the ambitious film version of the
Andrew Lloyd Webber/Tim Rice musical, based on
the life of Eva Peron, First Lady of Argentina.
"Evita" is an Opera, a sardonic character study,
a history lesson, a tear jerker, and a Madonna
vehicle, all at once.  And it is a little better
than the decidedly mixed reviews that it has
received.
Eva's life is shown from its humble beginnings
as a poor, illegitimate peasant girl living in
the countryside.  She latches onto travelling
musician Agustin Magaldi (Jimmy Nail), who takes
her to Buenos Aires,  and promptly dumps her
to return to his wife.  Eva has better luck with
a series of lovers, each of whom plays a role
towards making her a radio and film celebrity,
and each is discarded as his usefulness to her
is eclipsed.
Eva finally settles for Juan Peron, a colonel
close to power.  As the wife of a dictator, she
is able to pursue her social agenda: a transfer
of wealth from the snob elite to the "shirtless"
masses whose worship she craves.  But as her
political power and fame increase, her health
begins to fail...
With "Evita", Madonna has finally found a female
lead role that suits her talents.  She can only
hope that future Rice/Weber projects will involve
Princess Diana and Hillary Clinton.  Madonna does
not have a great voice, but she has a screen
presence and is able to put a lot of emotion into
her vocals.
Perhaps the real star of "Evita", however, is
Antonio Banderas.  He shows up in most of the scenes,
alternately commiserating with and condemning the
actions of Eva.  Part narrator and part audience,
his character is curious but necessary to explain
the plot to Americans oblivious to Argentine history.
As a history lesson, "Evita" seems credible.  Eva
and Juan are neither glorified nor villified.  The
real power seems to be held by the right-wing military,
who will tolerate the Eva Peron show only as long as
it serves their purposes of political stability.
I suppose someone knowledgeable with Eva Peron could
pick the film apart, but a quick fact check on the
web seemed to verify the film's integrity.  One minor
discrepancy: in the film, Eva apparently has leukemia,
while the real-life Eva had uterine cancer.
Musicals haven't been a major force in cinema since
the 1960s, and are now mostly relegated to children's
fare: animated films and Muppet movies.  An ambitious,
big budget musical is risky for a studio, and it is good
to see that the genre has not been forgotten.  Perhaps
"Evita" becomes overly funereal in the final third
of the film, but it is interesting and has surprising
content for a Lloyd Webber/Rice musical.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     More music video than musical, EVITA is a rock opera that doesn't
rock.  Three, maybe four songs crackle with the kind of energy that
threatens to send the audience into the aisles dancing.  The rest of the
songs-- all of which sound canned, another problem-- are slower, softer,
and often sleep-inducing.  Lady Madonna is picture-perfect and, at 
times, vocally impressive as the died-young-after-sleeping-her-way-to-
the-top Argentinean First Lady.  Rarely does she sing with the gusto,
though, that wandering narrator Antonio Banderas does; he has a set of
pipes that you won't believe!  The other singer/star is Jonathan Pryce
(CARRINGTON) and he barely registers as Juan Peron, partially due to his
having the least-interesting singing voice.  (And where are the profound
basses?  Andrew Lloyd Weber's score sorely lacks a bruising bottom-end.)
EVITA isn't exactly a fun movie to watch, nor is it particularly power-
ful.  Director Alan Parker (THE COMMITTMENTS, MISSISSIPPI BURNING), who
also co-wrote the script with Oliver Stone, provides, at best, bombastic
sketches of a certain someone's life.  Little to nothing is revealed
about Eva Peron's character, but, oh, doesn't she look pretty and sing
well?  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL home page:  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "She had her moments," sings Che (Antonio Banderas) about
legendary figure Eva Peron (Madonna).  "She had some style."  This
perfectly describes Madonna's performance as EVITA.  Madonna has "some"
style in the role, but not much.
     Perhaps the problem is that Madonna's performance is all style.
She mugs for the camera, but her acting is rarely convincing and her
songs are one disappointment after another.  To be fair, the score by
Andrew Lloyd Webber has only one decent song.  He is no Rodgers and
Hammerstein replacement.  For the record, I happen to love musicals.  I
have talked to critics who did not like EVITA, and the flames they
usually get claim the reason the critics did not like the film is
because they really don't like musicals.
     EVITA opens in a crowded movie theater in Buenos Aires.  The year
is 1952.  Someone stops the projector, and the cinema manager (Gabriel
Kraisman) goes out to tell the booing crowd some tragic news, "It is my
sad duty to inform you that Eva Peron, spiritual leader of the nation,
entered immortality this evening."  This is followed by mass weeping.
     The film then goes back in time to Evita's childhood.  The story
treats her as something between a saint and a demigod, and yet, she
remains as much an enigma when the movie is over as when it began.  I
guess she was a liberal because in her weekly radio program she ask her
admirers, "Tired of a government that no longer gives us the things we
deserve?"  I also learned that the military did not like her, and that
is about it.
     The cinematography by Darius Khondji is incredibly beautiful.  He
uses shadows and haze to film his subjects.  Everything is bathed in
warm earth tones.  You may have seen his work before in SEVEN, THE CITY
OF LOST CHILDREN, and STEALING BEAUTY.  I predict he will get an
Academy Award nomination for EVITA.  The sets by Brian Morris
(WUTHERING HEIGHTS and SABRINA) are also impressive.
     The script is by Alan Parker and Oliver Stone and is based on the
play "Evita" with lyrics by Tim Rice and music by Andrew Lloyd Webber.
The script has almost every word sung, which might have worked with
stronger singers and better songs.  It does work when they have musical
crowd scenes of people marching with banners unfurled or tanks rolling
and soldiers marching.  The chorus is good, but the individual singers
are not.  Banderas has a rough singing voice, Madonna has a weak one,
and Jonathan Pryce, as Juan Peron, has none at all.  Pryce gives up.
His "singing" is more like hummed words.
     For the first ten or fifteen minutes, the show concentrates on the
crowd scenes and the visuals.  At this point, the film was enjoyable.
And then Madonna makes her entrance and the whole film starts
imploding.
     As I sat in the theater bored stiff with only the images to
admire, I kept thinking: Where is Oliver Stone when you need him?  He
was originally slated to direct the film, but through a set of
circumstances the director role was given over to Alan Parker.  Parker
is perhaps best known for MISSISSIPPI BURNING, but my favorite picture
of his was PINK FLOYD: THE WALL, which had all of the energy and
singing values that EVITA does not.  You can, however, see a similarity
between the crowd scenes in EVITA and the classroom scenes in PINK
FLOYD: THE WALL.  Still, Stone, as much as I have disparaged him in
some of his work, might have been able to breathe some much needed life
into EVITA.
     The scene I will always remember from the show is not one of the
excellent crowd sequences, but the first meeting of Eva and Juan.  As
the actors sing each other's names, it is so false and so strange
sounding musically, that I began to laugh out loud at them.
     In mid-December when I was on my way to the press screening, my
car broke down on the highway.  My ever-reliable auto had not done that
in twelve years.  Maybe it was trying to tell me something.  Maybe I
should have listened.
     EVITA runs way too long at 2:14.  It is rated PG, but given the
bloody images I was surprised it was not PG-13.  I think some kids
under nine will be scared.  I can not recommend EVITA, but will
generously give it ** for the stunning visuals.  If I could have turned
the sound off, I would have liked it better.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
is the long awaited movie version of the 70's Andrew Lloyd Webber
musical starring Madonna as Eva Peron, a small time actress who slept
her way to the top by finally seducing Juan Peron, the dictator of
Argentina, played here by British star of stage and screen, Jonathan
Pryce.  Once established as Argentina's first lady, Eva Peron became a
self-serving champion of the downtrodden masses before succumbing to
cancer at the age of 33.
Directed by Alan Parker, "Evita" is narrated by Antonio Banderas as
cynical everyman Che.
"Evita", the movie, has been a long time coming to the big screen, and
has made its journey amidst much controversy, especially the one in
casting Madonna as Eva Peron.
Well, after years in the making, "Evita" has finally made it and it is
not shabby!
Alan Parker brings us a lavish screen production of the 1979 stage
play, with brilliant costume (88 costume changes for Madonna), art
direction, photography and music.
The music is mostly effective, keeping the songs in sync with the
period feel of the film. A couple of electric rock numbers are out of
place with the period and would have best been dropped. Two of the
numbers - "Look Out, Buenos Aires", a flashy and colorful piece, and,
what Laura calls "So Sad When A Love Affair Dies", which chronicles
Eva's efforts to sleep her way to the top - are good examples of how
the music fits the film.
Madonna, as Eva Peron, does a first rate job with the songs, but isnt
an experienced enough actor to use non-lyric expressions to convey
emotions. It makes me wonder what would have happened if Meryll
Streep, a much more accomplished actor, were cast as Eva. Madonna is
not that impressive as an actor, despite her entreaties for Academy
recognition.
Antonio Banderas, on the other hand, impressed the hell out of me. He
has a natural singing voice, with a slight gravelly quality, that
lends to his role as the everyman narrator, Che. His presence as both
actor and character help to make him the best thing in "Evita".
Jonathan Pryce, as Juan Peron, does not really have much to do but be
a figurehead character. His singing is fine.
My problem with the film, and the thing that hampers it from being
better, is that there is little attempt to educate the viewer about
the Argentine politics of the period and Eva's place in that world.
There's more shadow than substance to the story. Mainly, the film
tells me that Eva Peron was little more than a conniving opportunist -
not the image I would expect the filmmakers want to put forth. 
A particularly favorite lyric from one of the film's songs, which sums
up Eva Peron, is "The people, they need to adore me. So, Christian
Dior me." It gave me a hearty chuckle.
I think its funny that I rate "Evita" the same as I do "Beavis and
Butt-head Do America". I give "Evita" a B.
Alan Parker has co-produced, co-written (with Oliver Stone) and
directed a lavish musical film version of the smash stage musical
"Evita."  The 15 history of this coming to the screen approaches the
story of the casting for "Gone With the Wind," with the likes of Meryl
Streep vying for the role of Evita and directors such as Ken Russell,
Francis Coppola, Michael Cimino and Oliver Stone attached to the
project.  Parker ignored the play's screenplay and went back to the
original concept album's score and lyrics (which preceded the actual
stage production) along with historical research in order to write his
film's screenplay.
The film looks great.  It was shot on location in Argentina, England
and Hungary.  The "Don't Cry for Me, Argentina" scene was filmed at
the actual balcony of the Casa Rosada, where Eva Peron addressed the
people.  The art direction and costume very successfully evoke the
1920s and 1940s periods that the film takes place during.
Cinematographer Darius Khondji ("Seven," "Delicatessen," "The City of
Lost Children") also lends an appropriate period glow to the film.
"Evita" is told entirely by musical numbers (with the exception of a
very few spoken lines by minor characters).  Madonna (who passionately
fought for this role) does a fine job - at times I even forgot it was
Madonna I was watching, although not entirely.  She's publically
stated that she expects an Oscar nomination for this role.  While
she's good (surprisingly so in a few scenes, such as her death bed
scene), I don't think she's quite up to the competition this year.
The big surprise for me is Antonio Banderas as Che - he sings with
conviction and provides many of the film's laughs with his sly asides
and wry commentary.  Jonathan Pryce (English stage and screen star and
Lexus pitchman) doesn't fair as well as Juan Peron - his character is
never fully realized and I never understood his motivations.  At one
point in the film, we're given the indication that by the time he
marries Eva, the romance has been entirely replaced by politics.
Later, he stands up for her against political adversaries.  How did he
feel about her?  This film remains vague on that subject. 
There are some terrific musical numbers, smartly choreographed.  A lot
of history is covered as Eva begins sleeping her way to the top,
dumping each lover with the refrain "isn't it sad when a love affair
dies" while Che steps in and informs the dumpee that he's been had in
particularly colorful ways.  The seduction duet between Madonna and
Jonathan Pryce ("I Could Be Good for You") is very effective and one
of Pryce's best scenes.  The rousing "New Argentina," a number which
was cut from the stage production, attempts to fill in some of the
political history of the time.  As Madonna remakes herself as the
first lady she sings "the people adore me, so Christian Dior me!" as
we're presented with a montage of costume and makeup tryouts.  There's
also a nice fantasy sequence where Madonna tangos with Banderas as she
counters his everyman's accusations of how she's ultimately let her
people down. 
"Evita" isn't entirely successful, however.  It's opening sequence,
where we're presented with Eva's funeral cut back and forth with the
7-year old Eva attempting to attend her father's funeral (she was
illegitimate and refused entry) is a bit confused.  The film also gets
very repititve in its last half hour - a judicious trimming of 10-15
minutes would have tightened the film considerably.  The film also
fails in its depth.  As I already mentioned, Juan Peron isn't well
fleshed out and we're never entirely sure of Eva's sincerity either -
the filmmakers show both angles but never attempt to come to a
conclusion.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Hollywood/Cinergi)
Starring:  Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce.
Screenplay:  Alan Parker, Oliver Stone.
Producers:  Alan Parker, Robert Stigwood, Andrew G. Vajna.
Director:  Alan Parker.
MPAA Rating:  PG (adult themes, mild profanity)
Running Time:  135 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For a project which took forever to find a director and a star, EVITA
sure ended up with the natural choice in both categories.  There aren't
too many directors in the last thirty years who have directed one
live-action musical; Alan Parker has directed two (BUGSY MALONE and PINK
FLOYD THE WALL), and the latter was probably the last through-sung
English-language film.  Madonna, meanwhile, has spent her life preparing
for the role of Eva Peron -- a controversial figure accused of sleeping
her way to the top and who re-invented herself to become a woman of
uncommon influence and power.  Well, one of them fulfilled the promise,
anyway.  Parker has made EVITA a compelling visual spectacle, but his
leading lady doesn't provide the same vibrant quality, even though it
seems she is trying desperately to do so.
     EVITA opens in 1952, with the overwhelming emotional response of the
Argentinian people to the death of their First Lady, Eva Peron (Madonna)
from cancer at the age of 32.  A cynical narrator named Che (Antonio
Banderas) then proceeds to examine who this woman was, and flashes back
through her life, beginning with her childhood as the illegitimate
daughter of a middle-class businessman.  The young Eva Duarte becomes
determined to find fame and fortune, and heads to Buenos Aires on the
coattails of a popular nightclub singer (Jimmy Nail) she seduces.
Sleeping her way to success as a model, radio personality and film
actress, Eva eventually meets Juan Peron (Jonathan Pryce), an
up-and-coming colonel in Argentina's military regime.  With Eva by his
side, Peron becomes a populist president of Argentina, and Eva becomes a
figure as revered for her acts of charity as she is reviled for her
self-promotion.
     One of the reasons Andrew Lloyd Webber's musicals have been so
successful is that they combine the appeal of grand opera with an
accessible pop sensibility, and it would seem difficult to capture that
operatic feel in a film.  Alan Parker, however, has exactly the visual
style required for a production like EVITA.  The funeral scenes which open
the film have an impressive scope, captured in mournful tones by
cinematographer Darius Khondji (SEVEN), and there is a flow between scenes
which is both theatrical and cinematic.  Parker does his job by turning in
a larger-than-life presentation of a larger-than-life woman.
     EVITA is a story told almost entirely through the songs, and Parker
doesn't add any radical new interpretations with his direction.  There are
a few changes to the material, notably the addition of the new Webber/Tim
Rice composition "You Must Love Me" which could have been dropped into any
Disney animated musical and been just as suitable, but other changes are
more interesting and effective.  The plaintive "Another Suitcase in
Another Hall," originally a song for one of Peron's discarded mistresses,
works better as Eva's awakening to taking advantage of her own sexuality.
Some exciting arrangements also give new kick to Webber's tunes.  "Buenos
Aires" gets a swirl of percussion to match Eva's drive, and "I'd Be
Surprisingly Good for You" has a seductive swing.  Certain songs do have a
dated, jangly 70s guitar sound, but the characteristic infectious bombast
of Webber's compositions holds up surprisingly well.  
     What works far less well is the presentation of the film's three
central -- and, for all practical purposes, only -- characters.  Antonio
Banderas brings his appealing swagger to Che, as well as a voice which
compensates for a weak lower range with some sweet high notes.  Che is the
voice of Eva's critics, yet he isn't a complete character, and neither is
Juan Peron.  Pryce is a versatile, talented performer, but he shrinks into
the background as soon as Juan and Eva marry.  That leaves Madonna to
carry the dramatic weight of EVITA, and it is plenty clear that she is
eager to prove she can handle it.  She acts the heck out of the role,
gesticulating for all she's worth and looking appropriately sallow when
Eva is ill, but something is missing.  Madonna understands determination,
and she can convey it; charisma is another story.  You can't act a
magnetic personality, and Madonna is left to play benevolence without the
force of will which makes her uncertain motives intriguing.  The irony is
that, for someone who has made a career of not caring about how people
perceive her, Madonna seems to want too much to be liked and respected as
an actress.  Her EVITA lacks mystery, making Alan Parker's film a sweeping
piece of visual theater with a star who wants to step into the audience
and thank everyone for coming.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
EVITA ** 1/2  Directed by Alan Parker.Written by Parker and Oliver
Stone.Based on the book and lyrics by Tim Rice.Photography, Darius Khondji.
Production design, Brian Morris.  Editing, Gerry Hambling. Music, Andrew
Lloyd Webber. Choreography, Vincent Patterson.Costumes, Penny
Rose.Producers, Alan Parker, Robert Stigwood and Andrew Vajna. Cast :
Madonna (Evita), Antonio Banderas (Che), Jonathan Pryce (Juan Peron) et al.
A Hollywood Pictures release. 130 minutes.  PG-13.
A viewer's background makes a lot of difference when it comes to judging a
movie. For example, if you have no particular interest in Argentina and its
history  (notably the Juan Peron era), if you like Andrew Lloyd Webber,
and Madonna, you may be all set to like Evita-the-movie. On the other hand,
if you have seen Evita on the stage, you might make comparisons that do not
flatter the film.
"Evita" uses a number of flashbacks, a technique that seems to be more and
more frequently used or misused. The film opens with the announcement of
Eva Duarte de Peron's death in 1952, cuts back to the provincial funeral in
1926 for Eva's natural father. She was the low-class, illegitimate daughter
of a married, philandering local bourgeois. The church service for him has
a big heavenly chorus soundtrack. Then we cut to Eva's colossal funeral
procession in Buenos Aires, also to a huge musical soundtrack.
You begin to suspect that the leading principle behind this work is that
Bigger is Better, a suspicion that takes no time in being confirmed. To
what purpose? To give us a musical biography of the young woman with a
shady past who climbs methodically the social ladder,sleeps with
increasingly important people, reaches the all-powerful military caste and
finally snares Colonel Juan Domingo Peron. They married in 1945. She was
26, he was 50.
If you've seen any documentaries about Eva Peron, you'll notice that the
film does not invent facts too much the way most older Hollywood biopics
did. Here several aspects of the couple's powerful partnership come
through: the rise of  Peron to his first Presidency (1946) and the
aftermath; the initial mistrust of Eva by the Army; the unrelenting scorn
by high society ; Evita's efforts to better the life of the masses; the
adulation of the lower classes and many in the middle classes; the fiasco
of her visits to Franco's Spain and to the Pope; and so on. It's all
sketchy but sufficient. The main troubles with the film are merely Madonna,
the music, the lyrics and the singing.
Much has been said about the parallels between Eva's and Madonna's rise to
fame and power. It's a superficial comparison. More to the point  is that
Madonna, who will soon be 40, shows her age. She plays Eva at 15, then from
ages 25 to 33. No matter how well the magic of makeup is used, it cannot
shave off more than a few years. (In some shots she reminds me of Judy
Holliday in bad hair days). Somehow Evita and Madonna never really merge,
especially for those who are familiar with photographs and movies of the
real Eva Peron. Still, it would be too much to ask of this kind of
"historical musical" to come up with fully developed characters.
I  suspect that Andrew Lloyd Webber is a composer whose works include very
few "real" songs. In "Evita,"  beyond "Don't Cry for Me Argentina," and
another tune that I forget, there's not much musical nourishment. The movie
becomes something like a mega-music video directed by a latter-day Cecil B.
De Mille. Its parts are interconnected by  minimally harmonious recitatives
that tell us the story. This makes the words more important than the music.
Unfortunately, the lyrics are flat. Think of those in "My Fair Lady," "The
Music Man," "The King and I," all so charming, witty, so well adapted to
plots and characters, and you want to weep. Topping this, Madonna's singing
has none of the strong, semi-belting approach of other stage Evitas.
Talking of weeping, the picture does its utmost to manipulate the public,
to move it by building up big emotions (especially in the Casa Rosa balcony
scenes),to come up with a hagiography of Evita, warts and all. It doesn't
work for me. What does is the nice device of Chorus, played and sung by
Antonio Banderas, the best thing in the film. He keeps popping up as a
series of characters who make a running commentary and are quite critical
of  Evita. It comes, alas, to a final cop-out as Banderas joins the crowd
and kisses Eva's casket.
Banderas's voice may not be great but it serves the purpose well. Jonathan
Pryce's is small and insignificant, like his playing of Peron who looks
rather dumb (I was conscious of his fake nose too) as he takes a back seat
to Evita. The real Peron attained power through populism, through appeal to
the "descamisados," the shirtless people of the laboring classes. In the
film his big public moments are whenever he takes off his jacket, in a
silly equation of jacket and shirt. The other equation of Bigger with
Better is equally silly, but still, this munificent, lavishly staged, very
well shot production does have its striking visual moments.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 12/25/96 (NY, LA); 1/1/97 (limited); 1/10/97 (wide)
Running Length: 2:14
MPAA Classification: PG (Minor violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce, Jimmy Nail
Director: Alan Parker
Producer: Robert Stigwood, Alan Parker, and Andrew G. Vajna
Screenplay: Alan Parker and Oliver Stone
Cinematography: Darius Khondji
Music: Andrew Lloyd Webber
Lyrics: Tim Rice
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     As bold and dazzling a spectacle as EVITA is, it's missing a soul.  
This brash, glitzy, energetic entertainment has the power to hold an 
audience enraptured, but, at the same time, there's a sense that what 
we're experiencing is just candy for the eyes and ears.  In its own way, 
EVITA is much like this past summer's blockbusters -- lots of flash and 
pizzazz, but very little beneath the surface.  Anyone expecting more 
than loud music and boisterous musical numbers will be disappointed.  
EVITA, even more than the stage show upon which it is based, is light on 
characters and even lighter on historical facts.
     When it first hit Broadway in 1978, the play EVITA was described as 
the most cinematic of Andrew Lloyd Webber's musicals.  Despite that 
appellation, it has taken nearly twenty years for the story to make the 
stage-to-screen transition.  Along the way, a number of well-known and 
highly respected directors, including Francis Ford Coppola, Richard 
Attenborough, and, most recently, Oliver Stone (who receives a 
screenplay credit due to Writers' Guild rules, even though none of his 
script has been retained), have unsuccessfully tackled the project.  
Finally, Alan Parker, whose previous music-laden movie credits include 
FAME and THE COMMITMENTS, has completed the job using an unlikely cast 
that includes veteran actor Jonathan Pryce, international heartthrob 
Antonio Banderas, and, of course, Madonna in the title role.
     Only the bare facts of Evita Peron's life have been retained for 
the film.  As in the stage musical, she is represented as an heroic 
figure -- sometimes vain and self-serving, but rarely harsh or 
manipulative.  This doesn't necessarily agree with the historical 
record, but it makes for better cinema.  Likewise, Jonathan Pryce's Juan 
Peron is played as far more amiable than the actual dictator who took 
control of Argentina during the mid-'40s.
     Eva Duarte (or, as she was better known, Evita) was born in 1919, 
the bastard child of a man who perished when she was seven.  Thirty-
three years after her birth, Evita, then the wife of Argentina's 
President, Juan Peron, died of cancer.  The film, which opens with a 
flash forward to Evita's funeral, takes us from the day in 1926 when she 
places flowers upon her father's casket to the time when thousands of 
mourners file past her own still form.  In between, she uses an affair 
with a singer (Jimmy Nail) to enable a move from her family's rural home 
to Buenos Aires, where she eventually becomes Peron's wife.  Once he 
takes over the country, she attempts to apply her newfound power to the 
task of bettering the lot of Argentina's women and lower classes.  
     EVITA tells Evita's story almost entirely in song (spoken lines are 
few and far between), making it more of an opera than a traditional 
musical.  There are several familiar tunes (most notably, "Don't Cry for 
Me, Argentina"), but much of the dialogue is delivered in recitatives, 
which occasionally seem awkward.  Nevertheless, in those instances when 
EVITA reaches its musical stride, with a full orchestra accompanying 
Madonna's strong, clear voice, this movie soars.  Unfortunately, in the 
end, it always comes back to Earth.
     The production design is excellent, as one would expect from such 
an ambitious project.  From the streets of Buenos Aires to the interior 
of Peron's house, the film's look is composed with near-perfect 
attention to detail.  Crowd scenes -- and there are many -- are handled 
expertly.  Madonna's numerous, varied costumes add a further splash of 
color and style to a movie whose only serious fault lies in the 
shallowness of its narrative.
     We never learn more about EVITA's characters than is absolutely 
necessary.  They don't become either three-dimensional or especially 
sympathetic.  Although Madonna is an excellent singer, her emoting 
skills are limited.  There's little depth to her Evita, and this robs 
the story of a portion of its power.  The script is also surprisingly 
unambitious.  EVITA concentrates on the big musical numbers while 
virtually ignoring the sung, connecting words that provide opportunities 
for character interaction and development.  Jonathan Pryce (BRAZIL, 
CARRINGTON), who is certainly capable of giving a strong performance, is 
wasted.  Only towards the end is he given more to do than play second 
fiddle to Madonna.
     If there's a real surprise in EVITA, it's the strength of Antonio 
Banderas' performance.  Playing a sort of one-man Greek chorus, he fills 
the role of narrator with an impossible-to-miss sardonic quality.  
Banderas' Che gives the film an edge, and Evita's few negative qualities 
come to light through his numbers.  Even though Banderas doesn't have 
Madonna's vocal ability, he acquits himself well enough when it comes to 
singing, and his acting is the best that it's been since he parted ways 
with Pedro Almoldovar (after TIE ME UP! TIE ME DOWN!).
     A great deal has been written about whether EVITA will be able to 
revive the musical genre, especially when coupled with Woody Allen's new 
effort, EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU.  Obviously, it's impossible to give an 
answer now, but if this film strikes box office gold (which seems 
possible, with Disney plugging it so relentlessly), more musicals will 
follow.  Hopefully, anything in the works will combine the artistry and 
spectacle of EVITA with a stronger story and better-defined characters.  
As it stands, this is solid entertainment, but the potential exists for 
something richer and more satisfying. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Walter Frith
Andrew Lloyd Weber and Tim Rice's internationally acclaimed musical 'Evita'
is now a big screen motion picture featuring a sweeping pace despite its
running time of approximately two hours and fifteen minutes.  Some may come
out feeling as if they've watched an extended music video and that feeling is
justified but the integrity and originality of the play is kept intact by
director Alan Parker.  Parker is certainly no stranger to orchestrating and
piecing together films with a musical background.  'Fame' (1980) and 'The
Committments' (1991) are examples of Parker's talent and his eye for
dramatization is nothing to shy away from, either, as his craft in that
department was established with 'Midnight Express' (1978) and 'Mississippi
Burning' (1988).  Madonna who at first was a controversial choice to play the
title role stars as Eva Duarte, a poor Spanish woman who rose to national and
international attention when she married Argentinian dictator Juan Peron and
campaigned to help the poor while politicizing her own gains and that of her
husbands.  Despite being a target for many years by critics, Madonna is
electrifying in the picture and will probably receive an Oscar nomination for
her work.  Juan Peron is played in a straight forward manner by Jonathan
Pryce and Antonio Banderas is Che, a man who follows the everyday antics of
Eva.  Fans of the musical will be pleased to see it revived as this is an
almost zero speaking picture and 99.9999% song.  It's vivid re-creation of
that period is matched extensively by panoramic camera work.  'Evita' will
probably be enjoyed better by people who have seen the play but for those new
to the material, I don't think you'll be disappointed.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Eva Peron was dead 26 years before the musical was produced, and
it took nearly as long, 19 more years, for that musical to be filmed.
It is not clear why the film should be made even now or why the people
at Disney thought the American public would be interested in this story
of the attractive, blond, and politically-active wife of a
controversial reformer President who is popular among the poor but
disliked by the rich, the military, and the Right Wing.
     Like the play EVITA, the film opens in 1952 with the announcement
of the death of Eva Peron.  The film then tells in flashback the life
story of Eva, supposedly related by Che (Antonio Banderas).  Che is
every bit as omnipresent here as he was in the musical, but in Alan
Parker's film version he is no longer a research chemist developing an
insecticide, he is now just sort of a one-man voice of public opinion.
(This creates something of a problem with the lyrics of some of the
songs.  They have images of images of dying insects that now seem to
come out of nowhere.)  Eva is the illegitimate daughter of a prosperous
middle class man. Her life is forged in bitterness by her father's
other family refusing to acknowledge her existence or letting her
attend her own father's funeral.  Her being forcibly ejected from the
church is the film's most powerful scene.  At age fifteen, still filled
with venom, she sleeps with popular singer visiting her village.
Seeing this as an opportunity she attaches herself like a lamprey to
the singer forcing him to take her to Buenos Aires. In spite of bad
treatment, she works her way up a human ladder of men, trading her way
up until she allies herself to the powerful and politically ambitious
Colonel Juan Peron (Jonathan Pryce).  Juan unexpectedly finds himself
caught between Eva on one side and the Army and the wealthy of
Argentina on the other.  It is a moot point which side has a greater
loathing of the other.  But "Little Eva" brings with her an
overwhelming payload of political support from the Descamisados--the
poor, "shirtless" workers and Juan rides their support to the
Presidency--a very stormy trip.
     Madonna Louise Ciccone has not had a very distinguished acting
career up to this point but finally seems cast perfectly in a role.
Madonna not only resembles Eva Person, both have notoriety for a
somewhat salacious background.  The biggest drawback to casting Madonna
in the role is that she is 38--five years older than Eva Peron was even
at her death--and the days are long past when Madonna could reasonably
play the fifteen-year-old Eva.  Antonio Banderas is transformed from
chemist into a sort of narrator and Greek chorus and that causes some
problems with his character.  It is not clear what his point of view
means or if it is even consistent.  When Che was envisioned as a real
human, he could change his mind about Eva without it being a story
problem.  But can a narrator or a chorus change his mind in the course
of a story?  It is not usually done.  Ironically the Banderas character
has far more lines than does the much more literal character of Pryce.
Through much of the film Pryce has only to look good.  I was surprised
when Pryce speaks toward the middle of the film and I realized that we
have not heard his voice in quite a while.
     EVITA looks like a very expensive production and Parker has used
his budget very cleverly in some cases to make a film that looks
extremely extravagant.  In some cases it appears he had a whole scene
setup with a crowd on the screen only for the length of one line of a
song.  In fact there are some clever reuses of settings which may or
may not be disguised to offset the cost.  Part of the spectacle was
made possible undoubtedly only because of the comparative low cost of
filming in Argentina and Hungary.  The two sets of scenes flow together
seamlessly.  We get to see some impressively-scaled political rallies
or major street riots. Camerawork is by Darius Khondji who previously
filmed DELICATESSEN, SE7EN, and the amazing CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.  His
camera is at its most impressive in the long-shots.  Too often on the
close-ups are plagued by bad synchronization between the singing and
the lip movements.  Some images go by often too quickly to be
completely understood, including what looks like a sort of surrealistic
ballroom dance on the occasion of the death of Eva.  Webber's and Tim
Rice's play gives us only a superficial view of Peronist politics, but
then one does not expect an operetta to have the historical content of
a GETTYSBURG.  We never really see much of Eva Peron's politics beyond
her allying herself to the Descamisados and avenging herself against
the middle classes.  Andrew Lloyd Webber apparently could not resist
the opportunity to write one new song eligible for the Academy Award
race.  That song is "You Must Love Me," and it you want to hear it you
must listen carefully.  It is such a bland and lackluster piece of
music it can slip right by the viewer unnoticed.  It sounds more like a
bridging piece of music than a song of the caliber of "Don't Cry For
Me, Argentina."
     As a history film, EVITA is limited by the perfunctory musical
script on which it is based, but the look of the film is dazzling.  I
rate the film a high +2 the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce, Jimmy Nail Director:
Alan Parker Screenplay: Alan Parker and Oliver Stone Cinematography:
Darius Khondji Music: Andrew Lloyd Webber Lyrics: Tim Rice
Sometimes, knowing the unpleasant and unfortunate outcome of a story,
before it unfolds, will destroy ones appreciation of the movie itself.
Yes, I watched a documentary on Eva Peron, before I watched the
musical "Evita." What shocked me about the documentary was the abuse
that the mummified body of Eva Peron suffered at the hands of the
anti-Peronists. I won't go into gory details but here's the low down.
After the fall of the Peron government, Eva has some of her fingers and
part of her ear cut off for an identification process. She is stored
away in a plain wooden coffin, at a secret location for fear that her
dead body will spark a revolution. Somehow, her body and coffin end up
in a shady general's office, where it is rumoured that the general
committed acts of necrophilia. After another change of government, her
body is sent to France and buried under a false name for a number of
years. The winds of change blows frequently in Argentina, before another
change of government finally allows the return of Eva's body to her
family. She now lies buried beneath fifteen feet of marble.
If this sad finale, doesn't wreck one's appreciation of Evita, I'm not
sure what will. On a brighter note, I was impressed with the lyrical
style of the movie, which is mostly photogenic images of Madonna,
Antonio and Jonathan set to song. It is a long sit with no dialogue, but
the patient will eventually end up appreciating the music of Andrew
Lloyd Webber. The most moving moment is when the title song "Evita" is
sung. Although Madonna does not have the voice to perform the song to
it's full impact, she manages to hold her notes. In fact watching
Madonna's solid performance as Eva Peron, was perhaps this movie's
greatest surprise. I'm quite shocked that I am actually complimenting
the likes of this pop diva. Maybe it's because she is only allowed to
sing and not speak, which makes her believable as Peron. It's like the
Holly Hunter paradox in "The Piano", where she acts better when she
isn't given any dialogue. Antonio Banderas is ever reliable as the song
and tune narrator who appears at every scene to give the viewers some
perspective on where they are on the Perone timeline. Jonathon Pryce a
talented character actor, fills the shoes of Juan Peron with ease.
So if it wasn't for the fact that I had seen the documentary before the
film, I would have appreciated "Evita" more. Cause every time I saw
Eva on screen, I couldn't help but want to barf at knowing what would
happen to the poor women after she died. Here I go again, where's the
bathroom?

Author
Christopher Null
     Now I understand why Argentineans wanted Madonna to go home during
the filming of EVITA!
     What the fuss is all about, I have no idea, because EVITA is just
another bad movie starring one of our worst actresses, Madonna.  The
catch is, this time she gets to sing sing sing for 2 1/2 hours -- sing
until she can sing no more -- sing until your ears bleed.
     EVITA has had a long and sordid past as a motion picture project,
and it's easy to see why.  The fact that EVITA makes a mockery of
Argentina's most beloved personage *and* the filmmakers wanted to shoot
there is almost beside the point.  There's the problem that movie
musicals have tended to be huge flops over the last 40 years; the
problem of Madonna's inability to act; the problem that Eva Peron was
basically an egomaniac that died 40 years ago and that no one in America
really cares about anymore.  And when co-screenwriter Oliver Stone gets
involved... yikes!  They might as well have made a musical called
OSWALD!
     But they didn't.  Instead, EVITA rumbles through the plot points in
Eva Peron's life like a freight train.  From stargazing child to slutty
gold-digger to talentless actress to the wife of the President, it's no
wonder why Madonna fought so hard for this part -- it's straight out of
her life (except for the President part... so far)!  No acting
required!  *And* she gets to sing the whole time!
     And what's with all this singing, anyway?  Yes, I know it's from
Andrew Lloyd Webber (who, after seeing "Cats," I believe is seriously
disturbed), and as a traditional musical, EVITA might have had a
prayer.  But electric guitars and synthesizers?  Discordant,
headache-inducing chants?  A capella, sing-song dialogue between
characters?  Sheesh, EVITA is more like THE WHO'S TOMMY than SINGIN' IN
THE RAIN.  (It's no surprise that director Alan Parker also created PINK
FLOYD'S THE WALL.)  I half-expected Madonna to start rolling around in
baked beans a la Ann-Margret!
     No such luck.  Instead we have to listen to the likes of Antonio
Banderas's singing narrator, which sounds a lot like he has his cajones
in a vise.  Or the very British Jonathan Pryce as Juan Peron (!),
singing about how he ran the British out of Argentina.  The hilarity of
these two performing is *almost* as much fun as the real treat of
EVITA:  trying to see how many ways Madonna can cover up her blossoming
pregnancy.  How many arms, hats, and flower bouquets can she hold across
her waist?  A lot.
     In all fairness, Banderas is a diamond in the rough here, in a part
of comic relief that is desperately needed among the Very Serious
performances.  Also, a few of the songs are tolerable, even memorable,
even if they rarely make sense.  But, in the end, I have to pan EVITA,
if for no other reason than it's just plain goofy.  And some parting
words for Madonna, in a lyrical fashion she may be able to finally
understand:
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I've always liked Madonna's music, although we all know 
her movie performances are, for the most part, lackluster. That's why 
it was good news to find out her performance in EVITA is 98% 
singing. Now that I've finally seen it, though, I realize that's also the 
bad news. Everything in EVITA is sung, which makes it hard for 
most viewers to retain interest after the first hour. Even the most 
musical musicals consist of at least 50% dialogue, which makes 
EVITA some kind of genetic strand of hyper-musical.
        EVITA tells the story of Eva Peron, one of Argentina's 
most beloved historical figures and one of the longest running 
contemporary Broadway musicals. A lot of the Andrew Lloyd Webber 
/ Tim Rice songs are catchy, yeah, but (as Roger Ebert pointed out) 
it's because you end up hearing most of them five or six times 
through the course of the movie. Around the fourth reprise of "Don't 
Cry For Me, Argentina," I was about ready to burst into tortured tears 
of repetition.
        Madonna, of course, plays Eva from the age of 15 or so, 
which is completely unconvincing. You'd have to be pretty stressed 
out to have crow's feet in high school. The teenage Evita convinces a 
visiting singer she's sleeping with (which in Madonna's case is 
completely convincing at any age) to take her back to Buenos Aires 
with him. He does, but their association ends there. Eva makes it in 
the big city because she has that certain Madonna-esque quality, her 
stylish antics accounting more for her success than her voice or 
acting abilities. Art imitates life, you know.
        Evita becomes semi-famous with her radio program, but 
much more famous when she joins forces with Juan Peron (Jonathan 
Pryce), an authoritarian army officer who becomes leader of the 
country thanks to Evita's endless campaigning. The peasants love her 
because they sense she came from among them to make something of 
herself, although she never actually accomplishes much on their 
behalf aside from tossing money out a train window while she sings a 
gleeful song. Antonio Banderas, as some kind of singing narrator / 
collective peasant conscience, is always around to question her 
motives through cynical song, which doesn't lend the film any 
dramatic credibility.
        What's good about EVITA is the occasional gleeful song. 
Three highlights are Madonna singing "I'd Be Surprisingly Good For 
You" to Pryce, the one toward the beginning where she's trying to 
persuade her singer / lover to bring her along, and "Rainbow High," a 
showtune version of "Material Girl." And of course there's "You Must 
Love Me," the painful ballad that comes during Eva's dying days. 
Evita died at age 33, but from the denouement of this movie, it would 
seem like she lived for decades and decades. Around the fifth she's-
going-to-die-and-aren't-we-sad song, I was ready to yank the plug 
myself.
        The film does have a huge, epic scope. Director Alan Parker 
put a lot of effort into making EVITA an eventa, but in the end it's the 
singing and the epic length that bring this movie down. When going 
for emotional drama, a song doesn't cut it cinematically, and on the 
larger scope action scenes, a disco rock score is used. It helps to note 
that EVITA producer Robert Stigwood also produced the 1978 
Frampton / Bee Gee abortion SGT. PEPPER'S LONELY HEARTS 
CLUB BAND.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alan Parker
Writers: Alan Parker and Oliver Stone (based on the musical by Andrew Lloyd
Webber and Tim Rice)
Starring: Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce, Jimmy Nail, Andrea
Corr
Andrew Lloyd Webber's musicals, preferably his early work with lyricist Tim
Rice, present a musical which is totally unlike any musical before its
time.  Webber and Rice do not subscribe to the gaity of such musicals as
"Oklahoma!," or the slapstickness of shows like "A Funny Thing Happened on
the Way to the Forum."  They instead tackle hot issues from our past, and
view them differently, and pack them together with redundant, catchy music,
as well as thoughtful lyrics.  
Like "Jesus Christ Superstar," which examined the rise and fall of Jesus in
his last days from a fame perspective (in the cool tune "Superstar," a dead
Judas comes back from the dead to ask Jesus why he didn't spread his
message wider), "Evita" takes an inventive stance on its topic, this time
being the famed wife of Argentinian dictator, Juan Pern, Eva, who slept
her way to the top and became famous chiefly because she got attention,
much like the woman playing her: Madonna (although I think Madonna did rise
to the top for her musical talent, among other things).
"Evita" deals with the rise and fall of Eva Pern, a woman who captured the
heart of the nation after marrying Juan (Jonathan Pryce), then died at the
young age of 33, creating an international stir of mourning not unlike that
of Princess Di (the two do share a bit in common, although it wasn't like
Di slept to "the top").  Webber and Rice sure chose bizarre topics for
their musicals, but they always have a point for doing it.  Here, they wish
to expose her for what she is, but still show that despite all of her many
drawbacks, her lying, and covering up for her fascist husband, but show
that she was still a good woman with fairly good intentions, and her death
was very sad.
It's also a musical, with almost no words not unsung.  The film plays like
a rock opera, much like their "Jesus Christ Superstar," with many giant
musical sequences just like the old musicals, even if they do possess very
intelligent lyrics, which create not only an intellectually enlightening
experience, but also a very entertaining one.  After all, this is a
musical, and Webber's musicals never undermine this.  They are a balance of
energy and intellectual depth, walking on a fine line between the both, and
never stumbling on either side.
This is why the beginning of "Evita" is kind of a let-down.  Okay, it IS a
let-down.  I'm not saying the opening moments are bad, because they're
pretty good.  But what comes after is a lifeless, un-entertaining, and
totally unrewarding sequence where she cons a singer (Jimmy Nail) into
taking Eva to Buenos Aires after a one-night stand.  In the musical, it's a
fun, energetic sequence, culiminating in the show stopper, "Buenos Aires,"
which is also lifeless.  Then a punch is pulled as we see Eva being screwed
over by the singer, instead of her leaving him, where she ends up singing
the sad tune, "Another Suitcase In Another Hall," which was meant for a
later character, screwed over by Eva.  The portrayal of Eva in the
beginning is too soft, seeming like Parker and Oliver Stone, who adapted it
for the screen, are afraid to present her for what she is, even while it's
being narrated by a hater of Eva's, the omnipotent(Antonio Banderas), who
presents her in a negative light. For a while, it looks like Alan Parker
can't pull it off.
However, the film pulls itself together in a flash, and after that song is
over, and the giddily nihilistic song "Goodbye and Thank You," where we see
Eva go through a long line of lovers who help her ascend, is magnificent,
darkly comical, and just gleeful.  From this point on, the film is
hypnotic, satisfying, and satirical.  No more punches are thrown, and the
basic outline of the original musical are in tact.  We see Eva woo and
marry Juan, get him out of jail, rise to stardom, falter a bit, come back,
and then gradually die of cancer (I think it was because of cancer).
More importantly, many of the themes from the musical carry on with this,
as well as some filling-in-the-gaps reconnassaince work.  Juan, who is
pretty underwritten in the musical, is given some extra scenes, and exposed
as what he was for Eva: an accessory.  A muted scene where he tries to
visit her respective room but is shunned allows us to learn more about
Juan, and understand his sadness more than we did before.
>From the "Goodbye and Thank You" number on, the film shows Eva trying to
cover up for the horrible government by doing cheap and petty things which
wooed a nation, and saved a government, even while it left the nation's
people downtrodden.  But despite this, the nation still loved Eva, and when
she slipped into death, the world mourned her because she was a star. 
That's when our narrator, Ch, comes out to show that she wasn't the great
woman she really was, and expose her fame.  Describing this character is
difficult, mainly because he has no real realistic background (he's said to
be based on the revolutionary Ch Guevera, but the two probably could have
never met, like they do in the film), but he serves as a perspective on
Eva, but even his perspective can't help us from feeling bad when Eva dies
a pathetic death.
Alan Parker, no stranger to bizarre musicals (he's done "Fame," "The
Committments," "Bugsy Malone," and "Pink Floyd The Wall" - the latter which
is absolutely brilliant), nails the film, exposing everything for what it
is.  We cry for Evita at the end because we feel we should, by the way it
is presented.  His direction is manipulative for a reason: to show the
mourning for what it is.  And there is energy throughout, with lots of
bright colors, and scenes which are cinematically entertaning, as well as
enriching and deep, such as the balcony scene where she sings "Don't Cry
For Me, Argentina," and her death sequence, which is poignant becuase of
how sad it is.
Madonna's Golden Globe Winning performance is much like the movie: starts
kinda downhill then goes up quickly, remaning there for the rest of the
film.  At the beginning, she looks like she's too busy concentrating on her
singing to act, but she eventually gets it right, though never really
getting the presence of, say, Patti LuPone (who did the role in its
American Premiere back in the late 70s).  Her death, though, is brilliant. 
Her singing could be better though.  I know she took lessons to improve her
range and all, but it still sounds like she's trying to hard.  She sounds
way too soft in several places where she should be comanding (like...Patti
LuPone - I heard her sing on an old "Evita" CD, and you could just feel her
stage presence without even seeing her).  But it's generally very good,
although not up to the brilliance the role really requires.
Antonio Banderas, who is almost like a guilty pleasure these days (I'm one
of the few people who thinks he rocks), is extremely comanding in his
performance, presenting a lovable narrator.  His singing is very good,
though nothing compared to the original, Mandy Patinkin.  He does have a
pretty good singing voice, and a great range.  And Jonathan Pryce is pretty
awesome, although very brief at times, in his role as Juan, seeming to put
on a poker face for his melancholy facade.
Although it gets off to a rocky start ("rocky"'s polite for what it really
is), it soon picks up and becomes a wonderully poignant musical.  Like the
other musical released in '96 (Woody Allen's "Everyone Says I Love You"),
it's a reminder that the Hollywood musical may be dead, but it can come
back every now and then for a brief performance.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Michael Dequina
Who knew?  After torturing moviegoers for the past decade with awful
performances in sometimes even worse movies, Madonna actually proves to be a
capable screen actress in what a number of audience members at the media
screening declared "the best film of the year."  While I don't think quite
as highly of it, Alan Parker's long-awaited film version of Andrew Lloyd
Webber and Tim Rice's celebrated stage musical/rock opera Evita is
nonetheless a remarkable cinematic achievement--a brisk, involving, and
highly entertaining spectacle that could breathe new life into the dead
genre of the movie musical.
Evita follows the meteoric rise and fall of Eva Duarte Peron
(Madonna), a girl from the Argentina countryside who dreams of fame and
fortune in the big city.  A liaison with tango singer Augustin Magaldi
(Jimmy Nail) is her ticket to "B.A.--Buenos Aires--Big Apple," where she
climbs up the social ladder and carves out a career as a model and actress
by winning and then discarding useful lovers.  Her most useful conquest
turns out to be Juan Peron (Jonathan Pryce), who marries Eva and is soon
elected president.  As First Lady of Argentina, Eva wins the love of the
nation and all the riches she ever dreamed of, but her flame is ultimately
blown out in 1952, when, at the age of 33, she succumbs to uterine cancer.
Evita the show has a reputation for portraying one of the most
beloved figures in Argentinean history as a scheming viper hungry for fame
and fortune.  While the film does not shy away from this angle, it is just
one side of her persona; Eva as a whole is painted as a very complex figure.
Her accomplishments for her country (grant women the right to vote, the
openings of new hospitals, her giving money to the poor, etc.) are duly
noted, and she does have a vulnerable side.  Her obsessive drive to be
famous is really more of a need for acceptance, something she never received
as a child.  We first see Eva as a girl all of 7 years old, forbidden to
attend her father's funeral because she was the product of an extramarital
affair.  That scene is revisited more than once during the course of the
film, and it serves as a reminder as how the dream began and how the woman
came to be.  Eva's sensitive side does shine through in other moments,
especially in the lovely lament "Another Suitcase in Another Hall," which
she sings after Magaldi turns her back on her soon after arriving in Buenos
Aires (in the stage production, the tune is sung by another character); and
most notably near the end, where you can sense her emptiness and the feeling
that the dream had grown into something more than she could bear.
The effectiveness of those dramatic moments is due in no small part
to Madonna's startling performance.  Granted, she is in her element in this
film, taking on a role that is almost entirely sung, but there is more to
her work than her stronger-than-ever voice.  In all her other films, she is
so overwrought and in-your-face that she might as well have worn a sign that
read "Look at me!  I'm Madonna, and I'm ACTING!"  Here, she is surprisingly
restrained, and as a result her acting feels natural.  It is that
naturalness that enables her to make an emotional connection with the
audience, something she has never been able to accomplish before.  Usually a
Madonna death scene in a movie is met with laughter (or walkouts); this time
around there was silence, save for the sniffling that could be heard
throughout the auditorium.  After this film, she should retire from film
acting; I don't see her ever topping her astonishing work here.
Madonna would likely not have been able to pull off her career-best
work without the stellar talent around and behind her.  The liveliest
performance comes from Antonio Banderas, who plays the floating narrator
Che.  His perpetually unamused and cynical presence and viciously
snarled vocals give the film a welcome edge and prevent it from taking
itself too seriously.  Tony Award winner Pryce adds some maturity and polish
to the whole affair as only a theater vet can.  But most of the kudos go to
director-producer-co-scripter (with Oliver Stone) Parker, who keeps the
action moving briskly while allowing time for quieter moments.  The film is
quite the visual spectacle; the numerous scenes of chaos are well-staged;
the flashy editing serves the story well; and the scenes set at the balcony
of the Casa Rosada, where the Perons address the hordes of extras standing
below, are real stunners.  To quote Che, "The best show in town was the
crowd outside the Casa Rosada crying 'Eva Peron!'"  Parker's one misstep is
his tendency to crank up Webber's score to the max, which too often obscures
Che's expository lyrics, which, in turn, are already somewhat obscured by
Banderas's accent.
The movie musical is dead, and I doubt Evita will be its
resurrection; I'm not so certain that contemporary moviegoers are ready for
films where characters periodically break into song, let alone sing
throughout the entire film.  But if any film is to revive the movie musical,
it will be Evita, for its haunting melodies, strong performances, and
overall passion has the potential to reach even the most skeptical
mainstream moviegoer.

Author
Eric Robinette
Starring: Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce
Written and directed by Alan Parker; original treatment by Oliver Stone;
based on the musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice
And all I had to do was look at this visually stunning, engrossing
rendition of "Evita" to know that it lived up to its advance hype. In
fact, about the only problem with the movie is that its a little too aware
it lives up to its advance hype.
Many people had reason to doubt that it would work, not least of which was
that Hollywood had not made a suuccessful musical picture in years, much
less one where almost the entire film is sung. What these naysayers failed
to take into account were two names: Alan Parker, and yes, Madonna.
Parker has been publicly quoted as saying he wants to make a movie in
every genre before he days. If Iwere him, I would stick to musicals,
because it is in them that he most proves that he is a master of visual
storytelling. In "Pink Floyd: The Wall" he took a ponderous script and
breathed life into it with scores of memorable images. In "The
Commitments," he took a thin story and strengthened it by letting the old
soul songs tell paert of the story.
Now, with "Evita", Parker has pulled out all the stops and let the songs
completely take over, and it greatly helps that he has some great
performances to work from, not the least of which is Madonna's.  I, for
one, had no doubt she would be able to pull this off.  As derided as her
acting ability has been, even her detractors may admit she delivers the
goods in a musical forum, and she certainly does here. Not only is her
vocal range improved, but so is her emotional range. She effectively
expresses both theconniving manipulation and emotional vulnerability of
Eva Peron, which helps keep the character appropriately enigmatic.  
For all Madonna's success, though, the most vital performance in the film
is the one given by Antonio Banderas, who appears as Che', the film's
sardonic, omniscent narrator.  What surprised me was not Banderas' vocal
ability (I remember "The Mambo Kings"), but the confidence and ease with
with which he delivers Tim Rice's cynical  lyrics.  He effectively cuts
the proceedings down to size when they threaten to become overbearing. 
Unfortunatley that overstuffing is the picture's biggest detriment,
especially in Webber's score. While his melodies are more often than not
affecting, too often they're undermined by dated arrangements featuring
synthesizers and guitars that sound like they're stuck in 1979.  
Unfortunately, Jonathan Pryce's performance as Juan Peron is stifled, too.
 While he provides a solid center as Juan Peron ,he tends to be
overshadowed by all the showy proceedings surrounding him.
Even Parker's normally assured direction gets caught up in the pomp and
circumstance. Early on,Parker's staging  is too self-conscious,  too aware
that its  creating a big spectacle..  It's only after Banderas gets going
that Parker relaxes and lets the material speak for itself.
In the end, after Evita has "entetered mortality," Che contemplates her
memory, fully aware that Eva was not all she seemed, but admiring all the
same her gift for putting on a show. I found myself agreeing with him
about "Evita," the movie.
