Title
Review for Home Before Dark (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Hazelwood Films-Scout Produciton
 Director: Maureen Foley
 Writer:  Maureen Foley
 Cast: Stephanie Castellarin, Brian Delate, Katharine Ross,
Patricia Kalember, Helen Lloyd Breed
   In this modest film which was introduced at the 1997
Hamptons International Film Festival (where it won the Grand
Jury Prize), an 11-year-old girl submits a story to a contest
sponsored by "Seventeen" magazine.  The story is about her
own childhood, about incidents which marred her happiness
and caused her single-handedly to seek a resolution to the
serious problems her family must bear.  That narrative
becomes, in effect, the film itself: a tale about a sad but
intelligent and sensitive junior-high student at the time of the
Kennedy assassination, an era in which bold changes were to
occur in American society mirroring the surprises in her own
adolescence.  While "Home Before Dark" has the look of a TV
soap, and one which could use some judicious editing to pick
up its sluggigh pace, the film is redeemed by solid acting
particularly by young Stephanie Castellarin in her first starring
role in a feauture film.  It also showcases the talent of
Katherine Ross, best known to an American audience for her
role in "The Graduate" as Dustin Hoffman's main squeeze
and as part of a threesome with Paul Newman and Robert
Redford in "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid."
  "Home Before Dark" takes place in a Massachusettes
suburb which finds Nora (Stephanie Castellarin) attending a
strict parochial school in the class of Sister Concilia (Helen
Lloyd Breed), her studies hardly motivated by the tragic
events in her home.  Her mother, Dolores (Patricia Kalember),
feels responsible the for automobile deaths of three of her
sibs before Nora was born and is institutionalized after a
suicide attempt.  Forced to grow up before her time, Nora is
sent by her stressed-out dad Martin (Brian Delate) to live with
her Aunt Rose (Katharine Ross), a cold, prim Jackie-O
lookalike who treats the girl as a daughter-substitute but is
entirely too rigorous in her demands.  
  In her script, writer-directed Maureen Foley evokes the usual
laughs in dealing with a Catholic education, picturing Sister
Concila (Helen Lloyd Breed) as an overbearing disciplinarian
who nonetheless has humorous traces of humanity.  (In one
scene, she catches some 11-year-olds smoking, sends them
scurring back to the building, and takes a deep, satisfying
breath of their secondhand smoke.)
   Foley takes us through a pre-adolescent's usual rites of
passage: first period, first kiss, competition with a classmate
for the attentions of a cute boy.  The year 1963 is perhaps
the final year of American innocence, which was lost as a
result of the Kennedy assassination, the onset of the Vietnam,
and the introduction of the birth control pill.  The urge to
conform is present in the behavior of the beautician who ruins
Nora's free-flowing hair ("they're all wearing it this way"), and
the era's obsessiveness is well reflected in the behavior of the
priggish Aunt Rose who is "driven crazy" by the way Nora's
hair keeps flowing about the girl's face.
   Brian Delate turns in a strong and believable performance
as a dad who tries his best to pay his bills and bring up four
children without the presence of their mother.  Without
Stephanie Castellarin's laudable dispatch of her sensitive role
as an emotionally burdened girl, though, "Home Before Dark"
would be quite ordinary, however heartfelt.
