Title
Review for Michael Collins (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MICHAEL COLLINS *** 1/2  Written and directed by Neil Jordan.
Photography, Chris Menges. Editing,J. Patrick Duffner & Tony Lawson.
Production design, Anthony Pratt. Music, Elliot Goldenthal.
Producer,Stephen Woolley . Cast: Liam Neeson (Michael Collins), Aidan
Quinn (Harry Boland), Stephen Rea (Ned Broy), Alan Rickman (Eamon de
Valera), Julia Roberts (Kitty Kiernan) et al. A Warner Brothers & Geffen
Pictures release. 131 minutes. Rated R (violence).
Good things, they say, come in threes. Well, not quite. In rapid
succession I saw the Irish-made "Michael Collins" (Best Film, Best Actor
at the Venice Festival), the English-made "Secrets and Lies" (Best Film,
Best Actress at the Cannes Festival), and the shot-in-Mexico by an
Australian director American-made "Romeo and Juliet." The first two were
fine. The third put me to sleep intermittently, which precludes a
review.
"Michael Collins" is an ambitious, successful reconstruction of the last
years of its eponymous hero (in movie terms), who is also a hero in
terms of Ireland's history. Not for every Irish person or faction
however. The picture has caused controversy in the United Kingdom and
Ireland, while in America it has been very well received, with no
flare-ups. Public and the critics, rightly shying away from past Irish
politics -- a maze for which very few outsiders are qualified to pass
judgment -- have looked at the film  qua  film, as the portrait of an
exceptional leader about whom little is generally known. Even Irish-born
Liam Neeson ("Schindler's List"), admits that before he got the part he
had only vague notions about Collins.  
If nothing else, this work introduces to the masses of filmgoers a
historical figure of capital importance. It does it in a controlled,
thoughtful and, for most of us, credible way, accurate within the bounds
of cinema's possibilities. That's no mean service. It reaches beyond its
many artistic or "entertainment" values into expanding one's knowledge
of history. 
That's what movies have often done, including the biographical ones
("biopics") that presented mostly schlocky, romanticized and dubious
screen lives that had little to do with realities. Still, to mention
only one country, it is through motion pictures that most people outside
Mexico got their first acquaintance with figures such as Pancho Villa,
Juarez or Zapata.
To help orient the viewer, here is a sketchy chronology of matters Irish
in the early 20th century.
1912. Third Home Rule bill introduced . Ulstermen resist.
1913. Irish Volunteers vs. Ulster Volunteers
1914 .World War I
1915. Sir Roger Casement goes to Germany for help, gets only antiquated
weapons.
1916. Casement arrested upon returning to Ireland. Monday April 24,
Easter Rising. Between 1,000  and 2,000 Republican fighters involved.
They are put down in under a week. Executions of their leaders Patrick
Pearse, Tom Clarke, and 13 others.  Sinn Fein formed, led by Eamon de
Valera. Republicans set up their provisional government. IRA organized
vs. British administration. Violence: IRA vs. Irish police and the
English soldiers (the Black and Tans).
1920. Britain passes the Government of Ireland Act, divides the country
between Northern and Southern Ireland, both self-governing up to a point
-but only the Northern Parliament functioned.
1921. British Prime Minister Lloyd George negotiates with de Valera.
Slow results. Cease-fire. Anglo-Irish Treaty signed:  for Great Britain
by  Lloyd George; for Ireland by Arthur Griffith, Michael Collins, et
al. Irish Free State becomes self-governing dominion with he British
Commonwealth. Pro-treaty faction (led by Michael Collins) and
anti-treaty faction (led by de Valera) fight civil war. Pro-treaty wins. 
1922. Collins, ambushed, is killed. He would have been 32 in two months.
Irish author and film director Neil Jordan has given us, among others,
such excellent pictures as "The Company of Wolves," "Mona Lisa," and
"The Crying Game."  "Michael Collins" was planned and nurtured for 13
years. It  follows its protagonist from the Easter Rising to his
assassination. 
The opening sets the tone of violent action, excellent production values
and superb camera work. Cinematographer Chris Menges (Oscars for"The
Mission" and "The Killing Fields")   films fluidly without calling
attention to his skills, lights the sets naturally, without artificial
fill-ins. The word "exquisite" comes to mind, paradoxically, since so
much drama and tragedy are shown. 
What is also very subtle is that in the early scenes of fighting,
surrender, brutality and executions we get our first but almost last
contrast between the British and the Irish accents. Only Irish tones
will be heard, until Churchill picks "the elite of the British Secret
Service" to fight the fighters. Even then, the most poignant  parts are
the fratricidal, Irish vs. Irish ones.
>From the Rising we cut to 1918. Collins and his best friend Harry Boland
(Aidan Quinn) have been released from prison. The eloquent Michael
renews his incitement to resistance. New action follows, supenseful,
vivid,energetic and free of false gung-ho heroics.
Collins was 28 then. Liam Neeson was 43 when the film was made. Some
suspension of disbelief is in order, and perhaps - granted that the
Irish have great facility with speech- it also applies to the
self-assured, quick-thinking and -planning Collins shown. No Method
hesitations, aahs and ahems here. Even so, one gets caught up in
Collins's humanity, struggles and toughness. He sends a message to the
Irish police :" Any collaborating with the Army of Occupation will be
punished by death. You have been warned."
Collins - it is historically true - was the inventor of a special kind
of guerrilla warfare. Neil Jordan says that his tactics were copied by
independence movements around the world, from Mao in China to Shamir in
Israel. Why not add Vietnam and the resistance (and collaboration) in
Nazi-occupied Europe too? 
The acting, a tad romanticized, is uniformly impressive. Collins-Neeson
towers over all the performers, he IS the film, with all the others as
supporting cast. Among them, two stand out. The ambiguous, manipulative
Eamon de Valera who became Sinn Fein's president in 1918, thrice prime
minister with short interruptions (1932-1959) and President (1959-73). 
This best known of Irish politicians is played with  marvelous, dour
shiftiness by Alan Rickman, as a near-villain. His thorn in Collins's
flesh is one of the main lines the plot follows. There is also Stephen
Rea ("The Crying Game") as the mole Ned Broy, perfect as the humble
"little man" who risks and loses his life to pass on information to
Collins. Broy is a composite figure of three characters.
Setting aside controversial aspects (one of them being a car bomb that
some say did not exist at the time), a minor lack in the movie is that
we see of Collins mostly the activist-politician-leader while we don't
really know what makes him tick as a person. Of course, this dimension
would have lengthened the film considerably. There's also a small
annoyance as the private Collins is limited to his affair with  Kitty
Kiernan and to this rivalry with  best friend Harry for the lady's love.
While Kitty did exist, the cutting to parenthetical sentimental scenes
is  intrusive and superfluous. Julia Roberts plays her with charm and a
good Irish accent at first. Later the accent disappears. Later yet it
becomes American.
The overall movie and the specific Collins role are strong enough to
resist small objections. Collins, as a warrior turned statesman and
peace-maker, becomes exponentially a likable, truly heroic figure who
affects us viscerally and intellectually. Perhaps he is best summed up
when he says of the British " I hate them not for their race [...} but
for what the've done to us by breeding hate in us."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Most political struggles have their romantic heroes and with a
people as naturally poetic or as argumentative as the Irish, it is not
surprising that the fight for independence spawned a great romantic, if
controversial, hero.  The great hero of the Irish struggle in this
century was Michael Collins.  And who better to play him than Liam
Neeson, the Charleton Heston of the 1990s.  Having played larger-than-
life historical figures Oskar Schindler and Rob Roy, the Irish actor
was an obvious choice to play Michael Collins, at least if audiences
were willing to accept the forty-four-year-old Neeson playing a man who
died at thirty-one.
     The film--in good epic film style told in flashback just after the
main character's death--begins with Collins in the 1916 Easter Rising
of the Irish against British rule.  He escapes immediate arrest only to
be arrested later and receive a short term in prison.  Many of those
rebelling are executed, but Eamon de Valera, a major leader of the
resistance (played by Alan Rickman), is given a lighter sentence of a
term in prison. This is probably because of his multi-national
background, having a Spanish father and being born in America.  Collins
begins setting about the sort of activities that will get him back in
prison.  His public speeches for independence win him an ally in the
British police force, Ned Broy (Stephen Rea).  At least by this
account, Collins was impressed by the efficiency and efficacy of
British Intelligence and sets about the task of modeling the new Irish
Republican Army on it.  Collins manages to break de Valera from prison,
but de Valera is clearly envious of Collins's new-found power and the
relationship between the two is strained. With the intelligence Collins
is able to collect about his enemy he is able to outdo the British in
the effectiveness of his attacks.  He invents the sort of tactics that
have become the trademark of the IRA.  For two years he maintains an
urban guerrilla war against the British.  This creates a conflict with
de Valera in which the latter wants more traditional warfare, Collins
prefers his new terrorism.  His struggle ends in the Truce of 1921 and
de Valera sends Collins to England to negotiate for the Irish.  Collins
realizes that the British will make only limited concessions.  He
brings back a compromise treaty that allows for an Irish free state but
partitions Ireland and requires an oath of allegiance to the British
monarch.  The free state is declared and almost immediately breaks into
civil war with Collins defending the treaty and de Valera now on the
side of terrorist war against the British and against a treaty that is
dividing the country both politically and quite literally.
     There is not much in the style of MICHAEL COLLINS but the
combination of old elements.  Through the war against the British the
film draws heavily on the style of THE GODFATHER, particularly with
back- and-forth cutting between some tension-producing scene of
impending violence, to one more placid.  This gives the effect of a
much longer and more drawn-out tense scene.  Another scene at a
football match reminds one very much a similar scene in GANDHI.  Where
the film borrows, it seems to do it well in most instances.  There is
one James Bond-ish escape involving a seemingly nearly impossible
athletic feat done in complete silence.  Here Jordan, who wrote the
script as well as directing, seriously damages the credibility of his
story which elsewhere is reasonably well maintained.  Other places his
taste is considerably better.  He has a love triangle that could have
been a time-wasting plot cliche.  He leaves it in for historical
accuracy, but he wisely downplays before it can become a distraction.
MICHAEL COLLINS is photographed by Chris Menges who won Oscars for his
work on THE KILLING FIELDS (1984) and THE MISSION (1986).  He creates a
surprising amount of atmosphere with what he does not show.  He
frequently has smoke or fog in the frame.  Often part of the frame is
obscured by darkness or shadow.  At least for me some of the dialogue
was similarly obscured by the thick Irish accents.  While Menges's
images dominate the film, Elliot Goldenthal's score stays modestly in
background coloring the film subtly but rarely getting noticed.
     Liam Neeson is a big man and plays Collins as a big man, somewhat
larger than the people around him.  He sweeps into a scene with that
large bulk of his and commands it.  The one serious problem with the
casting is that he never seems as young as Collins needs to be, a good
fifteen years younger through much of the film.  Aiden Quinn as friend
and fellow revolutionary Harry Boland cuts a much less imposing figure.
Julia Roberts is by no means the center of the show here and her acting
appropriately is not either.  She can smile and look appealing and even
can master an Irish accent, but she makes little contribution to the
film that a lessor-known actress could not have done, and very likely
better.  Alan Rickman needs a good director to keep him from chewing
the scenery and he seems to have found a good director in Jordan.  His
acting is neat and precise.  His de Valera seems to be thinking out
each sentence and then delivering with the incisiveness of a scalpel.
One may not like what he is saying, but it seems certain that it is
precisely what de Valera means.
     It is hard to judge the historical accuracy of MICHAEL COLLINS,
since even the Irish are not sure of Collins's role in the fight for
Independence.  There are no obvious contradictions with anything I have
found written about Collins's role in history, though it is relatively
safe for a filmmaker to fill in some of the blanks about a man of
mystery.  It has been suggested that De Valera is shown a bit worse
than the historical figure, but much of this is within the range of
reasonable interpretation and opinion.  And speaking of opinion, mine
of this film is that it rates a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     MICHAEL COLLINS is a perfect project for a collaboration between Neil
Jordan and Liam Neeson, two artists whose projects tend to inspire
background articles.  Jordan had everyone talking about _not_ talking
about his 1992 sleeper hit THE CRYING GAME, then inspired controversy when
he cast Tom Cruise as the amoral immortal Lestat in INTERVIEW WITH THE
VAMPIRE; Neeson has stepped into the shoes of enigmatic historical figures
(SCHINDLER'S LIST) and national heroes (ROB ROY).  They are in familiar
territory then with MICHAEL COLLINS, which has drawn the expected fire for
glorifying an ostensible terrorist and for playing fast and loose with
history.  Unfortunately, that controversy is almost more compelling than
the film itself, which proves that hero worship and drama can make
uncomfortable companions.
     Neeson plays the title role of Michael Collins, who is among the many
Irish nationalists arrested in the wake of the failed 1916 Easter uprising
against the imperial British rule.  After two years in prison, Collins
emerges convinced that conventional warfare has no chance of defeating the
British.  The alternative is a guerrilla campaign of bombings and
assassinations of British government operatives, and that is exactly what
Collins and his friend Harry Boland (Aidan Quinn) undertake.  Though
violent and destructive, the program eventually brings the British to the
bargaining table, but the result could be even more violent and
destructive.  A compromise agreement which divides the nation physically
also divides the nation politically, as Irish Republic president Eamon De
Valera (Alan Rickman) leads opposition to the agreement against Collins
and a government which has exchanged an external battle for an internal
one.
     Neil Jordan (who also wrote the screenplay) is clearly going out of
his way to paint Collins as an extraordinary figure in Irish history, as
well as to rationalize his extremism.  "I hate them for making hate
necessary" Collins says in one of several scenes where Jordan makes his
soul-searching known to us, and it is only because Liam Neeson can sell
such a line that it doesn't inspire eye-rolling.  Neeson  has exactly the
charisma and physical presence to be convincing as a nigh-mythical figure
known as "The Big Fella," but he also conveys a moral uncertainty.  He
plays Collins with intelligence, conviction and sadness, and it is more
thanks to Neeson than it is to Jordan that Collins emerges as an
intriguing character, a man of action forced to make an uneasy transition
to man of peace.
     MICHAEL COLLINS is usually a solid piece of drama when it focuses on
the political, with Alan Rickman providing a complex counterpart to
Collins as the more politically calculating De Valera.  Jordan sometimes
over-reaches in his portrayal of the British as faceless villains,
notably in a scene where an armored car opens fire on the crowd at a rugby
match, but generally he is able to maintain a tense adversarial triangle
of Collins, De Valera and the British.  His other triangle, however, is a
perplexing mistake, and highlights how awkward MICHAEL COLLINS becomes
whenever Jordan tries to show us Collins' softer side.  There is a lovely
lass named Kitty Kiernan (Julia Roberts, improving on her MARY REILLY
brogue) who comes between Collins and Harry Boland, and perhaps the schism
is intended to foreshadow the civil strife to come.  Still, there is
little heat between Neeson and Roberts, and the relationship is not
developed in any appreciable way.  When Jordan juxtaposes a series of
political murders with an idyllic bedroom scene between Collins and Kitty
a la the baptism sequence in THE GODFATHER, the scenes do not complement
one another; every cut back to the budding romance is simply a
distraction.
     Even though MICHAEL COLLINS manages to avoid ever using two of the
most critical words in the Irish conflict -- "Catholic" and "Protestant"
-- it still provides a strong overview of the pivotal years when the Irish
rebels realized that fighting dirty was the only option left to them.  it
is a good looking film with several fine performances (including Neil
Jordan regular Stephen Rea as an informant for Collins inside the British
government), but I don't think it ever pretends to be an objective
history.  MICHAEL COLLINS is meant to be a monument to an important figure
in Irish lore, and it does a fine job of making him a monument.  It is
when it tries to make him a man that it inspires the only artistic
controversy it deserves.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Liam Neeson, Aidan Quinn, Julia Roberts, Alan Rickman, Stephen
Rea, Ian Hart, Brendan Gleeson, Stuart Graham, Charles Dance Director:
Neil Jordan Screenplay: Neil Jordan
'An eye for an eye', and a dead cabinet minister for every year under
British Rule. That would mean 800 years, and a lot of dead ministers.
Not a good idea, but when desperation becomes despair, people will do
anything to succeed. I say 'turn the other cheek', but that's Tim Voon
speaking, not Michael Collins.
So the year is around 1915, and the republic of Ireland is having
problems establishing their independence. In the midst of this unsettled
times, rises a man by the name 'Michael Collins' who has a single,
focused vision for his nation - freedom! Rough around the edges, gritty
and plain spoken, this working class man, who in another time and place
could have been an ordinary husband, father and brother; employs
guerrilla tactics, to achieve his end. His philosophy summarised would
be, 'when no one listens, act.' Which in no uncertain terms means
assassinations and explosions, with the occasional innocent sacrificed
for the cause.
Liam Neeson, Scottish? Irish? English? Plays Collins down to a very fine
line of detailed particulars - of note is the Irish accent, which Aidan
Quinn and Julia Roberts have some difficulty mastering (they are after
all American). The director has captured the beauty of Ireland at its
grim best. Heavy, dark grey clouds, threatening to unleash its heavy
burden upon cold, colourless, slate roof tops and soot filled chimneys,
puffing smog upwards to the already overcast sky. Cobbled streets,
filled with the hustle, bustle, day to day mundane, chore-laden
pedestrian darting through and fro, avoiding the clip-clapper of horses
pounding their hooves on lifeless stone roads. Add to this the
rit-rattle of ricocheting bullets, tall smoking buildings, and distant
screams and you have for yourself a city in distress.
The result of these extreme measures, is history itself. The
establishment of the independent self-ruling state of Ireland. Not
independence, but neither is Australia (an ex-penal colony). The treaty
with the British, resulted in disunity and disharmony amongst the IRA,
with a resulting split; but Collins the soldier, a product of years of
resentment of English rule, knows when to stop fighting and regain his
humanity - to once again become Collins the working man.
This is not a particularly uplifting movie by any accounts, but it does
tell a story of an ordinary man forced to make difficult decisions under
very tense circumstances. Whether the details of the plot are accurate,
I do not know; but if in doubt, all you have to do is open the pages of
a British history book to find the name 'Michael Collins' included
within.
Comment: I say, passive resistance on this occasion for added variation.

Author
Christopher Null
     The time between 1916 and the 1920s saw the worst of a revolt that
caused the creation the IRA and heightened the fight for independence
between Ireland and the crown in London.  At the head of this fight,
like it or not, was Michael Collins, a demagogue/saboteur/freedom
fighter that lived as a hero and died a martyr.
     Read it once again -- this is *not* BRAVEHEART.  BRAVEHEART took
place something like 600 years earlier, and just a stone's throw across
the North Channel, in Scotland.
     Otherwise, it's the same movie, except Neil Jordan's paean to the
Irish hero leaves much to be desired by the discriminating viewer. 
Jordan, best known for his masterpiece THE CRYING GAME, really seems to
be falling apart these days (did *you* stay awake during INTERVIEW WITH
THE VAMPIRE?).  Now he's back with MICHAEL COLLINS, a rambling,
138-minute epic that could have easily been cut to 90, and has its good
points and its bad -- but the bad really stick out like sore thumbs.
     Using more scrolling title cards than I've ever seen before, at
first I thought MICHAEL COLLINS was going to be a read-along.  But
instead of incorporating this information about Collins (Liam Neeson)
into the story, Jordan tacks on the printed Michael Collins at-a-glance
biography and just plugs the movie full of the same sequence over and
over again.  (That sequence is this:  the IRA guys are asleep, then the
Brits come on a raid, then the IRA guys get away just in time.  Whew!)
     Then there's the what-on-earth-were-you-thinking decision to put
Julia Roberts in this movie as Kitty Kiernan, the woman torn between
Collins and his once-best friend Harry Boland (Aidan Quinn).  Seriously,
my Irish accent is better than Roberts's, and I'm from *Texas*.
     The real story of Michael Collins may be a good one -- full of
intrigue, infighting with the Irish President Eamon De Valera (Alan
Rickman), bloody war with the English, and a struggle to get the girl
with the bad Irish accent.  The problem is that Jordan tells the story
like it's a history lesson, and a dull one at that.  Yes, the movie's
full of good acting (exception noted above), gory violence, and lavish
sets (all of which are blown up by the end of the film), but it ends up
being just another over-indulgent sermon by a misguided preacher.
     [The author of this review is not responsible for historical
inaccuracies in either the film or this critique.]
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael Redman
This is one of the most controversial films of recent times, not for the
quality of filmmaking, but rather the subject matter. Depending upon
whom you ask, Michael Collins is either a murdering terrorist and
traitor to his own people or a national hero of Ireland. Again,
depending upon whom you ask, director Neil Jordan ("The Crying Game",
"Interview With A Vampire") either portrays history relatively
accurately or plays fast and loose with the truth.
After the abortive 1916 Easter uprising against the British, Collins
(Liam Neeson) comes to realize that the only tactic left to the Irish is
an undercover war fought by an invisible army. Inventing the modern
terrorism that became the signature of the Irish Republican Army, he and
a small band of men bring England to her knees. As he states, his talent
is mayhem. The problem is that once he wins, it is no longer mayhem that
is needed, but politics. =
Sent to England by Sinn Fein head and president of the Irish Republic
Eamon De Valera (played with an eerie intensity by Alan Rickman) to
negotiate a settlement, Collins returns with less than he hoped for.
Ireland would be divided with the south being a Free State, but having
to pledge allegiance to the English king.
Historically correct or not, the film would have us believe that De
Valera send Collins because he knew what the outcome would be and didn't
want to take the fall himself. The two fellow revolutionaries have a
vicious falling out and civil war breaks out, each on different sides
and each leading forces killing their fellow countrymen. As with many
battles for independence, the real question is what to do when there's a
victory.  =
There are cries of whitewashing Collins' life by changing events to make
him appear more the hero. The less-than-admirable portrayal of De
Valera, also an Irish national hero, will strike some the wrong way,
especially the implication that he was involved in Collins'
assassination. =
Liam Neeson has played larger than life historical figures in
"Schindler=92s List" and "Rob Roy". Now he has stepped into the big shoes=
of Michael Collins. He is the fuel behind the film, although the
co-stars (Rickman, Julia Roberts, Aidan Quinn and Stephen Rea) help
carry it.
The cinematography is moody and with the exception of a technique stolen
from "The Godfather", extremely affective. No matter what your politics,
the craft of the film is beyond debate. And no matter what the
historical realities were, it=92s an extraordinary tale.
It has been said that history is written by the victors, but in the
latter half of the 20th century, history is being written by the
filmmakers. Although the movie itself admits that some events have been
=93fictionalized=94 to create a better story, the truth of the Irish
revolution has become "Michael Collins" for many people. It may be
wishful thinking to believe that we can have a grand film that is true
to the events, but it would be interesting to see someone try.
[This appeared in the 11/7/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Quick, name some good films about the American revolution?  Hmm,
couldn't name any?  For those of you who incorrectly listed REVOLUTION
(1985), remember I said "good" films.  Granted the Internet Movie Data
Base does also list a few obscure, older ones, but basically there
aren't any.
     Thanks to director Neil Jordan (MONA LISA, THE CRYING GAME, and
INTERVIEW WITH A VAMPIRE), there is a good one about the "Irish"
revolution.  Taken from the perspective of a key Irish terrorist and
later peace broker, the film is known simply as MICHAEL COLLINS.
     MICHAEL COLLINS is an excellent, but frustrating film.  The acting
is brilliant as is the direction.  The film's downfall lies in the
script, also by Neil Jordan.  Tactically the script works, but not
strategically.
     After a three paragraph written introduction to past Irish
history, the viewer is thrust into the thick of the 1916 Easter Rising
where the battle is fully engaged.  Certainly Irish historians will
have no problems, but I posit that average movie goers will feel like
they turned on the TV and found themselves starting off in the middle
of a great mini-series with only a few sound bites from the narrator to
give them the necessary context and motivation.  There is fat in the
show that could have been trimmed in favor of more historical
perspective in the beginning.
     Similarly, most of MICHAEL COLLINS leads up to the signing of the
treaty with England, but it does not end cleanly there.  Jordan decides
he must show all of the events after that up until Collins death.  The
problem is that the show is already about two hours long at that point
so he rushes through a sketchy outline version of the end that leaves
you exhausted and confused.  Quick incident after incident are thrown
at the audience in a montage that feels like we are see nothing more
than the trailers for MICHAEL COLLINS PART II.
     I have to get one final problem out of the way so I can
concentrate on the positive aspects of what is at its core an excellent
movie.  Hollywood decided that they had to have a sex interest in the
film so they signed Julia Roberts to play the role of Michael Collins's
girlfriend Kitty Kiernan.
     Without exception, the film would be stronger if every scene
Roberts was in, would have been left on the cutting room floor.  The
show's great momentum grinds to a halt every time she appears.  Her
part is the fat I alluded to earlier.  Maybe they could have left her
name on the marquee and just put her picture on Collins's desk, but not
forced her to deliver a bunch of meaningless lines, including my
favorite bit of drivel, "so which one of you gunslingers is going to
ask me to dance."  Roberts should have politely collected her check and
left.
     "What happens next time?"  asks Harry Boland (Aidan Quinn) as they
surrender at the end of the Easter Rising.  "Next time, Harry, we won't
play by their rules.  We'll play by our own," reassures Michael Collins
(Liam Neeson) with plans to switch to terrorism and away from open
warfare.
     When Eamon De Valera (Alan Rickman) is captured we see him writing
a letter from prison with the sun streaming in to bless writings.
Chris Menges's emotive cinematography makes him look like St. Francis
composing his pieties.  Later when Collins addresses a crowd, the
images are so strong that you want to leap out of your seat and join
the cause.  The cinematography is Academy Award nomination material as
is the acting by Neeson and by Stephen Rea as Ned Broy, who was
Collins's personal spy in the British intelligence service in Dublin.
     Neeson's portrayal of Collins as a terrorist's terrorist is
unflinching.  He is willing to kill anyone at any time to support the
revolution.  His only concern is not to waste precious bullets.
Nevertheless, Neeson is so attractive and compelling, that regardless
of whose side you were on when entering the theater, you are likely to
side with Collins during the show.  Neeson gives such an involving
performance that will find yourself pleased every time another British
soldier or intelligence officer is murdered.
     Collins wants to wage his war with fear so he starts a mass
campaign of slaughter against the British rulers, specially the British
"G-men" in Dublin.  There are British who are sympathetic to the Irish
cause.  While in Lincoln prison back in England, De Valera is told by
the chaplain (Aidan Grennell) that, "I can't understand your politics,
but I appreciate your integrity."
     The show argues effectively that De Valera had little integrity
and that he was the Machiavellian figure of the Irish revolution.
Specifically, it claims, among other things, that he sent Collins
rather than himself to negotiate with Britain because he knew that the
best result that could be hoped for would be derided by the Irish
people.  If someone else could be blamed, then his hands would be
clean.  Rickman gives a wonderfully slimy performance.
     Collins is drawn as a complex man who proclaims, "I want peace and
quiet.  I want it so much I'd die for it."  He loathes the British,
telling Harry, "I hate them for making hate necessary, and I'll do what
I can to end it."
     To make sure you take the Irish side, the film includes frequent
scenes of torture and murder by the British forces in Dublin.  Typical
of the G-men lines while torturing is the one where they say, "The
problem with the Irish is that they'll sing at the drop of a hat, but
ask them to talk and they won't."
     I accepted the film lock, stock, and barrel as accurate until a
scene where the British troops drive an armored car into a rugby match
for no reason and begin mowing down innocent people in the stands with
machine guns.  After that dubious bit of historical accuracy, I begin
to question all of my previous assumptions about the film.  Maybe the
incident did happen in exactly that way, but I find it a bit hard to
believe.
     MICHAEL COLLINS runs 2:13, which is too short for its attempted
scope, but the film would have been better if it were more tightly
focused in which case it should have been shorter.  The movie has an R
rating.  There is bloody but not sensationalized violence, lots of uses
of the F word, but no sex or nudity.  The show should be fine for
teenagers.  Although the picture could and should have been much
better, I liked MICHAEL COLLINS and recommend it to you.  Although it
is uneven, I average out its rating to ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     "It's my considered opinion that in the fullness of time, history 
will record the greatness of [Michael] Collins and it will be recorded 
at my expense."
          -- Eamon De Valera, President of the Republic of Ireland, 1966
     Of the more than five dozen films to be released this Fall, none is 
likely to generate more controversy than Neil Jordan's MICHAEL COLLINS, 
a biopic of the man who co-founded the IRA and signed the 1921 treaty 
that partitioned Ireland and provoked the 1922 civil war.  Even before 
its release, the film has fanned passions in the United Kingdom, where 
it has been tagged with such diverse labels as "ammunition for IRA 
recruiting sergeants and fund-raisers" (Ruth Dudley Edwards) and "as 
important a film as ever to be made in Ireland about Ireland" (Art 
Cosgrove).  Opponents are as vocal in their condemnation of the movie as 
supporters are in their defense of it.  Not unexpectedly, 
writer/director Neil Jordan has been obligated to affirm the picture's 
integrity, stating at the Toronto Film Festival that "Most of the people 
who accuse me of inflaming the peace process have no interest in the 
peace process whatsoever."
     In truth, while MICHAEL COLLINS does distort elements of history, 
most of the changes and compressions are dramatically effective.  
Certain characters are combined, a few deaths happen differently from 
what history records, and events have been streamlined.  The usage of 
such "dramatic license" is not uncommon in the development of reality-
based movies, so it shouldn't come as a surprise that it exists in this 
case.  Perhaps the most suspect element of MICHAEL COLLINS' script is 
the negative portrayal of Irish hero Eamon De Valera.  Without any real 
facts to back him up, Jordan hints that De Valera may have known about 
the assassination of Collins.  Partisans of the late President will not 
react favorably to such speculation, even though, in the context of this 
narrative, it works.
     Putting aside all the controversy, however, viewers are left with 
an expertly-directed and well-acted historical epic that disappoints 
only in its shallow perspective of the Irish/British and Irish/Irish 
conflicts.  For, in truth, MICHAEL COLLINS is as much the story of the 
birth pangs of the torn, troubled state as it is of one man's rise and 
fall.  This is a case where the era not only defines the character, but 
the character defines the era.  It's impossible to tell the tale of 
Michael Collins without delving into the beginnings of the IRA and the 
dramatic upsurge in support for Sinn Fein, yet there's a sense that 
important issues have been glossed over.  However, Jordan's view of 
characters and circumstances is remarkably even-handed -- he shows both 
the brutality and sensitivity of Collins' nature, turning the man into 
the central figure of an almost-Shakespearean tragedy.
     Strong acting is a key reason why MICHAEL COLLINS is as effective 
as it is.  Irish-born Liam Neeson, after playing a German (SCHINDLER'S 
LIST) and a Scotsman (ROB ROY), finally gets a chance to come home.  His 
portrayal of Collins is the most passionate, powerful work he has ever 
done, easily eclipsing his Oscar-nominated presentation of Oscar 
Schindler.  For well over a decade, Neeson has been carefully honing his 
talents, and the results are apparent here.
     Although Neeson's forceful performance drives the movie, he is 
assisted by an able supporting cast.  Aidan Quinn does his usual, solid 
job as Collins' best friend, Harry Boland.  Alan Rickman, best known for 
playing flamboyant villains (DIE HARD and Kevin Costner's ROBIN HOOD) 
gives a surprisingly low-key and introspective interpretation of De 
Valera.  Jordan veteran Stephen Rea (THE CRYING GAME) plays Ned Broy, 
Collins' spy inside British Intelligence.  And, despite a variable Irish 
accent, Julia Roberts is more than capable in the small role of Kitty 
Kiernan, the woman who brings Collins' human side to the fore.
     MICHAEL COLLINS opens in 1916 Dublin, with the infamous Easter 
Rising, where the better-organized British troops rout the Irish 
Volunteers.  From there, the movie progresses rapidly through the next 
two turbulent years, tracking Collins' rise in power and popularity and 
De Valera's ascension to the head of Sinn Fein.  Then, while De Valera 
is in America drumming up support for an independent Ireland, Collins' 
campaign of urban guerrilla warfare against the British proves to be a 
spectacular success.  Rejecting conventional tactics, he uses an 
"invisible army" that strikes unexpectedly with whatever means are 
available.  Informers are shot and England's Irish intelligence 
operation is brought to its knees.  By late 1921, Churchill and Lloyd 
George are willing to talk peace, and De Valera sends Collins as the 
Irish representative.  The resulting controversial treaty, the best 
Collins felt he could get at the time, fuels the drama of MICHAEL 
COLLINS' final act.  Because the agreement still requires that the Irish 
pay fealty to England's king and because it divides the country in two, 
De Valera rejects it, labeling it as a betrayal.  Civil war ensues, and, 
on August 22, 1922, Collins is assassinated while in his home district 
of Cork.
     Even for those who know the whole story of MICHAEL COLLINS, the 
movie is still a riveting piece of film making, capable of holding an 
audience's attention for more than two hours.  Jordan not only does an 
exceptional job recreating the Ireland of the 1920s, but presents us 
with an entirely human protagonist who's flawed yet sympathetic.  
Collins is not the brash hero of the traditional historical epic -- he's 
a tormented individual who knows that his chief talent is for creating 
mayhem, but who wants peace so desperately that he's willing to die for 
it.  Leeson's portrayal of Collins' agony during the civil war is so 
real that, at times, it's almost painful to watch.
     In tone and spirit, if not in time and place, this film shares a 
great deal with last year's Oscar-winning BRAVEHEART.  Michael Collins, 
like William Wallace, fought for independence, and, in the end, was its 
victim.  Neil Jordan felt that this story was so important that he 
nurtured the script for thirteen years until he had the clout to command 
the actors and budget he wanted.  The ultimate result may not quite 
match his ambitions, but it will still be one of 1996's most talked-
about motion pictures.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman
