Title
Review for High Art (1998)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Film Review by Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Whatever we get ourselves into, we have to pay for.  This theme seems to 
echo in the our heads at the end of Lisa Cholodenko's "High Art."
Syd, the central character, played by Radha Mitchell, is an assistant 
editor at 'Frame' magazine, an important publication in the world of 
photography.  One problem she's experiencing is that, despite her recent 
promotion, she's still treated like an errand-running editorial 
assistant by her boss Harry (David Thornton).  Syd's other problem is 
that her life with boyfriend James (Gabriel Mann), has come to a 
standstill of boredom.  James seems like he's more interested in the 
attractiveness of a blue shirt than in saying anything exciting or witty 
to Syd.  Not that she tries hard, either.
What opens Syd's eyes to alternatives is a visit to the apartment above 
her, ostensibly to inquire about a plumbing problem.  As she lies on the 
floor of the stranger's bathroom, we see the neighbor - Lucy Berliner, 
played by Ally Sheedy - glance at Syd's exposed side, a hint of 
attraction in her eyes.  It so happens that Lucy is a once-celebrated 
photographer who still practices her art privately; portraits of her 
friends, many caught in erotic candids, hang around the apartment and 
around Syd's memory.  Returning to Lucy's digs, Syd meets Lucy's 
drug-addled friends, herself does a line of heroine, and becomes part of 
Lucy's inner circle.  As she returns downstairs to James, Syd is unable 
to complete the hot session of sex she had awakened him for.  This marks 
the beginning of Syd's ventures outside the routines formed the last few 
years, and the end of any positive involvement with her boyfriend.
The bulk of the plot concerns the developing romance between Syd and 
Lucy.  It is marked by solid acting by both actresses, and the portrayal 
of serious emotions with no easy escapes or solutions, a plotting 
strategy for which Lisa Cholodenko, as writer and director, is to be 
admired.  Indeed, the story travels beyond realism into the edges of 
naturalism, as we see the seamy world that makes up a large part of 
Lucy's history - a world with which Syd will slowly become conversant.  
Cholodenko depicts the world as a place of utter nonchalance, where 
drugs of whatever form are shared between friends, where sex is casual 
and commitments uncertain.  As one of Syd's few male friends, Arnie 
(Bill Sage) is almost a comic example of an accommodating burn-out.
As Lucy's lover Greta, a German actress who is obviously too strung out 
to act, Patricia Clarkson makes her character disturbingly real.  
Imagine Greta Garbo's voice spoken even more slowly and lethargically - 
we know this character's soul has begun already to leave her body, and 
we realize with dread that misery loves all the company it can get.  
Greta calls Syd a "teenager," even though Syd saves her life by 
administering CPR after Greta overdoses.  Perhaps verisimilitude would 
have been satisfied had Greta screamed and thrown objects (a camera, 
maybe?) at Syd, but then again Greta's influence still manages to ruin 
any promise of happiness between Lucy and Syd.
It's good to watch Ally Sheedy in a vehicle so much the opposite of 
"Maid to Order."  In her mid-thirties, Sheedy is striking as ever, if 
fashionably underweight.  Her stringy muscles and tendons only help her 
sketching of the starving soul of Lucy.  We care most about her when she 
reveals her drug problem to her wealthy mother (Tammy Grimes), and 
especially when she complies with Syd's request to swear off the white 
powder for their weekend together.  Their professional lives 
intertwining with their personal ones, Lucy and Syd collaborate on a 
shoot for the cover of 'Frame.'  It's a touchy situation, and brings up 
nuances that can be applied to the mixing of anyone's job and home 
lives.  
I suspect personal tastes will be much involved in any viewer's 
reception of "High Art."  I found the love scenes between Lucy and her 
lovers to be realistic without being too graphic.  There is no nudity 
below the waist.  The scenes portraying recreational drug-taking, 
though, were too frequent and frankly revolting.  Cholodenko is building 
a sordid atmosphere that could engender what happens at the end, I 
suppose.  But the communal amorality of her characters certainly does 
not lessen our distance toward them.  We could care more about what 
happens to Syd and Lucy.  But we don't give a hang about Arnie, for 
example, when he's sitting in Lucy's age-worn Mercedes at the far end of 
the story, staring ahead in terror at what's facing him.


Author
Scott Renshaw
     Watch Radha Mitchell long enough, and I'll bet you'll start seeing a
young Mariel Hemingway.  Watch HIGH ART long enough, and I'll bet you'll
start seeing a heroin-chic spin on PERSONAL BEST.  The "lesbian awakening"
genre may hardly rival the mis-matched buddy comedy in sheer weight of
numbers, but the conventions are just as conventional in their own way:
wide-eyed naif, experienced older woman, tentative first steps, heartfelt
discusson over what the wide-eyed naif really wants, oppressive
earnestness.  Been there, done that, seen it all.
     There's one thing in HIGH ART, however, that I can virtually
guarantee you haven't seen before:  Ally Sheedy as a Serious Actress.
Sheedy plays Lucy Berliner, a one-time shining star in New York photo art
circles who burned out and disappeared for over a decade.  Now living with
her heroin-addicted lover Greta (Patricia Clarkson) and a cadre of
perpetually stoned hangers-on, Lucy is inadertently re-discovered by her
downstairs neighbor Syd (Radha Mitchell), who also happens to be a young
assistant editor for a classy photo journal.  Realizing she's on to a
career-making scoop, Syd begins working with Lucy on a new layout, only to
find her fascination growing more personal and less professional with each
passing day.
     Sheedy's performance alone is nearly enough to recommend HIGH ART,
and you can color me as stunned as anyone that you're reading those words.
Sheedy inhabits the character -- a woman who wants to return to her art
but doesn't know if her past will permit it -- with an intensity only
autobiographical subtext can provide sometimes.  The impish grin of the
teen star of WARGAMES and THE BREAKFAST CLUB now nestles in the lines of a
haggard, drawn, aged-beyond-her-years face; you can see the spark under
there somewhere, ready for an opportunity to burst out.  The performance
is never showy, but Sheedy manages to capture both the resigned
co-dependence in her relationship with Greta (played by Clarkson as a
mumbling black hole of self-pity) and the glimmer of hope she sees for a
new life.
     Sadly, the rest of Lisa Cholodenko's script -- an inexplicable
award-winner at Sundance -- strands Sheedy's performance in a sea of
cliches and muddled relationships.  It also makes Syd's sexual awakening
the center of the story, then fails to develop the character with anything
near the necessary depth.  Everything about HIGH ART tells us we should
understand Syd's ambition, her emptiness, her readiness to be part of
Lucy's wasteland milieu, but Cholodenko assumes too much and shows too
little.  Even worse off is Gabriel Mann as Syd's stick-figure boyfriend,
who exists entirely to give Syd someone to argue with.  Like too many
screenwriters, Cholodenko assumes that situation will carry the story,
leaving us with characters whose relationsihps feel like plot devices.
Though the seedy art-clique atmosphere adds a different dynamic, HIGH ART
is still a formulaic film with little dramatic urgency.  The urgency that
does emerge comes entirely from Ally Sheedy, whose own awakening provides
a far more fascinating story than the one Cholodenko wrote.

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
When reviewing low budget films, critics often tend to be too 
forgiving. They sometimes forgive obvious technical flaws because 
it's an independent film. Well I don't care what kind of film it is. 
If it has technical flaws, then I can't ignore that. Don't get me 
wrong, I'm not saying a technically proficent film is automatically 
superior to a low budget effort. I wouldn't take the slick, bug 
budget FX laden Armageddon over the atrociously acted poorly filmed 
Clerks mind you. Because Clerks was damn funny and Armageddon was a 
mind numbing bore. But I would never call Clerks a great film, just a 
good one.
Anyways, High Art is a film from first time director Lisa Cholodenko. 
 Radha Mitchell stars as an art magazine editor who runs into 
upstairs neighbor Syd (Ally Sheedy), who is a high profile 
photographer a while back and then suddenly disappeared. The movie is 
about Syd's attempts to break free from her dangerous social life, 
Mitchell's attempts to showcase Syd photography once more, and how 
the two of them fall in love.
High Art has been praised by many critics and it's easy to see why. 
It features two very strong performances from Ally Sheedy and Radha 
Mitchell, and it's an indie film with a distinct personal feel to it. 
It's also at times erotic, heartbreaking, and even ocasionally 
humorous. But the film does have some technical problems and poor 
performances that detract fromt he quality and a fatal flaw in it's 
concluding scenes that prevents me from recommending it.
One of my main problems witht he film was the character of Greta. As 
played by Patricia Clarkson, she is one of the most annoying 
supporting characters in recent memory. Greta is a german actress who 
is Syd's lover. She is the dark side that Syd must break away from. 
Unfortunately, there is very little credibility in their relationship 
to begin with. I assume Clarkson's slurred speech and odd mannerisms 
were intentionally annoying. I still hated them.
Even worse than Clarkson are the numerous random supporting 
characters in the film. While Clarkson was extremely annoying, at 
least she was doing something. The rest of the supporting cast is 
filled with amateurs that would have trouble getting roles in a high 
school production. Most of them don't even have one dimension to 
speak of and they wander around the screen like zombies. Where is Tom 
Savini when you need him?
Then in the conclusion comes the final breaking point for me. There 
is a shot at a crucial emotional moment that instead of focusing on 
Radha Mitchell, which would seem obvious, focuses on one of the 
zombie supporting characters. I simply don't get it. Was Cholodenko 
trying to put us in Radha's shoes in that moment? Not a good time for 
an odd stylistic touch. Were we supposed to understand the pain of 
the random supporting guy  better than we would understand Radha 
Mitchell's? Whatever the reasoning, it's a gaping flaw that 
ultimately kills the film.
Don't get me wrong though. This is far from a terrible film. As I 
said, the two lead performances are wonderful. Mitchell displays a 
rare natural presence in front of the camera. I found her performance 
to be quite compelling. Ally Sheedy is quite credible as the drug 
addled, depressed Syd. Her performance isn't quite as compelling, but 
it's still very good. And the two of them develop a strong chemistry 
together. I would've preffered more of them and less of the annoying 
Greta and her band of zombies.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Lisa Cholodenko
Cast:  Ally Sheedy, Radha Mitchell, Patricia Clarkson, Tammy Grimes,
Gabriel Mann, William Sage
Screenplay:  Lisa Cholodenko
Producers:  Dolly Hall, Jeffrey Levy-Hinte, Susan A. Stover
Runtime:  101 min.
US Distribution:  October Films
Rated R:  strong sexuality, drug use, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
High Art is a story about women, told by a woman.  It's not loud and
sentimental, but quiet, subtle, and intelligent.  There aren't a lot of
films like this, so this one naturally feels different from most stories
about women.  Our protagonist is Syd (Radha Mitchell), an assistant
editor for a photography magazine called Frame.  She's a young woman who
is deeply interested in her own job -- we can see the intensity in her
eyes as she gazes upon photographs that she loves and admires.  She
lives with her boyfriend, James (Gabriel Mann), and upstairs lives Lucy
Berliner (Ally Sheedy).  
Lucy is a retired photographer, and Syd is instantly entranced by her
work.  Just as she's learning of Lucy's artistic abilities, she also
learns of her personal habits.  Lucy is a drug addict, but, more
importantly, she's a lover of women -- her girlfriend is a crazy
low-voiced German named Greta (Patricia Clarkson).  Syd convinces Lucy
to come out of retirement, Lucy grasps on to Syd's ambition to give
herself energy, and the two women head towards a relationship that could
only be successful in a perfect world.
A friend of mine, who occasionally sees the art house films with me,
made a valid point the other day:  it seems like every art house film
has something to do with homosexuality.  I wouldn't say *every* art
house film does, but the issue is more completely explored in
independent films than it is in mainstream pictures.  High Art does
explore the issue, but it explores it from the rare perspective of a
neophyte woman, who has only been with men in her life.  Perhaps that's
what I find so interesting about this film -- most movies about lesbians
glorify and romanticize the sex, as if to appeal strictly to straight
men, but the love scenes in High Art aren't the slightest bit arousing. 
They are as disturbing for the viewer as they are for the characters who
don't quite know what they're doing.
Writer/director Lisa Cholodenko is a skilled storyteller.  I love her
direction in this film -- it's soft, and so slow that it almost feels
motionless.  Cholodenko observes the beauty of the female figure, but
she doesn't exploit it.  There are moments in this film during which Syd
does not look glamorous or stunning -- in fact, most people would say
she looks like a wreck -- but there's something in Cholodenko's vision
and in the pictures that Lucy takes of Syd that capture everything
subtle about Syd's figure.  Mitchell is a beautiful actress, and manages
to convey beauty without ever looking fake or flashy.  At the same time,
Lucy, despite her bony figure and dim eyes, comes across as oddly
desirable.
The film isn't elusive, but it doesn't come right out and tell us what
it's about.  It works on many levels -- in some scenes, it's a rather
acidic attack of the vicious photography industry.  More often, it seems
present primarily to diagram the unique relationship between Syd and
Lucy -- the mentor/student dynamic that arises through admiration and
progresses through desire.  The development of the characters in this
sense is well-orchestrated by Cholodenko:  it's believable that Syd
could fall for a woman like Lucy; at the same time, it's interesting
that Lucy, in her detached and foggy existence, finds someone that she
truly cares about.  High Art isn't a pleasant film, but this
relationship feels oddly pure.  
Cholodenko does owe a lot to her performers.  Mitchell, an actress with
whom I'm not familiar, is very good here.  Many of the subtle character
details I mentioned above are noticeable because of her talent as a
performer.  The first love scene between the two women truly showcases
her work, and illustrates perfectly the way her mental desires do not
coincide with her physical needs.  Sheedy, on the other hand, has never
been so honest and down-to-earth as she is here.  Neither actress has
any scenes that could be used as clips for Oscar nominations, but that's
the point -- this is a film that relies entirely on subtlety.
The very last sequence is the best in the film, and it brings the story
together with all of its themes.  It's not painless, but it's
emotionally satisfying in a way few movies are.  My only complaint with
High Art is that it's almost too subtle for its own good -- I could see
many people walking away from the film not knowing what to make of it. 
In fact, most of what I think the film is about is pure speculation.  I
do like to speculate, but I'm not sure that Cholodenko has given us
enough guidance as to what to make of her picture.  But this aside,
there is something special about a film that can take a subject with so
much baggage and still do new and interesting things with the premise. 
Because of this, I can assure you that High Art lives up to its title.

Author
James Sanford
Of all the Brat Packers of the early 1980s, none was more
consistently charming and down-to-earth than Ally Sheedy. And none has kept
such a low profile in the past few years. While former co-stars such as Demi
Moore and Matthew Broderick have since become household names, Sheedy has
been toiling in films with titles like "Country Justice," "Groupies" and
"The Pickle." If you somehow managed to miss all of them, count yourself in
the majority.
 What's initially most startling about seeing Sheedy in "High Art"
is her appearance: flat black hair, a pasty face that hasn't seen the sun in
weeks, jutting shoulder blades that threaten to burst through her blue-white
flesh. Hard to imagine this is the same young woman who was the adorably
wholesome ingenue of "St. Elmo's Fire" and "War Games." Have the years been
so unkind to her?
 No, actually Sheedy appears to have spent her time out of the
spotlight learning the mechanics of performance. As Lucy Berliner, a
once-acclaimed photographer who drifted out of the New York art scene into a
private world of drugs and dead-end relationships, Sheedy is a genuine
revelation; gone are the days when she coasted by on charm and her
girl-next-door smile. Patricia Clarkson matches Sheedy magnificently as
Greta, an ex-film star from Germany who's now both Lucy's lover and the
albatross around her neck. Though Lucy can see the toil heroin has taken on
the older Greta -- Greta rarely has both eyes open at once and tends to fall
asleep in the midst of sex -- Lucy still can't shake her own addiction.
 Enter downstairs neighbor Syd (Radha Mitchell), a moon-eyed
editorial assistant at Frame magazine who meets Lucy by chance and tries to
engineer a comeback for her. Lucy, who freely admits she's irresponsible, is
less interested in resuming her career than she is in pursuing intimacy with
Syd. Director Lisa Cholodenko makes no attempt to romanticize the bohemian
squalor in which Lucy and Syd live, nor does the screenplay paint the bond
between the two as a positive first step toward a better future. Instead,
both women have serious issues they hope to bury in the relationship: for
Syd, a confused sexual identity; for Lucy, an existence built around
self-destructive behavior. "High Art" opts for a rather predictable finale,
but up until that point the movie works as a compelling, well-observed
character study, tinged with razor-sharp black humor. And Sheedy's incisive
work should guarantee she won't spend the next ten years hiding her light
under a bushel.
James Sanford

Author
Walter Frith
'High Art' is the kind of hard-core art film that cries out for
understanding.  It's repetitive imagery is a reflection of its surreal,
moody and often abbreviated characterizations.  It has all the qualities
of sleaze, drama, reality and blemishes of the soul that a sophisticated
movie buff can and should appreciated.  What it lacks in the area of
common story telling is compensated by its uncompromising look at the
alternative side of some people's lives.
Ally Sheedy stars as Lucy, a semi-retired photographer who never really
understood the beauty of her work.  She watches over her materialistic
mother who spends six thousand dollars in the blink of an eye on her
American Express card and can't remember what she spent it on.  She and
her friends are primarily drug addicts and drifters in life.  One in
particular (Patricia Clarkson), is a German movie actress of limited
stature who doesn't seem to care about the effects of snorting dope and
she lives her life in a constant state of flagrancy.
The protagonist in the film is Syd (Radha Mitchell).  She is an
assistant editor of a fashionable New York City magazine who discovers
Lucy's work and asks her superiors if they're interested in looking at
her work.  Her superiors are aware of who Lucy is.  Sort of an
underground hero of the photographic art world, Lucy agrees after a
meeting with Syd and her superiors, to do a piece for the magazine, and
throughout the course of their working relationship, Lucy and Syd become
lovers.  Greta and Lucy also have a past and they never quite end their
relationship until later in the film as the film's sub plot is sort of
an exploration of their feelings for each other.
Paced in a very sedate manner, writer/director Lisa Cholodenko finds the
emotional core of each character in the film as being very
straightforward and brings absolutely no glamour whatsoever to any of
their lives or appearances and this is the film's strength.  Appearances
count for a lot in this film.  Sheedy and Mitchell look very comfortable
and convincing in their roles and their performances are extraordinarily
sharp.
There isn't a false note in this film which runs a perfect 101 minutes.
Not too long or too short.  It has Oscar worthy performances from Sheedy
and Clarkson and after watching Ally Sheedy in films from the 80's such
as 'WarGames', 'The Breakfast Club', 'St Elmo's Fire', 'Short Circuit',
her career in the 90's has become a true showcase of her real depth and
talent as an actress.
As a modern day tale of tragedy, 'High Art' has few flaws and fewer
shortcomings and is filled with interpretive dialogue showing the
nervous calculation of each life it chooses to document.  Some to the
extreme and some to a lesser extent. But in the end, one will most
likely walk away from it remembering not how it looked but rather how it
felt.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Lisa Cholodenko.
Cast: Radha Mitchell, Ally Sheedy, Patricia Clarkson, Bill Sage, Gabriel 
Mann, Anh Duong, David Thornton, Tammy Grimes, Helen Mendes, Cindra 
Feuer, Charis Michelson.
1998 - 101 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, nudity, and drug use).
Reviewed December 11, 1998.
Lisa Cholodenko's "High Art," is an intelligent, quiet drama. Its 
strongest quality, aside from the top-notch central performances, is the 
perceptive way in which the film, also written by Cholodenko, observes 
its characters. They are all flawed people, some more troubled than 
others, but they are not judged. Judging the characters in this picture 
would be a creative misstep on the filmmakers' parts, because no one, no 
matter how bad off they are, deserve to be negatively judged if they are 
involved in some serious problems that they cannot break free of.
Syd (Radha Mitchell), a 24-year-old woman living with her longtime 
boyfriend James (Gabriel Mann), has recently been awarded an ideal job 
at the high-profile photography magazine, "Frame." She very much enjoys 
where her career is headed, but is often not taken very seriously by her 
managers, who are always giving her petty jobs to do, when she knows she 
could be doing more important things. One night, while taking a bath, 
Syd notices a leak coming from the apartment above hers, so when she 
goes up there to inform them of it, she meets Lucy Beliner (Ally 
Sheedy), a thin, worn-out, and unhappy woman, who lives with her 
drug-addicted German girlfriend, Greta (Patricia Clarkson), a pathetic 
former actress who is usually so out-of-it that she often is in and out 
of conciousness. Syd quickly strikes up a conversation with Lucy, and 
discovers that she used to be an acclaimed photographer ten years 
before. Lucy claims she doesn't want to get back into the profession, 
but Syd manages to convince the "Frame" editors to do a piece on her 
work. All the while, Syd begins to grow deep feelings for Lucy, even 
though she has never previously been attracted to a woman, and Lucy 
starts a battle with her personal demons.
"High Art," is such an effective motion picture because it is never 
suger-coated or idealized, but instead an honest and convincing portrait 
of a handful of unhappy people whose lives are going nowhere, while 
Syd's luck begins to rise. The film in no way is about lesbianism, but 
about love, which was a refreshing change of pace from the usual 
stereotypical portraits of homosexuality. As Lucy and Syd grow closer 
and closer together, we really do believe that they are falling in love 
with each other, even if the relationship might be doomed. 
With this picture, Ally Sheedy's star has risen once again, thanks to 
her touching, nearly flawless portrtayal of Lucy, a woman who, in the 
course of a decade, has found her life consumed almost entirely by 
drugs, which has taken away her once-blossoming career. Her characted 
really is tragic, and one particular scene involving Lucy and her 
mother, in which Lucy admits to her that she has a drug problem, and her 
mother matter-of-factly responds by saying she can't help her, is 
heartbreaking. Although not autobiographical, Sheedy has had drug 
problems in her past, and I suspect she brought that knowledge of 
already being in Lucy's footsteps to her role. Also very good is Radha 
Mitchell as Syd, who previously starred in the slight 1997 Australian 
comedy, "Love and Other Catastrophes," wh caught me by surprise with her 
performance. Easily being able to pass as Christina Ricci's older 
sister, Mitchell obtains the same natural charisma that has made Ricci 
so popular recently.
As accurate as almost every detail is in, "High Art," I wish the 
relationship had been more tightly written involving Syd and James, who, 
played by Gabriel Mann, is left with a throwaway role. By the time he 
finds out about Syd and Lucy, he disappears from the film, and I wish 
there had been another scene where they confronted each other.
This is a very minor fault, however, in a film that is full of riches. 
Although many of the characters are stuck in a hopeless pit of despair, 
Syd and Lucy are intelligent people who recognize their problems. The 
character of Dominique (Anh Duong), the "Frame" editor who decides to 
give Syd a chance with her ideas, was also written to be far more mature 
than expected. And the one sex scene in the film was beautifully and 
originally done. For once, it did not invlove steaminess, or violent 
sexual activity, or gratuitous nudity, but focused on the actual 
characters, who love each other, and their insecurities involved in 
making the decision to actually have sex. "High Art," which won the 
screenwriting award at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, marks the 
superior feature film debut of Cholodenko, as well as Sheedy's 
strongest, and best, role to date.
           - Copyright 1998 by Dustin Putman
             Dustin
Putman's Film Reviews> 

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1998
U.S. Release Date: Summer 1998 (limited)
Running Length: 1:41
MPAA Classification: R (Lesbian sex, nudity, drug use, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema
Cast: Radha Mitchell, Ally Sheedy, Patricia Clarkson, Bill Sage, 
      Tammy Grimes, Gabriel Mann
Director: Lisa Cholodenko
Producers: Jeff Levy-Hinte, Susan Stover, Dolly Hall
Screenplay: Lisa Cholodenko
Cinematography: Tami Reiker
Music: Shudder to Think
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     I suppose HIGH ART is as good a name as any for this pretentious 
melodrama, an often-diverting but ultimately pointless attempt to wed 
intellectual twaddle with a soap-opera-ish lesbian romance.  Lisa 
Cholodenko's film, which had its world premiere in competition at the 
1998 Sundance Film Festival, received a decidedly mixed reception there, 
but was widely praised by feminists more because of its theme of female 
empowerment than because of a particularly original or engaging script.
     HIGH ART introduces us to Syd (Radha Mitchell), a hard-working 
twenty-something woman who has a menial position at a high-end 
photography magazine and whose home life includes a lifeless, routine 
relationship with an unsupportive cad named James.  One day, a leak in 
the ceiling of Syd's apartment opens a whole new world to her.  When she 
goes upstairs to inquire about the problem, she stumbles into the 
bohemian world of Lucy Berliner (Ally Sheedy), a once-famous fashion 
photographer who vanished from the public eye a decade ago.  Lucy's 
apartment is awash in sex, drugs, and banal, intellectual chatter.  She 
lives with her heroin-addicted lover, a German ex-actress named Greta 
(Patricia Clarkson), and a bunch of friends who drift in and out as they 
please.  Syd is so intrigued by Lucy's lifestyle that she worms her way 
into the older woman's inner circle, then uses the opportunity to press 
Lucy into doing a photo spread for her magazine.  Soon, however, the 
pair's working relationship turns sexual, and neither is sure where they 
should go from there.
     The most honest (although not the most unique) aspect of HIGH ART 
is the relationship between Syd and Lucy.  These are both real 
characters beset by believable angst.  The attraction is palpable and 
both actresses give capable performances.  Radha Mitchell (LOVE AND 
OTHER CATASTROPHES) lights up the screen with an unforced combination of 
innocence and seemingly-unintentional sensuality.  Ally Sheedy, who is 
best known for undemanding roles (such as in THE BREAKFAST CLUB and ONLY 
THE LONELY), is surprisingly effective cast against type (although I 
think some of the praise heaped upon her for this role has been 
overstated  she's good, but not excellent).  Frankly, though, I wish 
the movie had spent a little more time concentrating on Syd alone and 
less on her sexual liaison with Lucy.  Although better developed than 
most motion picture lesbian affairs, it's fundamentally not all that 
compelling.
     Unfortunately, the romance between Syd and Lucy is just one of a 
number of things on Cholodenko's agenda.  Her script delves into themes 
of female empowerment, the war between ambition and affection, the 
effects of star power, and the balance between art and commercialism.  
None of these ideas (many of which are glossed over) are effectively 
presented.  They are either woven into the plot in an obvious, chunky 
fashion (all that's missing is a neon sign saying "Look!  Important 
issue ahead!") or introduced through the pretentious drivel that the 
characters spout at one another.  
     Aside from Syd and Lucy, the characters are either irritating or 
complete non-entities.  All men fall into the latter category.  The only 
male with any significant screen time, a slacker played by actor Bill 
Sage (who has appeared in a number of Hal Harley films), spends most of 
his time sitting around in Lucy's apartment, engaging in pointless 
conversation and getting stoned.  Syd's partner, James, is a one-
dimensional, egocentric jerk.  On the female side, the most prominent 
supporting character is Lucy's irritating, self-absorbed lover, who is 
played with over-the-top relish by Patricia Clarkson.  
     Visually, HIGH ART is impressive.  The film's appearance is, as the 
title implies, artistic, and Cholodenko's presentation of the 
female/female sex scene is lush and sensual.  The director also displays 
an aptitude for developing atmosphere (consider, for example, the exotic 
setting of Lucy's apartment).  However, while such a sumptuous style 
makes it more enjoyable to look at the picture, it's far from everything 
needed for a successful endeavor.  Despite solid performances in the two 
major roles, HIGH ART's script is too talky and uneven to make this 
really worthwhile, unless, of course, you're a fan of arty soap operas.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Stephen Norrington
Writer: David S. Goyer
Starring: Wesley Snipes, Stephen Dorff, N'Bushe Wright, Kris Kristoferson,
Donal Logue, Udo Kier, Arly Jover, Traci Lords, Kevin Patrick Walls
"Blade" is not only the most recent attempt at commercializing on an old
school comic book action hero, but also the newest film that lives or dies
with how damn cool it looks and feels to watch.  And luckily enough,
"Blade" is a triumph of visual brilliance, a great piece of flashy, moody
pulp, and a film of mostly style and very little substance.  It's a more
grizzly "Batman"; a significantly better "Spawn"; and a less philosophical
"Dark City."  In other words: bitching as hell.
For those of you who don't know who Blade is (read: me before seeing the
movie), he's the latest vampire slayer with a twist: he's a hybrid of human
and vampire as a result of his mother being bit by a vampire minutes before
giving birth to him.  He's grown up with all of the strengths that a
vampire has, such as invulnerability and the like, but very few of their
weaknesses: he can walk comfortably during daylight hours, but he still has
to take a serum consisting of blood to ease his nerves.
Blade's fortress of solitude is a giant warehouse in New York City, and his
mentor/sidekick/bud is a grizzled old man with a nasty limp named Whistler
(Kris Kristoferson, tres grizzled), who has waged a personal war against
the vampires that have been in existence for centuries without a whole lot
of knowledge and uses Blade, whom he found as a kid in the streets, as his
chief weapon.  Speaking of weapons, Whistler is the one who makes them, all
silver products (the only thing that kill vampires), including one nifty
boomerang with sharp edges that when thrown, chops the heads off of a whole
bunch of vampires then returns safely into the hands of Blade.
The plot, as it were, concerns Blade and Whistler's ever-going fight
killing all the vampires in the world, and it picks one group who live in
New York City as the object de scorn for this particular introductory
installment.  As we are told, the entire world as we know it is just a
facade for the vampires who rule the night and feast on us measly humans
like cattle.  In the opening sequence (which cannot be missed - you may as
well not show up at all if you walk in late), one poor guy is led to a
midnight rave where the scene soon turns into a kafkaesque nightmare that
is saved by the presence of Blade, who proceeds to chop up anyone he can,
in a scene so over the top that it could leave anyone feeling sadistically
giddy.
This is basically the entirety of "Blade": he finds vampires, and chops
them up.  A little story is introduced: Blade has to square off against one
of the big-heads of the vampires, Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff, still stuck
in the three-day beard, greasy-hair days of yesteryear - oh those were the
days, my friend), who's trying to usurp the power from the other vampire
heads, such as the big big cheese, Dragonetti (the great Udo Kier), so he
can fulfill some prophecy of sorts (does it really matter?).
In the meantime, Blade hooks up with a doctor chick, Karen (N'Bushe Wright,
from "Dead Presidents"), who is half-bitten by one vampire early in the
flick and is slowly turning into one herself.  Saved by Blade, she begins
to help him and Whistler in their odyssey, although the only reason she's
there is as a sorta romance interest and blatant window dressing (sad,
because she was actually very good in "Presidents").
The big plus side to this film is that it's very well-directed.  Stephen
Norrington gives it a bleak, cool, and half-funny/half-serious feel that
turns it into just one big blast to watch.  The action sequences are
well-choreographed, and have the intensity and humorously violent feel that
a comic book film needs to have.  When the vampires are killed, they
instantly disentigrate, and sometimes when killed differently, even inflate
and blow up (a tactic blatantly stolen from John Carpenter's "Big Trouble
in Little China").
And the superhero is gleefully serious.  Played with an Eastwood-ian
inaffectiveness by Wesley Snipes (who's also credited with "Fight
Choreographer"), Blade comes off as a man who's deeply tortured, but keeps
all his pain deep down, and has a nice costume piece: dark sunglasses,
which not only make him look cooler, but also give him that nice touch of
hidden torture.  All the great superheroes are the ones who have inner
pains, and Blade is far from the exception.
It's not a great film.  It has very little substance, and the substance it
does introduce (like the idea of Blade's refusal to open up to anyone) is
dropped after a little bit of being played around with.  And the film seems
to loose some steam in its second half, when things become all to
predictable and a little redundant, even though it's still extremely
watchable.
No matter.  The final sequence, although a little puzzling (what the hell
happened with those 12 head vampires?  And is that REALLY the vision of
apocalypse?), is nevertheless totally kickass and amazing.  A final
tete-a-tete between Blade and Deacon is riveting, original, and filled with
fits of humor and shocks, all which leave the film off with a nice taste
that makes up for any little problems the film had before.
Unfortunately, this film will not be remembered for its story.  It falls
into the trap of oh so many films that try to launch franchises (most
recently "The Mask of Zorro") and comes off as more as an introduction to
cooler pastures that may or not be in the near future than ana actual great
film.  But even if there's not a "Blade 2" or "Still Blading" or whatever
they may call it, we can always remember this as another in the line of
films that are brilliant in their visual design and sensual intensity.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A pseudo-intellectual film about the pseudo-intellectual world of
art magazines, HIGH ART is as wasted as its drug-addled protagonists.
     In the only notable part of the movie, Ally Sheedy and Radha
Mitchell deliver nice performances in the two leading roles, not that
Lisa Cholodenko's script or direction makes you care much about either
character.  Living in a world of heroin induced highs, they float along
until they fall in love with each other.
     This uninviting picture, full of pretentious minor characters, has
a receptionist that reads Dostoevski and a woman in the restroom line
who is a certified genius, having recently been awarded a prestigious
McArthur grant.  24-year-old Syd (Radha Mitchell), who has a rather
bland, live-in boyfriend, was just promoted to assistant editor at the
artistic photography magazine "Frame."  Although the receptionist is
impressed, Syd is mainly a gofer for her boss until she meets famous
photographer Lucy Berliner (Ally Sheedy).  For her to do photos for
"Frame," Lucy demands that Syd be promoted to editor and assigned to
her since Lucy fancies her.
     Lucy lives with her current lover, a washed up German actress
named Greta, played with a frequently indecipherable series of mumbles
by Patricia Clarkson.  The two of them and their friends wile away
their time snorting and shooting up dope, usually heroin.  This does
not happen in a single episode, but becomes more commonplace than
sleeping in the picture.  Syd, who lives in the apartment below them,
joins in on the fun and becomes a member of the zombie club.
     Lucy seems pretty happy with her life of drugs, which apparently
is funded by her mother.  Lucy quit working professionally 10 years ago
since she thought she was being "pigeonholed," and, since her mother
has money, we can only assume that that's how Lucy supports her habit
and procures her living expenses.
     A typical scene has the editors arguing about whether a potential
photographer's work is transcendental or merely classical.  That no one
has a clue as to the dogma they are spouting becomes obvious but not
particularly funny.  "Your work has a cultural currency that is
important now," is the artist-speak that the Frame's manager uses to
convince Lucy to show her pictures in the magazine.
     When the big scene comes in which Lucy puts the moves on Syd, her
idea of a romantic line is, "I want to get high with you."  In Lucy's
world, sex and drugs come hand-in-hand.  And the movie, except for the
obligatory scene of someone almost overdosing, shows drug usage as
being a hip and natural part of the art scene.
     This vacuous picture throws in a standard downer ending in an
attempt to manipulate our emotions.  In another movie, it might have
worked, but in this one the reaction is likely to be decidedly muted.
     HIGH ART runs 1:36.  It is rated R for explicit sex, pervasive
drug use and language and is not appropriate for those younger than
college age.

Author
Heather Picker
     Written and Directed by Lisa Cholodenko.  Starring Ally Sheedy and Radha
Mitchell, with Patricia Clarkson and Gabriel Mann.  1998, 101 min., Rated R.
     Getting high and photography are very much a part of Lucy Berliner's (Ally
Sheedy) life. With that in mind, the title of "High Art" takes on a
double-meaning, as do many things in this, the feature-film debut of director
Lisa Cholodenko, who also wrote the script.  Lucy is a has-been, once at the
top of her game as a photographer.  She has sunk into oblivion with live-in
girlfriend Greta (Patricia Clarkson), a washed-up, drugged out German actress
who worked with Fassbinder.  
     Syd (Radha Mitchell, "Love and Other Catastrophes") has just been promoted
to an assistant editor status at Frame magazine, which is about what else but
photography.  Her job mainly consists of running errands for her superiors, to
which live-in boyfriend James (Gabriel Mann) is sympathetic.  One evening,
while taking a bath, Syd notices a leak coming from the ceiling, and decides to
visit her neighbor's apartment upstairs to see if she can fix it.  By this
time, anyone who doesn't know what will end up happening between Syd and Lucy
may have a feeling of deja vu, as women going to another residence to do
handywork, usually plumbing, always seem to end up romantically involved with
the woman of the house ("French Twist," "Bound").  
     As Syd tries to fix the leak, engaging in small talk with Lucy, she
notices the beautiful photographs that cover the walls of the apartment.
 Within days, Syd has found out more about Lucy's career, and the two of them
meet with Syd's bosses for lunch, in hopes of Lucy shooting a cover for Frame.
 Lucy reticently agrees to the project, but on the condition that Syd will be
her editor.
     The attraction between the women grows, and when Lucy wants to get away
for the weekend to work, and asks Syd to join her, James, who has become
suspicious of Syd's involvement with Lucy, asks if she has slept with her.  She
says no, and when he asks if she's leading up to it, she professes that she
doesn't know.  And later, when things heat up between her and Lucy, she admits
that she doesn't know what to do, also tearfully tells Lucy that she thinks she
is falling in love with her.  The next morning, Lucy takes photographs that she
will eventually ask to be used for Frame.
     When the two go back home, Lucy decides that things have to change.  She
wants to turn her life around.  She is through with drugs, and she is through
with Greta.  But addictions are never that easy to overcome, and withdrawn
resignation from a chance at happiness is something Lucy is familiar with.  Syd
returns to her apartment to find that James has left, and he is avoiding her
phone calls.  Lucy and Syd meet again, and this time Lucy gives her the
photographs that she took over their weekend together, and says that she wants
Frame to use them.  Syd is incomfortable with this idea, so Lucy also leaves
photos of Greta before going back upstairs, where Greta accepts that their
relationship is over, but implores Lucy to stay one more night. The ending came
as a bit of a surprise to me the first time I saw it.  The decisions that both
characters make were predictable, but one took much more courage than the
other.
     Cholodenko shot "High Art" in a simple yet visually mesmerizing way that
has a documentary feel.  The camera is perpetually close to Lucy and Syd, maybe
in symbolism to their relationship. There is a scene in which Syd comes home
after doing drugs at Lucy's, and initiates sex with James.  But she is
pathetically wasted, and soon falls asleep.  During this, the camera is much
farther away than it is during the Syd/Lucy scene, which is quietly beautiful
in it's unintrusive style and honest dialogue.  
     The script, a nice counterpart to the glorification of heroin chic, will
be considered pretentious by some.  Syd comments on the composition of some of
Lucy's photos, and Lucy replies that it's been a long time since she has been
deconstructed.  I found the script to be so sufficient in character
development, and observant, natural dialogue that I wasn't bothered by such
exchanges.  "High Art" can also boast some of the best acting of 1998.
 Clarkson steals every scene she is in, with a voice deeper than that of Garbo
and the look of someone who has been lost in her own universe for years and has
given up living.  William Sage, as Arnie, a hanger-on who lounges around the
apartment all day and into the night as to not miss out on the sharing of
heroin and anything else he can get his hands on, gives a similarily strong,
on-target performance.
     Sheedy's work here is Oscar-caliber.  As Lucy she is world weary and
defiant, struggling to deal with the contrasts between the life she has known
for the ten years since she dropped from public conscience and the sense of
rediscovery that Syd has brought to her life.  She wants to turn her life
around, but at the same time is skeptical that it is possible.  Telling her
mother (played by Tammy Grimes), who is a rich old woman who can't believe that
her daughter lives with a woman much less a "German" (which is all she refers
to Greta as), that she has a love issue and a drug problem, or a drug issue and
a love problem, you can see her gathering the strength to tell her mom about
her drug addiction.  But as soon as she does, her mother gets up and walks
away, meeting her daughter's expectations.  You can tell that this has happened
time and again in their strained relationship.  
     Mitchell and Sheedy have chemistry, and Mitchell is convincing as Syd,
movingly conveying her admiration for Lucy as it evolves from a crush to
infatuation.  She is engaged by being in the presence of such a gifted artist,
and her need to be around that fits so perfectly with Lucy's own needs to be
appreciated that in the end several interesting questions are posed, including
how subjective Syd could ultimately be about Lucy's work because of their
relationship and her own involvement with the photographs.  Would Syd and Lucy
have become involved if the art aspect was completely removed from the
situation?  See "High Art" and judge for yourself.  
Review Courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
E-mail: Ahber16@aol.com

Author
Sue Unruhe
High Art stars Ally Sheedy and Radha (I forget the last name).  Radha
plays Syd, an aspiring editor of a slick, artsy photography magazine based
in (of course!) New York City.  She lives downstairs from Lucy Berliner
played by Ally Sheedy.  When Syd ventures upstairs to stop the water from
leaking into her apartment, she discovers 1) an apartment full of zoned
out people and 2) some clearly excellent photographs hung around the walls
of the apartment.
In her quest to get Lucy to take photographs for her magazine, Syd enters
into Lucy's world which includes learning to snort heroin (much to the
dismay of her boyfriend James who's waiting for her downstairs).  As Lucy
responds to the spark of ambition she sees in Syd, she becomes interested
not only in the idea of taking new photographs, but in taking them with
Syd as her editor and lover.  As this romantic spark between Syd and Lucy
becomes apparent to their current partners (James with Syd and a german
actress with Lucy) they respond in their own unique ways.  James tries to
convince Syd that falling in with a heroin crowd will lead her nowhere. 
Lucy's lover simply tries to OD.
The love story is very sweet really and leads both Lucy and Syd down a
very different path from the one they were on previously.  Any more detail
would spoil the ending which is extremely well crafted and portrayed. 
Ally Sheedy is extemely thin with protruding bones which adds to the
characterization of the down and out life she's been living.  The only
thing that keeps her group zoned out rather than desperate on the streets
is the seemingly endless amount of money Lucy has inherited.
Newcomer Radha is quite a discovery!  She reminds me of a young Mariel
Hemingway a la Manhattan.  But instead of that squeaky little girl voice,
she's got the full bodied, sensuousness of Isabella Rosselini.  Her
portrayal of Syd is absolutely stunning.

Author
Susan Granger
Writer/director Lisa Cholodenko gives far more emphasis to getting
 high than to expressing art with this pretentious, downbeat dirge
about lesbian love. Flimsily cloaked in an "All About Eve"-like
scenario, the story revolves around a lowly, but ambitious young New
York art magazine editor (Australian actress Radha Mitchell) who
"discovers" a rebellious but talented photographer living in the
apartment upstairs. A heroin-snorting, Jewish Bohemian, she "dropped
out" of the art scene several years earlier to live in
disillusioned, drug-addled decadence with her groggy German
actress/lover (Patricia Clarkson) when the pressures of "fame" got
tooheavy. In this pivotal leading role, Ally Sheedy - once an
ingenue "Breakfast Club" member of Hollywood's Brat Pack - is
ghastly thin and neurotically intense, even ferocious. Predictably,
the relationship between the self-destructive artist and the naive
opportunist sparks, ignites, and eventually fizzles but, since all
the women involved are so spaced-out, it's hard for the audience to
connect with any of them. Nevertheless, for a first-time film-maker,
Lisa Chodolenko shows promise, particularly in herhip, witty jibes
about the "business" of producing art. If she could leave the murky,
rotten drug scene behind, she'd show her story-telling skills more
admirably. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "High Art" is a
tiresome 3. Watching lethargic, unhappy women take drugs and
incoherently talk nonsense is hardly classified as entertainment.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A major creator of designer clothes recently agreed under
pressure to stop displaying photos of heroin chic.  These ads
exhibited young people dressed in whatever hideous and
impractical threads were au courant, looking like zombies in
their trendy raiment.  Civic groups presumably feared that 
young and impressionable consumers would follow the
examples of their icons and shoot up or snort--just to be "in." 
In yet another recent case (the same designer?) an advertiser
was warned about using models who seemed every bit as
ancient as thirteen years of age.  The fashion industry is, like
many others including Hollywood, one based on hype and
image, but perhaps the enterprise that pushes spin to the
limit. The highly textured and beautifully photographed and
nuanced film "High Art" examines the lives of those who
create the glossies.  Are they jaded commercial artists who
are straight as an arrow and who cynically ply their trade for
profits, are do they come from more bohemian ranks, selling
out perhaps to raise money to buy more drugs?  The
prototypes in writer-director Lisa Cholodenko's engrossing
work may not be representative, but they certainly make for
more interesting viewing than would a bunch of square
professionals.
   Providing her audience with insight into the world of slick
fashion magazines, Cholodenko has thrown together a group
of three-dimensional characters who are studies in contrast. 
Syd (Radha Mitchell), a lovely, young, naive, straight, and
ambitious assistant editor for the fictitious "Frame" magazine,
is contrasted with Lucy Berliner (Ally Sheedy), a been-there-
done-that top photographer who burned out ten years ago,
presumably disgusted with the demands put upon her by the
industry.  Lucy's lesbian girlfriend, Greta (Patricia Clarkson),
an ethnically German woman who has moved to New York so
that Lucy can pursue her craft there, is differentiated from
Lucy's rich mom Vera (Tammy Grimes), a Holocaust survivor
who has no use for Germans.  Syd's boyfriend James
(Gabriel Mann), a bore who criticizes Lucy for not getting a
position of real influence with her magazine, is world's away
from Arnie (Bill Sage), a heroin-addicted guy who hangs out
with lesbians.  
   When Syd goes upstairs to find out whether her neighbor's
bathtub is leaking water, she meet the coterie of strung-out
somnambulists but is intrigued to discover that the woman
who lives upstairs, Lucy, was once a noted, published
photographer.  Ambitious to gain recognition from the editor of
"Frame" magazine, Dominique (Anh Duong), she persuades
Lucy to have lunch with Dominique and her own boss, Harry
(David Thornton), and is flattered, even ecstatic, when Lucy
insists on having Syd as her editor.  The relationship between
Lucy and Syd flourishes and, as they engage in some frank,
though unconsummated, sexual activity, each is concerned
about the loss of her long-term partner.
   Cholodenko has done quite a job tackling some major
themes, including the struggle between the demands and
deadlines of commerce vs. the free-spirited life of the artist;
the attachment of people to their constant sexual partners vs.
the appeal of fresh ties; the impact that a chance meeting
with strangers can have on a person's routines; and the very
nature of a person's sexual identity: is it fixed or fluid? 
Cholodenko deliberately keeps us guessing about the true
temper of Syd's feelings for Lucy, prompting us at one
moment to believe that Syd has changed her sexual
orientation while at another she has us convinced that Syd's
feeling is merely one of infatuation for a person she holds in
great esteem.  
   Ally Sheedy and Radha Mitchell give vibrant performances
as two women who investigate and explore their feelings for
one another, Ms. Sheedy breaking loose of her 1980s
ingenue specimen, Ms. Mitchell exposing every nuance of a
young woman at a turning point in her career and love life. 
One particular sexual scene has already become the talk of
the sophisticated film community: Sheedy and Mitchell do not
shed their clothes but engage in a tantalizing scouting of
sensation and sensitivity. With Patricia Clarkson squaring off
the triangle as a dazed heroin addict--a former Fassbinder
actress hanging on desperately to a straying woman--"High
Art" will attract a substantial following in the lesbian
community and should cross over well to a sophisticated
general audience of film buffs. Rated R.  Running time: 101
minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Dennis Schwartz

HIGH ART (director: Lisa Cholodenko; screenwriter: Lisa Cholodenko;
cinematographer: Tami Reiker; cast: Ally Sheedy (Lucy Berliner), Radha
Mitchell (Syd), Patricia Clarkson (Greta), Gabriel Mann (James), Anh
Duong (Dominique), David Thornton (Harry), Tammy Grimes (Lucy's mother),
William Sage (Arnie), 1998)
There was no visible difference between the characterization of a sleek
photography magazine, Frame, that is the subject of the film, and the
film itself, with all its glib characters provoking an air of chic
fashion, all in the pretense of art. What makes this film mesmerizing,
is not the plot, but the virtuoso performance of Lucy Berliner (Ally
Sheedy), as a wily photographer, retired from her professional duties
for the last ten years and living in a lesbian relationship with a
has-been German actress, Greta (Clarkson). Lucy is able to find things
within herself to show her jaded mood and her deeper artistic yearnings
for something that is unattainable. It is a performance that makes the
film seem greater than how it really is.
The less interesting story line involves the ambitions of an attractive,
baby-faced assistant editor at the magazine, Syd (Radha Mitchell), who
lives with a boyfriend (Mann) in an emotionally chilling relationship. A
plumbing problem brings her upstairs and that is the ploy used to show
how she meets the once famous photographer and her tired lover, who once
worked with the German director Fassbinder as an actress before her
demise through a heroin addiction. A sexual attraction develops between
the photographer and her ambitious neighbor. The complications that
arise out of this new relationship is the springboard for the plot.
Lisa Cholodenko's first feature is a sleek and soulful look at the
relationship between the two women, who find that they are attracted to
each other for various reasons, and it is also a look at the breaking up
of another relationship that was once vibrant but is now deadened by the
overuse of heroin and of a lingering ennui and self-pity that has set
in. The ambitious Syd is taken in by Lucy's artistic skills and worldly
manner, while Lucy is attracted to the beauty and youthful energy Syd
has, and is not displeased with her ambitions. That Syd should change
all her values on this chance encounter is possible but highly unlikely,
but in the milieu of these urban hipsters, their relationship works out
well. The two of them seem to have a chemistry together and their
kissing scenes did give us a needed look into their passions, with the
more controlling Lucy being in charge of things and instigating the
relationship to be more sexual.
Patricia Clarkson contributed a sense of despair and a cagey ability for
survival, as she reeks of being a sophisticated world travel. She is the
jealous lover who senses her impending doom, who is hateful of this
sycophantic upstart who has just entered her life. She has most of the
lines in the film that pack a wallop. When introduced to Syd, she says
in her heroin induced high state, which is where the film probably or
should have derived its title of High Art from: "I live for Lucy- I
mean, I live here with Lucy." The combo of the three women with
different intentions and personalities, plays well, as the acting here
is really fine. All the actors were properly ensconced in their roles
and supported each other very well.
The look inside Syd's new power job (shown kow-towing to those above
her, while putting on airs to those below her), where she was just
promoted from being an intern, is a despairing look at the work scene
she so much is enamored by; of her editor (Thornton), who is filled with
cynicism and arrogance, and the boss of the place Dominique (Anh), whose
opinion counts the most, as she is the one making the big decisions for
the magazine. For Syd, to bring back Lucy to work and have her work be
featured on the cover of the magazine, is her coup. It gives the story
some tension as to how Lucy will be reconciled to this commercial
venture, when she gave all this up because it was impossible for her to
continue working at a straight job, and she just stopped showing up and
dropped out of sight, though still taking portrait photos on her own.
Eventually the film, after being carried along by Sheedy's intense
performance, dies an ungraceful death from too much of its slickness; it
ran out of things to resolve other than by means of contrivance, and it
was highly questionable that the "art" seen was really worthy of being
deemed as something special. We just lost interest in the characters,
the film began to look like a commercial for a magazine that wouldn't
stop and get to the main article.
So what could have been cutting edge dramatics, if the lesbian romance
was followed through further, turns out to be a film not about art, but
more of a soap opera story, about how three women, at different stages
of their life, get together and separate. All the pain that is there, is
finally settled in the usual way sitcoms settle problems they don't want
to handle any more. Which left the film only somewhat satisfying; it did
create a proper atmosphere for us to view these lost characters, and it
did have something to say about how their lives are being emotionally
torn apart. But we only get a voyeurs look at them, and that is not
enough of a look for us to say that we penetrated into their world of
mind-games and drug induced delusions and need for each other. The film
just looked too much like the slick magazine it presented in the film;
that it wanted to say something more about Syd's sudden sexual reversal
and about the despair in Lucy's life, but it just couldn't get it out
what it wanted to say, which is why the film became a let down. Its
style was, perhaps, too beautiful for its own good. It would have been
wiser to develop more depth for the main characters and show them to be
more than the superficial beings they seemed to be on screen. Being a
talented photographer is not necessarily being a fully developed person,
as evidenced by Lucy's dissolute lifestyle and poor decision making.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
