Title
Review for Grace of My Heart (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     GRACE OF MY HEART is a happy and delightful show that celebrates
the creative process of song writing.  Mainly set in the 60s, it tells
the story of wannabe singer Edna Buxton (Illeana Douglas).  After being
rejected as a singer, she discovers her better talent which is
composing the music and lyrics for a host of marvelous songs.  GRACE OF
MY HEART is her fictional autobiography.
     I read that most of the people in the film are loosely based on
real stars, but that is a distraction that I ignored while watching the
film.  Better to concentrate on the sweet little story at hand.
     It is 1958 and at a big white mansion, gawky looking Edna Buxton
is trying on a strapless and low cut gown for her singing contest.  She
complains, "Mother, the dress doesn't fit."  Her mother puts her down
with, "the dress fits the occasion.  It's you that doesn't fit."
     In her first starring role, normally supporting actress, Douglas
is perfectly cast and performs flawlessly.  You may remember her as the
ice skater Janice from TO DIE FOR and the woman who gets disfigured in
CAPE FEAR.  She has none of the normal Hollywood glamorous looks.  She
is somewhat attractive, but her eyes and mouth seem a size too large
for her face giving her a natural look unlike the typical fashion model
appearance so popular in actresses today.  She gives a compelling and
always believable performance.  As she tries hard to succeed she has
all of the audience rooting for her.
     When she attempts to sell herself in New York as a singer, she
gets rejection after rejection.  Typical is the record producer who
tells her, "Nice voice, toots.  The thing is we already have someone
just like you."  If that is not enough, he goes on, "I don't want to
burst your bubble, but not only do we have someone like you.  We are
trying to get rid of the someone like you."  Just then the record
buying public had decided that female soloist were out, and male voices
were in.  Bad gender timing.
     She gets introduced to record producer Joel Millner (John
Turturro) who likes her songs, but only for his black singing group,
not for her.  Unstoppable Edna turns to song writing only until her
singing career can take off.  Joel fixes her lousy name and image
problem.  He christens her Denise Waverly and tells the world she is a
struggling song writer from a Philly tenement.
     Turturro demonstrates for the first time, at least to me, his
tremendous comedic abilities.  He is terrific as Denise's ever
domineering boss and mentor, and it is one of my favorite roles of his.
It is worth the price of admission just to see the chemistry between
them and their artistry.
     Denise forms a romantic attachment to fellow song writer and
pseudo-intellectual Howard Cazsatt (Eric Stoltz).  Her career goes
south fast with him.  Their first song together is a true story about a
twelve year old girl who gets pregnant.  It and their next four songs
all get band by the church and the record distributors.
     Her career takes off again when she starts collaborating with
Cheryl Steed (Patsy Kensit).  They are even successful in creating
songs for TV star and ingenue Kelly Porter (Bridget Fonda) whom they
figure has more hairspray than brains.
     Bruce Davison plays the part of married DJ John Murray who falls
for Denise.  Given Douglas's charisma, the audience feels like
complaining, take a number since they are enchanted with her too.
Denise eventually ends up with the lead, Jay Phillips (Matt Dillon), of
the Beach Boy look-alike group The Rip Tides.  Dillon gives a space out
performance of a spaced out guy, but it is so ethereal that his acting
left me cold.
     The first two thirds of the show is set in New York and is by far
and away the best part.  When Denise leaves in the late 60s to live on
the beach in Malibu, she starts to lose creative energy and interest
and so does the film itself.  If writer and director Allison Anders had
just stopped with the NYC part, she would have had made a brilliant
picture.  Like a pitcher who stays on the mound too long, Anders loses
her touch and the film goes astray on the California coast.
     Once in Surf City Denise gets down on herself declaring "maybe I
put too much of myself into my songs."  When she starts back on her
career, Jay declares opposition with, "the only thing I wish for you,
and I wish it most sincerely, I wish you would get fired."  Still she
protects Jay later by telling his equally spaced out doctor, "he smokes
some grass.  He uses some psychedelics.  He uses peyote, but he is down
on hard drugs."
     Her crutch throughout is Millner.  When she gets thin and
despondent, he shows up with food and little homilies like, "You look
like a vampire.  Eat your hamburger.  All that health food stuff will
kill you."
     This is an extremely rewarding film, flawed only by the plodding
last part on the West Coast.  There are twenty-eight songs in it, and
most of them were made just for the film.  All of the songs are full of
high energy and reminiscent of the period.  I left feeling I just had
my batteries recharged.
     My favorite part of the film, other than the mesmerizing
performances by Douglas and Turturro, is the insights the film provides
into the hard work required to produce a hit single.  Many scenes take
place in the recording studio where the rapport between the song
writers, the performers, and the record producer is a key to success.
I learned a lot by watching this fascinating bit of collaboration.
     The script is a gem.  When Denise first meets Howard, he is
pompous towards her but claims to have liked her first hit.  She asks
him, "What exactly did you like about my record?  The thickness of the
vinyl?"  When Cheryl is coaching a group of lethargic singers, she
barks at them, "come on girls.  This is supposed to be upbeat, not
uptight.  Get happy."
     The technical aspects of the production are also meritorious.  The
cinematography by Jan Yves Escoffier reminded me almost of the colorful
work by Jean Rabier in THE UMBRELLAS OF CHERBOURG.  My favorite image
is of the streets of New York at dusk with the neon lights glowing.
The costumes (Susan Bertram), make-up, hair styling, and sets (Francois
Seguin) all contribute to the authenticity of the film.
     Finally, my favorite small touch in the picture is the use of the
Theremin musical instrument by The Rip Tides.  As documented in the
engrossing film THEREMIN: AN ELECTRONIC ODYSSEY, this little instrument
was used in everything from science fiction movies to Beach Boy music.
Check out my review of the movie in the Internet Movie Data Base and
then rent the video if you can find it.
     GRACE OF MY HEART runs 1:55.  It is rated R for some bad language
and a couple of scenes of dope smoking.  There is no violence, no sex
and a single very brief nude scene at a commune.  The show would be
fine for most teenagers with only the brief drug usage scenes to be a
possible concern.  This is an easy show to watch and to enjoy, and
hence one definitely worth a recommendation.  The languid and
atypically morose last part of the show detracted from my rating, but
it still gets *** from me.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 20, 1996
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Illeana Douglas (TO DIE FOR) gives a command performance as Denise
Waverly, a singer-songwriter trying to launch a musical career in the
late '50's, when such combinations were unheard of.  After an aspiring
producer (John Turturro) pitches the prospect of putting her words in
other people's mouths, she's soon churning out the hits in Broadway's
fabled Brill Building.  Director Allison Anders (GAS FOOD LODGING and
one of the more-dreadful segments of FOUR ROOMS) piles on the drama.
Her slick, surface-level approach also keeps us from getting close to
the characters, even the one played by the marvelous Ms. Douglas.  (You
name the fate and it happens to Denise Waverly.  And then she writes a
song about it.)  What really reeks, though, is a sound recording that 
you can't believe is real for a minute.  Each singer seems dubbed and 
each song sounds like a track from a freshly pressed compact disc.  
Just terrible.  Sure, Phil Spector might appreciate this "wall of clean
noise," but, for the sensitive ear, it's a distraction that's all but
unlistenable.  Not good in a movie about music.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Illeana Douglas, John Turturro, Matt Dillon, Eric Stoltz, Bruce
Davison, Patsy Kensit, Jennifer Leigh Warren.
Screenplay:  Allison Anders.
Producers:  Ruth Charny, Daniel Hassid.
Director:  Allison Anders.
Running Time:  115 minutes.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations, drug use)
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I have this idea that what happened to GRACE OF MY HEART -- a good
movie which flirts with being a great one -- is that Allison Anders wrote
herself into a corner.  She created a story based in part on a pattern of
behavior, resulting in a structure which becomes repetitious; she has also
made a period piece filled with thinly disguised counterparts for music
industry figures of the 50s and 60s, resulting in a guessing game which
becomes distracting.  GRACE OF MY HEART has a superb character study at
its core, made even more appealing by the top-notch work of Illeana
Douglas, and that makes it a disappointment that Allison Anders has
surrounded that character with so many elements which draw attention away
from her.
     GRACE OF MY HEART opens in 1958, where Edna Buxton (Douglas), a
well-heeled young woman from Philadelphia, dreams of being a singer and
songwriter.  She thinks that she is headed for the big time after winning
a talent contest, but she finds the going tough in New York until she is
offered an opportunity by producer Joel Milner (John Turturro) to write
singles for other artists.  Though she wants to sing her own material, she
agrees to Joel's terms as a way into the industry, and even to his
suggestion that she change her name to Denise Waverly.  The newly
christened Denise begins to churn out the hits in the legendary Brill
Building, and soon gets involved with another one of Joel's writers,
Howard Caszatt (Eric Stoltz).  The relationship is as uneven as her
professional success, however, and Denise finds herself on a decade long
journey of discovery culminating in a marriage to surf music legend Jay
Phillips (Matt Dillon).
     On one level, GRACE OF MY HEART operates simply as a travelogue
through an era in American popular music, and there are some extremely
entertaining moments integrated into that travelogue.  Denise clearly is
modeled after Carol King, and it is interesting to note that her inability
to break in initially as a singer was based largely on the prevailing
notion that female vocalists were "out."  There is also a hilarious bit
involving Bridget Fonda as a Lesley Gore-type singer whose unconventional
lifestyle inspires Denise and her partner Cheryl (Patsy Kensit) to write
her a song about a "secret love;" the songs -- originals by Los Lobos,
David Baerwald and Elvis Costello, among others -- are generally true to
the period, making for a rich background of sound.  Yet there are moments
when the setting and the inspired-by characters feel forced.  Anders draws
too much attention to supporting players by asking you to chuckle at what
she is able to suggest about Gore, Phil Spector and others without
actually saying so, and it becomes a tail which wags the dog.
     That is particularly true where Matt Dillon's character is concerned,
a disturbed genius a la Beach Boy Brian Wilson.  Dillon's performance is
too sleepy to be involving even as Jay becomes more and more paranoid and
depressed, and we are left to watch him play the way Wilson might have
been without understanding why we should care.  It is a long,
patience-testing episode, and it is particularly frustrating coming at the
tail end of a string of relationship episodes in which Denise falls hard
for a guy who turns out to be more trouble than he is worth.
     Still, I was generally willing to indulge Anders, because I could see
where it all was leading.  She introduces Edna as a child of an extremely
traditional upbringing, with a mother (Christina Pickles) who is more
concerned that her daughter look and sound respectable at the talent
contest than that she express herself.  GRACE OF MY HEART is a film about
the struggle for a woman to find her own voice after being conditioned to
believe that it is more important for her to subsume her own desires and
talent to the desires of the men in her life.  It is sometimes aggravating
to watch Edna/Denise make the same mistake over and over, but that is
exactly the problem she is forced to come to terms with and it pays off in
impassioned moments when she finally does let her own feelings soar
(notably in her songs, with vocal provided by Kristen Vigard).  Illeana
Douglas is fantastic as a woman who is both strong and weak, and her
unique looks somehow make her even more believable as someone forced to
linger in the background longer than her talent warrants.  I wanted to
stick with her through her story, and it remained worth the effort even
after Anders gets sidetracked.  GRACE OF MY HEART is a film with built-in
flaws, but they can be overlooked for a chance to watch a woman find the
grace in her own heart.

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by Allison Anders.  Cast : Illeana Douglas,  John
Turturro, Matt Dillon, Eric Stoltz, Bruce Davison, Patsy Kensit and
Jennifer Leigh Warren.
I had never seen an Allison Anders film before seeing GRACE OF MY
HEART.  I was aware that she had an acclaimed film called GAS, FOOD,
LODGING which I am now eager to see but my only exposure to her work was
her contribution to FOUR ROOMS. Anders herself has said that she is
not pleased with her segment of that film and all I'll say is I'm glad that
with GRACE OF MY HEART she has laid that travesty to rest and produced a 
wonderful film.  Although it has not been commercially successful in the US, 
I hope it will find its audience as people spread the word about it.
The film tells the story of Edna Buxton who is an heiress to the Buxton Steel
family in Philadelphia.  Edna wins a local talent contest which gives her a 
recording contract which unfortunately fails to come to any fruition.  She 
writes her own songs and intends to record them herself.  She is told early 
in the film that you can be either a singer or a writer , but not both.  The 
age of the singer-songwriter is yet to come.  She eventually manages to get 
her songs recorded, but by other artists, when she hooks up with Joel Millner 
(John Turturro) who works in a building called the Brill Building in New York. 
The Brill Building was full of songwriters who turned out many hits during 
the 60's.  Initially Edna is told that her songs will be recorded by male 
vocal groups but eventually she manages to convince Joel to let a girl group 
she knows, record one of her songs.  
Joel manages to get Edna to agree to change her professional name to Denise 
Waverley and creates a new , more audience-friendly, working class background
for her.  Denise's songs become hits and she hooks up with another writer who
seems to want to write similar songs to her - romantic songs that use realism
and gritty social issues.  One of the songs they write is about a 12 year 
old girl who gets pregnant by her 14 year old boyfriend. Needless to say some
of these songs get banned. The rest of the film shows how Denise tries to 
launch her own solo career and marries a Brian Wilson-type figure, the tortured 
musical genius Jay Phillips (Matt Dillon) .
We hear many of Denise's songs throughout the film and all of them are
wonderful.  Illeanna Douglas mimes to the songs but she does it very well
and almost acts out the songs as she mouths the words.  The best song in the 
film is "God Give Me Strength" which is the song that Denise tries to 
launch her solo career with   At this point in the film she has joined up with 
Jay Phillips who gives her great song a wonderfully lush orchestration.  In 
the film, the song fails to become a hit and financially cripples Denise's 
publisher/manager Joel Millner.  To my ears this song is just terrific. It 
came as no surprise to see that it was written by the legendary Burt Bacharach 
and the brilliant Elvis Costello.  Elvis Costello sings his own version of this
song over the end credits and it is just as beautiful as when Illeanna
Douglas' character is singing it. At this point it is important to point out
that the person responsible for Denise's great singing voice is Kristen 
Vigard. She has a fantastic voice. 
The other song which really stood out was the song which Denise records for
her first album. This song is called "A Boat On The Sea" and was written by
Larry Klein (who was responsible for the soundtrack) and the great David
Baerwald (formerly of David and David. Remember them ?). The singer-songwriter
Shawn Colvin also appears very briefly singing a great song called 
"Between Two Worlds", written by Gerry Goffin, Louise Goffin and David 
Baerwald. Gerry Goffin was married to Carole King who Denise's character 
has been said to have been based on. 
Illeanna Douglas gives a captivating performance as Denise and carries
the audience along with her throughout the film with a warm and very
charming performance.  John Turturro is as great as ever as the wig
wearing music publisher.  Eric Stoltz is always a joy to watch on screen 
and his appearance as a socially conscious songwriter is very enjoyable.
Matt Dillon does very well with his portrayal of the paranoid and mentally
unstable musical genius , Jay Phillips; his final scenes in the film are
very powerful and moving.
The biggest star of the film though, are the terrific songs which were 
so enjoyable that I can't wait to get my hands on the soundtrack.  Allison 
Anders has created a terrific film which shows the workings of the music 
business in the 60's and is full of the joy and passions of the people 
behind the songs.
Review written by Vince Deehan on Friday March 7, 1997.
E-mail : vince@deehan.demon.co.uk

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Illeana Douglas, John Turturro, Matt Dillon, Eric Stoltz, 
      Bruce Davison, Patsy Kensit, Jennifer Leigh Warren, Bridget Fonda 
Director: Allison Anders
Producers: Ruth Charney and Daniel Hassid
Screenplay: Allison Anders
Cinematography: Jean Yves Escoffier
Music: Larry Klein
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     In many ways, it's hard to believe that the Allison Anders who 
burst onto the movie scene with GAS FOOD LODGING, a compelling and 
compassionate look at the trials of single motherhood, is the same woman 
who penned and directed GRACE OF MY HEART.  Don't misunderstand me -- 
GRACE isn't a bad movie, and its theme of female independence fits in 
with Anders' other work, but this film doesn't take any chances.  It's a 
safe, shallow motion picture that doesn't challenge the viewer.
     The film starts out pleasantly enough, introducing us to a young 
Edna Buxton (Illeana Douglas) circa 1958.  Living in a huge mansion just 
outside of Philadelphia, Edna isn't an ordinary young woman -- she's the 
sole heir to the Buxton Steel fortune.  But money and marriage aren't on 
Edna's mind.  She wants to sing professionally, much to her parents' 
dismay.  And, when she wins a singing contest where first prize is a 
recording contract, she's off to New York to forge her future. 
Unfortunately, the contract never materializes, and Edna's financial 
situation becomes so dire that she can't even afford a phone.
     Over the next eleven months, Edna's attempts to find work in the 
recording industry meet with failure.  "We already have someone like 
you" is the popular refrain of refusal until Joel Millner (John 
Turturro) hears one of her demos and falls in love -- not with her voice 
but with her songwriting talent.  He hires Edna, changes her name to 
Denise Waverly, and sets her up in a tiny office in the Brill Building, 
New York's sixties hit factory.
     For the rest of the movie, we watch as Edna struggles to launch her 
own singing career while continuing to turn out top-selling singles for 
others.  Her personal life is in turmoil.  She first becomes involved 
with a fellow songwriter, Howard Cazsatt (Eric Stoltz), whose child she 
bears.  Then she has a fling with a married man (Bruce Davison).  
Finally, she falls for Jay Phillips (Matt Dillon), a record producer and 
the lead singer of the Beach Boys-like Riptides.
     One of Anders' problems is that, in trying to span twelve years of 
pop music history and chronicle one woman's life over that period, she 
overextends her script.  Two hours isn't enough time to cover this much 
material, so Anders frequently takes the easy way out by skimming over 
important scenes and fast-forwarding at awkward moments.  By the time 
GRACE OF MY HEART was over, I felt like I'd watched a filmed version of 
the CLIFFNOTES edition rather than the real thing. 
     The movie pays lip service to issues of discrimination (both sexual 
and racial) and female empowerment, but doesn't do much with either.  
They're background elements that are given cursory screen time only when 
they impact upon the main story.  Also, GRACE misses numerous 
opportunities to explore the main character's inner struggles.  For 
example, when Edna finally records her first single, "God Give Me 
Strength", we're privy to the recording sessions, but, when they're 
finished, we're perfunctorily told that the song fails and she marries 
her producer. We see a quick snapshot of the wedding photo and a press 
clipping.  By reducing this critical juncture in the main character's 
life to such cursory exposition, Anders leaves us feeling cheated.
     Then there's the final half-hour, which almost seems like it 
belongs in a different movie.  With the time period moving into the 
late-sixties and early-seventies, we bear witness to the psychedelic 
breakdown of Matt Dillon's character.  For more than twenty minutes, 
GRACE's focus shifts from Edna and her music to Jay's deteriorating 
condition.  This prolonged  sequence of events is disruptive to the 
overall tone.
     Actors are GRACE's most obvious strength.  Illeana Douglas (CAPE 
FEAR, TO DIE FOR) is charming and likable in her first lead role.  I've 
always thought of her as a capable performer, and she reinforces that 
belief here.  John Turturro is excellent, stealing scenes left and right 
as Edna's boss (I'm not sure if it's Turturro's acting or his bizarre 
choice of wigs that captures our attention most forcefully).  The 
supporting players are all solid:  Eric Stoltz, Bruce Davison, and Matt 
Dillon as the three men in Edna's life; Patsy Kensit as her rival-
songwriter-turned friend; and Jennifer Leigh Warren as the Diana Ross-
clone who hits it big with a song written by "Denise Waverly."
    GRACE OF MY HEART's songs are, without a doubt, the film's 
highlight.  Penned by the likes of Elvis Costello, Burt Bachrach, and 
Larry Klein, they effectively recapture the sounds of the sixties.  The 
soundtrack will probably sell, regardless of how the film does at the 
box office.  However, while Allison Anders has certainly made a comeback 
from her horrific FOUR ROOMS episode, her return isn't complete.  GRACE 
OF MY HEART possesses certain charms, but those hoping for an in-depth 
character study, a autopsy of the recording industry, or an exploration 
of songwriters' angst, will be disappointed.  Lightweight and 
undemanding, this GRACE is a little less than amazing.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Dave Cowen
Just into the second act of GRACE OF MY HEART came a disarming moment
which I was never quite able to recover from.  Up until that moment
the casting of the film was contemporary and vibrant: John Turturro
and Eric Stoltz give hilariously fast-talking performances, while 
Bridget Fonda steals the show as a disturbed Lesley Gore.  However, 
after seeing punkers Redd Cross strike Gen-X poses over Matt Dillon 
and leer at a theremin player making horrible noise during a failed 
studio session modeled after the Beach Boys' sessions while producing 
the never-released _Smile_, I knew that I couldn't quite trust the 
film any longer.
In GRACE OF MY HEART, Illeana Douglas plays Edna Buxton, a "willful"
young woman who swaps dresses and musical numbers at the last minute 
in order to wow the crowd at a talent audition, finding herself the 
winner of a recording contract in New York.  That recording contract
never comes, and Edna finds herself destitute in New York.  A crying
fit at an audition nets her a lunch meeting with nice hebrew boy
Joel Millner, played by John Turturro as if he were the Barton Fink
of the music business, who convinces her to change her name and become
a songwriter.  The film follows Edna, loosely modeled on Carol King, 
through two decades of hits, misses, and her three failed relationships 
with industry insiders.  
Director Allison Anders literally races through the first half of the 
film, favoring distracting jump cuts between lines of dialogue and 
quick montages to lay out Edna's rise as one of the premier 
songwriters of the Brill Building era.  First encounters with Turturro, 
Eric Stoltz's Howard Cazsatt and Bridget Fonda's Kelly Porter border on 
the berzerk, bringing the film an endearing manic quality.  The use of 
original music, written by the likes of Los Lobos and Elvis Costello, 
saves this first half of the film from the kind of false sentimentality 
that usually grounds films similar to GRACE in nature.
After speeding through a brief relationship with a timid DJ, played by 
Bruce Davison, GRACE OF MY HEART takes a left turn when Matt Dillon's
character Jay Phillips is introduced.  Dillon brings to his character
a deliberately dazed impression of Beach Boys leader/producer Brian 
Wilson.  Dillon gets the carefully studied mannerisms and motions
right, but ultimately seems out of place in the part -- his teen idol 
reputation obscures the boyish quality that the real Brian Wilson
always seems to exhibit.  The film strikes an eerie note as Phillips
and Buxton marry: while Dillon's Brian Wilson may not be entirely
convincing, Illeana Douglas is a dead ringer for Wilson's real-life 
ex-wife, Marilyn.
The pace of the film slows as it portrays Phillip's descent into 
paranoia and isolation.  As an exploration of the downfall of 
Brian Wilson and the Beach Boys, the film provides a fascinating 
portrait -- but as the film shifts focus from Edna to Jay, it begins
to lose the emotional bond that the audience had created with Edna.  
At the end of the second act, an acceptably accurate portrayal of 
Brian Wilson's life is completely invalidated by a drastic action, 
and the film's tone switches again.
As followers of the Beach Boys know, Brian Wilson began to live his
life in bed, gaining weight hundreds of pounds over his normal size
and isolating his wife.  Earlier in the second act, Edna explains 
to rival songwriter Cheryl that she would stay with Brian no matter
how far he descended into madness.  In real life, that ended up in
years of isolation for Wilson's wife, and an eventual break-up --
and I had completely assumed that the plot would continue to follow
Wilson's life into order to make an ironic point about Edna's 
useless relations with men.  However. instead of continuing to use
Wilson's life as a drive for the film, Anders forcibly steers the 
script away from the Phillips character in order to finish the film 
with an ending which paints a much more rosy picture of Edna's life
than would seem necessary.
Throughout the first two acts, GRACE OF MY HEART is an invigorating
film: and unlike many other viewers who have found the second act
to be tedious, I was perfectly happy to accept the change in tone 
between the first and second acts, possibly out of my personal 
interest in Brian Wilson's life.  In the final minutes of the film, 
however, Anders drops both the manic energy of the first half and
the biographical portrait of the second in favor of Hollywood-style 
schmaltz.
As much as the film has extremely glaring faults, I do have to 
recommend it.  There's a lot to like in the film: Turturro fills
his scenes with charm, and Douglas is positively radiant.  Only 
the poor editing of the first half, where Anders compresses time 
to a ridiculous extent (in one scene, Anders doesn't even give Edna 
three seconds to walk over and greet a character, instead cutting 
directly to their embrace) and the distressingly commercial finale 
lowers my impression of the film.  At the very least, fans of Brian 
Wilson should get a tremendous kick out of Dillon's maligned
impression -- and fans of the music of the 50's and early 60's 
should be very pleased by the original music..
Dave Cowen (esch@fische.com)
Eschatfische. -------------------------------- http://www.fische.com

Author
Alex Fung
(Gramercy - 1996)
Starring Illeana Douglas, John Turturro, Matt Dillon, Eric Stoltz,
   Bruce Davison, Patsy Kensit, Jennifer Leigh Warren
Screenplay by Allison Anders
Produced by Ruth Charny and Dan Hassid
Directed by Allison Anders
Running time: 115 minutes
Everyone is at least partially familiar with some of the infectuous
pop ditties from the 1960s and the singers that churned them out, but
how many people can name the songwriters of tunes of this ilk?
Allison Anders' newest feature, GRACE OF MY HEART, tells the story of
an aspiring-singer-turned-songwriter from this era, and follows her
through the ups and downs, from doo-wop to Woodstock.
Edna Buxton, played by Illeana Douglas, comes from an upper-class
Philadelphia family.  After her rendition of "Hey There" wins her a
local talent contest, whose prizes include a trip to New York and a
recording contract, we next see her plodding from one audition to
another in the Big Apple; her 'recording contract' prize has conveniently
dissipated, and she's desperate to make it as a singer.  One audition
doesn't go particularly well - the public wants male singers, she's
told - but the producer takes pity on her and introduces Edna to Joel
Millner, played by John Turturro, who becomes her manager.  There's
a catch: Joel wants Edna to write songs for his other artists to sing,
not her.  Edna, now given the working name Denise Waverly ("Edna: that's
a terrible name" opines Joel), grudging accepts her role as a songwriter
and is put to work in a small office in the famous songwriting
hothouse, the Brill House.  Her songs become chart-toppers and make
other artists stars, but throughout the years and a number of
relationships, Edna never gives up on her dream to make her own records.
A number of men pass through Edna's life: Howard, a fellow songwriter
at the Brill House played by Eric Stoltz, who writes sociopolitical
tunes and is content to ride on the hot coattails of 'Denise'; a
kind-hearted (and married) radio disk jockey played by Bruce Davison;
Jay, played by Matt Dillon as a surf-rocker clearly based upon the
Beach Boys' Brian Wilson.  There's also a rival songwriter, Cheryl,
played by Patsy Kensit.
Illeana Douglas gives a solid performance in the lead role of GRACE OF
MY HEART.  Probably best known for her role opposite Matt Dillon (again)
in Gus Van Sant's TO DIE FOR (1995), or for losing part of her face
courtesy of Robert DeNiro in Martin Scorsese's CAPE FEAR (1991),
Douglas is in virtually every scene of the film, and it's through her
eyes that we see the music and culture scene change in America throughout
the 1960s.
There's a lot of offbeat casting in the film.  John Turturro catches
the feel of the jumpy, fasttalking, and ultimately good-hearted Joel
Millner, although his various hairpieces in the film are in themselves
utterly entertaining.  While Davison works perfectly as a mild-mannered,
kind radio DJ, the use of Matt Dillon as a surf musician is bizarre;
it's amusing to watch him lip synch to music while carrying a surf
board.  He's not bad in the film, mind you - it just seems completely
incongruous.  This is the second time Dillon has played a musician -
some may remember his performance on the other extreme of the musical
spectrum as a grunge rocker in Cameron Crowe's SINGLES (1992) - and
again he seems out of place.  Bridget Fonda (in a cameo role), however,
is perfectly realized as a teen ingenue.
GRACE OF MY HEART takes a very interesting approach to its music,
which of course plays an integral part of the film.  Rather than
recycling pop music from that era, original songs were commisioned
by Anders from various pop artists to recreate the sound of the 1960s,
and the end result sounds completely authentic and may very well be
the strongest element of the film.  The music in the first third of
the film, in particularly, sounds completely in step with the early
1960s.  Anders also seems to make no attempt to hide the fact that
her star actors are lip-synching their vocals during their performances
in the film, which ends up making the film a bit more goofy yet somehow
more fun to watch. (Curiously, Kensit, who actually is a vocalist,
does no singing in the film.)
GRACE OF MY HEART is a very episodic film.  Like MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS,
which also traces popular music over a span of decades, Anders' film
can clearly be segmented into specific vignettes.  It often has the
feel of a shmaltzy TV-movie, full of melodrama that really isn't that
dramatic nor unpredictable.  Does Edna get to record her own music?
What do you think?
However, underneath all the goofiness - the gleeful references to
the lingo (I haven't heard the term 'far out' this often in years),
hippie communes and other cultural oddities of the time, the
hairstyles and fashion - GRACE OF MY HEART has a certain underlying
charm about it that makes it likeable.  Allison Anders has been
acclaimed as an independent filmmaker, but with this film, she steps
firmly into mainstream soil.  GRACE OF MY HEART should be an
audience-pleaser, but with a lead with as low a profile as Douglas
(not to mention a God-awful print campaign), it may be a tough sell
to get the audiences into the theatre.
