Title
Review for Minus Man, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Christopher Null
     I'm still trying to figure out how to look at THE MINUS MAN.
Either it's supposed to be a dark, black comedy, or it's supposed to be
a thoughtful, pensive drama/thriller a la SLING BLADE.
     And it has so much going for it.  Owen Wilson, who was so great in
films like BOTTLE ROCKET.  Janeane Garofalo, who I like pretty much
universally.  Hampton Fancher, who adapted the screenplay for BLADE
RUNNER.  What's not to like?
     THE MINUS MAN takes as its premise that your average,
thirtysomething, white male is the most likely serial killer around.
Vann (Wilson) fits the profile perfectly, a quiet, blonde, super-polite
drifter who poisons people at random.  The town of Owensville is no
different, as Vann randomly offs people, narrating to himself along the
way along with two imaginary cops.
     There's a romance of sorts, with Garofalo as a postal worker
smitten with Vann, and her screen time turns out to be the only stuff
worth watching.  The rest of the film is interminable, boring, and
ultimately plotless, meandering from scene to scene with no discernable
direction.  Frankly, I gave up on THE MINUS MAN after 30 minutes.
Turned out there were 90 more to go.
     I don't know what the ultimate point of this film was supposed to
be.  That there are crazy people all around?  That life and film can
ultimately lack meaning?  That rock stars (Crow) can do whatever they
want?  That once-great actors and writers can produce junk now and
again?
Director: Hampton Fancher
Producer: Fida Attieh, David L. Bushell
Writer: Hampton Fancher
Starring: Owen Wilson, Brian Cox, Mercedes Ruehl, Janeane Garofalo,
Dwight Yoakam, Dennis Haysbert, Sheryl Crow
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Steve Rhodes
With just the sort of script that Hitchcock would have been drawn to,
THE MINUS MAN features everyday people who aren't always quite what they
seem. Full of small twists and subplots, the deliciously diabolical
drama stars Owen Wilson as Vann Siegert, a likeable all-American boy
type, who has just one tiny flaw -- he's a serial killer.
Vann, a deranged young adult, is really a sweet blonde with a strong
moral code, just not a normal one. "Never done anything violent to
anyone," he explains. His MO is to put fast-acting poison in
sweet-tasting liquor, which he keeps in a little flask. When his
intended victim notices the booze, he generously offers them a swig --
"to put them to sleep."
The story is told in voice-over from the perspective of the killer, who
shares his thoughts on his motivations and techniques. ("I take the
natural momentum of a person and draw it toward me." "I never make a
plan. Like a comet shooting across the sky. You never know where it'll
land.")
Written and directed by Hampton Fancher, the co-writer of BLADE RUNNER,
THE MINUS MAN should get bonus points for its trailer. In an age in
which studios think that audiences will not see a movie unless the
entire plot is revealed in the trailers, THE MINUS MAN dares to have a
trailer that features not a single clip from the film. All you see in it
are two fictional people leaving the movie, arguing about it.
A meticulous and delicate little mystery and thriller, THE MINUS MAN can
be thought of as the anti-SCREAM -- low on gore, as if the killer
himself made the movie. He's a gentle soul, who wouldn't want to disturb
the audience.
Vann is a loner who drives a pickup along small country roads until he,
uncharacteristically, settles in a small town for a while. He takes a
room in the house of a middle-aged couple named Jane (Mercedes Ruehl)
and Doug (Brian Cox). Supposedly, their daughter, who's off to college
now, used to sleep in the bedroom that they are renting. Like most of
the story, everything is suspect. Jane, for example, has a sullen look,
and her sunken eyes seem to be hiding something. Quirky Doug is a
conundrum. One night, he comes in beaten up. Who did it? A stranger in a
bar? Jane? Vann? Or maybe, Doug himself? Some of the story's puzzles are
immediately solved while others fester.
Vann quickly becomes ingrained into Jane and Doug's Rockwellian town. He
even gets himself a girlfriend at the local Post Office where he finds a
job sorting mail. In a surprisingly sunny performance, Janeane Garofalo
plays his girlfriend without a hint of her signature sarcasm. Showing a
naďve and playfully alluring side rarely seen, Garofalo proves that the
studios may have incorrectly pigeonholed her.
Hitchcock understood the power of humor, something THE MINUS MAN could
have used more often. When he tries, Fancher is able to enliven his
movie with carefully chosen comic situations. "I look harder than
anybody," Vann says in a wryly-funny scene, as he participates in a
large search for a guy that he has killed. "I look so hard,  I forget
there's nothing to find." He knows the body isn't buried in these woods,
but he searches diligently nevertheless.
Bobby Bukowski's intimately lit cinematography, full of close-ups, gives
the striking picture a realism and an immediacy. Although the film's
deliberately slow pacing will undoubtedly irritate some, the director's
style is more mesmerizing than soporific. With Fancher averaging about a
script a decade, one would hope that this film will boost his cachet in
Hollywood and he will be sought out more often.
THE MINUS MAN runs 1:45. It is rated R for language and a scene of drug
use and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: The Minus Man
Starring Owen Wilson, Janeane Garofalo, Brian Cox, Mercedes Ruehl,
Dwight Yoakam, Dennis Haysbert and Sheryl Crow
Based on the novel by Lew McCreary
Written and Directed by Hampton Fancher
website: www.theminusman.com
IN SHORT: All about Life, in a serial killer's own words. . .
On paper, it's a great concept and one which I can't recall seeing
before. Here we have Vann Siegert (Owen Wilson), a freshly scrubbed
All-American boy with truck, drifting from town to town, meeting new
people, making new friends, spiking their drinks with deadly poison and
moving on . . .
Writer/Director Hampton Fancher's script (he's best known for writing
Blade Runner a zillion years ago) offers us Vann's running commentary on
life the universe and everything else as we watch him settle in to a new
town, new lodgings and potential new girlfriend, Ferrin (Janeane
Garofalo) a co-worker at the US Mail office where he's found work as a
sorter. His landlords are Jane (Mercedes Ruehl) and Doug (Brian Cox),
whose college age daughter has gone missing and who are themselves
bordering on the edge of emotional self-destruction. Rounding off the
cast are a pair of imaginary (?) cops (Dwight Yoakam and Dennis
Haysbert) who are on the track of this killer. There's enough background
in this story to allow you to think the conversations with the cops are
Vann's own creation and rehearsal for an eventual arrest, but this is a
flick which leaves you with more questions than answers, and doesn't
allow any tension to build because there's no sense that the "pursuit"
is anything more than imaginary.
I must have been having a bad day, 'cuz my head kept trying to nod off,
and neither the script nor performances merited that kind of reaction.
The question is: How do you build sympathy for a serial killer? You
can't. How do you build tension when there's no visible pursuit? You
can't. Minus Man breaks all the traditional rules and knows it -- the ad
tag "conversation usually follows" is a perfect description of the kind
of post arthouse screening activity that will invariably happen, 'cuz
this flick is perfect for the arthouse.
The performances are uniformly good, with a most pleasant surprise being
that singer Sheryl Crow holds her own against the seasoned Wilson.
Still, the pace is rather slow and the lack of visible tension works
against it.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Minus Man, he would have paid...
Pay per view level, and where most of the arthouse flicks rank.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Joy Wyse
The Minus Man, Starring Owen Wilson, Brian Cox, Mercedes Reuhl, Janeane
Garofalo, Dwight Yoakum, Sheryl Crow.
Directed by Hampton Fancher
 The catch phrase for The Minus Man says that people will be talking
about this film after they see it.  Well, when I walked out of the theater
I heard person after person saying the same thing.WEIRD!
Sheryl Crow is the first onscreen victim of serial killer Vann Siegert
(Wilson) and she's not killed soon enough for me.  The scenes involving
her are slow and amateurish.  It was a precursor of things to come.   
Vann feels that he is providing a service with his homicidal endeavors.  
He kills whenever he gets a `sign' that a person would be better off in
the hereafter.    He even has a set of rules.  He doesn't kill anyone he
knows, or anyone who lives in the same town with him.   However, he breaks
both of those rules in one single day.
Two imaginary detectives continually jump in and out of the action,
visible only to Vann.  This only makes it more difficult to follow the
plot.
There is actually some very good acting in this film.  Brian Cox and
Mercedes Reuhl, are wonderful as Doug and Jane, a couple who take in Vann
as a boarder.  They have their own problems including the fact that Doug
is a heavy drinker who likes to beat up on himself.
With Doug's help Vann manages to get a job with the Post Office.  Now,
there's a great place to have a serial killer working, right?  He meets
Ferrin (Garofalo), a fellow Postal worker who is attracted to this nice,
sweet, attractive newcomer.  Where does the plot go from here?  Well, it
doesn't go where you'd expect.
This is an extremely slow-moving film, so slow that I had a lot of trouble
staying awake.  There were some people who dozed off, and others who left.
 They didn't get to see the very unusual ending.  It is easily a movie
that you can miss without regrets.  If it's on latenight TV sometime, you
might tune it in.  It'll help put you to sleep.  I give it a C-.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"The Minus Man" (1999) ** (out of four)
Written and Directed by Hampton Fancher
Starring Owen Wilson, Janeane Garofalo, Mercedes
Ruehl, Brian Cox, Dwight Yoakam, Dennis Haysbert, Eric
Mabius, Larry Miller, Brent Briscoe, and Sheryl Crow.
I remember first seeing the preview to this low budget
serial killer indie with a sold out crowd in front 
of The Blair Witch Project. The trailer was strikingly
original compared to most plot-revealing
advertisements today. There were no clips from the
film, just a young couple intimately discussing what
they had just seen at the theater. In fact, their
discussion was so intimate that the young lady
involved forgot about her life guarding
responsibilities at a local pool.  Arriving late to
her job, she finds two huge cadavers floating in the
pool. The laughter, following this bizarre moment,
roared throughout the theater. After this disturbing
event, words flew across the screen, accompanied by a
Danny Elfman-esque score, first declaring that you
will talk about this movie for a long, long time, then
listing a cast of familiar names including Janeane
Garafolo, Merecedes Ruehl, and rock star Sheryl Crow.
>From this experience, I told myself I had to see this
movie and I'm sure everyone else around me did the
same but for one reason or another no one did,
including myself.
I finally got a chance to catch this one on video a
couple of days ago and, sadly, it was not worth the 
wait. I think I understand why there wasn't a scene
from the movie in the preview  there is not one 
interesting or stand out moment in the whole film, not
one surprising turn in the plot, not one particularly
noteworthy acting performance, not one musically
charged instant. Not one of anything really, except a
lot of torturously slow paced dialogue.  From
beginning to end, everything remains consistently
low-key.Writer/director Hampton Fancher tells an
original story but he does nothing else. My only
reaction when The Minus Man ended was `So? Is that
it?' Fancher spends so many pointless scenes doing
nothing that, as time goes by, the movie begins to
drag and drag. The movie is way longer than it has to
be and still there is little to get out of it once it
is over. For a film that guarantees to be a
conversation starter, the only thing my viewing
partner and I had to talk about were the numerous plot
holes left annoyingly (and ntentionally?) unfilled.
The film starts with a questionable casting choice.
Thankfully Sheryl Crow is only in Minus Man for a 
couple of minutes because her acting skills are very
limited. She plays an innocent victim to a serial
killer by the name of Vann Siegert. Played
ndifferently by Owen Wilson, Vann is the last man
you'd expect to be a murderer. He has deceivingly
sunny blonde hair, he's sober, and he's a text book
example of a polite do-gooder. So when he rents out a
room in the house of the emotionally troubled husband
and wife Jane and Doug (Mercedes Ruehl and Brian Cox),
he is quickly taken in as the child the aging couple
wished they had. Vann immediately after arriving at
this ghost town ironically takes on the stereotypical
job of a post office worker, meets a girl (the
unpredictably banal Janeane Garofalo), and whenever he
feels like it, poisons a resident of the town.
Very similar to American Psycho, except without all of
the gory murder scenes, The Minus Man is full of
superfluous voiceovers by Vann. Sometimes interesting
but mostly irrelevant, these glimpses at a serial
killer's mind never tell us why he does what he does.
Fancher occasionally hints that mentally unstable Vann
feels a certain amount of power when he kills, but
unfortunately nothing is for sure.
Some of the scenes in which the viewer enters the
chaotic imagination of Vann are wonderfully eerie. 
Our narrator has dreams about two police detectives
(Dennis Haysbert and Dwight Yoakam) interrogating him
with cruel language and violence. But, like most of
the movie, nothing ultimately comes out of this part
of the story.
The Minus Man is not as depressing or disturbing as
claims it is. I wanted to like this movie and its 
actors but no matter how hard I tried, I could not.
Kudos to Artisan Entertainment. This is an example of
clever advertising attracting me to something I should
have avoided.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MINUS MAN, THE (director/writer: Hampton Fancher; screenwriter: based on
the 1990 novel by Lew McCreary; cinematographer: Bobby Bukowski;
editor:Todd Ramsay; cast: Owen Wilson (Vann Siegert), Janeane Garofalo
(Ferrin), Brian Cox (Doug), Mercedes Ruehl (Jane), Dwight Yoakam
(Blair), Dennis Haysbert (Graves), Sheryl Crow (Casper), Danny 'Big
Black' Rey (Arthur), Eric Mabius (Gene), Lew McCreary (Man in Diner),
1999)
This creepy serial killer tale had all the more fright in it than the
more highly touted "Felicia's Journey, "and was a superior telling of a
homicidal maniac on the prowl story than the more flamboyant venture
"American Psycho" was. The Minus Man stars Vann Siegert (Owen Wilson),
as an affable, clean-cut, blond drifter, with a bland personality, and
someone who offers no reasons for what he does, except some vague
philosophical explanations, as he talks into his miniscule tape recorder
revealing his private thoughts: "I look for the meaning of things and
act upon it at the spur of the moment. I take the natural momentum of a
person and draw it towards me. You don't always choose what you do,
sometimes what you do chooses you."
Hampton Fancher, the Blade Runner screenwriter and the first-time
director of "The Minus Man," creates a film that sets a dark mood of
everyday normal life contrasted by the cheery personality of Vann, who
looks like the average "Joe," easily fitting into his surroundings. He
drives his blue pickup truck from somewhere in the Pacific Coast, hiding
the poisons underneath his truck he discovered there, while spending so
much time alone in the woods. He is such a well-mannered and congenial
young man, whose appeal is supposed to make us irritated that we can
like someone like him. He even tells us in his narration, how good he
feels about himself, as he crows to himself that he does his killings
with the minimum of violence.
The film opens when Vann enters a nearly empty roadside bar, pays an
attractive alcoholic and junkie's (rock star Sheryl Crow) bar tab, gives
her a lift, watches her get high on smack, and offers her a poisoned
drink of Amaretto from his flask for a quick and painless death. A crime
with no sex or any other motive. The emptiness of his action, and the
film's emphasis on his charms, while keeping his past mysterious, adds
chills to his moody persona.
Vann spends the night asleep in his truck by the beach, but is awakened
and questioned by a state trooper about why he is in an off-limits area.
But, because he is so polite, he does not arouse the trooper's
suspicions and therefore no search of the vehicle takes place. He shows
up the next morning in a sleepy West Coast suburban town and rents a
room in a cottage from an unhappy middle-aged couple whose daughter they
tell him is away in college, but later it becomes evident that she must
be missing, or ran away, or is dead (it is never explained which).
Jane (Mercedes Ruehl) is at first suspicious of the renter, but Doug
(Brian Cox) takes to him right away and gets him a temp job for
Christmas in the local post office. Doug, lonely for companionship -- as
the couple is quietly depressed -- takes Vann to the local high school
football game, where he meets the star player (Mabius) afterwards in a
restaurant. Next week, before a big November game, he gives the football
player with the promising future in the F.B.I. but doubts about the
present, a lift in his truck and allows him to have a few swigs from his
poisoned Amaretto flask. He even joins the search party looking for him
when he is reported missing, looking hard for him, even though he knows
that he has already buried him somewhere out of their sight.
Vann often has vivid fantasies that he is being vigorously interrogated
by a pair of rough detectives (Dwight Yoakam and Dennis Haysbert) who
have been tracking him down and suspect him of being the serial killer,
but can't come up with the proof (like everything about Vann, it is
never made clear whether this a projection, had actually happened or
will happen in the future).
While at the the post office, he impresses his supervisor (Rey) that he
is diligent, so he is given even more responsibilities, even subbing for
a letter carrier who is ill. The routine work seems to agree with him,
as he mentions that this is the best job he ever had. At the workplace,
his co-worker, Ferrin (Janeane Garofalo), finds him appealing and tries
to make herself available to him. This is a different kind of part for
the usually gruff Garofalo. Here she plays a sweet, vulnerable girl, who
wants a serious relationship, but has trouble getting the shy Vann in an
amorous mood, and when she does succeed, he is so awkward in his
physical advances to her, that she is scared off by him.
What carries the day for this film about the banality of evil, which
presents its story as a mind game Owen Wilson is playing, is the strong
performances by him and Brian Cox, as they both are good at conveying
men who are psychologically damaged goods. While Janeane Garofalo and
Mercedes Ruehl are able supporting characters, completely believable as
women who need a man in their life to feel fulfilled. The film gets
over, despite its weakness of allowing  the serial killer to be someone
whom we can never understand or come to terms with.
These weird killings do happen in present society, and when we read
about them in the newspapers, we even know less about 'why' than we do
here. In the characterization Wilson gave to this psychopath, you could
see how his normalcy wasn't normal, and maybe that's about all we know
about most serial killers. But, we can't let society off the hook as
generously as we do in the newspapers, and what makes this film
particularly engaging, at least more engaging than most of the serial
killer films I have seen recently, is that in this film the sickness in
society also becomes part of understanding why these weird things
happen. What is unsaid becomes, at least, pointed out as to where we
should start looking for answers, if we can only stop looking at the
conventional places where we usually look and start looking at ourselves
as a society and what we have created. I just wish this film had more
body in it, more of a feeling for what it was up to, something more
revealing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Movies about serial killers are typically from some detective's POV as he
and we try to figure out just who the serial killer is. Why is it like this?
Simply because if the audience isn't seduced into some sort of sympathetic
relationship with the ostensible main character of the movie, that movie
doesn't work. We've got to care about the main character, not want him or
her to die. And, if the main character were the serial killer, well, it
would be that much harder to make him or her sympathetic. So most take the
conservative way out, allow the killer to be the focus of things, but make
the sympathetic detective the main character, the one we can feel
comfortable identifying with. Hampton Fancher's The Minus Man turns this all
around, makes the serial killer the main character. Which isn't all that
new, really, but, instead of establishing some sort of hierarchy of
immorality whereby the killer is serving some vigilante conception of
justice (Slingblade), Fancher makes his serial killer just as random and
heartless as Early Quaid from Kalifornia, or, better yet, Henry, from
Portrait of a Serial Killer.
His name is Vann Siegert. He drifts around in a phantom-grey 1979 F-250. And
he kills people (in a low-budget way), and he's done it enough that he even
has self-imposed rules, and he's played by none other than Owen Wilson (in a
Bottletrocket-ish role), ingratiating himself at every turn with his
I'm-showing-all-my-teeth-Mom smiles, his wide range of shy shoulder shrugs,
and a childlike diction which supplies a lot of the dry humor of The Minus
Man ('If Doug did something bad to his wife, he sure picked a bad time').
None of this is kept from us, either. From the opening frames, when he does
away with the down-and-out Caspar (Sheryl Crow, debuting), we know that Vann
Siegert's our Minus Man here. What we don't know is why, and Fancher uses
this generated need for explanation to pull us through the rest of the
movie. It's a device, yes, one most often used when the middle parts are
going to directionless enough that direction has to come from elsewhere. To
look at it another way, the idea is that if we want the answer badly enough,
we'll sit through anything to get it.
But then anything stretches two artfilm hours, which is to say clever
dialogue mismatched with an overly deliberate pace. Or perhaps perfectly
matched, imperfectly conceived. Either way, it drags at times, though of
course there's the necessary developments: the unsuspecting potential victim
Ferrin (Janeane Garofalo), a postal co-worker/love-interest, the
escalation/rising suspicion which results from too many bodies suddenly
turning up, the injustice of killing those who don't really deserve to
die--all the usual serial killer stuff.
What's strong about The Minus Man, though, is that there's more.
Specifically, there's serial killer Vann Siegert having bad enough luck to
rent a room from the most deranged family in town. And he's supposed to be
the deranged one here. As it works out, though, he quickly becomes something
of a replacement for the family's missing daughter, and subsequently finds
himself doing everything he can to keep that family sane. All the while of
course leading his double life--killing people on the side with zero
remorse, no passion. In fact, his 'killings' and the running monologue he
keeps about his bad habit suggest that he either sees himself as some
impersonal force of nature or wants to be that impersonal force of nature.
Which is as close as we ever get to any explanation. So be it.
Vann Siegert doesn't just talk to himself about it, though, either. As in
Chasing Amy, he has a couple of imaginary friends to bounce ideas off of.
But these imaginary friends, they're something of a cross between a David
Lynchian 'projected guilt' trick and the little kid who beat up Keifer
Sutherland in Flatliners. Meaning they 'bounce' ideas off him. Dwight Yoakum
and Dennis Haysbert, FBI agents extrordinaire, who together comprise about
2/3rds of the law in The Minus Man. The other third is a real state trooper,
whose presence allows an equally real Clay Pigeons type ending, which is the
only intense scene in the whole movie. Better late than never, right? When
all else fails, do what's been done. Fancher does, and it works, but just
barely.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Michael Dequina
With the title _Dog_Park_, this unremarkable romantic comedy sets itself
up for the easy play on words.  Comments such as "It's a dog" or "It's
bark is worse than its bite" would be fitting if the film had some bark,
let alone bite, to begin with--while not a good film, _Dog_Park_ is much
too gentle to inspire any dramatic reaction on either end of the opinion
spectrum.
The gentleness mostly comes from its lead characters--a fact that is, of
course, hardly a bad thing.  Luke Wilson is quite likable as average joe
classifieds writer Andy, who is smarting from his recent break with his
ex, Cheryl (Kathleen Robertson).  Natasha Henstridge, heretofore best
known for doffing her clothes through two _Species_ films, is equally as
winning as Lorna, a children's TV hostess also coming off of a bad
breakup.  Andy and Cheryl meet in a singles bar one night and hit it off.
 Is it all smooth sailing from here on out for the pair?  Of course not,
for there is still a good 75 minutes left in the film.
Unfortunately, writer-director Bruce McCulloch (who also co-stars) does
not come up with terribly convincing reasons for these two to remain
apart as long as they do.  One big reason for Lorna's reluctance to go
forward is the fact that the one night with Andy ended in embarrassment
for her, yet Andy forgives it so nice about it that one can't help but
wonder what her problem is.  This is highlighted when she decides to go
on a date with a loser she meets at a video store (Harland Williams).
The main pick-up spot in the film is not the video store, however, but
the dog park, where Andy and Cheryl spend time with the dog of whom they
share custody, Mogley--and, of course, where Lorna takes out her beloved
canine companion, Peanut.  As it turns out, Andy and Lorna also share the
same dog psychologist/trainer, played with maximum oddness by Mark
McKinney.  Offbeat touches such as that character lend the film its only
hint of edge.
And therein lies the problem.  _Dog_Park_'s soft quality makes it easy
enough to watch, but as with many things that are "nice," it doesn't
exactly make it memorable.  When the famously acerbic Janeane Garofalo
makes her first appearance as Jeri, Andy's editor/best friend, one's
hopes that she could put some of her usual zing into the thing and bring
it to life are soon dashed when McCulloch makes her play nice, too--also
erasing any hopes that the film will rise above its conventions.
Garofalo is also called on to play nice in a completely different film,
_Blade_Runner_ writer Hampton Fancher's introspective, deliberately paced
thriller _The_Minus_Man_.  But her turn as Ferrin, a sweet small-town
postal worker (!) who falls for friendly co-worker and new guy in town
Vann (Owen Wilson, Luke's brother, as it is) works better in this
context.  Perhaps that's because the mood here is not one of niceness but
of evil and dread, for Vann isn't exactly the nice guy he seems--in fact,
he's an unusually affable serial killer, who poisons people whom he feels
are better off dead.  
The cast is perfect; along with Garofalo and Wilson--whose low-key,
innocuous presence makes for an eerie fit--solid performances are given
by Brian Cox, Mercedes Ruehl, and, in her acting debut, Sheryl Crow.  The
film has been marketed as a big conversation piece, and, indeed, many
questions are raised throughout its running time.  But it's that quality
that is ultimately the film's undoing; too many pieces of the puzzle are
left out in what comes off as a rather strained and obvious attempt to
leave things up for discussion.  Most viewers, I suspect, won't really
want to go through the effort to talk it out, for there's really really
no point in doing it.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

