Title
Review for Killer's Kiss (1955)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jerry Saravia
Stanley Kubrick's first foray into film noir, "Killer's Kiss," is acceptable 
and often crude but certainly an interesting experiment for the late master. 
Released in 1955, it did not cause much of a stir but it has an almost 
dreamlike vision of noir in its documentary-like staginess. 
The film begins with voice-over narration by a Davy Gordon (Jamie Smith), a 
lonely New York boxer who seems rather unenthusiastic about his profession. 
Essentially, he seems tired of fighting, living an isolated existence in a 
low-rent, bland apartment. He is ready to leave for the farmlands of Seattle 
with his Uncle George. Across from his bedroom, he can see his neighbor 
Gloria (Irene Kane), a hostess for Pleasureland, a shabby dance hall that 
only seems to play the instrumental song "Once." Gloria's boss is Vincent 
Rapallo (Frank Silvera), a beastly, sad man who is also lonely and insecure. 
He sees himself as "low and worthless," and is unable to hold on to to the 
things he loves, including Gloria. 
One night, a scream is heard in Gloria's apartment, and Davy comes to the 
rescue. She was apparently attacked by Vincent, whom she wants out of her 
life. Naturally, Davy and Gloria get intimate and fall in love (rather 
abruptly, even for a noir tale like this one). Gloria wants to leave Rapallo 
and the dance hall but Rapallo's rage and jealousy grow stronger, resulting 
in an accidental murder and the kidnapping of Gloria. 
This kind of tale has been told countless times before, and if you have seen 
"Double Indemnity," you'll have some idea of where the story is headed. 
Fortunately, Kubrick is a master stylist and employs effective use of 
shadows, and his screenplay evokes ironic twists of fate. The accidental 
murder is one brilliantly shot example where two henchmen walk through the 
inside staircase of the Pleasureland dance hall, ready to kill the man 
waiting outside the door while the sign "Watch Your Step" is seen overhead. 
There is also the voyeuristic use of mirrors, particularly Davy's apartment 
where the reflection in his mirror shows Gloria's nocturnal activities of 
undressing before her bedroom light is turned off. For Kubrick to show the 
drab surroundings of these three lead characters, including Rappalo, makes 
quite a statement about the post-war 1950's where farmlands were a dream to 
be pursued in lieu of the big city life. 
"Killer's Kiss" is often awkwardly edited, with the exception of the climax 
set on the rooftops of loft buildings, and a room full of mannequins. But 
there are also some terrific visceral moments backed by a tense jazz score, 
often the counterpoint of any scene involving the Pleasureland setting. One 
scene, quite avante-garde for its time, is shot as a negative, leading to the 
aforementioned attack on Gloria.
Jamie Smith and Irene Kane are somewhat weak in their acting skills, but the 
two argument scenes between Irene and Silvera are marvelously dramatic and 
ironically funny. My favorite line is when Silvera says: "Like the man says, 
can happiness buy money?" Her response is: "Oh, and you are a comedian too. 
See what I am missing." There is no question that the best performance is by 
Silvera as Rapallo, showing a side of pathetic weakness crossed with rage and 
contempt for his persona. When Gloria refers to him as "an old man who smells 
bad," you can almost feel his temperature rising. 
If nothing else, at a breezy 67 minutes, "Killer's Kiss" is required viewing 
for anyone who is a Kubrick fan or interested in film noir. It is heavily 
flawed but often entertaining enough to warrant a viewing. It became the 
stepping stone to Kubrick's greatness as seen in the far superior "The 
Killing" (released the following year) and, well, the rest is history.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
KILLER'S KISS (director: Stanley Kubrick; writer: Stanley Kubrick;
cinematographer:Stanley Kubrick; cast: Frank Silvera (Vincent Rapallo),
Jamie Smith (Davy Gordon), Irene Kane (Gloria Price), Jerry Jarret
(Albert, Fight Manager), 1955)
An unsuccessful boxer Davy Gordon (Jamie) rescues an unhappy young
woman, Gloria Price (Irene), from being assaulted, who is a dancer in a
shady nightspot. They live in the same modest apartment building, which
is probably a lot like the one the Bronx born Stanley lived in as a
child.
Vincent Rapallo (Silvera) is the sleazy and evil boss, who has a crush
on Gloria, refusing to take her no for a final answer. His menacing
sneers are unforgetable, adding spice to a feature that makes grand use
of every shot taken, and for its very limited budget of $75,000, equals
in style and eloquence the highest budgeted films of that era.
Frustrated that his amorous advances are getting him nowhere, and stung
by her comment of him as a stinking old man, Vincent attacks her in her
apartment, only to be thwarted by Davy. This brings the two lonely
people together, and after knowing each other for only 2 days they fall
in love and decide to leave the city and go to Davy's uncle's place in
Seattle.
By mistake, Vincent's two henchmen grab Davy's fight manager, Albert
(Jerry), thinking he is Davy, and beat him to death. They also kidnap
Gloria, and when Davy's rescue attempt of her fails, she begs Vincent to
spare her life, telling him that she could now love him. This is too
much for Davy to take and he jumps out of the warehouse window to
escape, as Vincent follows him, leading to a mannequin factory battle
scene, where one of Kubrick's classic fight sequences takes place.
The scene returns to the opening shot of the train terminal, where the
disconsolate Davy is thinking to himself what a sucker he has been to
take life so seriously, when at the last minute Gloria appears and they
kiss.
Kubrick has created a sinister noir film, employing dark angle shots and
a hand held camera, which is used effectively in the street scenes where
he probably didn't have official permission to be filming. It is a
surprisingly well-made film, especially considering its low-budget
constraints and the very independent way it was produced. It is one of
my favorite noir films; it had something about it that I enjoyed that
goes beyond its taut story and authencity, it reminded me so much of how
the 1950s were a time of alienation and failed dreams for youngsters who
were trying to capitalize on the boom times after WW11. Davy and
Gloria's fling, despite the stilted acting, captured so much the way
lovers of that generation had trouble communicating with each other,
that their plight of hapless innocents, stuck in a world of powerful
figures who controlled their lives, made it seem as if their only hope
was to go where the grass was greener; it actually signalled a migration
away from the city for many children of that generation.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
