Title
Review for Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
What do you get when you slap together a movie based on a story by the
legendary George Lucas, directed by virtuoso director Steven Spielberg, and
starring one of the biggest box-office stars in the world, Harrison Ford?
You get one hot-fudge-rockin' good time, that's what you get!!!
PLOT:
Professor/archeologist Indiana Jones sets out to find the long-lost mystical
Ark of the Covenant before the Nazis get their grubby fingers hands on it.
Adventures, snakes, romance and mucho action ensues.
CRITIQUE:
Astounding movie packed with non-stop action, stunts galore, an interesting
story line, great one-liners, a solid cast, a catchy musical score, and all
the fun and adventure that you could squeeze into a two-hour thrill ride. If
you don't enjoy this film, then you just don't like action movies, period!
If you're young, you'll enjoy its humor, its cool action sequences and its
gross-out factor at times. If you're a little older, you'll appreciate the
interesting plot line, the romance, and yes, the mountains of adventure.
Watching this movie made me feel like a kid again, dreaming and fantasizing
about fighting the bad guys, travelling to different countries, making the
impossible, possible! Harrison Ford is perfect as the every-man with the
brains of a scientist and the brawn of an outdoors adventurer, and Spielberg
manages to achieve the ideal balance of action, fun, adventure and humor.
Now if you really want to have a good time, check into this movie on the
same night as its two sequels, rent a jug of iced Coke, truckloads of nachos
and salsa, an adventure hat and whip, and prepare to gag yourself into a
world of action-movie heaven!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This picture was nominated for eight 1981 Oscar nominations, including Best
Picture. It lost that award to CHARIOTS OF FIRE, but did manage to win for
Best Art Direction, Best Special Effects, Best Film Editing and Best Sound.
Actor Tom Selleck was originally cast as Indiana Jones, but was committed to
his hit TV show, "Magnum P.I.".
In filming the Well of Souls sequence, the producers scoured every pet shop
in London and the South of England for every snake they could lay their
hands on. Hence there are snakes that are identifiable from many different
geographical areas. However, once all the snakes were on set, it became
clear that there were not nearly enough of them, so Spielberg had several
hoses cut into lengths, and these were used as well. Looking closely, you
can tell which are the real snakes and which are not.
An early draft of the script had Indy travelling to Shanghai to recover a
piece of the Staff of Ra. During his escape from the museum where it was
housed, he sheltered from machine gun fire behind a giant rolling gong. Also
in the same script, Indy and Marion flee the chaos caused by the opening of
the Ark in a wild mine-cart chase sequence. Both of these scenes were cut
from the script, but ended up in 1984's INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF
DOOM.
This film begins with a shot of a peak in the jungle which is reminiscent of
the Paramount Pictures logo. The same type of opening is present in its
sequels.
Jock's airplane at the beginning of the film has the registration number
"OB-CPO". This is a reference to Obi-Wan and C-3PO from George Lucas' STAR
WARS (9.5/10). Also, the hieroglyphics in the Well of Souls include
engravings of R2-D2 and C-3PO. They can be seen on a post to the right of
Indy and Sallah as they remove the Ark.
The script originally included a long fight between a swordsman and Indiana
with his whip. As legend has it, actor Harrison Ford was suffering diarrhea
at the time, and asked if the scene could be shortened. Spielberg said the
only way he could shorten it was if Indy pulled out his gun and just shot
the guy. The entire crew laughed and that's how it was filmed.
When Indy first falls in the Well of Souls and is face to face with the
cobra, you can see the snake's reflection on the glass dividing it and
Harrison Ford, also some fingerprints and stuff like that.
When Indy is dragging along the ground, hanging onto the Nazi soldier's
truck with the Ark inside, you can see the pad that he's being dragged on.

Author
Mike Watson
You know what most adventure films ultimately lack?  A sense of
wonder, that's what.  But RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK is an utterly
delightful exception.  Not to say that this is a deeply philosophical
film.  Hell no!  But it does possess something that adventure films
often strive for but rarely achieve: a real sense of the mystical.
Archaeologist Indiana Jones' quest to beat the Nazis in the search for
the fabled Ark Of The Covenant is certainly a pretty intriguing
premise.  Still, in less inspired hands such a story could easily have
fallen prey to limp writing and empty spectacle.  Luckily for us, the
team of writer George Lucas and director Steven Speilberg have created
such cracking good action sequences and invested the film with such a
sense of awe and mystery that RAIDERS is able to stand alongside the
most thrilling Hollywood movies ever made. 
Of course, the other vital components of a great action film are also
in place: solid storytelling, colourful characters, spicy romance, and
exotic mid-Eastern locales, topped off with some very convincing - and
horrifying - special effects.  Oh, and a terrific sense of humour.
One short sequence about mid-way through when Jones is confronted by a
showy sabre-wielding bad guy is a bonafide all-time classic sight gag.
If by chance you haven't yet seen it, you're guaranteed a belly laugh.
Although RAIDERS is based on the old Saturday-afternoon matinees of
the 30's & 40's, it doesn't date the film one iota.  Indeed, Karen
Allen's strong, gutsy female lead is very much an exception in action
films.  Not for her the stupid, passive damsel-in-distress of years
gone by.  Nor of sequels to come, I might add: witness Kate Capshaw's
unbearable hysterics in the follow-up TEMPLE OF DOOM.  As Indiana
Jones, Harrison Ford is more the traditional action hero, but what a
hero he makes. 
A nod must also go to composer John Williamson for his near-perfect
score, particularly that haunting minor-chord theme which appears
right on cue at the most awe-inspiring moments.  And the film is
beautifully photographed by Douglas Slocombe, so if you're seeing it
on video, the widescreen version is a must.
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK is absolutely terrific American filmmaking,
worth seeing again and again as an example of Hollywood at its most
inspired.  A massive box office success, and richly deserved. 

Author
Max Scheinin
Raiders Of The Lost Ark  could be called a perfect film. It begins with a
stretch of virtuoso filmmaking
in which every minute looks polished and perfect but never overdone. ( I
would willingly compare it to the 
opening wedding sequence of The Godfather. ) When I recently saw the video
on sale I snapped up a copy ( for a generous $8.50 ) and watched it that
very night. It  doesn't accomplish what it wants to; it accomplishes MORE
then it wants to. It wants only to  entertain; it becomes, in that much
over-used cinematic term, a roller-coaster ride. In the first scene Indy
must swipe a golden idol from a huge temple; Threats? Alone in that one
scene, we have spiders and pits and snakes - Indy HATES snakes - and
rolling boulders and scheming proffesors and savage indians. You may find
yourself laughing in both suprise ( there's a terrific moment revolving
around Indy's whip ) and relief  ( "Get a backbone" may not sound
particularly funny out of context, but in Lawrence Kasdan's superb script
it's hilarious ). Pauline Kael called it impersonal and, though I'm ashamed
to admit it, she might be right; that is to say there's nobody to identify
with. ( Although all actors are in top form; Harrison Ford, in particular, 
was never any better. ) But I think she might have missed the point. It's a
throwback to old saturday morning serials and it creates an entire unverse
that works wonderfully ( though only when seen on it's own terms. ) I
watched it last night too, and at the same moments I held my breath  and
looked on, spellbound. I think I might watch it again tonight or tommorow.
That's how well it holds up. I could never say this about any of the Star
Wars films. ( I saw Return Of The Jedi twice, within two weeks, and upon
the second viewing it was tedious. ) You leave with a smile in your heart
and a grin on your face. 
In fact it's such a good opening that there wasn't much of  a chance that a
sequel would live up to our high standards. Indiana Jones And The Temple Of
Doom is a movie that inspires powerful reactions. You don't like "like" it.
You love it ( as does my friend Paul ) or you hate it ( there's me. ) I've
seen it twice, and only on a sceond viewing did I realize what a ludicrous
film it is. It's chalk full of men from forgein countries who eat eyeballs
and little forgein boys who drive around yelling things like "Oh no, Indy,
look big slimy snakes" etc. You may leave feeling as if the movie wanted to
entertain you a little too much. Spielberg wasn't willing to let it simply
unspool before our eyes; instead he had to make it clear that he was
working hard behind the camera ( and as far as I know it's the only bad
movie he's ever made. ) You can hear him saying: "Look at me, I'm
entertaining you with all of these daring adventures ( aren't I? ) look,
Indy's crossing a bridge, will he make it (?), oh no." You can hear me
saying: "Damn it Steve, just let me watch the movie, OK?".
As for the conclusion of the trilogy, Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade, 
it returns to the look and feel of the first movie with a string of
adventures that has you hooked from the begining to the end. It's a bit
uneven but after the dud that was the second film who am I to complain? In
fact it's really quite good at times ( although it never can get up there
with Raiders Of The Lost Ark. ) The end is really the problem. It's a
little to jokey. We should leave, still wondering what comes next. Instead
we learn that Indy is named after a dog and that doesn't really let us
ponder over what has just happened. The first film ended with that magical
little shot inside the wherehouse, but I am almost afraid that Spielberg
has lost his magic touch. Both Jurassic Park films were exciting and well
done, but there was never any sense of wonder when we saw the dinosaurs.
Can he ever recover this? I hope so. For now, as we wait, we can rewatch
his earlier projects and pray.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Harrison Ford; Karen Allen; Paul Freeman; Ronald Lacey & John
Rhys-Davies
In My humble opinion, Raiders of The Lost Ark ties Star Wars as the best
movie of all time. If that doesn't give you a hint as to the contents of
this review, nothing will.
It's 1935, and Indiana Jones (Harrison Ford) is a professor of archaeology.
Only, that's his day job. Jones is a globe hopper who has a unique talent
for acquiring rare antiquities. Jones' talents come to the attention of U.S.
Army intelligence, who just happen to require a little assistance. It seems
that Adolf Hitler and his Nazis have set out to recover the long lost Ark of
the Covenant. The Ark, according to the bible, was the container in which
the Ten Commandments were housed. According to legend the Ark will bring
incredible power to those who possess it. Jones, always up for a challenge,
agrees to try to find the Ark before the Nazis do.
I'm not going to bother giving a synopsis of the rest of the movie, because
99% of the people reading this review will already have seen the movie. As
to the other 1%, trust me when I say that nothing I could write here would
ever do this movie justice. Raiders is the classic action adventure, there
has never been anything like it before, and nothing since has ever measured
up to it. Including it's two sequels.
Harrison Ford is perfect as the adventurer who completes his goals no matter
what it takes.
The rest on the supporting cast do a fantastic job, including John
Rhys-Davies as Indiana's Egyptian connection Sallah and Paul Freeman as
Beloq, the French archaeologist who heads up the Nazi team searching for the
Ark. The only weakness in this movie comes from the casting of Karen Allen
as Marion Ravenwood, Jones' former flame and current partner in his quest
for the Ark. Not that there is anything wrong with Allen's acting, I've just
never felt that she was right for the part. Oh well, if that is my biggest
complaint about a movie I'm doing OK.
I could rave on and on about this movie for hours, but in the end I would
probably be just preaching to the choir. If you are one of the very few
people who have never seen this film, do yourself a favor and watch it. I
guarantee you will not regret it.
Possibly the best film ever made  10/10

Author
Jesse Kaplan
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK     A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan
Cast:  Harrison Ford, Karen Allen, Paul Freeman, Ronald Lacey, Denholm
Elliot, John Rhys-Davies
Directed by:  Steven Spielberg
 Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) is the spectacular, cliff-hanger,
breathlessly-paced, non-stop action/adventure film of the early 1980s,
an immensely successful summer box-office hit. George Lucas, producer,
and director Steven Spielberg made RAIDERS,
first of three Indiana Jones movies, as a tribute in homage to the
Saturday matinee thrillers and serials of yesteryear - the 1930s and
40s. It is a thoroughly entertaining film, with some of the greatest
gee-whiz technical effects, stunts, and action sequences ever filmed.
The musical score by accomplished composer John Williams (famous for
work on JAWS, STAR WARS, and THE EMPIRE SRIKES BACK) adds an air of
excitement.
        I'll say it right now, RAIDERS is better then STAR WARS.  There
you go.  I actually will go out on a limb and say it.  This is the movie
that led an entire decade into big budget action/adventure movies to
which the films of the 1980's are now known for.  Both Harrison Ford and
Karen Allen give probably their best efforts right here.  Who better to
cheer on then an American trying to recover a peice of Jewish History
against "The Armies of Darkness"  (Nazis).
        The Plot has Indiana Jones (Ford) trying to rescue the lost Ark
of The Covenant with the sacred 10 Commandments from the Nazi's who are
searching for it themselves for Hitler, along with Jones' Arch Rival
Renee Bollaq  (Freeman).  I have no idea why i'm botrhering to go over
this because obviously you have been living under a rock if you don't
know about the excitement, adventures, and action created by the movie.
See it.
    RAIDERS happens to be my second favorite movie of all time
(CASABLANCA) and obviously I give it my top rating of ****  Excellent
Copyright 1997 Jesse A. Kaplan paladin@mhv.net

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are many reasons why people like certain movies, but
often those reasons are quite sentimental in their nature.
For example, author of this review likes RAIDERS OF THE LOST
ARK because this film - among other things, of course -
brings back nice memories. This film was also not only the
subject of my very first movie review, but also the reason
why I started reading movie reviews in newspapers and paying
attention what the critics actually think about movies.
Year 1981, when the movie was made, actually belongs to my
very personal Golden Age of movies. Majority of my favourite
films was made in late 1970s and early 1980s and they left
long lasting impact on my future viewing preferences.
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, although not belonging to my
favourite genre of science fiction and being quite different
from mostly dark and thought-provoking visions of the
future, also became my favourite. Mastery of Steven
Spielberg, director who began his slow, but unstoppable
climb to the title of Hollywood king, enchanted me with his
magical vision of the past.
The plot begins in 1936. Indiana "Indy" Jones (played by
Harrison Ford) is shy and mild-mannered college professor of
archaeology, but when the college museum headed by Marcus
Brody (played by Denholm Elliott) needs new artefacts,
Indiana Jones is turned into experienced and fearless
explorer who would stop at nothing to make archaeological
finds even in the most dangerous places of the world. His
talents are being employed by U.S. Army Intelligence, since
Hitler recently became obsessed with the occult and sent
expedition in Egypt to recover the lost biblical artefact
known as the Ark of the Covenant. That mythical object
contains immense powers and army carrying it is believed to
be invincible. Indiana Jones doesn't believe in it, but he
would prefer to lay his hands on Ark before Hitler does. So,
he goes on the journey and the first stop is Nepal, where an
old colleague, Professor Ravenwood, should help him with an
ancient medallion showing the way to the Ark. Instead of
friend, he finds his daughter Marion (played by Karen
Allen), who still can't forgive Indiana for the heartbreak
caused ten years ago. Marion's dilemma about helping him
resolved after the visit by Nazi spies, led by sadistic Toht
(played by Ronald Lacey). Indy and Marion continue their
journey to Cairo, where Sallah (played by John Rhys-Davies),
top local digger and Indy's old friend, brings news about
German expedition making major excavation in the desert.
Their effort, that dug out ancient Egyptian city, is
intended towards the room with the Ark. "Indy" is going to
use medallion to find the Ark, and his quest is even more
motivated when he finds out that the Nazis are helped by
Rene Belloq (played by Paul Freeman), French archaeologist
and his arch-rival.
In the interviews that followed smashing success of STAR
WARS, George Lucas often named B-movies and cliff-hanger
serials of 1930s and 1940s as the major source of
inspiration. Four years later, it turned out that the same
material shaped the movie preferences of Spielberg, and
Lucas, together with Lawrence Kasdan, created movie
character that became embodiment of all heroes featured in
such films. For Spielberg RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK was
intended as nothing more than nostalgic trip to the past,
where such films spawned juvenile imagination with exotic
locations and breath-taking stunts. But his personal
nostalgia was quite in tune with the demand of audience -
those masses that got tired of dark, serious, cynical
protagonists of 1970s cinema and desired return of
old-fashioned heroes, ready to fight old-fashioned villains
and get old-fashioned girls in the end. This renaissance of
simplistic Good vs. Evil worldview, embodied in renaissance
of American self-confidence and national pride in Reagan's
years, was just one of the reasons why this film became one
of the first true summer blockbusters.
Another reason was the fact that Spielberg's artistic vision
proved to be perfect for such kind of films - pure and
ideologically unburdened juvenile adventures. Spielberg
excelled in all areas of filmmaking when he directed RAIDERS
OF THE LOST ARK. From brilliantly staged opening scene in
Peruvian jungle that remains memorable despite not being
particularly related to the rest of the film, until the
last, equally memorable scene, audience has opportunity to
enjoy Spielbergian magic at its best. Action scenes are
spectacular and exciting, but script by Lucas and Kasdan
allows enough room for character development yet never
hurting the perfect pacing of the film. There are many
scenes of violence and the amount of blood and gore might be
somewhat unsuitable for youngest audience; unfortunately,
Spielberg was somewhat more squeamish in scenes that could
be viewed as erotic. Dark and potentially disturbing
overtones of the film are compensated with humour and catchy
one-liners. General light-hearted tone of the film helps us
to suspend disbelief and digest certain anachronisms (1936
Germans armed with 1938 submachinguns) or implausibilites
(British allowing Nazis to deploy force equivalent to
Rommel's Afrikakorps outside Suez three years before the
war). Spielberg's long-time associate John Williams provided
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK with one of his powerful musical
scores and one of the most recognisable title themes.
By playing lead character of Indiana Jones, Harrison Ford
finally became Hollywood star in true sense, silencing all
those who saw him as "one hit wonder" and predicted same
fate as other STAR WARS leads. Ford was talented enough to
utilise all potential of his, superficially cartoonish,
character and create hero who is both traditional and
complex - troubled with his own imperfections (snake phobia)
and self-doubts. Karen Allen as Marion was his ideal partner
- woman who is both strong, tough, intelligent yet feminine
and charming. Unfortunately, Karen Allen failed to use this
role as boost for her future career. British actor Paul
Freeman as Belloq gave anything but routine role of villain
with complex motivations. Other two memorable roles were
also played by reliable character actors from Britain - John
Rhys-Davies (of SLIDERS fame) is one of rare Muslim good
guys in modern Hollywood, and Ronald Lacey was impressive in
his Peter Lorre impersonation.
Cliff-hanger movie serials and B-movies from 1930 and 1940s,
of course, weren't the only source of inspiration for
Spielberg. Another thing that makes this film so valuable is
the fact that it could be seen as some kind of movie
encyclopaedia due to the numerous references to various
movies made in 20th Century. Filmophiles would probably
enjoy seeing nods given to movie classics like CASABLANCA,
or the famous scene that pays homage to Kurosawa, flying
date that gives homage to Kubrick's bone in 2001 and even
Spielberg's use of relatively obscure (for American
audience) Belmondo adventures directed by French filmmaker
Philip de Broca in early 1960s. Some of the referenced
movies are rather recent, and Spielberg makes very explicit
homage to his partner's STAR WARS. Ironically, Indiana Jones
later became not just a movie icon itself and object of
numerous references (and two inferior sequels plus
disappointing TV series), but also a recognisable cultural
icon (with "Hungry Like a Wolf" clip by Duran Duran being
one of the first examples).
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK might be inferior to STAR WARS in
terms of cultural importance, but this film still deserves
to be praised as Hollywood masterpieces and loved even by
those viewers who aren't as sentimentally attached to it as
the author of this review.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Why?  Why write a movie review in retrospective fashion that everyone
loves and adores and is so popular that the need for further say isn't
necessary?  In short, a lot of that is true but I feel the need to say
several things about Steven Spielberg's 1981 classic, 'Raiders of the
Lost Ark', that is so beloved by movie fans around the world, including
myself.  1998 marks 17 years since we first saw a 39-year old Harrison
Ford sport the dashing fedora which he never managed to lose until the
bug infested chamber scene in 1984's 'Indiana Jones and the Temple of
Doom'.  Luckily he got it back in the nick of time.  Not to mention the
crackling bull whip, physical endurance and sense of ruggedness
comparable to a Sean Connery James Bond and nobody could ever replace
Harrison Ford in the role of Indiana Jones.  In plain fact, I wouldn't
even see an Indiana Jones movie if Ford were not Indy.  Ford will be 56
this year and Roger Moore served as the oldest James Bond and made his
last film as Bond in 1985's 'A View to a Kill' when he was 57.  If a
rumoured fourth Indiana Jones film is in the works, they had better do
it before Indy needs a walker to replace his bull whip.  Ford is in
great shape for his age but it won't last forever.
In 1997, I wrote a retrospective movie review of Steven Spielberg's 1977
masterpiece 'Close Encounters of the Third Kind' and mentioned it a
possible contender as Spielberg's masterpiece along with 'E.T.', and
'Schindler's List'.  'Raiders of the Lost Ark' was not mentioned and for
good reason.  Every respected filmmaker has a reason for making a motion
picture and the ones that turn out to be the best ones are the ones with
emotion.  'Jaws' and 'Raiders of the Lost Ark' were grand showcases in
film making but not moving.  Certainly, you walked out satisfied with a
tremendous bang for your buck but did you cry or want to hug anyone?
'Close Encounters', 'E.T.' and especially 'Schindler's List' packed
genuine and powerful emotion which greatly elevated Spielberg to the
level of one of the twentieth century's top five filmmakers with his
diversity to entertain audiences, move them, make them laugh, make them
jump and most importantly, make them return for more.
With movie technology advancing every year, 'Raiders of the Lost Ark',
unlike '2001: A Space Odyssey' and 'Star Wars' is beginning to look
dated.  I watched it again the other night and noticed this very fact
which made me raise my eye brows now and then.  I hope the YEAR 2001,
three years from now when 'Raiders' will celebrate its twentieth
anniversary, that it will prompt Paramount Pictures to release the three
Indiana Jones movies and a fourth movie if there will be one by then so
it can enjoy the success that the 'Star Wars' films had upon re-release
last year.  I would like to tell them that they can spruce up 'Raiders'
in several areas like they did with the 'Star Wars' trilogy last year.
Hopefully, three years will be enough time to do it.
The opening scene in South America.  Indiana Jones scares off one thug
at the sound of the thug's gun being cocked.  Indy raises his head,
makes the turn and thrusts the gun free with his bull whip.  Indy and
his companion, an actor named Alfred Molina (who was Leonardo DiCaprio's
defence attorney in 1996's 'Before and After' which also starred Meryl
Streep and Liam Neeson) enter a cave and they encounter spiders, poison
darts, unstable ground and a door which will seal them inside an
eventual tomb.  Indy is double-crossed in the name of greed by his
partner and upon escaping the trap, Indy makes off with a gold statue
when (what the heck is that noise behind me?), a giant boulder is
visualized.  I read that it took 800 pounds of the material they used to
make the rock to ensure it would roll properly.  Watch the video tape in
slow motion at various edits as Indy is being chased by it and you'll
notice a pole on either side of the rock propelling it forward as Ford
is running away from it.
Later in the film, we come upon the Well of Souls, which after an
eternity of being sealed, has become a giant snake pit.  Director of
photography Douglas Slocombe makes a fatal error when Indy falls into
the pit and comes face to face with a cobra.  If you look carefully (it
helps to dim or turn out the lights in the room), you will see the
reflection of a sheet of glass between Indy and his hissing pal.  As
Indy and his girlfriend, Marion (Karen Allen) are escaping their
impending doom, Indy manages to knock over a big pole and strike the
back wall of the pit where all that is needed now is to push a big rock
out and, presto, they're free.  When Indy forces the rock out, watch
when it falls.  IT BOUNCES!
Next (yes there's more), I'm sorry, but that scene has to be fixed up
where Indy and Marion escape the scene of the plane after the Nazi goon
gets chopped up in the propellor.  The part I'm referring to is when the
plane explodes.  It looks like a cardboard plane has just been destroyed
with cherry bombs.
They find transportation back to England in the form of a boat.  The men
on board cover for Indy when a Nazi submarine crew board the boat
looking for the ark and Jones.  The men cheer when the Nazis eventually
leave and they spot Ford on the outside of the submarine, certain to
follow the Nazis to wherever they are planning to take the ark and I
hope someone can help me here. Indy is on top of the submarine, right?
It submerges and we see a map interfaced with the inside of the
submarine and its crew.  Where was Indy all this time?  He couldn't have
made the ride all along on the outside of the sub  Could he get inside
if the Nazis sealed it?  How did he make that long journey with them to
that little island for the film's climax?  If he did get inside, he
certainly would have been exposed for who he was in such close quarters
with the others before the sub got to its destination.
Certainly computer technology couldn't fix that problem as it is an
academic one so that will remain a permanent flaw in the picture but the
other things I mentioned can hopefully be fixed with a computer clean
up.
The final scene on the island when the Ark is finally opened also looks
dated.  When the faces of the French archeologist and the two Nazis
melt, they clearly look like mannequins and I had a problem with this
from the first time I saw the film and the technology involving the
giant light show to kill all the Nazis and those swirling ghostly images
mixed in with that scene didn't do a lot for me.
Here's another question.  Has anyone ever found a VHS VIDEOTAPE version
of the Indiana Jones trilogy in the letter boxed format?  Strange how a
film like that can escape from not having its full format displayed on
home videocassette for so many years.
Are you out there Steven Spielberg?  If you want to respond to my review
of this film, it will be our little secret.  As I'm sure you remember,
'Raiders of the Lost Ark' was nominated for eight Oscars and won four.
It included nominations for Best Picture and Best Director but not one
for the script.  I truly admire and respect the 1981 classic and perhaps
given the fact that the film had the script of a b-movie, some of the
b-movie elements in the film make the flaws in 'Raiders of the Lost Ark'
easier to tolerate.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Jerry Saravia
The late Pauline Kael once said that a film is only worth seeing once and that
the initial viewing is usually the best - one's impressions are often correct
upon seeing a film the first time. When I first saw "Raiders of the Lost Ark" in
1981, I could not wait to see it again. And again. And again. The film is a
thunderous assault on the senses and a wonder to behold but more than that -  it
is a roller coaster ride that you want to keep visiting again and again. It is
thrilling, scary, adventurous, spooky, amusing, nerve-wracking and the kind of
movie that will literally keep you on the edge of your seat. 
By now, everyone knows who Indiana Jones is. He is the resourceful, stubborn,
educated archaeologist and adventurer seeking unusual artifacts around the globe
in the era of the 1930's. The first sequence, notably the most gripping opening
sequence in the entire action-adventure genre, has Indiana in Peru entering a
dangerous cave where a golden idol is kept. He must endure several booby-traps
before acquiring it. The action never lets up as he faces a rolling boulder,
poisonous darts, collapsing walls, ugly corpses and so on. It is a continuous
action serial where we wonder if the hero will make it out of one mishap after
another. He always does, of course. 
Harrison Ford is pitch perfect as Indiana Jones, showing sly changes from a
bespectacled professor who is admired by his students to an action hero with a
felt hat and trusty bullwhip who never thinks twice about shooting a swordsman
(easily the best joke in the film). In fact, it is a shock after the opening
sequence to see Indiana teaching an archaeology class - who is this guy, we
wonder. When he is asked to find the Lost Ark of the Covenant, a relic being
sought by Adolf Hitler, the gleam shows in his eyes as he is ready for adventure
all over again. 
Indiana's first stop in this adventure is Nepal where an old flame, Marion
Ravenwood (Karen Allen), has a  medallion that is a key to finding the Ark. She
denies having it, and punches him in the face for ignoring her for so long
(turns out that Indiana had deflowered her when they were younger). The villains
enter as he leaves, threaten Marion since they also seek the medallion, and a
shootout in a bar turns into yet another thrilling action setpiece. Other stops
around the globe include Cairo and some fortress where the Ark is to be unveiled
on some unnamed island. Indiana rescues Marion and the medallion from Nepal, and
they confront a variety of dangers and pratfalls along the way. There are mean
Nazis, bare-chested, bald fighters, slithering snakes, rotting temples,
poisonous dates (the fruit that is), clever monkeys, naval ships, trucks,
rotating planes, and so much more that you feel you have entered a museum of
1930's memorabilia come to life. It is a pulp fiction world that director Steven
Spielberg
 loves as does most people and it shows. And the action never stops, though it
is not as headache-inducing as say "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom."
Spielberg knows when to quit, when to let us breathe. It is only fitting that
there is even a scene where Indiana sleeps instead of making love to Marion. He
needs his rest. 
What makes all this silliness work is Ford's charismatic performance - he makes
us believe in him and makes the hero vulnerable enough to make us hope he will
make it out of every single jam he is in.  Also noteworthy is a hissable
villain, one who is as credible as Ford is as a hero. Belloq (Paul Freeman), a
French archaeologist, also has a gleam in his eyes and wants the Ark for his own
needs - "a radio for speaking to God." Both of these men are in pursuit of a
magical relic and will do anything to get it. 
Steven Spielberg is at his very best here, making every event as cinematic as
possible and accentuating all the visual gags with flair. The action scenes are
tightly edited and frightening in how explosive they are, especially the
climactic truck chase where Indiana rides horseback to get inside the truck
holding the Ark while dozens of jeeps and trucks go after him (as if this was
the beginning of World War II). The gags come from everywhere but are never
obtrusive, even if at one point a monkey does the Nazi salute! But what makes
"Raiders of the Lost Ark" wonderful is Spielberg's sense of fun and his surefire
direction, which somehow makes all the old cliches seem new again. The old
marksman versus the swordsman joke is old-hat but Ford's sense of desperation
makes the scene seem wondrous all over again, and one understands his reflexive
action of shooting the swordsman. Every scene tingles with excitement and
tension. The first time I saw the famous opening sequence, I was literally
grabbing the arms of 
my seat. I am not sure how Spielberg does it exactly but it works in ways most
action movies have not since - it is witty and there is an element of surprise
that engages us. The rousing, memorable musical score by the incredible John
Williams lends support and enhances our enjoyment.
The cast is superb and, surprisingly, there is little in the way of overacting
or exaggeration as say in "Romancing the Stone" or "Jake Speed." Harrison Ford's
secret is that he plays it straight, as if he believed what was happening all
around him. It is not easy for an actor not to wink at all the chaos and mayhem
but he succeeds admirably. Karen Allen is a great choice as the also stubborn,
tough, romantic interest in Indiana's life - a shame she did not appear in any
of the other entries of this series. She is clearly the woman for Indiana and
knows how to match his wits, and delivers a knockout punch. For some good belly
laughs, there is John Rhys-Davies as Indy's Cairo sidekick, Sallah. And for a
charming yet insane villain in the grandest of traditions, there is Paul Freeman
as the sympathetic Belloq who even has a thing for Marion. 
"Raiders" does not end on an uplifting note. Instead it sort of ends abruptly as
Indiana reclaims the Ark (what did you expect?) and brings it back to the United
States yet it falls in the hands of the government rather than a museum for
research and study. There is no sense of victory. And yet this remains one of
the best action-adventure films ever made, as rousing and engaging as any film
ever made. The sequels and numerous rip-offs can't do it justice. "Raiders of
the Lost Ark" showcases Spielberg at his kinetic best, bringing us into a world
we can only dream of. After all, isn't that what great movies are all about?
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at faustus_08520@yahoo.com
or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Well, Jones, at least you haven't forgotten how to show a lady a
good time!" remarks Indiana Jones's sidekick, the smart-mouthed and
hard-drinking Marion Ravenwood, after the bar she owns is burned to the
ground, thanks to Indy.  And Steven Spielberg in 1981 knew how to show
an audience a good time with an old fashion kids' adventure yarn,
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.  Think of it as a high quality version of one
of the old movie serials that kids used to get every Saturday at the
theater before the double feature.  (Too young to know what a movie
serial was like?  Check out my recent review of the 1949 serial BATMAN
AND ROBIN -- not to be confused with this summer's blockbuster by the
same name.)
     The plot of RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK is utter balderdash.  Indiana
Jones enters into a life-or-death struggle with the Nazis to find the
long lost, biblical Ark of the Covenant.  Why Hitler wants it makes
little sense as does the fact that the Nazis don't just kill Indy as
soon as he gets in their way, but this show is not one to be approached
logically.  It makes as much sense as most kids' stories, and this one
is so brilliantly and engrossingly executed, who cares how ridiculous
it is?  (My wife and I were once chased in Austria by a boulder the
size of the one from the famous scene in the film.  So even the
seemingly ludicrous can sometimes be true.)
     Harrison Ford, in a role arguably as important to his career as
that of Han Solo, plays Indiana Jones as an everyman, but one who has
the unbounded courage of a man possessed of a golden vision.  With his
rugged good looks and his signature outfit of big hat, leather jacket
and bull whip, Indy is a picture perfect action hero.  As vulnerable as
he is charming and persistent, Indy faces one scrap after another
including being trapped in a large pit full of his most feared animal
-- snakes.  ("Snakes, why did it have to be snakes?")  Bruised and
battered, he survives each bout, just barely, so he can fight again.
The film must have provided gainful employment for scores and scores of
stunt actors as action sequences come in increasing intensity as the
show progresses.
     Although not nearly his equal, Karen Allen, in the best role of
her long but undistinguished career, is his partner Marion.  Allen has
a charming toughness that can be strong and sexy at the same time.  Why
her career never took off remains a mystery.  In more recent times
Linda Fiorentino has demonstrated some of these same macho but alluring
qualities, and she too has had trouble breaking through into
significant stardom.
     The film's other roles are less important, and only Paul Freeman,
as the too milquetoast villain Rene Belloq, gives a disappointingly
bland performance.
     John Williams's rousing but playful music and the imaginative
script by BIG CHILL writer Lawrence Kasdan, based on a story by George
Lucas and Philip Kaufman, combine to make a fun romp.  A roller coaster
of a film, it loves to play tricks on its audience.  In one scene
Marion has been kidnapped and is hidden in a large basket.  Indy goes
looking for her only to enter a marketplace full of identical baskets.
     The cinematography of stone images filmed in warm blues and browns
is punctuated by bright flashes of lightning representing the wrath of
God.  The cataclysmic ending descends too far into the realm of an
overstaged horror show but is effective nevertheless.  Actually,
Saturday movie serials were never this good, but we'd like to believe
they were.
     RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK runs 1:55.  It was rated PG since I think
there was no PG-13 at the time.  Today, a show with this much violence
would be firmly in the PG-13 category.  Depending on how well they
handle scary scenes like snakes crawling through skeletons, kids as
young as 7 may be able to handle the film.  My son Jeffrey, age 8,
thought the movie was "good but pretty bloody," and he wished there
would have been less blood.  I strongly recommend this adventure to you
and give it a full ****.
