Title
Review for Someone Like You... (2001)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tony Goldwyn.
Cast: Ashley Judd, Hugh Jackman, Greg Kinnear, Marisa Tomei, Ellen Barkin.
2001 - 95 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 31, 2001.
In the wrong hands, "Someone Like You" could have been the next "The Wedding 
Planner," the recent Jennifer Lopez romance that was perfectly wretched from 
one end to the other. As directed by Tony Goldwyn (1999's "A Walk on the 
Moon") and written by Elizabeth Chandler, however, it is an unusually 
smart-minded comedy-drama that works well wavering between both genres, 
garnering intermittent laughs and honest emotional insights. Whereas "The 
Wedding Planner" tried way too hard for guffaws, inspiring over-the-top 
performances and a clumsily dopey screenplay, "Someone Like You" is guilty in 
neither respect.
Jane Goodale (Ashley Judd) is an assistant producer on "The Diane Roberts 
Show," a successful television talk program. While many of the stories deal 
with passion, love, and relationships, Jane can't seem to find any of these 
things in her own life. This all changes, it seems, when she meets the show's 
new producer, Ray (Greg Kinnear), and falls head over heels for him. He says 
he loves her, and before she knows it, she has leased out her apartment and 
is preparing to move in with him. A stumbling block arises when Ray suddenly 
turns cold on her, dumping her abruptly and leaving her without a place to 
stay. 
Enter womanizing co-worker Eddie (Hugh Jackman), a self-confessed ladies' man 
who seems to have a different girl in his bed every night, and is looking for 
a roommate. Jane takes him up on the offer, as she finds herself sharing 
living quarters with a man whom she gets along with alright, but finds rather 
slimy in his dating habits. Still not over Ray, and distressed about whether 
something is wrong with her or not, she gathers up enough information to form 
the Cow Theory, which states that two cows will not mate with each other more 
than once, no matter what, and that such a fact might apply to most men. 
Egged on by her best friend and editor of a men's magazine, Liz (Marisa 
Tomei), Jane pens her thoughts into an editorial in which she creates an 
alias author, unprepared for the popularity and success it will achieve.
The generically-titled "Someone Like You," which was originally to be called 
"Animal Husbandry," based on the novel of the same name by Laura Zigman, is 
thankfully far from generic when it comes to how much it manages to stand out 
from the majority of romantic comedies made today. While most romances come 
off as if they have been processed by a computer, "Someone Like You" is more 
reality-based, as it stands as a delicate, involving character study of a 
woman who gradually finds solace in her own skin, and realizes she can be 
happy with or without a steady guy. 
As Jane Goodale, Ashley Judd has turned in her most accomplished performance 
since her career-making debut in 1993's "Ruby in Paradise." Judd strikes all 
the right notes, uncovering Jane to be a lovable working woman with a brain 
in her head and never with a loss of ideas and thoughts. We happily follow 
her through the entirety of the film because we grow to care about her as a 
true person, and want to know how everything turns out for her.
Last seen as Wolverine in 2000's "X-Men," Hugh Jackman is a charismatic, 
easy-on-the-eyes performer who proves to have what it takes to be a star. 
Eddie remains accessible throughout, even when he does things that we 
disagree with (such as using most women for one night stands), and it is a 
testament to Jackman's talent that he not once comes off as being a pig. 
In smaller roles, Greg Kinnear (2000's "The Gift") and Marisa Tomei (2000's 
"What Women Want") are fine with what they have to work with, but deserve 
better. Kinnear's Ray isn't simply a one-dimensional idiot, thanks to the 
relatively fresh character writing, but it is difficult to see why he took 
this role. The same goes for Tomei, an often delightful actress who too often 
gets throwaway parts that underutilize what she is so clearly capable of. 
Ellen Barkin (1999's "Drop Dead Gorgeous") shines in a brief role as talk 
show host Diane Roberts, who shares a nice moment with Jane late in the 
picture, as she discloses her own insecurities in her life.
"Someone Like You" is an enjoyable dramedy that is fairly obvious in where it 
is headed right from the start, but in getting there, it surprises in how 
moving and wise it becomes. The tale of a woman who, through the trials and 
tribulations of a failed romance and a possibly invigorating new one, finds 
her place in the world, it is a worthwhile movie that will likely exceed most 
people's wildest expectations on just how good something called "Someone Like 
You" could possibly be.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Jane Goodale (Ashley Judd) is a talent booker for a hot new daytime talk show
who falls into a whirlwind romance for new executive producer Ray (Greg
Kinnear).  When he dumps her to return to the woman he was cheating on, Jane
bitterly develops her 'new cow' theory, utilizing the womanizing ways of her
new roommate Eddie (Hugh Jackman "X-Men") for research in "Someone Like You."
Trading the much better title of its book source "Animal Husbandry" for the
song title "Someone Like You" sums up the unoriginality at work in this film.
While the supporting cast provide some bright spots, Ashley Judd is bland
and unsympathetic in her first romantic comedy.
Jane moves in with Eddie (who also works with her and Ray), the kind of 
bachelor who has a stylish loft right above NYC's Hogs and Heifers the bar
featured in "Coyote Ugly", a source for new cows (apparently bulls will only 
mate with the same cow once).  Of course we learn that Eddie suffered a bad
breakup from a monogamous relationship, which can only mean that he's really
sensitive and eventually the one for Jane.  
Jane's buddy Liz (Marisa Tomei), who conveniently works for a men's magazine, 
convinces Jane to write up her theory, and Jane agrees, but only after 
creating a 65 year old PhD (shades of Dr. Ruth) as an authorial front.  The 
article's a sensation and everyone's clammering for the author as a guest, 
including Jane's boss Diane Roberts (Ellen Barkin).
Hugh Jackman, resembling a lanky, young Clint Eastwood out from under his
wolfen makeup, displays an easy likeable charm and warmth which elevates
the material when he's on screen.  Marisa Tomei is sharply creating a career
as the funny, witty best friend ('remember, time wounds all heels').  Kinnear
goes from eager puppy to whipped puppy as the subject of Jane's love/disdain.
Barkin is fabulously slinkly as Diane Roberts, always on the prowl for the
elusive interview.  Except for one scene where she allows herself to get silly 
showing Eddie her old cheerleading moves, Judd is simply stale.
The oh-so-trite material (adapted from Laura Zigman's novel by Elizabeth 
Chandler, "The Little Princess") goes so far as to rip off the missed
opportunity New Year's Eve party pairing of "When Harry Met Sally."  Director
Tony Goldwyn ("A Walk on the Moon") can't avoid cliches like title cards,
schoolgirls making pronouncements directly to the camera and video montages.
"Someone Like You" is largely inoffensive.  At least it has the convictions
to turn its male bashing on its ear.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A very pretty, intelligent, single girl finds, who she thinks is, the man of
her dreams. Sometime later, he dumps her unexpectedly and she doesn't know
quite how to cope with it. Left without an apartment, she is forced to move
in with her womanizing co-worker Eddie, and slowly but surely devises a
theory explaining men's bad behavior in relationships.
CRITIQUE:
I kept wanting this film to get better, to throw me a curve, to gimme some
oomph, to make better use of its great-looking stars, but sadly, it was not
to be. This movie is yet another subpar romantic comedy...Hollywood-style!
And I use the term "comedy" lightly, as only a few giggles ever made their
way round my parts and the film's second half featured the lovely Ms. Judd
tearing up in practically every other scene. And the whole "new cow" theory
on which most of this film is based (and its humor, I suppose), the one
which Judd's character keeps referring to in voice-overs throughout the
film, and conversations with her friends, is not one bit as clever as the
filmmakers believe it to be. All the theory basically says is that all guys
are "dogs" and that they can't stay with the same woman all the time. Yawn!
Wake me when the film comes up with an interesting NEW theory and not a
recycled one which in this film, is aligned to the mating rituals of animals
in an obvious attempt to boost its "cute" factor. C'mon man, here you've got
a magnetic up-and-coming male lead in Hugh Jackman, a man who radiates
charisma whenever he's on the screen, and the script just flops with
annoying title cards a la "Frasier", an extremely boring and generic romance
angle played by puppy dog eyes Greg Kinnear (I like the dude, but did he
have to look that way during the entire movie?) and an ending which will
likely give you what you want, but left me feeling emotionally vapid.
Basically, the film just didn't "grab me". It felt like a bunch of sketch
sequences all tied together by the "cutesy" theory and many scenes of Ashley
Judd crying. I mean, I know this is a definite "chick flick", in that it is
totally geared towards women (men are bad!), with a nice nod to Oprah just
in case we didn't realize what we'd fell in on, but I don't even think most
women are going to be impressed with this film either, since it's mostly
just boring. Yeah sure, it's got a couple of cute moments here and there,
extremely good-looking leads in Ashley Judd (who might work in a romantic
comedy but this isn't the one) and Hugh Jackman (a younger, better looking
Clint Eastwood), but not much else. Little romantic tension, little
character development in anyone, especially Kinnear and Barkin, who looks as
though she spent a couple of extra days in the tanning salon, and very
little originality. And I guess Marisa Tomei has convinced herself that the
best way to get "back in to the biz" is by taking two-bit friend roles in
second-rate flicks. Oh well. Now I don't usually do this in my reviews but
I'll tell you what might've made this movie better. One, more laughs, two,
more scenes and situations involving Judd and Jackman together, and three,
more romance and believable tension. And how about tying up loose ends? The
film brings up Tomei's relationship and touches upon Jackman's past love,
but never mentions them again once the film gets rolling. Hello!? We're an
audience here...don't just leave us hanging...! (or were they just
"devices"...whatever!) Much like THE WEDDING PLANNER earlier this year, this
film just seems more like a "vehicle" for two of the hot stars of the day,
with very little attempt to create something original, funny or all that
interesting. Skip it!
But if you really want, or if your opinions don't jive with many of my
previous views below, I say rent the movie one day, and see how even great
looking people like Jackman and Judd could be total messes when it comes to
relationships! Aaaaaah...there...I feel better now!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Fools Rush In (5/10) - Four Weddings and a Funeral (8/10) - Keeping the
Faith (7/10) - Runaway Bride (5/10) - The Wedding Planner (3/10) - What
Women Want (4/10) - When Harry Met Sally (10/10) -You've Got Mail (4/10)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Ashley Judd's popular mom and country songstress, Naomi Judd, makes a cameo
appearance in this film as a make-up artist who quickly applies some to her
daughter's face as she makes her way onto a talk show.
This film was originally titled ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, based on the novel of the
same name penned by Laura Zigman.

Author
Ross Anthony
Ashley Judd, dejected, rejected, and neglected by men in general, seeks 
some commiseratory theory with which to explain away the enigmatic 
query, "Why can't men commit?" She finds her comforting hypothesis in 
cows ... bulls, more accurately. Bulls, tired of old cows, scan greener 
pastures for greener heifers - so she discovers. "Monogamy isn't in 
their genes!" 
Greg Kinnear is the gentle, expressive, touchy-feely love-interest, 
while the actor (Jackman) who played Wolverine from the X-Men movie 
appropriately personifies the animal-man theory. He's absolutely 
shameless about his sexuality, yet subtly sweet; a well-drawn character 
brought to life by a strong actor. 
Speaking of acting and writing, "Someone Like You" employs 
professionals. The dialogue and relationships move the production 
warmly, confidently, and entertainingly from beginning to end, where, 
surprisingly the picture's prowess wanes. 
Though definitely predictable, this climax still could have soared. 
There would have been no avoiding the schmaltz - so splashing around in 
it a while ought to have been the prescription. Instead, the peak feels 
truncated with an unnecessarily cliche appendage. A respectable 
resolution follows, however. 
Instead of just dabbling in obsessive psycho behavior, a more acutely 
de-stabilized Judd would have backed the fluff with muscle (perhaps 
exhibiting job-threatening surreal delusional episodes). 
And those kisses! As a romantic-comedy, audiences expect kisses. 
Disappointingly, these tight-lipped pecks belie the chemistry built up 
between our big-screen lovers. 
Ah, but high quality scenes populate most of the film, like the one in 
which an obsessive forlorn Judd petitions a surgeon to remove nasal 
glands that link her sense of smell with memories. She begins the 
consultation calm collected and civilized, but in just one short minute 
and what seems like one breath, explains her plight to tears. Finely 
directed. 
The star power and direction iron out the wrinkles. If you're up for a 
light romantic-comedy, you'll have a fine time. 
Someone Like You. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Ashley Judd, Greg Kinnear, Hugh Jackman, Marisa Tomei, Ellen 
Barkin. 
*  Directed by Tony Goldwyn. 
*  Screenplay by Elizabeth Chandler. Based on the novel "Animal 
Husbandry" by Laura Zigman. 
*  Produced by Lynda Obst at 20th Century Fox. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tony Goldwyn.
Cast: Ashley Judd, Hugh Jackman, Greg Kinnear, Marisa Tomei, Ellen Barkin.
2001 - 95 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 31, 2001.
In the wrong hands, "Someone Like You" could have been the next "The Wedding 
Planner," the recent Jennifer Lopez romance that was perfectly wretched from 
one end to the other. As directed by Tony Goldwyn (1999's "A Walk on the 
Moon") and written by Elizabeth Chandler, however, it is an unusually 
smart-minded comedy-drama that works well wavering between both genres, 
garnering intermittent laughs and honest emotional insights. Whereas "The 
Wedding Planner" tried way too hard for guffaws, inspiring over-the-top 
performances and a clumsily dopey screenplay, "Someone Like You" is guilty in 
neither respect.
Jane Goodale (Ashley Judd) is an assistant producer on "The Diane Roberts 
Show," a successful television talk program. While many of the stories deal 
with passion, love, and relationships, Jane can't seem to find any of these 
things in her own life. This all changes, it seems, when she meets the show's 
new producer, Ray (Greg Kinnear), and falls head over heels for him. He says 
he loves her, and before she knows it, she has leased out her apartment and 
is preparing to move in with him. A stumbling block arises when Ray suddenly 
turns cold on her, dumping her abruptly and leaving her without a place to 
stay. 
Enter womanizing co-worker Eddie (Hugh Jackman), a self-confessed ladies' man 
who seems to have a different girl in his bed every night, and is looking for 
a roommate. Jane takes him up on the offer, as she finds herself sharing 
living quarters with a man whom she gets along with alright, but finds rather 
slimy in his dating habits. Still not over Ray, and distressed about whether 
something is wrong with her or not, she gathers up enough information to form 
the Cow Theory, which states that two cows will not mate with each other more 
than once, no matter what, and that such a fact might apply to most men. 
Egged on by her best friend and editor of a men's magazine, Liz (Marisa 
Tomei), Jane pens her thoughts into an editorial in which she creates an 
alias author, unprepared for the popularity and success it will achieve.
The generically-titled "Someone Like You," which was originally to be called 
"Animal Husbandry," based on the novel of the same name by Laura Zigman, is 
thankfully far from generic when it comes to how much it manages to stand out 
from the majority of romantic comedies made today. While most romances come 
off as if they have been processed by a computer, "Someone Like You" is more 
reality-based, as it stands as a delicate, involving character study of a 
woman who gradually finds solace in her own skin, and realizes she can be 
happy with or without a steady guy. 
As Jane Goodale, Ashley Judd has turned in her most accomplished performance 
since her career-making debut in 1993's "Ruby in Paradise." Judd strikes all 
the right notes, uncovering Jane to be a lovable working woman with a brain 
in her head and never with a loss of ideas and thoughts. We happily follow 
her through the entirety of the film because we grow to care about her as a 
true person, and want to know how everything turns out for her.
Last seen as Wolverine in 2000's "X-Men," Hugh Jackman is a charismatic, 
easy-on-the-eyes performer who proves to have what it takes to be a star. 
Eddie remains accessible throughout, even when he does things that we 
disagree with (such as using most women for one night stands), and it is a 
testament to Jackman's talent that he not once comes off as being a pig. 
In smaller roles, Greg Kinnear (2000's "The Gift") and Marisa Tomei (2000's 
"What Women Want") are fine with what they have to work with, but deserve 
better. Kinnear's Ray isn't simply a one-dimensional idiot, thanks to the 
relatively fresh character writing, but it is difficult to see why he took 
this role. The same goes for Tomei, an often delightful actress who too often 
gets throwaway parts that underutilize what she is so clearly capable of. 
Ellen Barkin (1999's "Drop Dead Gorgeous") shines in a brief role as talk 
show host Diane Roberts, who shares a nice moment with Jane late in the 
picture, as she discloses her own insecurities in her life.
"Someone Like You" is an enjoyable dramedy that is fairly obvious in where it 
is headed right from the start, but in getting there, it surprises in how 
moving and wise it becomes. The tale of a woman who, through the trials and 
tribulations of a failed romance and a possibly invigorating new one, finds 
her place in the world, it is a worthwhile movie that will likely exceed most 
people's wildest expectations on just how good something called "Someone Like 
You" could possibly be.
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Robert Strohmeyer
Based on the Laura Zigman novel, Animal Husbandry, Someone Like You is a
romantic comedy about a late night TV talent coordinator named Jane
(Ashley Judd), whose luck in love is predictably bad.  So predictable is
her misfortune, in fact, that she has devised a pervasive theory on the
subject, revolving around the notion that men are like cattle.
When she meets her show's new executive, Ray (Kinnear, You've Got Mail),
however, her luck -- she thinks -- begins to change.  But Ray, she
discovers, is just a typical bull, looking to spread his seed in wider
pastures.  And it's not until he dumps her for his ex-girlfriend that
she realizes the true depth of her plight.  Jane, it seems, is an old
cow.  And Ray is looking for a new cow.  This joke more or less carries
the film, and -- though interesting at first -- it gets old after its
twentieth or fiftieth appearance in the script.
Fortunately, though, the film's fresh, funny dialogue packs enough power
to keep things interesting.  And the wry, cynical performance of Hugh
Jackman (X-Men) as the incorrigibly good-timing Eddie drops in just in
time to prevent the entire film from degenerating into a ridiculously
softball piece of fluff.  These combine with quick, quirky editing to
provide enough stimuli to keep most audiences alert for this sub
two-hour picture.
Those needing a little more stimulation than that (men, mostly) should
take heart in the fact that Ashley's underpants scene from the movie's
trailer is served justly on the big screen.  (Though anyone looking for
world-class cheerleading sequences will be saddened to learn that Judd's
jumping splits performance was ruined by her inability to keep both legs
straight in midair.  For the record, this didn't bother me a bit.)
Judd carries her role with a Meg Ryan-esque charm that should prove
valuable in future productions, while Jackman proves he has all the
qualities of a rugged, enviable leading man.  The supporting cast is
funny, and well placed, as well -- particularly Ellen Barkin as the host
of the late night show.
Much to my surprise, Someone Like You made for a funny, enjoyable
picture right up until its final moments, when it completely brained
itself by falling into the usual rut of romantic comedy conclusions. 
With its richness of dialogue and editing, I was certain it might have
overcome its genre to set some new precedent in romantic comedy cheese. 
But no.
In the end, this is still a warm, fuzzy picture with enough wit to
satisfy most audiences in need of a laugh.  Ladies: Go for the humor. 
Gents: Stay for the underpants.
Director: Tony Goldwyn
Producer: Keith Addis, David Blocker, John Herzfeld, Nick Wechsler
Writer: Elizabeth Chandler
Starring: Ashley Judd, Greg Kinnear, Hugh Jackman, Ellen Barkin, Marisa
Tomei
http://www.someonelikeyoumovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
With ideas gathered from the science section of that bastion of 
knowledge, The New York Times, talk show television producer Jane 
Goodale (Ashley Judd) develops a theory as to why her office romance 
with executive producer Ray Brown (Greg Kinnear) went so suddenly sour.  
She refers to her discovery as "the new cow theory."  Bulls, it turns 
out, can't be tricked.  Once they've serviced one cow, they are ready to 
move on to the next.  Repeat business is of no interest to them.  So, 
Jane decides, it must be thus with human male members of the animal 
kingdom.
The sweet and cute SOMEONE LIKE YOU is a whimsical romantic comedy which 
is compartmentalized into nifty sounding little chapters, including 
"Establishment of Intimacy," "The Vocalization of Emotions," and "A Call 
to Arms."  You may not laugh a lot, but you won't mind since you'll be 
too busy being charmed.
Jane, the producer for Diane (Ellen Barkin), a new talk show host with 
Emmy ambitions, falls head over heels for Ray from the moment he joins 
the show's team.  On the rebound from a spoiled three-year relationship, 
he returns her affection.  Just before Ray jilts Jane, she gives up her 
apartment to move in with him.  This forces her to accept the offer to 
share the apartment of the show's smart-mouthed writer, Eddie (Hugh 
Jackman), whom she loathes.  An obnoxious smoker who lives a life of 
casual sex with a different woman nightly, Eddie is Jane's exact 
opposite.  Judd portrays Jane as a shy, girlish type, who slurps on her 
straw, wears proper, little short sleeve blouses and can be coaxed into 
late night cheerleader demonstrations.  Just as in magnets, opposites, 
of course, eventually attract.
In one of her typical supporting character parts, Marisa Tomei plays 
Liz, Jane's buddy and counselor in the ways of love.  Liz is a failure 
with her own love life, but that doesn't dissuade her from dishing out 
non-stop advice to Jane.  Jane also seeks help from a nose doctor.  No, 
she doesn't want a smaller schnozzola.  She wants the doctor to inhibit 
her ability to smell since whenever she gets a whiff of Ray in the 
elevator, she is reminded of how he "smells of soap, fresh laundry and 
vanilla," which drives her crazy.
As a way to work through her emotions after the breakup, Jane becomes a 
bookworm, reading everything she can on the male species in all forms of 
animals.  "Men never fail to do what's in their nature," Jane cynically 
informs Eddie based on her research.  Through a suggestion of Liz's, 
Jane turns her hobby into a famous sex column, which she writes under an 
assumed name in the magazine for which Liz works.   Soon, everyone wants 
to find this mystery woman and interview her.
Director Tony Goldwyn (A WALK ON THE MOON), normally an actor, is 
certainly an actor's director.  Letting his actors establish their own 
paces and rhythms, he comes up with a natural feeling, relaxed film 
that's easy to enjoy.  Of course, having such a likeable star as Judd 
makes his job seem a lot simpler than it probably is.
SOMEONE LIKE YOU runs a fast 1:33.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual content 
including dialogue, and for some language and would be acceptable for 
kids around 12 and up.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
