Title
Review for How to Make an American Quilt (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 10/6/95 (wide)
Running Length: 1:56
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Mature themes, brief nudity, mild profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Winona Ryder, Ann Bancroft, Ellen Burstyn, Maya Angelou,
      Jean Simmons, Lois Smith, Kate Nelligan, Alfre Woodard,
      Kate Capshaw, Samantha Mathis, Dermot Mulroney, Derrick O'Connor,
      Joanna Going
Director: Jocelyn Moorhouse
Producers: Sarah Pillsbury and Midge Sanford
Screenplay: Jane Anderson based on the novel by Whitney Otto
Cinematography: Janusz Kaminski
Music: Thomas Newman
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     There's more to a quilt than fabric and thread--each patchwork
design has its own unique story (or stories) to tell.  In HOW TO MAKE AN
AMERICAN QUILT, the first Hollywood release from Australian director
Jocelyn Moorhouse (PROOF), we come to understand how the tales of the
seven makers imbue their creation with passion and vitality.  All the
sorrows, joys, longings, sufferings, and loves of these women are sewn
into their quilt and, as their bittersweet memories are given
expression, one young woman applies these lessons of the past to her own
uncertain future.
     Motion pictures are filled with male bonding rituals; HOW TO MAKE
AN AMERICAN QUILT presents a distinctly feminine alternative.  The
"quilting bee" consists of seven members:  sisters Gladys (Ann Bancroft)
and Hy (Ellen Burstyn); Sophia (Lois Smith), a woman known for
frightening children; Emma (Jean Simmons), the timid wife of a
perpetually unfaithful man; Constance (Kate Nelligan), who has been
having an affair with Emma's husband; Anna (Maya Angelou), the leader of
the group; and Marianna (Alfre Woodard), Anna's daughter.  The project
they're busy with is the wedding quilt for Hy's granddaughter, Finn
(Winona Ryder), who has just become engaged.  She's spending the summer
with Hy and Gladys, and away from her fiance, to decide whether a
lifelong commitment is really what she wants, and whether it's better to
marry a friend or a lover.
     One of the greatest pleasures of HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT
comes from watching an array of fine performances by an impressive
ensemble cast.  From Winona Ryder, Ann Bancroft, Ellen Burstyn, and Maya
Angelou to minor players like Rip Torn, Claire Danes, and Kate Capshaw,
this film is overflowing with realized talent.  The performances are
good enough, in fact, to cover up many of the script's weaknesses.  HOW
TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT is basically an unremarkable, if affecting,
tale of love across the generations--a sort of truncated American
version of THE JOY LUCK CLUB, with a dash of FRIED GREEN TOMATOES added.
     There are probably too many characters.  So, instead of really
getting to know a few of them, we are presented with quick glimpses into
a single defining event in each of their lives.  We learn about the root
of the smoldering resentment between Gladys and Hy, and are told the
reasons why Emma stays with her husband and Sophia is so irascible.
There are other episodes as well:  the love of Anna's life, Marianna's
soul mate, and a look at the reasons why Constance entered into an
affair with her friend's husband.  The sum total of these tales is meant
to provide the framework for Finn's story:  whether to go forward with
her marriage or dally with a hunky stranger.
     There is no emotional epiphany in HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT.
The stories are all well-told, but it's difficult to really connect with
the characters--their moments pass so quickly.  While we certainly
feel something for each of the eight principals, our emotional
investment is tenuous.  There isn't enough depth to pull the viewer in
all the way, and many of the personalities and relationships feel half-
formed, like a quilt with patches missing.  To put it bluntly, while I
enjoyed watching this film, it didn't "do much" for me.
     On the whole, HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT is a nicely-understated
drama that has a lot to say about love, passion, and monogamy in
relationships.  Finn's segment is by far the most compelling, because
she's the focal point:  her actions are shaped by everyone else's
experiences.  The other patches of this American Quilt are successful
only to varying degrees.  If there's a disappointment here, it's that
the script doesn't have more resonance, but the privilege of seeing such
a fine cast in top form allows a viewer to enjoy this picture even if
the story is somewhat conventional.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Anthony E. Wright
     "Are they re-releasing that documentary on the AIDS quilt?"
questioned a friend.  Given the title, one might expect that or an
art-house needlepoint lesson.  But mainstream movie-goers should enjoy
this lyrical and entertaining movie about love, sex, and
relationships.
     The central character Finn spends a summer to write her thesis at
her grandmother's house, as a group of older women make her wedding
quilt on the theme "Where Love Resides."  The characters stitch their
feelings about love (and the related themes of sex, men, relationships,
children, and commitment) into the quilt, as the audience sees
flashbacks from key moments in their lives.  Winona Ryder performs
admirably as the story's center, but the credit goes to the entire
ensemble cast, including Anne Bancroft, Ellen Burstyn, Maya Angelou,
Jean Simmons, Lois Smith, Kate Nelligan, and Alfre Woodard.
     This could be the quintessential Ryder movie (yes, she narrates
yet again in raspy voice-overs), in that she embodies several roles
that she has taken before.  She plays the generational icon (perhaps
even the same character) as in REALITY BITES or even HEATHERS.  She
perhaps made woman-binding films like this possible with her success in
LITTLE WOMEN.  And she is the vehicle for a larger allegorical tale, a
la EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  Different people may enjoy various aspects of
the film, but there enought here for everyone.
     Call her a Twentysomething Everywoman.  Daughter of divorced
hippie parents, Ryder's Finn weighs her recent engagement against her
fear of commitment, to a thesis topic, a career, or a man.  While she
is young, her sensibilities are cautious, and in times it seems the
older women are having more fun.  Ryder's performance speaks directly
to the questions that many of her age group face as they begin the
"adult" portion of their lives, dealing with commitment, temptation,
and experimentation.  She learns from her elders all sorts of
conflicting lessons, and while she goes through uniquely 90s twists, we
see that most of the issues are universal, for every age and
generation.
     It's refreshing to see an all-woman cast, and one that is so
spunky.  Rather than the gentility of LITTLE WOMEN or the cattiness of
any soap opera, these women seem to break out of the stereotypes: many
of the issues and stories they deal with men will identify with,
although this is a clearly a female film.  In fact, to make that point,
all the male characters are caricatures: the steamy Latin lover that
tempts Finn, the flirtatious artist of passion, the one-night dreamboat
that becomes a father, the career-focused scientist who loses his love
and his family, the faithful husband that makes the one big mistake,
and the poetic soulmate who turns out to be married.  They are all
here, as mirrors for the women to react to.
     These are stories of relationships, but it is more than
pieced-together vignettes of Meg Ryan movies.  The gorgeous California
grove landscape, the lush cinematography, and the heavy
symbolism--framed by the quilt--uplifts this movie from good to great.
These stories do weave together, beautifully, as they also instruct
Finn on her life.  The overlapping sequences are done well.  By the
time the symbolism perhaps overreaches with the second appearance of a
guiding crow, the audience is lulled into a mystic trance, not unlike
being wrapped in a warm quilt with a loved one.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Universal)
Directed by    Jocelyn Moorhouse
Written by     Jane Anderson, from the novel by Whitney Otto
Cast           Maya Angelou, Anne Bancroft, Ellen Burstyn, Samantha 
               Mathis, Kate Nelligan, Winona Ryder, Jean Simmons, Lois
               Smith, Alfre Woodard
Running Time   109 Minutes
MPAA Rating    PG-13
Reviewed at    Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (2OCT95)
     With apologies to author and talk-show host Dr. Laura
Schlessinger, a better title for this movie might be SEVEN WOMEN WHO DO
STUPID THINGS TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES.
     Winona Ryder stars as "Finn," a Berkeley grad student who is
spending the summer with her grandmother (Ellen Burstyn) and great aunt
(Anne Bancroft).  She's taking a break from her
boyfriend-turned-fiance, because she's scared, and because she finally
wants to finish her thesis.  Grandma's house is also the longtime home
of a quilting bee, made up of seven women who have all suffered from
the tragedies of love.  Or, at the very least, from the results of bad
decision-making.  They each have a story to tell and they do.  So much,
in fact, that poor Winona and her character's fear of commitment are
practically lost in the shuffle.
     As a naysayer`s portrait of marriage, this spring's MIAMI RHAPSODY
was much funnier.  Sarah Jessica Parker as a bubbly neurotic beats an
angst-ridden Winona any day of the week.  Part of the problem is the
actress; Ms. Ryder still looks like she's in high school and it's a
stretch to think of her thinking such serious thoughts.  (Which she
really doesn't.  The story allows virtually no examination of her
character's feelings about engagement or marriage.  Instead, the plot
provides a silly stud-boy for "Finn" to be distracted by.)
     HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT is a "chick flick" that many may
embrace wholeheartedly.  The story shoots for anecdotal appeal and, in
some ways, succeeds gracefully.  Who can fault the flawless chemistry
between Burstyn and Bancroft?  Or the relaxed pace that so well suits
the, uh, patchwork narrative?  Or the unusual supporting cast that
includes everyone from Rip Torn to Ester Rolle to legendary poet Maya
Angelou?  Go with the flow and you're fine.  (At least until the hokey
final reel, which starts with a stormy, weather-related metaphor,
continues with a character-by-character recap of each woman's story,
and finally ends with fair Winona-- wrapped the a quilt, no less!--
following a crow into an orange grove.  Hilarious!)
     Stand back to think about the movie's message and reasonable doubt
comes into play.  A woman who sleeps with her sister's husband.
Another wife who accepts her husband's philandering.  Another
wife-turned-widow who answers her grief with an affair.  And so on and
so on.  How can we view these characters as anything other than
failures?  When we turn to Winona, with an optimistic look toward youth
and the future, we find *her* character in the arms (and more!) of
another man, because she's too afraid to face her own feelings!
[Insert head shaking.]
     To the credit of all parties involved, HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN
QUILT is no less honest than Clint Eastwood's well-received BRIDGES OF
MADISON COUNTY.  Both are warm, well-acted features that return plenty
for anyone willing to just "go with flow."  And what more does a movie
ask, these days, than mere physical attendance?  Go with flow, Sheldon,
and you're fine.  Stop, look, and listen... and you may come away with
a different opinion.

Author
Christopher Null
     I am dumbfounded about where to begin writing about this
experiment-in-filmmaking-gone-terribly-wrong, HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN
QUILT.  Some of the best actresses working in film (Anne Bancroft,
Ellen Burstyn, Winona Ryder, Jean Simmons, Lois Smith, Samantha Mathis,
and Claire Danes, to name a few) appear in this movie.  And I can't
begin to imagine how such a wide array of talents agreed to appear in
such a dreadful picture.
     Ryder plays the cheeky Finn, a precocious grad student pondering a
marriage proposal.  Having second thoughts, she decides to spend the
summer with a gaggle of quilting relatives and their friends, just to
sort things out.  Well, we see right off the bat that this probably
wasn't such a great idea, because each and every one of these people is
completely insane.
     For some bizarre, sadistic motive, each of the ladies begins to
tell Finn the warped story of her life, wherein we have the luxury of
viewing cutesy flashbacks which inevitably include adultery, self-pity,
insecurity, more adultery, pathetic whining, and/or a lot of just plain
bad advice.  And get this:  all this so-called "wisdom" is the "theme"
for the latest quilt they're working on--Finn's wedding quilt.
     After an O.D. of this idiocy, Finn is driven into the arms of Leon
(Johnathon Schaech), a muscle headed loser with no redeeming
qualities.  When she feels bad about it later, one of the quilters
(don't even bother trying to keep them straight, as some 8 zillion
characters are introduced in the first 5 minutes) advises her to
*never* tell her fiancee about the affair.  Well, how comforting.
     Maybe I didn't get it because I'm just a guy.  Maybe I just don't
understand "quilt humor."  But this film is simply awful.  The way I
see it, there's nothing wrong with the acting; it's the story and the
actresses' parts.  (I do give Bancroft and Smith a few kudos for making
me laugh ... twice.)  Director Jocelyn Moorhouse and especially
screenwriter Jane Anderson should both be blacklisted.
     Be warned, stay away from this one.  If this is really how to make
an American quilt, I'll just sleep on the floor covered with a burlap
sack.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Different women love men for varied reasons.  Some may not call it
"love" but by whatever name, they are happy or unhappy.  accept their
lot or fight back.  Bringing the stories of each of the women together
is accomplished by the writer of the screenplay, Jane Anderson and
director Jocelyn Moorehouse with the help of a cast, led by Winona
Ryder, that is outstanding.
     Finn (Ryder) has graduated from Berkeley and is spending the
summer at the home of her grandmother, Hy (Ellen Burstyn) and
great-aunt, Gladys Joe (Anne Bancroft) in California.  She is there for
two reasons: her boyfriend, Sam (Dermot Mulroney) has proposed marriage
and she wants time to think about it.  The second reason is she is
trying to finish a thesis on the rituals of women's handiwork in tribal
cultures.
     A group of women, led by Anna (Maya Angelou) long ago started a
quilting bee at Hy and Gladys Joe's home where she once was a maid but
is now the expert on the quilting.  Others in the bee are Constance
(Kate Nelligan), Em (Jean Simmons), Sophia (Lois Smith) and Marianne
(Alfre Woodard) who is Anna's daughter.
     As the quilt is being made, Finn is unaware that it is for her
wedding whenever that should happen.  Meanwhile, through flashbacks,
the stories of the women are revealed; a husband's death, another
husband's infidelity immediately after marriage but is always forgiven
by the wife because "that's how he is."  Each has her own tale to
tell.  There is even a discussion about whether marriage is still a
useful convention.  Finn hears it all.
     Others in the cast include Kate Capshaw and Rip Torn.  What
further enhances the film is the mood, the tone, the unhurried pace
and, for me, the surprise ending.
