Title
Review for Braindead (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jamey Hughton
Whatever you do, do not bother with the R-rated version of `Dead Alive'.
Stripped of twelve entire minutes of slimy gore, this version is not
worth your hard-earned cash. I mean, who would possibly rent a movie
like `Dead Alive' for anything but the gratuitous blood and extraneous
death scenes? First, ensure that the copy you picked up does not have an
MPAA rating of Restricted on the back cover. Then, with access to a
plastic barf bag, sit back and enjoy the uproarious Unrated version of
this pinnacle in horror movie-making.
Lionel (Timothy Balme) is a cowardly New Zealand man controlled by his
oppressive, domineering mother (Elizabeth Moody). One day, Lionel is
delivering a shipment of goods to a local convenience store and he meets
a beautiful clerk named Pequita (Diana Penalver). Harnessing all of his
courage and strength, Lionel asks Pequita out on a date to the zoo
(wonderful choice). Of course, in typical overbearing mother fashion,
Lionel's mum comes along for the trip to spy on the happy couple.
Unfortunately for the old hag, she stumbles too close to an adjacent
cage and is bitten by a Sumarian Rat Monkey, which has just been flown
in from overseas.
The Rat Monkey (presented in hilariously cheesy clay-mation) carries
with it a terrible plague: whoever gets bitten transforms into a
flesh-craving zombie. Lionel's mum begins experiencing certain changes -
namely, the loss of certain body parts - and nauseates baffled dinner
guests. When she eats Pequita's dog, it becomes clear that Lionel's dear
mum is not who she used to be. Soon, the entire town is infested with
zombies, even while Lionel attempts to control the plague by locking up
the undead in his fruit cellar.
`Dead Alive' (which was originally released as `Brain Dead') is perhaps
the goriest movie ever made. Director (and fellow New Zealander) Peter
Jackson has gone overboard in the field of splattered blood and
stomach-churning gore to such an extreme level that, after the final
showdown, the remaining characters are nearly knee-deep in a lagoon of
dismembered bodies. Those who carry with them a strong stomach and
appreciate the audacity of the horror genre may laugh until it hurts.
Balme is perfect in his naive, innocent role as an everyday shmoe caught
in an unlikely gorefest.
During the film's final thirty minutes, things get a little out of hand.
Lionel is forced to give up the family estate to his greedy uncle (Ian
Watkin), who invites dozens of people over for a party. Can you guess
what happens next? Here are a few helpful hints: rib cages are torn out,
people are disemboweled, legs are eaten off, and decapitated heads slide
around on the floor trying to chew on people's ankles. If that doesn't
sound like your cup of tea, then I suggest you rent `The Sound of Music'
again. This half-hour in frenetic film is sometimes so funny it causes
your sides to ache. Alas, when Balme begins using the underside of his
lawnmower to thwart the zombie intruders, Jackson gets almost too
content with himself. It gets to be a trifle too much, even for a
carnage-craving adolescent such as myself.
But, for the most part, `Dead Alive' is deviously inventive and darkly
hilarious, featuring astonishing gore effects that are often downright
sickening. The goal Jackson has in mind from the jump-start is obviously
this: to create a fun homage to classic zombie movies (such as George A.
Romero's `Night of the Living Dead'), and add buckets of blood to amuse
modern horror fans. Any individual who has followed the genre closely
and is disgusted with it's repetitive mediocrity is sure to have a
blast.
Along with the violence quota, the humor in `Dead Alive' is surely it's
most vital asset. In the single-funniest scene, a courageous priest
(Stuart Devenie) dismembers a group of zombie punks using nothing but
his hands and feet (as he puts it: `I kick ass for the Lord'). There is
also the presence of a zombie baby, which provides several fall-down
funny moments. Sure, Jackson also relies on this flesh-eating toddler so
much it gets annoying, but that's a minor problem. How in the world do
you draw a line in a film like this? If limits were set, then it could
have ruined a large portion of the fun.
I'm sure you've now realized `Dead Alive' is not for everyone, but for
all those who dare get involved, the experience will be a side-splitting
one. Just don't watch it with a full stomach. For that matter - don't
watch the R-rated version either.
Comments Appreciated:  ">HREF="mailto:movieviews@hotmail.com">

Author
Thomas Farmer
     Did BAD TASTE make you feel like raiding McDonalds after the film?
Did MEET THE FEEBLES make you wonder what Kermit *really* got up to
after the show was over?
     BRAINDEAD, the third movie from Peter Jackson, is the best of the
lot.  It has humour, adventure, romance, action, and bodily fluids.
Lots of bodily fluids.
     The film is set in suburban New Zealand in the 1950's.  Lionel, a
quiet man in his twenties (?), lives with his domineering mother.  Life
is not very exciting for Lionel until he meets Paquita, a charming girl
who works in the local store.  They go to the zoo together and see a
strange rat-monkey ("Vicious little shit") that has been brought back
from Sumatra and is now in Newtown zoo.
     Lionel's mother has followed them to the zoo to spy.  While
watching the happy couple, she is bitten by the monkey.  She falls sick
and, after a disastrous social engagement, dies.  Unfortunately for
Lionel, dying will not let you escape from the poison of the Sumatran
rat-monkey and she comes back to life as a zombie!
     You can probably guess the plot of the rest of the film.  Lionel's
attempts to keep the growing family of zombies under control.  His
failure.  The party.  The blood.  The body parts.  The final solution.
     This film is more than just a zombie movie.  It's more than a
hilariously funny splatter movie.  It's even more than a love story with
zombies playing the bit parts and other stagger-on roles.
     From the Rinso soap-powder packet (now discontinued) to the old
cars and trams, 1950's New Zealand is portrayed with loving attention to
detail.  The first shot of the film is of a New Zealand flag waving in
the breeze while the national anthem is played.  The period feel added a
lot to the film and gave it a bit more depth.
     The acting is uniformly very good.  You can split the characters
into two types - the normal people such as the nurse, the rugby bore,
the head of the Wellington Ladies Welfare League, and Paquita's father.
These people are all very convincing and well acted.
     Then we get to the slightly more odd characters such as the
reverend martial artist, the Nazi veterinarian, and the mad funeral
directors assistant - played by Peter Jackson himself.  These
over-the-top characters are all played with great verve, but none of the
actors go too far - the director's too busy doing it for them!
     I thought it was a good sign when one of the credits displayed at
the start of the film was for 'Creature and Gore Effects'.  The special
effects are excellent and can't have been cheap.  The blood bill alone
would have been horrendous!  We see lots of bodily parts, odd fluids,
dismembered people, and some really good make up.  Some of the zombie
effects are excellent - I can particularly recommend the seemingly
sentient digestive-system creature.
     Overall, the film works very well.  Peter Jackson described it as a
love story and he's not entirely wrong.  It's just that this love story
has more bodies than anything since Romeo and Juliet.  (Hmmm, what would
Shakespeare have done with a modern special effects budget?)
     By the way, Peter Jackson's next film will not be a splatter movie.
It will be about the Parker-Hume murder.  This is the story of two
teenage girls who form a relationship.  Their parents become worried and
try to break them up.  They are not happy about this idea and murder one
of their mothers with a large brick.  I'm glad to see that we will at
least get some blood.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Peter Jackson
Writers: Peter Jackson, Stephen Sinclair, and Frances Walsh (story by
Stephen Sinclair)
Starring: Timothy Balme, Diana Peńalver, Elizabeth Moody, Ian Watkin,
Brenda Kendall, Stuart Devenie
New Zealand director Peter Jackson's film "Dead Alive" (a.k.a.
"Braindead") gets major plus points for what may be the greatest single
piece of gorefest ever put on celluloid.  And he even gets plus points
for making a great film even before it reaches its big climax with the
aforementioned fest o' gore.  After re-watching this after seeing his
American debut, "The Frighteners," I could hardly believe it was the
same director, and it wasn't just because there was a significant lack
of gore, but because this film is so darkly comical and wild that it's
just widly entertaining.
"Dead Alive" takes place in 50s New Zealand, and deals with the arrival
of a Rat Monkey to the zoo there.  After a trek there, and some good old
limb-hacking, this dangerous Monkey, which turns whoever it bites into a
flesh-hungry zombie, is put in a zoo cage, and after biting one woman,
the film takes off on its surreal, and hysterical path, obviously
leading to a giant climax (ahem, the gorefest).
Timothy Balme plays Lionel, the inept, wimpish son of a rich New Zealand
bitch of a mother, who orders him around, and is more attached to him
than that mother in "Spanking the Monkey."  When he gains a love
interest in the form of a hispanic general store clerk named Pequita
(Diana Peńalver), she becomes insanely jealous, and is bitten by the rat
monkey during her bit of eavesdropping on their zoo date.
Lionel does all he can to help his mother, who is decomposing every
second, and is soon trying to eat the nurse.  When he finds out what's
going on, he tries to stop it, but, being the wimp he is, doesn't have
the guts to ask anyone for help.  Soon, he's keeping four zombies in his
basement, trying to watch over them, even as he's loosing Pequita, and
his obnoxious, oafish, John Goodman-looking Uncle Les (Ian Watkin) is
making stakes on the mansion, which Lionel has accidentally given to him
in the rush of things.
This, of course, brings us to the afore-afore-aforementioned gorefest.
And what a sight it is to behold.  For over 30 minutes, we witness a
large party being crashed by zombies, eventually turing everyone but an
elite few into zombies, who have to fight together.  We see
decapitations, appendages being ripped apart, a man being cut in half by
a rake, a zombie-chick's head being engulfed by a lightbulb, a zombie
baby running around, and a man using a lawn-mower as a deadly weapon. 
It's one of the most enjoyable 30 minutes in a film...if you have the
stomach for it.
"Dead Alive" features non-stop, no holds barred black humor, which makes
this film totally bizarre, and nothing to take seriously at all.  The
film seems to mock old zombie flicks through the entire film.  The
zombies are always presented with a lot of comedy, including two of them
having zombie-sex, and procreating a zombie baby.  And the romantic
subplot between Lionel and Pequita is handled with the utmost
campiness.  There are even some great one-liners - the best being a
zombie-fighting, karate/tai-chi fighting priest's declaration, "I kick
ass for the Lord!"
The acting is also done with huge campiness.  Timothy Balme has a great
knack for the kind of quiet, shy hero who is too meek to let anyone know
he has a group of zombies living in his basement, too attached to do
away with his zombie mother, and too shy to let Pequita know why he has
been ignoring her, as well as too weak to not let his Uncle Les take
over the household.  And Ian Watkin as Les steals the entire movie with
his absolutely hysterical performance.
"Dead Alive" might not be a masterpiece, but it is one of the few
frequently funny and wonderfully concously-campy horror films, and of
course, it just elevates the gorefest to a work of art.  And if you try
to rent it, settle for nothing less than the unrated version.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
Invite George A. Romero, Sam Raimi and Terry Gilliam over for a night of
Zombies, Bloody Mary's and some great conversation, secretively slip a few
dozen hits of orange-moon-pied acid drops into their respective drinks,
stir, serve on the rocks, and you will only be slightly prepared for the
bloody onslaught of style, horror, annihilation and gruesomely decorated
psychosis that director Peter Jackson has bestowed upon this world in the
form of this film. This movie is essentially for the 90's, what NIGHT OF THE
LIVING DEAD was for the 60's, and EVIL DEAD 2 (7.5/10) was for the 80's. An
all-out disgusting bloody mess of a horror show! All I could say is "wow".
PLOT:
A man who has always lived under the oppression of his own mother, suddenly
finds himself taking care of her, after she gets bitten by a rare rat-monkey
at a local zoo. It turns out that the bite from the animal actually turns
people into flesh-eating human zombies, and so his mother slowly but surely
crumbles into that state herself. As more and more people get bit, the man's
house turns into an absolute slaughterhouse for the dead, the living, and
the undead. Blood, carnage, decapitations, and did I mention blood...ensue.
CRITIQUE:
A fantastic cinematic achievement, this film has the greatest horror special
effects that I have ever witnessed in my entire life. It also has the most
gore, the most guts, the most blood, the most style and the most
mutilations, that I have ever had the privilege to be completely repulsed by
as well. This movie starts off slow, and looks like a highly stylized film
ready to thrill you with its eye for the quaint shot, but sadistically turns
into one of the most disgusting horror movies to ever greet the screen. This
film is gross beyond belief, with bloody murders after bloody murders,
followed closely by bloody decapitations, bloody maimings and dozens of
other novel shots of zombies killing, chomping and gnawing their way into
others.
THIS FILM IS NOT FOR THE FAINT-HEARTED!
This gorefest is filled with shots of body parts being ripped apart from one
another, limbs flying all around, and human insides taking on a life of
their own. Mrs. JoBlo could not take the whole film, and had to be relieved
of her duties as shotgun watcher, as the film progressed with only me
holding a barf bag to my side. I really do not know enough about this film's
background to know of Mr. Jackson's technique in this film's regard, but
suffice it to say that the man does an excellent job of coming up with a
plasma-infested horror spectacle that will not leave anyone lest an opinion.
Timothy Balme also does an excellent job of playing the straight-guy within
this mess of butchered torsos, even as he literally mows through them by the
end. His character was just like Bruce Campbell in EVIL DEAD 2. A chunk of
straight man material, plenty of black humour and a whole lot of
psychological head-trippings. Which reminds me, this film is not meant to be
a straight-forward horror extravaganza. It's got its tongue firmly placed in
cheek with a lot of off-humour pieces as well, like the one that has the
priest kicking some crazy zombie butt in the graveyard, and another one that
features our protagonist taking the baby zombie out for a carriage stroll in
the park.
This film will never leave your mind once you have seen it, and will most
certainly make a sickening impression on you, at first glance. You might
change your mind afterwards and respect its style, wondrous craft of
filmmaking and overall gruesome effect (as I did), or decide that it's one
of the sickest and vile things that you have ever had the indecency to
witness in your entire lifetime as an adult on this planet, and regurgitate
your appetite for ever taking in another horror movie. But even with a
fabricated absence of this film from your memory, you will never be able to
forget the fact that you were one of the lucky ones to have witnessed one of
the bloodiest, sickest and campiest fiestas of murder ever presented on
film!! Trust me, you'll feel better in the morning :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
BRAINDEAD was the original title for this movie, but Vidmark changed it to
DEAD ALIVE.
The mad funeral director's assistant is played by director Peter Jackson
himself. He was born in New Zealand, and also directed 1996's THE
FRIGHTENERS (7/10). He is presently working on all three parts of THE LORD
OF THE RINGS trilogy, which will be shot back-to-back. New Line Cinema has
apparently committed more than $130 million to produce this live action,
special effects-packed trilogy of films based on J.R.R. Tolkien's
internationally renowned fantasy novel. The filming is scheduled to begin in
May 1999 in New Zealand, with the first episode due for Christmas 2000
release.
Peter Jackson's favorite scene, in which the "baby" is taken for a carriage
ride in the park, was shot on the last two days only, because there was some
money left in the budget. The film apparently only cost $3 million to make,
with the director not making one cut from his original script.
Peter Jackson was one of the first people approached to script the JASON VS
FREDDY movie, but had to decline due to other commitments.
During the lawnmower scene in this movie, blood was pumped at five gallons
per second.
