Title
Review for Big Momma's House (2000)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Martin Lawrence, Nia Long, Paul Giamatti, Jascha Washington,
Terrence Dashon Howard, Anthony Anderson, Ella Mitchell 
Written by: Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer 
Directed by: Raja Gosnell 
Running Time: 98 minutes 
Screening Theater: Starnet Pablo 9 Theaters - Jacksonville Beach, FL 
What happens when you put Martin Lawrence in a fat suit in real life? 
You get Martin Lawrence in a coma (the comedian thought he was getting
fat, so he put on numerous layers of heavy clothing and went jogging in
100 degree heat, ending up in a coma).  So what happens when you put
Martin Lawrence in a fat suit in the movies?  You get an audience in a
coma. 
In Big Momma's House, Lawrence plays a FBI agent who's a master of
disguises.  When a naughty, naughty man escapes from jail and seeks out
his former girlfriend (the very sexy Nia Long... the only thing worth
looking at in this movie), she flees to Georgia to stay with her rather
large Southern aunt "Big Momma" (Ella Mitchell).  The FBI follows her in
order to recover the large sum of money stolen in the bank robbery that
sent the naughty man to jail.  However, Big Momma is called away on an
emergency.  Sensing that they could lose their only chance to capture
the criminal, Lawrence goes undercover as Big Momma.  And let the comedy
begin! 
Big Momma's House is the definition of a "gimmick" movie if there ever
was one.  The plot can basically be summed up as "Martin Lawrence
dresses up as a fat woman"... and even that description is too wordy. 
You can just see this script plotted out on a chalkboard with MARTIN
LAWRENCE/FAT WOMAN in the middle of the board with a big circle around
it, and all sorts of clichéd, "humorous" situations pointing to it.  Fat
woman plays basketball!  Fat woman takes a dump!  Fat woman kung fu! 
Well they left one off the board... movie critic slips into coma! 
Paul Giamatti (Private Parts, The Negotiator) plays Lawrence's partner
and as much as I enjoy his work, even he can't inject life into this
lifeless comedy.  Hell, the greatest performers on the planet couldn't
make this material work... it's just that awful. 
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Scott Renshaw
BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Martin Lawrence, Nia Long, Paul Giamatti, Jascha Washington, 
Terrence Howard.
Screenplay:  Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer.
Producers:  David T. Friendly and Michael Green.
Director:  Raja Gosnell.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  99 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The plot of BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE is Martin Lawrence in a fat suit and a
dress. That's not just the high-concept premise; it's the fully-realized,
all-encompassing plot. Such an emphasis is not unheard-of in the world of
Hollywood summer entertainment. One need merely look back to last summer,
when the plot of BIG DADDY was Adam Sandler being an incompetent surrogate
parent. The trap inherent in such an approach is that the high-concept
plot idea better be pretty well-realized, or rest on the shoulders of an
extremely talented performer, because you can bet there will be nothing
else worth a second of your time -- not a developed character, not a
provocative theme, not a witty twist. You will get 90-plus minutes of
Martin Lawrence in a fat suit and a dress -- nothing more, nothing less.
     Those who find Martin Lawrence more than an occasionally amusing
screen presence may have a shot at enjoying the one-note dud that is BIG
MOMMA'S HOUSE. Others will simply stare, mouth agape, at its sheer
unapologetic laziness. Lawrence plays FBI agent Malcolm Turner, an
undercover expert on a stakeout assignment with his partner John (Paul
Giamatti). Dangerous convicted bank robber and murderer Lester Vesco
(Terrence Howard) has escaped from prison, and the Feds think he's headed
for his former girlfriend and presumed-but-never-proved accomplice Sherry
(Nia Long). Sherry, however, has fled with her son Trent (Jascha
Washington), possibly to visit her grandmother Hattie Mae (Ella Mitchell),
better known as Big Momma. Indeed, Sherry appears to be on her way, but
Big Momma is headed out of town without knowing Sherry is coming. That
leaves master of disguise Malcolm to go under very heavy cover as Big
Momma and find out what Sherry knows.
     BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE's bloodlines are certainly traceable to
MRS. DOUBTFIRE -- director Raja Gosnell edited that film, and the makeup
effects were similarly created by Greg Cannom -- but there's just as
strong a whiff of TOOTSIE in the main character's attempt to use his
alternate identity to get closer to a woman. Unfortunately, BIG MOMMA'S
HOUSE makes a ridiculous decision neither of those other films made:
Instead of having the protagonist pose as a completely manufactured
character unfamiliar to anyone elses, it places Malcolm in the position of
playing a friend and family member to several other characters. Suspension
of disbelief in BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE requires you to believe every other
person in the film is blind and/or stupid, since no one notices that one
Big Momma looks or sounds absolutely nothing like the other.
     Of course, laughs trumps logic every time, and BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE
probably still would have worked in spite of its utter disdain for common
sense if it had just managed to be funny. And it misses its best possible
opportunity for some great farce by ignoring the simple fact that the real
Big Momma is set up as a foul-tempered beast, while Malcolm has to be
nurturing in order to get the information he wants out of Sherry. 
Unfortunately, no one involved appears to have the faintest idea how to
deal with the comic gold mine involved in one real person pretending to be
another, very different real person, so they fall back on an endless
parade of sight gags: Malcolm reacting violently to Big Momma's explosive
diarrhea attack; Malcolm-as-Momma schooling a pair of cocky teens in
basketball; Malcolm trying to avoid detection as various prostheses give
way at inopportune moments; Malcolm delivering a baby because Big Momma is
the town midwife (one of the few sequences that works). Martin Lawrence
can be likeable enough at times, but there's no reason to care a whit
about his budding romance with Sherry because Malcolm is never an
independently significant character. He's just Big Momma without the
makeup on.
     I won't waste time commenting on how ineptly the set-up of the
escaped convict is employed, since it was clearly a waste of time to the
film-makers. There are a few token scenes of Lester looming as a
threatening figure, but he's ultimately a distraction in a film that's
really about its central visual incongruity (and the accompanying
lascivious glances at Nia Long's posterior). I'm never prepared to
underestimate how appealing that idea may be to other people -- several
million of them apparently found Adam Sandler as an incompetent surrogate
parent appealing -- but I know that when a film-maker tries to throw a
concept at me and pretend that it's an entire film, I duck out of the way. 
The gross implausibility of BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE might have been tolerable if
it was seasoned with more big, cleverly-constructed laughs. Its lack of
big laughs might have been tolerable if its characters were at all
relevant. BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE is ridiculous _and_ not funny. It's just a sad
exercise in the jaded presumption that any scene should be considered
wacky and hilarious if it involves Martin Lawrence in a fat suit and a
dress.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Whether you see Big Momma’s House or watch Lawrence’s 1999 film Blue Streak, 
you will have seen the other movie. The two films contain the same lame 
comedy and rely on Lawrence's charm and energy to perk things up. While 
Streak was tolerable, House is rarely satisfactory. There are few genuine 
laughs from the script by Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer. The mostly juvenile 
humor found here belongs in an Adam Sandler movie. 
Malcolm (Martin Lawrence) is an undercover cop, and a master of disguise. His 
latest case involves a man who robbed a bank. His bank teller girlfriend 
Shelly (Nia Long) may or may not have been in on it. When the man is released 
from prison, Shelly flees her home bringing her son Trent (Jascha Washington) 
along with her. She decides to visit her obese mother, known to most as Big 
Momma. Since Momma has left town, Malcolm sees an excellent opportunity. He 
disguises himself as Big Momma, hoping Shelly will eventually crack and tell 
him everything she knows, including her boyfriend's whereabouts. Several 
problems arise with this plan including Malcolm’s poor cooking ability, 
keeping the undercover project a secret, and delivering a baby. Further 
problems arise when Malcolm begins to fall in love with Shelly and the real 
Big Momma returns home. Anything that could possibly go wrong does. The 
script squeezes out any available laughs. No matter how hackneyed or cheap 
they may be. 
There is plenty to giggle at in this movie for elementary school students. 
The movie contains everything your average 4th grader would laugh at. 
Overweight persons, feces, and flatulence are all present. A few chuckles 
escaped my lips, but most gags did not qualify for anything more than an 
amused smile. No matter how inane it gets, the humor is bearable. Big Momma’s 
House never fails at being (or trying to be) funny. The main problem is a 
dreadful story. After an outline of events, the script literally stops. There 
are sixty or so minutes in between where nothing feels fake or scripted. 
Lawrence's comic experiments fill this period of the movie. His energy is 
vital for navigating through a screenplay littered with every southern cliché 
you can think of (fried chicken, a spirited church ceremony, etc.) 
Implausibility is everywhere. Any person with the slightest intelligence 
would realize that Malcolm’s Big Momma is actually a man. Clues are present 
in lots of places, but the characters are clueless. Even worse than some of 
the humor and the implausibility is when Momma morphs into a romance in its 
final minutes. The film certainly does not work as one. It made me wonder why 
Hollywood does not turn scripts from nine and ten year-olds into movies. Most 
of these films would be of a much higher quality and have far more depth than 
this one.
Martin Lawrence exhibits a level of animation common in his movies. He just 
needs better material to work with. The beautiful Nia Long was surprisingly 
dull. She is stuck in what essentially is a one-man movie and does not do 
much. Other supporting performances are easily forgettable and seem 
restrained. The filmmakers were obviously trying to make this movie appeal to 
a young audience, as is apparent from Big Momma’s PG-13 rating. However, the 
film would be better suited as a loud, bawdy, and rude foulmouthed comedy. 
One can only hope that Nutty Professor II: The Klumps will be better.
There is nothing alive in this movie. The screenplay and acting both fall 
short, and the ending of the film is a horrendous and unbelievable happy 
conclusion. The premise gets very tiring and never reaches the guilty 
pleasure zone like Blue Streak did. Lawrence almost saves the lackluster 
humor, but achieves only modest success. This movie might appeal to kids or 
teens, but it did not delight or entertain me.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Twentieth Century Fox/Regency Enterprises
 Director: Raja Gosnell
 Writer:  Darryl Quarles (story and screenplay), Don Rhymer
 Cast: Martin Lawrence, Nia Long, Paul Giamatti, Terrence
Howard
   In a more innocent time when police corruption meant
simply stealing rather than shooting unarmed civilians, Frank
Serpico went under cover to expose the deeds of some of his
unscrupulous fellow officers.  Sidney Lumet's movie about
this hero--who had to leave his country to take us residence
in Switzerland--was not without humor, one of the most
amusing parts focussing on the title character disguised as a
Hasidic man and more.  The cop in "Big Momma's House"
may be like the champion of Lumet's 1973 movie in one way. 
He is the bearer of false identity, but lacks the variety
enjoyed by Serpico.  While "Serpico" featured an authentic
blend of comedy and drama, in making "Big Momma's House,
director Raja Gosnell aims strictly at our funny bone.
   Gosnell's aim is off.  "Big Momma's House" gives even the
notion of summer movies a bad name.  Utilizing one of the
oldest and moldiest species of comedy--female
impersonation--Gosnell is not even good at creating anything
original.  Ripping off a scene far better done by Tony Curtis
and Marilyn Monroe in "Some Like It Hot" and generally
filching from the modern forerunner of the genre, "Mrs.
Doubtfire," this one is merely a showcase for the talent
of a crackerjack comic, Martin Lawrence, but proves only that
Lawrence can be far better when he's just himself and not
decked out as a 400-pound cliche.
   The simple plot, which is nothing more than an excuse for
foisting one unfunny sitcomish bit after another on the
audience, could fit right into a six o'clock sitcom. Even the
outdoor scenes look as though they were wheeled in for use
by CBS or NBC TV.  In this tale, FBI Agent Malcolm Turner
(Martin Lawrence), together with his competent but comical
sidekick (Paul Giamatti), is on the trail of an escaped killer
(Terrence Howard).  The FBI guesses that the perp is looking
for his former girl friend, Sherry (Nia Long), who may herself
be on the run and headed for the house of her estranged
relative, Big Momma.
   Robin Williams had a far superior script and concept to
work with in Chris Columbus's 1993 film "Mrs. Doubtfire."
Lawrence, by contrast, is left with the most banal exertions at
physical comedy.  Disguised as Big Momma--who outweighs
him by about 250 pounds--Lawrence is given the most
predictable responsibilities, obligations which include fixing
his ample bosom when it gets out of alignment, cooking pork
chops with a couple of sticks of lard and half a bottle of
Crisco, and supporting a rubber mask whose construction is
hardly as adept as the ones used by Tom Cruise and
company in "M:I-2."  The mask begins to tear, the pork chops
are burned to a crisp, the boobs go a-bobbin' and Lawrence
ponders how he can make a hit on Sherry when Sherry
simply does not have romantic feelings for her Big Momma. 
   The scenes that have some possibility of functioning are
one which finds Nia Long cuddling up in bed with the
incognito FBI agent (who must convince the comely young
woman that what she feels in bed is only a flashlight) and
another involving the alleged Big Momma giving a sadistic
karate instructor his comeuppance.  There is also some
snappy gospel singing and a sentimental ending that turns
Agent Malcolm Turner from a man who has acquired the
hostility of the townsfolk into the citizens' hero after the
agent's unconvincing four-minute "testimony" to the
congregation.  Rent Ted Demme's 1999 movie "Life" to see
what Lawrence is really capable of doing when he has a story
that juxtaposes genuine poignancy with good, broad comedy.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Susan Granger
   If you're a die-hard Martin Lawrence fan, you'll appreciate
this movie. If not, forget it. Lawrence plays FBI agent Malcolm
Turner, who has built a reputation as a master of disguises. When he's
sent to a small town in Georgia to capture a bank robber who's escaped
from prison, he sets up a stakeout near the home of the con's
girl-friend's long-lost grandmother (Ella Mitchell), an old woman
known as Big Momma. Only Big Momma's not around. So Turner decides to
go deep undercover and impersonate the hefty Southern matriarch,
including cooking soul food, singing gospel, even delivering
babies. The result is an outrageous romantic farce because,
predictably, Turner experiences an emotional transformation, falls for
the girl-friend, a single mother played by lovely Nia Long ("Boiler
Room"), befriends her son and struts on the basketball court: "Grandma
knows she's got game!" Of course, when the real Big Momma surfaces, a
stunned onlooker chirps, "Are you the Doublemint twins?" The
screenplay by Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer, based on a story by
Quarles, serves primarily as a vehicle for Martin Lawrence's riff on
Eddie Murphy's "Nutty Professor" concept of playing several different
characters. And if it looks derivative, perhaps it's because director
Raja Gosnell served as editor on "Mrs. Doubtfire," while Big Momma's
make-up and prosthetics are the work of "Mrs. Doubtfire" Oscar-winner,
Greg Cannom. Cannom's also responsible for transforming Lawrence into
an Asian man for the opening sequence in which Turner busts an illegal
dog fighting ring. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Big Momma's
House" is a sporadically funny 5 - and, yes, the fat lady sings!

Author
Chad Polenz
Martin Lawrence stars as an FBI agent who must go undercover as a 350-pound 
southern woman in order
to catch an escaped bank robber by watching over the criminal's ex-lover (the 
woman's grand daughter). 
Another typical mainstream comedy that uses some shock humor, wacky slapstick 
and rapid-fire dialogue.
Lawrence is actually likable here, he seems so relaxed and confident in drag. 
The story is practically
irrelevant since it has so little to do with what actually goes on during the 
film. It's just Lawrence being
funny in any way he can and for the most part it works. What's more, the film 
actually has some heart to it
and doesn't come off as totally cheesy. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Michael Dequina
_Big_Momma's_House_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
Make no mistake--_Big_Momma's_House_ is all about Martin Lawrence
donning large old lady drag.  That's what moviegoers will buy their
tickets to see, and apparently that's the only reason why the director
and writers made this project, for the thin sliver of a plot is just an
excuse to get Lawrence in costume and let him do his thing.
That, of course, is not an entirely bad thing.  Lawrence is a talented
comedian, and he is able to bring more than a few laughs to the
proceedings.  As FBI agent Malcolm Turner, who spends most of the film
buried under makeup and prosthetics as the elderly Big Momma, Lawrence's
timing and manic energy juices up obvious gags cooked up by writers
Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer.  Since Big Momma is really a young man
wearing a fat suit, a lot of the humor derives from seeing what appears
to be a heavyset old lady doing un-old-lady-like things.  Big Momma tears
it up on the basketball court.  Big Momma beats up a surly self-defense
instructor.  Big Momma gets her groove on during a church service.  Then
there are the fish-out-of-water gags, such as when Big Momma is called on
to assist in a childbirth--an area, of course, in which Malcolm has no
level of expertise.
Individual episodes such as these are what viewers will remember most
about _Big_Momma's_House_, and that may very well be enough for the film
to become a hit.  But this isn't a sketch comedy on the television set;
it's a big screen film that is supposed to tell a story with a beginning,
middle, and end, and plot gets all but lost as director Raja Gosnell goes
from vignette to vignette.  For the record, Malcolm's disguise is part of
plan to capture a vicious escaped con (a barely used Terrence Howard). 
His ex-girlfriend Sherry (Howard's _The_Best_Man_ co-star Nia Long, also
wasted) may or may not hold some crucial information, so Malcolm
disguises himself as her old friend Big Momma (currently out on
vacation), whose home she is about to visit.
The story never makes complete sense, and while it really doesn't matter
considering the film's overall intent, it would have helped if there were
a strong spine on which to hang all the individual set pieces.  But there
isn't one, and this _House_ ultimately collapses under the weight of Big
Momma and her unfocused schtick.  
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Christopher Null
     Oh, to have been a fly on the wall when Big Momma's House was
cooked up....  Dress funnyman Martin Lawrence up as a 350-pound Georgia
grandmother, spin him around, and let him do his thang.  Beat Eddie
Murphy at his own game (The Nutty Professor II hits theaters later this
year), shoot it for cheap with no other real stars, and grab some good
grosses.
     Sure enough, Big Momma's House is a comic crowd-pleaser that should
score well with audiences that refuse to tire of incessant fat jokes,
slapstick, and, well, more fat jokes.
     So, how do we get Martin to dress up as a fat woman?  Naturally,
he's not just a crack FBI agent, he's also a master of disguise.  Ethan
Hunt, look out!  When a case involving a prison escapee and a few
million dollars of missing booty (er, no pun intended) comes around,
it's up to intrepid Martin to go deep undercover as "Big Momma," the
grandmother of our convict's estranged girlfriend (Nia Long) who may or
may not be hiding the cash.  Yikes!
     Naturally, this "plot" is pure throwaway, mainly serving to break
up the scenes in which Martin-as-Big Momma tries to cook soul food,
plays basketball, "testifies" in church, and nuzzles up to his/her
erstwhile granddaughter.  Will the convict show up just as the real Big
Momma returns home from a trip?  Will Martin get the girl?  I'd love to
say that Big Momma's House is full of surprises, but I think you're
getting the picture by now.  The mental flashbacks of Mrs. Doubtfire
don't help matters, either.
     Now there's nothing wrong with physical comedy.  Seeing Martin's
faux boob appear on his shoulder is awfully funny, until about 45
minutes of the same joke being repeated ad nauseam.  Paul Giamatti adds
a curious levity to the picture, and Long's femme fatale is at least
good for eye candy.  But the producers messed up one tiny detail when
they put this picture together:  Whoever decided to put Bad Boy Martin
Lawrence in a PG-13 neo-family production ought to be forced to watch
the end result over and over again until they figure out that Lawrence's
strengths are not in his fat ass, but in his big mouth.
Director: Raja Gosnell
Producer: David T. Friendly, Michael Green
Writer: Darryl Quarles, Don Rhymer
Starring: Martin Lawrence, Nia Long, Paul Giamatti, Terrence Dashon
Howard
http://www.bigmommashousemovie.com/
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.

Author
Michael Redman
"It's June," said the walrus to the carpenter, "and it's time to talk of
excruciatingly bad movies."
Every summer, the film industry, trusting in the belief supposedly held by
P. T. Barnum about how often suckers are brought into this world, dumps a
seemingly infinite number of movies into the nation's theaters.
Each of these cinematic offerings, most with a budget roughly equivalent to
the GNP of a small industrialized country, are touted as the "Big Summer
Blockbuster!" (TM).
There are movies that are hyped as hilarious: you'll be close to a heart
attack from laughter. Others are supposed to be the most exciting time
you've spent in the dark since your prom date in high school.
Unfortunately the vast majority are better suited for providing an
air-conditioned location for napping. The studios are banking on you having
so much free time during the warmer months that you'll be willing to fork
over a few bucks just to do _something_.
Of course there are the exceptions. Some of the best action films, funniest
comedies and even a few exceptional dramas are released while the sun
shines. But these are rare.
"Big Momma's House" is not one of these. It's not even an acceptable
time-waster. In fact, if it weren't for "Battlefield Earth", it could be in
the running for most disappointing film of the season.
FBI agent Malcolm Turner (Martin Lawrence), master of disguise, is sent to
stake out Big Momma's house in a small southern town. Big Momma's
granddaughter Sherry (Nia Long) just might come a'visiting along with
millions in bank loot and her escaped convict boyfriend.
When the very large matriarch is suddenly called out of town, Malcolm dons a
latex Big Momma suit to try to get Sherry to spill the beans.
You can probably guess the rest: a lot of fat jokes, fart jokes, old woman
jokes and then Malcolm falls for Sherry. Not one bit of which is even
remotely humorous.
The only potentially funny bits are telegraphed well in advance or have been
given away in commercials. It's a fewer-than-one-joke film.
Malcolm's disguise looks like a hyper-inflated Cabbage Patch Kid and could
only fool someone who has never seen a human being before.
Even Lawrence who has been amusing in other films, comes across as a
low-rent Eddie Murphy. The "real" Big Momma ((Ella Mitchell), a huge feisty
woman, would have been a much more interesting star. She's fiery and has
some energy about her. On the other hand, Lawrence, despite his padding, is
smaller than life.
It's a mystery what director Raja Gosnell had in mind. Perhaps he was
attempting to recapture the magic that was his directoral debut: "Home Alone 3".
Supposedly screenwriter Darryl Quarles pitched this with a one-line idea and
then went home to write it. The result looks like he never got beyond that
one line.
The film reminds me of an extended version of the failed sit-com pilots the
networks toss into the television schedules to fill time rather than show
reruns -- only not as entertaining.
The best part of this film? It's showing at the new Showplace West and the
seats are comfortable.
(Michael Redman has written this column for a very long time and you'd think
he'd come to know what to expect when the days get longer. But futile hope
springs eternal. Email your tales of better times to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 6/8/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]
-- 
mailto:redman@bluemarble.net
Film reviews archive: 
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Steve Rhodes
What could be funnier that the mere sight of a really obese woman?  How
about a guy in a few hundred pounds of latex impersonating one?
Well, if this is your brand of humor -- as it was for exactly one very
vocal member of our audience -- then BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE, starring Martin
Lawrence (BLUE STREAK), may be just the film for you.  This one-joke
movie generated a paltry number of laughs from our audience, save the
aforementioned one-person laugh track.  My personal laugh count total
was exactly zero.  The movie's attempts at humor weren't even enough to
get many small grins out of me.  Only in the few episodes when Lawrence
escapes his "funny" costume does the story ever possess any genuine
charm.
The minimal plot concerns an FBI agent, Malcolm Turner (Martin
Lawrence), who goes undercover to impersonate a 400-pound woman known to
one and all as Big Momma.  He hopes that Sherry, the girlfriend of
escaped bank robber and murderer Lester Vesco (Terrence Howard), who
barely appears in the movie, will spill the beans to her Big Momma as to
Lester's whereabouts.
Sherry, played by the lovely Nia Long (BOILER ROOM), adds class to a
movie that doesn't have much.  An actress who brings intelligence and
grace to her pictures, she has such well-scrubbed looks that she always
seems as if she just finished shooting a commercial for beauty soap.
Director Raja Gosnell, working from a hopeless script by Darryl Quarles
and Don Rhymer, gives Lawrence little apparent guidance, letting him
wander around aimlessly in his outlandish outfit, searching for laughs.
Typical of the film's humor is a basketball match in which Big Momma
plays a mean game, surprising some teenagers with her agility.  At it's
worst, suffice it to say that you'll thank your lucky stars that
Smell-o-Vision didn't catch-on.
Is there anything good in the movie other than Nia Long?  The music is
not bad.
BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for crude humor, sexual
innuendo, language, brief nudity and some violence and would be
acceptable for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, who loved Lawrence's last picture (BLUE STREAK),
laughed very little at this one.  Giving it just **, he liked Lawrence
only during those rare moments when he wasn't wearing a ton of latex.
His main criticism of the film was simply that it wasn't very funny.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
John Beachem
Malcolm Turner (Martin Lawrence) is an FBI agent who takes his work a 
little too seriously. He will dress in any disguise, no matter how 
ridiculous or embarassing to catch a culprit. His latest assignment 
involves both he and his partner, John (Paul Giamatti), going down south 
to stake out the home of massive elderly woman Big Momma (Ella 
Mitchell). They're trying to catch Big Momma's grand-daughter, Sherry 
(Nia Long), who they think was involved in a bank robbery several years 
ago. Sherry worked at a bank which her boyfriend robbed, and the money 
was never recovered. Unfortunately Big Momma has been called away to see 
a sick friend, and she won't be home when Sherry arrives. Seeing his 
chance to catch Sherry slipping away, Malcolm decides to try his most 
embarassing disguise yet, playing Big Momma. This involves him dealing 
with such tasks as acting as the neighborhood midwife; dealing with a 
sadistic karate instructor (Anthony Anderson); trying to live up to the 
expectations of Sherry's son, Trent (Jascha Washington); and fending off 
the very unwelcome advances of an admiring suitor (Carl Wright).
I often hear Martin Lawrence called a poor man's Eddie Murphy. I've 
never agreed with this because the two actors have very different acting 
styles. Murphy is a bit more quiet and a lot more vulgar. Lawrence is 
often hilariously over the top, and he is great at playing a fish out of 
water type character; but he's obviously not as good an actor as Murphy. 
What Lawrence lacks in serious acting talent he usually makes up for in 
energy ("Blue Streak", "Nothing to Lose") or originality ("Life"). Such 
is not the case with his latest outing, "Big Momma's House", which 
destroys the validity of my arguments for Lawrence having a style of his 
own. This movie is nothing more than a blatant rip off of Murphy's 
similar role in "The Nutty Professor". However, all the pent up energy 
that usually makes Lawrence so entertaining is strangely absent. 
Instead, we get Lawrence looking very bored under a ton of makeup, using 
a scratchy, high-pitched voice that somehow sounds worse than 
fingernails on a chalk board. The saddest part of all this is that 
despite the tons of makeup they have piled on poor Martin, I could never 
believe he was an elderly, overweight woman.
In a movie where the star appears bored with the proceedings, it's left 
to the supporting cast to hold the show up. Thankfully the supporting 
actors in "Big Momma's House" do a fairly good job. Nia Long ("Held 
Up"), in particular, does an admirable job as the only straight 
character in a movie filled with bizarre types. Paul Giammati ("The 
Negotiator"), who usually plays a little weenie of a character, actually 
plays a fairly competent one here; even more shocking is that he does it 
pretty well. The most entertaining character would have to be Anthony 
Anderson's ("Romeo Must Die") hilariously incompetent security guard. 
Anderson was one of the best things about Jet Li's "Romeo Must Die", and 
if he keeps playing his characters like he does here, he'll have quite a 
comic future ahead of him. The funniest scene with Anderson involves his 
teaching a karate class to a group of old ladies and being taught a 
thing or two himself by Malcolm, as Big Momma. Unfortunately, comical 
scenes like this one are few and far between. The funniest scenes are 
Nia's initial meeting with Malcolm as Big Momma, Malcolm trying to help 
deliver a baby, and one where Nia goes to sleep in Big Momma's bed.
One of the worst things about "Big Momma's House" is its use of 
gross-out jokes. There is one scene (and you'll know it when you get 
there) that almost had me running out of the theater, ready to lose my 
lunch. Of course, I've never been a big fan of gross out gags like some 
people are. If you find the sight of something utterly repugnant to be 
amusing for some reason, maybe you'll enjoy the film for that reason. 
Another major fault with Darryl Quarles' script is that several things 
are never explained. For example, when Nia first shows up at her 
grandmother's house, she's convinced that Big Momma is going to be angry 
at her and they haven't spoken in some time, but we never find out why. 
Nia also carries around a cross which seems to hold some signifigance to 
both her and her grandmother, but this significance is never explained. 
The romantic subplot between Malcolm (when he's out of his Big Momma 
garb) and Nia feels about as rushed and tacked on as is humanly 
possible. Last, we have the grating soundtrack. If you don't know what 
kind of music is in a Martin Lawrence movie, you've been living in a 
cave for the past couple of years. I'm not sure if I'd recommend this 
movie to Martin Lawrence fans, because they might lose what little 
respect they have for him after seeing it (I know I did). "Big Momma's 
House" runs a decent 98 minutes, though most of this run time is 
pointless fluff. I give it three out of five stars.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to: 
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at: http://www.dependentfilms.net,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public3Dyes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem

Author
Jonathan F Richards
Screenplay by Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer
Probably the scene that lost me was the early one where the fat lady 
rushes into the bathroom, hikes up her dress, sinks with a sigh onto the 
toilet, and lets go with loud, flatulent diarrhea, while Martin 
Lawrence, hiding in the shower, makes "Oh boy does it stink!" faces. 
Now, there are people who think that's hilarious, I imagine, or they 
wouldn't have put it in a comedy. There must have been chuckles at the 
pitch, chortles at the script conferences, and guffaws on the set. There 
weren't any in the theater where I saw it.
In fact, this entire 97-minute exercise in movie comedy was pretty much 
laugh-free. Take a little Tootsie (a great comedy), run it through a few 
reels of Mrs. Doubtfire (a pretty funny picture), dredge it in some 
Nutty Professor (now we're showing signs of strain), and by the time it 
comes out here, we're talking about a severely depleted comic gene pool. 
Martin Lawrence is an appealing guy, but he doesn't seem to have a sure 
fix on what's funny. Here he's an FBI man who's a master of disguise, 
and when Sherry (Nia Long), the ex-girlfriend of an escaped convict 
(Terrence Howard), goes to hide out at her granny's, and granny gets 
called out of town, it's an opportunity made in comedy hell. As quick as 
you can say Little Red Ridinghood, Lawrence has disguised himself with 
enough latex to keep a Nevada whorehouse in condoms for a decade, and 
he's greeting Sherry on the front walk with a big hug saying "Big Momma 
could never forget that ass.ma."
Nia Long, who showed well in The Best Man, is a lovely actress who will 
certainly live this down. Terrence Howard, the cynic from that same 
movie, is reasonably menacing as the villain, but he's on so little you 
hardly notice. The director, Raja Gosnell, has directed a couple of 
pictures (Never Been Kissed, Home Alone 3), but he must have caught this 
bug while editing Mrs. Doubtfire. But that had Robin Williams, and a 
script. This one made it to the screen without an ounce of wit or 
originality.
This is the picture that famously landed Lawrence in the hospital with 
heat stroke as he was jogging in heavy clothes to lose weight. Martin, 
baby, it wasn't worth it.
