Title
Review for Adventures in Babysitting (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in the 50s and 60s, society seemed safe and simple.  With the
exception of a few crime and juvenile delinquent films it seemed that if you
simply behaved yourself you would lead a calm and placid existence.  As we
perceive society getting weirder, we see more films of people doing normal
things that wind them up in the middle of real chaos, particularly over a
single night.  In INTO THE NIGHT a man who is simply at the wrong airport
parking slot at the wrong moment finds not only his night but his whole life
turned inside out as a result.  Well, that's not too different from NORTH BY
NORTHWEST after the main character runs across the wrong people (in this
case, criminals).  The classic "night of pure chaos" film is AFTER HOURS.
There aren't even dangerous criminals in AFTER HOURS; it is mostly paranoia
and just the general weirdness of people that creates all the danger.
     Well, of late Hollywood has been doing films in all kinds of popular
sub-genres, but with teen-age main characters instead of the usual adults.
The newest "night of chaos" film has three teenagers and an adolescent going
through a night of chaos in Chicago.  Chris Parker (played by Elisabeth
Shue, who was also in THE KARATE KID) is baby-sitting for Sara (played by
Maia Brewton) when a friend who desperately needs a ride calls her.  Against
her better judgement she packs Sara, Sara's older brother Brad (played by
Keith Coogan, formerly of THE WALTONS), and his friend Daryl Coopersmith
(played by Anthony Rapp) into her mother's station wagon and heads for the
city.  Add one flat tire and one weirdo with a tow truck and the film is off
and running.  What follows is a lot of fun and adventures nowhere nearly as
puerile as the regrettable title might indicate.
     This film is the directorial debut of Chris Columbus, who wrote the
screenplays for three Steven-Spielberg-produced films: GREMLINS, THE
GOONIES


Author
Randy Parker
   ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING is mindless, formulaic, unsophisticated, and
disposable ... and I thoroughly enjoyed it.  We've seen the premise of the
movie before, most recently in FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF.  On a Friday
night, four suburban youngsters venture out into the unfamiliar city (in
this case, Chicago) and suffer through an exhausting series of
misadventures.  Elizabeth Shue plays a beautiful baby-sitter who is
responsible for looking after a little girl (who idolizes the superhero
Thor), her 15-year-old brother (who is smitten by Shue), and his wild
friend.
   ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING wants us to believe that during the course of
their escapades, these four youngsters come to better understand
themselves and each other.  By the end of the movie, they are supposed to
be wiser and more mature than they were at the beginning.  However, the
plot situations in ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING, as well as the relationships
between the characters and the lessons they learn, are altogether
unoriginal.  The movie does not balance its extreme fantasy with a strong
enough dose of reality.  The fantasy is amusing but sometimes so
exaggerated that first-time director Chris Columbus undermines his own
attempts to generate any real dramatic credibility; a case in point is the
scene in which the little girl gets stranded on a window ledge 40 stories
high.  And yet despite these considerations, ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING is
irresistibly entertaining, thanks to its charming cast and keen sense of
humor.
   As in the film STAND BY ME, the success of ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING
lies primarily on the shoulders of four young and unproven actors.  These
four newcomers appear in nearly every frame of the film, and consequently
the strength of their performances determines whether the movie floats or
sinks.  ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING not only floats, it sails.  The young
actors save the film from its limitations and make it a worthwhile
endeavor.
   Elizabeth Shue, as the reluctant baby-sitter, is a natural; her
performance is enchanting.  She is a joy to watch from beginning to end
and seems completely comfortable in front of the camera.  With a
mischievous twinkle in her eye, Maia Brewton is cute and convincing as the
Thor-loving little girl who likes to tease her brother, steal eclairs, and
sometimes even climb skyscrapers.  Keith Coogan plays the little girl's
15-year-old brother, Brad, a freshman with a big crush on Shue (a
senior).  Coogan gives his character a delightful balance of awkwardness,
embarrassment, bravado, and charm.  He is particularly effective in the
scenes that deal with his hopeless admiration and growing respect for
Shue.  Although Anthony Rapp's role as Brad's friend is less substantial,
he is appealing nevertheless.
   The movie's loosely-structured plot is merely an excuse to have these
characters come together and interact.  These four young newcomers have
such great chemistry that I grew quite fond of them, even in an uninspired
and cliche-ridden story.  In fact, by the end of the film, I felt as if I
had made four new friends.
   ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING has another thing going for it: a wonderful
sense of humor.  Several scenes in the film are exceptionally clever.  For
example, Shue and her three wards at one point find themselves singing the
blues in an all-black nightclub.  The sequence yields the movie's funniest
one-liner.
   Regrettably,  the movie fails to make a lasting impression.  The
characters don't learn anything new, unusual, or enlightening from their
adventures.  Unlike THE BREAKFAST CLUB, a superior film which successfully
combined comedy and drama, ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING has very little
dramatic intensity or lingering emotional impact.  Columbus introduces
several serious, underlying themes into the movie, but he never fully
develops them.  These shortcomings, however, do not significantly flaw
BABYSITTING because its dramatic aspirations are not as lofty as those of
a film like THE BREAKFAST CLUB.  In any case, ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING
does succeed in fulfilling its primary function, which is to provide
diverting, humorous, and (alas) forgettable summer entertainment.

Author
Steve Fritzinger
     Chris is a high school senior from the suburbs of Chicago.  After her
boyfriend breaks their date, she agrees to baby-sit the Anderson's little girl.
Soon after the parents leave, Chris gets a call from her best friend, Brenda.
Brenda ran away, made it to the downtown bus station before her money and
resolve ran out, and wants Chris to drive into the city to pick her up.  The
little girl and her love-struck brother blackmail Chris into taking them and
the brother's best friend along with her.  They climb into Chris's mother's
car, and head for the bus station.
     A flat tire, a missing spare, and a forgotten purse leave them stranded
and broke in a city that seems to be one large unfamiliar and threatening slum.
Chris's task is clear: she must fix the car, evade the murderous auto-theft
czar, and get the children home before Mom and Dad get back from the party.
     ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING borrows heavily from RISKY BUSINESS, AFTER
HOURS, and FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF.  It is amusing with some genuinely funny
moments, but it's all been done before.  Another problem is director Chris
Columbus, writer of GREMLINS and GOONIES.  He paints this movies cute with a
wide brush: childhood innocence melts the hearts of hardened city toughs, help
is found in the most unlikely of places, and the kids learn about people and
about their own abilities.  The result has cloying sticky-sweet feel that will
disappoint anyone over the age of 14.
     ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING does have its moments; the appearance by blue
legend Albert Collins is almost worth the ticket price.  But there are so many
decent comedies out this summer, that unless you've seen everything else it
would be best to wait until ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING hits cable.
