Title
Review for Wild One, The (1954)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Generational conflicts were constant of the human history,
but Hollywood became aware of them only in 1950s. In that
time, new generations, that were enjoying unprecedented
post-war prosperity had hard time to adapt to the values
cherished by their parents who grew up during the hardships
of Depression and WW2. The first major film to deal with
such phenomenon is THE WILD ONE, 1953 drama by Laslo
Benedek, also known as the great grand-daddy of biker films.
Plot, which is based on real events in Hollister, California
in 1947, deals with "Black Rebels Motorcycle Club", gang of
leather-clad bikers that spend all their time roaming around
small towns in California searching for fun. But, sometimes,
instead of fun they find trouble and that would happen when
they come to small town of Wrightsville. At first, citizens
are only slightly annoyed by bikers who cruise up and down
the main street only to spend their time and money in the
local bar. Harry Bleeker (played by Robert Keith), town's
only policeman, doesn't intervene after first minor
incidents, since he hopes that the bikers would just go
away. But it doesn't happen because Johnny (played by Marlon
Brando), unofficial leader of the bikers, falls in love with
his daughter Kathie (played by Mary Murphy). In the
meantime, rival group of bikers, led by Chino (played by Lee
Marvin) comes to town and Bleeker finally decides to do
something, but it is too late to prevent the escalation of
violence.
Events presented in this film might have seemed shocking to
1950s audience or parents could think about bikers in THE
WILD ONE giving bad example to their children (which led to
this film being banned in some countries). But, the audience
of today would have to watch this film extremely carefully
to find any trace of nonconformist tendencies in its script.
This film is actually very conservative, taking the side of
the "squares" and using their fears to provide strong "law
and order" message. Lawlessness, even in its mildest forms,
will always escalate into violent anarchy, so social rules
must be obeyed, no matter how absurd, expensive or
unenforceable they might seem.
Conservative message of the film was muted thanks to the
fact that the bad guys actually looked quite appealing, at
least compared to their conformist adversaries. Marlon
Brando in his black leather jacket and cynical look became
the embodiment of Bad Boy, and the image he radiated in THE
WILD ONE became one of the most recognisable visual icons of
1950s youth rebellion, equal only to James Dean or Elvis
Presley. Brando contributed to the reputation of this film
not only with his looks, but also with great acting
abilities. His role of Johnny, young man doomed by his
machistic pride, is one of the rare things worth watching in
this, otherwise forgettable exploitation films. The other
thing is Lee Marvin in brief but unusual role of his rival
who provides additional fun for those who like to seek for
the hidden homosexual overtones in the relationships between
movie characters. Actually, this film, which is awfully
dated, provides a lot unintentional laughs. Without them,
THE WILD ONE, with its overcliched and sometimes ridiculous
characters and situations, plot holes, script flaws and
generally bad acting, could be less than pleasant viewing
experience.
