Title
Review for Indian in the Cupboard, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Omri gets some unusual gifts for his ninth birthday.  His (Asian)
Indian friend Patrick (Rishi Bhat) gave him a toy (American) Indian.
And his brother found a two-foot-high wooden cupboard and gave that to
Omri.  Neither is so great a gift by itself, but together they form a
lot more than the sum of the parts.  Omri locks the Indian in the
cupboard and when morning comes he finds that strange noises are coming
from the cupboard.  When he opens it, there in place of the toy Indian
is a real living Iroquois, just about three inches tall.  Little Bear
(played by Litefoot) is bewildered to find himself plucked from 1761
and the French and Indian Wars.  Even stranger, he is so small and ina
world he does not understand.  Now Omri finds he has responsibility to
do what is right for Little Bear, a miniature Indian who thinks Omri is
a god.  Omri quickly figures out that locking a toy in the cupboard an
odd number of times brings the toy to life; an even number of times and
the toy is just a toy.  The boy wants to keep the magic cupboard a
secret until he know better what to do with his new tiny friend.  But
he tells Patrick, and Patrick is quick to turn a toy cowboy into Boone
(David Keith) a real, but somewhat goofy, cowboy.  Now the two boys
find they must protect the cowboy and Indian from the real world and
from each other.
     This is an adaptation of the popular children's book by Lynne Reid
Banks but the screenplay by Melissa Mathison (THE BLACK STALLION, E.T.)
needs more of a spark to get going.  There is potential in this story
for some interesting relationships.  Omri is, after all, huge compared
to Little Bear, while Little Bear is a warrior and a mature adult,
albeit from another world.  Each could draw on the other's strengths.
But Omri never seems to profit much from the wisdom of Little Bear and
the child remains father to the man.  Little Bear is treated more an
interesting pet than an intelligent adult.  Instead the plot is tied up
with the over-acted Boone, wild and weird, who never becomes much more
than a caricature.  The personalities of the solid and intelligent
Little Bear and the silly Boone never mesh on the screen.
     Seeing this film on the same day I saw the 1957 film THE
INCREDIBLE SHRINKING MAN, I found it clear that visual effects have
come a long way since the 1950s.  Most of the scenes combining
characters of each scale are utterly believable.  There is some problem
with Little Bear being more in focus than his background, but I think
Jack Arnold would have loved to have the effects technology for his
film.  Yet Arnold was able to give far more interest value to his
characters than Frank Oz ever manages here.
     THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD wastes opportunities to use its clever
premise in any but the most superficial ways.  This is a film that
shows more technique than imagination.  I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Hal Scardino, Litefoot, Lindsay Crouse, Richard Jenkins, Rishi
Bhat, David Keith Director: Frank Oz Screenplay: Melissa Mathison based
on the book by Lynne Reid Banks
When a kid with not so perfect teeth locks a toy Indian in his magical
cupboard, WELLA we have a walking, talking, child bearing, lactating
Indian Squaw. No that's not right. How about a turban wearing, pipe
smoking, Indian snake charmer? Nope. What we have is a genuine
hunter-gathering, soul searching Iroquois Indian, who is a widower.
On his birthday, a nine year old boy (Scardino) receives two presents of
note. A toy cupboard (ten by five inches), and a plastic Iroquois Indian
(two by three centimetres). Any one who can't add, like myself, will
know that the Indian if divided by three, to the square root of two,
will fit nicely into the toy cupboard; and too my surprise, and
everybody elses, like a chemistry experiment where lead becomes gold,
the toy Indian when placed in the cupboard comes alive (flesh and blood,
but real small).
Wow, Ooooh, it's magical. For anybody who is wandering whether this also
works on toy T-Rexes, Darth Vader dolls, monopoly money etc. Yep, it
sure does, as long as it can fit inside that magical cupboard. We have
all played with toy soldiers, cars, and planes as children. Remember Ken
and Barbie, well I liked ripping Barbie's head off. So let's stick her
in the cupboard and we have for ourselves a walking headless
Barbie... now that's food for thought!
Besides being a relatively entertaining children's movie, where the
imagination gets a little carried away (I mean really where did the
cupboard come from, the 'Twilight Zone'?). This movie does deal with
important issues where the child grasps the concept of the
responsibility for human life. The child becomes the parent, for his
living, talking little Indian, and by the end of the movie realises that
he cannot toy with the life of another for his own selfish pleasure. So
if you want a pet, get a puppy, they don't talk back, and they sure
don't shoot arrows at you when unhappy.
So kids, jump into bed with mom and dad, and watch the 'Cowboys and
Indians' at play. Don't click your heels three times and wish you were
in Kansas, and don't say 'Open Sesame' or 'Abracadabra', or you may end
up with 'Dorothy and the Forty Thieves'. If it's Indians you want,
remember to turn the key to the cupboard clockwise, then anticlockwise;
but don't do it too often or you'll scare your little Iroquois Indian to
death.
Indian Feel Scale:
0% Pocahontas / *THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD* / Dances With Wolves 100%

Author
Thomas Wheeler
     As with CASPER, I went to THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD uncertain of
what to expect, and not really expecting a whole lot.  It looked
amusing, and certainly interesting from a special effects standpoint,
and it was based on a British children's story book, many of which are
wonderful adventures (I recommend the original version of 101
DALMATIANS to anyone).
     And, as with CASPER, the movie far, *far* exceeded my
expectations.  THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD is a truly wonderful,
marvelous, and magical adventure.  For those unfamiliar with the story,
a young boy named Omri receives, among other birthday presents, an
antique cupboard and a small plastic Indian.  Placing the Indian in the
cupboard (!) and locking it with a special key somehow (and they never
explain how, but this isn't "Star Trek," people--they don't *have* to
explain) brings the Indian to life.  Or more accurately, brings a
miniaturized Iroquois Indian named Little Bear to the cupboard. (I have
to say, it makes you wonder if there's a six-foot plastic Indian out
there in the past someplace after that).
     Omri soon learns a number of lessons, *none* of which are, thank
God, crammed down the audience's throat.  One is that such a wonder as
this cupboard must be treated carefully, as he learns when he crams
Darth Vader, a G.I. Joe, Robocop, a Jurassic Park dinosaur, and a Star
Trek Ferengi and Cardassian in the cupboard, and miniaturized chaos
ensues for a truly hysterical multiple cameo.
     Omri also learns that the little Indian must be treated with care
and respect.  It's a person, not a toy.  It's a lesson that Omri's
friend is a little slow to pick up on, as this youngster brings a
cowboy and horse to life.  But even he learns eventually.
     There are subtle lessons on friendship, respect, life and death,
all woven through the picture, but none pounded over your head.  You're
left with, as I said, a truly wonderful and magical adventure whose
special effects are just as carefully and subtly woven throughout the
movie.  If you've got kids, go see it.  If you don't have kids, go see
it anyway.  I don't, and I still enjoyed it.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Hal Scardino, Litefoot, Lindsay Crouse, Richard Jenkins, 
      Rishi Bhat, David Keith 
Director: Frank Oz 
Producers: Kathleen Kennedy, Frank Marshall, and Jane Startz 
Screenplay: Melissa Mathison based on the book by Lynne Reid Banks 
Cinematography: Russell Carpenter 
Music: Randy Edelman 
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     Without exception, THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD is the best family 
film to come along thus far in 1995, topping such notables as POCAHONTAS 
and THE LITTLE PRINCESS.  Based on the popular book by Lynne Reid Banks 
and scripted by ET writer Melissa Mathison, the movie teaches lessons 
without preaching, and focuses on the magic of relationships rather than 
that of special effects.  This leads to a production as affecting for 
adults as for children. 
     Omri, played with charm and enthusiasm by Hal Scardino, is an 
average nine-year old with a very unusual cupboard in his room.  
Whenever he places a figurine in it, turns the key in the lock, then 
opens the door, a living, breathing, four-inch high creature emerges.  
Omri's first transformation is the Onondaga warrior Little Bear 
(Litefoot), whose reaction upon seeing the "giant" boy is a mixture of 
awe and fear.  Gradually, however, Little Bear realizes that his 
caretaker is no god, and Omri learns that his newfound friend is a human 
being, not just a plaything. 
     As THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD progresses, other things get 
animated, including a cranky Texas cowboy (David Keith), a wartime 
British medic, Darth Vader, and Robocop.  The visual effects that mix 
four-foot actors with their miniature companions are effective, but not 
ostentatious, and the lack of flash keeps the focus on the characters 
and their story.  Suspension of disbelief in THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD 
is surprisingly easy. 
     This film is about friendships, responsibility, and ethics.  The 
bond between Omri and Little Bear illustrates that, regardless of size, 
shape, or race, any friendship is a rare and special thing.  Thirteen 
years ago, ET taught the same lesson to that summer's movie audiences.  
THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD also enforces the truth that everyone -- even 
a child -- must be responsible for his or her actions.  When Omri begins 
capriciously to give life to figurines, Little Bear reprimands him:  
"You should not use magic that you do not understand."  This prefaces a 
tragic epiphany for the young boy. 
     Frank Oz, a director who always seeks original and challenging 
projects (one of his past successes was LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS), brings 
an uplifting sense of fun to this film.  THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD 
moves along at a nearly-perfect pace:  slowly enough to capture the 
nuances of the characters' relationships, but quickly enough to avoid 
stagnation.  Hopefully, the double-edged classification of being a 
"family feature" will not destroy THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD's chances 
at the box office.  It deserves a better fate than that normally 
reserved for similar fare because, ultimately, this movie is not only 
about magic -- it is magical. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Remember the fantasies you had when you were a child?  Didn't you
always wonder what those toys in your room would say if they could come
alive?  Well, Hollywood seized on this theme long ago, but their vision
until now has usually been a nightmare with killer dolls and evil
abounding out of every drawer.  Great, make the kid scared to death of
his own room.  Turn his sanctuary into a house of horrors in his
subconscious.
     This time, in THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD, an imaginative director
(Frank Oz) has found a magical and delightful series of children's
storybooks by Lynne Reid Banks, and he delivers a tale full of joy as
well as some pathos.  Oz (what a great last name for a director of
children's stories) is a director with an usual background.  He has
directed Muppet movies (THE MUPPETS TAKE MANHATTAN) and some of my
favorite Steve Martin comedies (LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, DIRTY ROTTEN
SCOUNDRELS, and HOUSESITTER).  Moreover, as an actor, he was the voice
of Yoda in the last two Star Wars movies.
     Before I go too far, I do have some surprising news to report.
Regardless of what you might assume, there are no special effects in
THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD!  Trust me.  I have seen this movie, and the
little people in the movie are real.  You see the show and try to
convince me otherwise.  Nothing that realistic could be done with
special effects.  It is the real McCoy; I am certain.
     THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD tells the story of a nine year old boy
named Omri.  Omri is played by Hal Scardino who is a nerdy looking kid
with crooked teeth - not your usual glamorous child actor.  He gets an
old locked cupboard for his birthday.  His mother is played by Lindsay
Crouse who was so wonderful in HOUSE OF GAMES, but who does nothing
with her minor part in this movie.  She finds him a key given to her by
her grandmother.  The key opens the cupboard, and later Omri discovers
that whatever plastic item he puts in will turn to life.
     The body of the story revolves around two toys that the cupboard
transforms into flesh and blood.  One is an Iroquois Indian man, Little
Bear, acted by Litefoot who I am told makes his living doing rap songs.
Little Bear is brave, courageous, and wise.  He is the star of the
show, and Litefoot delivers a great performance.  Little Bear's nemesis
and sometimes sidekick is an alcoholic Texas cowboy, Boone - nicknamed
Boo Hoo Boone for his crying.  Boone (David Keith) is foul mouthed,
funny, smelly, dumb, and at first, very drunk.  The interaction between
the two of them is more interesting that even that of them and Omri or
of Omri and his buddy played by Rishi Bhat - another type of Indian.
     The easiest way to frame the story in your mind is that it is the
ET for this generation albeit the film is not of ET's caliber.  On the
other hand, it is easily the best family film thus far this year.  So
many movies treat kids as dumb or rebellious.  Here Omri actually likes
his parents and his school, and Omri is quite bright.  Watch how
cleverly he solves problems.  Too bad the movie didn't stop at certain
points and say, okay adults, if you are so smart, how would you get
Little Bear out of this fix?
     Unlike another similar movie, HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS, this is
not a comedy albeit we all laughed many times.  This is a serious show
about a magical moment in a child's life.  You get to live it
vicariously and savor some golden moments.  The feeling of the
innocence and challenges of your own childhood well up in you.
     The book and hence this movie takes some wonderful and unexpected
twists.  The only problem I had was with the script by Melissa
Mathison.  Why did she have to have a dozen hells and damns?  Without
them, the script would have worked just as well.  If your nine year old
told you he was feeling "damn good" wouldn't you attempt at least to
correct him or has society given up the fight against profanity?  I
know plenty of cuss words.  Would you have liked this review better if
I stuck some in every now and then for the sole purpose of spicing it
up?  What if this was a review to be read mainly by young kids?  Would
you feel like correcting me then?  Finally, why do we have to be so PC
these days where the cowboys must be lazy, stupid, and shiftless and
the Indians noble and brave.  Imagine the uproar if the character
traits had been reversed.
     THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD runs 1:30 which is just about right.
It is rated PG for some death and near death scenes and for the useless
profanity.  It would be fine for any child over say 4.  The violence is
handled very tactfully.  Jeffrey (age 6) and his friend (also 6) both
liked the show.  He awarded it a thumbs up, and she gave it a thumbs
sideways.  They watched the show intently and with much seriousness.
They seemed entranced by it and got scared only once briefly.  I
recommend the show to kids and to adults with or without the kids, and
I award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
