Title
Review for Elmer Gantry (1960)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Elmer Gantry" was a controversial film when it
was released.  So controversial, that no studio
would finance it.  Based on a Sinclair Lewis
novel, preachers are often depicted as cynical,
fundraising businessmen who consider themselves
to be in the entertainment industry.
Burt Lancaster is the title character, a small-time
salesman, con artist, and would-be preacher.  He
latches onto popular evangelist Jean Simmons, elbowing
into her traveling tent show.  While Simmons takes
the kindler and gentler route to saving souls,
Lancaster preaches fire and brimstone.  Lancaster
tries to change his sinful ways to win Simmons' heart,
but has a lapse upon meeting a woman from his past,
now a prostitute (Shirley Jones).
Considered a classic, "Elmer Gantry" has received
much critical acclaim.  Lancaster won his only
Best Actor Oscar for the film, which also won for
Screenplay and was nominated for Best Picture.
Despite her small role, Jones won Best Supporting
Actress.  Jones had been typecast as The Girl Next Door,
so her cynical hooker role must have shocked some.
"Elmer Gantry" has problems that prevent it
from being a very good film.  Lancaster's character
shifts like the wind.  Early, he appears to be
a grasping if charming con artist.  Upon befriending
Simmons, he drops his bad habits (drinking, smoking,
gambling) just like that.  He mixes heroic actions
with manipulative ones.  Does he love or lust for
Simmons, or is he simply using her as a platform for
a preaching career?  Jones' character is also
too flexible.  At first she is fun-loving but
cynical, but suddenly she seems to be in seriously
in love with Lancaster.
There are some spoilers in the following.
The last third of the film is increasingly
bewildering.  Arthur Kennedy, playing a newspaper
man with the utmost integrity who hangs around
the revivalists, betrays them with a devastating
column, but later gets into a fistfight *for* them.
Lancaster finally seduces the spiritual Simmons,
and neither has any regret, anger or guilt afterwards.
Lancaster's character is completely destroyed, then
completely redeemed, in a few days.  Jones
blackmails Lancaster, then won't take the money,
then tells the press that Lancaster was setup.
Why the sudden turn-around?  Is Lancaster that
hunky?  Lancaster, who is enraged at Jones, ends
up beating up a man who is attacking her.  His
suit is pelted with fruit, but is spotless in
the next scene.  A deaf man is healed by Simmons.
How?  Why?  Then she is killed in a fire, an artificial
contrivance to bring the story to a close.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Brooks
Writer: Richard Brooks (based on the novel by Sinclair Lewis)
Starring: Burt Lancaster, Jean Simmons, Arthur Kennedy, Shirley Jones,
Dean Jagger, Patti Page, Edward Andrews
It's truly queer when life imitates art, especially when the art has
pretty much predicted what happen.  Back in the 80s, televangelist Jimmy
Swaggart committed adultery, and suffered a giant public embarassment,
only to return to light with the public apology that he himself had
sinned greatly.  This, among other things, is what "Elmer Gantry"
attacks, as well as the public's lack of integrity or individualism, and
in a totally un-preachy and entertaining manner.
The Elmer Gantry of the title (played with intense brauvada by the late,
the great Burt Lancaster) is a boozer, a womanizer, a liar, a seducer,
an all-around sewer rat...and a preacher.  One night in a bar, drunk out
of his mind, he finds that he can seduce people into leaning towards a
noteworthy cause just by preaching like Al Sharpton.  He soon finds
himself attracted to the word of evangelism when he wanders into a big
church meeting set up to gain money for the evangelist Sister Sharon
Falconer (Jean Simmons), and eventually becomes one of their big
preachers, packing in the crowds, and helping the church business become
more of a business than a religion.
If this sounds familiar, you're not alone.  When I read the back of the
box, I was instantly thinking of the anti-classic Steve Martin flick,
"Leap of Faith," which became too sappy and preachy for its own good,
weighing down the satirical edge.  But "Elmer Gantry" is a smarter film
than that.  The film exposes a man who is trying to be a god to the
simple folk for what he is: a flaming hypocrite.  After all, the man is
really in the biz just to make a lot of money, not to help people.
After awhile, his fame has become so big, that his past come back to
haunt him.  An old girlfriend/prostitute of his, Lulu Bains (played by
Mrs. Partridge herself, Shirley Jones, although years before she was
Mrs. Partridge), shows up to blackmail him, exposing him as the
hypocrite that he really is.  But the twist this film pulls is that our
protagonist may or may not have actually changed for the better.
When we first meet Elmer, we know he must have had a religious
background due to a phonecall to his mother, who seems to badger him
about church.  When he starts speaking, we know that he doesn't really
believe what he's saying, and that he's just trying to make a buck out
of it.  But as the film goes on, and as he gets better aquainted with
Sharon, we see him become less of the rambunctious, hyperkinetic liar he
once was, and more of the selfless man he could be.  But, like everyone
else around him, we wonder if it's just an act.
But when he goes to see Lulu again, we know that he's in limbo between
good and evil, with the good winning.  When they expose him as a
hypocrite, he has changed for the better, and was actually innocent of
the crimes he was convicted of.  The film, instead, seems to satirize
the blackmailer over the victim.  Like the woman Jimmy Swaggart slept
with, or, in more recent news, Anita Hill or Paula Jones, she has chosen
to wait until the man is in power, and to get some cheap revenge on him.
But the overall point of this film is that no one is a god, not even
those who claim God talks to them.  Elmer, who eventually becomes a
believer in what he preaches, is still human, as he still lusts over
women, although not like he used to.  And since the bible says that we
should not just lest we be judged and to basically forgive people, we
should forgive the people who preach the word of the lord just like they
were actual people.  And the same should go for any kind of leaders, not
just those in the church business.
"Elmer Gantry" was a big hit at the Oscars, despite the controversy
(knowing what it was like back then, it's easy to see how this would be
controversial, although I can see it being controversial even today). 
It won three Oscars: for Burt Lancaster, Shirley Jones, and Richard
Brooks for his script.  The acting from everyone in the film is amazing,
especially from Jones, Simmons, and some great scene stealing from
Arthur Kennedy, who plays journalist Jim Lefferts - an agnostic who
covers Sharon and Elmer, taking a negative stance on what they do.
But Burt Lancaster walks away from the film, more than earning the Oscar
he won.  I've not seen many Lancaster films (the only other one to my
recollection was 1957's "Sweet Smell of Success), but as the last time I
saw him he played a very quiet, distanced character, it was unbelievable
to see him playing such a flamboyant role.  With his wild enthusiasm, a
giant grin plastered on his face, and coaxing words for any situation,
he seduces not only the characters in the film, but the audience into
loving him, despite the fact that he's not a very good person.  Because
of Lancaster's deft performance, we like Elmer, and can therefore feel
what we need to feel in the latter part of the film.
I've not heard much about "Elmer Gantry" as of late, but I can say that
it's truly an American Movie Classic, and proof that Hollywood can take
big gambles too.  With a strong message, excellent satire, and even some
heart, "Elmer Gantry" is an excellent film, and even a tad underrated.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
