Title
Review for Thousand Acres, A (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Harvey S. Karten
A THOUSAND ACRES
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Touchstone Pictures
 Director:  Jocelyn Moorhouse
 Writer:  Laura Jones/based on Jane Smiley's novel
 Cast: Jessica Lange, Michelle Pfeiffer, Jennifer Jason Leigh,
Jason Robards, Keith Carradine, Kevin Anderson, Colin Firth
   William Shakespeare's themes are universal, so it's no
marvel that they have been adapted to hundreds of diverse
settings.  Thus "Richard III" becomes "Dick Deterred" and
takes place during the administration of Richard Nixon. 
"Romeo and Juliet" is played out against the backdrop of
contemporary California gangs.  "Julius Caesar" is situated in
Mussolini's Italy.  "King Lear" now gets a production not in
prehistoric England but in modern Iowa, where emotions are
just as primitive.  Lear becomes Larry (Jason Robards),
Cordelia is Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh), Goneril becomes
Ginny (Jessica Lange) and Regan has changed her name to
Rose (Michelle Pfeiffer).  Unlike Shakespeare's version there
are no bastards this time around, but in the opinion of at least
one of the characters, you will find a couple of bitches.  Enter,
then, the world of Lear in the corn fields and not on the heath,
where the thunder and lightning are just as ominous,
Alzheimer's replaces heroic rage, and melodrama supplants
tragedy.  It's a weepy, soapy, takeoff.  People die with a
whimper and a Lothario assumes the role of the knights in
shining armor.
   When Tak Fujimoto's camera zooms in on land more fertile
than any Elizabethan king could have imagined, we are not
surprised to see its owner housing his family in three
mansions of the richest acres in the county.  Larry Cook, the
most respected manorial lord in the area, is determined to
beat Uncle Sam's tax collectors, so he carves up his land into
three parts for his daughters.  Caroline, the kid sister of the
group, is now a hotshot lawyer in Des Moines, and declines
her share for the time being--which is how we know she's The
Good One.  Dad, enraged, literally shuts her out of the house
and divvies the plots between the repressed Ginny and the
high-strung Rose--whose husbands Ty (Keith Carradine) and
Peter (Kevin Anderson) smack their lips avariciously.  
   After that Shakespeare takes a powder and "As the World
Turns" takes over.  Ginny, now enjoying an affair with Jess
(Colin Firth) is convinced by Rose that Dad used to seduce
both of them while they were in the teens.  And oh yes, Rose
has had a mastectomy: her husband regularly buttons her up
lest he be exposed to the scars, and you know the rest.
   Jennifer Jason Leigh shows herself capable of new range. 
No longer the cynical Mrs. Parker, she's all halos here but
Australian director Jocelyn Moorhouse--who contributed
mightily with her "How to Make an American Quilt"--does not
give her much to do despite the nice budget the producers
have given her.  Jason Robards' second thoughts about the
transfer of property are unmotivated. He accuses the
daughters of throwing him out, but in reality he has turned
himself out of the picture. The women are not as bad as
Goneril and Regan: they've simply decided to live with the
truth about the incest and are dismayed by their father's
paranoia.  The story's center, the relationship between Rose
and Caroline, is played out well but hampered by a so-so
script lacking in dramatic intensity and anticipated payoffs.      
   But "A Thousand Acres" is worth seeing as an antidote to
the standard summer action-adventure blockbusters. It deals
with real people in a genuine setting with strong female roles.
Rated R.  Running Time: 105 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A book with all the right ingredients does not a script make.  Nor
will the casting of great acting talent a movie make.  It takes more
than the right raw materials to fashion a compelling film narrative.
     Certainly, in the film A THOUSAND ACRES director Jocelyn Moorhouse
started off with many blessings.  For a retelling of the King Lear
story she has Jason Robards as the father, Larry Cook, and as his
daughters, Michelle Pfeiffer as Rose, Jessica Lange as Ginny, and
Jennifer Jason Leigh as Caroline.
     The unfocused script by Laura Jones is based on the best selling
novel of the same name by Jane Smiley.  It has treachery, sexual abuse,
sexual infidelity, dysfunctional families, repressed memories, sibling
rivalry, storms, hatred, jealousy, you name it.  What it lacks is more
than sketchy motivation for the characters' actions.
     In the story, the father wants to give away his rich farm to his
three daughters.  When Caroline raises a doubt about whether it is a
good idea, her father immediately casts her out of the family and gives
the farm to the other two women.  Once the father becomes unemployed,
he becomes increasingly drunk, bored, and sullen.
     The performances by Pfeiffer and Lange are excellent even if the
script dulls your interest in the characters they play.  They both bob
and weave as they talk like little girls who've never quite grown up.
Robards gives a sometimes chilling performance as the stern father with
a laser-like glare, whose alcoholism rapidly transforms into madness.
Only the usually reliable Jennifer Jason Leigh gives a disappointing
performance.  She makes a strategic error in her portrayal of lawyer
Caroline, the youngest of the brood.  She underplays the part when her
usual fieriness is called for.
     "We're not going to be sad," advises Rose to Ginny.  "We're going
to be angry till we die."  Therein lies the problem with the film's
presentation.  The characters mope around, whining about their woes,
but rarely work up anything approaching anger.  The story drifts along
on a dreamy cloud.  And when the two married women, Rose and Ginny, end
up having affairs with the same man, neither seems particularly shocked
or concerned.
     Even the show's most dramatic scene, in which the sisters discusstheir sexual abuse as children, is strangely ineffectual.  Perhaps
because of the story's plodding pace and large plot holes, this
potentially powerful scene leaves one dispassionate when it should have
been emotionally draining.
     The studio wasted money by hiring high quality actors, Keith
Carradine, Kevin Anderson, and Colin Firth, to play the parts of the
husbands and the lover.  Each character remains little more than an
outline so that, when the wives have affairs, the audience does not
become emotionally involved.
     The ending has one character making a totally unbelievable
decision and another giving us a tear-jerker.  Both left me unmoved.
     A THOUSAND ACRES runs 1:45.  It is rated R for nudity, profanity,
and mature themes.  It would be fine for mature teenagers.  Although
the acting by Pfeiffer and Lange is uniformly fine, the rest of the
movie isn't so I give it thumbs down and **.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 27, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
A THOUSAND ACRES
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Michelle Pfeiffer, Jessica Lange, Jason Robards, Jennifer Jason
Leigh, Colin Firth, Keith Carradine, Kevin Anderson.
Screenplay:  Laura Jones, based on the novel by Jane Smiley.
Producers:  Marc Abraham, Steve Golin, Lynn Arost, Kaaate Guinzburg and
Sigurjon Sighvatsson.
Director:  Jocelyn Moorhouse.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, brief nudity)
Running Time:  104 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     All right, let's get this out of the way:  A THOUSAND ACRES is "King
Lear" on the farm.  It's the story of an aging farmer named Larry Cook
(Jason Robards) who decides to retire and divide his massive Iowa spread
between his daughters Ginny (Jessica Lange), Rose (Michelle Pfeiffer) and
Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh).  Caroline expresses some doubts, however,
prompting an enraged Larry to cut her out of the deal.  That leaves Ginny
and Rose and their hubands running the farm, but it also leaves Larry on a
slow train towards madness.  One massive
external-storm-reflecting-internal-turmoil later, the entire family is
caught up in a complex web of bitterness and long-buried secrets.
     No one involved is pretending A THOUSAND ACRES _isn't_ a gloss on
"Lear."  The front cover flap of Jane Smiley's Pulitzer Prize-winning 1991
novel flatly proclaims it, and the film's production notes explain the
connection in detail.  But that didn't have to be all there was to the
film.  There was certainly plenty more to Smiley's novel, an engrossing
tale filled with lyrical prose and finely-observed details about the
daily routines of farm life.  That sense of a specific place, as well as
the specific time of malaise-era 1979, gave the novel a distinctive feel
which transcended the familiarity of the basic plot elements.
     Director Jocelyn Moorhouse's rendering of the story, on the other
hand, never quite stakes out its own territory.  Sure, it retains Smiley's
unique sympathy for the daughers -- her angle suggests Lear deserved
everything he got, and then some -- as well as the strong sibling
relationship.  Both Jessica Lange and Michelle Pfeiffer turn in strong
performances, particularly Lange as the placid, unquestioning Ginny.  Yet
even their relationship can't hold A THOUSAND ACRES together once Laura
Jones' script starts racing from melodramatic plot point to melodramatic
plot point, as though capturing every sordid detail would result in
capturing the essence of the material.  Without the poetry and perspective
of Smiley's language, the story becomes little more than a collection of
tragedies -- Shakespeare without the wisdom or the words.  It's like
something out of a pitch meeting from THE PLAYER:  "It's King Lear, but
it's funny, and sad, and with breast cancer, adultery, domestic violence,
alcoholism and child abuse."
     Actually, not exactly sad, and not at all funny.  A THOUSAND ACRES is
a terribly grim film experience, filled with bitter and unhappy people who
become more bitter and unhappy with each passing day.  Even when the film
turns to pathos, it never allows the audience an emotional catharsis
because no one seems eager to reach a resolution.  Meanwhile the only
laughs are of the gallows variety, mostly connected to realizations that
characters have suffered yet another humiliation, with a dash of mixed
Shakespearean metaphor (a reference to THE MERCHANT OF VENICE's "pound of
flesh") thrown in for good measure.
     Talented cinematographer Tak Fujimoto does his best to capture
Smiley's Iowa landscapes visually, but his is an effort doomed to failure.
Smiley was able to turn the land into a charater in her novel, perhaps its
most important character.  It's a character Shakespeare didn't come up
with, and it's one of the things which gave A THOUSAND ACRES its own
personality and resonance on the page.  How sharper than a serpent's tooth
it is to have such a disappointing adaption.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jessica Lange, Michelle Pfeiffer, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Jason
Robards, Colin Firth, Keith Carradine, Kevin Anderson
Director: Jocelyn Moorhouse
Producer: Steve Golin
Screenplay: Laura Jones, based on the novel by Jane Smiley
Although this may appear to be another girly, weepy chic flic', and it
is, at least it comes at a reasonably high standard. Jocelyn Moorehouse
(HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT) does not resort to cheap tricks for
tears and the plight of these believable characters, are earnestly
addressed on screen.
A THOUSAND ACRES is based on a novel of the same name, written by Jane
Smiley. She has also cleverly entwined elements of KING LEAR into her
novel. A respectable farmer, a pillar in his community, wishes to leave
his farm to his three daughters. Everything seems perfect on the
outside, but beneath this veneer of a happy family, lies a most horrible
secret.
This is the story of three sisters torn apart by the past, the present
and the future. The youngest daughter, Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh),
is also her father's favourite. When she disagrees with his will, she is
unceremoniously disinherited from the family. The two older sisters
Ginny (Jessica Lange) and Rose (Michelle Pfeiffer), agree to his will
and take over the running of the farm. It is here that perfection
becomes to crumble, and the true nature of the family is revealed. As
the father (Jason Robards), becomes rapidly paranoid and believes that
the oldest daughters have stolen the farm from him and are now
mistreating him. This evolves into an ugly family and legal battle,
between the youngest daughter and father and the two older siblings.
Issues like infertility, breast cancer, dementia, incest, death and
dying, loss of a mother, forgiveness, unforgiveness, hate, anger,
resentment, sibling rivalry, unfaithfulness, family discord, husbands
and lovers and lots more tear jerking material are addressed. Although
too numerous for a single movie to handle, the novel is available for a
more comprehensive perspective.
Jessica Lange and Michelle Pfeiffer are wonderful as the competitive,
and yet close sisters. Michelle is particularly good as an angry,
vindictive bitch who is out to destroy her father for what he did to her
in the past, whilst Jessica Lange shows more compassion and forgiveness.
It is these cornfields of A THOUSAND ACRES which binds them all
together, and which will eventually tear them apart.

Author
James Sanford
A THOUSAND ACRES(Touchstone/Buena Vista)Directed by Jocelyn Moorhouse
 The film adaptation of Jane Smiley's Pulitzer Prize-winning "A Thousand
Acres" works so hard to pack as much of the book into an hour and 45
minutes that it feels like the highlights tape pulled from several
months of a daytime soap-opera. Incest, lawsuits, broken marriages,
impulsive affairs, senility, cancer, suicide: They're all present and
accounted for. You'll barely have time to weep over one crisis before an
even worse one pops up.
 But at the heart of this sometimes strident movie are two magnificent
performances, which redeem everything that surrounds them. As the
relentlessly downbeat and vengeance-hungry Rose, Michelle Pfeiffer all
but breathes fire. Mad about everything---and mad at herself
besides---Rose rips away years of cover-ups to reveal her family's
darkest secrets, as well as her private hell. When Pfeiffer challenges
her husband (Kevin Anderson) after a ruined game of Monopoly, it's a
scene Bette Davis would have come back from the grave to play.
 Equally "wow"-worthy is Jessica Lange as the serene, industrious Ginny,
whose perpetual happy face finally cracks and disintegrates. Few
actresses give themselves over to a role as thoroughly as Lange does:
She leaps into the pit at the bottom of Ginny's soul, unafraid of where
she'll land. Playing off the equally determined Pfeiffer seems to
sharpen her instincts even more; plenty of sparks fly before the finale.
 Laura Jones's screenplay sometimes short-sells the novel's themes and
its' characters' motivations, but the priviledge of watching two of
America's finest leading ladies scaling new dramatic heights is reason
enough to put "Acres" on your must-see list.
James Sanford

Author
Alex Fung
A THOUSAND ACRES (Buena Vista - 1997)
Starring Michelle Pfeiffer, Jessica Lange, Jennifer Jason Leigh,
  Jason Robards
Screenplay by Laura Jones, based on the novel A THOUSAND ACRES by
  Jane Smiley
Produced by Marc Abraham, Lynn Arost, Steve Golin, Kate Guinzburg,
  Sigurjon Sighvatsson
Directed by Jocelyn Moorhouse
Running time: 105 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
As one might expect from a film featuring a cast including some of
America's greatest active actresses, Jocelyn Moorehouse's A THOUSAND
ACRES, based upon the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Jane Smiley,
benefits from customarily outstanding central performances.  Sadly,
the fine performances by Jessica Lange and Michelle Pfeiffer are in
service of a particularly overwrought screenplay by famed Aussie
screenwriter Laura Jones which fails to live up to the standards set
by their work.
As has been well publicized, A THOUSAND ACRES is a modern adaptation
of Shakespeare's tragedy, "King Lear", in which the benevolent
monarch is eventually driven to madness and death by the scheming and
conniving of his two evil daughters Goneril and Regan after his
proposal to divide his kingdom up three ways -- to Goneril, Regan,
and the youngest and favourite daughter, Cordelia.  However, the Ms.
Smiley's novel, and Ms. Moorehouse's film, stands "King Lear" on its
head while transporting it to the modern American Midwest -- here,
Ginny/Goneril (Ms. Lange) and Rose/Regan (Ms. Pfeiffer) are the
sympathetic protagonists, while Larry Cook/Lear (Jason Robards) is
antagonistically portrayed as the abusive farmer who proposes to
split his prized thousand-acre Iowa farm between daughters Ginny,
Rose, and Caroline/Cordelia (Jennifer Jason Leigh).
It's a fine idea and a solid premise to attempt to reinvent the plot
by embracing (and, where needed, embellishing upon) the perspective
of a different set of characters in the story, and A THOUSAND ACRES
is initially very faithful to this concept.  The problem is that it's
simply *too* faithful -- seemingly hampered by the unnecessary
inclination to touch upon every major plot point in "King Lear" from
its alternate perspective, the film's narrative flow suffers,
lurching back and forth and resulting in inconsistent
characterization and erratic behaviour in service of the plot.
The early scenes in A THOUSAND ACRES are particularly problematic, as
characters seem to change their behaviour depending upon which way
the wind is blowing.  Featuring an absurd amount of unnecessary and
extraneous voice-over by narrator Ginny, the first hour of the film
seems more like a sequence of vaguely interrelated scenes rather than
a cohesive introduction, and while they clearly aspire to be moving
-- Richard Hartley's stirring score, virtually omnipresent at the
outset, at times obscures the dialogue -- there's ultimately no real
payoff, and it's easy to become distanced by the sudsy storyline.
A THOUSAND ACRES takes an irrevocable turn about halfway through the
film, effectively demonizing Larry, and by association, his
supportive daughter Caroline, and canonizing Ginny and Rose.  It's at
this point where the film begins to collapse in on itself, as all
subtlety inferred in the familial relationships is lost, and where
stunning revelations fraught with heavy doses of melodrama become par
for the course.  The film quickly loses interest in Larry and
Caroline and focuses upon the sisterly relationship between Ginny and
Rose; it's telling how inconsequential Larry and Caroline become that
their eventual fates are left as a throwaway piece of narration.
And yet, due to the performances and the handsome cinematography by
Tak Fujimoto, it all almost works.  Ms. Lange and Ms. Pfeiffer turn
in superb performances as the film's leading characters; Ms. Lange
portrays great depth and thoughtfulness in her moving turn as Ginny,
whose pleasant nature masks her struggle with long-buried repression,
while Ms. Pfeiffer is equally mesmerizing as the blunt, forthright
Rose.  She demonstrates an emotional volatility and edginess rarely
seen in any of her other film performances (ironically, reminiscent
however to Ms. Lange's previous work), and Ms. Pfeiffer's icy,
unblinking stares convey a torrent of spiteful emotion.  Ms. Lange
and Ms. Pfeiffer have great screen chemistry, and these performances
are indeed so strong that they serve to emphasize the weaknesses in
the film; one is so impressed with their individual performances that
they are left wondering how much more effective they would be had
they been in service of involving characters in a film less cumbered
by artifice and not nearly as intent on tugging heartstrings.
The remainder of the cast is quite capable. Ms. Leigh and Mr.
Robards, both underused in A THOUSAND ACRES, share an easy affable
chemistry onscreen -- no surprise: where do you think she got the
name 'Jason' for her stage name, after all?  The remainder of the
more-prominent male characters have little depth.  Keith Carradine is
fine as Ginny's dignified husband Ty (correlating to "King Lear"'s
Duke Of Albany), while Kevin Anderson is again fairly wooden and
quite uninteresting as Rose's destructive husband Peter.  Colin Firth
is uncompelling as Jess Clark, but he's not given much material with
which to work -- his superfluous character adds nothing to the film
(Ginny could have easily been stirred out of her stupor in another,
more effective manner than through the use of his character) -- and
frankly seems extraneous to the story, save for the ill-conceived
need to remain near-religously faithful to the original source
material.
Ms. Moorehouse reportedly was extremely displeased that her final cut
of A THOUSAND ACRES was discarded in place of the one currently seen
on the finished product, and threatened to go the Alan Smithee route
by removing her name from the project.  As can be seen by the
direction credit, she was eventually appeased, but I, for one, would
be curious to see how her cut of the film plays.  If it's any easier
to become involved with these characters and their dilemmas, it'll be
an improvement, but the problem ultimately lies with Ms. Jones'
unfocused, vastly-overwritten screenplay; consequently, any
improvements would be minor, incremental ones.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Man, that was a big spider.  It was so big I thought I saw a small dog
 caught in its web.  We are talking big.  That spider could've kicked
 Charlotte's ass." - Hope Davis, THE MYTH OF FINGERPRINTS

Author
Michael Dequina

A Thousand Acres (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        The most telling moment of A Thousand Acres is neither an image nor
a scene but a credit: "Based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Jane
Smiley"--not merely based on Smiley's novel, but her
_Pulitzer_Prize-winning_ novel.  This unusually blatant mention of its
award-winning pedigree not only highlights the self-important pretensions of
Jocelyn Moorhouse's overheated melodrama, but also how far from
award-caliber the film is.
        Early in the film lifelong Iowa farmer Larry Cook (Jason Robards)
decides to quit the business and split is 1000-acre lot between his three
daughters: loyal, optimistic eldest daughter Ginny (Jessica Lange); sassy,
bitter middle daughter Rose (Michelle Pfeiffer); and the youngest, big city
lawyer Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh).  This monumental decision causes
major upheaval to what appeared to be a perfect family, bringing
long-simmering tensions to the surface.
        What ensues is a tale of betrayal, abuse, adultery, cancer,
repressed memories--a blueprint for a potentially provocative and
Oscar-worthy tale.  But for all the hot-button issues screenwriter Laura
Jones packs into A Thousand Acres, the film itself does not pack the
emotional punch it so obviously strives for.  With so many serious issues
crammed in (including a fleeting reference to the dangers of contaminated
well water), Moorhouse's direction is often too overtly manipulative to
elicit a genuine emotional response.  The viewer is especially aware of the
button-pushing during the overtly "dramatic" confrontation scenes, in
particular one between Ginny, Rose, and Larry during a storm.  Melodramatic
music by Richard Hartley peals on the soundtrack as everyone yells at each
other and, for good measure, thunder roars in the background.  Everything is
so overblown as to feel processed and synthetic, and as such, the viewer
cannot feel anything authentic.
        A Thousand Acres does manage to generate some poignancy, though,
during the intimate scenes between the dazzling Pfeiffer and Lange, who
elevate the film to a higher level than it deserves.  Less is definitely
more here; the two have a natural sibling rapport (we feel both their anger
and love for one another), and Moorhouse wisely steps aside and lets that
speak for itself during these quieter moments.  Tears are shed, invective is
exchanged, and hearts are broken, but the material isn't overplayed--the
pitches are firm but not shrill, the tears slowly flowing instead of spewing
uncontrollably.  The two are magic together, and only in these scenes does
any hint of real emotion shine through.  One wishes that the film was solely
focused on their relationship than the business involving their father's land.
        But, unfortunately, the film _is_ titled A Thousand Acres, and the
other actors struggle with that less inspired side of the story.  Pity the
talented Leigh; while she also plays a Cook sister, she has scant screen
time, and in that time one never gets a satisfactory read on her character.
She starts off as sort of a black sheep and then becomes her father's big
supporter somewhere along the way; I could not figure out what motivated
her.  Robards appears to be a perfect fit for the Cook patriarch, but I was
never convinced that he could be seen as anything other than the crabby,
morally questionable man he eventually reveals himself to be.  He never
establishes any trace of gentleness or heart that would lead everyone to
believe that he is an upstanding member of the community; from the get-go
there seems to be something sinister lurking underneath.
        Propelled by a number of effective Pfeiffer-Lange scenes, the film
builds up some steam as it approaches its sentimental conclusion, but it
isn't quite enough.  By that time, any promise the film initially has proven
to be just that, promise, and instead of being profoundly moving, in the end
A Thousand Acres is little more than slightly affecting.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jessica Lange, Michelle Pfeiffer, Jennifer Jason Leigh, 
      Jason Robards, Colin Firth, Keith Carradine, Kevin Anderson
Director: Jocelyn Moorhouse
Producer: Steve Golin
Screenplay: Laura Jones, based on the novel by Jane Smiley
Cinematography: Tak Fujimoto
Music: Richard Hartley
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     When viewing a melodrama like A THOUSAND ACRES, it's easy to label 
it as a "chick flick" or a "tearjerker."  However, such a facile 
categorization would do the movie a disservice, since it possesses a 
layer of depth that most films of this sort lack.  Director Jocelyn 
Moorhouse, working from Laura Jones' adaptation of Jane Smiley's novel, 
gives A THOUSAND ACRES the emotional pitch of FRIED GREEN TOMATOES (even 
though the stories are vastly dissimilar).  Although the plot is 
undeniably overwrought at times, the characters remain strong and 
reliable, and it's their believability that pulls us through.
     The story is presented from the point-of-view of fortysomething 
Ginny Cook Smith (Jessica Lange), who burdens the film with a voiceover 
narrative that is occasionally useful, but more often tedious.  She's 
the oldest of the three daughters of farmer Larry Cook (Jason Robards), 
the "most respected man in the county."  Along with her husband, Ty 
(Keith Carradine), she still lives on her father's 1000 acre farm.  Her 
sister May (Michelle Pfeiffer) resides there as well, along with her 
husband, Peter (Kevin Anderson), and their two teenage daughters.  Ginny 
and May's baby sister, Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh), has left the 
farm to become a lawyer in nearby Des Moines.  Despite the distance 
between her and the Cook farm, Caroline is closer to her father than 
either Ginny or May.
     Things begin happening when the son of a neighbor, Jess Clark 
(Colin Firth), returns home after a thirteen-year absence.  On the day 
of Jess' welcome back party, Larry announces his intention to turn over 
control of his farm to his three daughters.  When Caroline wonders aloud 
whether this is a good thing, Larry cuts her out of his plans.  The 
entire 1000 acres is then divided between Ginny & Ty and May & Peter.  
But, even though he initiated the change, losing control of the farm 
doesn't sit well with Larry, and he becomes angry and abusive about his 
lot in life.  And, as his rage escalates, deeply-buried secrets begin to 
ooze into the open.  As in David Lynch's vision of America, A THOUSAND 
ACRES shows that green fields and crisply-painted houses can hide a 
festering horror.
     A THOUSAND ACRES has a choppy feel, almost certainly the result of 
the book-to-screen transition, and the pre-epilogue ending happens with 
surprising suddenness.  Subplots get short changed and characters 
seemingly disappear without warning.  Arguably, the complexity of the 
storyline may be too ambitious for 100-plus minute running time.  
Nevertheless, Moorhouse (HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT) does a fine job 
with the material she is given to work with.  In lesser hands, this 
could have turned into little more than another big-screen soap opera.  
However, by generating an effective rapport between the audience and the 
main characters, Moorhouse gives us some meat to chew on.  She also 
manages to develop a number of multi-dimensional characters by showing 
the good and bad in everyone.  Some will doubtless complain that the 
film engages in routine man-bashing, but anyone who looks carefully will 
see that the women are nearly as flawed as their male counterparts.
     Three of the four leads give powerful performances.  Jessica Lange, 
who won an Oscar for one of the least-impressive films on her resume 
(BLUE SKY), is very good here as the self-deluded Ginny.  As our 
narrator, she provides the anchor in a turbulent dramatic sea.  Michelle 
Pfeiffer shows an edge that we're unaccustomed to.  This isn't a 
lightweight glamour role, and she is up to the challenge of pulling it 
off.  Jason Robards manages to bring out both sides of Larry -- the 
evil, lecherous creep and the fumbling, lost old man.  Only Jennifer 
Jason Leigh is less-than-impressive, and that's more a function of the 
lack of exposure and development accorded to her character than a knock 
on her performance.  The supporting cast includes Keith Carradine as the 
ineffectual Ty, Kevin Anderson as the self-destructive Peter, and Colin 
Firth as the charismatic Jess, who entertains ideas of seducing all 
three Cook daughters.
     A THOUSAND ACRES covers a lot of ground, and raises numerous 
questions about the demons that some families keep buried.  The land 
means many things in this film:  a source of pride, a means of economic 
survival, a financial windfall, and, most importantly, a tool for 
revenge.  This is the kind of movie that you experience more with your 
emotions than with your intellect.  It's not a dumb film, but its 
undisputed strength lies in the way it tears at the heart.  Moorhouse's 
manipulation is skillful, and that makes it easier to forgive the 
occasional missteps.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Kristian Lin
I haven't read Jane Smiley's novel "A Thousand Acres," but the movie has
pretty much scared me off.  The story attempts to turn a variation on
"King Lear," where powerful Iowa farmer Larry Cook (Jason Robards)
decides to divide his estate among his three daughters Ginny (Jessica
Lange), Rose (Michelle Pfeiffer), and Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh). 
The youngest dissents and is exiled from the family, and then family
tensions drive the remaining members apart.  The twist is that Larry
sexually molested Ginny and Rose as girls, and he, not his eldest
daughters, is the movie's monster.
I guess the best thing about this movie is the rapport between Lange and
Pfeiffer.  Ginny is virtue under siege, while Rose (who, unlike Ginny,
remembers her father's sexual abuse) is full of poorly repressed rage. 
The actresses have played these characters before and better ("Rob Roy"
and "Batman Returns," for instance), but they seem happy to be working
together.  The chemistry between them and their obvious dedication to
this project give the film its low level of interest.
Other than that, Robards overplays the patriarch going insane.  If
you're a fan of Jennifer Jason Leigh (like me), you'll be really
frustrated at the way her character is given no arc.  The dialogue is
flat, the men in Ginny and Rose's lives are ciphers, and Rose's
daughters are hardly there at all.  Jocelyn Moorhouse's filmmaking is
static; long conversations have the feel of a tepid evening at the
theater.  Cliches abound; lightning streaks at dramatic moments, a
deathbed scene, a courtroom scene.  Hollywood has turned out great
"women's pictures" (a categorization I disapprove of), but Moorhouse is
the worst director in this genre.  When they're done like this,
touchy-feely dramas are no improvement on Hollywood's usual
testosterone-laced fare.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
I found it amazing - no, astonishing - that A Thousand Acres is amongst
fellow pulitzer-prize winning novels-turned-films as The Diary of Anne
Frank, Driving Miss Daisy, The Age of Innocence and To Kill a Mocking
Bird.  Somewhere along the line - and I suspect it's the conversion to
the big screen - Jane Smiley's tale of two sisters' traumatic family has
been drained of emotion, passion and heart.
Larry Cook (Jason Robards) owns 1,000 acres of fertile land in Iowa,
USA.  The farm, irrigated by his grandfather and father - and passed
down through the generations - has given him respect in the community
and a pessimistic attitude towards life and relationships.  Troubles
starts to brew when Larry, realizing that his days on Earth are
numbered, decides to divide his land between his three daughters - Ginny
(Jessica Lange), Rose (Michelle Pfeiffer) and Caroline (Jennifer Jason
Leigh).  Ginny and Rose are eager to inherit part of their family
heritage whilst Caroline remains uncertain as to the success of this
venture.
But when a closet of dark family secrets is opened, and memories of
tormented childhood's and chilling experiences are revealed, the three
daughters and their menacing father will take a turn for the worse.
For most of its hollow duration, A Thousand Acres ultimately angered me
for this simple reason: it is very easy for an average action flick to
be insulted for its obvious flaws, yet these sorts of family "tear
jerkers" often slip past criticism because they look so much classier
than they actually are.  Have a couple of high profile actors, a slimy
romantic plot/subplot and a tear shed here and there and what do you
have?  A potentially great film?  Perhaps.  A definite "good" film?  No
way.
There were many things that irritated me about A Thousand Acres.  To
start with, the relationship between Rose and Caroline - the films
central focus - never once convinced me.  As the unfortunate viewers, we
are expected to believe that these two women have a deep understanding
and love for each other - yet at one stage, one of them completely cuts
off all contact from the other - not speaking or writing for years.  But
of course, a couple of scenes later, they are together again with no
mention of what the hell happened to them previously.
A slab of utterly trashy scenes occur upon the introduction of "Jess
Clark (Colin Firth)", a character that this very 2D film attempts to
bring into another dimension of love, lust and greed.  Unfortunately,
any scenes that could have allowed us to have a greater understanding of
the characters needs have been completely avoided - it almost seems that
director Jocelyn Moorhouse has gone out of her way to create a set of
dull predicaments.  And it's those sorts of ludicrous thoughts which
plagued my mind from start to finish - making myself search for a reason
that would explain exactly how a pulitzer-prize winning novel could end
up so ordinary as a motion picture.
What saves A Thousand Acres from total failure is its adequate
performances from Pheipher and Lange (adequate, simply because the
dialogue would not allow an in depth understand of the characters) and a
music score that belongs on Easy Listening 3MP.
A thousand triumphs?  No - a thousand tears of boredom.


Author
Brandon Stahl

I've never read Jane Smiley's "A Thousand Acres," nor have I read
Shakespeare's "King Lear," which is what the new movie "A Thousand Acres" is
supposed to be based off of.  After reading the press kit and browsing the
internet for awhile, I knew what the main plot for both of them were supposed
to be: A wealthy, respected man divides his kingdom among his daughters
and they squabble over the land. In the middle of that, there is incest,
division among the family (especially the sisters), and a whole lot of
dying.  
A story like that sounds like it should be entertaining, but the film
version of "A Thousand Acres" is pretty far from entertainment.  It's a lot
like sitting around your house on a Saturday afternoon with nothing to do. 
You turn on the TV and watch without caring if it's good or bad - it's
just on.  That's what "A Thousand Acres" is - it's just on.  It's not at all
good, but then, it's not that bad. You just sit, drifting off into space
asking, "Well, what else am I going to do?"
I liked a few things about the movie: Jessica Lange turns in a good
performance (as always), and the cinematography is beautiful (I wish they would
have shown more of it).  But all of the characters are written and
portrayed as one-dimensional, stereotyped people.  The director, Jocelyn
Moorhouse, doesn't give the audience any sense of who we should like. The movie
is confused, and there is no sense of consistency in the story or with the
characters.         
For example, at the beginning of the movie, I got a real sense that the
daughters truly loved their father, ten minutes later, they profess no
loyalty to him, proclaiming him as the biggest jerk that has ever walked the
land. Why? We're not given a reason. 
Then there's Michelle Pfeiffer, who was out of place in this movie.  She
plays an emotionless character in a role that demands emotion.  Jason
Robards, who has won two academy awards in the past, is reduced to grunting
out a stereotyped performance.  "I'm an old man! And things just aren't as
good as they used to be!"  
Of course, all the men in the film have to be villains.  There's a scene
in a Thousand Acres where Jessica Lange starts an affair with Jess (played
by Colin Firth). During the scene, the director wants us to be happy that
Lange is having this affair; as they kiss, sweet, romantic music starts
up and the photography gives us a sense of joy and passion.  But, there was
no reason for our sympathies to be with her.  Her husband (played by
Keith Carradine) didn't seem to be a bad guy - certainly not bad enough so
that she had to go out and have an affair on him.  
What's most disappointing about the movie is that you're left with
nothing afterwards.  A friend remarked, "For a movie that's supposed to make you
feel something, bring out emotions in you and make you feel sad, it just
didn't."  I think that sums it up - it's not that it was an awful movie,
it's just that it didn't make you feel anything.  Watching something like
that is always a let down. 
If you're in the mood to watch a good movie about the trials and
successes of Midwestern farmers, I highly recommend "Troublesome Creek: A
Midwestern", which is out on video right now. 
"A Thousand Acres"  (* and a half out of four).  Directed by Jocelyn
Moorhouse.  Starring Jessica Lange, Michelle Pfieffer, Jennifer Jason Lee, and
Jason Robards.  

Author
Jamie Peck
Touchstone / 1:44 / 1997 / R (language, incest, brief nudity)
Cast: Michelle Pfeiffer; Jessica Lange; Jennifer Jason Leigh; Jason 
Robards; Colin Firth; Keith Carradine; Kevin Anderson; Pat Hingle; John 
Carroll Lynch 
Director: Jocelyn Moorhouse 
Screenplay: Laura Jones 
Sibling rivalry. Terminal illness. Extramarital affairs. Mental 
sickness. Parental conflicts. Child abuse. What sounds like a full week 
of Oprah Winfrey episodes is actually the material that "A Thousand 
Acres" covers in less than two hours. And the similarities to talk shows 
don't end there -- like that particular one, "Acres" is stark, 
manipulative, quite watchable and easy to digest. It's nothing
great, but at least rich performances make it worth its weight in acting 
gold. 
The film opens with a gathering of the Cook clan: Patriarch Larry (Jason 
Robards) and his three daughters -- Ginny (Jessica Lange), Rose 
(Michelle Pfeiffer) and Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh) -- and their 
respective families. On a rather impulsive whim, Larry decides to divide 
his 1,000 acre Iowa farm -- his pride and joy -- between his offspring. 
While Ginny and Rose are agree, Caroline reacts with some trepidation. 
Larry responds by shutting her out of his life altogether. 
His seemingly too-strong overacting gives way to a plethora of events 
straight out of so many TV movies-of-the-week. Long-buried secrets 
emerge and are confronted, leading to the questioning of his very mental 
health. Loyalties flip-flop, and before too long, the sisters are not 
only doubting their father but each other as well. In the middle of all 
this is an impromptu wedding for Caroline and marital woes for both 
Ginny and Rose, brought about by the resurfacing of an old friend played 
by "The English Patient"'s Colin Firth. 
It didn't surprise me to learn that "A Thousand Acres" takes its source 
from a previously-published work, but I would have guessed its roots 
were of the stage variety rather than a Pulitzer Prize-winning novel. In 
execution, it feels just like a play -- you're watching these people do 
things from a distance. The characters themselves are interesting, but 
it's hard to be involved in the unfolding events because you've seen 
them one too many a time already. Some subplots feel underdeveloped and 
some main characters end up forgotten in "Acres"' last third, and that's 
what keeps it from achieving a higher emotional reaction. 
Still, "A Thousand Acres"' selling point seems to be a plethora of 
robust acting from its four main stars, and that's what carries it 
across the finish line. Pfeiffer plays Rose as a hard-nosed truth-sayer, 
which contrasts Lange's naive restraint. Their scenes together -- and 
there are many -- fondly recall the stellar work Meryl Streep and Diane 
Keaton did in the somewhat similarly-themed "Marvin's Room," and A 
Thousand Acres effectively becomes a showcase for their intense,
beautiful vitality. Both Robards and Leigh offer fine support, but their 
roles seem to become less significant (especially Leigh's) as "Acres" 
nears its conclusion. 
Shot attractively and with a potent undercurrent of tension, "A Thousand 
Acres" extends plenty of reasons (namely Lange and Pfeiffer) to not let 
it slip through the fall movie offerings cracks even as it isn't a 
standout of the season. "A Thousand Acres" would probably like to pluck 
a thousand heartstrings, and although it fails in that specific area 
because of an overall familiarity and an eventual lack of strong 
material, it ultimately passes the test. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
