Title
Review for Hurricane Streets (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 United Artists 
 Director: Morgan J. Freeman
 Writer: Morgan J. Freeman
 Cast:  Brendan Sexton III, Shawn Elliot, Jose Zuniga, David
Roland Frank, Carlo Alban, Antoine McLean, Mtume Gant,
Lynn Cohen, Edie Falco, Heather Matarazzo, Damian
Corrente, David Moscow, L.M. Kit Caron, Isidra Vega
   "Hurricane Streets" is much closer in genre to Truffaut's
"400 Blows" than it is to the Hughes Brothers' "Dead
Presidents."  Written and directed by Morgan J. Freeman--
who has moved Truffaut's Parisian ambiance to New York's
Lower East Side--the picture deals with a group of high-school
kids who are dabbling in petty crime, presumably hurt by the
absence of parental authority.  They're at the crossroads that
can take them more deeply into a life of misconduct or can
see them straighten out: In fact we can predict that the fellows
who make the big move to armed robbery are the ones who
are being manipulated by older, more hardened criminals who
appear to be mentoring them into the big stuff.
   This picture, which played at the 1997 Sundance Festival,
claims to be the first dramatic entry every to win a triple prize:
the Audience Award, the prize for inaugural Dramatic
Directing, and the honor for Cinematography.  For a while you
wonder why.  But director Freeman carefully adds texture to
his tale of youthful anomie and, with a sound track that builds
up and underscores the wonderful disco beat of "Being Alive,"
"Hurricane Streets" has enough suspense and complexity to
appeal to its targeted youthful audience and to cross over to
an adult constituency as well.
   Opening with a black-and-white scene which foreshadows a
climactic point in the drama, "Hurricane Streets" focuses on
the 15-year-old Marcus (Brendan Sexton, Jr.), a kid whose
budding career as a petty thief belies his open-faced
vulnerability and general naivete.  The de facto leader of a
racially- and ethnically-mixed group of young people who
hang out in an underground club house, Marcus has troubles
which can be traced to an absentee mother who is serving a
prison sentence for killing his abusive father.  Living with his
grandmother, who owns a neighborhood bar, Marcus awaits
an air ticket from his uncle in New Mexico, a sunny state
which the young man treats as a Shangri-La where he has
space to breathe and where he can get away from the mean
streets of his New York ghetto.  The romantic interest is
almost laughingly innocent when you consider the pregnancy
rate of young women living in poor neighborhood: when
Marcus meets fourteen-year-old Melena (Isidra Vega), he
begins to hang out with her and while they meet daily, they
content themselves with a couple of chaste kisses.
   Moreover with one exception the guys who chill out in the
clubhouse to play darts, one-up each other with remarkably
guileless braggadocio, and plan an incremental increase in
their blooming careers in crime, are flat-out cute.  Marcus,
Benny, Harold and the others are more like the Bowery Boys
than Anthony Curtis and his band from "Dead Presidents."
They seem even unfamiliar with popular slang: when one of
the boys suggests stealing a car, he estimates that they could
fence it for "1,000 big ones."  (Since when is a buck a big
one?)
   The coy courtship of Marcus and Melena is tender and
believable, courtesy of sharp acting from Sexton--who gained
national recognition from his role in the remarkable "Welcome
to the Dollhouse"--and a film debut from 18-year-old Isidra
Vega.  Cinematographer Enrique Chediak shines particularly
in his lensing of Marcus riding his bike feverishly through the
streets of New York and, all in all, "Hurricane Streets" profiles
for us a group of teens who are not cookie-cutter gang
members.  Rather, they are individuals with a fair degree of
guilt feelings for the lives they are leading and who can be
helped to follow the straight and narrow if they can only be
sequestered from the more hardened adults who are tutoring
them.  Rated R.  Running time: 88 minutes.  (C) Harvey
Karten 1998

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Morgan J. Freeman.
Cast: Brendan Sexton III, Isidra Vega, Shawn Elliott, David Roland 
Frank, L.M. "Kit" Carson, Edie Falco, Jose Zuniga, Lynn Cohen, Heather 
Matarazzo.
1998 - 89 minutes.
Rated R (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed November 29, 1998.
"Hurricane Streets," which won an unprecedented three 1997 Sundance Film 
Festival awards, for Best Director, Best Cinematography, and the 
Audience Award, is one of the most accurate films about teenagers I've 
seen in a while.
Marcus (Brendan Sexton III), who lives in the East Village in NYC with 
his grandmother, is about to turn fifteen, and spends his day stealing 
petty things from stores with his friends. His mother is in prison, and 
he hopes that for his birthday, his father will send him a plane ticket 
so he can visit him in New Mexico. While selling some CD's that he has 
stolen to a bunch of young kids, he meets a 14-year-old girl, Melena 
(Isidra Vega), and they quickly become friends, much to the disapproval 
of her abusive father. To his surprise, Marcus finally does get the 
ticket to go to New Mexico, but his hopes begin to diminish when he 
discovers some secrets that his mother has been hiding from him. 
Although the story is occasionally a little bleak, at its center is the 
sweet, gentle love story between Marcus and Melena, played marvelously 
by Brendan Sexton III (1996's brilliant, "Welcome to the Dollhouse) and 
newcomer Isidra Vega. To prove that the screenplay is so well-written 
and unpredictable, director Morgan J. Freeman (not to be confused with 
the actor) does not include exploitation and sex to their relationship, 
which is what a typical film would have done, but relies more on the 
realism of being 15 and in love. 
One of the pleasures of, "Hurricane Streets," is watching all of the 
characters interact with each other, which is basically what the film is 
about. There is no particular storyline, because it would have put a 
damper on the effectiveness of the relationships. Watching it, I was 
surprised by how completely uncliched the film was. Since Marcus is a 
teenage thief, the banal thing to do would to simply make him act tough 
and uncaring. Instead, Marcus is a kid with a pretty good head on his 
shoulders. He does not do drugs, is not promiscuous, but does have the 
insecurities that teens his age have, and has a very good relationship 
with his grandmother, who owns a bar.
"Hurricane Streets," did not, or rarely, step wrong until the very 
ending, which abruptly ends while in midstream, as if the final ten 
minutes had never been shot. A great many twists and revelations comes 
during the climax, but they are not solved, and I cared so much for the 
two main characters of Marcus and Melena that I desperately wanted to 
see what would happen next. Maybe this is just a sign of an exceptional 
film, since I got so involved in it, but the conclusion could have been 
better.
What came before the end, however, was masterfully written and memorably 
performed. An added bonus was briefly seeing Heather Matarazzo (also of, 
"Welcome to the Dollhouse), one of the best young actresses working 
today, as Vega's friend, Ashley. "Hurricane Streets," is a gritty, 
highly impressive directing debut by Morgan J. Freeman, and I greatly 
look forward to seeing his next film called, "Desert Blue," which is due 
out in 1999, and stars Sexton III, Christina Ricci, Casey Affleck, Sara 
Gilbert, among others. To get so many talents in only your second 
picture is a sign of a talented director.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HURRICANE STREETS tells the story of an amoral group of young New
York City teenagers, who live lives of varying degrees of criminality.
Some draw the line at shoplifting, some at grand theft, others at guns,
and others at much worse crimes.
     Written and directed by the accomplished actor Morgan Freeman, the
film won numerous awards at last year's Sundance Film Festival.  With
the tone and pacing of a slow, coming-of-age story set in the Midwest,
the movie, set instead in an inner city, apparently wants the audience
to be sympathetic to the kids.  The multiracial cast looks like a
carefully chosen cross section of society.  And although the kids live
in relatively poor environments, they act more like middle-class teens.
     Riding little bikes like the ones from ET, the kids go from the
crime scenes to their club house where they keep their loot, to the
elementary school grounds where whey take orders, including sizes, for
yet-to-be purloined goods.  Except that they idle away their days with
various misdemeanors, the kids act like older versions of Spanky and
Our Gang.
     Marcus, played with despair by Brendan Sexton III, is the leader
of the gang.  Marcus is constantly challenged by fellow member Chip
(David Roland Frank), who thinks he is invulnerable -- "I'll never get
caught, man."  Chip prides himself on being the local rebel.  He gets a
tattoo of the finger on his arm, dies his hair a strange color, and
gets a nose ring.  He also has friends who want to push the gang way
beyond their petty larceny.
     Marcus meets a sweet girl of 14 named Melena, played sweetly by
Isidra Vega, whom he invites to his fifteenth birthday party.  Her
abusive father -- you can guess that he will be bad because he wears a
prominent gold cross -- keeps Melena on a tight leash and will not let
her go to the party or anywhere at night.
     The script tries to pull at your heart strings at every turn.  We
find that Marcus loves his mother, but she's in prison.  The exact
nature of her crime is another reason for his melancholy.
     The kids view stealing goods from shoes to candy bars with the
same casualness that others might look upon collecting seashells.  The
story provides ample hints that its really not their fault.  They've
been brought up to act this way and don't know any better.  What, for
example, does one of the adults give Marcus for his birthday?  A can of
spray paint so he can deface the local buildings.
     When the cops arrest Marcus for taking orders for stolen goods
from ten-year-olds, he doesn't understand why the police are bothering
him.  "I might have sold a thing or two -- it's not like killing people
or selling drugs," he argues with the officers.
     After meandering for over an hour in a landscape of hopelessness,
out of the blue the show takes an unrealistic but dramatic twist.  The
abrupt ending is equally surprising.  People left the theater at my
screening kind of numb and disinterested.  One hopes that in the future
Freeman will stick to acting, where his talent has few equals.
     HURRICANE STREETS runs just 1:28.  It is rated R for violence and
profanity and would be fine for older teenagers.
