Title
Review for Pagemaster, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Macaulay Culkin, Christopher Lloyd, Ed Begley Jr., 
          Mel Harris 
Featuring the voices of Patrick Stewart, Whoopi Goldberg, 
          Frank Welker, Leonard Nimoy, and George Hearn 
Directors: Maurice Hunt (animation) and Joe Johnston (live action) 
Producers: David Kirschner and Paul Getz 
Screenplay: David Casci, David Kirschner, and Ernie Contreras 
Music: James Horner 
Released by Twentieth Century Fox 
     At a time when children are reading less, opting instead for such
fast, furious, and empty entertainment as video games and MTV, it falls
to a movie, THE PAGEMASTER, to make the case for books.  This clever,
often engaging, and always fast-paced motion picture uses the visual
medium to encourage its viewers to reach out with their imagination.
They may not be as visibly transformed as Macaulay Culkin's Richard
Tyler, but through the magic of page-turning, they can enter different
worlds--or at least that's the message this release is trying to
convey.
     Richard Tyler is a child with so many phobias that they've run out
of names for them all.  His father (Ed Begley Jr.) despairs that his
son will ever shed his cloak of fear, especially when Richard's
response to an invitation to climb into a tree house is that he can't
because "seven percent of all accidents involve ladders."  So, instead
of joining Dad up in the branches, Richard is sent off to the store on
a quest for a box of nails.  Instead, he finds something he never
dreamed possible.
     Along the way, a sudden thunderstorm necessitates Richard to seek
shelter in the nearest building--a mysterious library run by the
prescient Mr. Dewey, aka The Pagemaster (Christopher Lloyd).  During
his stay amidst the thousands of books, Richard is transformed into a
cartoon character and forced to make his way through several lands of
fiction, guided by a trio of genres-come-to-life:  adventure (voice of
Patrick Stewart, lustily belting out his lines like a refugee from
Pirates of the Caribbean), fantasy (Whoopi Goldberg, all
sugar-and-starch), and horror (Frank Welker, doing his best "Igor"
imitation).
     Titles as diverse as ATLAS SHRUGGED, DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE,
TREASURE ISLAND, MOBY DICK, GULLIVER'S TRAVELS, ALICE IN WONDERLAND,
and JACK AND THE BEANSTALK are either alluded to or represented.  If
the sight of Culkin's animated image making his way through these
adventures isn't enough to pique the reading curiosity of the average
youngster, it's hard to imagine what will.
     Technically, the movie isn't an unqualified triumph.  While the
live action special effects are impressive, the animation appears
somewhat rushed.  It's certainly not the worst to have graced the big
screen in the past few years (that distinction probably goes to
FERNGULLY), but certain sequences, most notably those involving The
Pagemaster--who resembles Gandalf from the animated THE HOBBIT--look
unfinished.  On the other hand, the fire-breathing dragon is suitably
imposing and menacing.
     With its curious mix of TIME BANDITS-like enchantment and plain
sense of fun, THE PAGEMASTER represents the least-annoying and most
enjoyable contribution Culkin has made to the industry since HOME
ALONE.  This won't be the monster hit that movie was, but children
venturing into THE PAGEMASTER should be no less beguiled. Grownups who
often feel insulted by the too-juvenile tone of most so-called "family
features" will likely find this movie long enough to catch their
attention, but short enough not to lose it--in essence, a surprisingly
affable (and occasionally even sophisticated) movie-going experience.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
THE PAGEMASTER is the oddest film aimed at children I've ever seen.  It
makes a number of gigantic errors in judgment -- not the least of which is
that it has the unsubtle subtext of reading as being a chore to be risen to.
It's a depressing and blatantly manipulative movie at its heart, although it
obviously wants to be anything but.
The movie opens interestingly enough.  Macaulay Culkin is featured as a kid
who is paralyzed by fear of -- well, everything, from the look of it.  He's
memorized reams of accident statistics and keeps emergency provisions of all
kinds in his room (which gives rise to one of the movie's few genuine
laughs). One day he blunders into a mysterious library, and after some
mishaps, manages to get himself projected into various animated versions of
several classic books.
This is where the first of the errors in judgment come in: instead of trying
to woo the audience with the subtexts or emotional content of those books
("Moby Dick" and "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" among them), they get turned into
cheap arcade-game attacks on the senses.  The movie is not interested in
reading, or the stories, per se -- or even in the kid's plight, really.
It's just an excuse to throw us into one animated headrush after another --
and, presumably, to unload PAGEMASTER toys of one variety or another.
Even the animation doesn't hold up.  Shows like "South Park" and "Beavis and
Butthead" (and their attendant spinoffs) don't have Disney-level animation,
but they use smart writing and clever direction to more than make up for it.
They are no more than they need to be.  THE PAGEMASTER badly wants to be an
eyeful of the Disney variety, but looks dim and unclear, done in haste.
How do movies like this get made?  The whole thing probably sounded like
such a nice IDEA that nobody paid much attention to the way it was being
embodied.  Didn't anyone stop and wonder, what an unrepentant piece of
cynicism this is, trying to sell kids on books and reading through the same
strategies as mindless action movies and electronic games?  I have nothing
against video games -- just that books and video games are apples and
oranges, and this movie should have known better than to blatantly confuse
the two.
I also resented the way the kid's emotional problems are used for a cheap
payoff.  At the end of the movie, he's basically learned to suck in his gut
and take it all like a man.  Allegedly, the movie is propaganda in favor of
kids picking up books, but after something like THE PAGEMASTER, they're more
likely to feel insulted than inspired.  The best way to get kids interested
in books is to read to them, and let them pick up the habit naturally,
instead of subjecting them to cynical concoctions like this.
