Title
Review for One Eight Seven (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
David Nusair
In "187", Samuel L. Jackson stars as a teacher in the inner city.  As
the movie opens, he's been attacked by one of his former students and 
left for dead.  Cut to several months later, he's recuperated and ready
to start teaching again.  He's transfered to an even more dangerous
high school, but this does not faze Jackson.  No, it does not faze him
because he is going to Change the System.  He's an idealist.  And the
fact that all his pupils wield weapons of some kind doesn't bother him.
He believes that there is some good in everyone, even if they stab you
11 times in the back with a knife.
Pardon my facetious tone, but the first half of "187" is so cliched, so 
over-wrought that one can't help but be a little cynical about it.
It takes virtually every element generally found in films of this 
calibre ("Dangerous Minds" and "Stand and Deliver" being the most 
prominent examples).
Fortunately, after that rather unoriginal beginning, the film takes an
unexpected turn that quite frankly I hadn't predicted.  Not to give too
much away, Jackson eventually tires of all the abuse and begins to 
fight back.  In other films of this type, the hero-teacher ends up
"saving" the bad kids and everyone's happy.  Not so in "187".  Ol'
Sammy completely loses his cool after a certain point and starts
kicking some serious ass.
I appreciated that aspect of "187".  Just when I thought I had the
whole story figured out, the screenwriter throws a rather large
spanner in the works.  Predictability is a big problems with most movies
these days, so it was nice to have a movie that kept me guessing as to
what would happen next and also as to how the film would end.  Another
nice touch is the directing by Kevin Reynolds.  He's shot the film in
mostly brown colours, which only adds to the feeling of desperation
Jackson's character is experiencing.  I also liked how, in one moment
of rage, the camera following Jackson began shaking.  I'd never seen
anything like that, and in this age of Michael Bay-type of nonsensical
camera pyrotechnics, it was nice to see a director use his camera as
an instrument to further display the emotions of his characters, rather
than as a tool to "excite" the audience.
"187", much like the "Death Wish" series, got a little carried away
as it progressed, but nevertheless, it's an entertaining look at how
deeply violence can affect a regular person.
-- 
David Nusair                                http://chat.carleton.ca/~dnusair"As I have pointed out before, Andre Rousimoff's portrayal of a giant in
"The Princess Bride", Richard Dawson's portrayal of an obnoxious game show
host in "The Running Man", and Courtney Love's portrayal of a junkie hooker
in "The People vs Larry Flynt"."
        -R. Wiley on the all-time biggest Oscar snubs

Author
Ben Hoffman
          "187" (pronounced One Eight Seven) we are told is the
California State Penal Code for murder; the term is now used by
gangs all over our lovely country.   Watching the film and seeing
the decline and fall of the U.S. as illustrated by "our" youth is
enough to make one want to throw a net over these young people.
They are lost.  They cannot be rehabilitated.  With all the money
spent on defending our country from perceived enemies, spending to
keep anti-communist dictators in power, and no money for jobs and
housing so that everyone in the country has both, has resulted in
our winning each battle and losing the war.  A pyrrhic victory for
our CIA, our military, our Congress and our Presidents.
          So much for editorializing.  That is not how I write
reviews but this film provoked me into doing just that.  It is
enough for anyone who loves his country, to cry.
          In Brooklyn (where I went to school and where almost all
the teachers even in high school had doctorates) Trevor Garfield
(Samuel L Jackson) is a science teacher, earnest and dedicated.
The class (a euphemism) consists of tattooed, rings in the ears
and nose, "students."   Their sole object is to ridicule, belittle
and denigrate their teachers.   In that atmosphere Garfield tries
to shed a little light.
          Threatened by one of his students (who writes "187" all
over the teacher's books), Garfield brings it to the attention of
a self-serving, keep-my-job and do not raise a fuss, Principal.
The threat has come from a student to whom Garfield had refused a
passing grade.   The Principal pooh poohs Garfield's apprehension.
Shortly thereafter, Garfield is stabbed with what appears to be an
ice pick and he lands, near death in a hospital.  After many
months, he recovers enough to leave Brooklyn and go to the perceived
safety of Southern California.  Hah!
          Garfield quickly learns that it is equally bad in
California.  The schoolhouse is a bungalow.  The students are the
same illiterates he left and they are just as threatening and dangerous.
          At the school he becomes acquainted with a couple of
teachers, Dave Childress (John Heard) and Ellen Henry (Kelly
Rowan).   Dave has been teaching for many years and has given up
on ever being able to impart any knowledge to his students.  He is
"burned out," and is just going through the motions so he can
collect his paycheck.  In between, he smokes and drinks enough to
get crocked. There was a time when he thought he could make a
difference but that was long ago.
          Ellen Henry is fighting a losing battle.   Both she and
Dave look upon Garfield as part hero (having found out about the
stabbing in Brooklyn) and at the same time as someone they cannot
quite fathom.
          When a student becomes too threatening, he is found
dead.   Another student who was always menacingly pointing his
finger in Garfield's face finds himself with a broken finger.
Suspicion falls on Garfield.  Has he taken matters into his own
hands now that he sees there is no other way?
          Up until this point, the film is horrifyingly believable. In about the last 20 minutes, the movie turned sickeningly ludicrous.   I could not believe the denouement I was witnessing.  What were screenwriter (and former substitute
teacher) Scott Yagemann and the Director thinking of?  How could they have Rita (Karina Arroyave) who all picture long wears a ring  in her nose, suddenly appear ringless to do the valedictory speech?   How could everything suddenly turn hopeful?  How could they show the graduating class in cap and gown marching to their seats like normal students when all picture long we saw nothing but misfits?  Give me a break.
Others in the cast include Clifton Gonzalez Gonzalez, Jonah Rooney
and Lobo Sebastian.
Some statistics we are given:  One in nine teachers has been
attacked at school with 90% of the incidents coming from students.
160,000 students stay home from school EVERY DAY because of fear.
Nearly 3 million thefts and violent crimes occur in or near school
each year.
One in five suburban high school boys owns a gun,  40% of them
were threatened and/or shot at while going to school.
Nearly 20% of all students of high school age have carried guns.
Knives or razors  (55%), clubs (24%) and guns (20%).
Nearly 135,000 guns are brought into school each day.
20% of schools report student-on-teacher assaults.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Since his star-making turn in 1994's "Pulp Fiction," Samuel L. Jackson has
been slowly leveraging himself into the forefront of the American
moviegoers' consciousness.  Therefore it's something of a surprise that his
latest vehicle, "187" ("One Eight Seven"), a sincere yet cookie-cutter look
at how hard it really is to be a teacher, has crept into the
back-end-of-summer releases with very little fanfare.
Jackson's performance is typically commendable, but there's nothing new to
be learned from this seen-it-all-before movie experience.
When Trevor Garfield (Jackson), a high-school science teacher in the
Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of New York, flunks one of his students,
the kid takes it personally, perforating Garfield in the back with a nail
the way one would tenderize a nice flank steak.  Fifteen months later, a
recovered Garfield transfers to L.A., but quickly learns that academic
achievement is not a high priority for the underprivileged youths of John
Quincy Adams High, where he signs on as a substitute.
Stubbornness and a passion for teaching compel Garfield to stand his
ground, winning the affection of Computer Science instructor Ellen Henry
(Kelly Rowan) and the ire of many a disenfranchised student, including one
particularly confrontational punk, Cesar (convincingly played by Clifton
Gonzalez Gonzalez).  In an environment where staying alive takes precedence
over educational excellence, Garfield soon finds himself a man on the verge
of breaking point.  Again.
The number 187 (police code for homicide), by the way, shows up at the
beginning and end of the film, first scrawled threateningly throughout one
of Garfield's textbooks ("When a student says they're going to kill you,
you believe them") and lastly scratched in his car's paintjob, when events
lead to a contrived and over-the-top finale that is every bit as
uncomfortable as it is stupid.
Director Kevin Reynolds, whom many thought wouldn't work in this town again
after the much-maligned "Waterworld," displays some creativity in his
burned-out depiction of an East L.A. scorched by apathy and hate.  It's
like a brick-red, jump-cutting Pepsi ad, with students literally coming
into focus as the lightbulbs spark in their tiny minds.  But where the film
fails is in its writing.
"One in nine teachers," the statisticians choose to inform us at the onset
of the film's end credits, "are attacked in their schools.  Ninety-five per
cent of those attacks are by students."  But perhaps the most jarring
statistic is this: "A teacher wrote this film."
Screenwriter Scott Yagemann, although having spent seven years teaching in
the Los Angeles public school system, presents a viewpoint so devoid of
originality that it makes you wonder how this film ever got financed.  An
insider should have shown us something we haven't seen before, not a pale
imitation of such standout films as "The Blackboard Jungle" or "Stand and
Deliver."  True, the casting of Jackson in the lead might draw a crowd (as
at one of Philadelphia's few remaining Center City movie houses, where
audience participation is on a par with "Let's Make a Deal").  But while
Jackson gets a B+ for his solid, dominating performance, "187" should have
been held back.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, John Heard, Kelly Rowan, 
      Clifton Gonzalez Gonzalez, Karina Arroyave, Jonah Rooney, 
      Lobo Sebastian
Director: Kevin Reynolds
Producers: Bruce Davey, Stephen McEveety
Screenplay: Scott Yagemann
Cinematography: Ericson Core
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     187 (ONE EIGHT SEVEN), the new film from WATERWORLD director Kevin 
Reynolds, lies somewhere in the murky gray that separates the 
exploitation revenge flick from the serious urban drama.  Simply put, 
this film is too good to be lumped together with DEATH WISH, EYE FOR AN 
EYE, and THE SUBSTITUTE in the latter genre, but not good enough to 
share the shelf with BOYZ 'N THE HOOD and MENACE II SOCIETY.  187 offers 
some thought-provoking ideas and several effective performances, but the 
script ultimately lets down both the actors and the audience members who 
are watching them.
     Public education today isn't what it used to be.  Many urban 
schools have metal detectors, and the threat of violence, either by 
student on student or by student on teacher, hangs in the air.  
Newspaper headlines shout out stories of children gunned down in 
bathrooms or stabbed in halls or classrooms.  Discipline has become a 
joke; students and teachers alike are more concerned with surviving the 
school day than following a cirriculum.  So it's not much of a stretch 
to accept that the environment presented in 187 is closer to reality 
than to some nightmarish fantasy. 
     "187" is the police code for a homicide.  It's also the terse 
message science that teacher Trevor Garfield (Samuel L. Jackson) finds 
scrawled in a textbook meant for his eyes only.  When Garfield goes to 
the principal of New York's Roosevelt Whitney High School to report what 
he believes to be a threat on his life, he is calmly informed that he's 
overreacting.  Moments later, Garfield has been stabbed ten times in the 
back by an irate pupil.
     Fifteen months later, Garfield is returning to teaching, but this 
time as a substitute, and no longer in New York City, but in Los 
Angeles.  John Quincy Adams High, however, bears a striking resemblance 
to Whitney.  Gangs and violence are pervasive, and a greater percentage 
of the students are at school to kill time rather than to learn.  
Garfield is tentative about returning to work, but he's an idealist who 
loves his vocation, so he accepts a four-day assignment for an absent 
science teacher.  Almost immediately, his disciplinarian stance makes 
him a target for the verbal abuse of some of the class' most tough 
trash-talkers.  He also learns that one of his fellow teachers, Dave 
Childress (John Heard), keeps a gun in his desk, and another, Ellen 
Henry (Kelly Rowan), has received death threats.
     For better than an hour, 187 treads the delicate line between the 
gratuitous violence of THE SUBSTITUTE and the schmaltz of DANGEROUS 
MINDS.  In fact, for more than the first half, this movie takes a frank, 
hard look at the difficulties facing teachers in urban environments 
today -- how helping a student can be misconstrued, how law suit-fearing 
administrators are rendered impotent, and how peer pressure can drive 
otherwise-studious teenagers out of the classroom and into gangs.  
Garfield is an idealist, and he's fighting a losing battle, but, because 
he believes in the cause of education, it's a war that he's willing to 
participate in.  And, for different reasons, he's an inspiration to both 
Dave and Ellen.
     Then, as seemingly must happen in films of this sort, Garfield goes 
too far, and someone wants to kill him.  The last forty-five minutes of 
187 play like a condensed, low-key version of FALLING DOWN.  And the 
conclusion, aside from being unremittingly bleak, is horribly written.  
The characters' motivations in the climactic scene make no sense 
whatsoever, and the viewer feels profoundly cheated by events.  
     A saving grace of 187 is the performance of Samuel L. Jackson, one 
of today's few "can't miss" actors.  No matter how uneven the script, 
Jackson always manages to shine, and, since he's on screen for almost 
every frame of this film, his forceful screen presence compensates for 
numerous weaknesses.  He's supported by a fine cast, including Heard and 
Rowan as fellow teachers, Clifton Gonzalez Gonzalez as his chief student 
nemesis, and Karina Arroyave as a young woman whom Garfield takes under 
his wing.
     Nevertheless, while Jackson's performance is enough to keep us 
engrossed for most of the running time, even he can't do much with the 
unfortunate resolution.  It's here that 187 comes apart at the seams -- 
the conclusion will disappoint those who love revenge fantasies and 
those in search for something more thoughtful.  Indeed, with a different 
ending, 187 might have been a truly powerful motion picture.  As it is, 
it has its compelling moments, but, overall, it's flawed and 
dissatisfying.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Don't make the mistake of assuming that "187" is gritty, urban
classroom drama in the mold of DANGEROUS MINDS.  Yes, it does deal with an
inner city teacher (Trevor Garfield, played by Samuel L. Jackson), and it
does deal with his attempts to get through to certain of his students.
But this story isn't about the amazing power of dedicated teachers to
effect change in the face of socio-economic hardships and an oppressive
tie-in soundtrack.  No, "187" is about a man's descent into madness.
"187" is a horror movie.
     At least that's what it _should_ have been.  You see, it turns out
that while teaching at a Brooklyn high school, science teacher Garfield
found himself on the wrong end of a disgruntled student's ten-penny nail.
Fifteen months later, he attempts to get back on the horse by going to
work as a substitute at a run-down Los Angeles school.  Unfortunately,
Garfield discovers that things aren't much different from coast to coast
-- every teacher fears the threat of student violence (187 is a police and
gang code for homicide), and every administrator fears the threat of a
lawsuit.  And in his own mysterious way, Garfield sets out to guarantee
that the inmates will not run this particular asylum.
     Samuel L. Jackson seems pefectly clear about the critical theme of
"187."  For most of the time he is on the screen, Jackson generates a
tension which threatens to explode at any moment.  His performance is raw
and haunting, like a priest experiencing a crisis of faith.  You keep
watching "187" because Garfield's response to his crisis is chilling and
provocative:  he sees his best option as becoming the devil. 
     Credit Jackson with an insight screenwriter Scott Yagemann and 
director Kevin Reynolds both lack.  Yagemann's script -- full to bursting
with good teachers (Kelly Rowan) and bad teachers (John Heard), good
students (Karina Arroyave) and bad students -- fairly yanks the outrage
out of us with pliers, dwelling on the unconscionable conditions and trite
confrontations.   Reynolds, meanwhile, perhaps in an attempt to create an
atmosphere of surreality, opens up the film school grab-bag -- dizzying
360 degree tracking shots, blurred focus, black-and-white video footage,
jittery hand-held camera work, slow motion, rust-tinged cinematography.
It is a dreadfully misguided choice.  Every flashy gimmick proves
distancing and distracting, pulling us away from the painful reality of
Garfield's life.
     It's clear that the makers of "187" want to leave viewers angry and
frustrated.  And they succeed, though not in the way they intended.  We
don't need another film to drag us into the classroom to show us how bad
things are.  We don't need another film to lecture to us, or to try to
impress us with cinematic puffery.  "187" is frustrating because it had
the chance to be unique, to pull us into the psyche of a man operating on
sheer survival instinct.  Only in a riveting climax do we ever get a
chance to see Garfield in his darkest moments, as Reynolds and Yagemann
create a pointless did-he-or-didn't-he mystery.  This could have been the
urban high school film which has been begging to be made for years, one
which avoids inanely and simplistically describing that world as "gritty"
or "tough."  The appropriate word is "terrifying."  The appropriate mood
is horror.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Where are good old-fashioned expulsions when you need them?  And
why do we have judges who sentence juveniles, who are ready to maim and
kill their teachers, to stay in school as a condition of their parole?
Most of all, can teachers really be so dedicated that they would risk
their lives every day to teach a group of kids whose raison d'etre
seems to be the humiliation and torture of their teachers?
     These are just a few of the provocative questions the movie 187
shouts at us.  Directed by Kevin Reynolds with few subtleties, the film
asks all the right questions, but with its BILLY JACK approach it rings
false even when making some sense.  (The press kit is careful to point
out that Reynolds's last film, WATERWORLD, was "an international
box-office sensation."  Sure.  And that other expensive bomb, the
Edsel, became a hit with collectors.)
     The show has two distinct parts that could have been labeled
"scorn" and "revenge."  The star of both is the wonderful Samuel L.
Jackson from PULP FICTION.  He plays a New York City teacher, Trevor
Garfield, who was stabbed in the back so many times by a student that
Trevor became a kind of national hero.  The show is set 15 months later
when Trevor starts teaching again as a substitute in a crime-infested
area of L.A.
     The original script starred a white teacher, but Jackson wanted
the part so he could change the focus from race to kids' dealing with
an authority figure.  Jackson's performance in the film manages to rise
above the absurdities of the story.  His transformation from idealistic
to timid to vengeful has an honesty to it that the rest of the picture
never musters.
     "Let's go people!" barks the high school guard to the entering
students.  "Today's a good day to learn."  With metal detectors and
students who cuss out their teachers wit impunity, the schools in the
film should all be named after Franz Kafka.  Learning to survive is the
only lesson these kids will be required to master.  The film's title,
187, is the number of the penal code for murder, which is the teachers'
constant fear in the story.  Theirs is a job from which they may never
return home.
     "You're no real teacher, fool," student Benny Chacon ridicules
Trevor.  "You're just a sub."  And this is the mildest insult he hurls
at him in class.  Most are full of unprintable expletives, but none get
Benny in any trouble.  Benny, overacted by Lobo Sebastian, has been
paroled by the judge to the school, so he figures he can get away with
anything.
     Among the staff at Trevor's new high school is a gun nut named
Dave Childress.  Childress, played by John Heard as a pure cliche, has
a 357 magnum in his desk at school.  He brags about having had sex with
one of his students, played by Karina Arroyave as the oversexed,
ex-gang member Rita, who secretly wants to be a writer.  Childress's
purpose in the story is to provide someone for Trevor to put down as a
bad teacher.
     In the saint category is the angelic blond computer science
teacher named Ellen Henry, played with constant fright by Kelly Rowan.
Ellen has a dog whom she loves dearly, and if you can't figure out what
will happen to it as soon as you see it, then you just flunked Movie
Going 101.
     Stevie Middleton, the token white in the all ethnic student body,
is played by Jonah Rooney.  Stevie's rich parents had sent him to the
rundown school for unexplained reasons.  Maybe it's because he likes
being in the local gang.
     The principal who, as the teachers point out several times, has
never taught thinks of the students as "his clients."  When a student
comes to his office, he brings in the teacher and tape records it all,
reminding them about a student who recently won a half million dollars
in a lawsuit.
     After an implausible first half, the film loses all credibility in
the second.  "At some point we have to take responsibility for our
actions," explains Trevor.  "The system will not protect us."  No, we
need a teacher vigilante instead.
     Filmed by Ericson Core in harsh lighting and sepia toned colors,
the movie seems to have the words "important message" emblazoned on
every scene.  Scott Yagemann's script, while considering admittedly
important material, pushes believability to the limits, even if the
credits remind us that the film "was written by a teacher."  This
picture has a message and it wants to beat us over the head with it.
     The film ends by lecturing us that 1 in 9 teachers are attacked in
our schools and that 95 percent of the attacks are by students.  Rather
than enlightening, the film leaves the viewers cynical and disgusted.
187 is a disturbing film that will stay with you long after you leave
the theater.
     187 runs too long at 2:01.  It is rated R for profanity, brief
nudity, drug usage, and realistic violence.  The film is appropriate
for teenagers only if they are older and mature since the message is
too strong and too easily misconstrued.  The show considers important
issues, but its presentation is too stridently unrealistic to recommend
it.  I give it ** for Jackson's performance and for good questions.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Dequina
187 (R) *** (out of ****)
        Fifteen months after being stabbed by a student in a New York high
school, teacher Trevor Garfield (Samuel L. Jackson) returns to the
profession at a Southern California inner-city school a changed man--his
passion is not the same as it used to be; his guard is always up.  And he
soon finds out that while he and the setting have changed, everything is the
same as it was in New York--the gangs, the crime, the senseless violence.
And Trevor will no longer be anyone's victim.
        187 at times threatens to become another inspirational "teacher who
makes a difference" film a la Dangerous Minds, but scripter Scott Yagemann
(himself a teacher) has a darker agenda.  If anything, 187 is about the
impossibility of making a difference, at least a wholesale one.  Another
smart move is to not paint Trevor in the most sympathetic of lights; while
he is noble of intention, he at times is certainly not noble in action,
making for a refreshingly human educator instead of the saintly
Michelle-Pfeiffer-as-Louanne-Johnson types.
        The film does, however, have a problem at its core, and that is
director Kevin Reynolds.  Directing an urban drama is a stretch for the
one-time Waterworld helmer, and it shows.  Apparently bored by the
down-to-earth material, he and cinematographer Ericson Core amuse themselves
by juicing up the visuals, but the fancy camera  work only serves to
undermine the grit and reality of the story.  Is it really necessary, for
example, to have the camera ceaselessly circle two characters having a quiet
dinner at home?  Or, in a scene where Trevor and fellow teacher Ellen Henry
(Kelly Rowan) have a discussion in his classroom, to see the oversized
silhouettes of basketball-playing students projected onto the walls behind
them?  The visual flourishes are not only unnecessary, but pointless--who
wants a gritty drama to look pretty?
        What makes the film work, perhaps better than it has any right to
be, is Jackson, who brings a quiet dignity and slow-simmering anger to
Trevor that is fascinating.  But this is not to say that he isn't
vulnerable, and its his emotional rapport with the audience that makes the
character of Trevor sympathetic to the audience, even when his actions cross
the line.  The other actors, such as Rowan, John Heard (as a burnt-out
teacher), and Clifton Gonzalez Gonzalez (as a delinquent student) are able
to hold their own, with the exception of the badly miscast Karina Arroyave
in the pivotal role of Rita, Trevor's star pupil.  It is her character's
duty to deliver the film's key closing speech, and Arroyave can't shed a
tear to save her life.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
