Title
Review for I.Q. (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     If you enjoyed seeing a Tyrannosaurus Rex turned into a big purple
plush toy named Barney, you have what it takes to appreciate seeing
another giant of bygone science, Albert Einstein, turned into a big,
lovable, avuncular pushover in I.Q.  In fact, you will see not just
Einstein, but Godel and Podolsky as lovable old gentlemen who play
Cupid for Einstein's mathematician niece Catherine Boyd (played by Meg
Ryan) and an auto mechanic Ed Walters (Tim Robbins).  Ed is the last
side in a love triangle.  Boyd is already planning to marry James
Morland (Stephen Fry, who currently plays Jeeves on PBS).  Morland isa
psychologist who performs sadistic experiments on animal and human
subjects and his lab is rarely without the sound of some moaning
subject of his experimentation.  I think the viewer is not supposed to
like Morland.  Walters falls in love with Boyd in a chance meeting with
her.  He begins courting her, and as an experiment, Einstein and some
of his cronies decide to help him.  They decide they have to make an
expert in auto mechanics seem on a par with the experts in quantum
mechanics.
     The first step is to convince Boyd that Walters is more
intelligent than your average auto repairman.  This goes disastrously
awry and it is not long before Walters is presenting papers on "cold
fusion" and interstellar drives to the Princeton Institute of Advanced
Studies.  Soon the joke has taken on national political significance.
     Ryan was an interesting choice to play a mathematician and
Einstein's niece.  While she does not look Jewish as presumably
Einstein's niece would, her quirky acting style, somewhat toned down in
this performance, could easily be attributable to a sort of nervous
energy that someone of high intelligence might have.  Robbins, on the
other hand, always seems a little snide and at the best of times is
never particularly likable in his films.  He and Ryan just do not play
well off of each other.  Surprisingly, Walter Matthau is not too
unbelievable as Albert Einstein.  Some of his dialogue could be more
believable, but the real Einstein apparently did have a child-like,
fun-loving nature as exemplified by famous photos of him riding a small
bicycle and of him sticking his tongue out to make faces for news
cameras.  Walter Matthau's brand of sly humor is not an unreasonable
depiction.
     The real problem with I.Q. is that the script was not ready to
film.  Particularly late in the story, the storytelling becomes a
little cryptic.  Ryan's character makes a deduction that is supposedly
explained by a comment she makes, but it is not clear how.  There are
notable anachronisms.  The film supposedly takes place prior to
Einstein's death, making it April 1955 at the latest, yet the dialogue
uses terms like "mind-meld," "cold fusion," and "space race" that were
not coined while Einstein was alive.  In one sequence we see Walters
and Boyd looking at a perfectly clear sky full of stars, yet less than
three minutes later the script calls for a pouring rain that lasts the
rest of the evening.  A sequence at the very end of the film is
incredibly contrived.  These are all very amateurish script problems
that seem to indicate a rush job.
     On the other hand, where one would expect the script to most fall
down--its depiction of scientists talking shop--is not as bad as it
might have been.  It is not easy for a non-genius to write dialogue
supposedly spoken by a genius.  It could be better here, but some of
the dialogue does deal with the right sorts of issues.  Godel gives an
argument that time does not exist that is easily countered and unworthy
of the real Godel.  But generally the issues discussed are not too
unrealistic.
     I.Q. is directed by Australian Fred Schepisi, who most recently
directed SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION.  The film has a nice look with the
camera work by Ian Baker, but not a look that bears close examination.
Princeton in late March and early April seems unseasonably pleasant.
Meg Ryan wears mostly sun dresses at a time of year when most of the
rest of us in New Jersey would still be dressing warmly.  The cars on
the road seem mostly large and with prominent fins.  Even if the film
is set as late as 1955 this seems unlikely.  (As a side note, Fred
Schepisi apparently always uses Baker for cinematography.  This is
their eleventh film together of the eleven that Schepisi has directed
and the twelve that Baker has filmed.)
     In short, this is a film with some pretty sloppy filmmaking, a
romance with little chemistry, and a few pieces of reasonable humor.
Mostly it is on the level of a TV situation comedy.  I rate it a flat 0
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Meg Ryan, Tim Robbins, Walter Matthau, Stephen Fry.
Screenplay:  Andy Breckman and Michael Leeson.
Director:  Fred Schepisi.
     A movie like I.Q. is like a souffle.  When you're trying to mix
whimsy, romance, comedy and (of all things) physics together, the whole
recipe can collapse under its own weight without the right chef.
Director Fred Schepisi made all the right decisions in 1987's ROXANNE,
a film that could have been either cloying or tedious in the wrong
hands.  I.Q. isn't quite as successful as ROXANNE, but it is far more
entertaining than it has any right to be.  While it's rarely
laugh-out-loud funny, it's pleasant, low-key and consistently
charming.
     I.Q. stars Meg Ryan as Catherine Boyd, a scatter-brained
mathematician engaged to a boring clinical psychologist (Stephen Fry).
Her uncle believes that Catherine is an over-thinker who needs a chance
at true love, and decides to play Cupid; her uncle also happens to be
Albert Einstein (Walter Matthau).  The man chosen to be Catherine's
suitor is Ed Walters (Tim Robbins), an auto mechanic who appears to be
out of his league intellectually.  However, Einstein and a few of his
friends become physics Cyranos, convincing Catherine and much of the
scientific community that Ed is an unschooled whiz who has developed a
formula for cold fusion rocket propulsion.
     It's not easy to describe exactly why I.Q. works, because in many
ways it's extremely simple and predictable.  Meg Ryan does her
pattented button-cute number, combined with a stereotypical distracted
genius; Tim Robbins is a simple guy with a heart of gold; a la
SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE, Ryan is already involved with the Wrong Man.
Stephen Fry (PETER'S FRIENDS, TV's "Black Adder" and "Jeeves and
Wooster") is an unconventional casting choice as the Wrong Man, but his
part basically asks him to stand between Catherine and Ed.  There are
the standard complications, and none of them are particularly
hilarious.
     I think I.Q.'s greatest strength may be that it uses its premise
to perfection.  Einstein isn't part of the story simply as high-concept
gag; love really does become a kind of physics formula, and its
incorporation into the story is delightful.  Matthau is a marvelous
Einstein, a gentle matchmaker with a twinkle in his eye.  A trio of
colleagues of Einstein's, played with gusto by Gene Saks, Lou Jacobi
and Joseph Maher, provide assistance for Ed when he is trapped by
smarter folks, most cleverly when Ed is forced ot take a multiple
choice physics test.  The running commentary they provide on
philosophy, science and love is a goofy little trick that turns them
into an almost fantastical Greek chorus.  It's exactly what Schepisi
was able to do with ROXANNE:  keep the tone light and coax fine
supporting performances out of every last supporting character.
     Of course, a romantic comedy is generally only as successful as
the chemistry between its stars, so how do Ryan and Robbins fare
together?  Quite well, and that's mostly because screenwriters Andy
Breckman and Michael Leeson take their time bringing them together.
This is far from Ryan's best work -- I thought she was coasting much of
the time -- but a mediocre Ryan is still worth a lot in a role like
this.  Robbins, on the other hand, turns in one of his most appealing
performances yet.  Many of his previous roles have been one-note jobs,
either simpletons or sleazes, but Ed is a warm and engaging character
which shows that Robbins has a bright future as a romantic leading
man.  Their scenes together may not set the screen on fire, but they
are comfortable enough together that the smiles just keep coming.
     I didn't expect much from I.Q., and it really didn't deliver all
that much.  I just had fun, and I left with a smile.  It doesn't take a
genius to realize that achievement is worth a compliment.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     When I first read a small synopsis of the film, I thought it was
going to be a real dog: "Einstein acts as a cupid for a pair of young
lovers."  I was therefore prepared for the worst.  As it turned out, it
was not nearly as bad as I had anticipated.
     Einstein (Walter Matthau, looking exactly like old Albert
himself), has a niece, Catherine (Meg Ryan), a very bright
mathematician.  She is having her car fixed at a place where Ed (Tim
Robbins) works.  With her is her fiance, James, (Peter Fry who was
Peter in the film PETER'S FRIENDS ... and Jeeves on the PBS series).
     It only takes one glance at Catherine for Ed to fall madly in
love.  Ed, although a mere auto mechanic, is interested in aspects of
science and he uses "Time" to envision him being married to her and
their having 2 children.   Meg, of course, is unaware of Ed's fantasy.
     Einstein when he learns of Ed's infatuation with his niece thinks
it is a great idea, far superior to her marrying the dull Peter even if
he is a scholarly psychiatrist.  Albert and his science cronies set
about getting Catherine to drop Peter and to fall in love with Ed.
     While there are many scientific and mathematical jokes as well as
a dozen gags about "time does not exist," they are all in the first
half of the film.   The second half is devoted to how the writers would
get around to having the mathematician settle for the auto mechanic who
thinks he, too, is a scientist.  Unfortunately, the writers did not
succeed.
     Another segment that hurt the movie was the scene where Einstein
and his fellow geniuses are trying to help Ed in a test he is taking by
grimacing at him to give him the answers--an utterly childish bit of
buffoonery.
     In the cast are also Charles Durning, James Maher, Gene Saks, and
Lou Jacobi.

Author
James Berardinelli
     With its goofy premise, charming stars, and inoffensive humor,
I.Q. is likely to delight those who frequent movie theaters in search
of romantic comedies.  Anyone who wants a little more from a film won't
find it here, however.  I.Q. is inappropriately titled--cute and
lighthearted it may be, but it definitely isn't clever or intelligent.
     The storyline--which features Walter Matthau's Einstein playing
cupid to two mismatched younger people (Meg Ryan as Albert's brainy
niece and Tim Robbins as an auto mechanic)--is best when relegated to
the background.  Through the first hour, I.Q. is pleasant, carried by
the chemistry of its leads.  Ryan, with her wide-eyed gaze and
characteristic head tilt, and Robbins, with his Jimmy Stewart-like,
low-key style, work well together.  It's only in the movie's final
third, when an increasingly absurd and disjointed plot surfaces, that
the screen presence of the pair is no longer sufficient.
     Matthau is okay as Einstein, fitting most people's preconception
of a doddering genius.  Joining Albert are three other well-known
elderly personalities: Godel (Lou Jacobi), Liebknecht (Joe Maher), and
Podolsky (Gene Saks).  Altogether, these intellectual giants act much
like the Four Stooges, and are responsible for a fair share of I.Q.'s
comedy.
     The film starts out with Ryan's Catherine Boyd engaged to the
snobbish and fun-hating James Morland (Stephen Fry, of PETER'S FRIENDS
and TV's "Jeeves and Wooster" and "Blackadder").  Enter Ed Walters
(Robbins), who knows all about distributor caps, but little about
quantum mechanics or higher mathematics.  Once Catherine and Ed
exchange glances and trade tongue-tied sentences, we know poor James is
on his way out.  Fortunately, Fry plays his charge as such a stuffed
shirt that we don't care.
     Einstein decides that the only way for Ed to win Catherine is to
act like a lot smarter than he is.  This leads to the film's funniest
lowbrow scene--a multiple choice intelligence test with the four old
men finding a way for Ed to cheat--but it also devolves proceedings to
a sit-com level.
     Technical inaccuracies and anachronisms abound, some of which are
a little too obvious to miss.  How much these annoy the individual
viewer will likely depend on how spellbound he or she is by the film's
dubious web of magical romance.
     Towards the end of the film, Einstein advises Catherine, "Keep
your sense of wonder" and "Don't let your brain interfere with your
heart."  Those, apparently, are mottoes director Fred Schepisi hopes his
audience will bear in mind when watching I.Q.  The reason is obvious:
thinking is not the way to get the most out of this uneven picture.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 
