Title
Review for Working Girl (1988)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Craig Good
     Melanie Griffith's name should finally become a household word after her
performance in WORKING GIRL.  Stealing the show from the likes of Sigourney
Weaver and Harrison Ford is no mean feat.  All three turn in impressive
performances in roles which must have been fun for them to play.
     Griffith is a secretary with brains and ambition.  Her new boss at the
investment company is Weaver as a self-centered, unscrupulous, climber of the
corporate ladder.  Weaver's character is written so on-the-edge that it would
have been an unconvincing cartoon in the hands of a lesser actress.  Sigourney
plays it to the hilt, and eventually convinces us that such a jerk could
actually exist.  This is the second time this year she's excelled in the role
of a difficult, unlikable woman (the first playing Dian Fossey in GORILLAS IN
THE MIST).
     Harrison Ford does his usual top-notch job in a supporting role as a
financier who drinks too much but manages to perform reasonably well at work
anyway.  When Griffith gets a chance to put together a deal, by pretending not
to be a lowly secretary, she needs his help.  Naturally, he falls for her.  And
why not?  As she succinctly describes herself while under the influence of
valium and tequila, "I've got a head for business and a bod for sin."
     The thing I liked most about Griffith and her character was being reminded
what a turn-on brains can be.  After so many films and so many bimbos it's
wonderful to see a gutsy, intelligent woman.  She's not superwoman, mind you,
and is perfectly capable of making mistakes.  But you get the real impression
that she learns from them, too.  She is constantly making choices: between
failure and the failure to take risks, and between a man who buys her underwear
and one who buys her a briefcase.  She progresses rapidly, like a scrappy,
savvy woman.  Even her goofy, comic-relief friend (Joan Cusak, delightful as
ever) is no airhead.
     In the final analysis, WORKING GIRL is an old-fashioned romantic comedy.
It now seems like daring, hang-ten film making to take the kind of risks this
film does, but once upon a time many movies were like that.  I felt almost
guilty enjoying an honest-to-gosh happy ending, where work and adventure are
rewarded, and avarice and dishonesty fall to satisfying retribution.  Having
said all that, perhaps I should have simply noted that WORKING GIRL is on my
Top Ten list for 1988 and said "check it out."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  WORKING GIRL will probably be the film
     with which Melanie Griffith breaks through to stardom and
     genuine name recognition.  She plays a secretary who
     discovers that her boss (Sigourney Weaver) has stolen her
     idea and decides to put the idea over herself.  Rating: low
     +2.
     Tess McGill is one of hundreds of secretaries in a Manhattan brokerage
house.  She has gone to night school to learn the business and what she
hopes will set her apart is her drive to get ahead.  Her company holds out
the carrot to her that she may someday get a better job, but it is clear
from her modish mini-skirted dress, her excessive jewelry and makeup, and
her long hair that she is just not the type of person who makes it into the
upper echelons.  One evening she discovers that her boyfriend is cheating on
her and that her boss is using her and stealing her ideas for a client's
investments.  Fed up, she decides to get serious about the business.  She
cuts her hair, dresses for a higher class, passes herself off as being at
her boss's level, and goes out to pitch her ideas for herself.  WORKING GIRL
is the story of the elaborate ruse and the effects it has on Tess, her boss,
and a foundering executive at the client's business.
     Just as Tess was competent but never got any special notice until she
pulled her business coup, Melanie Griffith (who plays Tess) did not get any
particular recognition until WORKING GIRL.  She was a familiar face who had
been seen in several films: NIGHT MOVES, the all too rarely seen SMILE, ONE
ON ONE, BODY DOUBLE, STORMY MONDAY, and THE MILAGRO BEANFIELD WAR.  Her only
role that really got critical attention was that of Lulu in Jonathan Demme's
SOMETHING WILD.  I suspect that with WORKING GIRL she has made herself a
recognizable star.  WORKING GIRL is her film even if Fox unconscionably
gives her third billing.  Second billing goes to Sigourney Weaver as her
boss and adversary.  Weaver plays a slick shark of an executive who uses
every dirty trick, including sex, to fight the fight.  This is the first
time I have seen her play a villain.  Top billing goes to Harrison Ford who
is just barely one of the major characters of the film.  (Perhaps as a
subtle protest to the billing, Sigourney Weaver has been quoted as saying,
"I loved the idea of playing a supporting role with Melanie the star.")
     WORKING GIRL was directed by Mike Nichols with a little less bite than
his films usually have.  Of course, Nichols' best-loved film is THE GRADUATE
and generally his films (like CATCH 22, WHO'S AFRAID OF VIRGINIA WOOLF?,
CARNAL KNOWLEDGE, and SILKWOOD) make a social statement.  The social
statement here is "do not exploit you fellow workers" and "you should fight
to get ahead," not unlike the moral of Colin Higgins' comparable--but not as
good--9 TO 5.  Where SILKWOOD was negative on big business, WORKING GIRL
concentrates on both faults and virtues.  Rate it a low +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Randy Parker
        In director Mike Nichols' WORKING GIRL, Melanie Griffith plays a
secretary in Manhattan, the type who wears running shoes and socks over her
nylons as she commutes to work and then changes into high heals once she
gets there.  Her greatest desire is to be respected for her mind as well as
for her pretty face and shapely body.  She has big ideas but no one will
listen to them.  And to top it off, her macho chauvinistic boyfriend,
played by Alec Baldwin, is cheating on her.
        But Griffith's fortunes turn when her new boss has a skiing
accident and is laid up in the hospital for two weeks.  Griffith uses her
boss' absence as an opportunity to implement her own innovative business
scheme.  She joins forces professionally and romantically with Harrison
Ford, who plays a struggling investment broker.  Ford is outstanding in his
role as a bumbling and ruffled, but charming, bachelor.  He demonstrates
once again his unheralded versatility.
        WORKING GIRL is a contemporary Cinderella story, but one with a
corporate twist.  Instead of a ball, we get a board room.  Mr. Charming is
not a prince, but a broker.  And the evil stepmother is an executive in
"Mergers and Acquisitions" who is happy to steal an idea and call it her
own.  Although the movie may not generate much in the way of deep drama or
high comedy, it succeeds beautifully as a fairy tale.
        WORKING GIRL is a showcase for Melanie Griffith.  Nichols takes
every opportunity to show off her cleavage, her curves, and her captivating
blue eyes.  But Griffith's role calls for much more than mere sex-appeal,
and there is more to her character than meets the eye.  Griffith gives a
solid, even impressive, performance as the intelligent, ambitious, and
resourceful secretary who wants to raise her social stock.  Whereas
Griffith's character is someone we can root for, Sigourney Weaver's is
someone we can love to hate.  Weaver turns in a bravura performance as
Griffith's cool, calculating, and back-stabbing boss.
        The secret to WORKING GIRL's success lies in its inspired casting.
Griffith, Weaver, and even Ford--who is playing against type--are perfect
in their roles.  And Joan Cusack is weird and wacky in yet another small
supporting part.  I bought into this simple Cinderella story primarily
because the characters and performances captured me hook, line, and sinker.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I can't remember the last time I saw a Mike Nichols film that reflected an
ounce of the talent and promise that he showed in THE GRADUATE, years and years
and years ago.  (it spoke to my *parent's* generation, for God's sake.  :-) ) I
am happy to report that the dry spell appears to have finally ended: WORKING
GIRL is the kind of comedy you walk out of with an afterglow.  It's slick --
very, very slick; I don't think it skips a beat, except maybe a few minute
jiggles during the last ten minutes.  It's the kind of entertainment that
delivers smoothly, with the acting, technical and music cylinders firing right
when they need to.  It's not genius, or even an outstanding work, but it has so
few weak points and so many good (not great) ones that it tends to stand out
over the rest of the Christmas mudslide.
     I was impressed with Melanie Griffith when I saw her in SOMETHING WILD,
but I assumed much of that was due to Demme's directing (completely
off-the-wall remark: saw a repeat episode of Columbo the other night, with
Louis Jordan as a murdering restaurant critic, that was directed by a Jonathon
Demme).  More credit was due to her, it appears.  Griffith has the ability to
appear soft and rather vague, while at the same time showing that something is
clicking beneath the mascara.  It all appears very natural, and she is, without
a doubt, the star of the movie (no doubt Ford and Weaver's agents insisted that
they get top billing).  Ford has been better, but it appears that he was asked
to play Gary Cooper, and he does that better than anyone else in the movies
these days.  I admit that I like Sigourney Weaver in just about anything; I get
the impression that she takes a part based on whether she likes the script, as
opposed to whether it will enhance her career as a "serious actress".  (Can you
see Sissy Spacek or Meryl Streep rotating over a bed with Bill Murray in it?).
She romps through this one, basically playing Joan Crawford and having a heck
of a good time.  And finally, Joan Cusak gets added to my list of "Durn Good
Character Actors/Actresses", a breed I hold in higher respect than most "lead
actors/actresses".  
     Technically, the film is a dream; the cinematography is excellent, and the
segues between the parts of the films work very well, indeed.  The shots on the
ferry are particularly well done, and the whole film has a texture that is
reflected both in the acting and the way the scenes are photographed.  I am
usually against popular vocalists doing the soundtracks to a film -- the
demands of a film upon it's musical score are usually different than those
placed upon a pop star's ballad.  Carly Simon, however, puts together
background music that fits WORKING GIRL like a glove; it pops up at just the
right places, and is never intrusive.  I hope they put out a soundtrack for
this film...

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: One of the best American comedies of recent years.
Pity the plight of the modern personal assistant. Tess McGill (Melanie
Griffith) is a smart cookie who would probably be a good player in the
financial world, if it weren't for the fact that she's landlocked. Nobody
listens to a secretary for tips on mergers and acquisitions, even if she
does know what she's talking about. Especially with that hair, and those
bracelets, and that squeaky voice that charms her loutish boyfriend and
absolutely no one else.
One day, Tess gets a job as an assistant to a new boss in the mergers and
acquisitions department of the financial firm she works in. Katharine
Parker (played deliciously by Sigourney Weaver) is Serious with the cap S.
Everything about this woman bespeaks of authority, and it starts to rub off
on Tess. Not only that, but Ms. Parker likes to hear Tess's ideas. She's
got an idol. One great scene has Tess listening to Dictaphone recordings of
her idol and trying to modulate her voice.
Then Ms. Parker breaks her leg on a skiing trip and is laid up for some
time, giving Tess access to Katharine's home (someone has to let the
cleaning lady in, right?), personal computer, and phone logs. And there she
discovers that Katharine has stolen one of her best ideas and passed it off
as her own. (As if this wasn't bad enough, she returns home from this
humiliation to find her boyfriend being unfaithful. It never rains...)
Tess steams for a bit, and then decides to turn things around. Apparently
Katharine was going to get in touch with a fellow named Jack Trainer about
this idea. Tess dresses up in some of Katharine's own finery and presents
herself to Jack as an associate of Katharine's (not Katharine herself,
mercifully!)... and then things really go wild.
I hope from this description the movie doesn't sound like a dumb comedy of
impersonation. It is not. WORKING GIRL is a smart, intelligent and
incredibly well-written movie that takes all of its characters seriously,
including Katharine. Another movie would have made Katharine unpalatable
from start to finish; Katharine is very likeable when she's on screen --
she's just doing the wrong thing, and sees it as being business as usual.
The movie also features one of Harrison Ford's best performances. With a
name like "Jack Trainer", we're expecting a wolf -- instead, we get a man
who's got a sense of class and a sense of humor about himself. Tess and
Jack like each other immediately -- each sees the other as a wonderful
relief from the run of the mill they've grown accustomed to. Ford is
incredibly funny when let loose in a story like this (so unlike the dismal
SABRINA), and is one of the best things in the movie.
Mike Nichols' direction is smooth and unobtrusive, and lets all the best
moments in the screenplay come out unobscured -- a critical thing in a
comedy, since bad timing or a break in the mood would have ruined
everything. Even the ending, which could have been a complete gimmee, is on
just the right note, with everyone getting precisely what they deserve.
Even those of us who have never seen the inside of a corporate boardroom
will empathize -- and laugh.
