Title
Review for White Squall (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
Running Length: 2:08
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, mature themes, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Jeff Bridges, Caroline Goodall, John Savage, Scott Wolf, 
      Jeremy Sisto, Balthazar Getty, Ryan Phillipe, Jason Marsden
Director: Ridley Scott
Producers: Mimi Polk Gitlin and Rocky Lang
Screenplay: Todd Robinson based on the memoirs of Chuck Gieg
Cinematography: Hugh Johnson
Music: Jeff Rona with contributions by Hans Zimmer
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     WHITE SQUALL combines male bonding drama, high seas adventure, and 
coming-of-age stories.  For his first film since the disastrously dull 
1492: CONQUEST OF PARADISE, director Ridley Scott (BLADE RUNNER, ALIEN, 
THELMA AND LOUISE) has again turned to the ocean.  This time, however, 
instead of sinking the film with a needlessly meandering plot, he 
energizes the screen with a movie that gives the audience an involving 
narrative and characters to care about.
     Based on the true-life memoirs of Chuck Gieg, WHITE SQUALL 
introduces us to 13 high school students who have elected to spend the 
1960-61 academic year on the American schoolship Albatross (a windjammer 
based out of Mystic, Connecticut).  The Captain is Christopher Sheldon 
(Jeff Bridges), a man who preaches two lessons:  the importance of unity 
among the crew and that "the ship beneath [them] is not a toy and 
sailing's not a game."  His wife, Alice (Caroline Goodall), is the 
ship's doctor and the boys' science teacher.  Other adults aboard are a 
Shakespeare-quoting English teacher (John Savage) and a Cuban cook 
(Julio Mechoso).
     The young crew includes Chuck (Tom Cruse look-alike Scott Wolf), an 
all-American student who wants to break away from his parents' vision of 
what his future should be; Tod (Balthazar Getty), a tough-as-nails kid 
who hides a secret; Frank (Jeremy Sisto), who can't escape from under 
his rich father's thumbnail; and Gill (Ryan Phillipe), a young man with 
a desperate fear of heights.  The trip on the Albatross is their rite of 
passage.  By the end of WHITE SQUALL, those who have survived are no 
longer boys, but men.  
     Given the title, it's no secret that the Albatross runs into real 
trouble.  In nautical language, a "white squall" is a sudden, violent, 
wind-and-lightning storm that can take the sturdiest ship and snap it in 
two.  However, this meteorological catastrophe doesn't make an 
appearance until the film's last forty-five minutes.  Until then, WHITE 
SQUALL devotes itself to developing its young characters, their growing 
admiration for their skipper, and the relationships amongst them.  While 
some of this drama relies on familiar formulas, a capable director like 
Scott can maintain the audience's attention through a long setup.
     As is typical of a Scott film, the visuals are marvelous.  The 
scenes of the Albatross as it rises and falls with the swells of the sea 
are majestic, and the fury of the squall is as terrifying an experience 
as you're likely to find in an adventure film these days.  With the aid 
of cinematographer Hugh Johnson, Scott composes each of these grand 
sequences carefully, in order to convey the maximum effect.  
     Jeff Bridges, who is beginning to look more like his father with 
every passing picture, is in top form, providing a compelling father-
figure/mentor.  The role isn't exactly unique, but Bridges brings enough 
personality to Chris Sheldon to create an interesting character.  John 
Savage, who hasn't done a film in a while, is delightful as McCrea.  The 
young actors playing the boys vary from passable to good, with those 
having key roles doing the better jobs.
     For nearly two hours, WHITE SQUALL is a completely involving motion 
picture, keeping its comic, dramatic, and tragic elements in perfect 
balance.  Unfortunately, the need to end with a DEAD POETS' SOCIETY-like 
catharsis brings the conclusion down.  Hopelessly corny and needlessly-
manipulative, the last scene is bad melodrama.  Mercifully, it lasts 
only a few minutes, and the overriding image left with the viewer as the 
end credits roll is not of this silliness but of the Albatross riding 
the seas in the face of a hurricane-force wind.  WHITE SQUALL is a 
success because the good elements are so well-orchestrated that they 
dwarf the few obvious flaws.  This film offers just about everything, 
including a twenty-minute white-knuckle sequence and a chance to shed a 
few tears.  In short, it's first-rate entertainment.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Michael Redman
Jeff Bridges commands a sailing ship as a school for troublesome teenage boys.
Using `tough love', Bridges molds the kids into a tight crew. Based on a true
story, there is enough high drama here that the film doesn't need to become
the mish-mash that it is.
The boys are sent (or sentenced) to the ship to build character and
self-discipline. As with all movies of this genre, they do change, if for no
other reason than self preservation. Without giving too much away, there is a
major disaster at sea which pulls them together even more.
Big adventure, but there are problems. There is a large cast of boys who
mostly look alike and act alike. It's not until late in the film that you can
even tell them apart. By that time, it's impossible to remember who did what
and which motivations belong to which person, except for just a few characters.
The film doesn't flow. There are a number of good, some even great, scenes,
but they jump from one to another without much connection. A few moments are
remarkably intense, but others are severely underplayed. A tropical island is
the scene of the crossing the equator rite of passage when the boys
demonstrate a new comprehension and a tribal identity. This should have marked
a turning point for the group. Instead it has all the emotion of a romp
through the meadow.
There are some nice bits, but in this case the whole is not greater than the
sum of the parts. The film, in the words of the bard, falls apart, the center
does not hold. Unfortunate.
[This appeared in the 2/8/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jeff Bridges, Caroline Goodall, John Savage, Scott Wolf, Jeremy
Sisto, Balthazar Getty, Ryan Phillipe, Jason Marsden Director: Ridley
Scott Screenplay: Todd Robinson based on the memoirs of Chuck Gieg
It's about a big wave which capsizes a boat killing a wife and some
school boys, AND it's a real story.
The name of the ship is 'The Albatross', its a solid beautiful vessel,
but I kind of thought it looked old and probably would not have allowed
my child to go sailing half way around the world in it; but hey some
parents are real crazy right.
The idea of studying as you travel is any school boys dream of having a
great bludge, but these boys do actually learn some important lessons
about life, survival and working as a team.
So getting back to this big wave, a meteorological phenomenon known as
the 'White Squall' which has the propensity to capsize ships. It strikes
swiftly and unsuspectingly like the 'Hand of God', and it does so with
such awesome majesty that you almost forget about the people who are
drowning. The most touching and memorable scene involves the captain.
When unable to rescue his wife, he mouths the words 'I Love You' through
the sky light of their cabin as the ship sinks. She can only look up to
see her husband float away as she sinks to a watery grave.
I wander whether such educational cruises are still available for school
boys today? The responsibility to carry out such a venture must be
overwhelming, and I can only imagine the legal nightmares that would
eventuate if anybody drowns. After this unusual, tragic occurrence, I'm
sure the contracts signed by parents must include a clause which exempts
the crew responsibility for their child's life if struck by a "White
Squall".
However, this is not were the story ends. The captain never remarries
and becomes the leader of a peace movement in South America, whilst the
surviving boys are shipped of to Vietnam three years after this tragedy.
Amazingly they all return safely. One cannot help but wonder whether the
'Squall' which on one hand claimed the lives of their friends, in the
other instilled in them the courage and determination to survive no
matter what the circumstance.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     DEAD SAILORS SOCIETY is the unfortunately appropriate description
of this aspiring, real-life drama that ends up, well, all wet.  The
plot, based on the true 1961 incident, centers on the floating school-
ship Albatross.  Its crew of thirteen high-schoolers have signed-on for
a year of sailing 'n' schooling, just as *we* have signed-on for a grand
coming-of-age tale set against the allure and adventure of the high
seas.  Unfortunately for us *and* them, neither gets what they expected.
     WHITE SQUALL is a confounding film.  The visuals are great, as only
Ridley Scott (ALIEN, BLADE RUNNER) can render them; equally good is Jeff
Bridges, who gives a strong, salty performance as the no-nonsense
Captain.  "If we don't have order, we don't have anything," he notes and
to which somebody behind the camera should've taken seriously.  For
starters, all the young dudes look alike.  There's nary a distinguishing
trait between them, other than the fact that they all look like Tom
Cruise.  The passage of time is never properly charted, also a problem,
nor is the awesome "strength of the sea" given it's proper due.  That
is, until the climax.
     What happens to the Albatross-- and after someone shoots a dolphin,
no less!-- could be an outtake from Robert Shaw's speech in JAWS.  Man
goes out on boat with three crew and thirteen lads; only eleven return.
The villain-- impressively rendered inside an indoor tank-- is a freak
meteorological phenom called a "white squall," which hits near the end
of the film.  Water water everywhere and soon the surviving captain and
crew are blubbering and bonding before a condemning Coast Guard
tribunal.  It's a stupid, sappy ending to an already waterlogged movie.
Arrggh.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Now here is a concept for a movie, how about DEAD POETS' SOCIETY
GOES TO SEA?  So you are not enthralled?  Well, too bad, that movie has
been produced, and it is called WHITE SQUALL.  This is a movie that
should have never been made.  It is a low quality rehash of the classic
teaching high school kids movie that has been made more times than I
can count.  This picture has nothing original to say, and the acting is
way below par.  Imagine making a show about kids and then not putting
in a single kid (or adult for that matter) that you care about.
     WHITE SQUALL is based on a true story that occurred in 1960.  A
bunch of high school students elect to have their senior year aboard a
sailing ship called the Albatross.  The ship will travel the Caribbean
where the students will learn sailing as well as English and Biology.
Most of all, thanks to the stern and sadistic Captain Christopher
Sheldon (Jeff Bridges), they will learn self-reliance.  Captain
Sheldon's wife, Alice (Caroline Goodall), is the ship's doctor and the
boys' biology teacher.  The other older people on the boat are an
English teacher, Mr. McCrea (John Savage), and a cook, Girard Pascal
(Julio Mechoso).
     There must have been a dozen or so boys.  They include Chuck Gieg,
whom I thought must have been Tom Cruse's brother, but actually turned
out to be played by Scott Wolf, Tod (Balthazar Getty), Frank (Jeremy
Sisto), Preston (Eric Michael Cole), and the canonical tough kid named
Gil Martin (Ryan Phillipe).
     The Captain alternates between berating the boys to inspiring them
with little homilies such as, "If we don't have order, we have nothing.
Where we go one, we go all."  In a typical scene, we have a boy who has
a deadly fear of heights so the Captain forces him to climb high up the
masks while they both yell at each other making the sounds of wild
animals.  We also learn that sailing is a dangerous activity.  From the
beginning people get hanged by getting caught in the ropes, they get
thrown overboard in high seas, and in general death is around every
corner.  Sailing was not like this in my day.  Guess it got a safer
quickly since 1960.
     The derivative script by Todd Robinson is filled with cliches.
The boys go into town and in a scene straight out of PORKY'S, they rent
a prostitute for the most inexperience boy.  They fight a lot too.
When girls come aboard the ship, the boys claim no knowledge of what
they would say to a girl.  Sure.  Another kid keeps hitting himself in
the head and crying while repeating, "I'm a moron," because he is
having trouble learning a subject.  Another shoots a dauphin just
because.  There is not much of a story really just a series of almost
unrelated and completely trivial incidents.  I will not give away
anymore other than to say they did not choose the title of the movie at
random.
     There is no chemistry among the boys or among anyone else in the
cast.  There is not a single decent acting job by any of the boys.
None of the characters are acted believably thanks to poor direction by
Ridley Scott.  I know it is a true story, but somehow I do not think
the kids were really this boring or the Captain this mean.  Bridges's
performance is especially pathetic.  He never warms up to the part and
seems to be spaced out in most of the scenes as if he wishes he were
somewhere else rather than in this film.  Perhaps he was suffering from
sunstroke during the filming.
     The cinematography (HUGH JOHNSON) is full of dark blues and greens
with heavy use of shadows to create an overbearing feeling of impending
tragedy and doom.  Sometimes they use extreme close-ups for reasons I
could not figure out.
     There is a single good part of this movie.  It starts on the
lovely out of the way island of St. Vincent, and as they sail away for
the first time, you get a beautiful shot of tiny Young Island right off
St. Vincent.  Since my wife and I spent eleven wonderful ten day
Thanksgiving Holidays in a row there, it brought back wonderful images
to my brain.  Too bad we have not been there in years, but the movie
served as a one minute travelogue for me.  Now, that is it; there is
nothing else worth seeing in this film.
     WHITE SQUALL runs way too long at 2:08 thanks to a lack of serious
editing by Gerry Hambling.  The first part is excruciatingly slow.  The
movie is rated PG-13 for violence and a little bad language.  There is
no sex or nudity.  There is nothing here that would harm teenagers
other than boredom.  I do not recommend this show to anyone, and I give
it 1/2 of a star.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     You have to respect any movie with enough guts to use the word
"squall" in its title.  Brought to us by stellar director Ridley Scott
(BLADE RUNNER, THELMA & LOUISE), and pitched as "DEAD POETS SOCIETY on a
boat," WHITE SQUALL ends up as a passable film, but won't being going down
as one of the director's best productions, much less an equal to POETS.
     WHITE SQUALL is the true story of the Albatross, a ship carrying 13
boys as students of the Ocean Academy, a school-at-sea on which
Christopher Sheldon (Jeff Bridges) is the captain.  Setting sail in 1960
for a year-long voyage "half way around the world and back," the boys
learn about discipline, facing ones fears, the joys of Danish schoolgirls,
alcohol, venereal disease, and they occasionally even find some time to
study.
     In a completely unexpected turn of events (never mind the TV
commercials) near the end of the tour, the ship encounters a mythical
"white squall" (basically a mini-hurricane) and capsizes.  (I won't spoil
the ensuing aftermath like every other review you'll read.)
     WHITE SQUALL is really hard to get in to, and it's even harder to
like.  For a full hour, the ship is docked, and we explore the
coming-of-age of these kids who are just absolutely hideous:  there's the
fighting, taunting, vomiting, dolphin-killing, pants-wetting, and
toilet-exploding that makes the film seem like it should have starred
ex-"Saturday Night Live" cast members.  (As it is, the 13 boys are almost
exactly alike with the exception of 1 or 2 with actual personalities.) 
And it's not just gross, it's predictable and over-simplistic.
     This is all bad, yes, but believe me, you'll forget all about it when
The Big Storm hits and the film reaches its watery climax.  Scott really
jumps into the film here, regaining his old sense of suspense,
constructing an intricate and visually stunning sequence of events that
lead to the gripping climax:  the sinking of the Albatross.  These are
probably the best action scenes ever filmed on water, and they fully
redeem the film for its earlier failures.
     While the denouement is basically another bummer of a letdown, you'll
still be coming off that adrenaline rush from the "squall scenes."  Extra
points if you even remember the ending after you leave...or any of the
rest of the film, for that matter.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list
