Title
Review for In Too Deep (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Like an actor who can't get out of character, rookie cop Jeffrey Cole
(Omar Epps) has gone so deep undercover in the projects that he has
trouble remembering where his allegiances lie.
Supposedly based on a true story, Michael Rymer's IN TOO DEEP tells a
conventional and predictable undercover story that requires frequent
suspension of disbelief.  After his first bust, Cole, for instance,
walks away so that everyone in the neighborhood can see he is a cop.
Normally, once your cover is blown, you give up the undercover life.
Not in this story.  And -- surprise! -- this mistake will come back to
haunt him.
As in the recent, abysmal DEEP BLUE SEA, the best thing about the movie
is LL Cool J, who gives humanity and a chilling reality to a role that
frequently is reduced to caricature.  Here he plays God, an aptly named
drug lord.  God, who controls eighty percent of the crack cocaine in the
city, loves to do things like throwing parties for his current and
potential customers.  He treats everyone in the ghetto to a Thanksgiving
Day feast.  He also likes to beat disrespectful employees to death,
using a pool cue to sexually abuse them first.
Michael Henry Brown and Paul Aaron's script wants to make the story into
a sentimental one, looking compassionately at the plight of the poor
undercover cop.  To foster this mood, Cole is sent for a long sabbatical
of sorts in the middle of his investigation.  Living in a pastoral
setting in a farmhouse, he spends his time taking a photography course
and photographing a lovely nude model, played by Nia Long from LOVE
JONES.  Of course, they will fall in love, and he will spill the beans
about his life as an undercover investigator of a big-time drug lord,
God.
BIG NIGHT's Stanley Tucci, plays Cole's sympathetic supervisor in the
police department.  Cole disobeys his direct orders and verbally abuses
him without any consequences other than the aforementioned free vacation
in the country.
The dialog can be unintelligible at times, and there are only a few
sympathetic characters in the story, yet the movie somehow manages to
rise slightly above the hackneyed storyline.  Still, there's little to
recommend the movie.  You've seen this story before.  And better.
IN TOO DEEP runs too long at 1:44.  It is rated R for strong, pervasive
violence, drug usage, sex and language and would be acceptable for
teenagers only if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
The title _In_Too_Deep_ describes the situation its young undercover cop
hero finds himself in, but it also aptly describes the predicament of the
film's cast.  An uncommon amount of talent appears before the camera, but
their abilities are not well-served by this routine urban drama.
Two actors are able to transcend the tired material they are given: the
leads, Omar Epps and LL Cool J.  Epps plays the cop, rookie Cincinnati
police officer Jeff Cole, who loses his sense of self during a deep cover
operation designed to bust druglord Dwayne Gittens, a.k.a. "God" (LL Cool
J).  Epps makes a strong and likable protagonist, and as such his
character's flirtings with the dark side makes for some involving drama. 
However, LL Cool J is the more commanding presence as God, at once cold
yet so appealingly charismatic that it is easy to see how people are
drawn to him.
But director Michael Rymer and writers Michael Henry Brown and Paul
Aaron don't give their equally able supporting players much to work with,
largely due to the formulaic paces of their story.  Stanley Tucci has the
token commanding officer role, and his meatiest scene is the old reliable
one where he tells the increasingly out-of-control Cole that he is off
the case.  (Of course, Cole eventually worms his way back onto it.)  Nia
Long is wasted in the most thankless role of Cole's love interest, who,
as par for the course in films such as these, tells Cole that she can't
be with him as long as he's on his case.  And Pam Grier, whose memorable
turn in _Jackie_Brown_ apparently wasn't the career-ressurrector it
should have been, lends her steely presence and is required to do little
else as a veteran cop.
_In_Too_Deep_ isn't necessarily a bad film, just an average one, and
therein lies the big problem.  With the amount of talent at their
disposal, the filmmakers should have been more motivated to come up with
something a bit more inspired and distinctive.  Instead, they simply
settled for the routine--something that the cast shouldn't have to settle
for.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

