Title
Review for What About Bob? (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     WHAT ABOUT BOB? is a film starring Bill Murray and Richard Dreyfuss.
     My expectations were not high going into the auditorium.  Bill
Murray is one of the most uneven, undisciplined stars in Hollywood today
and Richard Dreyfuss isn't far behind.  Which means mugging, smirking,
doing this eye-thing with the camera that says hey watch me I'm being
pretty cute over here.
     Leaving the auditorium, I felt I had been entertained, albeit in a
rather predictable, formulaic way, but, yes, I had had a pretty decent
time back there in the dark with Bill and Richard.
     Bill Murray's character Bob is a near-basket case of neuroses.
Agoraphobia, haphephobia (irrational fear of being touched -- old
Peanuts joke "Haphephobia is better than none"), manipulative,
dependent.
     Richard Dreyfuss is his new, ambitious, success-obsessed doc.  He
had a bust of Freud in his office, he's named his children Sigmund and
Anna, his wife is a doormat, and he's out the door, on vacation until
Labor Day.
     Bob's wants treatment now and follows his new doc to his New
England retreat (Virginia stands in for Vermont here).  The doc expects a
live remote for Goodmorning America and gets Bob.
     Whose crazy, Bob, the doc, or the audience?  One gets better, one
will get better, and the third will get over it.  Okay, for matinee
prices it's okay.  Murray and Dreyfuss efficiently chew every stick of
scenery the script hands them.  They're cute, they're sort of funny in
an icky way.  I mean we are laughing at crazy people here, aren't we?

Author
Randy Parker
        WHAT ABOUT BOB? serves up Bill Murray's most delectable character,
and performance, in a long, long time.  Murray is both funny and tender in
the role of an obsessive-compulsive agoraphobe coming out of his shell.
Unfortunately, the rest of the cast doesn't measure up: Richard Dreyfuss,
as Bob's put-upon psychiatrist, is untypically uninspired--and Jill Hagerty
(who plays Dreyfuss' cookie cutter wife) gives what will probably end up
being the worst performance of the decade.
        The first of the movie half zips along smoothly, but then,
frustratingly, the film takes a disastrous nose dive.  Tom (DEAD POETS
SOCIETY) Schulman's disappointing script becomes more and more contrived
until--THUD--the movie ends with a painful belly flop.
