Title
Review for Someone Else's America (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
France/UK/Germany/Greece, 1995
U.S. Release Date: beginning 6/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:36
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes, sexual situations,
      profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Tom Conti, Miki Manojilovic, Sergej Trifunovic, Zorka Manojilovic, 
      Maria Casares, Andjela Stojkovic, Chia-Ching Niu
Director: Goran Paskaljevic
Producers: Antoine De Clermont-Tonnerre, David Rose, and Helga Baehr
Screenplay: Gordon Mihic
Cinematography: Yorgos Arvantis
Music: Andrew Dickson
U.S. Distributor: October Films
In English, Spanish, and Yugoslavian with subtitles
     Goran Paskaljevic's SOMEONE ELSE'S AMERICA is a modern-day tale of 
the immigration experience.  Despite the complexities of today's socio-
political situation, where illegal aliens enter the United States 
seemingly at will to work in sweat shops at sub-minimum wage jobs, the 
lure of the American Dream sings its siren song to men and women 
worldwide.  Ellis Island may be a tourist site, but the Statue of 
Liberty still stands tall, beckoning the tired, the poor, and those 
yearning to breathe free.
     Paskaljevic's film reminds us that simple tales are often the most 
affecting.  Nothing of world-shaking importance transpires during 
SOMEONE ELSE'S AMERICA's 96-minute running time.  We're introduced to a 
pair of characters, then follow their trials and tribulations as they 
attempt to adapt to their new surroundings.  Nevertheless, this movie is 
an insightful examination of the differences with which members of the 
same family react to being uprooted from their native land and 
transplanted to a strange country.  
     SOMEONE ELSE'S AMERICA opens in Brooklyn, across the East River 
from Manhattan, where the skyscrapers loom like a steel-and-concrete 
promise forever beyond the immigrants' reach.  As photographed by Yorgos 
Arvantis, Manhattan is cold and beautiful.  Bayo (Miki Manojilovic, TITO 
AND ME), from Montenegro, has been in the United States for less than a 
year, doing odd-jobs for his Spaniard friend, Alonso (Tom Conti, SHIRLEY 
VALENTINE).  In his spare time, he works with a crew of other illegal 
aliens, wearing a gas mask and cleaning up toxic waste sites.  The money 
he earns, he sends home, where his mother and three children still 
reside.  Not for long, however, as it turns out.  Spurred by the desire 
of Bayo's oldest son, Luka (Sergej Trifunovic), to reach the new world, 
the four embark on an ocean voyage to Mexico, where a "travel guide" 
agrees to take them north of the border.  Tragedy strikes as they cross 
the Rio Grande -- Bayo's youngest son is swept away in the currents, and 
the family's subsequent reunion becomes a sad event.
     Three generations offer three different perspectives of immigrating 
to America.  When asked why he crossed the ocean, Bayo responds that, 
though he would love to go back home, he has to remind himself daily 
that he came here to build a future for his two youngest children.  
Bayo's mother, however, hates New York.  "I don't know how to live 
here... it's someone else's country," she laments.  Responding to her, 
Luka says, "There's nothing for us [back in Montenegro]."  He has come 
to the United States to forge his dreams, and, by making himself 
invaluable to Alonso and marrying a Chinese American citizen, he takes 
strides in that direction.  But Bayo blames Luka for the Rio Grande 
disaster, and their relationship becomes strained.
     One of the reasons SOMEONE ELSE'S AMERICA is so effective is that 
it shuns melodrama.  This low-key tale concentrates on family dynamics 
and interpersonal relationships rather than making political statements 
or toying with the audience's emotions.  Paskaljevic accepts that 
immigrating to the United States is what it is, and concentrates not on 
condemning the process, but exploring how it affects those who, for 
better or worse, make the attempt.  This is a tragic comedy, with 
moments of wry, unforced humor peppering the drama.  Because of its 
positive outlook on life, SOMEONE ELSE'S AMERICA isn't a downer, but, 
like last year's LAMERICA, it prompts viewers to consider how much 
courage and sacrifice is demanded for an individual to risk moving from 
one country to another.  It also encourages understanding of why 
newcomers to this country cling so desperately to traditions and customs 
of the one left behind.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
     In this beautifully told story of two immigrants and their
families in America,  we feel the difficulties they encounter, the
homesickness, the troubles they must endure.  Despite that, the film
has its many humorous moments in between the pathos.  That the
direction and acting, as well as the story, are so good make this one
of the year's better films.
     Alonso (Tom Conti) is a legal immigrant from Mexico, supporting
his blind mother (Maria Casares) who yearns for Spain, her homeland.
Alonso's  income is from a  small bar he owns, the Paradiso, in a poor
neighborhood in Brooklyn.  Employed  at the bar, and living there, is
Bayo (Miki Manojlovic) who is from the faraway land of Montenegro.
Unlike Alonso, Bayo is here illegally.  Of the pittance he earns in
various other small jobs, he sends money back home to his mother, Anja
(Zorka Manojlovic) so she can take care of his three children.
However, he is unaware that his mother is not receiving the money and
that his children are heartbroken at their father's absence.
     The youngest daughter, Savka (Andjela Stojkovic) is ill with
yearning, the youngest son, Pepe (Lazar Kalmic) is a dear boy, but the
oldest son Luka, (Sergei Trifunovic) is a rebel always in trouble with
the authorities.   Grandma Anja decides that only by taking them to
America can she handle the problems caused by the  lack of money and
her ability to care for her three grandchildren.    The trip to the
U.S., via Mexico. and the attempt at illegal entry engender the
saddest part of the film as in crossing the Rio Grande, Pepe loses his
treasured accordion, lets go of the rope that directs them to the U.S.
and, a non-swimmer, goes after the accordion..   His father Bayo will
not believe the child has drowned and will not give up the search for
him, shouting "PEPE!  PEPE!"  as he walks along the shore.
     Alonso and Bayo are from two different worlds but their
friendship  is binding.    This bonding and the smaller stories that
are in the film make it one that you will savor, that you will not
soon forget..    Do not miss this unassuming little gem..

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SOMEONE ELSE'S AMERICA is a good natured, but plotless show about
the plight of illegal immigrants in America today.  Although it shows a
lot of potential, little of it is realized, and the show operates in a
narrow range.  The acting is earnest, but monochromatic, and I did not
find any of the characters believable.  The characters are certainly
charming and energetic, but they are not real.
     The movie is set in New York City, but the spunky illegal
immigrants fighting for their existence in the underground economy
could be almost anywhere in the US.  A Montenegro immigrant named Bayo
(Miki Manojlovic) and his buddy Alonso (Tom Conti), an immigrant from
Spain, work cleaning up toxic waste sites.  They live in squalor in
common quarters among and on pieces of junk.  Nevertheless, through all
of their hardships, their resolve shines through.
     To show his courage against these difficulties, Bayo says, "Did I
ever tell you the story of my people?  We no surrender."  He listens to
English language tapes all of the time and actually his English is
pretty good.
     Alonso is more of a worry wart.  His view is that, "This is USA of
America.  This is the place where if you work hard, and you worry.  You
can be anything you want."  He has the problem that he is love with
someone who ignores him and says, "I got no luck in America.  I never
gonna get married."
     The cinematography by George Arvanitis is generally unimaginative
except for the outdoor scenes where he creates carefully contrived
images.  Some of the effective ones include the zooming out from the
Statue of Liberty as the police sirens get louder and the picture of
the NYC skyline at dusk with a cemetery in the foreground.  The best,
and only truly moving scene in the film, happens on the Rio Grande, and
the photography adds to its effectiveness.
     The script by Gordan Mihic and the pace set by director Goran
Paskaljevic meanders.  With a show where little happens, there needs to
be more tension and more character development, but they rely too much
on props to carry the picture along.  Alonso, for example, drives a
beat-up pickup truck with a fake bull on the top that has eyes that
light up at night and the side of the truck proclaims in bright
letters, "Paradiso."
     Other than having the characters talk about their holy grail -
getting a green card - the script finds little to say.  The low point
of the film is a unbelievable sequence where Alonso tricks his blind
and ill mother (Maria Casares) into believing they are flying all the
way back to Spain by playing a tape of a jet on a boom box while they
set in a seat taken out of a car.
     Except for an interesting and unusual minor character who played a
Texas good old boy who helps the immigrants across the border, I
thought the cast's acting was acceptable but no better.  I like the
idea of the story, but not this execution.  Tom Conti is an actor that
can be excellent as he was in REUBEN, REUBEN and SHIRLEY VALENTINE, but
generally seems to deliver performances without any depth as he does
here.  Perhaps he needs just the right director to realize his
potential.
     SOMEONE ELSE'S AMERICA runs 1:36.  It is rated R, but there is no
nudity, no violence, little bad language, and only the start of sex.  I
would have given it a PG-13, and it would be fine for any kid over 10.
As a gentle demonstration of the melting pot still in action, the show
works, but overall, there is not enough for me to recommend it.  I give
it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
