Title
Review for Man's Best Friend (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
The Phantom
     As it happens, the very friendly-looking, good-natured dog that is
the star of MAN'S BEST FRIEND -- John Lafia's ill-fated, poorly-made
updating of Stephen King's CUJO -- is apparently supposed to be rather
more evil-minded than the enthusiastic, happy-go-lucky fool he appears
to be throughout most of the film.  And he is, in fact, a Tibetan
mastiff, a bit of information the Phantom was able to glean from the
review in the New York Times -- which can only mean that it was
mentioned in the press kit, since the reviewer assigned to the unsavory
task of writing up this turkey normally spends his time reviewing pop
music and likely knows even less about dogs than he does about horror
films.  As no press kits were made available to the Phantom, he'll
trust Mr. Holden got the breed right, even if the rest of his review
was, as usual, something less than helpful.
     The Phantom figured that Max (short for EMAX 3000, his official
designation as yet another genetically-enhanced product of science run
amok) was part of the "working dog" group, but it was hard to tell
exactly what breed this smiling, happy dog was.  Not St. Bernard,
though that was the Phantom's first guess, perhaps influenced by the
preview for BEETHOVEN'S 2ND, a movie that as it happens looks a lot
like MAN'S BEST FRIEND with fewer prosthetic canine effects and one or
two less maulings.  And he certainly wasn't a Doberman, or a
Rottweiller, or a German Shepherd -- or in fact any breed of dog bred
for at least a modicum of aggression under the right circumstances.  Or
any breed in the Husky family that might, on first sight, raise uneasy
thoughts of our none-too-friendly relationship with wolves and other
wild predators.  No indeed.  This dog was just a big, sloppy, friendly
dog of indeterminate breed who wouldn't scare a three-year-old; and
unless one harbored an unreasonable fear of drool, it's hard to see how
he could inspire even a worried thought or two, let alone real terror.
     Cujo was a big, normally harmless St. Bernard-like mutt, which
might have raised similar problems for King; however, Cujo was rabid,
and a rabid St. Bernard could certainly engage in activities a tad more
worrisome than chronic slipper-chewing.  And while Lewis Teague's
screen adaptation was not entirely successful, it did at least capture
the horror inherent in the situation: a normally domesticated friend of
man who, because he becomes possessed by forces outside of his control,
turns on his master and everyone else he would normally do no more than
drool on.  It's exactly the scenario that made CHILD'S PLAY such an
effective film -- what could be more frightening than seeing a friend
turn on us, especially one that should be entirely in our control?
Lafia, who as a writer-director turned in a very serviceable entry in
the "small doll run amok" sub-genre of horror cinema with CHILD'S PLAY
2 (and whose witty screenplay helped make the original CHILD'S PLAY a
sleeper hit), seems a bit at sea here, not knowing how MAN'S BEST
FRIEND should play -- one moment we're convinced that Max might really
run amok, and the next we're listening to a none-too-convincing parrot
get all the best lines in the screenplay.
     The very thin plot revolves around Ally Sheedy who, as a hot-shot
television news producer, discovers that the friendly mad scientists at
EMAX experiment on animals.  After a daring break-in, Sheedy and her
assistant go to some lengths to present us with a brief episode of
"Vivisection on Parade" -- film which would make any PETA member proud,
and which presumably provides MAN'S BEST FRIEND with its redeeming
social value; then Sheedy discovers Max.  Naturally upon seeing a very
large, caged and tortured animal, the first thing she does is pose with
him; the second thing she does is release him and take him home with
her, making only a quick pit-stop at a local 7-11 to get mugged and
allow Max to perform an off-camera Charles Bronson impersonation by
mauling the mugger (in a startlingly non-graphic off-camera scene) and
returning Sheedy's purse to her.  The fact that the mugger is nearly
dismembered is not revealed until very late in the film, leaving us to
wonder both how the film planned to go about earning its "R" rating and
how Max -- who returns to the parking lot looking just as happy and
well-groomed as he left it -- cleaned himself up so much in the few
seconds he had off camera.  Just the first of far too many continuity
problems in the sloppily-written screenplay; occasionally the Phantom
enjoys keeping track of such blunders, but in the case of MAN'S BEST
FRIEND it quickly became clear that if he kept count he'd need more
than two paws to do so; in fact Lafia's screenplay is on occasion so
bad that it seemed a whole litter's worth of paws might be needed.
     Putting continuity and a distinct lack of horror aside, early on
it became obvious to the Phantom that Sheedy was, herself, part of
what's wrong with MAN'S BEST FRIEND, and that he was not the only
member of the audience hoping for her timely demise (hopefully at Max's
hand -- or rather, his paw).  Her character is written as unlikable and
stupid, and Sheedy certainly does the role credit; yet as incredible as
it may seem, Sheedy's character is the most likeable and intelligent in
the film.  Her yuppie boyfriend certainly goes to great lengths to be
as unappealing as possible, and yet it's not until the film is nearly
over that Max decides to put us out of our misery by engaging in yet
another off-camera mauling.  Tied for third in the "least appealing
character in this film" contest are everyone else.
     This would not necessarily be a bad thing, since after all there's
nothing like watching a really annoying character get chewed to death,
but Lafia is curiously reluctant to show much of anything on camera.
Yes, special effects are expensive, but what's the point of making an
R-rated horror film that's less violent than HOME ALONE?  So as in
JURASSIC PARK, much of the carnage is left to our imaginations; of
course Speilberg wanted JURASSIC PARK to be as much of a horror film as
JAWS and DUEL were and filmed it as such, whereas it looks like Lafia
aimed for horror/comedy and missed.  MAN'S BEST FRIEND, on the
infrequent occasions when it does decide to turn back into a horror
film, plays a lot like ALIEN might had it been set in the middle of a
open, sunny field, rather than on a dark, claustrophobic spaceship.
Since the maulings are all shot from Max's perspective; since we know
where everyone is throughout; and since in any event the carnage is
something less than graphic, the audience doesn't find itself exactly
overwhelmed by feelings of tension or terror.  Which leaves the comic
aspects of MAN'S BEST FRIEND, about which the less said the better.
     And then there's Max himself, who is presented throughout the
first two-thirds of the film as a sort of Lassie on steroids, able to
maul muggers, rid the neighborhood of pesky cats, and perform minor
light truck repairs while bounding around with a suspiciously sunny
disposition.  Even by the end of the film, and wearing a fair amount of
uncomfortable-looking canine prosthetics, Max just doesn't come off as
a worthy successor to DEVIL DOG: THE HOUND FROM HELL (the
mid-seventies, made-for-television production that remains one of the
prototypical "Man's Worst Enemy" horror films).  We wait, it seems in
vain, for Max to get mean, or angry, or even the least perturbed, but
waiting is the order of the day in MAN'S BEST FRIEND -- nothing much
happens when the screenplay isn't focused on a cliched set piece (Max
chases a cat; Max finds true love in the form of a collie named Heidi;
Max pays back the abusive, crazy-looking, junkyard-dwelling loner with
which the idiot Sheedy left him after reading his "Dog needed for
endless, cruel abuse -- large friendly dogs with amiable, sunny
dispositions preferred" want-ad in the newspaper and deciding that this
would be the best way to keep Max out of the hands of the mad
scientists at EMAX).  And when Max finally snaps, he does so only
because he's been so thoroughly provoked that even had he been
cross-bred with Ghandi he could hardly have restrained himself
further.  Although Max is not exactly kept on the shortest of leashes
in this film, he generally does little more than perform a set number
of impressive tricks and wonder whether every washed up, post-BREAKFAST
CLUB actor will eventually be reduced to co-starring with members of
another species.
     Lance Henriksen, as the mad-scientist-who-would-dare-to-play-God,
blunders through much of the film harassing two stereotypical cops and
urging them to find his million-dollar dog; should Max continue to
remain unfound, there's no telling what might happen.  Dire things are
predicted: once the drugs that keep Max looking and acting an awful lot
like a very clever, well-trained and friendly Tibetan mastiff wear off,
he will be transformed into a crazed, unstoppable killing machine,
ridding the film of extraneous characters left and right.  Maulings;
chewings; fatal lickings -- anything could happen.  Carnage-A-Go-Go --
really!  But the Phantom should have known better, much as the two
people who walked out on the film midway through obviously did.  Any
film that talks this much about terrible things to come generally
provides little in the way of terror, and much in the way of being just
plain terrible.
     The Phantom could go on, but let's face it -- this film just
doesn't work.  Sheedy needs to call her agent; Max should call his
trainer; and Lafia should stick to playing with dolls.  Although MAN'S
BEST FRIEND has a few funny moments, it can't hold a candle to
BEETHOVEN; and as far as horror goes, it was fairly obvious to the
Phantom that the screenplay wasn't HOUSE-broken enough to qualify.
Calling this film a dog is too easy; but as we're just days away from
Thanksgiving, calling it a turkey will do.

Author
James Berardinelli
     A woman enters a secret laboratory filled with screeching, caged
animals, each the product of evil scientific experiments.  While
there's no sign "Raw Meat" tattooed on her forehead, anyone familiar
with the genre knows her chances of getting out alive.  Cut to later
that evening, when hard- hitting TV reporter Lori Tanner (Ally Sheedy,
looking like she should have stayed in bed) breaches the
apparently-impenetrable security at a company called EMAX (which
consists of a solitary guard who's never on duty and any number of
unlocked doors).  There, Lori finds animal atrocities, and decides to
release a lovable 200-pound dog named Max and take him home.  Dr.
Jarret (Lance Henriksen) is suitably upset by the dog-napping, and lets
the police know his feelings in yet another embarrassingly over-the-top
performance by an actor I once respected.  The problem is that Max
isn't a normal dog (what a surprise!), but a genetically engineered
killing machine, and the drug that keeps him under control is about to
wear off.  Instead of MAN'S BEST FRIEND, we're about to get MAD DOG IS
GORY.
     Actually, there aren't too many deaths in this movie, but in some
ways that's unfortunate, because when MAN'S BEST FRIEND isn't adding to
its body count, it's spending time showing the characters running
around getting nothing done, engaging in poorly-written dialogue, or
participating in some inane expository scene.  Admittedly, there are a
few nice touches (such as Max's "courting" of a female dog to the tune
of "Puppy Love") which show that writer/director John Lafia was willing
to make occasional stabs at parody.  One could make a case, I suppose,
that the entire movie is a wonderfully-conceived satire, but I don't
think that was intention, nor does the overall script seem to bear out
such an interpretation.
     Possibly the most bizarre sequence in MAN'S BEST FRIEND, and
certainly the one to get cat-lovers up in arms, is when Max chases an
orange tabby up a tree, follows it, then eats it whole.  The cat's
apparent crime is to have annoyed a couple of kids who, frankly, have
personalities that make them appealing dog-fodder (it doesn't happen;
no one under the age of 18 gets mauled).
     If there was any question of the direction in which Ally Sheedy's
career is going, it's answered here, where she turns in a
non-performance in which she somehow manages to get out-acted by a
dog.  Lance Henriksen, whose career peaked in ALIENS, notches another
unimpressive credit for his already-tarnished resume.  The most
interesting thing about Dr. Jarret is his short bleached-blond hair.
     As horror/thriller movies go, MAN'S BEST FRIEND has a double
disadvantage:  it's slow-moving and the monster dog isn't immune to
bullets.  In fact, the ending is so abrupt and anticlimactic that it
will leave many veterans of the genre feeling cheated.  (Where's the
inevitable resurrection where the bad guy comes back for a second
go-'round?)  This film has the capacity for disappointing just about
everybody, especially someone who walks in expecting to see BEETHOVEN'S
SECOND.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
ROBERT LEON BERNSTEIN))
     It's a rare treat when a quality horror film is released in the
theater.  And unfortunately with MAN'S BEST FRIEND, we'll be waiting a
while longer.  The film stars Ally Sheedy and Lance Henrikson in a tale
of bio-genetics gone wrong.  Sheedy plays a nosy reporter whose need
for a "good" story provokes her to snoop inside of EMAX, a poorly
guarded million dollar bio-lab that she finds herself effortlessly
intruding.  The result: she unleashes the experimental wonder dog named
MAX, a German Shepherd with genetic recombination allowing it to
swallow like a snake, camouflage like a chameleon, climb trees like a
leopard, and attack with the strength of tiger.  MAX takes a liking to
Sheedy, and she finds herself  protecting the animal from the cruel
technological realm of EMAX, owned by Henrikson.  Well, it doesn't take
long before the hormonally unstable biohazard unleashes his jowls upon
the unsuspecting suburban landscape which offers MAX juicy leg of
mailman, etc...
     Sheedy is a boring non-presence on the screen, tripping through
the enormous plot chasms neglected by the writer/director (I apologize
for a lack of credits. I suppose I was eager to leave the theater, and
in my rush, forgot to take note of the director, writer, producer,
etc...).  Henrikson offered the only relief from the contrived narration
of the script, giving his character as much development as he could
considering the flat dialogue plaguing the film.  The movie depends
upon it's ability to impress the audience with animal special effects,
but all it presents is a dog that can growl, open door handles with his
paw, sit, roll over, play dead, and sick.  The rest of the special
effects were so poor, I found them offensive.
     The film attains sub-mediocrity, an unambitious film at best.
Horror fans might find that CUJO offers a better bite.

Author
Tak
NewLine Cinema / approx 90 mins / color
Rated: R
Tak rating:  see once as a matinee   (or wait a few weeks and rent it)
Tak Summary (I couldn't resist SOME low-grade guessable spoilers)
     Sounds great, right?  Well, apparently the good doctor hasn't
gotten all the kinks worked out yet, for the dog goes dangerously
psychotic and tends to munch on the lab help unless he gets his
periodic tranquilizer shots.
     Which wouldn't be of much concern to us except that Max is freed
from the vivisection-practicing lab by an investigative reporter who
befriends him.  Max, much to her surprise and delight, ends up staying
with her and her animal-disliking boyfriend.
     Max's drugs hold out for the night, so he remains calm.  But the
next morning he's feeling rather frisky: he offs a cat (defying gravity
to do so), a parrot, a mailman, a hydrant (I won't spoil it for ya),
makes two attempts at the reporter's boyfriend, and stops briefly for
some frolicking with a nervous neighborhood collie.
     Meanwhile the reporter (who still thinks Max is a big cuddle
beast) decides to give Max away so he won't be killed, found, or
returned to the EMAX lab. She takes him to a junkyard owner who
apparently has a dog-heaven ranch outside town.  She leaves, and before
she's out of sight, he beans Max over the back o'the head with a shovel
(he coulda used some spider sense ...), and chains him up for a career
as a junkyard dog.  Max will have none of it--he breaks his bonds,
gets a beauty mark, dispatches the owner (guys, you might not wanna
watch this scene ... ouch) and bounds home.
     Meanwhile the doctor has finally convinces the police to stop
investigating him for murder, and has them send the troops after his
million-dollar dog.  The bumbling police arrive just in time to save our
heroine, but not so-in-time for her boyfriend, whose face will never be
the same again (Max must drink too much cranberry juice).  We're then
treated to a five-car chase scene, low-budget car crashes
(fender-benders really), some goofy dog catchers, and the required
computer graphics.
     We pause briefly for breath, then jump right back into the thick
of things with many dead policemen, bullets, more car crashes and a
climactic showdown back at the Lab where it all began.  In true B-movie
style, they manage to include all sorts of goodies in the climax.  They
start with a chase, elbow-fu, projectiles, a car crash.  And it doesn't
stop until they've combined an impressive array of gimmicks, including
a series of chases, rubble, lurking psychotic dogs, the stuffed-dog
variant of the spring-load-cat scare trick, a shotgun, electrocution,
needles, big knives, tense hiding in dark spooky labs, bleeding (lots
of bleeding), a tender moment, and poetic justice by a cute dog that I
thought shoulda shared the parrot's fate.
     The movie ends on a sad note, but then turns things around
with ... anyone? anyone? ... hope for ... anyone? anyone? ... a
sequel!
     Okay, okay. There *was* one bad edit that looked like they dropped
about five frames from a chase scene.  And a tree-climbing scene
reminded me of those old live-actor spider-man movies where you can
just *tell* the camera is sideways.  But that's what makes a truly good
B-movie.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I do so love bad movies.  This one was a fine example.  It was fun
to watch, the plot was dealt with early on so we could got down to the
action, and we got to laugh, cheer and cringe.
     The blood-splashing was kept to a minimum, mostly at the
beginning.  And they never do show much maiming actually going on ...
just enough to let your imagination do all the work, which I prefer
anyway.  The St.Bernard wasn't actually *shown* attacking complete
people--lots of close-ups of limbs and suggestive action cuts.  But
there was the scene where some kids sic Max on a cat (yea! there's too
many of these foul creatures anyway), where Max ingests the whole cat
in bloodless snake-like fashion.
     They got pretty thick with the animal rights moralizing at times,
(again near the beginning--was their boss watching then?) but it was
bearable.  There were lots of familiar cookie-cutter movie characters,
but that's okay too.
     We hear some classic lines from the doctor: "In the right hands
Max can save lives, but in the wrong hands he can be a deadly weapon."
I've heard *that* one a lot.  The parrot even gets some good wise-cracks
in before he turns into a feathered kibble.  (I wonder if they actually
taught it its lines?)  A security guard with all of three lines gets a
one-liner where he calls the mad doctor "jerk"--I guess you had to
be there.  It did get a chuckle from the audience.
     The plot's not terribly original, and looks rather tattered under
good lighting.  What's up with the laser-sighted dart gun?  Or the
throw-away comment about Max turning on the doctor?  Why'd the police
go from disbelief and laughter to fully supporting the doctor with a
five car chase, a stake-out and blazing guns? Just imagine: "you want
us to shoot the dog??"  But that's just picky afterthoughts.  We don't
need no steenkin plot!
     And the types of -fu were amazing.  We got to see (in alphabetical
order): barrel-fu, bat-fu, brake-line-fu, bullet-fu, cage-fu, claw-fu,
dartgun-fu, elbow-fu, fang-fu, knife-fu, mace-fu, rat-poison-fu,
shotgun-fu, shovel-fu, uric acid-fu, welding torch-fu, and I'm sure I'm
forgetting others.
     A light-hearted, fun, low-gore, love-conquers-all, whup-ass
movie.  Entertainment for the whole family.  This would make a good
installment in your whup-ass matinee diet.  You'll need a break from
all the smarmy feel-good holiday movies coming up anyway.
