Title
Review for Dr. No (1962)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dragan Antulov
Endless trailers for THE PHANTOM MENACE were telling us that
every saga had a beginning. So was the case with the most
enduring and probably the longest-running movie franchise in
history - James Bond films. That series, that had spawned
eighteen (or nineteen, depending on the count) films through
almost four decades of its existence, was famous for its
successful and almost always winning formula - spectacular
action, exotic locations, plenty of beautiful (and
promiscuous) women and impressive villains with megalomaniac
ambitions. The formula didn't change through the years, but
almost everything else did, including the actors playing the
lead character. There were five of them, but almost everyone
agrees that the original one, Sean Connery, represents the
best incarnation of James Bond. The reputation of the lead
actor followed the movies that introduced him - first five
James Bond films are regarded as classics. On the other
hand, the first among those classics, DR. NO, directed by
Terrence Young in 1962, has relatively obscure reputation,
being either ignored or not favourably compared with the
other films of the series.
Relatively bad reputation of the film shouldn't be much of a
surprise, although DR. NO happened to be a huge commercial
hit in its time, big enough to launch both the series and
the stellar career of Sean Connery. It was made on
relatively low budget, with producers very doubtful of its
future potential. Ian Fleming, the creator of the character,
wasn't too thrilled about the producers' choice for the lead
role, preferring more established actors like David Niven,
Cary Grant or his own cousin Christopher Lee to relatively
unknown Scot like Connery. The movie wasn't even supposed to
be based on the novel DR. NO; producers had been forced to
abandon their original choice THUNDERBALL because of the
legal entanglements (that novel was later adapted twice). The
insecurity of its creators and the lack of budget (at least
relative to all the latter films) mirrored itself in the
film, although Young, as a capable director, managed to hide
most of it.
The plot begins in Jamaica, when British secret agent
Strangways and his secretary get killed by some mysterious
assassins. Chief of Secret Service, mysterious and grumpy M
(played by Bernard Lee) summons one of his best men, agent
James Bond (played by Connery), who is the perfect man for
this job, equipped not only with the superior training, but
also with the code name "007" with "00" that indicates the
license to kill enemy agents without any legal procedures.
As soon as Bond comes to Jamaica, he becomes the target of
various assassins. He survives all attempts on his life and
begins discovering the reasons why Strangways was killed.
They all have something to do with the radio signals that
sabotage American space program, and the source of this
signals is most likely Crab Key, isolated island owned by
mysterious Chinese character named Dr. No. After initial
suspicions, he is joining forces with CIA agent Felix Leiter
(played by Jack Lord), Bond and Leiter's assistant Quarrel
(played by John Kitzmiller) travel to the island to
investigate. There they stumble on Honey Ryder (played by
Ursulla Andress), voluptuous shell hunter that would help
them evade Dr. No's guards.
DR. NO has the every obligatory element of the Bond formula
(action, exotic women, locations, villains) and it is as
entertaining as an average Bond film, but something is
missing. First of all, film lacks spectacle usually
associated with the Bond classics. Jamaican locations and
characters seem somewhat too real, too ordinary and many
viewers, unaccustomed to Bond, would mistake this film for a
conventional spy thriller. Realistic tone of the movie is
also underlined with the use of local calypso music (which
is also a nice opportunity to hear Jamaican sounds before
that island became famous for its reggae.) Realism is here
partly due to a limited budget (legendary Pinewood studios
were used only for the last scenes of the film, with the
sets rather lame compared to the latter Bond adventures),
and partly due to Fleming being able to influence the film
more than in all latter films. As a result, even the Bond
character is closer to original Fleming's vision - he is
cynical and scruples when it comes to achieving his goals.
Contemporary moralists (including Vatican, which issued
official communique condemning the film) were outraged with
the scenes like Bond shooting helpless enemy in cold blood
or Bond having sex with a female enemy agents before turning
her to authorities. On the other hand, DR. NO is more
realistic than other Bond films because here 007 lacks his
usual spy gadgets and must rely solely on his wits in order
to survive. And the realism also works the other way around
- Bond is perhaps meaner than in other films, but he also
gets his comeuppance by having been tortured, beaten and
humiliated more than usual.
Sean Connery was, of course, splendid in the role that
clinched his career. His Bond is a classic Bond - stone-cold
deadly killer, intelligent yet witty and loveable, able to
bring every woman to his bed. First time we hear those
immortal words "Bond, James Bond" we hear the very same
confident voice that would be a trademark of this character
for decades to come. Connery's charm is unstoppable; because
of it, we are able to enjoy his presence and take for
granted lines that would otherwise sound ridiculous and
trashy. And the script by Richard Maibaum, Johanna Harwood
and Berkley Maher was very suitable for Connery to show his
acting abilities; non-Superman Bond in DR.NO even has some
opportunity to express fear, panic and repulsion, something
we don't see very often in the latter incarnations of his
characters.
The other two obligatory characters - Bond's partner and
Bond's chief opponent - weren't that lucky. Many say that
Ursulla Andress, Swiss actress who had the honour of being
the very first Bond girl, actually happens to be the best
from the bunch. It is truth that the scene of bikini-clad
Honey Ryder coming out of sea really belongs among classic
Bond scenes. It is also truth that Ursulla Andress one of
the shinier careers among all the Bond girls. But her
character is ruined by the weak script and the writers not
able to decide whether to treat her as a tough woman and
equal partner to Bond, or just an ordinary damsel in
distress. Joseph Wiseman as enigmatic Dr. No is also very
good, but the script left too many plot holes concerning his
intentions and didn't really explain some of his actions.
The other characterisations are even worse - for example,
Quarrel as Bond's sidekick has a role that borders parody
and even some racial stereotyping. PC police of today
probably wouldn't appreciate the fact that the all the
villains, except one, happen to be dark-skinned or Asians.
DR. NO, seen by itself, is a still entertaining, but rather
inferior Bond film. However, since it was the first in the
series, it established the character of Bond, his
trademarks, recognisable musical theme by John Barry and
Monty Norman, and even some of the regular side characters
(M, Miss Moneypenny). All that makes it essential for all
those who want to be introduced to the series and all those
who are already fans of Bond films.

Author
Andrew Hicks
DR. NO (1962) **1/2 (out of four)
        OH NO would be a more suitable title for this one. It's the 
first James Bond movie, but it hardly ranks as one of the best. Sean 
Connery is entertaining as usual as 007, but the movie itself lags. The 
action and death trap scenes are barely thrilling. Besides that, the plot 
is never actually explained. We know Dr. No has his underwater 
hideout beneath an island, but what's it there for? What nuclear device 
is he about to launch at the end of the movie, and at what target? It 
wouldn't hurt to let the audience in on these things.
        Bond is off to Jamaica in DR. NO (and, if you've never heard 
someone with an English accent say, "Hey mon!" you're a mighty 
deprived person) to find out what happened to a missing fellow agent. 
Along the way, he wakes up to find a tarantula in his bed (It's sad 
when you're so drunk you don't know who you're going home with.) 
and trespasses on No's island, where he finds a beautiful woman 
(Ursula Andress) gathering seashells. He also finds a few Jamaicans 
opening machine gun fire on him. You have to take the good with the 
bad... Sorry, I've been working on the side as a fortune cookie writer 
lately. My favorite message to people who have just finished eating 
Chinese food: "Your sweet and sour pork was infected with E. Coli 
bacteria."
        DR. NO is worth watching just because it was the movie that 
started off the seemingly endless set of sequels. It's one of the weakest 
Connery vehicles (with YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE taking the cake), 
though, and has much more dialogue than action. You know a James 
Bond movie moves slowly when Bond only nails two women in the 
entire movie. Promiscuity is the all-encompassing gauge of success... 
Another one of my cookie fortunes. I apologize.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Joseph Wiseman, Jack Lord, John Kitzmiller, 
      Ursula Andress, Bernard Lee, Lois Maxwell
Director: Terence Young
Producers: Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum, Johnanna Harwood, and Berkely Mather 
      based on the novel by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Ted Moore
Music: Monty Norman
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Barring a television adaptation of CASINO ROYALE in the 1950s (not 
to be confused with the 1967 movie of the same name), 1962's DR. NO was 
the first opportunity fans of Ian Fleming's James Bond had to watch the 
intrepid superspy in action.  However, producers Harry Saltzman and 
Albert Broccoli wanted their movie to appeal to a wider audience than 
just Fleming's readers.  To that end, they altered the 007 of the novels 
to better fit the screen.  Bond became more suave and witty, and less 
cold-blooded.  Nevertheless, the hero of DR. NO is still grittier than 
he would become by GOLDFINGER (released only two years later), and bears 
little resemblance to the version of Bond essayed by Roger Moore 
beginning in 1973.
     Although many have rightly commented that DR. NO (the movie) is one 
of the closest cinematic interpretations of any Bond novel in tone and 
plot, Sean Connery was not among Fleming's choices to play 007 (the 
author stated his preference to be David Niven).  That didn't stop the 
public from immediately embracing Connery, and, after just one movie in 
what was to become cinema's longest-running series, he was regarded as 
the definitive Bond.  Today, even after four others have taken the role, 
stalwart Connery fans view George Lazenby, Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton, 
and Pierce Brosnan as impostors.
     Story-wise, DR. NO isn't all that different from most of the other 
Bond plotlines, although it is a little more "bare bones".  When a 
British agent assigned to Jamaica disappears, M (Bernard Lee) sends 007 
to the Caribbean to look into the situation.  Upon arrival, Bond is 
immediately the target of a would-be assassin, and, as his investigation 
leads him closer to the truth, attempts on his life become more 
frequent.  After joining forces with CIA operative Felix Leiter (Jack 
Lord), Bond enlists the aid of boat owner Quarrel (John Kitzmiller) to 
take him to Crab Key Island, which is ruled by the mysterious Dr. No 
(Joseph Wiseman).  Once there, in addition to meeting a scantily-dressed 
young woman named Honey Ryder (Ursula Andress), 007 learns why no one 
ever returns from Crab Key.
     With the exception of the big explosion during the film's finale, 
DR. NO is a low-key adventure.  There are no gadgets, forcing Bond to 
rely on his ingenuity (in one scene, when he needs to breathe while 
submerged, he uses hollowed-out reeds as air tubes).  The single car 
chase is reasonably straightforward.  And, for the only time in the 
series, 007 is unmistakably brutalized, appearing bloody, beaten, and 
disheveled as a result.  Regardless, he still defeats the villain and 
gets the girl.
     Many elements of the "Bond formula" are present in their infancy.  
Maurice Binder does the opening titles, although they lack the flair of 
his later contributions.  The "James Bond theme", co-created by Monty 
Norman and John Barry (although exactly who is responsible for the bulk 
of the piece remains a topic of contention to this day), peppers an 
otherwise unmemorable score.  M and Moneypenny make their screen debuts 
(Q first appeared in the next film, FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE), and the 
first -- and perhaps best-remembered -- Bond girl, Ursula Andress, sets 
a standard that hasn't wavered in more than thirty years.  All-in-all, 
DR. NO is a successful, if not superlative, motion picture.  While it 
may appear tame by the standards of the later productions, it's an 
entertaining look back in movie history at a project that developed into 
a worldwide phenomenon.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Like father, like son.  Just a few years ago, my son turned on to
one of my all-time favorite cinematic series, STAR WARS.  And now that
he has almost reached the ripe old age of nine, he has decided, as his
Dad did back in high school, that James Bond is cool.
     Thus began the Rhodes's household saga of viewing every Bond movie
in order.  The Bond pictures started in the early 1960s with teenagers
everywhere, including yours truly, taking their dates to see them.
These pictures had everything, including, but not limited to, exotic
locales -- remember world-wide travel was not that prevalent then, lush
sets, high tech gadgets, beautiful people, beaucoup sexual innuendo,
heavy action and non-stop entertainment.  And Sean Connery.
     1962's DR. NO, set to a seductive calypso beat, could not have
been a better introduction to the series.  The smooth movie goes down
as easily as one of those potent Caribbean drinks.  Even the show's
obvious flaws -- most of the fight choreography is atrocious, for
example -- become part of its simple charms.  It is as if the studios
knew how popular the shows would become, so they took their time with
the first one in making the lead character accessible and worth caring
about.
     Nobody, but nobody, can play Ian Fleming's James Bond like Sean
Connery.  As he thwarts every foe with grace, wit, and style, the
audience laps it up.  The female members fall in love with him and the
male ones dream of having his romantic successes as every movie brings
a new stream of female conquests for him.  Connery makes Bond so
inherently likable that no matter how outlandish his maneuvers, he
never seems in any danger of overacting.
     Unlike subsequent episodes, where Bond always gets a load of new
high tech gadgets especially created for that caper, in this one the
only thing he gets is a new gun, a Walther PPK with a Brausch silencer,
to replace his trusty Beretta.  No personalized car with on-board water
cannon, fog making machine, or any other gizmo.
     Although not necessarily the first thing that comes to mind when
you think of a Bond picture, one part that rarely disappoints is the
music.  Monty Norman and Academy Award winner John Barry (DANCES WITH
WOLVES, OUT OF AFRICA, etc.) came up with some great music for DR. NO.
Not only does it set the mood and the pace perfectly, but it leaves you
humming the tunes when the show is over.
     Director Terence Young sets a relaxed and bubbly rhythm in the
opening sequence with three innocent looking "blind" guys dancing to
the tune of three blind mice, all set to a calypso beat.  The perfect
pacing draws you quickly into the story's characters.
     As they sing easy-going Caribbean songs like "Underneath the Mango
Tree," Jamaica at first seems an odd choice for a spy thriller.  But
the laid back inhabitants and the busy spies make for a fascinating
contrast.  The result is certainly one of the more relaxed of the Bond
films.
     As always in Bond stories the forces of evil have some dastardly
deed in mind, usually involving attempts at world domination.  This
time it surrounds a device that the nefarious Dr. No uses that can
force missiles off course.
     Jack Lord plays the CIA agent on the island, but the most
memorable star, other than Connery, is the gorgeous Ursula Andress as a
big shell hunter known as Honey Ryder.  When we first see her perfectly
shaped body in an athletic looking two piece swimsuit encasing her
golden tan, the natural reaction is "wow!"
     Honey risks her life going after the big ones on Dr. No's hideout,
Crab Key Island.  Even the locals will not go there thanks to the
presence of a fire-breathing dragon.
     In a winner for the story's most ridiculous but undoubtedly most
realistic part, the Jamaicans wear loose fitting short sleeve shirts in
the hot Caribbean weather while the outsiders torture themselves for
the sake of fashion by wearing gray suits with long sleeved shirts and
ties.
     In the Bond films, especially the early ones, sex is a kiss with a
cutaway before the action starts and a cut back after it is over.
(Notice how Bond gets to bed the voluptuous bad woman before he turns
her over to the cops.  Similarly, Bond is happy to kill in cold blood
if the other guy's gun is empty.  Bond is not a big moralist.)
     In an age where this genre of show often degenerates into a
special effects extravaganza, it is refreshing to see one, like Dr. No,
where brains can be characters' salvation.  When Bond and Co. get
hunted down by dogs, he saves his band through simple ingenuity.  He
cuts off reeds, and they use them to breathe as they hide their bodies,
and hence scents, under the water.
     DR. NO runs 1:50.  It is rated PG for violence and sexual innuendo
and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, thought the film was great!  His only
complaint?  Too much kissing.  He's been wanting us to rent one of the
Bond videos, and although GOLDFINGER is arguably the best, we decided
to start with the first in the series.  He can't wait until we rent the
next one.
