Title
Review for Threesome (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
     Romantic comedies are, by nature, never models of originality, so
their appeal is usually based on the freshness of the characters, the
charm of their interaction, and about a dozen intangibles.  THREESOME
has a hook--it pairs two guys and a girl--but that's about all it can
claim as far as appeal goes, and it ends up seeming like some sort of
bizarre amalgamation of Ben Stiller's REALITY BITES and Truffaut's
JULES AND JIM.  Add a dash of political correctness, a pinch of ANIMAL
HOUSE unruliness, and cook until half-baked.
     THREESOME starts out with a familiar premise.  Two mismatched male
college students, Eddy and Stuart (played by Josh Charles and Stephen
Baldwin, respectively) end up sharing a dorm room.  They become
complimentary cogs in the machine of campus life, with Eddy doing
Stuart's homework and the housecleaning while Stuart teaches Eddy how
to drink, party, and pick up girls.
     Enter Alex (Lara Flynn Boyle), a girl whose gender-unspecific name
got her identified as a "male" in the school's computer and
consequently assigned to a suite with two guys.  Predictably, her
arrival creates a whirlwind of sexual tension as she becomes attracted
to Eddy, while Stuart pursues her.  Meanwhile, the shy and stand-offish
subject of Alex's affections recognizes that he may be gay, as
evidenced by his feelings for his roommate.
     About the only thing that THREESOME does well is to present
homosexual relationships with the same degree of sensitivity that it
presents heterosexual ones (and note that this statement makes no
claims about the depth of this movie's "sensitivity").  No attempts are
made to "reform" the gay man by giving him a girlfriend, and there's no
cop-out ending where he turns straight.  While few will consider
THREESOME a landmark in Hollywood's recognition of the normality of
same-sex relationships, it at least manages to reduce these to a
virtual non-issue.
     Unfortunately, other elements of this production are riddled with
flaws, not the least of which is a script that veers wildly from
silliness to profundity.  Somehow, these diametrically opposite
approaches don't work well together.
     The film goes nowhere, and it doesn't take long for the viewer to
wonder if anything is going to happen.  THREESOME could have been
devised as a stage play, with most of its content occurring within the
confines of the dorm suite.  It also doesn't demand a campus background
since, with the exception of a few throw-away scenes, little that
happens has anything to do with studying or classes.
     The characters don't start clicking with each other until well
past the film's halfway point, and it takes even longer for the
audience to warm to them.  Perhaps a little more genuine interaction,
and a little less reliance on voice-overs and gimmicky scenes of "rock
tune bonding" (designed to sell soundtracks) would have helped.
     While the script has its clever moments, these are overbalanced by
a combination of painfully trite scenes (you have a pretty good idea
what's going to happen when the three take a picnic near an inviting
pond) and cumbersome dialogue ("Pandora's proverbial box had been
opened, but more interestingly I don't think any of us wanted to close
it.").
     The actors supposedly had a great time making this movie.  Too bad
the audience doesn't have the same fun watching them.  Stephen Baldwin
has the annoying "party dude" down pat.  Josh Charles manages to bring
a little life and charm to his angst-riddled character.  This is
Charles' and Baldwin's second film together--they co-starred in 1993's
deadly- dull CROSSING THE BRIDGE.  Finally, Lara Flynn Boyle's
performance vacillates between acceptable and awful--a fair
description of the overall movie, actually.
     There are very few romantic comedies that manage to successfully
blend their lighthearted elements with intelligent examinations of
issues such as the importance of intimacy and the difficulties in
discovering one's sexual identity.  THREESOME, by falling into the
common trap of mistaking pretentiousness for substance, loses its way
early on.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Tastes and morals may change, but one thing remains the same
throughout history - among all works of art the most
controversial ones are those that explore how far a human
being can go before he/she reaches happiness. Since that
happiness often corresponds with active love life,
controversy often comes from the depiction of sexuality -
either unconventional display of sexuality or display of
unconventional forms of sexuality. Interestingly enough,
THREESOME, 1994 romantic drama by Andrew Fleming, hardly
caused any controversy despite satisfying both of
aforementioned criteria.
The plot takes place on unnamed American college where shy,
bookwormish student Eddy (played by Josh Charles) shares two
thirds of dormitory suite with Stuart (played by Stephen
Baldwin), typical jock. Two of them, despite differences in
character and views on world, become best friend, but their
relationship becomes complicated when, due to bureacratic
mistake, remaining third of their suite gets occupied by a
female student, Alex (played by Lara Flynn Boyle). Soon it
becomes apparent that Alex rejects all Stuart's advances in
favour of Eddy, who, to his utmost horror, starts realising
that he is being attracted to Stuart. However, despite
triple case of unrequited love, all three become great
friends and enjoy time with each other. But the unresolved
sexual tension is still present and threatens their unusual
relationship.
THREESOME didn't cause much of a controversy because it was
made during the zenith of "political correctness" when
homosexual desires as integral part of love triangle didn't
look as shocking as in previous eras. Furthermore, this film
at first glance didn't look very different from the standard
romantic comedies from Hollywood and for many the unusual
love triangle was nothing more than "high concept" for
formulaic and predictable Hollywood product. However,
writer-director Fleming approached this farcical situation
with a great deal of seriousness. There are some truly funny
moments in this film, but THREESOME is melodrama in its
nature, obviously inspired by Truffaut's classic JULES ET
JIM (which is explicitly referenced in this film), and
Fleming is not afraid to counter mostly benign humour with
some darker overtones in the plot. The actors who appeared
in this film seemed perfect for the part - Josh Charles is
very good in his role, while Stephen Baldwin plays very
convincing jock. Lara Flynn Boyle is also very good as the
only female in this triangle and plays her role with a lot
of natural ease, which wasn't such easy thing do considering
that she had to appear not only naked in front of camera,
but also to play love scene that features certain sexual
activity that used to belong only in the domain of X-rated
movies. The ending of this film, however, seems somewhat
forced and diminshes generally good impression of this film.
However, even when the novelty of its basic premise wears
off, THREESOME is still going to be interesting and
entertaining movie experience.
Review written on September 30th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Tak
TriStar Pictures /rated R
Starring:   Lara Flynn Boyle        Stephen Baldwin            Josh Charles
Classification: Romantic Comedy
Tak Rating: see it several times - full and/or matinee
One-Line-Summary
----------------
    A non-traditional love-triangle where no one's lust is reciprocated.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Things heat up when Alex (Lara Flynn Boyle) is mistaken for a male
by the college bureaucracy and placed with Eddie (Josh Charles) and
Stuart (Stephen Baldwin) in a college dorm room.  Alex soon develops a
huge lust for Eddie, Eddie would rather not get involved, and Stuart is
really hot for Alex.  The rest of the movie is about trying to sort out
these feelings and the situations that arise.
Tak Thoughts ** minor spoilers -- revealed in first 20 mins ** 
------------
     THREESOME opens with a definition of "deviant" that goes much like
this: 1) to stray, esp. from a standard, or principle.  2) to depart
from an established course or norm.  Eddie narrates, and says "... this
is the story of a time in our lives where we traveled the less traveled
path and, for a brief while, became deviants."
     When you look at the thick of things, it seems far from the norm,
but it's not such a stretch.  Each step down the so-called deviant
lifestyle makes sense as it's taken.  It's only after you've traveled
for awhile that you realize how far from normal you've gone.
     Anyone into combinations and permutations?  Well, THREESOME would
make an interesting story problem.  If you had three people, Alex,
Stuart, and Eddie; all of whom wanted to sleep with one of the others,
but the person they wanted didn't want them.  List all the possible
combinations of partners and their directed lust, indicated by a
directed arrow. ---> Find the solution with the most fulfilled lust.
     That's a lust of 3, but that's the given.  So let's list all the
other combos, including leftovers.
     The numbers say everyone should sleep with everyone, right?
Right.  But that's too easy.  And it just doesn't work.  Mostly because
the two guys have a problem with taking certain partners.  Though it's
not with each other, as Eddie is gay.  Eddie won't do Alex (except for
a trial run), and Stuart won't do Eddie (though he makes certain
concessions).  So they really have to find some solution that everyone
is comfortable with.
     They really try.  They try out all the combinations listed above.
They even bring in "outsiders" for the left out person in the couples
experiments.  These just don't work.  They're only really happy when
they're all together.  Then some sort of magic happens, where they can
all believe they're getting what they want.
     THREESOME could be seen as a glorification of an immoral
lifestyle.  This is certainly acknowledged, as the threesome become
quite the scandal at their dorm.  I certainly wouldn't condemn them.
It fact, I'm envious.  They look like they're having so much fun.  I
know there've been times in my life ... well ... :-)
     My favorite scene is a road trip where they abduct an garden
gnome, frolic in a rental convertible, and end up at a swimming hole.
Fun, tense, and delightful to watch.  Oh, and there's the "scary, hairy
Larry" scene.  There's lots more.
     I've spent more time than usual talking about the storyline.  I
think that's pretty high praise, actually.  I didn't have any problems
with any of the mechanics of the movie (actors, direction, etc) getting
in the way of me being totally immersed in the story.  Bravo.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I liked THREESOME.  Strict adherence to wholesome-ness can be so
restricting at times.  Check it out--let yourself think about what it
might be like to be a deviant.  Who knows? If you're lucky, maybe
THREESOME will set you off on your own deviant path.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Lara Flynn Boyle, Stephen Baldwin, Josh Charles.
Screenplay/Director:  Andrew Fleming.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I think "The Wonder Years" may be to blame.  There was a time when
I didn't take particular notice of voiceover narration one way or the
other; it was just another part of a movie.  Now I'm not sure whether
it is the content of the narration or my perception that has changed,
but it seems lately that hearing narration at the beggining of a film
is enough to make me suspicious.  There comes with some narration a
pretentiousness that can weigh down a simple story or pummel an
audience over the head with a moral.  THREESOME has all the elements to
be a successful lighthearted character romp, but many of its strengths
are obscured by the moments it takes itself far too seriously.
     THREESOME opens in the mid-term at an unnamed university, where
two new transfers prepare to join a returning student in a three-person
dormitory suite.  The returning student is Stuart (Stephen Baldwin), a
boorish womanizer; his new roommates are Eddy (Josh Charles) and Alex.
Much to everyone's surprise, Alex (Lara Flynn Boyle) turns out to be a
woman, assigned to the room through a bureaucratic blunder.  Tensions
are high at first, but eventually the three become close friends.
Naturally, romantic attractions begin to get in the way.  Stuart is
attracted to the fiery Alex.  Alex is attracted to the sensitive Eddy.
And Eddy, who is just discovering his sexual identity, is attracted to
Stuart.
     THREESOME is set up almost as a three-character stage play wherein
other characters exist only to make observations on the behavior of the
three principal characters, and those characters are established with
widely varying degrees of success.  Stuart is probably the most
interesting and fully-rounded character, one who bears many of the
marks of a stereotypical college jerk but responds to his roommate's
sexual orientation with minimal sturm und drang.  Stephen Baldwin is
surprisingly charming in the role, spewing forth sexual single-entendre
with an infectious enthusiasm.  Josh Charles is appropriately tense as
the confused Eddy, one of those over-thinkers many of us knew (or were)
in college.  Still, there comes a point where his heaviness is a bit
much for an audience to take.  Lara Flynn Boyle, who has gone from
looking too old for her part as a high school student on "Twin Peaks"
to looking too old for her part as a college student here, does some
interesting things with a character who never really finds a center.
Alex is part sex kitten, part basket case, and several other parts of
several other characters, and it's difficult for anyone to strike the
right tone with such a character.
     What did work strike a chord with me was the interaction between
the three characters, which was extremely reminiscent of relationships
I knew.  College was filled with people who bantered and sparred,
trying desperately to ignore sexual tension, and while the specifics of
the relationship between the three characters in THREESOME are somewhat
unique, that dynamic is not.  The dialogue, while tending toward the
unrealistic, is still frequently funny, and I found myself basically
engaged in the lives of these three people as long as they weren't
navel-gazing about how hard it all was.
     And it is on the level of its self-consciousness that THREESOME
falls somewhat flat.  What could have been a lively and fairly
entertaining look at a slightly different kind of romantic triangle
instead becomes a film that tries far too hard to be *about*
something.  The narration, which comes retrospectively from Eddy, is
filled with descriptions that could just as easily have been provided
visually, and with pseudo-profound pronouncements about that wrong turn
that becomes the best part of a trip.  There are a couple of three-way
love scenes which are handled deftly, but much of Andrew Fleming's
direction is leaden.  It appears as though he wasn't quite clear that
he had a decent little comedy on his hands; it wasn't really necessary
to try to turn it into an earth-shaking drama.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THREESOME is one of those movies where you must be able to suspend
disbelief from the start; otherwise, the movie has no chance of
working.  Here we have 2 men and a woman who are assigned to the same
room in a coed dorm, but are unable to get reassigned.  Sure.
Actually, it was made plausible enough in the movie (it is actually a
suite with a private single (woman), a private double (men), and a
shared bath) that suspending disbelief turned out to be easy for me.
     The premise of the movie is that person A is attracted to person
B, B to C, and C to A whereas B is not attracted to A, nor C to B, and
nor A to C.  This simple equation gets much more complex as the movie
advances.  All along, they are all quite good friends and have great
times together.
     The show has several points to commend it.  The plot is quite
intriguing.  The character of the woman (Lara Flynn Boyle best seen in
RED ROCK WEST) is well written and well acted.  It is easy to get swept
up in some of the scenes and have vicarious fun along with them.
Boyle's smile and physical emotions were well done and catching.
     On the other hand, the guy's parts were poorly written, especially
the handsome, dumb jock type character (Stephen Baldwin).  Baldwin
needs to take some acting classes rather than relying on getting roles
because of his good looks and his famous brother.  The other guy played
by Josh Charles was mediocre.  I did not believe either of the male
characters.
     With the same plot, but a much better script writer (Andrew
Fleming), a recasting of all of the roles except for Boyle, tighter
editing, and perhaps a different director (Andrew Fleming), this movie
could have worked since it actually had a lot of possibilities.  It was
not a bad movie, but did not come close to what it could have been.
     THREESOME runs only 1:33, but seems longer.  It is rated R for the
seriousness of its material I guess.  I can not recommend it as
constructed although it had good potential.  For Boyle's acting and
energy, I award it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
