Title
Review for Wide Sargasso Sea (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     WIDE SARGASSO SEA is a film directed by John Duigan.  The case
includes Karina Lombard, Nathaniel Parker, Rachel Ward, and Michael
York.  Music is by Stewart Copeland.  Rated NC-17, for (frontal) nudity
and sexual situations.
     John Duigan is a great Australian director who has made his
reputation with small, personal films including FLIRTING and THE YEAR
MY VOICE BROKE.  In adapting Jean Rhys' 1966 novel to the screen,
Duigan has eschewed the small, the personal, the Australian and given
us a slight and slightly dull Gothic romance.  He turns the beauty of
Jamaica into a moody, dangerous haunt and peoples it with ciphers whose
actions we cannot begin to understand, unless we ourselves just happen
to be characters in a bodice-ripper.  Rhys was bold enough to take the
moody hero of JANE EYRE, Edward Rochester (played by Nathaniel Parker),
and attempt to explain why he was the way he was to poor dear Jane.
Probably not that good of an idea to be begin with.  And Duigan cannot
help but make more of a muddle of the thing.
     Rochester's first wife, mad and locked away in the attic, turns
out to have been Antoinette Cosway, the creole daughter of an English
planter and ex-slave-holder and his French wife.  One nice thing about
Antoinette's story is that we get to see Michael York and Rachel Ward
in brief parts as the parents.  Antoinette, played by newcomer Karina
Lombard, is eventually married off to the penniless second son of a
wealthy English family.  After some initial difficulties, they settle
into one of her family houses tucked up in the mountains and enjoy what
is supposed to uninhibited lovemaking.  As these things go it isn't
much and probably the only reason the film got its NC-17, which Duigan
reputedly set out to get, is a lamentably short shot of Parker's
penis.
     Both of the principals are handsome people and look marvelous in
the nude.  Duigan hasn't given them a lot to do in or out of their
clothes.  And most of their actions are pretty hard to fathom.  He gets
a poison-pen letter that his wife has the seeds of insanity in her and
suddenly he no longer loves her.  *And* she starts to lose it.
     Lombard is no great shakes as an actor and that doesn't help us
any to understand her character.  Parker's acting is better, but
meaningless and unmotivated.  Some of the black supporting actors are
actually interesting performers especially the woman who plays a
combination witch and nanny and another woman who plays one of the
servants with a combination of coldness and pity and secret jokes that
is quite appealing.
     I cannot recommend WIDE SARGASSO SEA to anyone at any price,
except die-hard Duigan fans, perhaps.

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 7.4 out of 10 (B-, **1/2 out of ****) 
     The story of WIDE SARGASSO SEA is a prequel to Charlotte Bronte's
classic JANE EYRE.  It tells what happened before the events of that
novel, explaining in some detail the history behind the mad West Indian
wife that Rochester (Nathaniel Parker) keeps locked away in the attic.
When Rochester is first introduced, he is a fortune hunter, and
Antoinette Cosway (Karina Lombard) is the object of his attention.  She
has a sizeable land holding in Jamaica that he wants to make his own,
so he entices her into marrying him.  For a while, the couple seems
genuinely happy, but eventually an ugly secret from Antoinette's
past--one that may also foretell her future doom--comes to light.
     WIDE SARGASSO SEA, faithful to the novel from which its story is
taken, is a beautifully photographed, wonderfully sensual, and
poorly-paced motion picture.  The first half-hour moves along nicely,
but then the film bogs down and by the last fifteen minutes (which go
by in blur), WIDE SARGASSO SEA has become virtually stagnant.
     Director John Duigan knows what he's doing when it comes to using
a setting to convey feelings.  WIDE SARGASSO SEA is a vibrant movie,
one of images and passions.  His sweltering 1840s Jamaica is perfectly
rendered as the backdrop for the tumultuous relationship between
Antoinette and Rochester.  Duigan manages something difficult--getting
an audience sitting in a cool movie theater to feel like they're in the
tropics.  Equal credit must go to cinematographer Geoff Burton, who
displays talent for the visuals of this film.
     Even with its uneven tone, WIDE SARGASSO SEA might have been a
success had stronger performers been hired in the leading roles.  While
both Karina Lombard and Nathaniel Parker are pleasing to look at,
neither is capable of delivering dialogue with any consistent degree of
realism.  With the characters not being realized with full power, the
storyline becomes plodding, and the movie threatens to grind to a
halt.
     As a romance, this movie is mildly successful.  As a tragedy, it
isn't nearly as good.  The fatal wedge in the marriage (the likelihood
that Antoinette will eventually become as insane as her mother) seems
overplayed.  One must remember that this is not a a contemporary
society and insanity was thought of much differently, but the film has
trouble presenting solid character motivation during its second half.
The relationship between Antoinette and Rochester, which was developed
with great skill, is torn down with far less concern for detail.
     There are a lot of sex scenes in this film, but nothing to earn it
an NC-17.  BASIC INSTINCT was as explicit, and perhaps THE LOVER even
more so--with one caveat.  There is a shot of full-frontal male nudity
in WIDE SARGASSO SEA.  That apparently is a no-no for a movie wanting
an R.  As a result, this film gets the dreaded NC-17.
     WIDE SARGASSO SEA is has a strong beginning.  By the time the
pacing becomes a problem, the viewer is engrossed enough that he or she
is unwilling to let go just because the story is moving slowly.  It
isn't that this is a bad movie, because it's not.  Rather, it's a
question of how powerful it could have been with lead performers who
could bolster--rather than mute--the strength of the main characters,
because the interest in Antoinette and Rochester is exclusively what
pulls the audience through the flatter parts of the story.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
