Title
Review for Deceiver (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
This film is reminiscent of two other films helmed by brother
writer-directors. The first would be 1996's BOUND (8/10) by the
brothers Wachowski, and the other would be BLOOD SIMPLE (8/10), by the
ultimate in brother-tandems in the film industry, Joel and Ethan Coen.
The twin Pate brothers have orchestrated a solid follow-up to their
first film THE GRAVE, which had debuted at the 1996 Sundance Film
Festival. 
PLOT:
A wealthy, arrogant, manipulative alcoholic by the name of Wayland gets
interrogated by two tough cops in regards to the murder of a prostitute
found chopped in two pieces. Wayland suffers from a serious case of
temporal lobe epilepsy, and has had a history of deception. The intense
officers also have their own demons, and struggle to determine the
truth and the identity of the real killer in this meandering murder
mystery.
CRITIQUE:
Dark, gritty, engrossing whodunnit, with strong performances by all of
its leads, effective storytelling by the way of the Pate brothers
(despite its convoluted plot) and a unique, if somewhat overdone, style
of directing. This film suggests film noir, but with its proverbial
femme fatale chopped in two, I suppose. The entire story basically
takes place in one interrogation room, with two uncompromising cops
grilling a wealthy suspect, but the superior performances by the
actors, the interesting story line, and the unique flashbacks from
directors Pate, make this film a suspense filled, original tale of
tantalizing inquisitiveness. 
It's the type of film that continues to leave you guessing as to the
identity of the perpetrator, even after the final frame of the film has
been faded out. And it's not in the nasty sense of the plot being too
complex, but in the good sense of being able to sit down and discuss it
thought-provokingly with others afterwards. If you are the type of
person who likes to have their films delivered fresh and clean on their
plate, then you will definitely not enjoy this film's unique sense of
serpentine narrative. But for all those who relish the idea of actually
paying close attention to a film, and utilizing most of your brain's
capacities to solve a well-developed mystery, then straddle yourself up
for a good time with this enigmatic confection.
Michael Rooker pulls off another convincing performance as the tough
guy with an attitude, and Penn demonstrates his capacity to act
decently, without having to resort to a swear word every two lines. Tim
Roth does come across as the strongest of the bunch with an excellent
portrayal of a man whose ambitions, dreams and hopes were lost a long
time before his extreme wealth and epileptic condition drove him to
psychologically deceptive distractions. The directing is also uniquely
envisioned to take full advantage of an otherwise dull setting, but the
twin brothers do tend to ambitiously overwork the camera at some
points. All in all, this film demonstrates an involved story line with
many twists and turns, solid performances by its leads, a unique
filming style and an all-around good time for all those looking to
untangle a quirky murder mystery.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Renee Zellweger met producer Peter Glatzer and the Pate Brothers at a
bus stop in the snow at Sundance in 1996. They had just seen Zellweger
in THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD and were so impressed with her performance that
the role of Elizabeth was written for her. Shortly thereafter,
Zellweger was cast opposite Tom Cruise in the critically-acclaimed hit
JERRY MAGUIRE (7.5/10).
Renee took her first acting class to ensure graduating from The
University of Texas with a literature degree, made her film debut while
still in Austin in Richard Linklater's DAZED AND CONFUSED (7/10).
Jonas Pate graduated from Princeton University in 1993. His twin
brother Josh graduated from Chapel Hill in 1992. The duo joined forces
with Peter Glatzer to create THE GRAVE, their first feature film, which
premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 1996. 
Don't blink because you will miss Ellen Burstyn doing her best
impersonation of a "struggling, aging actress playing a bit part in an
independent production", as she portrays the bookie Mook in this film.
HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER was Michael Rooker's first movie
which was filmed in 1986, but was not released until years later.
This film was originally titled LIAR.
This film was shot entirely in South Carolina, home of the Pate
brothers.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Jonas and Josh Pate co-wrote and co-directed this enigmatic crime
film.  Two pieces that together make up one dead prostitute, Elizabeth
(played by Renee Zellweger in flashbacks), have been found.  The police
investigation has turned up a most unusual suspect, Wayland (Tim Roth).
Wayland is the misfit heir to a textile fortune.  The evidence tying
Wayland to the prostitute is very weak: she simply died with his phone
number in her pocket.  But Wayland acts guilty and a two-man team of
policemen administer a series of polygraph lie detector tests to
Wayland.  In little flashbacks we get to know the policemen.  There is
Kennesaw (Michael Rooker) and Braxton (Chris Penn).  Each has
complications in his life at the moment. Kennesaw has a beautiful but
wayward wife (Rosanne Arquette) that he does not want to lose, but he
has fits of rage about the situation.  Braxton is a younger man, a
security guard turned cop.  We are explicitly his IQ is a lowly 101 and
he certainly is not one of the more promising policemen on the force.
He also has gotten into trouble with a flamboyant bookie (played by--
are your ready for this?--Ellen Burstyn) and he desperately needs money
that he hopes to borrow from Kennesaw.  Braxton and Kennesaw work as a
team to try to break down Wayland, but it is not clear that even his
answers on the polygraph are dependable. Even on the polygraph Wayland
may be playing a deadly game of deception.
     Tim Roth is, of course, second only to Steve Buscemi as the king
of bizarre roles in arthouse films.  His smooth strange manner is just
about right for this film.  He maintains a wall around himself inside
which he remains aloof even from the audience.  Most of the rest of the
casting is prosaic.  By far the most interesting choice is to have
Ellen Burstyn as the bookie and kingpin Mook, complete with glitter
eye-shadow.  It is, of course, in stark contrast to the matronly roles
we expect of her, and while we see her in only two scenes, her face is
the one image of the film that sticks in my memory.  Photography by
Bill Butler is dark and moody.
     DECEIVER is clearly an attempt to make another puzzle crime film
in the tradition of THE USUAL SUSPECTS.  It is the sort of story that
does not really begin until the film is over and the audience has all
the clues and then can start trying to piece them together.  Generally
that is a very good touch, but there has to be at least one real
solution and way to get to it.  It goes wrong, however, in DECEIVER
because the clues do not seem to lead in a coherent way to a solution.
It is an art in a puzzle story to leave enough clues about what is
going on so that the viewer can piece together one or more possible
satisfying explanations but at the same time make the explanation
complex enough that piecing together the clues is a challenge. One had
the feeling that on a second watching of THE USUAL SUSPECTS the viewer
could make all of the clues fit.  (And in fact it was not difficult on
the second viewing.)  A second viewing of DECEIVER on the other hand
seems much less promising because there will still be too many holes to
piece together the story.  At the same time what we have already seen
seems contradictory.  There seem to be no explanations for what we have
seen that are both coherent and interesting.
     The Pates are trying a little too hard to surprise the us at the
expense of logic in the script.  Still while the illusion of the puzzle
film lasts this film is intriguing.  I rate it a 5 on the 0 to 10 scale
and low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   They say that absinthe makes the heart grow fonder, but
don't believe it.  This liqueur with its opaline-green color,
flavored with wormwood and consumed largely by bluebloods
from the American South can make a mean and crafty
gentleman into an even more dangerous and deceptive dude. 
If the imbiber is cursed with epilepsy to boot, watch out.  You
don't know what he's capable of doing.  What's more, even he
may be oblivious to his actions.  By centering "Deceiver" on
such an individual, Jonas Pate who directed the dazzling
police drama which he and his twin brother Josh wrote have
concocted an intoxicating whodunit.  This cat-and-mouse
game between a murder suspect and two detectives who
subject him to a series of polygraph tests pits a Princeton
summa cum laude graduate with a 151 I.Q. against two cops
who just can't keep up with his maneuvers.  Conceived with
the working title "The Liar," the Pates' rogue has as much in
common with a recent picture bearing a similar name as does
Tim Roth with Jim Carrey.
   Filmed entirely in one of the most handsome of American
cities, Charleston, South Carolina, "Deceiver" fails to exploit
its location but is photographed principally within one of the
town's police precincts and in the minds of its three principal
characters.  A classy prostitute, Elizabeth (Renee Zellweger),
is found dead, divided in half by a long kitchen knife and
buried in suitcases in opposite corners of the municipality.  A
suspect who has been frequently seen with her and who, in
fact, had invited her to a posh party in his parents' home is
pulled in by two detectives from the polygraph unit, Kennesaw
(Michael Rooker) and Braxton (Chris Penn).  The suspect,
Wayland (Tim Roth), has no lawyer but needs none: he is
convinced that he can turn the tables on his interrogators and
by doing so can be permanently removed from suspicion.   
On the one hand Wayland--who had from time to time
conversed with the hooker but who insists he had never
touched her--has brains and money in his favor.  He is what
they still call in Charleston a blueblood, whose wealthy father
provides him with enough cash to allow him access to
important information about the town's residents.  On the
other hand, he is an alcoholic who is fond of absinthe, and
subject to liquor-augmented seizures.  When in the midst of a
paroxysm, he can climb furniture and attack people who touch
him without recalling the event when he returns to
consciousness.  
   During the course of several sessions with the lie detector,
Wayland surprises the two cops with his knowledge of their
weaknesses.  For Braxton it's an addiction to gambling, a
compulsion which has put him $20,000 in debt to the head of
the town's underworld, Mook (Ellen Burstyn).  For Kennesaw
it's a seething, internal rage against his wife, a woman who
outclasses him and who is having an affair.  "Deceiver" is one
movie that helps prove the premise bandied about in the
nation's schools that knowledge is power.  By seeming to
know as much about their lives as they do themselves,
Wayland is able to gain the upper hand on the detectives, an
advantage that gives the final half hour of the piece a
particularly compelling nature.  Hold on to your shoes
because the final twenty seconds--which sew up the loose
strings--may knock your socks off.
   Josh and Jonas Pate are known to a select audience for
their 1996 Sundance Film Festival work, "The Grave." That
indie movie looks at first like a horror picture but actually
deals in an intermittently comic style with a shotgun-wielding
maniac and some moronic grave-robbers motivated by what
they hear about a rich man who buried millions of dollars of
goods inside his own grave.  Shucking their preoccupation
with over-the-top theatrics, the Pates this time have
disciplined themselves wonderfully to produce a work
emphasizing language, particularly its use by the articulate
Wayland to turn the tables on his examiners.
   In a sense, it's a shame that cameraman Bill Butler is able
to give us just a scant insight into the beauty and charm of
that old world city of Charleston--every bit as aristocratic as
the Savannah, Georgia of "Midnight in the Garden of Good
and Evil."  Instead he focuses inward to underscore the
churning of emotions as three men play their canny chess-like
game of one-upmanship.  As such the movie takes on a
theatrical milieu, with its emphasis on dialogue and situation
in enclosed spaces.  Yet "Deceiver" works quite well on the
big screen thanks to a clever plot and its larger-than-life
performers, particularly the great Tim Roth--who has
entertained us so wonderfully in a variety of villainous roles in
movies like "Rob Roy" and "Hoodlum."  When Roth's pupils
bury themselves deep into his forehead, we in the audience
virtually feel the torment of a man succumbing to seizures, fits
made all the more devastating by his love for absinthe and his
consumption of powerful pills.  We sit at the edge of our seats
understanding perfectly the perspiration that pours from
Michael Rooker's brow, the tension that builds in Chris Penn's
body as he tries to regain command over out-of-control
situations.  Ellen Burstyn is not so fortunate, being cast not
too successfully (and virtually unrecognizably) against type as
the remarkably sinister queen of the underworld, a woman
who dispenses pills, takes bets, and generally knows the
weaknesses of the important people in this closed community
of manifestly antebellum aristocrats.  As Elizabeth, Renee
Zellweger has thrown off the naivete that allowed her to go
totally gaga over Tom Cruise in "Jerry Maguire," turning in a
fairly convincing role as a seductive prostitute, while Rosanna
Arquette acquits herself well as the abused wife of the
policeman she married beneath her class.
   "Deceiver," like "L.A. Confidential," is a thoroughly adult
drama which presses its audience to listen carefully to the
spoken word and keeps the Big Secret effectively hidden until
the final, dramatic frames. Rated R.  Running time: 102
minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Matt Williams
Deceiver is a plot twist in search of a movie.  This overly constructed
film succeeds in having many surprises, and, being true to its title,
being deceptive. But there is little in the film that is worthy of
deceit.
Braxton (Chris Penn) and Kennesaw (Michael Rooker) are two cops
investigating the brutal murder of a prostitute (Renee Zellweger).
Their lone suspect is Wayland (Tim Roth), a wealthy young man whose
phone number was found in the hooker's pocket.
However, a routine lie detector test turns against the investigators, as
the crafty Wayland somehow turns the tables.  Braxton and Kennesaw are
forced to confront their own troubled lives.  Braxton is a gambling
addict in deep to Mook (Ellen Burstyn), a local bookie. Kennesaw is
bitter about his marriage to a socialite (Rosanna Arquette), believing
his wife to be unfaithful.
The plot is twisty and complex, with lots of lengthy flashbacks, and
plenty of surprises.  However, there are times when it is needlessly
complex, and at least one instance the storytelling turns so muddled
that the answers to important plot points actually get lost.  Take a
look at L.A. Confidential, or the film's more likely inspiration, The
Usual Suspects for how a complex plot can properly be handled.
The dialogue in Deceiver is as overcrafted as the plot.  For example,
the film tells a few substories (such as the tale of a woeful absinthe
bender, or an alternative telling of how Van Gogh lost his ear), but
they are so flat and so plastic that they come off as prefabricated and
unbelievable. There's never the sense that these are real characters
engaging in conversation. They appear to be nothing more than words on a
screenplay.
The characters, themselves, are rather pathetic and despicable.  Not one
of them is an ounce sympathetic, and as a result, the labyrinthine plot
is all for naught. What does it matter who is guilty of what and why?
Writer-directors Josh and Jonas Pate seem to desire to emulate the Coen
brothers' masterwork Blood Simple, or the Wachowski brothers' less
worthy Bound. But, while they have got the plot twists down cold, they
need to work on characterization and dialogue.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tim Roth, Chris Penn, Michael Rooker, Renee Zellweger, 
      Rosanna Arquette, Michael Parks, Ellen Burstyn
Director: Jonas & Josh Pate
Producers: Mark Damon, Peter Glatzer
Screenplay: Jonas & Josh Pate 
Cinematography: Bill Butler
Music: Harry Gregson-Williams
U.S. Distributor: MGM
     It's Wednesday, March 27, and a murder investigation is underway in 
Charlotte, South Carolina.  The crime:  a young prostitute, Elizabeth 
(Renee Zellweger), has been brutally slain.  One half of her severed 
body was found in a bag at the train station.  The other half was 
discovered in a trunk at the harbor authority, miles away.  The police 
duo of Braxton (Chris Penn) and Kennesaw (Michael Rooker) are strapped 
for leads.  At the moment, they have only one possible suspect:  Wayland 
(Tim Roth), a wealthy, unemployed genius who graduated Summa Cum Laude 
from Princeton and appears to be the least likely character to commit 
such a heinous act.
     That's the premise for DECEIVER, a new thriller from the Pate 
Brothers, Jonas and Josh, who made their mark on the film world two 
years ago at Sundance with the movie THE GRAVE.  DECEIVER plays out like 
a mind game between the intellectually superior Wayland and the two not-
so-bright cops (captions early in the proceedings let us know that 
Wayland's IQ is 151; by contrast, Kennesaw's is 122 and Braxton's is 
102).  The setting is a police interrogation room where a lie detector 
test is about to be administered.  Over three days, as Wayland returns 
to answer more questions, the drama and tension among these three 
characters gradually escalates until, inevitably, it boils over.
     Other plot elements are thrown in for good measure.  Wayland 
suffers from a peculiar kind of epilepsy that can, in stressful 
situations, render him virtually catatonic or extremely violent.  
Braxton, a compulsive gambler, is deep in debt to a local syndicate.  
And Kennesaw is haunted by a dark, abusive side that delights in 
terrorizing women, especially his wife (Rosanna Arquette), whom he 
suspects of being unfaithful.  The foibles and failings of these three 
are brought into the open as the mystery around Elizabeth's death 
deepens and it becomes unclear who has the upper hand:  the suspect or 
his questioners.  
     DECEIVER, which mostly transpires in a dimly-lit room and involves 
a lot of smart dialogue, has the feel of a David Mamet play:  edgy, 
claustrophobic, and tense.  The atmosphere is explosive, and some of 
pivotal moments of confrontation are riveting.  DECEIVER has the power 
to grab an audience.  Unfortunately, in the end, it succumbs to the need 
to throw in one last, unexpected twist, and this is its undoing.  For, 
while this surprise will certainly shock most viewers, it also stretches 
our credulity too much, and raises more questions than it answers.  It's 
only an effective wrap-up if you don't think too carefully about its 
full implications.  Of course, the film as a whole plays fast and loose 
with reality and logic.  Police procedure is totally ignored and it's 
almost impossible to accept that any criminal investigation would or 
could proceed in this manner.  But the real focus in DECEIVER is on 
character interaction, not plot details.  
     DECEIVER only occasionally gets out of the police station, and 
those instances occur primarily during flashbacks featuring the 
prostitute.  The Pates employ a number of interesting techniques to 
present vignettes from Elizabeth's final days and hours.  The most 
intriguing of these is to use an unreliable narrator while underlining 
the discrepancies in his voice-over by visually showing what really 
happened.  Moments like this are too effective to be dismissed as 
gimmicks.
     The movie, obviously fashioned in the manner of classic film noir, 
drips atmosphere.  There are some fascinating stylistic touches; for 
example, although the setting is contemporary, all of the telephones are 
old-fashioned, rotary models.  Cinematographer Bill Butler is given an 
opportunity to use unconventional camera work to liven up DECEIVER's 
look.  Some of the things he tries (mostly those that involve the 
contrast between light and shadow) work exceptionally well, while others 
(like any of several Lazy Susan shots) seem more like unnecessary visual 
tricks.
     As Wayland, Tim Roth gives the film's top performance, despite 
occasionally treading the tightrope between acting and overacting.  Roth 
makes us believe that Wayland is both as brilliant and as troubled as 
he's supposed to be.  The other two leads, Chris Penn and Michael 
Rooker, aren't as effective.  Both play their characters like familiar 
types.  Penn's performance is uninspired; Rooker's lacks subtlety.  Some 
of the best work is turned in by the supporting actors.  Renee 
Zellweger, in a role that's miles away from her star-making turn in 
JERRY MAGUIRE, brings a note of vulnerability and humanity to a part 
that could easily have become a caricature.  Rosanna Arquette is solid 
as Kennesaw's wife, and Michael Parks delivers several wonderful scenes 
as a psychiatrist who's entrusted with evaluating Wayland's condition.
     One of the best things about DECEIVER is that it never talks down 
to the audience.  Plot points aren't hammered home, and, although the 
ending has its weaknesses, everything isn't spelled out in bold letters.  
The Pates give audience members credit for having brains, which is an 
increasingly rare characteristic for film makers.  Occasionally gripping 
and never uninteresting, DECEIVER is a fine noir effort.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Travis Cottreau
    Tim Roth plays a possible suspect (and the only lead) in a murder
case where the victim was killed, and the two pieces of her body were
found miles apart. Needless to say, there is lots of political pressure
to solve this crime and the two policemen (played by Michael Rooker and
Chris Penn) don't really have much to go on. Almost the entire movie is
set in the police interrogation room.
    Shades of "The Usual Suspects", "Deceiver" is full of quick plot
twists and lots of head games that leaves the audience guessing all the
way through. The movie, however, fails to play by the rules and leaves
the viewer with lots of questions and no answers. I have to admit, up
until the final seconds of the movie, I was convinced that it was going
to be really good, then the credits roll and I had to say, "HUH! What
the #$%! was that!"
    If you're going to make a "shell game" type movie, it would be
helpful if, at the end of the movie, you'd lift up all the shells and
show us where the ball is. As it is, all the shells were swept off the
table and the movie maker expects members of the audience to sit back
and say, "Ahhhh.... Ohhhhh.... THAT'S WHAT THEY WERE UP TO!", but no,
there's no bolt of lightning, no revealing sequence, you're forced to
guess at the end. Who's telling the truth? Who's lying? What was the
point? There are so many little, meaningless clues along the way, that I
have the distinct impression that the writer out-clevered himself and
just didn't know what to put into the final scene.
    If someone can e-mail me and explain what the hell the final
sequence was supposed to mean, I would be eternally grateful.

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Jonas Pate and Josh Pate
Starring Tim Roth, Chris Penn, Michael Rooker, and Renee Zellwegger
Its becoming pretty trendy to try to surprise the viewer.  It seems like,
every time I turn around, some critic friend of mine is blurbing about "a
twist ending rivaling such-and-such film."  The such-and-such is normally some
not-that-obscure, not-that-old film such as The Usual Suspects, 12 Monkeys,
The Sixth Sense.  My personal favorite would be calling it a "Nowhere Man"
ending, after the short-lived ultraparanoid UPN series about a photographer
whose existence is erased.  At the end of it all, he finds that he was never a
photographer to begin with and that he is the head of the organization he has
been fighting against and created a new identity and memories for himself so
that the security of their conspiracies could be tested.
Deceiver may not be the latest in this trend of trying to trick us, but it
is, like most of them, incredibly easy to predict.  You see, when you've
watched enough movies, you become immune to their tricks.  You see through
them, know the killer ten seconds in from their first facial expressions.
Unlike most of these movies, Deceiver scrapes by on the virtue of being
unpredictable enough that I had some doubt in my mind whether or not I was
correct.  Other than that and the fact that it uses a non-linear narrative
style, there is not much to distinguish Deceiver from your Joe-schmoe mystery
film... the ones where the movie buff can see where its going a mile away.
The plot of Deceiver is relatively simple.  Wayland (Tim Roth) is the only
suspect in the murder of Elizabeth Loftus (Renee Zellweger, in her first
outing since Jerry Maguire).  Wayland is one of those creepy types who happens
to be a violent and insane epileptic with homicidal fantasies and an alcoholic
to boot.  He's a Princeton grad with a 152 IQ and a BA in Psychology.  Against
him are Braxton (Chris Penn) and Kennesaw (Michael Rooker), IQs of 102 and 132
respectively.  Braxton is a former security guard at Wal Mart, Kennesaw a 20-
year vet of the force with a BA in Psych from UNC.  All of this info you get
in the first few minutes.
The murder is grisly; the girl has been sawed in half with different parts of
her body put in different parts of the city.  The motive appears non-existent.
 The only evidence they have is finding Wayland's phone number in her pocket.
The next hour and a half is a bunch of creepy conversation and mind games
related to the murder.
Sure, the dialogue is nicely scripted and writer-directors Jonas and Josh
Pate should get credit for being able to take the interrogation scene and
stretch it to make half the movie work, but the basic fact is that the movie
ends up exactly where you expect it to be.  In the end, there are no real
surprises.
The writers seem to spend their time walking the fine line between a very
good movie and a very bad one, between a film so completely original and so
completely typical that, when all is said and done, the film just kind of gets
on your nerves.  Like most horror movies, it can be enjoyed in a state of mind
where the majority of your brainpower is not actively working, but there is
not much to it beyond that.
The acting and directing is fine.  It is not great and it is not terrible. 
It lies, like the movie does, on the fine line between genius and madness.  Of
note is cinematographer Bill Butler, who manages to handle a semi-noir
lighting fairly well.  But, as far as the movie itself goes, rent 12 Monkeys
instead.  That one will get those cranial juices flowing.
MovieKritic2000: Reviews for the Generation of a New Millenium
http://www.geocities.com/moviekritic2000/
Help support MK2K, become a member of http://www.epinions.com/.  It's free and
you can post opinions on books, movies, music, travel, software, and just
about anything else under the sun.
To subscribe, email MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To email the critic, email MK2K@usa.net

