Title
Review for Pootie Tang (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
You can say this much for POOTIE TANG, written and directed by Louis C.K., it
isn't pretentious.  Pootie Tang (Lance Crouther) is a crime fighter rather in
the spirit of AUSTIN POWERS but with an extra dose of silliness and set in a
black ghetto rather than in swinging London.  The jokes, while always
outrageous, are rarely funny.  Its humor tires not too long after the beginning
credits have finished rolling.
Typical of the level of the comedy is the way that Pootie's father, known as
Daddy Tang (Chris Rock), dies.  Daddy Tang, we are told, is "only" the third
employee to have been mauled to death by a gorilla at the steel mill where he
works.
About the only funny bit occurs when Dirty D. (Reg E. Cathey) arrives on the
scene.  Driving a big Cadillac that looks like it has just been through a mud
storm, Dirty D. is exactly like his name, right now to a fur coat covered in
dirt.  When he raises his arms, dust fills the air like the fog rolling in off
the ocean.  He's a bad dude, but no match for superhero Pootie Tang, who can
dodge a hail of bullets with his dance-like undulations.
Like a biography, we flashback to see Pootie when he was a 6-year-old boy. 
Swaggering through the neighborhood in his fur coat, leather pants and
sunglasses, he attracts the local women like flies to honey, even if they're a
couple of decades older.
Much of the movie concerns Pootie's war with the evil Dick Lecter (Robert
Vaughn) who runs a large conglomerate.  When Pootie's PSAs (Public Service
Announcements) encouraging healthy lifestyles cause the sales of Lecter Burgers,
Lecter Cigarettes and Lecter Whiskey to plummet, the battle begins.  By this
time, however, you will have long since lost any interest in the movie.
POOTIE TANG runs 1:20.  It is rated PG-13 for sex-related material, language and
drug content and would be acceptable for teenagers.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email?  
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Blake French
After a hard, busy day, I'm sitting in the movie theater waiting for the
projectionist to start Pootie Tang.  I become relaxed, comfortable, with
a notepad in one hand and a pencil in the other.  The lights dim.  The
movie starts.  But the image is out of focus, then it goes black.  The
house lights shine brightly.  The theater is experiencing technical
difficulties.  This is a warning from God: "Run for your life while you
still have the chance," screams a little voice in my head.  Then the
lights dim once again, and the movie restarts.  I regret not dashing for
the door.
I cannot remember any other movie without subtitles that creates a
language for its characters, but never teaches it to the audience.  The
main character in Pootie Tang utters phrases like "I'm gonna sine your
pitty on the runny kine" and "Sipi-tai!"  But what does that mean?  Not
that it matters -- you won't even try to follow this hopeless,
incoherent story.  Instead I wondered about the cologne on the man next
to me, if that lovely cashier was wearing a wig, and what I needed at
the store later that night.  Anything to clear my mind from the painful
occurrences transpiring on screen.
Adapted from a comedy sketch on HBO's The Chris Rock Show, a major
motion picture should have been the perfect platform for the nest of
talent at the acclaimed Rock, but these filmmakers prove, like the folks
at SNL do every other week, that a five-minute, one-character TV sketch
just doesn't transfer to the big screen.  Pootie Tang is just over 70
minutes long, shorter than your average Pokemon movie.  And I would
rather watch all the Pokemon movies, back to back, than waste my time
watching this production for a second time.
Here's the painful setup: We first learn that the entire movie we are
about to watch is actually a movie clip playing on a talk show featuring
an immensely popular celebrity named, you guessed it, Pootie Tang (Lance
Crouther).  Pootie Tang is an African-American, an international crime
fighter, a kung-fu master, a superstar singer, and an actor.  Children
adore him.  Women idolize him.  He speaks in a language of his own
(Pootie-nese, if you will).  Everyone in the movie understands him, but
the audience can only follow occasional remarks.  He uses his late
father's belt to eliminate crime.  (A terrible accident killed Pootie's
father back in the late 70's when a wild gorilla mauled him to death
while he was working in a factory.  We can literally see the zipper on
the gorilla costume.)  We witness all kinds of incidences in a corny,
maundering, sarcastic style that is just not funny.
Even bad movies usually contain a few redeeming factors, but not this
one.  Each and every shot is agonizing in its own ways -- not just in
one way, in many ways -- the fanatical actors appear disjointed, the
painful scene transitions feel awkward, the terrible dialogue wreaks of
desperation, the poorly written screenplay seems unfinished, the
soundtrack gives us a headache.  Pootie Tang stinks as badly as
possible.  Regardless of how much you paid to get in, it's worth double
to get out.
Director: Louis C.K.
Producer: Cotty Chubb, Chris Rock, David Gale, Ali LeRoi
Writer: Louis C.K.
Starring: Lance Crouther, Jennifer Coolidge, Chris Rock, Wanda Sykes,
Robert Vaughn
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
