Title
Review for Love Is the Devil (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Joy Wyse
This is definitely an Art film, but the art is missing.  Although the
pivotal character of the movie is the renowned artist, Francis Bacon, his
estate refused to allow his work to be shown.  Instead, we are presented
with scenes showing the works during creation.
Derek Jacobi stars as the controversial artist, and he does an admirable
job in showing the many facets of the man's life.  Daniel Craig portrays
George Dyer, Bacon's model and lover.
This is a very heavy film dealing with sadism, masochism, homosexuality,
power, control, and despair.  The pain in Bacon's soul is the basis of his
art.  Although the acting and the production of the film well done, and
the subject is well represented, it is not recommended for the general
public.  Perhaps this is why the release date kept being postponed, week
after week.  Finally, it is in theaters, but only for a limited run.

Author
Matt Prigge
Writer/Director: John Maybury
Starring: Derek Jacobi, Daniel Craig, Anne Lambton, Tilda Swinton,
Adrian Scarborough, Karl Johnson, Annabel Brooks, Richard Newbould
"Love is the Devil" is a challenging film, munundating its audience with
wild imagery and a plot structure that disallows a plot, perhaps in an
attempt to get us to know the artist's psyche rather than the artist's
lifeline.  Watching it, I was enthralled with the look of the film, the
way the director shot everything like it was looking through a bizarre,
personalized filter.  Everything looks like it is not how life looks
like but how painter Francis Bacon, the film's subject, looked at it
personally.
But while I was engrossed, I stumbled upon my thoughts halfway through
the film, awakened from my trance by some inner distraction, and began
to try and follow what's going on.  Exactly what was I looking at?
Watching this film, I wasn't sure if it was the most insightful film I
had ever seen or the most vacuous.  Directed (and written) by John
Maybury, "Love is the Devil" is stylish masterpiece for the senses.
Everything looks originally bizarre and perplexing.  The camera angles
are ferociously askew, and the close-ups are uncomfortably too close.
The editing is deft, occasionally cutting away to something bizarre
every couple seconds, but other times holding on a shot for so long that
you wonder if the audience is not supposed to be voyeurs, or rather,
intruders to Bacon's world and psyche.
As such, there is no real story.  I've not heard much about Francis
Bacon that I didn't read prior to the film, but what I learned was this:
he was a painter in England who reached his peak during the 60s and 70s,
drawing hideously bizarre drawings of carnage and the like.  He was one
of the first to really come out of the closet, and in interviews, he was
notoriously drunk yet incredibly witty.  As played by great Shakesperean
actor Derek Jacobi, he's like a foppish and self-absorbed cross between
Oscar Wilde and Nero.  He lives life the way he wants to live it, to the
disatisfaction of those who have the privelege of being really close to
him.  It's as if he were taking delight in the destruction of others and
maybe himself ("Champagne for my real friends, and pain for my sham
friends," he says one night at the bar he frequents).
"Love is the Devil" chronicles the latter part of his life.  Bacon,
well-known in his mid-life, awakens one night when he hears a man tumble
through his ceiling window and land on the floor.  He walks in, unafraid
of what he finds, and discovers a thief, George Dyer (Daniel Craig).
Bacon gives him an offer: if he spends the night with him, he can take
anything he wants in the morning.  George agrees to this, and off to bed
he goes, but ends up staying with him, for whatever reason.  The film
shows their lives together, at least in reference to one another.
While creating Bacon's world of friends (like "High Art," this film
minors in showing a certain group of people who radiate a connection
that is not shown but is understood), the film shows the relationship of
Bacon and George as it remains rather stagnant.  Bacon is haughty and
bizarre; George is simple and doesn't understand Bacon in the least,
especially not his paintings.  While watching this, that's basically all
I thought was there.  The film has a hypnotic feel, free of any
restraints of form, and is shot so uniquely that I felt my attention was
almost entirely on the way this film was made rather than what it is
about.
Once the film is over, it's easier to piece it together.  I kept on
thinking about this film, wondering what the point to all of it was.
Someone doesn't merely make a film of all style and no substance at all,
and if they do, they do it by accident, but still allow some substance
to creep in.  Thinking about it, I remembered how the two fed off of
eachother.  I thought about how Bacon was a masochist, in love with
cruelty (in one scene, he watches a boxing match with a orgiastic
delight, and lets out a squeal of pleasure when blood from the one
boxer's head splashes across his face; in another scene, he masturbates
to the Odessa Steps sequence of Eisenstein's "Battleship Potemkin"), and
perhaps he drove George too far in his delight for pain.  He drove him
over the edge, and for him that was love, even if it wasn't for George.
I guess that explains the title.  A bit.
That's great and all, but I almost wish the film was devoid of any
meaning.  I wish it hadn't reduced itself to making some point about
humanity, about how love is the most selfish thing in the world (and it
is, if you look at it a certain way).  Or maybe if it had avoided any
meaning about humanity and merely drove itself into being the one film
that was truly inside one man's twisted pysche.  It's almost always best
to obtain insights from looking at one man's uniqueness than it is
forcing universality down an audience's throat.  That way you don't
reduce your film to something it's just not.
I can't say I totally enjoyed "Love is the Devil," though.  Despite all
of the things I respect about this movie, it's still rather
uncomfortable to sit through.  Even at a normally trite length of ninety
minutes, the film still seems like an arduous task to sit through,
especially after an exhausting first hour.  Though hypnotic, it still
almost seems gimmicky and even redundant at times, as if it were taking
advantage of one man's truly bizarre nature but not doing anything
deeper with it.  As such, I respect the way the film looks.  It's
beautiful and painstakingly crafted so that, along with "What Dreams May
Come" and "Dark City," it's the year's most visually stunning film.  In
fact, if a better script had been forged, I'd almost compare it in
visual power to a Peter Greenaway film, complete with similar haunting
images that stick in the mind forever.  And with a dymanite performance
by Derek Jacobi, it has the comic and distanced tone that it needs.  I
just wish it had been more than mostly style and just a hair bit of
substance.  Then I would have had something to hold me over even now.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LOVE IS THE DEVIL (director: John Maybury; Derek Jacobi (Francis Bacon),
Daniel Craig (George Dyer), Tilda Swinton (Muriel Belcher), Anne Lambton
(Isabel Rawsthorne), Adrian
Scarborough (Daniel Farson), Karl Johnson (John Deakin), Annabel Brooks
(Henrietta Moraes), 1998-UK)
Simply put, the renown British artist, Francis Bacon (Jacobi), is not a
very nice person. This is a true-to-life portrait of  one of this
century's most celebrated artists, as the film covers his work from the
periods of the 1960s- through the- 1970s, as Bacon's specialty in the
macabre is examined, as is also his spectacle of what is horrific, but
the film offers very little concrete arguments for him to be considered
as a great artist (we saw none of his paintings on display; I realize
that this was no fault of the director, since Bacon's estate refused to
grant permission for their use).
That he is a great artist, is of course, a debatable subject; but what
is not subject to debate, is the brilliant performance by Derek Jacobi
(a virtuoso one) and the fine supporting performance by his lover who is
the foil for all his nasty wit, Daniel Craig (George), as both exhibit a
forcefulness and a subtly for their character that leaves no doubt that
they have mastered their subject rather well, leaving no sharp stone
unturned, so to speak.
In the very first shot, Bacon is diabolically smelling the pillow from
an obvious lover who just left his flat, an image that reminded me so
much of Hannibal Lecter in THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, and his
extrasensory capacity for smell.
Soon he is confronted with a crashing sound from his skylight flat and
there is George Dyer, a lower-class London East Ender, a petty burglar
who gets caught by Bacon as he is robbing his flat. They immediately
become lovers and begin a relationship that mystifies both their circle
of friends, as George's friends think he has joined up with a bunch of
puffs, while Bacon's clique of vipers are titillated to no end by this
unholy union, as they make sniping remarks directed at how dull George
is, trying to get the devilish Bacon to say what he sees in him, even
though George will heretofore become the model for Bacon's decadent and
lifeless figures, as well as his almost full time lover, except when
Bacon picks up an odd stud or two and locks the hapless George out of
the studio flat. He will also generously support George with money and
proper clothing and booze.
That George and he are almost complete opposites, able to use each other
for whatever it is worth, is part of the fascination of the bleak
material covered, as the film becomes an exercise in excesses and
debauchery, that is covered so wantoningly, with Bacon referring to his
relationship with George at one point, as the man who does odd jobs for
him once in a while.
But somewhere in the seven year relationship between George and Bacon,
Bacon tires of him and chooses to let the demise of George become
complete without showing one bit of concern for him. This should not be
too surprising, because he proudly tells us that he is optimistic about
nothing and finds beauty in the suffering and bloodshed of others, such
as at a car accident, relating how it excites him to see the bodies lie
randomly on the road, and at a professional fight we see how he nearly
has an orgasm in public when he gets splattered with the boxer's blood.
That his precarious lifestyle often shines as brightly as his visual
images, as his oeuvre of work is presented to us through these visions,
rather than seeing it as on framed paintings, and this is stupendously
done by a brilliant stroke of filmmaking, as the artist's soul was seen
crawling out of the recesses of his warped but talented mind, as
distorted lenses and mirrored images and shaded colorings and quick
editing of the images, were all effectively used to enhance the eeriness
of the artist's visions.
The nonlinear story is transcribed for the most part either in Bacon's
studio or in the bar where his circle of friends hold court, as Bacon
who is the submissive one in sex, is the ever aggressive and dominant
one with both his sham friends, as he notes realistically what they are
to him, and his George, who foolishly tells him that he loves him and is
quickly admonished with the following put down from the master, "from
what bad TV show did you get that from?"
I must confess, I never cared for Bacon's art, though I was somewhat
impressed with the raw power of his blood curling images and the
deathlike objectivity he gives his work. But I was put off with his
inability to reach farther back into the human soul and see what the
whole being is like as the truly great artists such as a Blake or Durer
can, who know both good and evil. To know one of the contraries is not
enough, as it probably means that you can't even see that as clearly as
you should, as in Bacon's case, what evil is for him to see, is mostly
felt as a raging flux inside, something Jacobi captured on screen, that
made this film a very special one, and saved it from the doldrums it
could have been. It is rare that an actor can really sense the mood and
spirit of an artist, because when he doesn't, it is to the detriment of
the film, no matter how good the story is or who the artist is that is
being portrayed. What comes to my mind is the risible performances of
Charlton Heston as Micheangelo and Kirk Douglas as Van Gogh, or more
recently Leonard Di Caprio trying to be convincing as an unknown artist
in TITANIC. Their lack of credibility as artists, were enough to make
the films they were in seem phony. Off hand, I can only think of Derek
Jarman's CARAVAGGIO, to match this one in intensity and homosexuality,
and integrity of performance.
But whatever I think of Bacon and his art work or the unwatchable
moments this film had, and the pangs I got from his negative philosophy,
and how the story was going down a cul-de-sac, I was nevertheless, still
dazzled by a performance from Derek Jacobi, that left me breathless, and
by a first time director, who is in every mannerism an artist and feels
like an artist does, and was able to translate that inspiration onto the
screen, which is no easy feat to do.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
The marvelous British actor Derek Jacobi stars in writer and director
John Maybury's LOVE IS THE DEVIL about the popular modern artist Francis
Bacon.  As always, Jacobi's acting is impeccable, but the movie tries
hard and succeeds at being unentertaining and opaque.
The movie convincingly argues that Francis, played by Jacobi, was a
completely despicable and vain individual, but it never provides any
insight into his work or any motivation for his attitude.  When
interviewed by a fawning talk show host, Francis calls his style "chance
brushstrokes."
Starting with a burglary of Francis's flat, the film uses loud sound
effects that sound like they were lifted from a cheap horror movie.  The
camera shots are heavy on the avant-garde angles -- lots of wide-angle
close-ups and distorted shots filmed through colored-glass reflections.
The director is much more interested in filmmaking style than in the
substance of the story with the result being a sterile examination of a
lonely and vain man.
Daniel Craig, in a lifeless performance, plays the burglar and boxer,
George Dyer.  When Francis lays eyes on him after the break-in, Francis
promises not to call the police if he'll stay for sex.  He stays for the
entire movie but never respects the man with whom he shares a bed.  He
thinks that Francis's paintings have "no bloody use," and the movie
presents no counterargument.
Writer Maybury barely outlines Francis's character, and George and the
rest of the supporting cast remain a complete enigma.   We learn little
of George other than Francis's reason for liking him -- George's
"amorality and innocence."
Francis's love of sadomasochism is shown early and often.  "Boxing is
such a marvelous aperitif for sex," he reflects to George on the way to
watch a boxing match.  As the fighter's head is sliced open with a heavy
blow, the camera cuts to a gleeful Francis whose own head is soaked by
the flying blood.  Francis appears to be in complete ecstasy.
Another of Francis's favorite activities is viewing old movies of
atrocities.  As the carnage mounts, we witness an orgasmically happy
Francis in the audience.
In a film that tries obsessively to shock, one dream sequence portrays a
family in a car accident.  Francis's mind slowly examines every bloody
limb of the mother, the father, and the boy.
Sometimes the script throws us tidbits of Francis's wisdom which
illuminate little while merely sounding insightful.  ("I'm optimistic by
nature.  I'm optimistic about nothing."  "Loneliness is my only true
companion.")
We learn more details about Francis's makeup techniques than about the
man himself.  He prefers shoe polish for his hair and sink cleaning
powder for his teeth.
Full of metaphorical interpretations, the film's best scene occurs late
one night when George has to get up to go to the bathroom.  Mistaking
Francis's picture of a toilet for the genuine article, he urinates on it
and then crawls back into bed contentedly.
Like a parody of a bad art house movie, LOVE IS THE DEVIL has horrid
characters filmed bizarrely and confusingly by a director who is much
more interested in technique than storytelling.  By the end, the
audience hasn't learned any more than it could have in a three-minute
sketch.
LOVE IS THE DEVIL runs 1:30.  The film is not rated but should be
considered NC-17 for violence, profanity, graphic sex, nudity and
sadomasochism and is unacceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  Watching this movie about Francis Bacon, perhaps the
greatest painter of the latter half of this century, I couldn't help
thinking about Neil Simon.  Like Bacon, Simon is tops in his
field--not the greatest playwright, artistically speaking, but the
most successful, one of the most prolific, in fact the most
highly remunerated writer of plays in history.  Despite the
sniffing of some theater snobs, Neil Simon is nonpareil in his
ability to shape a well-constructed work.  So when are we
to get a movie about him?  Never.  Why not?  Because he
wears a suit and tie, speaks normally, and has had a
prosaically stable married life.  What artists get movies made
about them?  Those whose lives are filled with great drama,
preferably of the debauched kind.  Thus we get Vincente
Minelli's "Lust for Life," not because Vincent Van Gogh was a
great painter, but because he was a great painter AND cut off
his ear.  Scott Hicks's "Shine" would never have been made if
its accomplished pianist had not spent a good deal of his time
babbling incoherently.  Agnes Merlet's title character in her
"Artemisia" was a splendid painter whose name would be
unrecognized today if she did not insist on painting naked
men in Renaissance Italy.  Brian Gilbert made hay with
"Wilde" because that late 19th century British writer was
hounded by the Marquess of Queensbury until he wound up
in jail for the "crime" of private, homosexual unions.
   Along comes this picture about a painter about as
unorthodox as the aforementioned who, despite his being a
household name in England and France, is largely
uncelebrated in the U.S.  Ah but wait: he should be better
known and he will be after the release of this movie.
Americans may or may not go for what he did on canvas but
they can relate to the sensationalism that surrounded him. 
Bacon was a homosexual who encircled himself with a
demimonde of weird aesthetes, but what makes him a
fascinating study is his novel relationship with a working-class
stiff, a low-life petty burglar named George Dyer whom Bacon
caught in the act of robbing his home.  Rather than turn him
in or scare him away, he seduces him into a seven-year
relationship, paying him handsomely to be the model, the
icon, of a great many of his paintings.  He saves the man
from his insignificance but ultimately steers him toward
suicide.  Therein lies the potential audience, thematically at
least, for "Love is the Devil."
   Yet this fascinating, disturbing, challenging, and poignant
film is likely to be seen only by a select audience, an elite not
of devotees of the brush but of fans of highly stylized, avant-
garde filmmaking.  John Maybury, its writer-director, has taken
great pains to avoid the format of a static biopic.  Instead, he
has drenched the screen from time to time with a succession
of fast-moving images to capture the ambiance, much more
than the details, of the ill-fated affiliation.  He has the good
fortune to organize the skills of one of the world's great
performers, Sir Derek Jacobi in the artist's role, and the
talents of Ryuichi Sakamoto, whose atonal notes augment the
eerie, claustrophobic atmosphere of the 90-minute work.
   The story begins in 1964 as Bacon (Derek Jacobi) surprises
burglar George Dyer (Daniel Craig), who has chuted himself
into the painter's home and rummages about for something of
value.  "And who might you be?" the artist bellows, "You're
not much of a burglar.  Take your clothes off and come to
bed and you can have whatever you want."  With these words
the lives of the two are forever altered, as Bacon uses Dyer to
model a good deal of his paintings from 1964 to 1971 while
Dyer struggles--with Bacon's financing--to shuck off his
working-class culture and to fit into the artist's cloistered
world.
   Throughout their relationship, though Dyer has
been custom-fitted with expensive suits, given money and
trips to Paris and New York, he is no match for his
Pygmalion.  Gaining solace only when hanging out with rent
boys in Parisian bars, he cannot match his benefactor's
perpetual wit.  The clever Bacon is in his element when
mixing with women like models for nude photography with
whom he shares drinks, toasting "Champagne for my real
friends, real pain for my sham friends" and introducing his
unconventional confederates with words like "Welcome to the
concentration of camp."  When Dyer complains of nightmares,
Bacon quickly replies, "George, nightmares cannot be as
horrific as life."  
   It comes as no surprise to learn that director John Maybury,
himself an artist, has had experience making MTV videos. He 
amusingly hones in on his painter in the act of making
up his face even more carefully than Bacon applies himself to
his paintings.  In fact while Francis is seen actually attacking
his canvasses with the color, he deftly applies cosmetics to
his eyelashes, powder his face and forehead, and whitens his
teeth.    
   While Bacon often treats Dyer with contempt, lashing out at
him for rustling newspapers and "babbling" and advising him
to "get out," he has sublimated his rage most effectively in his
work, as so many artists are able to do to tame their inner
demons.  Maybury intermittently interrupts the unorthodox
narrative with images from the paintings, particularly one of a
naked man, covered with blood from head to toe while sitting
in a position similar to that found in the logo of the epic play,
"Angels in America."  The image keels over at the point in
which Dyer swallows a bottle of pills with a bottle of liquor.
   Maybury coaches a splendid performance from Derek
Jacobi (as though it were possible to do otherwise), and while
Daniel Craig cannot match one of the grand masters of British
theater (though he could easily portray the nicotine addict
from "The X-Files"), he does fine as the master's disturbed
foil.
   Toward the end of the movie, Bacon remarks "I want a
picture to annihilate the rest."  The entire movie may fall short
of annihilating the other movies about painters, photographers
and writers, but when you consider, especially, that this is
Maybury's first feature film, "Love is the Devil" is an
astonishing piece of work.
