Title
Review for Invisible Circus, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Robin Clifford
18-year old Phoebe O'Connor (Jordanna Brewster) spent her teen years
possessed by the memory of her older sister Faith (Cameron Diaz). Faith
left home years before to go to Europe to "do something important." She
died. Phoebe has always questioned the death and finally leaves home,
herself, to find the truth in "The Invisible Circus."
Adapting the novel by Jennifer Egan, Adam Brooks scripts and directs this
road journey/coming-of-age story about a young woman growing up in the
70's. By the beginning of that decade, the hippie philosophy of changing
the world through peace and love had mutated into change-through-terror. In
Europe, radical factions like the Bader-Meinhoff Gang were using guns and
bombs to affect change, attracting revolutionaries from around the world.
Faith and her boyfriend, Wolf (Christopher Eccleston), leave the staid
safety of San Francisco to check out what's happening in Europe. After
wandering the continent to find themselves, Faith is drawn to the
excitement of the Red Army and joins the terrorist group, leaving Wolf
behind. Faith's fails to prove herself as a revolutionary and is abandoned
by the gang. She joins a splinter faction and, when she delivers a bomb to
the offices of a prominent industrialist one night, an innocent man is
killed. Faith is changed forever by the incident.
Years later, after Faith's death in Portugal, Phoebe takes the postcards
that her sister faithfully sent her, kisses her mom (Blythe Danner)
goodbye, and heads to the Continent. Once there, she traces Faith's
movements from Amsterdam to Berlin to Paris where she finds Wolf. Her
appearance at his doorstep and her mission cause the expatriated American
to join Phoebe on her quest. A romance ensues. During the journey Phoebe
convinces Wolf to tell her the truth about her sister and this truth is to
change Phoebe forever.
"The Invisible Circus" is throwback film that feels like it was made in the
70's. There is an innocence to both the story and its telling that is
rather refreshing. It does not try to recreate events of the day. Instead,
it shows the essence of the idealism the young possessed at the time. Faith
personifies the free spirit that sees herself as the vehicle of change for
the whole world. When her ideals are dashed by the results of her violent
actions, it reps the loss of innocence for both Faith and the radical youth
movement.
The focus of the story is on young Phoebe as she struggles with the loss of
her sister without understanding why she died. Phoebe lived, vicariously,
through the postcards from Faith, seeing the world from her sister's eyes.
Faith's death and Phoebe's newfound independence cause the young woman to
follow in her sister's steps. The ensuing journey is both physical and
spiritual for Phoebe as she finds herself, love and, finally, the answers
she seeks. It's an interesting story of a young woman whose experiences and
pain turn her into a wiser, though more melancholy, young adult.
Jordanna Brewster does a solid job as Phoebe. She has to carry the bulk of
the screen time and actually matures as the story progresses. The young
actress acquits herself well. Cameron Diaz has the difficult role of being
the idol of her sister's eye and her character is held at arm's length to
be examined by her sister (and the viewer). Christopher Eccleston is
believable as Wolf. He, too, has a tough role and walks a fine line between
weakness and strength. Blythe Danner's is little more than a cameo
performance, but she does do a good mom. Patrick Bergin appears in
flashback as the girls' father.
Production is well done with beautifully selected European locations. It's
almost a travelogue as we journey to the canals of Amsterdam, the streets
of Paris and the lush scenery of Portugal. It looks good, too, with the
photography Henry Braham and costumes by Donna Zakowska lending to the feel
of the 70's. There is also a surreal element, nicely handled, when Phoebe
meets the members of the title troupe in a display of magic, juggling and
dance.
"The Invisible Circus" is a good coming-of-age tale that has a sensible arc
to its story. It should have an attraction for more mature teens and young
adults, though I doubt if it will set any fires. I give it a C+.
For more Reeing reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Phoebe O'Connor (Jordana Brewster, "The Faculty") remembers the magic her 
late father (Patrick Bergin, "Sleeping With the Enemy") and her sister Faith
(Cameron Diaz) brought into her life as a little girl.  Now eighteen and
living alone with her mother (Blythe Danner), Phoebe needs to understand
her sister's death, a purported suicide which took place halfway around the 
world.  After provoking her mother to tears, Phoebe runs away to Europe to 
retrace the steps of Faith and her boyfriend Wolf (Christopher Eccleston, 
"Elizabeth"), the pair who once brought her "The Invisible Circus."
"The Invisible Circus" is one of those movies that you can enjoy in a numb
way on a rainy day when you're sick in bed.  Watching it is like having a
book read to you by someone who can't enliven his voice above a monotone.
Writer/director Adam Brooks ("Almost You") clearly exposes a source novel
(by Jennifer Egan) by his use of extensive voiceover narration and
flashbacks.  Phoebe tells us how wonderful things were when she was a 
child, even as she lets slip that both she and her mother were kept at
a distance from dad and Faith's close relationship.  Rebellious Phoebe
dares to suggest Mom didn't understand her own husband as much as she,
his daughter, did as a child.  Once in Europe, the narration is given over
to Wolf, who fills in the parts of her sister's story that Faith's postcards
glossed over, in an ever tightening circle.  An affair of proximity/comfort
is fallen into.
Some liveliness is added to the proceedings by the flashbacks taking place in 
the tumultuous 60's and the present action taking place on location in Paris, 
Berlin and Portugal.  Yet even these aspects aren't fully realized, as
much discussed drugs are nowhere to be seen in the flashbacks and a present
day acid trip in Paris is handled embarrassingly.
Brewster isn't bad as the central character whose search for truth ends
with some image shattering reality.  The camera certainly loves her dark,
exotic looks.  Diaz is also OK as the idealistic Faith whose desire to
change the world leads her down an ironic path.  (The two's contrasting
dark and light looks can be explained away by the casting of their parents.)
Unfortunately, Diaz and Eccleston, a usually fine actor, never really seem
to connect except on a superficial level.  Eccleston seems like a nice
guy in a long haired hippie wig with Faith and simply uncomfortable in his
later scenes with Brewster.  Still, he adds a bit of class to the proceedings.
At least Brooks keeps things moving along at a fairly steady pace, although
things begin to drag a bit as the climax approaches.  Cinematography by Henry 
Braham ("Waking Ned Devine") presents a bright San Francisco but rather
dank looking Europe.  Landscape is kept to a minimum in favor of close
character shots.
"The Invisible Circus" is both overwraught and undercooked.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Why are Americans so fascinated with Europe that they
travel there in great numbers, and if Europe is so wonderful,
why do so many Europeans come to the United States on
their three-week vacations?  Obviously we all crave change--
the chance to break way from our daily routines to see how
the other side lives, secretly hoping to find that the grass is
not really greener on the other side of the fence.  For Phoebe
O'Connor (Jordana Brewster), her maiden trip from San
Francisco to the streets and hills of the Netherlands, France,
Germany and Portugal were for a different reason.  She is a
person following a dream--not the dream of "finding herself"
as so many people seem to think that a couple of months in
the Old World will achieve but of a chance to discover how
the sister she adored lost her life, her crumpled body found
on the rocks below the steep hills of Portugal's tiny village of 
Cabo Espichel.  What makes her voyage to the Continent of
particular interest is that Phoebe is anything but a party
animal: she is someone who finds that she cannot fit in
anywhere and yet she takes off alone at the age of 18
despite the refusal of her otherwise hip mother, Gail (Blythe
Danner), to grant permission.
   This is yet another coming-of-age drama.  I suppose many
in the audience will find it to be a woman's picture, a chick
flick, and "The Invisible Circus" is that, but there's more to
the story than a focus on a young, sheltered, introverted
woman who changes her life by taking her first real initiatives. 
The tale involves the politics of the early seventies, the time
that young people, especially students, were rebelling
thorughout most of the Western world against what they
considered their warmongering governments and against
large corporations who supplied the materials needed to kill.  
   Faith (Cameron Diaz), who is Phoebe's older sister, has
grown up in a middle-class home in San Francisco, adoring
her father who returns the affection and incurring the jealousy
of her mother thereby.  Apparently bored with the security
which her life provides, she is determined to make a
difference in the world and, this being the late sixties, she
pulls a Patty Hearst and joins up with revolutionary groups
who commit robberies and worse to bring down their
governments.  While at first enjoying a romantic relationship
with Wolf (Christopher Eccleston), she ultimately breaks
away, finding her boyfriend too timid about taking on so-
called oppressive governments.  When her body is found in
Portugal in 1970, sister Phoebe is determined to find out how
she died.
   Conventional though the story telling may be, "The Invisible
Circus"--an ironic title given that the expression refers to a
European fun-house--is an involving tale featuring a solid 
performance by the comely nineteen year old actress,
Jordana Brewster.  Brewster has us caught up in her
adventure, making us empathize with her conflicts and
compulsions, leading us to appreciate how her bonding with
her sister's former boy friend Wolf could lead into her very
first sizzling romance...and in this movie the couple do indeed
sizzle.  Christopher Eccleston, who does not know how to
give a poor performance, is perfectly cast although Cameron
Diaz, who could easily pass as the daughter of Blythe
Danner, appears too old for the role.  Diaz at one point is
even asked to portray a girl of about twelve, and not too
successfully.
   The story moves forward smoothly, with Adam Brooks's
cameraman Henry Braham taking us on a Cook's tour of
some high spots in Europe in both meanings of the term,
though we wonder whether Brooks is geographically
challenged.  Did we really see Phoebe cross directly from
France into Portugal?  (No mention whatever is made in the
production notes that she spent even a moment on Spanish
soil.)
   "The Invisible Circus," then, is a substantially fine
adaptation of an novelist Jennifer Egan's bildungsroman, with
both Jordana Brewster and vivid scenes from the Continent
most pleasing to the eye.
Rated R.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Adam Brooks's THE INVISIBLE CIRCUS is a handsome travelogue and mystery 
about a young woman venturing to Europe in order to discover the exact 
circumstances behind her older sister's suicide 7 years earlier.  
Although well cast and acted, the movie doesn't amount to much.  Still, 
it is an enjoyable enough diversion.
Based on Jennifer Egan's novel, the story opens in 1976 in San 
Francisco.  Phoebe O'Connor (Jordana Brewster, who looks like a young 
DEMI MOORE) is troubled about her mother's (Blythe Danner) dating, even 
though she has been a widow for 9 years.  Her father's death from 
leukemia was the seminal event that caused her sister, Faith (Cameron 
Diaz), to become a radical and, in an escalation in her underground 
activities, leave for Europe.  
Phoebe leaves home with her sister's postcards in hand so she can 
retrace her sister's route through Amsterdam, Paris, Berlin and 
Portugal.  Joining her on her search for the truth behind Faith's death 
is Faith's old boyfriend, Wolf (Christopher Eccleston).  As they travel, 
we meet Faith in flashbacks.  Diaz, like the rest of the cast, is quite 
good, but, in Diaz's case, she never makes a convincing revolutionary.  
In fact, the more militant she acts, the less believable she becomes.
At first, Faith's protests are like beautifully choreographed ballets.  
Bursting in on some dining diplomats in Paris, the radicals shower 
feathers down on the diners like falling snow.  It is perhaps one of the 
most picturesque protests on record.  Faith, who is stoned much of the 
time, joins the Red Army, where her duties are rather akin to that of a 
maid.  Eventually, she becomes a full-fledged, gun-toting, bomb-throwing 
terrorist, while still staying her sweet lovable self.  One suspects 
that she must have suffered from a horrible, split personality disorder.
"She thought she was changing the world, but, in the end, she was just 
one more person getting her kicks," Wolf summarizes the meaning of 
Faith's life to Phoebe.  The movie itself is like that.  It just doesn't 
add up to anything.
THE INVISIBLE CIRCUS runs 1:38.  It is rated R for sexuality, language 
and drug content and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
