Title
Review for Human Traffic (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
HUMAN TRAFFIC, written and directed by Justin Kerrigan, literally bursts
with raw energy.  Set in the club scene in Cardiff, Wales, the movie is
filled with hypnotically pulsating music that'll have you wanting to
dance in the aisles.  A funny and imaginative film, it is best thought
of as a more good-spirited version of TRAINSPOTTING.  The humor, as it
was in that hugely popular film, is drug-based.  HUMAN TRAFFIC
unabashedly glorifies the life of the recreational drug user.  Many
viewers will have trouble enjoying the humor since they will not be able
to get beyond the film's clearly pro-drug message.
The language is true to the subjects, a bunch of kids just turned 20,
which means that a sentence without the F-word is like a day without
sunshine.  Americans and those much older than the cast may have some
trouble identifying with the kids and the setting.  But the director
somehow makes the film more universal than it might seem.  The message
of sex, drugs, and rock and roll, after all, will certainly remind you
of the 60s.
The movie happens mainly over one long night in which the kids party.
And boy, do they party.  Before the action starts we meet the
characters.
Jip (John Simm), who daydreams of himself wearing a "Mr. Softy" T-shirt,
suffers from erectile dysfunction.  (Could too many drugs be a cause?
The story, not surprisingly, doesn't explore this angle.)  In the
story's funniest sequence, he leads a sing-along to his own anthem.  Set
to the tune of the British national anthem, the characters and the
audience follow it to a bouncing ball on the words.  It's high-spirited
fun.
Koop (Shaun Parkes) is a "vinyl pusher" from a local record store.  He
tells one guy that a record is hot because it was recorded by rappers on
death row.  "When they get the chair, the price will go into orbit,
mon," he advises his customer.
Lulu (Lorraine Pilkington) is the film's free spirit.  She brags that
she wears lipstick because she likes it.  Her best friend, Nina (Nicola
Reynolds), works at a fast-food store, where the director sets a dance
number.  The film's staging constantly surprises and delights.
Long portions of the story spend needless time listing the joys of a
life of drugs.  Usually, but not always, these are quite humorous.  One
documentary crew interviews Nina and Lulu in the club.  After talking
about heroin, Lulu stops the interview.  "Sorry, we've got to go," she
says, grinning.  "We're late for our next hit."
Another episode has a 17-year-old, Moof (Danny Dyer), on the town to
enjoy his first night of sex and drugs.  "I'm about to become a part of
the chemical generation!" he effuses.
When not pondering drugs, the film examines the difficulty of
communicating across generations.  When Lulu has dinner with her
relatives, the movie includes subtitles that translate what each one
really means.
By the end, the movie has transformed itself into a nice little romance
between Jip and Lulu.  The ending is as upbeat as a Fred Astaire movie.
In fact, they looked like they were going to start dancing in the rain,
but, alas, it was not to be.
HUMAN TRAFFIC runs a fast 1:39.  It is rated R for pervasive drug
content, language and some strong sexuality and would be acceptable for
college students and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
Wow, what to say? If you liked "Clerks" or are deep into the "rave" culture
you'll no doubt enjoy this wacky drugged out piece of video-cinema.
Unfortunately, the majority of the movie-going population may think
otherwise. Heavy on the "F" word, focusing on illegal drug consumption and
expressed in a thick hyperactive and Welsh/British tongue; "Human Traffic"
nonetheless keeps an uncaring chin up, proud as it is paranoid.
Subject matter aside, the production is a drain trap, catching all the
social and philosophic ramblings of some excitable young UK talent, high,
coming down, and otherwise never at a loss for words.
Almost entirely character driven, there is a faint attempt to make a plot
out of getting an extra ticket so that this motley group of starburst mates
can hit the hottest dance/drug club in all of Cardiff. Oh, and another
smaller tension created by two best friends of opposite sex wondering if
there's more to their relationship.
Besides, the occasional ecstasy-inspired gems that spew from these nervous
pals; the look and feel of the production rattles with a juicy eye for the
screen. Though, sometimes overdone and/or mis-edited, writer/director Justin
Kerrigan interjects visuals that picturize what his characters are merely
conceptualizing. It's a tactic that David E. Kelley does so well with "Ally
McBeal." Overall, it's energy laden, cleanly-cut and looks good, and (like
Kevin Smith of "Clerks" that later did "Dogma") full of future picture
promise.
Watching stoned people swear is not my idea of a good time, but I did enjoy
the production techniques and the minor relationships between these main
characters and their parents.
In one scene, Muff's father chases him out of the house yelling about
getting a job or something. The camera follows the two as they tear down the
steps, Muff rants on how everyone he knows that has a job hates it and that
he's just "not ready yet to be miserable."
Human Traffic. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring John Simm, Lorraine Pilkington, Shaun Parkes, Nicola Reynolds,
Danny Dyer, Andrew Lincoln, Carl Cox, Howard Marks.
Written and Directed by Justin Kerrigan.
Produced by Allan Niblo, Emer McCourt at Fruit Salad LTD/Miramax release.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/33fa9bf0128812dd882568df006c08df?OpenDocument
Any movie about the underground music scene is a difficult beast to
master.  Any meaning found in the underground is usually lost by the
dumbing-down of the experience to make it "more accessible" to the
general public.  Or the film is produced and directed by people that
have about enough understanding of the subject matter that they ought to
work as production assistants for VH1.  Human Traffic, a new film
exploring the British underground party/rave scene and the people
immersed in the world of clubbing, pubbing, drugs, sex, and the
beautiful, beautiful music, is an example of how it really ought to be
done.
The film follows five Brits in their young twenties during a wild
weekend of parties, drugs, dancing, sex, pop culture discussions,
relationships, and wanking off in front of a mirror while mum
interrupts.  The cast of character consists of Jip (John Simm), our
narrator, who has a bit of a problem with his willy, known as Mr.
Floppy.  Koop (Shaun Parkes), our black DJ maestro, who has insecurity
issues, afraid his girlfriend Nina (Nicola Reynolds) is shagging other
men.  Nina herself can't stand her McJob and longs for the freedom of
the weekends.  Lulu (Lorraine Pilkington), Jip's best mate, is tired of
her cheating boyfriends.  And Moff (Danny Dyer) can't seem to escape the
black hole of his awful life.  The film follows these five individuals
during one weekend as each of them discovers love, friendship, and
self-fulfillment, all against the raging party background.
Human Traffic is proof that cinema can still tell us deep stories while
being visually alive, as director Justin Kerrigan's subtle use of the
camera lets the audience become part of the action.  The use of direct
communication to the audience by the collection of characters works
well, making the viewer the subconscious mind for the characters.
Dialogue is crisp and moves with an even pace, and the acting is
confident.  However, the two females leads tend to promote their
relationships and dialogue with a bit of unneeded urgency that shows
through when poignancy is needed.
Human Traffic does not try to explain the rave scene.  Instead, it gives
the audience the ability to listen to the people inside it, letting you
choose your own convictions about this powerful musical movement that
brings together strangers, friends, and lovers for one blissful night of
music and peace.
Writer/Director: Justin Kerrigan
Starring: John Simm, Lorraine Pilkington, Shaun Parkes, Danny Dyer,
Nicola Reynolds, Dean Davies
Producers: Allan Niblo, Emer McCourt
Rated: R

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   What do you say when you leave work on Friday
afternoon?  "Have a nice weekend."  Right?  Do you mean it? 
Maybe...that is if you even remember what you said.  But if
the five cats in Justin Kerrigan's first feature film "Human
Traffic" heard you wish them a "nice" weekend, they'd
probably roll on the floor with laughter, because "nice" is
about the last thing they want when they quit their
stupefyingly boring jobs.  These guys and gals, all in their
early twenties, are going to live during those forty-eight hours.
They're going to forget the disapproval of their bosses at the
fast food joint and the jeans store and the flak they'd get from
their parents if indeed their folks even cared.  As Jip, the
principal character and the one who mostly likely stands in for
the writer-director, "All that exists now is clubs, drugs, pubs
and parties...I'm gonna blow steam out of my head like a
screaming kettle....We're gonna get more spaced out than
Neil Armstrong ever did.  Anything could happen.  For four of
the five kids on one particular weekend in the Welsh capital
of Cardiff, this weekend is fun like no other.  For Jip (John
Simm) and his frizzy blonde friend Lulu (Lorraine Pilkington)
something really big goes down.
   "Human Traffic" is the story of one weekend in the lives of
five young people who meet regularly from Friday eve
through Sunday and who get their kicks from solitary
probing of web sites or sitting passively in the movie
theaters like us critics, but from rave parties that they attend
while high on the drug Ecstasy.  You'll never think of coal
miners again since, after all, you don't have to be in swinging
London or hip New York to be part of the weekend madness. 
The groovy pubs of Wales will do just fine.
   Kerrigan, who wrote the script to this partly surreal
adventure two years ago when he was twenty-three, has lived
the scene and knows whereof he speaks.  He opens up the
movie by having a few of these characters tell us something
about their lives. Nina (Nicola Reynolds) relates that she was
turned down by her college because she gave the wrong
answer to the interviewer who asked why she was interested
in philosophy.  Jip sells jeans, but the boss is on his back
--and Kerrigan means to show that concept quite literally, as
portrayed by cinematographer David Bennett.  The only one
enjoys what he's going during the week is Koop (Shaun
Parkes), a vinyl freak that makes even Jack Black's character
Barry (from Stephen Frears's "High Fidelity") look like a
square.  When Koop flips a record onto the turntable, the
twenty-something customers dig the beat and dance up a
storm.  
   "Human Traffic" follows the five for two days as they make
the rounds of the pubs, the rave clubs, their parents' homes.
While there is no real plot and much of the dialogue is
improvised by these largely unknown performers, some of the
scenes are touching while most will draw at least a smile
form the youthful, targeted audience.  The Ecstasy-popping
comes with a price, of course. On Sunday the party animals
are so down, so paranoid, that they can't even look one
another in the eye.  The paranoid Koop doesn't even need
drugs to conclude that his bird, Nina, is flirting with every man
in sight.  
   "Human Traffic" is neither pro- nor anti-drug, laying out
both sides of the coin.  When these guys are high, they're in
the clouds, and the regularly surreal Justin Kerrigan puts
them there--again, literally.  When Moff (Danny Dyer), the
youngest in the group, is coming down from his high, he is
surrounded by his parents and grandmother at Sunday dinner
as they tut-tut about Cardiff's callow: "They have no
discipline: they have no morality."  As Moff targets each of
the adults with his TV remote control device hitting the
forward and back buttons rapidly, he sees them repeating
their blather over and over to a rollickingly funny effect.
   "Human Traffic" has been compared to "Trainspotting," but
this association is at best superficial.  We can understand
every word that Kerrigan's characters say without subtitles,
there are no bathroom jokes, and we never see any of the
people actually taking the drugs or throwing up.  This is a fun
buddy movie that looks more like Kerrigan's revenge for
being rejected by every film school to which he applied--at
which point he took odd jobs for a year until he was finally
admitted.  Kerrigan utilizes the cinema for what the big
screen is intended: a visual far more than literary delight. 
"Human Traffic" proves that amateur actors using a loose
script can do just fine given a director's quixotic camerawork
and fertile imagination.  Kerrigan gives new meaning to the
term "rave review."
Rated R.  Running time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ross Anthony
Wow, what to say? If you liked "Clerks" or are deep into the "rave" culture
you'll no doubt enjoy this wacky drugged out piece of video-cinema.
Unfortunately, the majority of the movie-going population may think
otherwise. Heavy on the "F" word, focusing on illegal drug consumption and
expressed in a thick hyperactive and Welsh/British tongue; "Human Traffic"
nonetheless keeps an uncaring chin up, proud as it is paranoid.
Subject matter aside, the production is a drain trap, catching all the
social and philosophic ramblings of some excitable young UK talent, high,
coming down, and otherwise never at a loss for words.
Almost entirely character driven, there is a faint attempt to make a plot
out of getting an extra ticket so that this motley group of starburst mates
can hit the hottest dance/drug club in all of Cardiff. Oh, and another
smaller tension created by two best friends of opposite sex wondering if
there's more to their relationship.
Besides, the occasional ecstasy-inspired gems that spew from these nervous
pals; the look and feel of the production rattles with a juicy eye for the
screen. Though, sometimes overdone and/or mis-edited, writer/director Justin
Kerrigan interjects visuals that picturize what his characters are merely
conceptualizing. It's a tactic that David E. Kelley does so well with "Ally
McBeal." Overall, it's energy laden, cleanly-cut and looks good, and (like
Kevin Smith of "Clerks" that later did "Dogma") full of future picture
promise.
Watching stoned people swear is not my idea of a good time, but I did enjoy
the production techniques and the minor relationships between these main
characters and their parents.
In one scene, Muff's father chases him out of the house yelling about
getting a job or something. The camera follows the two as they tear down the
steps, Muff rants on how everyone he knows that has a job hates it and that
he's just "not ready yet to be miserable."
Human Traffic. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring John Simm, Lorraine Pilkington, Shaun Parkes, Nicola Reynolds,
Danny Dyer, Andrew Lincoln, Carl Cox, Howard Marks.
Written and Directed by Justin Kerrigan.
Produced by Allan Niblo, Emer McCourt at Fruit Salad LTD/Miramax release.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Have you ever been to a rave party? Have you ever smoked a lot of dope, done
some Ecstacy or just gotten really ripped with some of your best buddies
over a weekend? Well, I hope for your sake that you have, since the fantasy
world of intoxication has always been known to drop many an inhibition,
loosen the façade of reality, and if anything, grant us with more than just
one memorable story for our friends. But if you're a straight player, have
only heard of the parties and the drugs and the sex, well maybe this movie
is just what you need. Buckle your seatbelt, Dorothy...it's gonna be a bumpy
ride!
PLOT:
This film follows the lives of five close friends during one typical rave
party evening, with a little bit of background on each of the main players,
a setup to the nite's activities, the parties, parties and parties, and
inevitably...the crash end of the evening.
CRITIQUE:
Hard to truly rate this film since I did quite appreciate its visuals, its
soundtrack and its authentic portrayal of the rave/drug scene, but I just
couldn't get past the fact that the characters were uninteresting, the story
absent and the overall sense...deja-vu. Of course, movies like TRAINSPOTTING
and GO worked because they presented us with an overall picture including
intriguing characters and engaging storylines, two elements which were
ultimately missing from this fast-paced movie. In fact, this film could
actually be considered more of a documentary on the rave scene, with its
believable insights, actual drug depictions, which are generally glanced
over in other teen-party flicks, and its innovative filming style.
Unfortunately for the audience, at least in my case, all five of the main
characters were just annoying, unentertaining and generally, over-the-top.
Add that to the fact that the two lead girls looked like they were in their
forties, and not much investment went into these characters from my end.
Without that bond with the characters, without much of a story, and without
much of a high while watching this picture, I can't say that much of it
"did" anything for me.
Sure, there were a couple of definite funny scenes, including one which
broke down the politics of "passing the spliff" at a party...very funny! And
another one which showcased the uncomfortable feeling one has when
constantly running into someone whom you only know as an acquaintance, and
all of the bullshit conversation that you must carry on with that person. So
true, and pretty darn funny as well. Many of the other moments in the film
featured movie references attempting to be clever (both the TAXI DRIVER and
STAR WARS conversations didn't work for me), as well as kids basically
screaming, jumping up and down, and telling us how cool it is to be high. I
know what they're saying, but watching it for ninety minutes just didn't
click much for me. The ending was especially weak with a dopey romance angle
coming out of nowhere, but I will give the first time writer/director Justin
Kerrigan this much...the camera tricks are abundant and certainly quite
inventive.
Being a fan of stylish movies and not being afraid to admit that I have
personally "inhaled" some friendlies of my own, I might recommend this film
to those who love the raves, like to smoke a little doobie before watching a
movie, and anyone who doesn't mind watching a film with no actual plotline.
For the rest of ya'll, I would suggest skipping this puppy, and renting many
of the better films to which this movie makes mention, including TAXI
DRIVER, CLERKS, SCARFACE or THE SHINING.
Incidentally, I got the chance to interview 26-year old writer/director
Justin Kerrigan for this film, a conversation which you could read by
following this link: http://www.joblo.com/kerrigan1.htm

Author
Greg King
This blistering Lost Weekend for the rave generation takes
audiences on a searing, frenetically paced, dazzling, chemically
fuelled journey through Britain's rave culture of the late '90's.
Those looking for a lazy comparison will inevitably compare this film
with Trainspotting.  Admittedly, this energetic, drug fuelled, wildly
cinematic ride through Britain's club scene and rave culture bears
some superficial similarities with that ground breaking Scottish film.
This impressive film debut from writer/director Justin Kerrigan is
imbued with a similar sense of dynamic energy, momentum and bravura
visual flair that cuts to the core of youth consciousness.
Almost plotless, the film follows a group of five
twentysomethings through a weekend of drugs, sex, club crawling and
deals.  It centres around five friends - Jip, Lulu, Koop, Nina and
eager young Cockney lad Moff, the party animal - who use the club
scene as a way to escape the drudgery and boredom of their week day
routine, spent working or bludging on the dole.  The partying begins
on Friday night and they begin to dry out on Sunday afternoon.
The film looks at the sexual hang-ups, the drug induced
paranoia and the attitudes of its protagonists with humour and an
unflinching honesty.  However it's unflinching view of the excesses of
today's youth will not appeal to all audiences.
This is something of a personal film for Kerrigan, who has had
first hand experience of the scene.  He has drawn upon a lot of his
own personal experiences for the characters, and has put himself on
the line with this film.  Kerrigan brings a flamboyant, often surreal,
visual style and cutting humour to the material.  He cleverly uses
monologues and different points-of-view to offer insights into this
scene.
He also draws superbly natural, and largely improvised
performances from his young and enthusiastic, and largely unknown,
cast, most of whom are new to feature films.  Newcomer Danny Dyer is
wonderful as Moff, the youngest member of the group, and his energetic
performance comes close to stealing the film.  Human Traffic does not
really espouse an anti-drugs message.  Rather, it speaks to the
consciousness of its hip young audience.
Whereas films like the classic Saturday Night Fever and the
recent 54, etc, explored the disco scene of the '70's, Human Traffic
has an immediacy and relevance for today's audience, who have
experienced the rave and club scene.  The action is accompanied by a
sizzling soundtrack assembled by noted DJ Peter Tong, and features
artists like C J Bolland, Fat Boy Slim, Orbital, etc.  Human Traffic
goes off, and will likely attain the same sort of cult status as
Trainspotting.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
A Review by Akiva Gottlieb
At a screening of "Human Traffic" in the United Kingdom, writer/director 
Justin Kerrigan received a compliment that states exactly why his film 
is successful in so many different ways. A 65-year-old man left the 
screening, nearly in tears, proclaiming "God! I wish I was young again!" 
"Human Traffic" is not a great movie, but it taps into the zeitgeist of 
the many young people who try their hardest to truly "live".
That these people are heavily into hallucinogenic drugs is not a subject 
Kerrigan shies away from. "Human Traffic" will, without a doubt, be 
compared to the similarly fast-paced Scottish import "Trainspotting", a 
film which many believe to have glamorized heroin use. "Human Traffic", 
which is also becoming a cult-classic in the U.K., examines "the most 
dominant youth culture there's ever been in Britain, bigger than the 
rockers, the hippies, the Mods," according to Kerrigan. This is a 
culture where Ecstasy (or "E") is the drug of choice. Yes, I am talking 
about Rave.
"Human Traffic" focuses on the lives of a cross-section of Welsh 
twenty-somethings who use the weekend rave parties to find meaning in 
their aimless lives. They spend every hour of their dead-end jobs 
looking forward to the pleasures that the weekend promises. This film is 
about such a weekend, and the pleasures are as much the viewer's as they 
are the characters'.
Our guide is Jip (John Simm), an energetic type who is coming to grips 
with the fact that he is in love with his friend Lulu (Lorraine 
Pilkington), and that he suffers from an acute case of "sexual 
paranoia". His best friend Koop (Shaun Parkes) suspects that his 
faithful girlfriend Nina (Nicola Reynolds) is cheating on him with 
numerous partners, and his buddy Moff (Danny Dyer) is always looking to 
have fun to rebel against an upper-class upbringing.
Without following a visible plotline, "Human Traffic" goes through the 
motions of a weekend in Rave culture. Late Friday night, the group heads 
off to a rave where they dance, take drugs, and search for the meaning 
of life. After the rave there is a party where they dance, take drugs 
and discuss how "Star Wars" is a dissection of life as a junkie. 
Cleverly, Kerrigan's inventive and stylish film also portrays the 
uncomfortable aftermath of any Rave weekend: the comedown. By showing 
the consequences of such a weekend, Kerrigan proves to not be 
glamorizing the culture, or drugs itself.
Justin Kerrigan claims that he made "Human Traffic" because this culture 
is the one he grew up on, and he felt qualified to make a film based on 
his experience. In the film, he doesn't try to make excuses for why 
today's youth are hooked on drugs, or paint negative stereotypes of such 
youth. Instead, he is trying to provide a Woody Allen-type insight into 
a generation that takes drugs, but doesn't resort to violence. Drugs are 
just a part of their weekend routine.
"Human Traffic" is hardly groundbreaking (infact, last year's "Go" and 
this year's upcoming "Groove" both focus on similar topics in the same 
culture), but it is an excellent movie because it really understands how 
much fun life can be. Kerrigan's characters are the type who just say 
"yes!". They know that mixing a bit of fantasy into their reality may be 
illegal, but to them, its also a risk worth taking.
