Title
Review for Joe Versus the Volcano (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Magus
Joe Versus The Volcano is really one of the worse movies made in very recent 
memory.  The strangest thing is that you would think nothing would go wrong 
with it.  It has a solid cast with Tom Hanks & Meg Ryan as the lead roles.  
But you can never judge a movie by its cast...
If there is one good thing about Joe VS The Volcano, it is that the plot is 
original.  Unfortunately, it is also incredibly stupid.  The movie begins with 
Joe (Tom Hanks) going to work.  This opening sequence is very boring and slow. 
It shows Joe walking to his office.  But on the way, he has to wait in a long 
line passing by strange and slightly depressing scenery with obnoxious 
lighting.  A sequence like this should take 2 minutes.  Here, it takes over 
5...
It is obvious that Joe hates his job.  At his office, one of his co-workers is 
Meg Ryan.  Oddly enough, she plays 3 different roles in this movie!!  Joe 
leaves to go to a doctor's appointment.  His doctor informs him that he has a 
"brain cloud."  This means that in a few months, he will die.  So what does 
Joe do?  Quit his job, of course!!
When he arrives home, Joe meets an old man named Graynamore (Lloyd Bridges).  
Graynamore tells Joe that in order to get some important mineral for his 
company from an island, the natives need someone to sacrifice to their volcano 
to please their Fire God.  By a startling coincidence, the boat trip to the 
island takes a few months.  By the time he reaches the island, he will almost 
be dead from the "brain cloud" anyway, so Joe agrees.  
Graynamore gives Joe a credit card to buy everything he needs to go on this 
"great adventure".  Joe goes on a date with Meg Ryan, his co-worker.  The day 
before the boat trip, Joe meets one of Graynamore's daughters.  She is also, 
surprise, Meg Ryan.  Except she looks more hippyish.  They both have dinner 
and the next day, Joe gets driven over to his boat.
The lady that sails the boat is another one of Graynamore's daughters.  And, 
wonder of wonders, she is also played by Meg Ryan.  As they sail to the 
island, Meg Ryan tells Joe that the natives of the island have a craving for 
orange soda.  After some stupid talking scenes, they also deduce that 
Graynamore had his doctor be the one that Joe went to.  And that the "brain 
cloud" thing was made up!!
They do plently of cheap special effects on the boat voyage.  Joe goes fishing 
and catches a hammerhead shark.  This is a cheap gag that has been pulled off 
many times.  But, to top it off, the shark is obviously rubber and fake!!  One 
night there is a storm.  A cheap-looking lightning bolt strikes the boat and 
everything is cast overboard.  Fortunately, Joe and Meg Ryan manage to find 
some of the luggage that Joe brought to sail.
By pure luck, they get to the island.  Since the natives like orange soda 
, they wear soda cans as attire!!  Stupid or what?  ;)  Before Joe leaps in 
the volcano, he gets fed.  Right before he jumps, Meg Ryan pleads him not to.
When Joe decides to, she goes in with him because "she loves him".  Now this 
is where the movie should end.  But, unfortunately, the "cheesy ending" bug 
comes in.
The volcano blows the couple out and into the ocean where they land on Joe's 
luggage.  They float to another part of the island as they watch lava pouring 
out of the volcano towards the villagers.  I give this movie a * out of ****.  
See it only if you're a film buff that enjoys a bad movie every now and then 
or if you REALLY like Tom Hanks or Meg Ryan...
(Any comment or disagreements on this review can be e-mailed to 
magus@mindspring.com)

Author
Randy Parker
        JOE VERSUS THE VOLCANO is the most frustrating kind of movie.  You
watch most of it with a dopey grin on your face, loving every minute of it,
but you end up leaving the theater frowning and scratching your head.  The
reason?  The first two thirds of the film are virtually perfect.  But just
when you think the movie can do no wrong, it pulls the rug out from under
you, self-destructs, and dissolves into a sloppy mess.  Writer-director
John Patrick Shanley has created two thirds of a four star classic.
        The movie stars Tom Hanks as Joe Banks, a hypochondriac who always
feels miserable.  Joe works as an advertising librarian in a hideous
office, which is located deep in the bowels of a surgical parts factory.
His boss is a dunce, the work is boring, the coffee is putrid, and the
fluorescent lights create a blinding glare.  In short, Joe's life is
incredibly grim, and it goes from bad to worse when a doctor tells him he
has a "brain cloud"--a rare condition which will kill him within six
months.  Joe quits his crummy job, and the very next day a rich tycoon,
played by Lloyd Bridges, comes a knockin' on his door with an unusual
offer.  He wants to hire Joe to jump into a volcano on a small island in
the Caribbean.  Joe has nothing to lose so he accepts the offer.
        After Hanks' dismal outings in THE BURBS and TURNER & HOOCH, JOE
VERSUS THE VOLCANO comes as a breath of fresh air.  Like PUNCHLINE, VOLCANO
taps into Hanks' somber side and offers him a substantial character:
someone who has lost his spirit and who comes to life only after he learns
that he's dying.  Joe is one of Hanks' more intriguing roles, and
consequently VOLCANO is easily one of the actor's better films.
        VOLCANO, however, really belongs to Meg Ryan, who seems more and
more polished with each movie.  Ryan plays three vastly different
characters, and she is enchanting in each one.  First, wearing a brown wig
and brown lenses, she plays DeDe, a dizzy secretary who works with Joe.
Second, sporting a red wig and red lipstick, she plays Angelica, Lloyd
Bridges' snobby, neurotic daughter.  Third, she plays Angelica's
half-sister, Patricia, a blond blue-eyed beauty.  First, Ryan looks like
Ally Sheedy, then like Molly Ringwald, and finally like herself.  But it's
not just Ryan's make-up that changes: it's her mannerisms, her body
language, and the way she talks.  Ryan plays each part with flair and
conviction.
        Until the disappointing finale, VOLCANO brings to mind films like
AFTER HOURS and SOMETHING WILD.  It shares with those movies a timeless,
otherworldly quality and a pungent satirical tone.  As in any great black
comedy, every character is colorful; every actor seems perfectly cast.  For
example, Ossie Davis turns up as a sophisticated limo driver who takes Joe
on a massive shopping spree in Manhattan.  The grave luggage salesman they
encounter is a riot.
        VOLCANO is most memorable, however, not for its performances but
for its production design.  The opening sequence, which takes us into Joe's
work-place, is a masterpiece of surrealism.  The surgical parts factory is
a nightmarish dungeon, complete with endless stairs, clunky machines, and
glaring fluorescent lights.  VOLCANO is Shanley's directorial debut (he
previously wrote MOONSTRUCK, FIVE CORNERS, and THE JANUARY MAN), and his
direction is surprisingly confident and stylish.
        The problem is that an hour into the film, the bottom falls out of
Shanley's script, and the movie takes a nose dive.  VOLCANO begins as an
intelligent satire and ends as a silly comic book.  The movie really falls
apart once Joe reaches the volcanic island, which is inhabited by natives
who worship Orange Soda; their chief is played by Abe Vigoda of all people.
It's as if Shanley didn't know how to end the story; the tacky finale
seems as if it were written by someone else, by a hack.  It just doesn't
feel right.  How can a movie so extraordinarily good become so exceedingly
awkward?  Blame Shanley: he rows the movie up a creek and then throws away
the paddle.
