Title
Review for Focus (2001/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Classics
 Director: Neal Slavin
 Writer:  Kendrew Lascelles, Arthur Miller (novel)
 Cast: William H. Macy, Laura Dern, David Paymer, Meat Loaf Aday
    Former Cambodian leader and all-around nut-case Pol Pot--
responsible for killing perhaps one-fourth of his own people during
his administration--issued an order to murder everyone in his
country who wore glasses.  He was not a lobbyist for the new
Lasik laser treatment that allows you to "throw your glasses away." 
Though Pol Pot was one of the most myopic rulers of the 20th
Century, he simply believed that people with weak eyes could pick
rice, no problem, but that those who took the trouble to correct
their vision must  be readers.  If they're readers, then they're
intellectuals and if they're intellectuals, they're a danger to his style
of government.  QED.  Wearing glasses could get people in
trouble even if they live far from Phnom Penh.  There are still
some anti-Semites in the U.S. who believe that what you wear on
your nose has something to do with your religious preferences:
specifically that you're likely to be Jewish.  Sounds strange, but
then, anti-Semites are mighty strange people.
   Arthur Miller, known as arguably America's greatest 20th
Century playwright, belted out a novel in 1945 about how one guy
in Brooklyn is targeted as a Jew from the time he popped on his
first pair of glasses.  Winningly adapted from The Great Writer's
novel, Neal Slavin's "Focus" gets its heft largely from the
casting of David Mamet's favorite actor, William H. Macy, in the
role of  a quiet, unmarried Christian living in a nondescript
Brooklyn neighborhood during the height of World War II. 
"Focus" looks for the most part like a work that would be dynamite
on the off-Broadway stage or on a 36-inch TV rather than the big
screen, and the script by Kendrew Lascelles lacks wit-- but then
again Arthur Miller has frequently been criticized for a
certain clunkiness in his prose and a suffocating case of self-
righteousness.   Nonetheless, the film works on two levels: on a
didactic one to enlighten people about the presence and dangers
of hatred; on an entertainment level given the frequent injections
of humor supplied by Laura Dern in the role of a seductively-
dressed woman and Macy himself as a Woody-Allen style wimp
who when confronted by an extremist for his lack of enthusiasm
for the cause excuses himself by saying simply "I never applaud."
   At a time that hate groups in the U.S. have already carried
atrocities such as the infamous Oklahoma City bombing of a
federal building and alleged overreactions have been taken by the
U.S. government such as that pursued against a cult in Waco,
Texas, we are not surprised to discover that our country has a
history of zealotry against people who are "different" dating back
to the Salem Witch trials, running through the campaigns of the
Know Nothing party against immigration, right up to the present
existence of skinheads types hiding out in the woods from New
Jersey to Oregon.  But you may not have known (I didn't at any
rate) that a virulent anti-Semitic group carried out activities in my
own home town, Brooklyn, New York, during the height of World
War II when our country was presumably fighting against the
archcriminal of religious hatred in Europe.  "Focus" shows us a
remarkable transformation of thought by Newman (William H.
Macy), a personnel manager overseeing an office of women at
typewriters, who is under orders to hire only Christians.  (In one
scene, the camera hones in on a newspaper's help wanted ad
with the caveat "Christians only"--an advisory that I can attest to
since I was a little kid during the war and did indeed take note of
such un-P.C. material.) He refuses to hire applicant Gertrude Hart
(Laura Dern) because the name sounds to him Jewish.  She's
not.
   Advised by his boss to get a pair of glasses, Newman does so
and immediately draws dirty looks from his neighbors on the street
and even from his mother, who berates him for not getting the
rimless kind because "you look Jewish."  Assumed, then, to be a
Jew by the company president, he is forced to resign his job,
meets Ms. Hart once again when he applies for a new job, and
marries her.  Noting verbal and then physical attacks against the
owner of a small luncheonette, Finkelstein (David Paymer), both
Newman and his new wife spend the major segment of the story
insisting that they are not Jewish.  After a dramatic payoff scene,
they both change their tune.  Listening to their words in the final
moments, one can almost see Arthur Miller himself, ramrod
straight in his unbending morality, taking on the forces that have
often made America anything but the land of human rights.
   "Focus" is a powerful, though for the most part responsibly
understated and sincere diatribe against the persistence of anti-
Semitism.  With its reproduction of automobiles from the mid-
forties and subway cars with cushions made of straw, the movie
looks every bit the period piece that it is. Yet thematically, "Focus"
is torn from today's headlines.  Filmed in Toronto which stands in
for my Brooklyn, Neal Slavin's film is an event which in its low-key
style combined entertaining with didacticism so cleverly that
adolescents now in high school  should be taken to see it as part
of their customary field trip experiences.  Nor will adults be
disappointed.
   In his book "Chutzpah," Alan Dershowitz argues that anti-
Semitism is all but dead in the U.S.  I'm sure he doesn't live in
yet another Brooklyn neighborhood, Crown Heights where, while 
somewhat dormant, the disease springs to life now and then as
when a Hasidic Australian scholar visiting the country was
attacked and killed simply because of his religion.  Oh,
anti-Semitism is alive all right, but it festers below the surface. 
We're not likely to find characters like former radio personality
Arthur Godfrey, who had a sign on the grounds of his Florida
home, "No Jews or dogs allowed," but given the right
circumstances, who knows what could happen?  For a current
picture that deals with the subject--how an economic depression
led to a rise of ethnic hatreds in Liverpool--take a look at Stephen
Frears's touching picture, "Liam."
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: In the late years of World War II a man sees 
    anti-Semitic influences moving into his neighborhood but 
    wants to remain neutral.  As neutrality become more and 
    more difficult he struggles with his conscience.  Neil 
    Slavin directs this adaptation of a novel by Arthur Miller.  
    Rating: 7 (0 to 10), +2 (-4 to +4)
FOCUS is a story of an anti-Semitic movement during the years of 
World War II, but it does not take place in Europe, but in the US.  
Kendrew Lascelles wrote the film based on Arthur Miller's 1945 
novel FOCUS.  It is the story of Fascism creeping into a middle-
class neighborhood.
Lawrence Newman (played by William H. Macy) lives with his mother.  
He works in a prosperous Manhattan company interviewing new 
applicants.  He interviews people applying for jobs and generally 
makes sure the company hires only the "right type," good gentiles.  
One of the people he turns down is non-Jewish Gertrude Hart (Laura 
Dern) who nonetheless looks too Jewish to be put in a visible 
position.
Lawrence happens to witnesses a tough-guy neighbor beat up a 
woman.  But he does not want to make trouble in the neighborhood 
by going to the police.  Another neighbor Fred (the intimidating 
Meat Loaf Aday) seems to be on a personal campaign to chase out of 
the neighborhood the corner news dealer, a Jew (David Paymer), to 
move out of the neighborhood.  When Lawrence gets new glasses, 
glasses that accidentally make him look Jewish; suddenly he gets a 
new view of his street and especially neighbor Fred who is 
inviting "Americanist" organizers into the neighborhood.  Lawrence 
tries desperately to hold onto his neutrality in the Jew-baiting 
in spite of the dictates of his conscience.
For his first feature film commercial producer Neal Slavin has 
chosen a particularly timely theme, that of a slow but insidious 
spreading prejudice and fascism.  The targeting of ethnic groups 
for particular hatreds is especially timely.  Particularly 
chilling is that Fred so anxious to introduce the same fascism 
that was currently engulfing Europe.
Slavin symbolizes the cycle of evil with the image of merry-go-
round accompanied by ominous music.  The film's one less than 
subtle touch is the big billboard at the end of the infiltrated 
street proclaiming "There's no way like the American way."
It is interesting that two of Arthur Miller's novels were adapted 
at the same time.  Like FOCUS, Amos Gitai's EDEN also was shown at 
the Toronto International Film Festival.  Both are about people 
caught up in evil circumstances and having to take a stand.  
However, FOCUS is by far the better of the two.  I rate it a 7 on 
the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
