Title
Review for Joy Luck Club, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  9/24/93 (limited); 10/1/93 (general)
Running Length:  2:19
Rated:  R (Language, mature themes, violence)
Starring:  Ming-Na Wen, Tamlyn Tomita, Lauren Tom, Rosalind Chao, 
           Kieu Chinh, Tsai Chin, France Nuyen, Lisa Lu
Director:  Wayne Wang
Producers:  Wayne Wang, Amy Tan, Ronald Bass, and Patrick Markey
Screenplay:  Amy Tan and Ronald Bass based on the novel by Amy Tan
Music:  Rachel Portman
Released by Hollywood Pictures
In English and Chinese with English subtitles
     The Joy Luck Club, as stated in the movie's opening narrative, is
a collection of four aging Chinese women bound together more by hope
than by joy or luck.  The four women--Suyuan (Kieu Chinh), Lindo (Tsai
Chin), Ying Ying (France Nuyen), and An Mei (Lisa Lu)--came to America
many years ago to escape China's feudal society for the promise of the
United States' democracy.  Now, however, Suyuan has died and the three
surviving members of the club invite her daughter June (Ming-Na Wen) to
take her place.  June belongs to the "new" generation, those of Chinese
heritage who grew up speaking English and learning American customs.
Also of roughly the same age are Waverly (Tamlyn Tomita), Lindo's
daughter; Lena (Lauren Tom), Ying Ying's daughter; and Rose (Rosalind
Chao), An Mei's daughter.  It is around these eight figures that the
stories of THE JOY LUCK CLUB revolve, telling of the varied
difficulties and tragedies involved in these mother/daughter
relationships.
     Co-writer Ronald Bass (who, along with Amy Tan, adapted from Tan's
novel) says that there are sixteen separate stories in THE JOY LUCK
CLUB.  Since I didn't count, I can't verify this statement, but it
sounds about right.  Taken as a whole, all of these vignettes combine
to lend greater meaning to the whole.  THE JOY LUCK CLUB is the sum
total of its parts with common themes giving solid grounding and
greater resonance to the overall film.  As Bass comments, "I saw all
the mothers' and daughters' stories as facets of the same experience.
Put together, they formed a mosaic.  That's the genius of the book, and
if we cut it down to just a couple of stories it would be like any
other movie."
     The stories are not told in such a manner as to seem pared down or
truncated, nor is their presentation confusing, thanks to a cleverly-
orchestrated framing scene with the principal characters gathered
together.  However, it is apparent that a lot more could have been
told, and we're left wondering about all that we didn't get to see.
The characters are mostly well-developed, but it's tantalizing to
consider just how much fuller some of them could have been with a
different plot structure.  But there are always sacrifices to be made,
and no movie can tell everything about the lives of the people it
introduces.
     One of the themes of SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE is that there are some
"guy movies" and some "chick movies."  If this is true, then THE JOY
LUCK CLUB fits into the latter category.  Certainly, a tear-jerker like
this is likely to find more open acceptance among women than among
men.  That's not necessarily because men won't like it, but some will
be too embarrassed to admit that they enjoyed something as emotional as
this.  In fact, there are those who may refuse to see it to avoid this
possible dilemma altogether.
     Nevertheless, there will be a group of people who will genuinely
dislike THE JOY LUCK CLUB, and I can't say that their reasoning is
entirely flawed.  The movie has a few moments that can justifiably be
described as cloying and manipulative, and those who are offended by
these methods are going to become annoyed at THE JOY LUCK CLUB.
Die-hard cynics are advised to stay clear.
     What the aforementioned people have missed, however, is that the
scenes that don't work are far fewer in number than those that do, and
most of these can easily be overlooked in piecing together the overall
intent of the motion picture.  Few movies are without at least a
problem or two, and it's more difficult to put together a flawless
production when going for the emotional payoffs that this film does.
     THE JOY LUCK CLUB is clearly--perhaps too clearly--an adaptation
of a book.  The dialogue is often too poetic to be real, and the story
too clearly plotted to be acceptable as anything more than an imperfect
reflection of the world we live in.  I hasten to add that this is not a
bad thing, but it is evidence that this movie, through its willingness
to loosen the strings of realism, expects a certain suspension of
disbelief from the audience.
     Personally, I never identified with any of the characters, but I
became involved in their stories.  That is to say, never did I make a
connection between something in my own life and what I was seeing on
screen, but that in no way diminished the impact of what was being
presented.  I venture to say that many women, especially those who have
had tempestuous relationships with their mothers or daughters, will
have an entirely different viewpoint.
     The line between drama and melodrama is a fine one, and most of
THE JOY LUCK CLUB successfully navigates the tightrope, staying on the
more powerful dramatic side.  There are times when it slips and comes
across as heavy-handed.  You know something isn't right when it becomes
apparent that certain lines of dialogue and character actions are
trying desperately to make you, as a member of the audience, shed a
tear.  Whether or not these incidents do what they're trying to is
another matter entirely....
     Wayne Wang, whose best-known previous film was DIM SUM, shows
significant ability in the way he has structured this movie.  He has an
excellent and believable cast working behind him, including a number of
virtual unknowns (France Nuyen and Rosalind Chao being exceptions).
     The characters are THE JOY LUCK CLUB's real strength.  Many are
played by more than one actor (as children then adults, for example),
but all changes are smooth and seamless.  It's as easy to accept a
little girl as Waverly as it is the beautiful, sophisticated-looking
Tamlyn Tomita, and that's because the characters transcend the
performers portraying them.
     It's fascinating and satisfying the way that the diverse threads
are knitted together into a single tapestry.  Some might complain that
this movie is a downer, but those who do, fail to recognize that THE
JOY LUCK CLUB's message is one of hope, and that catharsis and
emotional fulfillment often come through tragedy.  Sure, a lot of bad
things happen during the course of this film, but at the end, the tears
are of happiness and new beginnings, not loss.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  THE JOY LUCK CLUB is the stories of
     four families that have migrated from mainland China in the
     last generation.  It is the story of four mother-daughter
     relationships in the United States and the story of the four
     mothers' lives in repressive and sexist Chinese society.  The
     stories are often heart-wrenching and often inspirational.
     If this is a woman's film, it at least is miles ahead of
     something like BEACHES.  Rating: low +3 (-4 to +4).
     It is a party.  Friends have gotten together in a celebration.  Several
families are represented.  The families are Chinese-American, though through
inter-marriage not all the people present are Chinese.  At the center of the
party, four women play Mah Jong.  They are the Joy Luck Club, originally
four women from different parts of China who found each other in the new
country of the U. S. and have played together and talked for years.  One of
the original members died months ago and her daughter has replaced her.
Each of the four families has a daughter who was born in this country; each
has or had a mother who was born and raised in China.  THE JOY LUCK CLUB is
really an anthology film with four pairs of stories, each pair with the
story of the mother's life in China and the story of the mother-daughter
relationship in the new country.  There is a beautiful symmetry in the eight
stories.  In each pair a single theme will run through the mother's story
and the mother-daughter story.  Each mother's story will show the hardship
placed on women in a country bound by the ancient traditions that still live
in China.  They are traditions that are particularly hard on women, giving
them little choice as to their fate.  In the mother-daughter stories, each
daughter faces, and of course overcomes, problems caused by freedom from the
pre-set roles of the old country.  So each pair of stories is also about the
changes that go on in a family adapting to a very new way of life.  It is a
matrix of eight poignant stories woven into a single story.  Bracketing the
entire film is the story of June (played by Ming-Na Wen) who discovers early
in the film that her mother did something bad in China, an act so terrible
June does not understand it and one that calls on June to return to China on
a mission that she is worrying about.  Hanging over most of the film is the
question of how June's mother Suyuan (Kieu Chinh) could have done what she
did.  Yet by the time the full story is revealed we have seen how different
mainland Chinese culture is from our own and we will come to understand
Suyuan's actions.
     THE JOY LUCK CLUB is what used to be called "a woman's film."  And a
"crying film" at that.  I will say in its defense that I liked it
considerably more than my wife did.  I think that the family conflicts I saw
in the film are similar to conflicts I have seen in real families, but that
Evelyn might have seen less of.  Usually we do not see how really different
life is in China even today.  I will defend the "crying film" aspect much in
the same way I defended the same aspect of THE COLOR PURPLE.  We are looking
at very real stories of human misery and the cruelty in parts of this film.
If a film that shows you that does not manipulate you and perhaps bring a
tear to your eye, the film is broken.  Or maybe you are broken.  In any case
we are talking about a culture that has extreme sexism by Western standards;
it has forced marriages; it has terrible poverty.  At least the stories are
all fairly new and unfamiliar here, which already gives it a point above the
recent THE WEDDING BANQUET.  One of the eight stories was in some ways
reminiscent of RAISE THE RED LANTERN, but even there it had unexpected
touches.
     Visually the film brought back memories of China, and particularly the
karst-dotted landscape near the Li River Valley and Guilin.  The camera work
by Amir Mokri is very beautiful when it needs to be and downbeat when that
is what is called for.  The film was directed by Wayne Wang from a
screenplay by Any Tan (based on her novel) and Ronald Bass.  The three
shared production credits with Patrick Markey.  THE JOY LUCK CLUB is one of
several very good films that are coming out this autumn.  I would rate it a
low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
TANAKA Tomoyuki
        After watching the film THE JOY LUCK CLUB recently, I read some
        movie reviews, including the two stored in the
         FTP site.
        
        (See also .">http://www.msstate.edu/Movies>.)
        The reviews are almost all positive.  Newsweek (Sept 27, 1993)
        called it "a four-hankie classic".  Time (Sept 13, 1993),
        Variety and other magazines hailed it similarly.
(1) No yellowfaces: Asian actors are playing Asian roles.
(2) Stereotype: Asia is sexist, cruel, strange, exotic, and inscrutable.
(3) Stereotypes: Asian males are bad; white males are good.
(3.2) Asian males are all bad, whether in China or in the USA.
    --- Waverly's father.  The only thing he said was "Sit down. Eat."
(4) Comments on the plot of reunion between the mother and
        children deserted in China.
(4.1) Tyuugoku-zanryuu-koji (China-deserted-orphans)
(5) "Feminist" film or "Asian American experience" film?
(5.1) Stacy Ferguson  has written an
        excellent Usenet article questioning that "powerfully feminine
        starting point".  She argues that the film shows emotionally
        disturbed Asian mothers raising insecure daughters, and is not
        a good reflection of Asian women.
(5.2) A "feminist theme" film becomes weaker if it is flawed in other
        ways, such as by including racial stereotyping.  We (Steve Wei
        , etc) argue that this is the case in THE
        JOY LUCK CLUB.

Author
Mike Turton
The Joy Luck Club
Produced by Hollywood Pictures.  Directed by Wayne Wang. Starring Kieu
Chinh, Tsai Chin, France Nuyen, Lisa Lu, and Tamlyn Tomita.  Runtime: 1:39.
Reviewed by Michael
Turton.
What a heap of limping, lurching cliches.  This tear-jerker, well-recieved in
the US, is a terrible movie which depends for its freshness on the Asian faces
and cliches with which US audiences are unfamiliar.
Many critics have already skewered this film, but I won't let that stop me
from piling it on.  Not only does this movie portray certain stereotypes
which others have pointed out, in some ways depends on the racism of
Westerners in order to work.  For example, most westerners can not/do not
discriminate between Asians of different ethnic origin, thus, for most
viewers, the use of actresses of Japanese and Vietnamese origin to portray
Chinese women was a success.
This film has come under much criticism for its allegedly "sterotyped"
portrayals of Chinese men.  As one who lives in Taiwan and is married to a
Taiwanese, I disagree.        It is relatively faithful in its portrayal of Chinese
men (women and children are still sold in China and Taiwan even today), where
it errs is in its relentless depiction of Chinese women as saints put upon by
males.        The behavior of the various mothers toward their children is not
overshadowed by the authoritarian patterns of dominance and control which
mark even the most well-intentioned interpersonal relationships in Chinese
society, but always by some dark secret in the past.  The mystifying behavior
(from the mother's point-of-view) of the daughters, which in real life would
be a struggle to move beyond this control, in the movie are generally
depicted as a mere cultural/generational clash. This is the sort of
white-washing one sees daily in soap operas on Taiwanese TV.
The acting is excellent, the directing competent, but the storyline is so
riddled with triteness nothing can save it.  The individual stories of the
aunties will be recognized by anyone familiar with romances, soap operas and
TV dramas in Asia.  The use of flashbacks is a good idea, but the pace is too
slow at times.
The film's strongest point lies in its depiction of Asians as people too. 
It's refreshing to see so many faces, marginalized in other films, stand tall
here. If only they'd been given something to really sink their teeth into. 
1.5 out of 5.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I saw THE JOY LUCK CLUB this weekend.  I loved this show, thought
it was fantastic and gave it *** 1/2.  I would recommend it to anybody
who likes movies with real and vibrant people in them.  What a great
show.
     Now, all of that having been said, I would like to spend the rest
of this review discussing one aspect of the film.  Did anyone else
notice how men were portrayed in this movie?
     Men in this movie came in basically two types with few exceptions.
Either they were horrible brutes, or they were like wallpaper.  Either
they were mean and cruel, or they had almost no lines at all.  It was
more than just they tried, and rightly so, to emphasize the women.  In
such a wonderful show why such stereotypes of men?
     Given this show was about eight women who were either all married
or in relationships, I would have hoped for a little more
realistic/sympathetic/hopeful image of men.  Given Oliver Stone was one
of the executive producers and given he sees the world in black/white
and good/evil, maybe that was the reason.  I do not know why it was
done, but it bothered me.
     Still, my strong recommendation stands, but if I could have edited
it just a bit ...
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
