Title
Review for Permanent Midnight (1998)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Artisan Entertainment
 Director: David Veloz
 Writer:  David Veloz, from Jerry Stahl's autobiography
 Cast: Ben Stiller, Elizabeth Hurley, Janeane Garofalo, Maria
Bello, Owen Wilson, Peter Greene, Fred Willard, Cheryl Ladd
   Why do people take illegal drugs?  The most powerful
argument is given by one scuzzy character in Danny Boyle's
movie "Transpotting": "Imagine your best orgasm and multiply
it by one thousand."  When Boyle was asked whether his
movie encouraged drug use, he replied "Absolutely not." 
Yeah, right.  Several movies provide an antidote to
"Trainspotting"'s glorification of chemical highs and lows,
beginning with Otto Preminger's "The Man with the Golden
Arm," with Frank Sinatra as the junkie and Eleanor Parker his
crippled wife.  That major work, now dated, is still powerful,
and has a jazz score by Elmer Bernstein that hasn't yet been
beaten by movies of that genre.  But for sheer in-your-face
potency, you'd look hard to find a better remedy to drug-
glorification films than "Permanent Midnight."  What gives
David Veloz's new film its extra poignancy is that it's all true. 
The events really happened, as recorded in TV writer Jerry
Stahl's autobiography which has been successfully adapted to
the screen.  Stahl, who had a promising career writing for the
thriving puppet-show sitcom "Mr. Chompers," was making
$5,000 a week at the time. Trouble is he was paying out
$6,000 a week for cocaine and heroin, and you don't have to
have a CPA to know that this does not provide a favorable
individual balance sheet.  Stahl spent some time in an L.A.
rehab clinic and based on the film's conclusion seems now to
be clean.  He appeared on several TV interview shows to spill
all--Oprah, Geraldo et al--and was the ideal guest who must
have kept the folks in the audience tut-tutting throughout the
interviews.
   Forceful direction by Veloz and poignant acting by the
talented Ben Stiller compel audience attention to what
otherwise might have been a fairly static chamber piece
suitable more for stage than screen. The thirty-two year old
Stiller is positioned early on in his career to surpass the
renown of his talented parents, Anne Meara and Jerry Stiller,
and now seems to be one of the most sought-after actors
though largely for indie films.  You're not a serious movie buff
if you've missed the likes of "Reality Bites," "Flirting with
Disaster," "If Lucy Fell," and his most exciting work to date in
Neil LaBute's "Your Friends and Neighbors."  In "Permanent
Midnight" he appears at first behind a fast-food stand,
obviously too bright for positioning tartar sauce on fish
sandwiches for mentally challenged customers.  Kitty (Maria
Bello), pulling up in her convertible, sees that in him in one
glance, invites him for coffee and, of course, they end up in
bed.  Mellowing out, Stahl becomes eager to confess his life
while the attractive woman at his side is all-ears.  We in the
audience eavsdrop on the intimate details of his sordid tale.
   Stahl takes us through his green-card marriage to the
stunning Sandra (Elizabeth Hurley, a dead ringer for early
Jacqueline Bisset), for which he receives $30,000.  His writing
gains the attention of the producer of a TV puppet show, Mr.
Chompers.  He fixes the script, the show takes off, and
Stahl's career seems made, but for one thing: he is an addict. 
"I'm from New York, but I came to LA to get away from the
drugs," he confesses not without waggery.  
   Now, director Veloz does not let the audience off the hook
by turning Robert D. Yeoman's camera away from the
innermost details of the needle.  Veloz does for narcotics
what Spielberg did for war: he takes us right into the action to
watch every miserable component.  We see Stahl slowly bind
his arm with a tube, insert the needle, remove it, and roll his
eyes upward as he fixates on the evil liquid in the syringe.  At
one point, when he apparently has run out of veins, he
plunges the hypodermic deep into his neck.  We watch it all. 
(Five people walked out of the screening at this point, which
is a recommendation for the movie.)  He steals percodan from
his wife's medicine cabinet, going through his usual routine
since his wife is just outside the door.  He coughs when he
opens the chest, and flushes the toilet when he closes it.  He
steals drugs from a friend, having discovered the hiding place. 
Just out of a rehab session, he is seduced by another "friend"
into shooting heroin and smoking a crack pipe, after which he
and associate begin running toward the unbreakable window
of an office building and literally smashing repeatedly against
the glass, rolling like cretins on the carpeted floor.
   The greatest irony of the story is that Stahl is a health nut
who jogs five miles after breakfast and insists on eating only
organic vegetables.
   In a less than successful scene he flirts with an
unresponsive agent (Janeane Garofalo in a rare, serious,
role), but for the most part the movie works because Stiller is
so convincing that you'd almost think he was forced to shoot
up repeatedly in researching the part. "Permanent Midnight" is
one muscular film about Hollywood's underbelly, done without
commercialized fanfare but with a great deal of attention to
the real hazards of self-destructive addictions.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Permanent_Midnight_ (R) ** (out of ****)
Arriving fairly fresh off the blink-and-you-thankfully-missed-it run of
Terry Gilliam's _Fear_and_Loathing_in_Las_Vegas_ is another adaptation of a
drug-dazed book, this time a non-fiction one: _Permanent_Midnight_, the
celebrated autobiography of TV writer Jerry Stahl.  While the resulting
film is nowhere near the disaster Gilliam's was, screenwriter-director
David Veloz's glimpse at one man's real-life walk on the wild side rings
just about as false as that surreal work. 
The true story of Stahl would appear to make an intriguing film.  While he
was a successful writer for such television shows as _thirtysomething_,
_Moonlighting_, and _ALF_ (the latter recreated in the film as
_Mr._Chompers_), Stahl also led the life of a heroin junkie.  This double
life scenario does hold some promise, and with the vibrant Ben Stiller
playing Stahl, first-time helmer Veloz appeared to be onto something
interesting.
Veloz, however, shoots himself in the foot just about right from the
get-go.  Not content to follow Stahl's story straight ahead, he comes up
with a woefully unconvincing framing story.  We meet Jerry as he works in a
fast food joint as part of a drug rehab program, and he gets picked up by a
mysterious woman named Kitty (Maria Bello).  Jerry and Kitty hole up at a
motel, and in between (and sometimes during) attempts at sex, Jerry tells
Kitty of his turbulent life: the out-of-control heroin abuse and the
devastating effects it had on his marriage of convenience to a beautiful
Brit (Elizabeth Hurley, trying her best in a thankless role) and his
once-thriving writing career.
The Jerry-Kitty subplot fails the test as a simple framework, yet Veloz
somehow got the wrongheaded idea that this already-weak part of the story
could serve as the film's emotional core.  Past catches up to present by
the end of act two, when Jerry finishes his story and he parts company with
Kitty; just when one thinks that's the last of Kitty, act three's focus is
on Jerry's inexplicable romantic feelings for her.  According to the
script, Jerry and Kitty form an unbelievably strong bond during their
nights together, presumably due to the "similar pasts" they purportedly
share.  But one is never given a clear idea of Kitty's past; she alludes to
having similar troubles, but she never gets a chance to deliver her whole
story (or, at the very least, _enough_ of it).  Bello is terrific (she
could very well have a successful film career after suddenly bolting from
TV's smash _ER_), investing great warmth and humanity to her role, but,
still, Kitty never becomes a fully developed character.
The same, unfortunately, can be said about Jerry.  Stiller's immersion
into the role is admirable (he lost 30 pounds), and as a whole, he turns in
an impressive dramatic turn.  However, as written by Veloz, Jerry is less a
person than a set of tics: shaking, manic talking.  It does not help that
one is never treated to a glimpse to what Jerry was like before the drugs,
thus never lending the audience to a standard of comparison.  Even worse,
there's no clear turning point in Jerry's story; the film feels like it's
missing a scene where he realizes his mistake and decides to turn his life
around.  While one pivotal event is _said_ to be his turning point, its
depiction leaves little of that sense.
I have not read _Permanent_Midnight_, but based on what I've read about
it, the film is a pale shadow of what is said to be a work that is quite
harrowing and even funny.  Of course, what apparently makes the book work
even more is that it is all based on fact.  If I had not known that detail
in advance, I would not have been able to glean it from
_Permanent_Midnight_ the movie, which comes off as manufactured and
synthetic as most Hollywood product.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "PERMANENT MIDNIGHT" (Artisan Entertainment)
         There are two primary pitfalls in making movies about drug
addiction. First: the subject matter has already been covered,
beginning in the '50s with "The Man With the Golden Arm," so the
audience knows the protagonist will inevitably collapse. Since then,
the real-life dramas of Janis Joplin and John Belushi have already
been explored and exploited. Second: if the story proceeds through
rehabilitation, there's the challenge of not being preachy. "Clean and
Sober" (1988) is one of the few films that avoided
this. Writer/director David Veloz's "Permanent Midnight" falls into
both pitfalls - and worse - as it chronicles TV comedy writer Jerry
Stahl's real-life recovery from heroin addiction in the form of a
confessional, filled with flashbacks. Stahl was one of the writers for
"Alf" and other sit-coms. Ben Stiller, who has made a career out of
playing nice guys who are losers, plays Stahl. He's graphically shown
shooting himself up with smack, complete with blue-hued skin,
blackened eyes and drops of blood squirting onto the bathroom ceiling.
He behaves like an idiot and epitomizes decadence. Once he gets into
rehab, of course, this predictably changes. Problem is: he's miscast
and it's all very episodic and ultimately boring. British
model/actress Elizabeth Hurley appears briefly as his ambitious
wife-in-name-only, the result of a green-card marriage, as do Cheryl
Ladd, as a TV star who recognizes his problem, and Janeane Garofalo as
an inquisitive agent. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Permanent Midnight" is a sordid, junkie 3. Just say no.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Hollywood addicts are different but no less pathetic than addicts
elsewhere.  PERMANENT MIDNIGHT, based on screenwriter Jerry Stahl's
autobiography, paints an alarming portrait of drugs in Tinseltown.
After shooting up heroin and consuming his green-grass-shake breakfast,
Jerry has to get in his 5-mile jog.  His carefully controlled diet
avoids any non-organic food products.
Ben Stiller, still playing in theaters as the comedic lead in THERE'S
SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, demonstrates considerable versatility as Jerry
Stahl, addict extraordinaire and television writing wunderkind.  With an
emaciated look that is the spitting image of Stahl in his drug addled
days, Stiller dresses almost exclusively in black leather.  Hyperactive
and erratic, he's a nuclear reactor in constant danger of meltdown.
The tragic story opens with Jerry in the toilet, literally.  His wife's
about to give birth, but he needs his hourly fix so he has hidden in a
toilet stall near the operating room where he can shoot up his heroin --
one of many drugs from speed to crack cocaine to which he is addicted.
The only reason he has a wife is due to his drug habit.  Offered $3,000
to marry Sandra, who needed a green card, he reluctantly agreed.  Since
the gorgeous Elizabeth Hurley plays Sandra, many male viewers may wish
they were so tempted.  Hurley plays the role of the "supportive" wife,
who blissfully ignores her husband's drug problem until it looks
completely hopeless.
The story is told in flashback after Jerry has completed a few months of
rehab and is now working at a menial job in a fast food outlet.  Jerry,
who sleeps with anyone in a skirt, hits it off with a customer fresh out
of rehab herself.  Between having sex, he tells her his tragic story.
Not content with mere alluding to his habit, the film is filled with
explicit scenes of him shooting, smoking and popping drugs.  While
typing his scripts with the ferocity of a madman, he pops pills like
candy.  Later in the movie, it will take 6 bags of smack before he can
even get started at his daily writing grind.
Jerry is a prolific writer for various television series. Most, but not
all, producers manage to be conveniently oblivious to his difficulties.
"Hollywood is so self-obsessed that nobody notices what anyone else is
doing," Jerry points out.
Drugs own Jerry so that his judgement becomes more and more clouded.  He
shows up as high as a kite to job interviews and to script idea
sessions.  The other actors tend to be ex-druggies themselves, so they
are sympathetic to his plight.  Still, when Jerry goes totally off the
deep end at one session, his career seems near an end.  "Realism is
dead," he shouts as the drugs pump through his bloodstream.
"Expressionism is where it's at."  He goes on to describe his bizarre
vision of where he wants to take the television series.  He is fired
that same day.
Filled with the minutia that characterizes a real drug addict, Jerry
guzzles water, sweats profusely and craves sugar when he's not shooting
up.  A conversation with him at a party is nigh impossible.  He
interrupts guests every few minutes to sneak off to the bathroom for his
next bag.
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT, while having a few dark comedic undertones, is as
effectively realistic a statement against drug usage as you're likely to
find.  It also amply demonstrates the downside of fame in the fast lane.
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT runs a fast 1:35.  It is rated R for pervasive hard
drug usage, profanity, sex and nudity and would be acceptable for
teenagers only if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Well, there's nothing like missing a fad by a few years to show how
*really* behind the curve you are.  PERMANENT MIDNIGHT, the new film about
the rise and fall... well, mostly the fall... of TV writer Jerry Stahl
should prove to be the final nail in the short-lived, and now
painful-to-watch, genre: the drug movie.
     Perhaps best known as the chief influence behind the TV show "ALF,"
MIDNIGHT is a simplistic retelling of Stahl's tell-all autobiography.  Ben
Stiller, the only remotely passable part of this film, plays Stahl with
gusto, but twenty minutes of Stiller going berserk as a strung-out junkie
are more than enough.
     Sadly, that's all this movie is: a whopping 85 minutes of Stiller on
heroin.  There's precious little about his life before or after his
addiction.  It's just a few pages out of the life of a junkie.  And I
couldn't have cared less.  Plot development?  Ha!  First-time director Veloz
obviously feels it's beneath him.
     Maybe the worst part of MIDNIGHT is that it's told completely in
flashback, as Stahl reminisces to some blonde girl who picks him up at a
fast food joint.  Played by Maria Bello, this outta-nowhere character is so
devoid of, well, of *anything* that my cat could have played her with the
same conviction.  Bello had best start rethinking that "ER" departure,
*pronto*.
     I won't waste any more time droning about how bad PERMANENT MIDNIGHT
is.  But I will say one thing: at least it explains a lot about "ALF."
http://www.permanentmidnight.com
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        There's something about Ben Stiller that makes him a popular choice
among casting directors these days.  Stiller currently has three projects
in circulation, and what other actor can lay claim to that?  He's in
"There's Something About Mary," which I *still* haven't seen.  And he's in
the acerbic "Your Friends & Neighbors," playing a talkative,
sexually-frustrated drama coach called Jerri.
        Now there's "Permanent Midnight," in which Stiller plays another
Jerry, this one a heroin-addicted television writer, last name Stahl.
        There's also something about this industry that pushes bankable
stars like Stiller into doing drug-addiction pictures the minute they've
proved themselves commercially.  Ewan McGregor springs to mind who, after
successful turns in "Emma" and "Brassed Off," received greater respect and
admiration for his mind-blowing realization as Renton in Danny Boyle's
transatlantic junk-fest, "Trainspotting."
        "Permanent Midnight" is based on the true life experiences of Jerry
Stahl, a successful Hollywood writer who, in the mid-eighties, had a
$5,000-a-week job churning out plotlines for disposable TV sitcoms and a
$6,000-a-week heroin habit.  A habit, in Stahl's own words, "the size of
Utah."
        As Stahl, Stiller contributes a commanding performance.
        Unlike "Trainspotting," which was successful in having it both ways
by chronicling both the highs and the lows of heroin abuse, "Permanent
Midnight" instead focuses on the concept of drug addiction as maintenance.
One of the earliest observations in the film is a casual reference to
"Naked Lunch" author William S. Burroughs who, when asked why he shoots up
first thing in the morning responds, "so I can shave."
        Stahl rarely appears to be puncturing veins for the thrill of it
all in "Permanent Midnight"; it's so he can talk to his mother on the
phone, show up for work on time, even pay his bills.
        While the film itself occasionally wobbles around along with Stahl,
the writing (adapted from Stahl's autobiography by director David Veloz) is
controlled and pointed.  "Permanent Midnight" shows how Stahl moved from
New York to L.A. to--again in the author's words--"escape the drug scene"
(yeah, right); why he entered into a convenient marriage with a British TV
exec (Elizabeth Hurley, so impossibly polite you'd swear her single
profanity was dubbed); and that he conceived a child in between his random
hirings and firings.
        Stahl narrates all this in a motel bedroom to a sympathetic lover
called Kitty (Norristown's own Maria Bello) with whom he spent some rehab
time.  Janeane Garofalo is wasted--and miscast--as a heavily-bespectacled
Hollywood talent agent who fails to get her hooks into the doped-up
wordsmith, and that's Stahl himself playing a jaded clinic counselor.
        Stiller, unshaven (Burroughs take note) and with lots of mascara
around the eyes, has Stahl stumble through the film looking like a train
wreck but, to his credit, never once pushes his pill-popping,
needle-jabbing performance over the top.
        The ubiquitous Stiller is the reason to see "Permanent Midnight"; a
dark, comic, and strangely absorbing study of assisted living.

Author
Christopher Null
     Well, there's nothing like missing a fad by a few years to show
how *really* behind the curve you are.  PERMANENT MIDNIGHT, the new
film about the rise and fall... well, mostly the fall... of TV writer
Jerry Stahl should prove to be the final nail in the short-lived, and
now painful-to-watch, genre: the drug movie.
     Perhaps best known as the chief influence behind the TV show
"ALF," MIDNIGHT is a simplistic retelling of Stahl's tell-all
autobiography.  Ben Stiller, the only remotely passable part of this
film, plays Stahl with gusto, but twenty minutes of Stiller going
berserk as a strung-out junkie are more than enough.
     Sadly, that's all this movie is: a whopping 85 minutes of Stiller
on heroin.  There's precious little about his life before or after his
addiction.  It's just a few pages out of the life of a junkie.  And I
couldn't have cared less.  Plot development?  Ha!  First-time director
Veloz obviously feels it's beneath him.
     Maybe the worst part of MIDNIGHT is that it's told completely in
flashback, as Stahl reminisces to some blonde girl who picks him up at
a fast food joint.  Played by Maria Bello, this outta-nowhere
character is so devoid of, well, of *anything* that my cat could have
played her with the same conviction.  Bello had best start rethinking
that "ER" departure, *pronto*.
     I won't waste any more time droning about how bad PERMANENT
MIDNIGHT is.  But I will say one thing: at least it explains a lot
about "ALF."
http://www.permanentmidnight.com
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  /
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT
(Artisan)
Starring:  Ben Stiller, Elizabeth Hurley, Maria Bello, Owen Wilson, Peter
Greene.
Screenplay:  David Veloz, based on the memoir by Jerry Stahl.
Producers:  Jane Hamsher and Don Murphy.
Director:  David Veloz.
MPAA Rating:  R (drug use, sexual situations, profanity, brief nudity)
Running Time:  87 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In the last few minutes of PERMANENT MIDNIGHT, writer/director David
Veloz introduces a jarring element of irony to what had been a fairly
straightforward dark night of the soul drama.  It's the true story of
Jerry Stahl (Ben Stiller), a successful television writer during the 1980s
for such programs as "ALF" and "thirtysomething" who bottomed out as the
result of heroin and cocaine addiction.  The film's coda shows
Stiller-as-Stahl, having written his confessional autobiography, appearing
on a series of television talk shows to promote the book and bare his
soul.  In one of the film's best lines, Stahl explains in voice-over that
the most humiliating thing he ever did as the result of his addiction was
"appearing on 'Maury'."
     A good gag, but also a pretty self-serving one.  In an era when
celebrity mea culpas are just another part of the public relations
landscape, a film like PERMANENT MIDNIGHT has to work extra hard to
function as an honest cautionary tale rather than a plea to love me, feel
sorry for me, let me back into your hearts.  The film makes sure we know
about Stahl's troubled family life, including two suicidal parents, which
already suggests that Stahl and/or writer/director David Veloz is pointing
fingers outward as much as inward.  That five minute montage of chat show
appearances, however, acts almost as a slap in the face.  Watching the
character pitch his book -- which, of course, became the movie we're
watching -- takes every harrowing moment which preceded and makes it cheap
and exploitative.  Instead of learning from his experience, we learn that
a really good salesman can turn his tragedy into dollars.
     That's truly a shame, because Stahl's story is given a harrowing
conviction by Ben Stiller's performance.  Though best known as a comic in
films like the hit THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, Stiller is a versatile
performer who makes heroin addiction about as ugly as we've ever seen it.
It's funny yet pathetic watching Stahl trying with a ridiculous lack of
success to disguise his stupors as artistic eccentricity; even other
self-absorbed Hollywood types instantly recognize that he's utterly
useless.  What's fascinating about Stiller's performance is that there's
never a moment when his character appears to be functional as an addict.
He disappears instantly into a world of excuses and frantic searches for
his next high.
     Unfortunately, there's nothing besides Stiller's performance to make
us care about PERMANENT MIDNIGHT.  The two romantic angles which are
supposed to give resonance to the story -- Stahl's marriage to a mid-level
television executive (Elizabeth Hurley) and his post-rehab infatuation
with fellow recovering addict Kitty (Maria Bello) -- are both undercut by
the circumstances of their relationships.  The marriage, though it
produces a child, is primarily a way for his British wife to get a green
card, and the romance with Kitty serves primarily as a device for Stahl to
tell his story in flashback.  There's not much at stake as we watch Stahl
disintegrate, nor is there a particular reason to care if he's earned his
second chance at love.  He's just another cleaned-up Hollywood junk-head
with a tale to tell, probably one of a thousand.  The last five minutes of
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT are as ill-conceived as any five minutes of film this
year, because they make it look like Stahl is just a different kind of
self-absorbed now.  You're left with the uncomfortable feeling that for
him, addiction is just a marketing hook.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Permanent Midnight (1998)
Ben Stiller, Elizabeth Hurley, Maria Bello, Janeane Garofalo, Owen Wilson,
 Peter Greene, Fred Willard. Produced by Jane Hamsher, Don Murphy. 
Cinematography by Robert Yeoman. Screenplay by David Veloz, based on the 
book by Jerry Stahl. Directed by David Veloz. 85 minutes
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
We live in an era of personal problems made public, an "Oprah" age where 
people seek attention and absolution by hauling the results of their poor 
decision-making skills in front of the nearest spotlight. Using the media 
as an ersatz confession booth, they pour out the intimate details of 
their obsessions, compulsions and other assorted demons; expecting, and 
generally receiving, forgiving applause following their "daring" displays 
of honesty.  
Once reserved for celebrities, this peculiar form of self-flagellation is 
now available to anyone willing to sacrifice their privacy and dignity in 
exchange for attention. After a local television newsreader was arrested 
for driving while intoxicated, she spoke with the print media and 
received a couple of splashy profiles. In both stories the notion of 
lives endangered by a drunk tooling erratically down the interstate 
became secondary, eclipsed by her sad tale of how family losses, bouts 
with depression and a near-suicidal state of mind led to her brush with 
the law. Cue the string section, flip on the applause sign, and let's all 
pray she stays sober. 
"Permanent Midnight" recounts the true story of Jerry Stahl, a writer who 
routinely earned upwards of $5,000 a week creating scripts for shows like 
"Alf" and "Moonlighting," while spending $6,500 a week on heroin and 
cocaine. He eventually hit bottom, of course. That's what junkies do. 
Told in flashbacks, the film covers his descent to the depths of 
addiction and his work on recovery, culminating in scenes of Stahl 
appearing on various daytime talk shows, baring his soul while promoting 
his tell-all autobiography.
Let's pause and look at Stahl's accomplishments. From his addiction he 
spun a book, lots of television and print exposure, a feature film in 
which he makes a cameo appearance, and more interviews to promote the 
film. Nice work, Jerry! What's next, action figures?
Within this massive exercise in self-exploitation lies a solid, if 
unexceptional, movie. "Permanent Midnight" offers nothing we haven't seen 
before, but as far as harrowing portrayals of junkies go, this one is 
unflinching and well-acted. Ben Stiller gives a strong performance as 
Stahl, making heroin addiction look as ghastly as we already knew it was. 
The film shows entertainment industry types willing to make allowances 
for Stahl's outrageous behavior, as long as he kept cranking out material.
 The scenes are interesting, but certainly not surprising. 
Stahl's tale, like most calculated tell-all's, remains firmly focused on 
him. As with the aforementioned newsreader, the effects of Stahl's 
behavior on others is far less important than his pain, his loss of 
esteem, his shame. You see, in "Oprah-land," the confessor is the star, 
always remaining the center figure in their real-life soap opera; with 
everyone around them fretting over the confessor's tragic self-
destructive behavior. Stahl's horrible actions are presented graphically 
because audiences require that. After all, what good is a public 
confession without juicy details about personal degradation? 
Aside from Ben Stiller's acting, the only thing that really stands out 
about "Permanent Midnight" is the sheer callousness behind its creation. 
Adding even more irony to the cynical proceedings is the appearance of 
"NewsRadio's" Andy Dick as a junkie discussing his habit alongside Stahl 
during the talk show montage that closes the film. In real life, Dick is 
almost as well known for his struggles with substance abuse as he is for 
his comedic skills. The spectacle of a real Hollywood addict playing a 
confessional addict onscreen is borderline surreal and unquestionably sad.
So what message does "Permanent Midnight" send? It's an anti-drug film, 
to be sure, but who among us doesn't already know what addiction can do 
to the human soul? Ultimately, I think the film's message is this: if 
you're plagued by personal demons, get yourself a good agent, because 
there's gold in them thar hills.

Author
Matt Williams
David Veloz directs his adaptation of Jerry Stahl's autobiographical
portrait of a Hollywood writer succumbing to the downward spiral of drug
addiction. Despite some adequate performances, the film merely treads
water with nowhere to go, and nothing to say.
Ben Stiller portrays Stahl, who moves to Los Angeles in the mid-1980s to
get away from the drug scene in New York. However, his ploy doesn't
work... rooming with a fellow addict (Owen Wilson) doesn't help...and
soon Jerry is plunged even deeper into the world of drugs.
But not everything is a negative influence on Jerry.  His wife, Sandra
(Elizabeth Hurley), who married him for a green card, helps him get a
job writing for the puppet sitcom, Mr. Chompers (in real life, ALF). A
literary agent, Jana Farmer (Janeane Garofalo) is impressed by his work
and wants to represent him.
But all that matters to Jerry is the drugs.  He continues to sink deeper
and deeper, blowing off work, friends, family, and anything else which
might have once held some meaning for himself.  The fact that this story
is an autobiography (and that it's told in flashback) should let you
know that he doesn't completely self-destruct, but the question
remains:  how far will he drop.
Permanent Midnight is all over the map, and not in a good way.  Its
narrative is jerky, the flashbacks seem forced, and there's nary a
consistent tone to be found in the entire film.  Sometimes, a confusing
atmosphere can actually enhance a film about drug addiction (see:
Trainspotting), but here it is a serious distraction.
Ben Stiller does his best to lift Permanent Midnight out of the morass,
but can't quite do it on his own.  His dramatic performance here is one
of the best in his career, showing that he can do more than neurotic
comedy.  However, he is hamstrung by the script.  We are treated to one
dramatic scene about his family, but other than that there is never any
insight into what makes his character tick.  He's merely a junkie
writer, and that's it.
The plight of the junkie has been visited several times before in films.
Permanent Midnight delivers a few illustrations of the depths to which a
drug addict will sink, but little else.  You don't leave the film more
enlightened than when you entered, and not very much more entertained
either.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: David Veloz
Writer: David Veloz (based on the autobiography by Jerry Stahl)
Starring: Ben Stiller, Maria Bello, Elizabeth Hurley, Owen Wilson, Fred
Willard, Peter Greene, Janeane Garafolo, Cheryl Ladd, Connie Nielsen, Andy
Dick, Jerry Stahl
Being inside someone's mind for about an hour and a half can really fuck
you up, especially if you're in the mind of Jerry Stahl.  Stahl was the
writer of such TV shows as "Moonlighting," and "Thirtysomething," and most
brilliantly"Alf," but more significantly, he was a drug addict making five
grand a week then blowing six grand on drugs.  His bestselling
autobiography, if anything like the book, has got to be one of the most
depressing, alienating book of the 90s, and that's counting Rush Limbaugh's
"See, I Told You So."
Watching "Permanent Midnight" is like watching a giant shapeless blurb on
the screen, framed by a section that tries to make sense of it but just
joins in the shapelessness.  We see Stahl's life from the beginning of his
career to his rapid descent into obscurity then back up again, and half the
time we have no idea where we are.  This would be a major complaint if this
film weren't about a drug dealer who's life was just like this.  His drug
taking was not so much out of pleasure as it was out of just trying to get
the pain of addiction to stop.
Stahl, as played by Ben Stiller, is a selfish, shameless man who just
happens to have a knack for being witty at the right time, but with an acid
edge that makes him funny and a bit of an asswhole at the same time.  Why
he started drug taking, we never find out.  When we first meet him, he's
already hooked onto drugs and takes it just because he physically needs it.
 The first image in the film is of him injecting heroin into his veins in a
public restroom, and we see nothing but pain in his eyes.  He's not
enjoying this ride.  Neither was I.
The framing device of the story is his flashbacks to his life as he tells
an ex-heroin addict named Kitty (Maria Bello, from "ER") in a smarmy motel
room, far from the pleasures of L.A.  As they have sex, and just lay around
talking, he talks of his move out to L.A. where his friend hooks him up
with a neat gig: for a quick payment of 20,000 bucks, he can marry a
British television producer named Sandra (Elizabeth Hurley) so she can get
a green card, and she will give him a writing job on a sitcom called "Mr.
Chompers" (er, "Alf").
He does it, and this allows him to feed his addiction more and more until
everything becomes a big blur.  He shows up late to meetings, arrives high,
and manages to write a script in about a half hour (this explains a lot
about the quality of those shows, eh?).  He injects his own life into his
scripts (his mother commits suicide, and he uses it in his show as a joke),
then ignores them as he does more drugs and has sex with various people. 
He befriends a dangerous dealer (Peter Greene), who is out in the parking
lot outside of the drug clinic where Stahl gets help at.
All of this, including the framing device, comes at you in a blunt,
straightforward manner, something which is totally respectful - hey, not
every film has to be neatly organized and sweetly delivered in a nice
little package - but after awhile, this becomes tedious.  Stiller's
performance is two-edged: he has no problem with showing the true
grittiness of Stahl's persona and lifestyle, but at the same time, he comes
off as a stupid asswhole who has no boundaries and no problem with wasting
other people's time (notably that of a potential agent, played with
hilarious control by Stiller-friend Janeane Garafolo).  It's hard to really
like a guy like this, and it's even harder to sit for an hour and a half
and really care what happens to him.
Overall, I respected this film because it doesn't bullshit anyone about
drugs.  This isn't "Trainspotting," which glorified then trashed drug-use. 
But that film at least gave a reason for people to do it in the first
place.  This one forgets about all that, and just assumes that because the
man is played by Ben "Mr. 1998" Stiller that it'll be easy to really give a
shit happens to him.  Wrong.  I really like Stiller, especially this year
(if you don't think he's a good director, at least after "Your Friends and
Neighbors" you can say he's a brilliant actor), but there needs to be
something else going on that gives me a reason to plow ahead with a film so
murky and overtly depressing.
"Permanent Midnight" is one of those films that will be admired for its
grit, but will never become enjoyable, even with some really nice moments
that either horrify or humor.  There's a really nasty scene where Stahl
tries to inject a syringe into the vein in his neck, and there's also a
really hilarious scene where he tries to come up with some ideas for a new
TV show he's working on, all while being totally high.  These moments, and
the greatness of the acting by pretty much everyone involved, make this
worth watching and plowing through.  But I really doubt I'll ever try to
plow through it again.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by David Veloz. 
Cast: Ben Stiller, Elizabeth Hurley, Maria Bello, Owen Wilson, Cheryl 
Ladd, Peter Greene, Janeane Garofalo.
1998 - 92 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, sex, and drug use).
Reviewed October 25, 1998.
"Permanent Midnight," is based on a true story about television 
screenwriter Jerry Stahl (Ben Stiller), who battled with his extreme 
heroin addiction throughout the 1970's and 80's. Told in flashback to a 
one night fling (Maria Bello) after he has been sober for 50 days, he 
talks about how the drugs pretty much destroyed him, as well as the 
relationship with his British wife (Elizabeth Hurley), whom he married 
so she would be able to get a green card.
"Permanent Midnight," is a none-too-special drama that tells a story 
about drugs that has been done countless times before, and better. 
Although the sequences of the drug taking are occasionally quite graphic 
and realistic, that is the whole movie. There is no attempt to develop 
any of the other characters, and his relationship with Hurley doesn't 
even seem fully written. We also learn next to nothing about Stahl's 
career, so the film isn't even good for learning about him. 
Ben Stiller cannot be faulted, however. He gives a brave, first-rate 
performance, and Maria Bello also is charismatic. Janeane Garofalo may 
very well be the highlight of the film, however, even though she is only 
in two scenes. There is something about her that I always love, and she 
brings something special or funny to every role she takes on.
"Permanent Midnight," is a film filled with good performances, but very 
little else. It's okay to tell a story about drugs, but the filmmakers 
probably should have realized that constant sequences of drug taking, 
one after the other, does not a good film make.

Author
Bill Chambers
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT *1/2 (out of four)
 starring Ben Stiller, Elizabeth Hurley, Maria Bello, Janeane Garofalo
screenplay by David Veloz, based on the novel by Jerry Stahl
directed by David Veloz
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT is a pretty bad movie, though it took me a few days to conclude this. The
film is more masturbatory than bleak, with its main character intent on confounding us with his
stupidity. (He has a $6000 a week drug habit.) Ultimately, as adapted by Veloz, Jerry Stahl
comes off as one of those playground braggarts who chainsmokes at the age of twelve; you are
less mystified by his self-destructive nature than bored into a stupor yourself.
Ben Stiller plays Stahl, a young author who arrives in L.A. with ambition and a nasty drug
habit. He eventually gets a gig for $5000/week writing for a sitcom called Mr. Chompers (a
thinly veiled stand-in for "ALF": Chompers looks just like ALF except he's blue), marries a
producer (Hurley) so she can get a green card, and hooks up with a Spanish mother (Liz Torres),
who shoots heroin with him in the afternoons. Insert proverbial downward spiral here.
PERMANENT MIDNIGHT is structured mostly as a flashback, with recovering addict Bello meeting
Stiller (at a fastfood restaurant, where Stiller works the drive-thru as part of rehab), taking
him back to a hotel, and between bouts of serious screwing, listening to his life story. I've
spent the last week trying to figure out why Stiller never seemed to find the frighteningly
gorgeous Hurley attractive-worse, I've been trying to figure out why Hurley DID find Stiller
attractive. As Stahl, Stiller displays none of the charm or wit one would expect (post-There's
Something About Mary) of either the actor or a comedy writer. What separates Stahl from the
hundreds of other Hollywood punk-junkies, it seems, is that Stahl wrote a book about his
idiocy. Watch Stahl shoot heroin next to a baby! Watch Stahl spoil numerous pitch meetings with
smack-fueled babble! Stiller gives a technically flawless performance: the film could double as
a documentary on how to be a junkie. But PERMANENT MIDNIGHT is mostly soulless. When the movie
poses the question Will Stahl be saved? and then answers it in the form of Bello's character
(basically a shrink in black panties), could a person care less? In the film version of his
autobiography of the same name, Stahl doesn't need saving, he needs someone who will sit there
and listen to him go on about himself. If you learn anything about the other characters in this
movie, it's that they are the most incredibly tolerant Hollywood-types known to man. (Stahl
also seems to be the only person at schmooze parties doing drugs. Is this
Hollywood...California?)
I learned very little about the entertainment business from PERMANENT MIDNIGHT and a whole lot
about an egotistical lunkhead. Of course you know that Stahl triumphed because he lived to talk
about his problems. So, basically, his drug habit got him a book deal, a movie based on his
life, and now he's apparently collaborating with Stiller on future projects. So much for the
moral of that story. TEMPORARY MIDNIGHT is more like it.
-Bill Chambers; September, 1998
