Title
Review for Firestorm (1998)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Howie Long, Scott Glenn, William Forsythe, Suzy Amis, 
      Christianne Hirt
Director: Dean Semler
Producers: Thomas M. Hammel, Joseph Loeb III, Matthew Weisman
Screenplay: Chris Soth
Cinematography: Stephen F. Windon
Music: J. Peter Robinson
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     I can think of three reasons why Howie Long will likely never be a 
major action star:
1.  He doesn't have a hard-to-decipher accent,
2.  He doesn't always speak in a monotone, and
3.  His face doesn't always wear the same impassive expression.
     In short, the former NFL player turned FOX sportscaster turned 
actor is too good to be bad, but too bad to be good.  Unfortunately, the 
same cannot be said of his first star vehicle, FIRESTORM, which is just 
plain awful.
     One of the most glaring problems with Long (who made his acting 
debut in John Woo's BROKEN ARROW) is that he's so mediocre that he often 
blends in with the scenery.  As ace firefighter Jesse Graves, Long is 
supposed to be playing a bigger-than-life action hero -- the kind of he-
man who will crash through a flaming door to save a child or parachute 
into a burning clearing to rescue some stupid campers.  Unfortunately, 
despite the best efforts of first-time director Dean Semler to 
photograph Long using heroic shots that make Kevin Costner's work in THE 
POSTMAN look stark, Jesse turns out to be a pretty boring good guy.  
     To put it kindly, this is not a well-written motion picture.  
FIRESTORM is a collection of howlingly bad lines set against a backdrop 
of disaster movie clichés which, taken together, form something that 
requires a level of viewer inebriation to be recognized as a plot.  The 
only reason this film is getting one star (instead of something lower) 
is that most of the fire sequences are realistic, and I was fascinated 
by the meticulous planning that must have been necessary to stage them 
effectively.
     We're introduced to Our Big Burly Hero one afternoon when he and 
some colleagues jump into the midst of a forest fire to save a group of 
people.  During this sequence, Our Big Burly Hero proves that he's also 
A Sensitive Guy by risking his life to save a little girl and her dog 
(yes, the dog lives) from being broiled alive.  Flash-forward a year.  
Now, Our Big Burly Hero is taking over as chief of his smokejumpers 
association, replacing outgoing honcho Wynt Perkins (real actor Scott 
Glenn).  But this day, Our Big Burly Hero's first in charge, isn't going 
to be business-as-usual.  A group of Nasty Escaped Criminals have set a 
Wyoming forest alight to aid their flight to freedom.  Led by Randy Earl 
Shaye (William Forsythe), The Sadistic Creep Who Must Be Killed Twice to 
Really Die, they pose as Canadian firefighters who somehow got lost 
across the border.  Along the way, they meet and take hostage The Damsel 
in Distress (Suzy Amis).  Eventually, Our Big Burly Hero is placed in a 
position where he has to fight the fire, rescue The Damsel in Distress, 
defeat The Sadistic Creep Who Must Be Killed Twice to Really Die, and 
restore order to the galaxy.  
     FIRESTORM's director, Dean Semler, is a former cinematographer (he 
won an Academy Award for his work on DANCES WITH WOLVES), so it's no 
surprise that the film looks good.  Unfortunately, that's FIRESTORM's 
lone asset, and it falters near the end, when computer-generated special 
effects fill up the screen.  These are of about equal quality to what 
you might observe on a Nintendo 64 video game.  The action sequences, 
which include a variety of chases, are occasionally interesting, but 
never invigorating.  Everyone, including Long, appears to be going 
through the motions.  
     There isn't a memorable performance to be found from beginning to 
end, unless you count the forest fire, which generates some heat.  As 
The Sadistic Creep Who Must Be Killed Twice to Really Die, William 
Forsythe lacks panache.  He's worse than a generic bad guy; he's a 
boring generic bad guy who doesn't have any snappy one-liners to hurl at 
Our Big Burly Hero.  My advice to Scott Glenn (ABSOLUTE POWER) and Suzy 
Amis (TITANIC) is to accidentally forget this film the next time they're 
making out a resume.  
     There's some small comfort in knowing this early in the year that I 
already have one entry for my Bottom 10 list.  (At least I hope there 
aren't 10 worse films than this.)  And I know I wasn't the only one who 
really disliked this movie.  As the audience was filing out of the 
screening, I loitered in the theater lobby to catch a few comments.  The 
general consensus seemed to be that, although the movie sucked, the 
promotional key ring was cool.  The problem is that Fox won't be giving 
out key rings to regular movie-goers, so that nixes any reason to see 
FIRESTORM.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Howie Long, Scott Glenn, William Forsythe, Suzy Amis
Synopsis: 
>From the ad, I thought this movie was an action movie about a soldier,
but it turns out FIRESTORM is about the adventures of a smokejumper in a
firestorm. Jesse (Howie Long, the former Los Angeles Raiders football
star defensive lineman) is a smokejumper - - a fireman who parachutes
out of helicopters to fight forest fires that are hard to access by
road. A firestorm is a situation where air suddenly comes rushing into a
forest fire, causing a blazing inferno. Unknown to Jesse, some escaped
convicts led by a psycho (William Forsythe) are dressed as firefighters.
They are using a deliberately set blaze as a distraction to make their
escape through the burning forest. A beautiful birdwatcher (Suzy Amis)
becomes their hostage. When fireman Jesse parachutes in alone, he soon
finds that he must defeat the psychos, rescue the girl, and escape the
firestorm all at the same time. This is a B-grade flick, the kind where
fireman Jesse is trapped in a burning camping lodge but manages to
escape because - - unbelievably - -  a motorcycle happens to be parked
inside there, and fortunately a piece of fallen debris looks just like a
convenient ramp. It's just a matter of catapulting out the roof despite
there being no hole. In another scene, a criminal's head is used to plug
a boat leak. The screenplay was written by Chris Soth and Graham Yost
(SPEED) and the film marks the directorial debut of director Dean Semler
(the cinematographer of DANCES WITH WOLVES). 
Opinion:
This is a mediocre firefighting yarn that's half DANTE'S PEAK and half
BACKDRAFT. FIRESTORM is fairly predictable with many cheesy escapes. But
it is watchable, and at least you won't fall asleep. I felt as if I were
watching something like SPEED 2, only with a smaller budget for actors
and effects. 

Author
Walter Frith
The mechanics of a film like 'Firestorm' are pretty basic.  It isn't
like you would expect a brainstorm of ideas to revolve around such a
simple and mundane premise.  Therefore, you have to count on the film
having a well executed blend of stunt work, editing, photographic
expertise, and it should, at the very least, have a brisk pace.
'Firestorm' doesn't have any of these elements in the proper place.  In
a somewhat shameless and pitiful way, it passes itself off with the
trademark elements of a television movie.  The shaky camera angles, an
obviously low number of takes, murky photography and cheesy special
effects are all presented in a protracted and scattershot manner and
many of the movie's bland action sequences are clumsily executed and
in a movie involving fire, you almost need a magnifying glass to see any
of the important moments.
Former NFL celebrity and present day football analyst Howie Long stars
(barely) as a wilderness firefighter who confronts a renegade group of
escaped prisoners, disguised as firefighters, who are using a forest
fire as the perfect cover for a getaway scheme involving the recovery of
millions of dollars hidden away just before their leader was caught and
sent away to prison.
William Forsythe plays the villain leader (barely) who enlists the aid
of other prisoners to help him recover the money but kills each one of
his helpers along the way so he doesn't have to share the loot with
them.  Tagging along for the ride is a nature photographer (Suzi Amis)
who becomes embroiled in Long's fight against the bad guys after Long
rescues her from Forsythe's gang after she's kidnapped and tells Long
during their hike through the forest that she's the daughter of a
tough marine and learned a lot from her old man.  Where's the
incredible hulk when you need him?  Rounding out the cast is the veteran
actor Scott Glenn who is completely wasted as a colleague of Long's in
the fire fighting game who suffers a career ending injury and has to
make an embarrassing sacrifice during the film's climax.
'Firestorm' is unbelievably anaemic and has some of the worst computer
enhanced gimmicks so far in the technology of motion pictures.  It's
credibility is strained by so many phony fire related elements that
you'll wish you had a little device with you that's marked "break glass
in the event of boredom".  There are countless scenes where some of the
cast members would have become overcome by smoke inhalation and died
long before they get out of their entanglements and other scenes that
depict debris landing on them, in front of them and around them would
have been equally fatal in a real scenario.
The only thing worse than this movie would be to see it turned into a
movie theme park ride which actually may be more entertaining than
sitting through this.  Thankfully, it's less than 90 minutes.  Wow!  It
really does resemble a t.v. movie!
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     My first press screening of 1998 and already I've gotten a prime
candidate for my worst ten of the year list.  What an auspicious
beginning!  Welcome to the dog days of winter when the only film
openings of merit are those Oscar contenders that the studios opened in
late December in New York and L.A. and which are just now beginning to
appear elsewhere.  FIRESTORM, the directorial debut of DANCES WITH
WOLVES's Academy Award winning cinematographer Dean Semler, is the
first of the new year's crop of movies.
     As our story opens, the movie pretentiously informs us that of the
tens of thousands of firefighters only 400 are "smokejumpers."  We then
cut to a plane load of smoke jumping cowboys and one cowgirl, where one
of the gung-ho guys is taking a romance quiz from "Cosmopolitan."
Having the time of their lives, they then jump into the middle of a
burning forest.
     When, even in the beginning, the director can't get the small
parts right, you can sense the movie is in trouble.  With the noisy
fire roaring all about them and with the trapped people huddled near
their gasoline-filled cars, smokejumper Monica (Christianne Hirt) tells
them to get away from their soon-to-explode vehicles.  Not bothering to
shout nor even get close to them, she announces her warning without
raising her voice much or approaching the people.  Miraculously, they
manage to hear her and move away.
     In a movie that specializes in cheap shots, the camera locates the
proverbial young girl trapped in a nearby burning building.  As it does
throughout, overly dramatic cinematographer Stephen F. Windon from THE
POSTMAN uses extremely fast zooms right down to the endangered girl's
face.
     Our show's two heroes, the crew's chief, Wynt Perkins, played
laconically by Scott Glenn, and his second-in-command, Jesse Graves,
played by Howie Long in a weak attempt to be the next Steven Seagal,
enter the burning house looking for the little girl.  In a panic they
have difficulty in locating her before they are engulfed in flames.
The manipulative script has her hidden in her own dollhouse.
     This mawkish show cuts back to Monica, who has a life-or-death
decision to make.  The chopper with the fire-retardant chemicals has
only enough to save one group.  Will it be the large group near the
cars or the helpless little girl and Monica's two firefighting buddies?
She has only seconds to decide who will be saved.  Yes, she goes for
the majority, but, miracle of miracles, the other three come out alive
anyway.
     Not content with a traditional firefighting story, Chris Soth's
screenplay attempts to jazz it up by having William Forsythe from
PALOOKAVILLE play a vicious killer named Randy Earl Shaye who sets a
forest fire so that he can join the crew to put it out and then escape.
("Hoods in the woods," is what the "ground-pounders" yell out when the
convicts are bused in to help them fight the fire.)  Along the way,
Shaye picks up an ornithologist hostage played by Suzy Amis, who turns
out to have been trained in warrior ways by her father, who was a
Marine drill instructor.
     Most of the highly predictable movie is a long chase in which poor
Howie Long is given one ridiculous stunt after another to look silly
performing.  He flings a chain saw backwards over his head while riding
a speeding motorcycle so that the saw can hit the windshield of the
pursuing truck.  Arguably the low point is when he escapes from a
locked burning building by riding a motorcycle conveniently parked
inside.  Using a ramp, he shoots straight out of the top of the
building's attic, and when he hits the ground, he just rides off in a
cloud of dust.
     When the film isn't using some stock footage of actual forest
fires, the simulated ones look hokey.  Editor Jack Hofstra cheapens the
action even more by his use of burning flames in scene transitions.
     The ending, with its sick twists, manages to be even worse than
the rest of the movie.  Perhaps the best that can be said for the
picture is the faint praise I heard afterwards in the lobby, "It's not
as bad as some of the television sitcoms."
     FIRESTORM runs mercifully just 1:29.  It is rated R for violence
and language and would be acceptable for teenagers.

Author
James Brundage
Being a critic is like having a Ph.D. in Theology, you are constantly
questioning everything you've every known about your field of study. As a
Ph.D. would wonder about the particular meaning of a bible verse and if it
does or does not mean transubstantiation is real or not, I wonder, seeing a
particular movie, why such trash is turned out by the movie industry day
after day after day.
I find myself sitting in movie theater after movie theater, staring
mindlessly at mindless movies that depress me further and further because
they are so idiotic that no one should have written the story in the first
place. They are ideas that should have never been thought up, things which
should have never been created, like the IRS or the KKK. Movies like
"Firestorm", something that has no purpose whatsoever as a film, makes me
wonder "why?" more than any other type of film.
To give you an idea of what the worth of it is, I'll go through the basics.
The first thing we can cross off our possible list is quality; the film was
one of the poorest quality films I've ever seen, with people tripping over
lines, faking Canadian accents that sound more like something out of
"Fargo", and embarking on a Sierra-Club like mission to save the birds.
The next thing to go kaput is merit as an action movie. Watching the screen,
for myself and, I think, the entire movie theater, was like sitting through
a foreign film without subtitles, or, worse, like a college lecture in a
subject you hate. As each person was killed, as each thing happened, at
least one member of the audience groaned. The special effects were no star
at all, mustering all the realism of cardboard cutouts for a TV movie. And,
the saddest merit that a film can ever offer as its sole bit (being able to
connect people to Kevin Bacon in six steps or less), won't help anybody...
the only person who's in, or worked on, this movie that anyone would
remotely recognize is Scott Glenn, and he plays a bit part.
I propose something for you viewers. If you're bored, why as why?, Don't see
"Firestorm"

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Dean Semler
Cast: Howie Long, Scott Glenn, William Forsythe, Suzy Amis,
Rated R: Language, violence
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Clocking in at just under 90 minutes, I find it simply astonishing
that the makers of Firestorm were able to rip off every single action
film ever created, using not only the same situations, but the same
dialogue, stock-characters, and plot devices. There isn't a unique
breath in the lungs of this film; every second is regurgitated directly
from classic action films like Die Hard, although most of the material
is stuff that we continue to see in second-rate action flicks. It is
commendable, really, the level of unoriginality in Firestorm, for it
must have taken a lot of time and hard work to ensure that every element
of the film is the result of cinematic plagiarism.
    Firestorm stars Howie Long. People who follow films and not sports
(like me) will remember him as one of the bad guys in Broken Arrow; the
rest of you are supposed to know him from football. I don't have any
qualms against the guy; he's not a terrible actor (though he could use a
few lessons on how to sound more natural when speaking dialogue), and he
manages to command a reasonable screen presence (he is, after all, an
enormous individual). He seems pretty nice, too.
    But he can't pick a script if his life depended on it. Broken Arrow
was one thing, but Firestorm...such a pity. His character's name is
Jesse Graves. In a pointless message preceding the film, we are
explained that out of the thousands of firefighters in the country,
there are only 400 who are qualified "smokejumpers." Smokejumpers, as
the name implies, jump out of airplanes, directly into the fires to stop
them from the inside. I didn't understand why the film needed to tell us
this in advance, because the conflicts in the film have nothing to do
with this profession, and the fact that Jesse is a smokejumper only
comes into play once during the film.
    Like all dumb action movies, the story is silly and simple, but
irritating to explain. The evil bad guy Randy Earl Shaye (William
Forsythe) arranges for a forest fire to be set so that he gets put on a
crew to go and put out of the fire. He enlists the help of several other
prisoners. Of course, his efforts to escape are initially successful,
but as soon as they randomly run into the military-trained bird watcher
woman (Suzy Amis), things go awry. That's when the smokejumping part
comes in, because Jesse sees the bad guys, dressed up like Canadian
firefighters (complete with accents and all!), and parachutes down to
them. Soon he finds out they're not who they say they are.
    Directed by Dean Semler, Firestorm doesn't look too bad. Some of the
cinematography is nice, and one of the action sequences (a fight in a
burning trading post) is exciting. Unfortunately, the script is so
detestable that nothing in this film is ultimately enjoyable.
    Let's start with the Shaye character. He is simply a collaboration
of every bad guy you've ever seen. Forsythe plays him with a ridiculous
amount of meanness, which helps to show that his actions are pointless
and absurd. For instance, he kills off his helpers one-by-one as they're
escaping through the forest. This takes almost the entire film, but
there's no reason for any of it. He doesn't need their help; it would
seem infinitely more logical if he just lined them up and shot them.
Instead, he pushes them off cliffs, traps them in burning buildings, and
all of this while the other guys aren't looking. Forsythe sneers and
hisses his way through the movie, pretending sometimes to be nice to the
female hostage, but usually just acting like a licentious pig.
    To avoid making this too long, here's the short version of the
characters that this film contains: the bad guy who won't die (got to
kill him twice!); the strong female character who is completely
extraneous to the story; the good bad guy who stands up for the hostages
but is ultimately killed by the bad bad guy; the good guy who turns out
to have helped the bad guy; and the invincible, good-hearted,
bullet-dodging good guy. The film also features gratuitous violence,
excessive special effects, implausible action sequences (how much can
you really do running around in a forest?), and by-the-book meter and
pacing.
    Hopefully, you haven't gotten the idea that I recommend this film.
Go to the video store and rent The Rock or something. Ignore this film
unless you're crazy about Howie Long. Then, maybe you might enjoy it. As
I said, I don't watch football. I follow movies, and I've seen enough of
them to know that this one stinks.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
WOW - Talk about divine intervention.  About 55 minutes into my screening
of `Firestorm', the tape broke or got wound up on the reel or
something.  The manager said it was unfixable, so not only did I not
have to suffer through the rest of this silly film, I also received a
free ticket to another film and got home in time to watch prime time
television.  Needless to say, things could not have gone better.
What I did get to see wasn't much.  There was a brief description of
what a `Smokejumper' was before the pictures came on.  At first, I
thought it might have been a disclaimer, like at the end of `Mr.
Magoo'.  I always secretly wished that they would do that with really
bad movies.  You know, something like this:
`The people at [studio name here] would like to apologize for the film
you are about to see.  When we started production, it seemed like such a
good idea.  But when we got the finished product, we were disappointed.
Very disappointed.  Unfortunately, it was way too late to do anything
about it.  We had already paid for it, so we released it.  Now that we
got your money, we felt we could be honest.  Thank you for your support
and we hope that you enjoy our next film.'
Anyway, from the opening scene, we learn that a smokejumper is a kind of
person who parachutes out of a plane into a forest fire.  Jesse Graves
(Long) is this kind of person.  So is Wynt Pekins (Glenn), but he is the
chief smokejumping person.  After Graves cuts down a tree for no
apparent reason, he and Glenn rush toward a burning cabin to rescue a
little girl trapped inside.  They get her and her little dog out just
before a burning tree crushes the cabin, but are completely surrounded
by the fire as they run out.  So Graves whips out a big piece of
aluminum foil to cover Glenn, the girl and himself, but not the dog.
Now I always thought that foil made things cook faster, but this was no
ordinary foil.  This was special smokejumper foil and the fire went
right over it, just like the nuclear fallout did in those `Duck & Cover'
spots they used to show to kids in the 50's.  The dog miraculously
survives.
I know that sound exhilarating enough, but there's more to this film
than fighting fires and magic foil.  There are also bad people in this
film.  The bad people start out in jail, but then they escape when Randy
Earl Shave (William Forsythe) dies his hair, gives himself a temporary
tattoo and sticks a guy in the neck with a knife.  When I was in jail,
they wouldn't give us any temporary tattoos until the hair dye had
washed out, just to avoid this type of prison break.  I must have gone
to a really good prison.  I didn't escape until they put me on an
airplane full of other convicts and we took control of the plane and
landed on the Las Vegas strip.  But that's another story
There was also a wildlife photographer played by Suzy Amis (`Titanic').
Her character only got to be in one scene before fate stepped in and
broke the film.
`Firestorm' is the directorial debut of Dean Semler, the Oscar winning
cinematographer of `Dances With Wolves' fame.  Ironically, the
cinematographer for this film is Stephen F. Windon, who is also
responsible for the equally reprehensible, but more recent Kevin Costner
self-love fes, `The Postman'.
As far as fire for entertainment goes, the `Backdraft' ride at Universal
Studios was more entertaining.  But I didn't see the whole thing, so
what do I know?  Benjamin Harrison was an appropriate rating because his
presidency ended before we could truly evaluate it.

Author
Tim Voon
After the likes of VOLCANO, TWISTER and HARD RAIN now comes the likes of
FIRESTORM. Thus completing the quartet of Elements i.e. Earth, Air,
Water and now Fire. Hollywood does not fail to surprise me time and
again with its ability to churn out disaster movies at such an alarming
rate. Using the smallness of man and pitting him against the greatness
of nature, to create a feeling of overwhelming awe as we get blown away
by the special effects.
This time the hero is a fireman (Howie Long). The aim is to make him
bigger than life and Howie sure has the size even if he doesn't have the
screen presence. He's probably the regular kind of guy that women like
to see sweaty with torn clothing, working at a construction site
quenching his thirst with a large can of coke, but then again I could be
wrong and he may have originated from a Chippendale troupe. Anyway,
Howie does well throwing axes, wrestling with men as huge as himself,
saving the girl and beating the smart, but ugly bad guy all in a single
day. How many firemen can claim they have done that?
I ask myself should I be amazed by the special effects, me being a
person who doesn't like playing with fire, who keeps a safe distance
from the stove. I guess I should have been, especially towards the end
when a sea of fire sweeps over everything, ripping forests and people's
heads apart but somehow I wasn't enthralled by the spectacle. Maybe it's
because one needs to feel a FIRESTORM in order to fully appreciate it,
but getting that close usually means you die, so I'll retract my
statement. The movie's saving grace was that it lived up to it's claims,
instead of just lighting a couple of trees and calling that a FIRESTORM.
Despite not being an overly innovative movie, it is still pretty
innocent, brainless fun for big beefy men - something which fans of big,
beefy action would most likely appreciate.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Steve Kong
Wow! What a great movie -- er, made-for-TV movie. It's now nine days into 1998
and I already have a film for an entry into my Top 10 Worst Films list.
I like Howie Long, he's a good guy, very down to earth looking and congenial.
His debut acting stint, starring opposite John Travolta and Christian Slater,
in John Woo's Broken Arrow was a good one. But, it was good for the fact that
Long was not the lead in the film.
Firestorm starts out with an action sequence that overuses just about every
camera technique known to movie making. From the slow-mo shots of our heroes
running directly towards the camera to the quick zooms to a
little-girl-in-distress. The opening sequence also uses some of the most hokey
cliches; a lost child in a burning house, the parents outside trying to get in
to save the child, cars in a fire with the requisite firefighter yelling,
"Run,
there's gas in the cars! They're gonna blow!", and the all annoying slow-mo
tight shots of happy firefighters jumping up and down in joy as their
teammates
come walking out of the blaze with a child in their hands (don't forget the
crescendo of music to follow this.) Whew, and that was just the first ten
minutes of the film.
Jesse Graves (Howie Long) is a smokejumper -- one of only a few hundred
firefighters trained in the specialty of jumping into a blaze to save stranded
campers and such. What happens next takes a leap of believability; a big-time
robbery prisoner (William Forsythe) breaks out of jail with the help of four
other prisoners, their plan brings them to an arson site where they, as the
big-time robbery guy tells the others, "Will become Canadian firefighters."
The rest of the film is spent following Graves, the bad guys, and the hostage
(Suzy Amis) around. The action is cheezy, uninspired, and plain uninteresting.
The action includes Howie in a fire, Howie in a building on fire, Howie on a
bike in a fire, Howie on a bike in a fire throwing a chainsaw, and so on. The
special effects for the fire are some of the worst I've seen, especially
during
the climax.
Firestorm marks the first film directed by Oscar winning cinematographer Dean
Semler (Dances With Wolves). Unlike another cinematographer turned director,
Jan De Bont (Speed, Twister), Semler does not have the eye for action. The
action is flat and bland in this film. His cinematographer, Stephen F. Windor,
tries to spice up the action with strange camera angles and techinques, but
none of these work. And worst yet all this "unique" camera work only worsens
the action. The camera work suffers from the dreaded shakey-makes-it-urgent
camera technique. Also used are a lot of extreme close-ups of things that
could
have been shot wider and the out-of-focus-makes-it-look-cool shots.
Scott Glenn and William Forsythe are the two A-list actors in the film and
both
do horribly. Glenn seems to be walking through this part since he's already
done it once before (hint, hint.) Forsythe opens the film with a somewhat
familiar imitation of the Sean Connery character, John Mason, from The Rock.
I'm glad that the film was just a few minutes under 90 minutes long. If it had
lasted any longer I would have walked out. Firestorm is a bad film that could
have past as a made-for-TV movie, but unfortunately it made it to the big
screen. Skip this film. Personally, I enjoyed the trailers more than I did the
film. (For those of you wondering, the there was a new and longer trailer for
Michael Bay's Armageddon, one for Chow Yun-Fat's US debut film The Replacement
Killers, and one for The X-Files.)

Author
Matt Williams
You always have to be careful with the first official studio release out
of the gate each year.  They're obviously films for which the studios
have no great hopes (having missed both the deadline for  Academy Award
eligibility and the big box-office holiday season).  Combine that with
Howie Long's first starring action role, and you've got a doozy of a
movie that, while not as bad as it could have been, isn't a very good
film.
Howie stars as an ace smokejumper (a firefighter who parachutes into
forest fires unreachable from the ground).  In the slightly contrived
opening scenes, we witness his heroism in action, as he, and his mentor
(played by Scott Glenn) attempt to rescue a small girl and her dog from
an oncoming forest fire.
William Forsythe plays the bad guy, a mass murderer who has several
million dollars tucked away to help fund his jailbreak.  He (and five
convict cohorts) manages to get selected for firefighting duty when a
woodland blaze just happens to ignite nearby. His escape plan bets a lot
on the laxity of the guards, but (since there must be a movie) luck is
with him.  Soon the now-escaped convicts are masquerading as Canadian
firefighters. Why Canadian?  Who knows, eh?  Along the way they pick up
a pretty birdwatcher (Suzy Amis) to be their hostage.
Enter Howie Long.  He's called in to help fight the blaze, and when he
spots the group of "ground pounders", apparently lost, he parachutes in
to help.  When he discovers their true identity, he is the only thing
standing between them and escape, and the only hope of help for the
hostage.
Long's acting talents are above those of, say, Steven Seagal, but not by
much. Although his delivery is mostly flat and wooden, he's a likeable
hero, and there are some hints here and there that he may get better.
The script doesn't help him out any, however.  All too often, it veers
into the realm of the unintentionally funny.  The dialogue is strictly
B-movie material, and the plotting relies too heavily on coincidences to
be believable.
Long's co-stars are a mixed bag.  At least they're all comfortable in
their respective roles. Forsythe has the scenery-chewing villain down
cold, down cold, and Scott Glenn is always enjoyable to watch, even when
he doesn't seem to be stretching his talents (as is definitely the case
here). Suzy Amis plays peril pretty well, but isn't given much more to
do.
Some of the nature and wildfire shots are interesting, but many are
rather bland.  You'd think that the director, Dean Semler, a former
cinematographer, would at least produce a film with interesting
visuals.  That's not the case. There's a lack of originality to nearly
all the sequences...we've seen this stuff before.
It's not the most auspicious start to 1998, but it could have been worse
(just think back to 1996's debut, Bio-Dome). However, after a month of
Oscar-caliber pictures, a movie like Firestorm at least gives you some
perspective on how good those movies really were.  In fact, there's a
good chance that some of them are still playing near you...
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 500 upcoming releases
