Title
Review for Hot Shots! (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Greg Goebel
     Somehow I visualize that when the ZAZ team was a gang of kids they
were sitting around in a bedroom all with their faces buried in copies
of MAD magazine.  "Hey, gimme that one."  "Nah, already read this one."
     And now that they have gone their separate ways we are facing a
glut of cinematic MAD-magazine humor.  Whether that is a blessing or
curse probably depends on how *you* spent your dull afternoons when you
were a kid.
     So, okay, HOT SHOTS is TOP GUN as reinterpreted by MAD.  Is it a
laugh-a-minute?  Not really.  Does it get its yuks?  Certainly.  So a
recommendation is hard to make, other than you might catch it at a
matinee or wait until it comes out on video.
     I did have one major problem with this movie in that parodying TOP
GUN is hard because a movie that had such an agonizingly predictable
script as TOP GUN was lethally close to being a parody of itself, and
simply because a movie uses lame pathetic obnoxious dialogue as a source
of humor makes said dialogue no less lame pathetic and obnoxious.  To
successfully reduce that to excess means really going over the top and
HOT SHOTS only succeeds at that intermittently.
     But it does have its moments and I would say stays one step ahead
of (if not fly rings around) NAKED GUN 1/2 (not the correct title but
the appropriate one).

Author
Randall Rhea
     HOT SHOTS is a slapstick comedy film in the tradition of such
movies as AIRPLANE! and THE NAKED GUN.  
     The fact that this film is one of the season's top grossers is
ample evidence of how dismal this summer has been for the movie
industry.  HOT SHOTS provides only an occasional gut-laugh; its bad
jokes outnumber its good ones.  AIRPLANE!, AIRPLANE 2, and THE NAKED GUN
are all funnier films, and anyone who has seen and enjoyed them is bound
to be disappointed by HOT SHOTS.   I am particularly surprised at the
large number of good reviews that this film has received.
     The film's premise (an attempt to spoof TOP GUN) is weak,
considering that TOP GUN is filled with such stereotypical plots and
characters that it is something of a parody already.  Scenes from other
films, such as the hungry wolf from DANCES WITH WOLVES, are thrown in at
random, and are only occasionally funny.
     Charlie Sheen is reasonably good in the starring role as a pilot
who is called back to the Navy after being discharged for mental
incompetence.  He had already done some effective comedy (FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF), and this film should lead him to more work in that
area.  However, Sheen is not naturally funny like Leslie Nielsen or
Robin Williams--he strains to get the humorous lines out.
Unfortunately, there are few if any other decent performances.
Particularly weak is Lloyd Bridges, who is embarrassingly bad as a
senile old admiral, positioned throughout the film as a constant source
of stupid toilet jokes.
     Wait until this one appears in the video stores ... and then rent
it only if the store is out of AIRPLANE!

Author
Brian L. Johnson
[The names on the From:- and by-lines are correct; this is by a family
member of the account owner.  -Moderator]
90 min, PG-13, Comedy, 1991
Director: Jim Abrahams
Cast: Charlie Sheen, Cary Elwes, Valeria Golino, Jon Cryer,
      Lloyd Bridges, Kristy Swanson, Bruce A. Young
Synopsis: Hot-shot Sheen was kicked out of the Air Force when he
endangered another recruit.  The Air Force goes to the Indian
reservation he is now living at to ask him to come back.  On his way
back to the Air Force base he sees Golino.  He falls in love with her
but she is currently seeing another man in the Air Force.  Sheen makes
it to the Air Force base where personnel are being briefed on the next
assignment.  Some of the men want Sheen taken off the mission because he
is a hot shot.  An evil organization wants to keep Sheen on the mission
to make the Air Force look bad.  Sheen tries to win over Golino in his
spare time.
      The film is rated PG-13 for explicit language, adult situations,
violence, and adult humor.
      Sorry it took so long to get this film review out.  I saw HOT
SHOTS on its opening night and I have not had time since then to do the
review on it.   I recommend running out to the theater to see it, while
it is still there, if you liked THE NAKED GUN 2-1/2 as it is much in the
same style.  This was written by Jim Abrahams and Pat Proft (who wrote
for the "Police Squad!" television series).  The director, Abrahams, has
also done the slapstick films AIRPLANE! and TOP SECRET!.  If you liked
either of these films I recommend seeing this film.  This is unlike
Abrahams' more recent comedies like WELCOME HOME ROXY CARMICHAEL and BIG
BUSINESS.  I give this film a four on a zero to five scale.
      Most of the scenes shown in the advertisements for the movie
happen during the credits (e.g., the man roasting his hot dog in the
jet's after-burner).  In the next ninety minutes the jokes come one
after another.   Lloyd Bridges (who was also in AIRPLANE! and the not
as good sequel AIRPLANE 2: THE SEQUEL) plays the commander of the
mission.  As we find out by the end of the film (and had probably
guessed earlier) Bridges has had most of his body replaced with metal,
from accidents in the war, which leads to 1/3 of the jokes.  Some of
these may start to wear on you though.  Half of the comedy in the film
is based on Charlie Sheen and Cary Elwes both fighting over Valeria
Golino.  Sheen and Golino have what may be the most interesting sex
scene in movie history, the two of them and an array of vegetables.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Jim Abrahams, without the assistance of
     the Zucker brothers, manages to recapture the spirit of the
     classic Z.A.Z. comedies with about a gross of bad jokes, a
     gross of good jokes, a half dozen *very funny* gags, and maybe
     two or three dozen in-joke film allusions.  What NAKED GUN
     2-1/2 should have done to police action films, HOT SHOTS does
     to military flying films.  Not one cliche remains intact when
     Abrahams is done.  Rating: law +2 (-4 to +4).
     Earlier this summer, and with much fanfare, we saw NAKED GUN 2-1/2
directed by Jerry Zucker of the famous team of David Zucker, Jim Abrahams,
and Jerry Zucker, who made KENTUCKY FRIED MOVIE, AIRPLANE!, TOP SECRET!,
television's POLICE SQUAD!, and NAKED GUN.  And at that point I said that a
film was just not as funny if it did not have all three funny men doing the
writing.  As far as I am concerned, NAKED GUN 2-1/2 just did not click.  Now
Jim Abrahams has his own attempt at an Airplane!  style film with HOT SHOTS.
And guess what?  Abrahams operating without the other two really can capture
the manic style of AIRPLANE!.  HOT SHOTS must average at least three jokes a
minute and probably more.  Maybe one in six is genuinely funny and at least
half are enjoyably witty.  The movie is 85 minutes long.  You can do the
math yourself and figure that HOT SHOTS is a *very funny* movie.
     This time around Abrahams is trashing another breed of flying film, the
military flying film.  TOP GUN, FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, AN OFFICER AND A
GENTLEMAN, MEMPHIS BELLE, and probably many others provide a mother lode of
cliches for HOT SHOTS to mine.  But those are just the beginning.  There
must be thirty film references for films outside the military flight genre.
Charlie Sheen plays Topper Harley, a second generation hot-shot pilot who
wants to recover the name his father soiled.  Carey Elwes (formerly of THE
PRINCESS BRIDE) plays Kent Gregory, who has a vendetta to settle against
Harley.  Valeria Golino (formerly of PEE-WEE'S BIG-TOP) plays Ramada
Thompson, Navy psychiatrist and occasional night club singer, who provides
the love interest, and who in a remarkable scene with Sheen really sizzles.
Even telling the names of most of the other characters would be giving away
some of the gags of the film, not that HOT SHOTS could not spare them.
     The film culminates in an air attack on a certain unnamed Middle East
country.  Considering that the flight sequences are basically a throwaway,
they are surprisingly convincing.  While occasional model work is obvious,
at least some of the scenes really seem to show some impressive flying.
Even where model work is used it is surprisingly good, no doubt by reaping
effects technology as well as cliches from supposedly more serious flying
films.  If you like Z.A.Z. films but were disappointed by NAKED GUN 2-1/2,
this may be the film you were looking for.  I rate HOT SHOTS a low +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
