Title
Review for Amistad (1997)
Number of Reviews
28

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As the abolitionists kneel in prayer and song before the jail, the
African slaves imprisoned inside cannot figure out what to make of this
weird group.  At first they think these strange people prostrating
before them are sick, but then they decide that they must be
entertainers.  But why are the entertainers all so sad?
     AMISTAD is Steven Spielberg's earnest movie based on a true story
of a group of Africans who in 1839 revolted and commandeered the slave
ship (La Amistad) upon which they were being transported.  With the
film, Spielberg boldly comes out foursquare against slavery -- not a
very controversial or original idea.
     Although Spielberg devises many powerful scenes for the movie, his
staging confuses more often than it enlightens.  When the slaves speak,
for example, we frequently do not get English subtitles, but when their
captors speak in Spanish, we get their every word translated.
     Told by a host of known actors, almost all white, the overly long
movie never takes the time to develop more than the one slave -- Joseph
Cinque (Djimon Hounsou) -- into a real character.  The other slaves
make up a large faceless mass.  With over two and a half hours of
movie, in which Spielberg devotes time to incidents as small as young
Queen Isabella of Spain (Anna Paquin) jumping up and down on her bed,
why we couldn't hear from more than one slave remains a mystery.
     In ROSEWOOD, a much better film from earlier this year, we heard
from a wide variety of African-Americans, which made their plight real
and vivid.  Why did Spielberg feel he needed to devote so much money
and screen time to a group of known actors (Anthony Hopkins, Matthew
McConaughey, Morgan Freeman, Nigel Hawthorne, Stellan Skarsgard, Anna
Paquin, David Paymer and Arliss Howard among others) as the people
aiding the slaves and then create only a single decent part (Cinque)
for the slaves themselves?  How effective would SHINDLER'S LIST have
been if only the Nazis and the Allies got parts, but the Jews were
relegated to a single character?
     After the slaves revolt in AMISTAD, they are tricked into sailing
to America, thinking it is Africa.  Once near the shore they were
captured by an American naval ship and taken in for trial.
     The case itself has many intricacies, both in the number of
litigants and in the strategy of the slaves' defense attorney.  Matthew
McConaughey plays Roger Baldwin, the slaves' tricky but effective
lawyer.  Several groups sue for ownership of the slaves, but the script
never takes the time to explore the issues as effectively as it should.
Instead, we get a Cliff's Notes-style outline of the case plus a few
random scenes of the trials.
     When Spielberg should be storytelling, too often we get theatrics
instead.  Cinque, for example, bursts out in the middle of their trial
and starts speaking for the first time in English.  "Give us free," he
shouts repeatedly, thereby bringing the trial to a complete standstill.
Rather than anyone trying to repress the outbursts of the prisoner,
everyone stares in awe at him as the music contains something
approaching the sounds of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir raising a loud
voice to heaven.
     Morgan Freeman and Stellan Skarsgard play Joadson and Tappan, the
two abolitionists who hire Baldwin.  Freeman gets little dialog and is
basically wasted in the movie.  But then, most of the characters in the
film exist mainly in caricature.  Tappan, for example, is the canonical
do-gooder who is perfectly willing to let others die for his cause.
"They may be of more value to our cause in death than in life," Tappan
explains to Baldwin.
     Nigel Hawthorne repeats his Academy Award nominated role of George
III, except this time his character is addressed as President Martin
Van Buren.
     The best performance in the picture, and the only one with any
depth, is given by Anthony Hopkins as the semi-senile, ex-president
John Quincy Adams.  Adams comes into the story mainly at the last as he
argues the slaves' case in front of the Supreme Court.  "We've come to
understand that who we are is who we were," he orates in his moving and
complicated address to the court.
     Even given the film's ponderous pacing, the slaves' story does
come out.  We see extremely gory pictures of naked people being beaten
to death as their blood splatters everyone nearby, and we see naked
human beings chained together, attached to a weight and thrown to their
deaths in the ocean.
     "Whoever tells the best story wins," is Adams's advice on how best
to conduct the trial.  Spielberg should have listened.  All in all,
AMISTAD is an excellent story, poorly told.
     AMISTAD runs 2:37.  It is rated R for gore, nudity and mature
themes, and would be fine for teenagers who can handle gruesome images.

Author
Homer Yen
Throughout the history of Man, our individuality, our evolution, and
our innate ability to define who we are stems from one concept.
Freedom is what allows us to pursue our inalienable rights of life,
liberty and happiness.  The struggle to attain that freedom; however,
has come at a high price.  Consider the sacrifice that Jesus made.
Consider the American Revolutionary War.  Consider the case of the
Amistad.
In 1839, slaves aboard the ship, La Amistad, escape from their bonds
and subsequently overrun the ship.  Enraged, they kill most of their
captors. The Amistad is eventually captured by the US Navy, and the
escapees are brought to stand trial for various counts of murder and
mayhem.  But this is more than just a simple trial.  During this time
period, the symbolic nature of this trial will have a long-lasting
effect that will ultimately help to shape the direction of young
America.  Several interested parties all have a large stake in its
outcome.  Some view the slaves as property and want the trial to be
handled as a property issue.  The trial also has repercussions that
threatens the stability of an international treaty.  But most
importantly, exonerating and freeing the Amistad defendants may
ultimately throw the country into civil war as southern leaders will
look upon this as a prelude to total emancipation, which would be a
threat to their economic prosperity.
This is a very fragile and pivotal point in America's history.  Part
of the film acutely illustrates the atrocities of the slave trade.
Men, women and children are ripped apart from their families and
communities, only to be sold as a commodity. Their lives have been
stripped away.  Their ordeal is torturous.  Like cattle, some are sold
off while others are slaughtered.  It is truly shocking to witness
such brutality.  You can not help but shed a tear for those
unfortunate victims.  The other portion takes the form of a courtroom
drama that shows how the great minds of that day tried to maneuver
through moral ambiguity and address a higher order of responsibility.
Those that wished to set the slaves free include Roger Baldwin
(Matthew McConaughey), a lawyer who at first bases his case on
property law but slowly comes to see his clients as human beings. The
cause is also supported by two abolitionists, a former slave (Morgan
Freeman) and an immigrant named Tappan (Stellan Skarsgard).  Former
President John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins) also argues eloquently
and ably for their freedom. Those that oppose their freedom include
the pubescent Queen of Spain (Anna Paquin) who demands that the slaves
be returned to her, sailors and merchants that hold receipts of their
purchase, and a bumbling President Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorne), who is
constantly being pressured by Southerners that threaten secession.
The leader of the slaves, Cinque, (African model Djimon Hounsou), is
truly a majestic and formidable leader.  He doesn't speak any English,
but must somehow try to free his comrades in a foreign environment
where the judicial system is still experiencing growing pains.
Directed by Steven Spielberg, you can see his penchant for
over-the-top poignancy.  Indeed, there are some incredibly moving
scenes that can bring you to tears.  The plight of the Amistad
defendants is a heart-wrenching one.  Cinque's crusade is poetic.
Another highlight is Anthony Hopkins as the dotty politician, who
delivers one of the best courtroom speeches ever (Oscar contender as
Best Supporting Actor).  There are, however, two minor (very minor)
complaints that I want to point out.  The first is that the actual
exploration of the slave trade happens outside the main framework of
this movie.  It serves as a backdrop to Cinque's quest for freedom.
Eventually, and this is my second minor reservation, this fact gives
way to an extended courtroom drama, which covers the last 90 minutes
of the film.
But, do not let these observations discount the importance of this
historical epic.  Amistad, based on the book, Black Mutiny, is
courageously weighty and poignant.  It's an important movie and offers
a historical peek into a young nation when a few good men desperately
tried to do the right thing within a misguided society that was deeply
divided.

Author
Walter Frith
     Steven Spielberg is without a doubt the most creatively diverse movie
maker of his generation.  He chooses material for children and adults alike
and often makes important social statements while doing so.  He released
'Jurassic Park' in 1993 and followed it up that same year with 'Schindler's
List'.  Can you think of two films more diverse?  He has released the sequel
to 'Jurassic Park' in 1997 entitled 'The Lost World: Jurassic Park' and has
followed that up with 'Amistad'.  
     Beginning in 1839, it tells the story of a slave ship whose prisoners,
led by new coming actor Djimon Hounsou, miraculously escape and kill the
Spanish crew of the ship.  Two men who bought the slaves remain and are
ordered by the prisoners to steer the ship back to Africa.  The ship floats
into U.S. waters and the slaves find themselves in the hands of U.S.
authorities and are tried for their actions in a New England Court.
     Their attorney (Matthew McConaughey), is joined by an abolitionist
(Morgan Freeman) and another man (Stellan Skarsgard) who fight for the
freedom of the slaves and they seek the counsel of former U.S. President
John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins) who helps them argue for the release of
the prisoners in the United States Supreme Court.  
     The strongest thing 'Amistad' has going for it is that its message is
undoubtedly about morality.  The challenge in finding justice tries to
overcome many obstacles.  It places its profound message on the highest
pedestal and drives a stake into the heart of the American justice system as
it tests its fairness which sometimes seems partial when the President at
the time of the incident, Martin Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorne), who is a
supporter of slavery only in terms of keeping the South off his case,
replaces the judge at the trial with someone of his own choosing who may
rule against the slaves in their argument for release.
     'Amistad' begins slowly and gets better as it goes along and is well
crafted above anything else.  You can tell this is a film which was
discussed greatly by everyone involved in the making of it as it again looks
and feels like nothing Hollywood has ever made before which is a special
gift Spielberg has.
     The most important character in the film is the portrayal of John
Quincy Adams by Anthony Hopkins.  By the end of the film you wish you had
seen more of him but you realize that his role was adequate enough to affect
the outcome of the film and you feel satisfied after thinking about it.
Hopkins triumphs again in playing another U.S. President separated by 130
years.  Remember 1995's 'Nixon'?  It makes Hopkins a more appreciated and
cherished actor when you consider his range in playing those two characters
along with many others just as different.
     I was very impressed with the performance of Djimon Hounsou as Cinque,
the man who is the centre of the slaves' struggle for freedom.  It is
possible that along with Hopkins, he could receive an Oscar nomination for
this movie.  I hope 'Amistad' finds a place separate from Hollywood's
commercialism at Christmas time and while it does take liberties with
history's actual events, it should still be used in schools and universities
as an important learning tool in the progression of a more equal society.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
David Sunga
Synopsis: 
In this movie, Steven Spielberg, one of today's finest directors,
attempts to spice up the 1800s story of a long courtroom battle over the
fate of prisoner Cinque (Djimon Hounsou) - - a young angry man from
Sierra Leone who was kidnapped into slavery - - and his fellow
prisoners. Cinque and friends have landed a ship on the shores of
America after escaping Spanish slave traders, but since the Americans
don't speak Cinque's language, the black men are hauled into court to
determine whether or not they are legally slaves. Technically, since the
international slave trade was outlawed at that time, people like Cinque
couldn't be kidnapped into slavery; one had to be born a slave to be
legally considered a slave. Lawyers Baldwin and Adams (Matthew
McConaughey and Anthony Hopkins) must prove Cinque and the others were
captured into slavery, rather than born slaves, in order to get them out
of prison as free men. Three lengthy court cases are portrayed with
Spielberg's trademark panache - - flashy beginning, lots of facial
close-ups, big music, and dramatic imagery. A final speech by Adams is
followed by an anticlimax where subtitles show what eventually happened
to the various characters.
Opinion:
Making a fictional movie is easier than making one about real life. In
fiction, one invents purposeful, clear-cut good guys and bad guys, puts
the fictional characters in conflict, and takes the tale to its exciting
conclusion. Real life, however, consists of long stretches of boredom
with a few dramatic moments and characters who stand around, think
thoughts and do nothing, or come and go before events are resolved.
Spielberg gives us a visually spicy and historically accurate real life
story. Djimon Hounsou and Anthony Hopkins turn in excellent
performances.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

AMISTAD (director: Steven Spielberg; screenwriter: David Franzoni;
cinematographer: Janusz Kaminski; cast: Morgan Freeman (Joadson), Nigel
Hawthorne (Martin Van Buren), Anthony Hopkins (John Quincy Adams),
Djimon Hounsou (Cinque), Matthew McConaughey (Baldwin), David Paymer
(Secretary Forsyth), Pete Postlethwaite (Holabird), Stellan Skarsgĺrd
(Tappan ), 1997)
An accurate historic story of the 1839 revolt by Africans on the
slaveship Amistad and their capture and trial in New Haven, Connecticut.
Much of the story involves a court-room drama featuring the slave Cinque
(Djimon) who led the revolt. The relevance and devastating emotions of
the slaves were intelligently presented; even though, at times, the film
was static and seemed to have no legs to get it going in the direction
it wanted to be going. Yet it still turned out to be a potent and
forceful movie.
It is hard to be critical of the stand for morality and piety the film
makes; but what saved this picture from being the "holier than thou
self-righteous bomb" I thought it might have been, were the presence of
John Quincy Adams (Hopkins) and Cinque in the film. Hopkins gave life to
the story by his stunning status and ability to articulate. Cinque
represented the black man, whose viewpoint was seen through his massive
physical strength and pride. He gave authenticity to the events of the
story. Without their human emotions, one by his words, the other by his
facial expressions, the film would not have been as impactful as it was.
There could be only so much that one can take from watching the misery
of others, until it would become overbearing and defeat all its good
intentions.
The exploitation scenes of the slaves being captured by nets in their
homeland and then chained on ships, and some being thrown overboard to
drown, were truly malevolent acts, and thankfully kept to a minimal
portion of the film's time. Or else, the film would have been a very
difficult one to watch.
For the trial of the slaves, the abolitionists hire a self-promoting
real-estate lawyer, Roger Baldwin (Matthew), to take their case. He, at
first, does not realize the importance of the case he is taking on,
thinking all he has to do is treat it as an ordinary case of a property
dispute. But he soon realizes that this is a very important case. He
presents this question in court: Were they born as slaves-- on a
plantation, say, in the West Indies-- or, as free men in Africa ? If it
were the later, he would win freedom for his clients, because free men
are allowed to resist being taken by force, according to the
constitution. He eventually gets Cinque to speak through an interpreter
and tell the story of his African Mende tribal people, who were captured
by rival tribesman and sold to an illegal Portuguese slave ship, and
eventually put aboard another ship, La Amistad, in Havana, Cuba. He also
tells of the part he played in the revolt and taking over of the ship,
and then being tricked by the two surviving Portuguese seamen into
taking them to America instead of Africa.
Spielberg is the master of a visual story, and here he is in top
form.The carnage and cruelty aboard the slave ship are shockingly and
revealingly shot, giving one enough of an idea what the slave had to
endure. That gives the film the force and importance that is needed for
it to make its moral point. The final moral point is made in front of
the Supreme Court, with John Quincy Adams saying, if these men are not
set free, you might as well start the Civil War now. He, then, proceeds
to rip up a piece of paper to symbolize the death of the Declaration of
Independence.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Bob Bloom

 Amistad (1997) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Djimon Hounsou, Matthew
McConaughey, Anthony Hopkins and Morgan Freeman. Directed by Steven
Spielberg.
 The first scene is an extreme close-up of a man's sweaty face as he
struggles mightily to loosen a bolt.
 You neither know who the man is nor the reason for his actions.
 In quick succession, the man successfully loosens the bolt, frees himself
from shackles and then frees others, who gather weapons, attack the crew of
the ship on which they are being held and capture the ship after a short,
but bloody, skirmish.
 These are the opening images of Amistad, Steven Spielberg's film based on
a little-known event in American history.
 The year is 1839 and 53 kidnapped Africans are being transported from Cuba
to begin lives as slaves in America.
 After their shipboard revolt, the Africans spare two crew members and
order them to turn the ship east and head back to Africa. During the day,
the sailors steer into the sun, but at night, when their captors sleep, the
sailors turn the ship toward North America.
 Eventually, the ship winds up off the coast of Long Island, where a U.S.
naval vessel captures the Africans.
 Brought to trial in the United States, the Africans are charged with
murder. However, the situation becomes a political tinderbox as the Spanish
government claims them as property and wants them returned.
 The whirlwind that surrounds this event eventually lands at the doorstep
of the U.S. Supreme Court, and involves an incumbent president, Martin Van
Buren, and a former chief executive, John Quincy Adams.
 Amistad is an earnest examination of one race's fight for their rights and
their freedom. Led by Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), the Africans are confused
and frightened by the international uproar they have unwittingly created.
Yet, they only want one thing - to go home.
 Coming to their defense is a property lawyer, Roger Baldwin (Matthew
McConaughey), whose initial success in winning the Africans their freedom
is sabotaged for political expediency by President Van Buren's minions.
 A reluctant and retired Adams (Anthony Hopkins) must then present their
case before the Supreme Court, seven of whose nine justices are
Southerners.
 This sounds like rather dry material for movie fare, but Spielberg gives
it a deep emotional core. He makes you care about these uprooted people and
their wretched plight. You do more than pity them - you root and pray for
their success.
 The heart of the picture is Cinque. Newcomer Hounsou, a former model whose
previous acting experience includes a Janet Jackson music video, gives a
towering performance.
 A man of great strength and dignity, Cinque finds it difficult to grasp
the various complications and ramifications being woven around him and his
fellow Africans. To Cinque, there is only right or wrong, justice and
injustice.
 Hounsou learned the Mende dialect of West Africa for his role. And though
he speaks an unfamiliar tongue, Hounsou is able to display Cinque's
courage, as well as his vulnerability.
 McConaughey is adequate as Baldwin. Even though his New England accent
comes and goes, he captures the lawyer's passion and fire to do his best
for his clients.
 Hopkins, as Adams, buried under old-man makeup, reveals the spark and
righteousness that age could not dim.
 Morgan Freeman, however, is given little to do as leader of the
abolitionists who adopt the Africans' cause as their own.
 Spielberg's strength, as it was in Schindler's List, is showing the
cruelty one human being can inflict upon another. His recreation of the
Middle Passage, the deadly journey that transported captured Africans from
their homeland across the Atlantic, is as harrowing and horrifying a series
of images as ever put on film.
 And, to his credit, Spielberg has not fallen into the trap of other
filmmakers who have told black history from a white person's viewpoint.
Most of the story and much of the action is told and shown through the eyes
of Cinque and his people.
 In a film in which the lines between right and wrong, good and evil, seem
defined, Spielberg and screenwriter David Franzoni do not stoop to
stereotypical villains to further their cause.
 His antagonists are not villains, per se, but rather flawed men who value
political expediency above morality. They are amoral politicians who feel
they are doing what they must to preserve their country.
 Amistad has its slow moments. Overall, though, it is a riveting
examination of a piece of American history ignored in the textbooks. But it
makes a powerful statement about the value of freedom.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    What is freedom? How does one determine who is free? In 1839, those 
questions were more difficult to answer then they are now. Yet, the 
mistakes of our forefathers must be examined in order to rectify current 
situations.
That is, in essence, what Steven Spielberg's gripping drama 
"Amistad" is about. Through its various dramas, Spielberg presents a 
case about a group of Africans, who, after being seized from their home, 
were forced onto a ship and sent to the United States aboard "La 
Amistad". On their way there, the slaves, led by Cinque (Djimon 
Hounsou), rebelled, killing off part of the crew. However, the ship was 
still directed towards the United States, where the Africans were 
brought to trial under murder.
In the court, various factions claim ownership of the slaves, and 
therefore try to seize them away. The United States government, led by 
President Martin Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorne), and Secretary of State 
Secretary Forsyth (David Paymer), try to ship the Africans to Spain, 
where an 11 year old Isabella II (Anna Paquin) wants them back. The two 
Spaniards who own "La Amistad" want the slaves for themselves. The 
American ship that found the slaves also wants them. In the midst of 
this are two abolitionists (Stellan Skaarsgard and Morgan Freeman), who 
want the slaves to be free. They enlist the help of lawyer Matthew 
McConaughey, who tries to free them. Through various legal proceedings, 
the case appears before the Supreme Court, where it is argued by 
ex-President John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins).
The film itself is a visual wonder. Spielberg favorite Janusz 
Kaminski sets the film in a dark, somber mood when appropriate, and a 
visual setting when appropriate as well. At times, the film is very 
slow, and very methodical. However, Spielberg is not at his finest here, 
because the courtroom scenes have a tendency to lag. The film is, in 
essence, a courtroom drama, one whose events are oversimplified.  The 
characterization is also weak, displaying weaknesses in building up 
characters such as the lawyer Baldwin (McConaughey), and especially 
Morgan Freeman's abolitionist.
But Spielberg's finest work in the film, the opening scene, a scene 
of Cinque's family, and the brutal voyage of the slaves to America, is 
altogether stunning. It is this emotional force that carries the film. 
McConaughey is superb as the lawyer defending the Africans, Hopkins is 
sensational as the old Adams, Freeman is outstanding when used 
(Spielberg vastly under uses his supreme talents), and the rest of the 
cast is stellar. The movie, however, belongs to Hounsou. His emotional 
intensity is brilliant. Spielberg manages to make even the slowest 
scenes sparkle with focus on Hounsou, and the film's extraordinary power 
is simply captivating. The film is flawed, for most of the supporting 
characters are merely cardboard. But that doesn't matter. The story is a 
gripping one, and one of extreme importance. Kudos to Spielberg for 
finding it, finding the right men for the job, and letting the audience 
listen to the words of Cinque. A good job all around.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 12/12/97 (limited); 12/25/97 (wide)
Running Length: 2:37
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, mature themes, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Djimon Hounsou, Matthew McConaughey, Morgan Freeman, 
      Anthony Hopkins, Nigel Hawthorne, Stellan Skarsgard, David Paymer, 
      Pete Postlethwaite, Anna Paquin
Director: Steven Spielberg
Producers: Steven Spielberg, Debbie Allen, and Colin Wilson
Screenplay: David Franzoni
Cinematography: Janusz Kaminski
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: Dreamworks SKG
     Here's a word analogy:  AMISTAD is to THE LOST WORLD as SCHINDLER'S 
LIST is to JURASSIC PARK. In 1993, after Steven Spielberg made the 
monster dino hit, many critics described SCHINDLER'S LIST as the 
director's "penance" (as if there was a need for him to apologize for 
making a crowd-pleasing blockbuster).  Now, after a three-year layoff, 
Spielberg is back with a vengeance.  Once again, his summer release was 
special effects-loaded action/adventure flick with dinosaurs munching on 
human appetizers.  Now, following his 1993 pattern, he has fashioned 
another serious, inspirational Christmas release about the nature of 
humanity.  That film is AMISTAD.
     Although not as masterful as SCHINDLER'S LIST, AMISTAD is 
nevertheless a gripping motion picture.  Thematically rich, impeccably 
crafted, and intellectually stimulating, the only area where this movie 
falls a little short is in its emotional impact.  Watching SCHINDLER'S 
LIST was a powerful, almost spiritual, experience.  Spielberg pulled us 
into the narrative, absorbed us in the drama, then finally let us go, 
exhausted and shattered, three-plus hours later.  Aspects of the movie 
have stayed with me ever since.  AMISTAD, while a fine example of film 
making, is not as transcendent.  
     The incident of the ship La Amistad is not found in any history 
books, but, considering who writes the texts, that's not a surprise.  
However, the event is a part of the American social and legal fabric, 
and, while AMISTAD does not adhere rigorously to the actual account, 
most of the basic facts are in order.  Several, mostly minor changes 
have been made to enhance the film's dramatic force.  On the whole, 
while AMISTAD may not be faithful to all of the details of the 
situation, it is true to the spirit and meaning of what transpired.
     One stormy night during the summer of 1839, the 53 men imprisoned 
on the Spanish slave ship La Amistad escape.  Led by the lion-hearted 
Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), they take control of the vessel, killing most 
of the crew.  Adrift somewhere off the coast of Cuba and uncertain how 
to make their way back to Africa, they rely on the two surviving 
Spaniards to navigate the eastward journey.  They are tricked, however, 
and the La Amistad, which makes its way northward off the United States' 
eastern coastline, is eventually captured by an American naval ship near 
Connecticut.  The kidnapped Africans are shackled and thrown into 
prison, charged with murder and piracy.  
     The first men to come to the Africans' defense are abolitionists 
Theodore Joadson (Morgan Freeman) and Lewis Tappan (Stellan Skarsgard).  
They are soon joined by Roger Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey), a property 
attorney of little repute.  Aided by advice from former President John 
Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins), Baldwin proves a more persuasive orator 
than anyone gave him credit for, and his central argument -- that the 
prisoners were illegally kidnapped free men, not property -- convinces 
the judge.  But powerful forces have aligned against Baldwin's cause.  
Current President Martin Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorne), eager to please 
Southern voters and 11-year old Queen Isabella of Spain (Anna Paquin), 
begins pulling strings behind-the-scenes to ensure that none of the 
Africans goes free.  
     At its heart, AMISTAD is a tale of human courage.  Cinque is a 
heroic figure whose spirit remains unbreakable regardless of the pain 
and indignity he is subjected to.  He is a free man, not a slave, and, 
while he recognizes that he may die as a result of his struggle, he will 
not give it up.  Effectively portrayed by newcomer Djimon Hounsou, whose 
passion and screen presence arrest our attention, Cinque is the key to 
viewers seeing the AMISTAD Africans as more than symbols in a battle of 
ideologies.  They are individuals, and our ability to make that 
distinction is crucial to the movie's success.  To amplify this point, 
Spielberg presents many scenes from the Africans' point-of-view, 
detailing their occasionally-humorous observations about some of the 
white man's seemingly-strange "rituals".
     The larger struggle is, of course, one of defining humanity.  As 
the Nazis felt justified in slaughtering Jews because they viewed their 
victims as "sub-human," so the pro-slavery forces of AMISTAD use a 
similar defense.  The abolitionists regard the Africans as men, but the 
slavers and their supporters see them as animals or property.  In a 
sense, the morality of slavery is on trial here with the specter of 
civil war, which would break out less than three decades later, looming 
over everything.
     AMISTAD's presentation of the legal and political intricacies 
surrounding the trial are fascinating, making this movie one of the most 
engrossing courtroom dramas in recent history.  Four claimants come 
forward against the Africans:  the state, which wants them tried for 
murder; the Queen of Spain, who wants them handed over to her under the 
provision of an American/Spanish treaty; two American naval officers, 
who claim the right of high seas salvage; and the two surviving 
Spaniards from La Amistad, who demand that their property be returned to 
them.  Baldwin must counter all of these claims, while facing a 
challenge to his own preconceived notions as the result of a 
relationship he develops with Cinque.  Even though attorney and client 
are divided by a language barrier, they gradually learn to communicate.
     Aside from Cinque, who is a fully-realized individual, 
characterization is spotty, but the acting is top-notch.  Matthew 
McConaughey successfully overcomes his "pretty boy" image to become 
Baldwin, but the lawyer is never particularly well-defined outside of 
his role in the La Amistad case.  Likewise, while Morgan Freeman and 
Stellan Skarsgard are effective as Joadson and Tappan, they are never 
anything more than "abolitionists."  Nigel Hawthorne, who played the 
title character in THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE, presents Martin Van Buren 
as a spineless sycophant to whom justice means far less than winning an 
election.  Finally, there's Anthony Hopkins, whose towering portrayal of 
John Quincy Adams is as compelling as anything the great actor has 
recently done.  Hopkins, who can convincingly play such diverse figures 
as a serial killer, an emotionally-crippled English butler, and Richard 
Nixon, makes us believe that he is Adams.  His ten-minute speech about 
freedom and human values is unforgettable.  
     One point of difference worth noting between AMISTAD and 
SCHINDLER'S LIST is this film's lack of a well-defined human villain.  
SCHINDLER'S LIST had Ralph Fiennes' superbly-realized Amon Goeth, who 
was not only a three-dimensional character, but a personification of all 
that the Nazis stood for.  There is no such figure in AMISTAD.  The 
villain is slavery, but an ideology, no matter how evil, is rarely the 
best adversary.  It is to Spielberg's credit that he has fashioned such 
a compelling motion picture without a prominent antagonist.
     AMISTAD's trek to the screen, which encountered some choppy waters 
(author Barbara Chase-Riboud has cried plagiarism, a charge denied by 
the film makers), comes in the midst of an upsurge of interest in the 
incident.  An opera of the same name opened in Chicago on November 29, 
1997.  Numerous books about the subject are showing up on bookstore 
shelves.  It remains to be seen how much longevity the AMISTAD phenomena 
has, but one thing is certain -- with Spielberg's rousing, substantive 
film leading the way, the spotlight has now illuminated this chapter of 
American history.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Scott Renshaw
AMISTAD
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  Djimon Hounsou, Matthew McConaughey, Anthony Hopkins, Morgan
Freeman, Nigel Hawthorne, Pete Postlethwaite, Stellan Skarsgaard.
Screenplay:  David Franzoni.
Producers:  Debbie Allen, Steven Spielberg and Colin Wilson.
Director:  Steven Spielberg.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, violence, adult themes)
Running Time:  153 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     AMISTAD is no SCHINDLER'S LIST.  Think it unfair if you must, but
Steven Spielberg is going to face comparisons like that for the rest of
his film-making career.  In the case of AMISTAD, those comparisons are
going to be even harder to avoid, given the proximity in time (it's
Spielberg's first "serious" film since the Oscar-winning SCHINDLER in
1993), the subject matter (the trials of an oppressed people) and the
situational familiarity (if it's the December after a Spielberg dinosaur
movie, it must be time for a Spielberg fact-based historical epic).
Spielberg may never make another SCHINDLER'S LIST -- even the most
successful home run hitter isn't likely to knock _two_ World
Series-winning grand slams -- but he did raise his personal bar.  Now that
we know what he's capable of, we're not going to let him get away with
choosing less than stellar material.
     AMISTAD is hardly a half-hearted effort; in fact, there are a couple
of scenes which rank with Spielberg's best work as a director.  It is,
however, a piece of material which ends up providing far less impact than
it should.  The film is based on the true story of an 1840s court case
involving 44 black men and women, led by Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), accused
of piracy for an uprising against their capters on the Spanish slaving
ship "La Amistad."  Found off the coast of Long Island by a U.S. Navy
ship, the blacks become the subject of an intense and controversial series
of legal challenges.  Are they the property of the two surviving members
of the "Amistad" crew?  Are they the property of Queen Isabella (Anna
Paquin)?  Are they the property of the naval officers who claim salvage
rights?  Or are they the property of no one, free men illegally captured
from their homes in Africa?
     It is the latter point which is argued by attorney Roger Baldwin
(Matthew McConaughey), assisted by abolitionists Theodore Joadson (Morgan
Freeman) and Lewis Tappan (Stellan Skarsgaard), with further assistance
from former President John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins).  Faced with
direct opposition from struggling incumbent President Martin Van Buren
(Nigel Hawthorne, looking even more befuddled than he did in THE MADNESS
OF KING GEORGE) as the case becomes a flashpoint for Southern grumbling
over the slavery issue, Baldwin tries to overcome a profound language gap
and get Cinque to tell his own story.  AMISTAD is at its best when Cinque
is telling his story, allowing the electrifying performance of Djimon
Hounsou to take center stage.  Though he utters only half a dozen English
words through the entire film, Hounsou's impassioned work brings to life
an intelligent man trying to understand a thoroughly perplexing new world.
He is the heart and soul of AMISTAD.
     If it had ever been made clear that AMISTAD is Cinque's story, the
film could have been a masterpiece.  Instead, David Franzoni's script
allows too many characters to flirt with the impression that the story is
all about them.  Freeman, as a former slave turned anti-slavery advocate,
somehow gets first billing despite disappearing for most of the film;
McConaughey plays his noble lawyer from A TIME TO KILL with mutton chops,
but without a sense of what the case means to him; Hopkins'
borderline-senile Adams has little to do before delivering his oration
before the Supreme Court.  Franzoni also tosses off one of the story's
most crucial pieces of historical trivia -- that while slavery was still
legal in 1839, capturing Africans was not -- as though it were common
knowledge.  The "Amistad" case was a messy piece of history, but the
script only serves to make it messier, obscuring the human drama in a
muddle of over-plotting.
     When AMISTAD does give the Africans' plight its undivided attention,
it's a gripping piece of film-making.  As he did with the horror of the
concentration camps, Spielberg provides unflinching images of the horrors
of slave ships without exploiting those horrors.  He also creates a
splendid sequence in which one African's Bible lesson to Cinque is
cross-cut with one man's struggle of Christian conscience.  If only there
had been more of those moments, more singularity of purpose, more
complexity of character.  Spielberg brought in SCHINDLER scribe Steven
Zaillian to do some doctoring on the AMISTAD script, but the doctor
couldn't turn merely good into great.  AMISTAD is a solidly made film.
It's just no...well, you know.

Author
Chris Loar
Directed by Steven Spielberg
Starring Morgan Freeman (Theodore Joadson), Anthony Hopkins
(John Quincy Adams), Matthew McConaughey (Baldwin), Djimon
Hounsou (Cinque), Nigel Hawthorne (Martin Van Buren), David
Paymer (Secretary Forsyth), Pete Postlethwaite (Holabird),
and Stellan Skarsgard (Tappan)
I went to see _Amistad_ expecting, from the reviews I'd read,
to find a film that was morally uncomplex, self-satisfied and
self-congratulatory, but nonetheless a well-told tale in the 
Spieldbergian tradition -- polished, well-acted, shining like a
new penny.  What I found surprised me on all counts.  For while
the film certainly has a self-satisfied tone, all aglitter with
pride in the traditions of the American legal system, there is 
more at work -- a happy depiction of cross-cultural respect and
understanding, certainly idealized and unrealistic but optimistic 
in a way a really self-satisfied tale can never be.  At the same 
time, the storytelling here is often severely disappointing; just 
enough of really fine filmmaking comes through to make us wish for 
more.  The film is, ironically, neither ill-intentioned nor
especially well-crafted.
The film, as most everyone probably knows by now, deals with an 
unjustly obscure event in our nation's history -- a slave revolt
aboard a ship (the _Amistad_) carrying recently-captured African 
slaves to the new world.  The film opens just as the revolt is 
about to begin; we watch as the leader of the revolt, Cinque
(portrayed with astonishing charisma by West African actor Djimon 
Hounsou) pries free from his chains and frees his fellow captives.
The prisoners take control of the ship, slaying most of their
captors in the process, and attempt to take the ship back to
Africa.  But their captors succeed in tricking them, and the
ship winds up off the coast of New England, where the Africans
are captured and put on trial for the murder of their captors --
and, more importantly, for their status.  For it's not clear
whether the Africans are legally property or free citizens,
a legal question first seized on by their lawyer, Baldwin
(Matthew McConaughey).  Working with a free black abolitionist
(Morgan Freeman), Baldwin works to establish a rapport with
Cinque, while trying to secure the expert legal support of the
once-brilliant attorney and former President John Quincy Adams
(Anthony Hopkins).
What follows is several hours of, essentially, a courtroom drama,
which culminates when John Quincy Adams argues the African's case
before the Supreme Court.  The courtroom sequences are, for the
most part, overlong and a little tedious, in my opinion.  Much
better are what breaks those sequences up -- the flashbacks which
show us Cinque's capture and some of the horrors of the Middle
Passage, as well as some fine scenes demonstrating Cinque's 
growing understanding of the American legal system, and his 
defenders' growing ability to see him as a real human being, rather
than a mere cause.
It's really not terribly hard to nitpick about the film's failings,
which are numerous.  Neither Hopkins nor McConaughey is especially
convincing as a quirky attorney; both actors' excessive reliance
on gimmicky tics and obvious eccentricities looks flaccid when placed
side by side with Freeman's easy solemnity and Hounsou's volatile
intensity.  And the story doesn't really give any single character
his or her due; instead, it lights on its characters like butterflies,
departing after an instant, leaving a tickle rather than a real
impression.  The plot also does at best a poor job of explaining why 
this case mattered as much as it did to abolitionists or Southerners
or anyone else; after all, the final verdict seems to have little 
enough bearing on the fate of slaves born into slavery.  And the John
Williams score, while fine in itself, feels intrusive and manipulative,
bursting in to cue our emotions in spots where the plot and characters
can't quite carry the moment.
These failings, though, don't ruin the movie, they simply turn what
could have been a compelling, fascinating film into one that is 
merely watchable and engaging.  For _Amistad_ is clearly worth 
seeing for its many virtues:  Djimon Hounsou's powerful performance,
its moving images of racial injustice and revolt, and its well-
intentioned (if flawed) depiction of cross-cultural communication
and understanding.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
While everyone were praising "Titanic" , greater and far more important
films slipped by, overseen and underrated. Amistad was one of them. Unfairly
compared to box-busters, Amistad is one of the best films of the year.
Set in 1839, Amistad tells the true story about a group African natives
imprisoned on a Spanish slave ship La Amistad. Led by the lion-hearted
Cinque (Djimon Honsou), they take control of the vessel, killing most of the
crew. Uncertain how to make they way back to Africa, they put their trust on
two surviving Spaniards. But the clever slave traders outsmart them and La
Amistad makes its way northward to United States. Here the Africans are
captured and imprisoned, charged with piracy and murder.
The christian abolitionist Lewis Tappan (Stellan Skarsgard) and ), an
ex-slave Theodore Joadson (Morgan Freeman), are the first men who come to
the Africans' aid. These two men receive assistance from Roger Baldwin
(Mathew McConaghey), an property attorney and former president John Quincey
Adams (Anthony Hopkins). However powerful forces are against them. Current
President Martin Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorn), eager to please the Southern
voters, and the 11-year old Queen Isabella of Spain (Anna Paquin) start
complotting against the abolitionists to ensure that the Africans never go
free.
Steven Spielberg directs with wonderful precision and passion from the
opening to the closing shot, bringing in the horrible reality and a powerful
sense of importance.
The film begins with a masterful close-up on bloodied fingers, lit up by the
bolts of lightening, trying to scratch free a bolt holding the chains to the
deck. The brutal and violent mutiny that follows is more than balanced by
Spielberg's honest and terrifying flashback sequence later in the film,
describing the horrors and inhuman suffering of everyday life on a slave
ship.
Spielberg doesn't hold back anything and directs with incredible visdome and
deep understanding:under a rain of blood, surrounded by pain and screams, a
mother holding a child jumps overboard, choosing a life in death, rather
than a death in life; I doubt that anyone will forget the helpless men and
women chained to rocks and thrown overboard, because the crew has
underestimated the provisions.
However this uncovered and honest flashback is also the most intense and
emotional sequence in the film, as the picture suffers from the lack of
emotional resonance and immediacy. There are some moments in Amistad that
resemble a dry history lesson, although an important one.
With bitter irony Spielberg named the ship La Amistad, meaning friendship.
The Africans understand their trial as we would understand a trial on Mars.
And the film has many humorous scenes shown from the Africans's point of
view, such as their view on the christians (who they call singers) and on
the American legal system.
The cast is solid and effective, involving some of the most famous stars of
Hollywood.Morgan Freeman plays an ex-slave that has devoted his entire life
to the abolition of slavery. Freeman doesn't know how to disappoint, and the
only regret is that there is very little time granted on his character.
Mathew McConaghey's character is a bit like Oscar Schindler in "Schindler's
List".He was looking at slaves as property and was only interested in how to
win the case, and how to gain money from it. Throughout the movie however,
he gets more human, when he realizes what he is fighting for. Anthony
Hopkins delivers one of his best performances. Hi has painted a sensational
portrait of a man that is fighting his age, his reputation and his legacy to
accomplish something good, something he truly believes in -- before he dies.
But the film's best performance comes from the newcomer Djimon Honsou , who
brings a wonderful sense of dignity, quite strength and touching
vulnerability to his role as the unofficial leader for the Africans. During
the whole film he speaks only 5 words in English, and jet, we understand
everything he is saying, because the words come from the heart and not from
the mind.
The visual perfection of the film is as staggering as the direction.
Janusz Kaminski's wonderful cinematography resembles the paintings of Goya -
muted to tones and low on colors and lighting. Rick Carter's marvelous and
detailed production design and Ruth E. Carter's costumes re-create the
historical period. John Williams' deep, emotional and occasionally
terrifying musical score, including African quire and folk songs is probably
the finest composition of the year.
Amistad is a finely crafted drama that explores, better than any film to
date, the injuries, the injustices and the horrors of slavery. Equally
important to our understanding of slavery as "Schindler's List" was to
holocaust.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Steven Spielberg's "Amistad," which is based on the true story of a group of
Africans who revolted on board a slave ship, then were captured and taken to
America where a legal dispute ensued over who "owned" them, is concerned with
several different aspects of this story. First, the film addresses the issue
of the inherent evils of slavery. Second, it deals with the historical
involvement of several American politicians in the case, including President
Martin Van Buren and former President John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins).
Last, and most importantly, it examines the cultural confusion experienced by
the Africans who were forced into slavery and the damage done to their native
culture in Africa by the slave trade. 
"Amistad" succeeds at least partly with all three of these elements. I have to
admit that I was a little skeptical as to how much I could really get out of
another "anti-slavery" movie. Having seen several other movies and
documentaries about slavery, I doubted that there was much I didn't already
know about it. Fortunately, I turned out to be wrong. For one thing,
Spielberg's camera never once gets near a Southern plantation and instead
sticks to the slave ships and the slave traders' operations in Africa, so
"Amistad" was dealing with a different part of the history of slavery from the
very beginning. And some of the images here are, in fact, much more harrowing
than what we usually see in movies about slavery. One scene in the middle, in
which the crew of a slave ship dispose of some of their "excess" slaves by
throwing them overboard to drown, has to be one of the most disturbing film
images of the year. Spielberg digs farther into the evils of slavery than I
was expecting he would, and in fact he probably goes about as far as a movie
director can without getting an NC-17 rating. 
The stark suffering of the Africans is contrasted sharply with the shallow
luxury of the politicians, such as President Van Buren and Queen Isabella of
Spain, whose naval officers were involved in the legal dispute and who was
only a small child at the time. Exposing politicians as narrow-minded,
opportunistic hypocrites is fairly standard stuff, of course, but Spielberg
and writer David Franzoni do it well enough that it still comes off as
something more than just a simple exercise in audience manipulation. The film
also examines the contentious nature of the slavery issue at the time, such
that John Quincy Adams (and probably other politicians like him), who clearly
disapproved of the practice, was reluctant to get involved in the case until
it was appealed all the way to the Supreme Court. 
The biggest success of "Amistad" is probably the characterization of Cinque
(Djimon Hounsou), who emerges as the de facto leader of the kidnapped Africans
and struggles to communicate with Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey), the lawyer
who represents them in court. Through Cinque, we are given a window into the
native culture, as he and the displaced Africans try to explain to the prison
guards what they need for a proper burial of a dead tribe member, or find an
illustrated version of the Bible and try to understand the story of Jesus
Christ. Cinque sees the dispute with a clarity and simplicity that, again,
contrasts with the technicalities and mechanics of the legal process and of
the political squabbles. "What kind of country is this, where laws 'almost'
work?" he asks Baldwin in bewilderment, when he learns that the case must be
re-tried before the Supreme Court. 
Spielberg's direction tends a little bit towards the manipulative side at
times, such as when he adds a heavy orchestral swell to Cinque's angry
outburst in the court room. Still, there isn't enough of this for it to be a
serious problem. The main flaw in this film, which prevents it from earning
four stars, is that it seems like Spielberg and Franzoni can't quite handle
all of these issues at the same time, so instead they settle for addressing
each one separately and simply editing the results into the same movie. This
summer's Contact, for example, dealt with several issues at once, but each of
them was somehow present in almost every scene and, most importantly, all of
them were resolved at once. "Amistad" tries to pull it all together in the end
with a speech from Adams, but it somehow feels a little forced, and in any
case the speech itself, which lasts almost fifteen minutes, wears out its
welcome about halfway through. 
Perhaps the best way to describe it is this: "Amistad" is three four star
films edited into one. Almost every individual scene works, but the final
product is lacking the necessary focus and coherence, and thus is less than
the sum of its parts. However, I can't honestly say how it could have been
done differently, and in any case the story comes through with enough raw
emotional power that it is still a very good film, and thus I recommend it to
anyone who can handle the disturbing imagery. 
Visit my Film Reviews page at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
Steven Spielberg knows how to tell a story that is at once gripping
and enlightening.  Here he turns his attention to the year 1839 when
the Amistad uprising took place on the high seas.   A Spanish ship
is taking slaves from a Havana slave market to somewhere else in
Cuba.  Conditions below deck where the prisoners are held are
unbelievably horrible.  When the captors discover they have
insufficient food for all their slaves, they tie some of the
most ill and debilitated  to the anchor cable and drop it overboard
where all attached to the cable drown.
The movie tells us many strange things of which we may have been
unaware. We know that the God-fearing people of the South saw
nothing wrong with enslaving other humans, ripping their families
apart and destroying their culture. It was just that point that made
me wonder at Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), the leader of the fateful
uprising, who did not remark when shown in a Bible pictures of
Jesus,  including the walking on the water, "Where was He when my
people were being drowned?"   How could he say that while the slaves
were treated badly, "others" had apparently suffered worse.    As I
do not recall that in the book on which the film was based, I wonder
why that was inserted in the film?
The film is filled with heartbreaking emotion.  The anchor incident
mentioned is one of them.   The scene of Cinque's wife and family
back in Africa; the capture and enslavement by other black Africans
is fearful viewing.
Attempting to help the slaves who are on trial for murder of some of
their captives is Roger Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey) who, at first
approaches the trial (with 7 of the judges slave-holders!)  as a
trial of humanity, only to discover that he can win only if it is
shown as a matter of property.   Were the captors legally justified
in shipping someone else's property?    He is aided by a couple of
abolitionists: Joadson, a former slave himself (Morgan Freeman in a
comparatively small role) and Tappan (Stellan Skarsgard), an
immigrant.
Prominent in the film is Martin Van Buren as a weasel who would sell
his soul to get re-elected.   At the opposite end is  the most
powerful performance  given by Anthony Hopkins in the role of  John
Quincy Adams addressing the court for some dozen spellbinding
minutes.    Now, THERE is an actor!

Author
Michael Dare
        Amistad is a masterpiece that will shake your foundations.
Since he's Jewish, it was easy to understand how Steven Spielberg
could have found the emotional power he displayed in Schindler's List.
But he's definitely not black. Amistad shows that the depth of his
talent and perception knows no bounds. It does everything for the
black experience that Schindler's List did for the Jews, and with just
as much passion. He understands the power of pain that crosses all
boundaries. It's a film about integrity and the inescapable power and
attraction of freedom. It's classic cinema that takes risks, full of
the type of graphic realism Spielberg has always avoided. For the
first time, he doesn't blink at violence, but forces you to confront
your darkest fears about man's inhumanity.
It's an epic about the slave trade, and I admit I expected the
film to start in Africa with the rounding up of the slaves, but it
starts on the ship. Halfway through the film, there's a flashback that
is the single most harrowing and intense scene I have ever witnessed.
For ten minutes tears poured down my face while watching the graphic
truth of the slave ships. It's so powerful it's almost unbearable. I
can't believe people were ever treated like this. Schindler's List was
just practice for Amistad. With this film, Spielberg becomes not only
America's premiere filmmaker but our premiere educator. I can't
believe I wasn't taught about this in school. This is the incident
that made the civil war inevitable. It resonates with compassion, full
of brilliant performances, an amazing score, and incredible writing.
Spielberg is at the absolute peak of his powers. Don't miss it.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In one of those delightful ironies of history the ship was called
La Amistad--Spanish for "friendship" or "friendliness."  In fact, the
ship was anything but friendly.  Its primary cargo was black people
being brought in chains from Cuba to the United States, a country just
sixty-three years old and whose current President, Martin Van Buren
would be the last President to have been born owing allegiance to the
Crown of England.  In this summer of 1839 off the coast of Cuba some
fifty-three slaves chained up in the hold of the ship would break from
their bonds take control of the ship.  Taking command was Sengbe Pieh
whom the Spanish had renamed Cinque (played with surprising power by
Djimon Hounsou).  His plan was to force the crew of the ship to sail
back to Africa, but they tricked him and instead sailed north up the
coast of the United Stated.  An American Navy man-of-war captured La
Amistad off of Long Island, New York.  The ship could have been hauled
to a New York harbor or to Connecticut.  It was taken to New Haven,
Connecticut to increase the salvage value.  New York law said that
nobody could own anyone else and the blacks on board would be
considered passengers.  Connecticut still allowed slavery and the
blacks were legally cargo that could be sold.
     Steven Spielberg's new film tells the story of the legal battle
that followed the ship Amistad arrival and the question of whether the
blacks on board would be slaves or free men.  It was an issue that made
opponents of current President Van Buren (played in the film version by
Nigel Hawthorne--with no small borrowing from his role in THE MADNESS
OF KING GEORGE) and former President John Quincy Adams (Anthony
Hopkins), now a doddering old man and member of the House of
Representatives.  Van Buren, already unpopular due to a recession
resulting from Andrew Jacksons policies, is anxious to placate
Southern voters who could make the difference in the elections the
following year.  Van Buren also wants to placate Spain's eleven-year-
old Queen Isabella II (Anna Paquin) who believes that the slaves are
Spanish property.  Both sides in the controversy are aware that this
could be a powder keg that would lead the country into a civil war over
the issue of slavery.  Coming to the aid of the blacks are two
abolitionists, former slave Theodore Joadson (Morgan Freeman) and a
Mr. Tappen (Stellan Skarsgard).  They bring aboard a real estate lawyer
named Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey).  But Baldwin has his work cut out
for him.  He has no language in common with his clients and does not
even know if they come from Africa or Cuba, an issue pivotal to the
case.  The screenplay for this film is based on the book BLACK MUTINY
by William Owens and is adapted by David H. Franzoni.  The latter's
only previous screen writing was the story for the Whoopi Goldberg
vehicle JUMPIN' JACK FLASH.  It is rumored that for him to make a
script of this quality he needed the help of perhaps the best current
screenwriter, Steven Zaillian of SCHINDLER'S LIST and LOOKING FOR BOBBY
FISCHER.
     One weakness of this film is that apart from a few very powerful
scenes, AMISTAD is very much a cold account of a court case.  Because
the blacks who are on trial are strong and for the most part silent we
get only rare glimpses at emotions we can share with them.  The viewer
is angered that they are being denied justice but gets very little
understanding for the characters.  Their plight is more compelling than
they themselves are.  Cinque is never a fully three-dimensional person,
though we do see a bit of his self-doubt. The only character who is
anywhere near fully developed is Matthew McConaughey's.  We seem to be
seeing a lot of McConaughey these days, but he is not the most emotive
actor.  Anthony Hopkins plays John Quincy Adams as what old age has
left of a once fascinating man, but who now colorful without being
really interesting.  He bores people with his flowers and plays small
practical jokes in the House of Representatives.  When he gives an
eloquent speech it rates about a 7 where 10 is Lincoln at Gettysburg
and 0 is Steven Seagal anywhere.
     Spielberg had a difficult fight wanting to make SCHINDLER'S LIST
(mostly) in black and white.  Here he creates much of the same effect
by subduing the color scheme in the set design and probably also by
photographic filters.  He then makes the only bright colors of the film
the blood during the mutiny.  In this way he can underscore the
violence of his film in a year of so many bloody films.  Be warned that
in that same violent year perhaps the most jarring scene I remember is
AMISTAD's depiction of a man being killed by a sword.  The mutiny, lit
only by lightning, is the first thing we see in AMISTAD but nonetheless
is the centerpiece of the entire film.  Spielberg does have a nice
visual sense that comes out in this scene and elsewhere showing the
blacks in impressive silhouette to make them look larger.  Spielberg
creates some additional tension by letting the viewer from the start of
the film go a long, long time, perhaps fifteen minutes, without any
English in the dialog or on the screen.  That itself becomes a little
wearing.
     Others of the film's touches I question: the mutineers aboard the
Amistad having fashioned for themselves turbans made from what appear
to be American flags.  It is not clear where they would find what would
be three or four American flags on a Spanish ship.  Also the Capitol
building at this point had a ring of pillars at the top and ended
there.  The actual dome was not added until early in Lincoln's second
term.  We see it, however, fully domed.  Just as the Capitol Building
was incomplete, so was the Supreme Court.  There were eight judges, not
nine.  The latter was pointed out by Gore Vidal in an article for THE
NEW YORKER. Van Buren appears a dithering incompetent.  This is perhaps
unfair.  He was merely a second-rate President having to clean up a
mess left by our first second-rate President, Andrew Jackson.
     The Jewish Steven Spielberg has now made two stirring films on
Black History and one on Jewish History. If he can manage to reconcile
tensions between those two communities he will be deserving of more
than Oscars.  I rate AMISTAD an 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
     Generally when I review a history film I like to look up the
incidents in multiple history books and add information to my review to
broaden the context and correct misimpressions left by the film.  In
this instance my collection of history books have been nearly unanimous
in omitting the Amistad Incident. Even Howard Zinn's A PEOPLE'S HISTORY
OF THE UNITED STATES which concentrates on injustice and minorities
appears to omit the incident.  Of course, any historian writing a
history is forced to choose the incidents he feels willing to cover,
but it is surprising to see this particular incident so ignored and
rescued from obscurity by Black History courses and by Steven
Spielberg.
     Another touch that is wearing: in general the film is deliberately
paced and comes to a conclusion, then the viewer discovers the film
runs its own stop sign and just keeps going.  It was a pleasant
surprise when Spielberg did that in POLTERGEIST, but here it goes just
a bit too long with too little reward.  It needed a more power behind
the speech by Adams.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Djimon Hounsou, Matthew McConaughey, Morgan Freeman, Anthony
Hopkins, Nigel Hawthorne, Stellan Skarsgard, David Paymer, Pete
Postlethwaite, Anna Paquin Director: Steven Spielberg Screenplay: David
Franzoni
I have perhaps wrongly felt that Steve Spielberg excels better as a
director of action packed adventure movies, than one needed to handle a
sensitive melodrama. With the exception of SCHINDLER'S LIST, which was
too intense for my comfort zone, I have continued to hold to this
generalisation until now. The AMISTAD is exactly this, a tense courtroom
drama with a powerful, universal message  Freedom!
Set in the 1800's, this is the true story of a group of African slaves
who manage to mutiny aboard a Spanish ship in their desperate efforts to
return home.  Recaptured of the coast of the United States, they are put
through the mill of judicious trials before reaching the Supreme Court
to be represented by the ex-President himself, John Quincy Adams
(Anthony Hopkins). The nature of this case was not as simple as letting
a few African slaves go, but would become the thorn of contention over
which North and South would go to war.
Spielberg draws horrific pictures of the maltreatment of slaves aboard
the slave ships. This is not dissimilar to the horrific suffering he
recreated during the Jewish Holocaust. The AMISTAD is also full of
powerful, sickening images of human beings subjected to torture, rape
and murder. Human life is reduced to a mere commodity and is as easily
exchanged for coin, as it is to toss into the sea as unwanted cargo. It
is these images that tell us of their unimaginable suffering and the
reason why slavery must and should always remain abolished.
Anthony Hopkins once again scores another Academy Award nomination for a
finely tuned character performance in portraying the great Quincy Adams.
Morgan Freeman says little in the movie and has little room to manoeuvre
with his character except to silently voice his protest through others.
Matthew McConaughey is no stranger to the courtroom (A TIME TO KILL) and
does well as the property lawyer who defends the Africans up until the
Supreme Court. But it is the African slave Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), who
shows us the torment of a captured human being with his every defiant
expression and shed tear. He gazes up at the night sky and carries with
him all the hopes of one looking for the way home. This movie is a long
sit, but should be worth your while if you are willing to understand the
plight of the human spirit.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
There's a scene, late in Amistad, where lawyer Roger Baldwin (Matthew
McConaughey) is trying to explain the American legal system to his West
African client, Cinque (Djimon Hounsou).  Cinque, having never heard of
the appeals process, is enraged when Baldwin tries to explain that the
Supreme Court will now have to decide whether Cinque and his fellow
African refugees will go free or be executed for revolting against their
captors.  Baldwin explains that Cinque is "almost" free, which prompts
Cinque to scream, "Almost!" again and again in rage and frustration.
(At least that's what I think he's saying, as almost all of Cinque's
lines are in the Mende dialect.)
Amistad is a well-made, exceptionally well-acted, and skillfully
directed film about a great historical story, but it's a victim of its
own quality.  Amistad is a good movie, an Oscar contender, even, but
with its pedigree, with its starpower, with the resonance of its story,
you would expect this to be a great movie.  And it's almost a great
movie.  While that word -- almost -- is not as frustrating for you and
me at the movies as it is for Cinque and his pirate crew, it's
frustrating enough.
Amistad is at its most powerful in depicting the voyage of Cinque to
America.  After a brutal kidnapping from his village, and harrowing and
murderous journey  from West Africa on the a Portuguese slaver, Cinque
manages to break free of his chains on the slave deck of the Spanish
ship La Amistad, kill his oppressors, and attempt to steer the ship back
to Africa.  The action sequences are powerful and deeply disturbing,
evoking all the horror and pity of slavery.  Unforunately, the real meat
of the movie takes place ashore, in a series of courtrooms and legal
manuevers.  It's sort of like Perry Mason meets Roots.
Now, don't get me wrong, here.  I'm a lawyer.  I love this kind of
stuff.  And for me, anyway, it's a bonus to see Matthew McConaughey in
the courtroom again after his performace as Jake Brigance in A Time to
Kill.  But there is just so much courtroom wrangling and arguing and
cross-examination that it detracts from what the movie is really about.
Even the resolute Cinque, who disrupts one trial by shouting, "Give us
free!", over and over again, is reduced by the end of the movie to
quizzing lawyers Baldwin and former President John Quincy Adams (Anthony
Hopkins) about jurisdictional questions.  And by the climax of the
movie, a quirky, overlong speech by Adams, we're all as tired of the
legal process as Cinque is.  (It's a measure of the screenplay's
awareness of the legal process that former Justice Harry Blackmun was
tapped to play the part of the Chief Justice.)
The problem with Amistad is that it tries to do too much and leaves too
much left undone.   Amistad spends, for example, a lot of time on
historical political intrigue.  While pertinent to the legal
back-and-forth, it isn't very interesting, and wastes the talents of
fine actors David Paymer, Anna Paquin, and Nigel Hawthorne -- not to
mention that America's Finest Actor, Morgan Freeman, is given a
suprisingly slim role as a Boston abolitionist working towards Cinque's
freedom.  There's also a surprising amount of time spent on John Quincy
Adams and his supposed struggle with the memory of his father, President
John Adams -- which doesn't quite ring true.  (John Quincy Adams, while
a mediocre President, was one of America's most accomplished diplomats,
possibly America's greatest Secretary of State, and served ably in the
House of Representatives after his term in the White House.)
Amistad is at its best when Djimon Hounsou is on screen. McConaughey's
character calls Cinque "the greatest man living in chains", and
Hounsou's indominitable Cinque exudes greatness and dignity, even in
chains.  In a world all too quick to write him off as a savage, Cinque
gives us an example of courage, humility, strength, and resolve.
Hounsou plays his role brilliantly, especially considering that we don't
know what the heck he's saying most of the time.  (Amistad is stingy
with subtitles for some reason.)  But we always know what Cinque is
feeling and thinking, thanks to Hounsou's expressive performance.
Amistad's chief failure is that it takes the focus of the movie off of
Cinque and on the legal and political issues.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, in relating the story of his arrest in The Gulag
Archipelago, asked why, exactly, the Russian people never rose up and
fought the KGB agents that came to arrest them in the middle of the
night.  He sadly concluded that "we didn't love freedom enough."
Amistad, by telling the story of one man's fight against slavery,
reminds all of us that freedom is precious, worth fighting for, worth
dying for.  It is a noble effort by a great director to deliver a
powerful message.  However, just as Cinque's efforts at freedom were
hampered and delayed by legal and political manueverings, Amistad is
hampered in telling its tale by the memory of those same maneuvers.  A
good movie, yes, and almost a great movie.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"I don't want to study law," she said with the
same tone as if she had been saying, "I don't
want to turn into a cockroach."

Author
David Wilcock
Running Time: 155 minutes (2 hours 35 minutes)
Starring Morgan Freeman, Matthew McConaughey, Antony Hopkins and Djimon 
Hounsou
Directed By Steven Spielberg
After Jurassic Park (1993), Spielberg went to drama with Schindlers
List (1995) a harrowing tale of the Holocaust, a subject very close to
Spielberg. So, after The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997), he follows
it up with Amistad, a harrowing tale of slavery, mutiny, freedom, and
hope. Although nowhere near as personal, or as good, as Schindlers
List, Amistad is a fine film, with good acting, an interesting story,
and some outstanding scenes.
The films starts spectacularly (and violently) with a mutiny by black
slaves (led by Cinque, played by Hounsou) on the ship 'La Amistad.'
They demand that the ship is taken back towards Africa, but they are
tricked, and end up on the shores of Connecticut. They are imprisoned,
and have to go to court to decide who's 'property' they are, either
the ships captains, or the Queen of Spain (played by Anne Paquin,
previously seen in The Piano) Slave abolitionist Theodore Joadson
(Freeman) first takes their cause, and also attorney Roger Baldwin
(McConaughey.)
After the great opening sequence, the film dies down a bit, and goes
into standard historic fare, with sweeping music by John Williams, and
some words of wisdom by Cinque, plus ex-president John Quincy Adams
(Hopkins.) The two standout performances are Hounsou and
Hopkins. Hounsou is superb, because he only says one line of
English. The audience has to rely on his facial expressions to see
what he is feeling, and he conveys them very well. Hopkins performance
is the complete opposite, with the audience enjoying his superb
speeches rather than his facial expressions. Both are excellent,
though, although Hopkins hardly has any screen time, and only really
comes in at the end of the film. Of course, the other performances are
good, especially McConaughey. Sadly, Freeman is given a relatively
small role, and never really gets to do much acting. It's a shame, as
Freeman is a superb actor, but this role is not meaty enough for
him. In fact, he hardly says anything in the film, and a fine actor is
wasted.
The bad guys are good fun, with David Paymer fun as the slimy John
Forsyth, and Pete Postlethwaite good as the district attorney. As
usual, it turns out that the bad guys are more fun than the good guys,
although as said above, Cinque and Adams are both well played, and
interesting characters. Paquin is fun as the eleven year old Queen of
Spain, stamping her feet and complaining to get her 'property' back.
The script, although based on a true story, is clinched. You can tell
what the characters are going to say before they even say it.  Advice
we have heard a hundred times before is heard in this film. Sure, it
may be in Mende (the slaves native language) but it is still the same
words of wisdom. The costumes, set design and cinematography are
impressive, however, and the music is pretty decent, and nowhere near
as intrusive as in Empire of the Sun (1987) Spielbergs direction,
apart from the start and the end, is surprisingly average. It isn't as
powerful as Schindlers List direction, and there are no scenes that
are as good as the 'shootings from the roof' or the woman showers
parts in Schindlers. It's a shame, as this film could easily be as
powerful as Schindlers, but it never quiet's achieve it.
The film has other flaws. The length is horrendous. This is a very
long film, and the film can slow down to a crawl. In fact, halfway
through the movie, it threatened to drop dead. Thankfully, there was a
superb flashback sequence to save it, but then it went back to dull,
then another saving sequence. It's like this through the
whole. There's a superb scene that holds your attention, and then a
dull one. It never quite reaches 'boring' as such, luckily, because
there's always a good scene just before it becomes too dull.
Amistad, overall, is a interesting story, with two stand-out
performances, and even a bit of humour, but never really a very high
level of entertainment. It's a shame, because this film has a lot of
promise. It's not bad, but it's not spectacular either. However,
despite it's flaws and it's very long length, Amistad is interesting,
and quite entertaining. Sadly, though, it's no classic.
*BEWARE: The film contains a lot of strobe lighting at the start and 
during the flashback.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Amistad (1997)
Djimon Hounsou, Matthew McConaughey, Anthony Hopkins, Morgan Freeman, 
Nigel Hawthorne. Directed by Steven Spielberg. 145 minutes.
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of 5 stars)
In 1839, 53 Africans, held under horrific conditions on the Spanish slave 
ship La Amistad, broke free and killed most of the crew. They tried to 
force two survivors to take them home, but the ship was captured and the 
Africans found themselves in America, imprisoned again and embroiled in a 
massive legal battle, with ramifications far beyond their particular case.
 The story of these Africans is important and needed to be told. It's a 
shame Steven Spielberg does such a poor job telling it.
"Amistad" is a maddening film because it comes so close to greatness. To 
be sure, there are magnificent scenes, particularly the opening of the 
movie, depicting the revolt on the ship. The segment is dark, brutal and 
thrilling, mesmerizing because it taps into the fundamental nature of the 
human condition, that desperate need for life and freedom. Unfortunately, 
for most of the movie Spielberg inexplicably takes an academic approach 
to slavery, reducing the Africans to noble props in a series of extremely 
tired courtroom scenes. Instead of looking into the personalities of the 
Africans and the psychology of slavery, we watch stuffy white guys in 
silly outfits debating the legal minutiae of the issue.
Matthew McConaughey plays the lawyer for the Africans. In granny glasses 
and curls, he looks like a frat boy in a college play, and his unfocused 
performance adds little to the movie. Morgan Freeman fares better as a 
former slave turned abolitionist, but he isn't given much to do. Anthony 
Hopkins, however, gets loads of screen time as former President John 
Quincy Adams, reluctantly drawn into the case. Hopkins gives a bizarre 
performance, shuffling about while alternating between mumbling and 
bellowing at those around him. In early scenes, he appears to be quite 
senile, but later in the film, he miraculously recovers enough to give a 
long, ponderous speech to the Supreme Court. 
The only African we get to know is Cinque, beautifully played by Djimon 
Hounsou. The actor is remarkably expressive, creating the only fully-
realized African character. Cinque is a leader who believes himself 
unworthy to lead. His doubts, confusion, defiance and bravery give us the 
human connection the film so desperately needs.
In the magnificent "Schindler's List," Spielberg showed uncharacteristic 
restraint, allowing the audience to react to the story naturally. Here, 
he reverts to the emotional manipulation he used in films like "E.T.," 
with John William's overbearing musical score constantly telegraphing 
what Spielberg expects us to feel. Every moment of the film is 
choreographed in glossy Hollywood fashion. Even a scene depicting the 
Africans' nightmarish life on the slave ship, an extremely powerful 
segment, loses some of its impact because Spielberg can't resist 
orchestrating every second, using oh-so-perfect lighting and "emaciated" 
Africans with bodies straight out of Gold's Gym.
"Amistad's" best moments are the quiet ones. A scene where a captive 
African interprets the story of Jesus based on illustrations from a Bible 
is gently moving. A dinner conversation where President Martin Van Buren 
(Nigel Hawthorne) receives thinly-veiled threats about a brewing civil 
war sends chills up the spine. Scenes like those hint at what a great 
film "Amistad" could have been.
If only Spielberg had realized that bombast is no substitute for good 
storytelling. The historical account of the human beings taken captive on 
La Amistad is important, but we barely get to see it here. Instead, we 
get two and one half hours of Spielberg's bells and whistles, with 
lawyers pontificating while the Africans are left in the sidelines. 
"Amistad" has some great moments, but great moments just aren't enough 
anymore. 

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) Steven Spielberg is like Alfred Hitchcock. 
A professor of mine once raised the question of whether Alfred Hitchcock
was a genius or merely a carnival ride operator. 
On the one hand, most of his films are exceptional pieces of work.
Suspense, intellect, and morality weave through his films, giving them
first-time enjoyment and multiple-viewing substance. 
On the other hand, most of his movies are so easily analyzed, and were
created with such calculated intent, that it's almost as if he never
created anything original, other than the PROCESS by which he made
movies. Once the process was in place, it only took a minimal effort to
create a new movie each time. 
Spielberg's AMISTAD has those qualities of Hitchcock's. On the one hand
most of my observations were favorable; Spielberg and his long-time
editor Michael Kahn packed many clever insights into the movie. On the
other hand, many of these insights seem mathematically calculated. They
are intellectual, and smooth, not evocative or mood-setting. 
Because the story is so moving, a more emotional approach from a more
intuitive (and less analytical) director would have worked better. 
The movie opens on a close-up of the harshly lit, animalistic face of an
African man wincing in pain and determination. This man is Cinque
(pronounced "SING-kay," played by Djimon Hounsou) and he is extracting a
spike from a post using only his fingernails and his willpower. He is
able to free himself and others, and together, they take over the slave
ship they are on, ironically named La Amistad (The Friendship, in
Spanish). 
None of the Africans know how to sail so they keep the ship's captain
and a skeleton crew alive. They demand to be sailed back home. Instead
of heading for Africa, the ship's captain sails to Boston where the
Africans are recaptured. 
Several interested parties claim ownership of the Africans. A black
freeman and abolitionist, Joadson (Morgan Freeman), hires a young
lawyer, Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey, showing his limited range), to
file a claim for the captured Africans' freedom. 
The trial goes rather quickly and favorably for the Africans, but just
as it looks like the abolitionist's case will win, President Martin Van
Buren (Nigel "King George" Hawthorne), up for re-election, appoints a
new, less sympathetic judge to the case. The case is so airtight that
the Africans are "freed," in spite of the new judge, but the case is
appealed over and over, all the way to the Supreme Court. Along the way,
Baldwin and Joadson convince John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins, superb
as always) to help them out. 
AMISTAD is at its best when Cinque gets to tell his story. The scenes of
his capture, enslavement, and sale are the most moving parts of the
film. Sadly, they take very little screen time. Instead, a lot of time
is spent in the courtroom or in the prison. These aspects of the story
are interesting in their own right, but it's not where I would have
focused my attention. 
Spielberg placed the rhetorical fights of the courtroom over the
emotional battles on-board. Like many of Hitchcock's stories,
Spielberg's is calculated rather than evocative. Here are some examples
from AMISTAD that reveal an insightful movie, more created than born: 
 Still on the Amistad, at night and through the fog, the Africans first
hear chamber music in the distance, then drift past another ship. It is
a ship full of rich white Americans out on a pleasure cruise. They are
in the same place at the same time, yet their situations are so
obviously different. 
 The scene of the Africans' initial imprisonment ends with Cinque
starting to cry. Kahn cuts from his face to the face of a shiny white
porcelain doll that we see belongs to the prepubescent Queen Isabella II
of Spain. From a man in pain and powerless to help himself, to a spoiled
brat who will never know pain with more power than she knows how to
handle. 
  When it first appears that Baldwin and Joadson have won their case, a
new judge is appointed and it appears likely that he will overturn their
decision. Their world is turned upside-down. Literally. Spielberg shows
us the new judge posing for a picture through a camera lens that inverts
the image. 
 One of the slaves is given a Bible. He can't understands the words,
but he spends lots of time thinking about the pictures. He explains the
story of Jesus to Cinque as best as he can by interpreting the pictures.
They compare their own plight in America to the trials of Jesus. Right
after they see the picture of the three crosses on Calvary hill, a ship
sails by with three masts in the same configuration as the crosses,
linking their martyrdom to his. 
 Former supreme court justice Harry Blackmun, and not a professional
actor, reads the final Supreme Court verdict. (He calls the ship the
"Armistead.") 
Each of these examples works very well, but they seem too perfect to be
natural. In each example Spielberg adds depth by comparing and
contrasting Cinque's situation with some other. But the examples don't
arise from the characters or the story; they are clearly introduced by a
godlike author. The effect is that you notice the author's winks rather
than getting emotionally involved. And since the story of a slave revolt
is such a rich mine for emotion, the direction of the film ends up
working against the story. 
I do think that Spielberg is a good director. He is very good at what he
does. But his technique doesn't work for every story. His cold
calculation doesn't work well with the hot injustice of slavery. AMISTAD
would have been a better film from someone less thoughtful and more
emotional, and Spielberg should stick to operating carnival rides.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Steve Kong
James Berardinelli pointed it out best, Spielberg's Schindler's List is to
Jurassic Park what Amistad is to Lost World. I hope that this is a short
cycle for Spielberg, because the first cycle was a lot stronger than this
second one. Jurassic Park was a lot more fun than Lost World, and
Schindler's List is a lot stronger than Amistad. If this is a cycle for
Spielberg it looks as if the cycle is getting weaker.
This is not to say that Amistad is not a great movie, it's just not as
great as Schindler's List. Amistad is a good movie that stands not on its
plot and story but on the performances of its leads; Djimon Hounsou,
Matthew McConaughey, Anthony Hopkins, and to a lesser extend Morgan Freeman.
Spielberg opens the film with a harrowing sequence on how slaves take over
the ship that they are being shipped on, La Amistad. The sequence is very
graphic and shows clearly the feelings of the slaves towards those who have
taken them slave. After this the slaves try to sail the ship back to their
home country with the help of the captain. They though end up in
Connecticut where groups of different people, with different agendas, argue
about the "ownership" of these slaves. This includes the Prime Minister
from Spain representing the prepubescent Queen -- in which Spielberg
handles with some good humour and irony. But the real fight is between the
Attorney General of the United States and a small time properties lawyer
Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey). The Attorney General is fighting on "behalf"
of the United States and Spain. The current President at the time wants to
avert a civil war from this situation and in doing so also make Spain
happy. Baldwin wants to set the slaves free after he befriends one of them,
Cinque (Djimon Hounsou) the leader of the group.
Anthony Hopkins, starring as former President John Quincy Adams, has a
small introduction in the beginning and then is forgotten for almost half
the film. I wish that it wasn't so, but I guess you can't change history.
Hopkins is just wonderful as the former President, injecting into the
character a large dose of humour.
Newcomer, Djimon Hounsou, gives a great performance as the leader of the
slaves, Cinque. His strong stubborn performance is one that is inspiring.
You latch on to his cause and that is what really carries the film.
McConaughey, whom we last saw in this summer's Contact, gives a good
performance as the lawyer who wants to free the slaves, Baldwin. And Morgan
Freeman is given a somewhat smaller part as Theodore Joadson an
abolitionist who first brings up the case of the slaves to Baldwin. Freeman
who is always a strong screen presence does well, though he is not given
enough screen time. The star of the film is Hopkins though, his performance
is the staple of the film.
Spielberg makes a good film with Amistad, but it doesn't top Schindler's
List. I found that there was no real antagonist in Amistad, the only real
antagonist is the idea of slavery. The mid-portion of this film where
Cinque recounts how he had been brought into slavery is again like the
opening sequence. This sequence is disturbingly frank and the audience is
forced to sit through the sequence because as the audience knows, it's all
too true.
Spielberg is able to bring an emotional closing to the film through
Hopkins' speech. And again, I stress, Hopkins' performance in Amistad is
the one that holds the film together. This performance is Oscar material,
and I hope that he gets honoured for it. What I did like was that Spielberg
was able to insert different pieces of humour throughout the film to let
out some tension and to stir things up again. This was a good move from
Spielberg for such a long film.
Worth mentioning is John Williams' score for the film, which like all his
scores is brilliant.
Amistad is not a great film, but it is a good film that is worth watching
on the big screen. It is a good return for Spielberg after his special
effects driven and plot less dinosaur romp Lost World. It's also the first
film directed by Spielberg out of the DreamWorks SKG production house and
it is a good release at that. Don't miss Amistad on the big screen.

Author
Michael Redman
Slavery is bad. After hundreds of years, we've finally figured that one out.
This almost universal belief is the both the strength and weakness of director
Steven Spielberg's latest "serious" film.
During the late 1830s, a Portuguese slave ship carries a cargo of black men
and women kidnapped from their home on Africa's west coast to Cuba to be sold
into slavery. Fifty-three of them are stuffed into the "La Amistad" (from a
Spanish word for "friendship") by their new Spanish owners.
Freeing himself from his chains, Senge Pieh (Djimon Hounsou), renamed Cinque
by his masters, leads a bloody revolt. After killing most of the crew, the
Africans force the remaining sailors to return them to their home - or so they
think. Instead the ship heads up the coast to the United States.
The Amistad is boarded by an American naval ship and the revolutionaries are
put on trial in Connecticut for murder and piracy. The legal question becomes
are they free men fighting justly for their freedom or are they property. If
they are property, who do they belong to? Their masters? The Spanish
government? Salvage rights of the officers who captured the ship? The US government?
The defendants are pawns in several games. Abolitionists Theodore Joadson
(Morgan Freeman) and Lewis Tappan (Stellan Skarsgard) want to free them, but
Tappan sees them primarily as a means to further the cause. Their lawyer Roger
Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey) views the case as a simple one of property
rights and a chance to make his share of legal fees. South Carolina Senator
John C. Calhoun (Arliss Howard) pursues the case for the political advancement
of the southern states. President Martin Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorne) is
willing to force the result towards his own political ends.
When the verdict looks to free the Africans, Van Buren replaces the judge with
one more sympathetic to his wishes. Even that doesn't work and the new judge
frees the kidnap victims. At the urging of Calhoun, the President then appeals
the case to the Supreme Court, populated by a majority of slave-owners.
This little-known (try finding it in any history text book) incident from
America's past would have gone down a darker path were it not for former
President John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins) who is persuaded to argue the
case before the Supreme Court.
The slavery issue is easy pickin's for Spielberg. Much like his "Shindler's
List" (which followed "Jurassic Park" as this follows "Lost World"), the moral
sides are not difficult ones to choose. Nazis and slave traders: both treat
groups of others as less than human. It's not hard to see who the bad guys
are. Without that question to ponder, the director's job is more difficult. He
has to make the story interesting.
Spielberg succeeds for the most part. The visual aspect of the film is beyond
reproach. Where the movie falls down is a bit more subtle. There are very few
_people_ in the tale. In fact, Cinque is the only character who is fleshed
out. Tappan and Joadson are "abolitionists": symbols but not humans. Van Buren
is a weak politician but nothing else. The rest of the "slaves" barely exist
other than dressing for the set. Like many other films about people of color,
almost all the major players are white.
The film's salvation lies in the acting strength of everyone involved and the
powerful presence of Hounsou. The former model's first major role is a winner.
Without speaking more than five words of English, he conveys more emotion than
most actors with a thousand lines of dialog.
The other stand-out is Hopkins who seems to be making a career out of
portraying American Presidents (he also played the title role in "Nixon"). The
impassioned speech by the doddering old man who phases in and out of
rationality is among the best court-room drama ever on the screen.
There are some other great moments. Especially impressive are the African's
struggle to understand what is going on in the strange land. Their
interpretation of the Bible based solely on the pictures and their own
experiences is poignant.
As grand as the epic is, it would have more impact had it focused more on the
experience from the point of view of the Africans. More humanity in  the fight
for humanity would have made it a four-star film.
(Michael Redman has written this column for a real long time and is just now
getting around to seeing some 1998 films.)
[This appeared in the 2/12/98 "Bloomington Voice" Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Steven Spielberg
Cast: Morgan Freeman, Anthony Hopkins, Matthew McConaughey, Djimon
Hounsou, Nigel Hawthorne, David Paymer, Pete Posthelwaite, Stellan
Skarsgard, Anna Paquin
Rated R: Violence and brutality
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Spielberg's Amistad begins with a spellbinding scene. On board the
Spanish slave ship Amistad, an African slave named Cinque (Djimon
Hounsou) escapes and frees all of his brothers, leading a violent mutiny
against the overseers on the ship. The opening shot is dark, and it
takes a few seconds to understand what we're looking at--the shot
changes from a close-up of a pair of straining eyes down to raw, bloody
fingers removing a nail from a piece of wood. The man pulls the nail out
after what we expect was an extremely long time, and looks at it in
wonder for only a second before standing to help his fellow captives.
The ensuing moments are violent and horrifying, as Cinque and the
others, enraged, murder the ship's crew.
    The slaves keep two of the seamen alive to navigate the ship; these
two men take the ship to America (the slaves thought they were going
home to Africa) and the entire group of slaves is arrested for murder.
Much of the film involves the trial, in which a young activist lawyer
(Matthew McConaughey) defends the group. Later in the film, he enlists
the help of John Quincy Adams (Anthony Hopkins).
    Amistad is the latest Important film this fall. The hype on this one
is intense, mostly because audiences are expecting a film with similar
impact of Schindler's List. Amistad, arguably in the same technical
realm as Schindler's List, never reaches the emotional level of the
latter. Of course, to base my criticism on a comparison between the two
is unfair: it is unlikely Spielberg intended to make something that
would be as powerful as Schindler's List. Amistad's subject matter is
one to which most individuals in this time period have very little
exposure, and is immediately limited because of this. Spielberg,
however, has done a spectacular job of recreating the values of the time
period and educating viewers as to what went on in the mid 1800s. His
work is so successful in this respect that I was truly moved by the end
of this film.
    As a whole, however, the film's progression and the script don't
quite live up to Spielberg's potential. My biggest problem is with the
length. Many of the scenes went for far too long; towards the end of the
film, Hopkins gives a speech to the US Supreme Court. The speech lasts
roughly 15 minutes, but it seems to go on forever. Hopkins' delivery is
nice, and the speech is well-written, but it meanders, and despite its
meaning, I was tempted to tune it out. Many of the scenes have this
quality, where the development isn't always apparent and the point of
each scene isn't totally obvious.
Scenes between McConaughey and Hounsou, which should be magical and
energetic, often come across as dull and obligatory. The performances
are all very good, but the characters don't feel like they're
interacting with one another--it seems like they're always talking to
the audience, almost knowing of the fact that they're in a film meant to
teach us something.
    Morgan Freeman, who is top-billed for some strange reason, is mostly
wasted in this role as anti-slavery activist Theodore Joadson. He has
almost no lines, and is given basically no time to create a character.
The prize of this film is newcomer Hounsou, who is charismatic and
powerful as the leader of the slaves. McConaughey is also good (and I
found it ironic that he actually toned down his Southern accent for this
role), and Hopkins gives an authentic portrayal of Adams (and he
maintains a better accent than he did in Nixon). Pete Posthelwaite,
another British actor covering up his accent, delivers a cold and
balanced performance as the prosecuting lawyer Holabird.
    Although Amistad has some significant problems with pacing and
character interaction, the mood is perfect. The experience wasn't always
engaging, but the parts that worked really worked. The best scene in the
film is a flashback to a horrible moment during which a group of slaves
are tied to a bundle of rocks and thrown off the ship because there
wasn't enough food. Spielberg doesn't pull any punches here; just as he
did in Schindler's List, he allows the material to speak for itself, and
the result is pure and painful to watch. Cinque's character, as well, is
an enticing individual, even though he doesn't speak a word of English.
His struggles are easily accessible to the audience, and understanding
him is almost too easy a task.
    I found great satisfaction from the last fifteen minutes of the
film; two of the scenes nearly brought me to tears. The way Spielberg
ends the film--almost as a hollow victory--seems so appropriate for the
subject of slavery. I went into Amistad not knowing much about what I
was going to see, and, despite its problems, I left the theater with
something new and tangible to think about.

Author
Michael Dequina

Amistad (R) ** (out of ****)
        The true story of the 1839 revolt on the Spanish slave ship La Amistad
would appear to make strong material for a film, and the brilliant opening
scene of Steven Spielberg's Amistad proves that point.  Depicting in
graphic, unflinching detail how the imprisoned Africans, led by one Cinque
(Djimon Hounsou), fought against their captors and took command the ship,
the scene gets the film off to a bold, arresting start, delivering the
promise of a highly charged and powerful two-and-a-half-hours.
        Alas, the promise remains just that, a promise, and the ultimately
disappointing Amistad loses its momentum once the action shifts from the
sea to New England, where the 44 Amistad Africans end up.  Held under lock
and key once more, the Africans, charged with murder and piracy, become the
objects in a heated property trial, and the film settles into the familiar
rhythm of a courtroom drama.  The prepubescent Queen Isabella (Anna Paquin)
of Spain argues that the Africans are rightfully hers, claiming that the
passengers were Cuban-born slaves; the British Navy lay a counter claim
since, as they maintain, the passengers were not slaves but free people
illegally captured from West Africa.  Looking out for the Africans'
interests are abolitionists Theodore Joadson (Morgan Freeman) and Lewis
Tappan (Stellan Skarsgard), as well as Roger Baldwin (Matthew McConaughey),
a young attorney with a struggling practice.
        If McConaughey's role sounds familiar, it should--he is playing no more
than a variation on his starmaking role in A Time to Kill, which just adds
to the routine quality of the courtroom scenes, which are the meat and
potatoes of the film.  As well-acted as these scenes are, especially by
Pete Postlethwaite as the prosecutor, none of them really engaged me.  The
proceedings are strangely devoid of any tension or suspense, except for one
moment where the overwhelming pressure Cinque feels is reflected by a
pulsating drumbeat.  But that is squandered, for the scene climaxes with
Cinque making a dramatic outburst that can best be described as a perfect
example of the cloying sentimentality that often mars Spielberg films.
Spielberg managed to control his inclination toward emotional bombast in
Schindler's List, and the film was much more effective for it; a similar
understatement would have worked better for Amistad, whose most powerful
moments are the quieter ones, such as a modest yet moving scene where
Cinque and his friend Yamba (Razaaq Adoti) attempt to interpret the Bible.
        Eventually the Amistad Africans' case makes it to the Supreme Court, with
none other than former President John Quincy Adams (Sir Anthony Hopkins)
arguing on their behalf.  The usually great Hopkins delivers one of his
weakest performances; he lays on the cantankerous old codger schtick a bit
too thick, and he does something peculiar with his voice--not his American
accent (which I, for one, did not mind at all in Nixon), but he makes it
kind of high pitched and lispy, at times almost squeaky and chirpy.
Needless to say, this is highly distracting and, in the end, annoying,
especially since his character handles the climactic oratory.
        But by this late juncture in the film, the problem with Hopkins's
elocution is the least of the film's troubles.  I felt as if the real
story--that of the Africans--had been lost.  Baldwin's case hinges on the
fact that the Amistad Africans are people, not property, yet, with the
exception of Cinque and maybe (to a much lesser extent) Yamba, screenwriter
David Franzoni never develops them as people.  Granted, it would have been
impossible to delve into the identities of all 44.   But if Franzoni had
applied to the Africans some of the  effort he uses to make the Americans a
varied bunch, the film would have been given a deeper human dimension.
        But even with the underdeveloped African perspective, the scenes that
squarely focus on them are more compelling than any of the legal action
with the Yanks.  The closest Amistad comes to recapturing the opening
scene's power is an extended flashback where Cinque recounts the events
leading up to the revolt.  This sequence, which opens with the violent
capture in Sierra Leone, progresses through the harrowing sail to and from
Cuba, and then concludes with a brief recap of the revolt, gets under the
skin and stays there, which is a lot more than can be said for all of the
courtroom scenes, which barely have a single memorable moment between them.
        The same can be said about the cast of characters, despite the very worthy
efforts of the actors, which is by far Amistad's strongest asset.  The
always-reliable Freeman's presence is always welcome, but his character is
a minor background player at best.  McConaughey predictably plays his
familiar role with ease, but the character of Roger Baldwin never exhibits
much personality.  Nigel Hawthorne's President Martin Van Buren _does_ have
personality, but his screen time, much like Freeman's, is limited.   The
only character, American or African, that comes to full-blooded, vivid life
is Cinque, played with mesmerizing ferocity by the charismatic Hounsou, a
remarkable find who has come a very long way indeed from his heretofore
most visible work, lipsynching in Janet Jackson's 1990 "Love Will Never Do
(Without You)" video.
         As I have stated, the true story of the Amistad Africans would make a
great film.  But not only do I not think Amistad is that film, I do not
think it really is a film about them.  A true Amistad movie should be an
inspiring, highly emotional and moving tale about the courage and will of
the Africans themselves--not the mildly affecting, American-centered
courtroom drama that Spielberg has made.  (opens December 10)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"If you chase something, then sometimes you never get it.
 If you put forth the work and all the attitude, next thing you know
 it's bestowed upon you."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Steven Spielberg
Writer: David H. Frinzoni (based on the book "Black Mutiny" by William
Owens)
Starring: Djimon Hounsou, Matthew McConaughey, Morgan Freeman, Anthony
Hopkins, Stellan Skarsgĺrd, Nigel Hawthorne, David Paymer, Pete
Postlethwaite, Jeremy Northam, Xander Berkeley, Paul Guilfoyle, Geno Silva,
John Ortiz, Peter Firth, Arliss Howard, Razaaq Adoti, Abu Bakaar Fofanah,
Anna Paquin, Tomás Milián, Kevin J. O'Connor, Austin Pendleton
In 1839, the slaves on the Spanish Ship "La Amistad" revolted, killed all
but two captors (two because none of them knew how to steer the ship), who
proceeded to sail them to America instead of Africa like they said they
would.  Once there, a series of long, controversial hearings were heard,
debating over their origin, which would decide if the slaves were legal
(which means they are technically murders) or not (which means they were
merely defending themselves, and hey, that's okay).  It's a true story, and
I didn't even know about it.
Upon learning about this and how undertold it is, Steven Spielberg thought
it was high time someone made a big budget Dreamworks movie out of it,
directed by him as his next "Schindler's List" (since he directed "The Lost
World" this summer, he thought he'd try to do what he did in '93, otherwise
known as "The Year of Spielberg").  The result?  "Amistad."  With a big
vast cast of everyone from Anthony Hopkins to Anna Paquin to Austin
freaking Pendleton, very impressive production designs, and lots of debate
over freedom to stir everyone up into a pissed-off and emotionally moved
frenzy.
In fact "Amistad" is so big that it's almost disappointing.  "Amistad" not
only wants to be Spilberg's next "Schindler's List," but it wants to be: a)
as emotionally moving as that film; b) as monetarily successful as it; and
c) the big winner in the Oscar race.  It's hand-crafted so that everything
about it is supposed to stir someone up, and filled with scenes of horror,
beauty, and various other stuff that melts Oscar's heart.  But why isn't it
all this?
Well, there's a couple problems with the film.  First off, the film limits
the debate over slavery in a couple ways: first, making the film's outcome
only affect a small group of slaves - no big grand debate here; and because
it's only a trial.  The film plays like this: a great 15 minute
introduction where we see the bloody, gory, and charging in oh so many ways
revolt; then 2 hours and 15 minutes of various courtrooms and talking,
broken up sporadically with scenes like one where the unofficial slave
leader and on-again-off-again protagonist, Cinqué (Djimon Hounsou), stands
up in court to scream repeatedly "Give us free!" while John Williams' score
pounds the emotion into our brains so that we don't have any other thoughts
than "Guess the film wants me to cry now."
Another problem is lack of focus in some areas.  Is it a film about slavery
and its affects on man, or is it just a big debate by people who only know
from second hand experience?  For maximum effect, the film should have been
about Cinqué and his experience as the leader of the alleged slaves.  It is
sometimes.  But the film also decides to focus on other people, placing
them in the foreground for awhile.  The other main character is a real
estate lawyer named Baldwin, played by Matthew McConaughey, which brings
out deja vu since his character in this is only slightly different from the
one he played in "A Time to Kill" (though admittingly he does it so well). 
He takes over the story sometimes, presenting a man who gets into the job
thinking as the slaves as objects to debate over, and eventually thinking
of them as people.  It's too weakly shown, and perhaps it could have been
tossed all together and had him get into the job to make sure they become
free.  But the film just shows it, and almost dumps him later on in the
film, then picks him back up.
This goes with many of the characters, most of whom are underwritten (I
suspect there's a big-ass director's cut somewhere, where everyone gets a
chance to grow - but I'm sure there's not many people who want to see it). 
Take for instance Morgan Freeman's character, an ex-slave who's now a
civilian/abolitionist (working with another abolitionist, played by the
great Stellan Skarsgĺrd, now of "Good Will Hunting" fame): he never grows
throughout and the main reason he seems to be there, other than for
historical accuracy perhaps, is so that there can be a few scenes where he
remembers the pain of being a slave.  That's it.
In fact, many characters can be summed up in either very short sentences or
mere words.  Nigel Hawthorne's current President Van Buren is sheepish,
since he has to try and not create a Civil War and also hold a good
contract with Spain (headed by young Queen Isabella, played by Anna Paquin
who has a small monologue); Jeremy Northam's judge in the second trial is
nervous but trying to appear confident; David Paymer's Secretary John
Forsyth is ignorant; and Pete Postlethwaite's prosecuting attorney is
stubborn.  And for "comic relief," look to Austin Pendleton as a Professor
who's forte is African languages, who stutters just as much as he usually
does, and to the same effect (I love that guy).
As for Djumon Hounsou, he's very intense as Cinqué, showing him as
sometimes pissed off, sometimes saddened, sometimes bewildered.  Some say
he should have received an Oscar nomination for his performance, but just
remember that this year had so many strong performances that you can't
acknowledge them all.  Regardless, Hounsou has a strong film presence, one
that attracts sympathy for his character.
But the one actor who REALLY walks away with his role is Anthony Hopkins,
who DID get an Oscar nomination for his performance as the crotchety,
somewhat bitter, and incredibly intelligent ex-President John Quincy Adams,
who has the most characterization in the film, sometimes shown in scenes
that he's not even in (one of my favorites was one where a bunch of
Presidential advisors discussed how the only great thing about him was that
his father was a great president).  Hopkins not only emerges as a scene
stealer in all of his scenes, but also gives one of the best courtroom
speeches in any film.  Sure, it goes on for 11 minutes, but it's so well
done, so underempahsized by the music (the score is one of Williams' most
overbearing), and so fascinating that I almost wanted to applaud
afterwards.  And I almost did.
What I really didn't feel like applauding after, or even really cheering
over (though I did smile) was the final verdict.  Sure, the music stirs up,
people get pissed off, and many others dance in happiness (McConaughey
jumps up and down like he was moshing), but for some odd reason I could not
really feel that emotionally moved.  Maybe it was because it was the third
time this verdict had been read in the film.  Maybe it was because the
vedict wasn't monumental.  It only affected a small group of people.  In
the beginning of the film, Van Buren replies to a message about the trial
with a quick "There are over 100,000 slaves (or something) living in the
U.S; why should I care about 40 (or so)?"  Sure, he sounded cruel when he
said it, but at least he was being honest.
Yet during the ending when they were showing close-ups of characters in the
film and summing up their lives afterwards in short paragraphs, I couldn't
help but feel moved for Cinqué when the title said that he returned to his
land in Africa to find it destroyed and his family gone, maybe being
captured into slavery.  Why did it move me?  Probably because it was
personal.  It affected one person.  The film has a way of not getting to
grand and not getting to personal with its message throughout.  Maybe if it
had picked one of these instead of lingering in moderation, it may have
been great.  Maybe it could have been almost as good as "Schindler's List."
Still, "Amistad" is educational, powerful, and intriguing throughout.  The
film's 2 1/2 hours are leisurely but never tedious, and there are so many
great moments in the film...let me ammend that a bit: so many great real
moments in the film, like clips of slaves been drowned on the slave ships
by being tied to a bunch of rocks and pulled to the ocean floor, or a bunch
of slaves in captivity and a newborn baby being held above them...things
like this that make "Amistad" worth seeing.  It suceeds on many levels, but
doesn't suceed on being magnificent.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some years ago it became fashionable in politically correct
circles to denigrate some American heroes.  Thus, Columbus
did not deserve annual veneration for discovering us but
rather defamation for prompting the wholesale slaughter of
the people who discovered America long before.  And what
about Jefferson's relationship with a black slave and George
Washington's ownership of same?  Was Lincoln hypocritical in
putting the union ahead of simple morality?  
   Just the other day we hear that some American high
schools have changed their designation because their
namesakes were tainted with ownership of vassals from
Africa.  Now, there is a Martin Van Buren High School in
Queens, New York, that has had no thoughts of alterations. 
Not until now.  According to a new, bold, in-your-face, epic
movie directed by Steven Spielberg, President Van Buren was
guilty of kowtowing to southern slaveholding interests.  In this
film, "Amistad," Van Buren attempts to fix a court case which,
if decided as he wished, would condemn forty-four black men
imprisoned in New Haven to execution in Cuba or Spain.
   "Amistad," filmed largely in the area of Newport, Rhode
Island with a design resembling the New Haven of the 1830s,
deals with an actual incident that occurred during that period
which strangely enough has not received any attention in
high-school or college history texts.  Any schoolchild can tell
you about the Nat Turner revolt, but if the incidents depicted
in this movie are truly based on actual occurrences, the
Amistad affair would be significantly more important, striking,
and alarming.  Spielberg unfolds the tale of a Spanish ship
ironically called Amistad (friendship) which is transporting
newly-purchased slaves from Havana to their new homes. 
When Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), a charismatic, larger-than-
life prisoner, manages to find the key to unlock the chains
binding him and his fellows, the newly-freed prisoners mutiny
and slaughter all whites aboard except for the two men who
have bought them: these two buy time by promising to guide
the ship back to Africa, but instead wander for two months up
the American coast until it is captured by an American naval
vessel off Connecticut.  The forty-four men are imprisoned
and held for trial on several counts of murder.  The general
belief is that if they are returned to Havana or sent to the
Spain of Isabella II, they will be executed there.
   The film is part courtroom scene, with segments devoted to
incidents on two slave ships, one Spanish, the other
Portuguese.  While Spielberg's audience will be composed
(hopefully) largely of kids in secondary schools and below, the
director-producer does not shrink from displaying graphic
violence.  The opening shots are particularly riveting, as
Cinque, breathing heavily and bleeding from all fingers,
endeavors to pry loose the key to his chains.  The massacre
of the Spaniards is graphically presented down to the severe
stabbing received by one hapless fellow at the hands of the
involuntary cargo.  In yet another grim vista, Portuguese
slavetraders are shown chaining fifty prisoners to a sack of
stones and throwing the human payload overboard to drown
when provisions were running low.  (We are told that this was
the practice as well when the Europeans had to destroy
evidence of their illegal sailing.)  
   At the trials of the black men both in Federal District Court
in New Haven and before the U.S. Supreme Court, much is
bandied about of the paramount desire of people for their
freedom. As the press notes say, "Freedom cannot be given./
It is our right, at birth./ But there are moments in time/ when it
must be taken."  Yet the case turned not on epic moral issues
like liberty but on a purely technical consideration.  Were
these men who are being shipped into involuntary servitude
actually born in Cuba of parents who were themselves slaves,
or were they taken forcibly from their homes in Africa?  If the
former, then they indeed were legally taken and could be
returned to Cuba for execution.  If, however, they were
abducted as free men from Africa, those who transported
them were engaging in illegal practices, as the trading of
slaves was barred by both the English who had colonies in
Africa and by the Americans, who maintained slavery in some
states but prohibited their continued transoceanic exchanges. 
If the trade were carried out illegally, the treaty between the
U.S. and Spain agreeing to return cargoes of property would
not be relevant.
   Much of this techno-legal information may be missed by an
audience attending the film to grasp the conspicuous
spectacle of the horrors of the slave trade.  In fact, some
background in history and politics would help quite a bit in
deciphering the practical issues dealt with by Spielberg and
his wonderful cast of characters.  In much the way that film-
makers use particular locations to simulate the look of a
historical period, Spielberg has filled the screen with British
performers, recognizing that the principal settlers in the
America approaching the mid-century period were of Northern
European stock.  Thus Anthony Hopkins shucks his English
accept for that of the New England speech of former
president John Q. Adams and Nigel Hawthorne assumes the
role of the incumbent president, Martin Van Buren, who is
raked across the coals by Spielberg.  Pete Postlethwaite
casts off the goody-goody role he assumed in "Brassed Off"
to take on the role of prosecutor who insists that the prisoners
be returned to their Spanish owners.
   Perhaps the most complex character of the movie is that of
real estate attorney Roger Baldwin, played by Matthew
McConaughey, who is featured with reading glasses
suspended on the tip of his nose as a practical lawyer-turned
idealist.  Believing that his specialty has particular relevance
since the case dealt with property, he undergoes a
transformation into a visionary who sees his clients as real
human beings with the same need for liberation as any white
person would require.  Spielberg, adapting a sharply-drawn
script by David Franzoni, draws upon other subtleties as well,
as when he contrasts two abolitionists.  Theodore Joadson
(Morgan Freeman), a former slave who is prominent in the
abolitionist cause, becomes infuriated when a fellow
abolitionist, Lewis Tappan (Stellan Skarsgard) suggests that
the anti-slavery crusade might be strengthened if the black
men were executed and thus turned into martyrs.  Anna
Paquin has fun with the role of the eleven-year-old monarch
ruling over Spain, a pre-pubescent, amoral potentate who in
one scene jumps gaily on her bed with a doll in her arms and
in another writes spirited memos back to Secretary of State
Forsyth insisting that the black men be returned to Spain.  
   Cinematographer Janusz Kaminski does a particularly fine
job in contrasting the glitter of the White House during a state
dinner with the muted colors of shipboard mayhem while
Spielberg evokes particular poignancy with the problems that
two groups can encounter when faced with a language gap. 
Significantly, much of the dialogue of the Mende people (who,
not surprisingly speak Mende) goes untranslated, leaving the
audience with the task of figuring out what is being
communicated by Cinque and those of his tribe.  Language
differences do indeed put some people on Venus while others
are on Mars.
   While "Amistad" highlights true ensemble acting, Djimon
Hounsou stands out as the ferocious, freedom-loving leader
Cinque, whose glaring eyes and untamed body language do
justice to what Anthony Hopkins insists--in his monologue
before the Supreme Court--is man's greatest need: freedom. 
Hounsou, a native of Benin who moved to Paris, has turned
out a career-making performance as the central figure of the
movie, one which will educate the audience about slavery in
much the way the "Schindler's List" schooled viewers about
the horrors of the Holocaust.  To say that "Amistad" should be
required in every high-school social studies class is not to
take away from its value as spectacular entertainment. 
"Amistad" is a picture you will not want to forego.  Not Yet
Rated.  Running Time: 153 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Dreamworks)
Directed by     Steven Spielberg
Written by      David Franzoni
Cast            Djimon Hounsou, Matthew McConaughey, Morgan Freeman,
                Anthony Hopkins, Nigel Hawthorne, Stellan Skarsgard,
                David Paymer, Pete Postlethwaite, Anna Paquin
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for violence and nudity)
Running Time    157 minutes
Reviewed at     The Rialto Theatre, Raleigh, NC (25DEC97)
     AMISTAD is a bit of a sit.  Seemingly shooting for another SCHIN-
DLER'S, Steven Spielberg only halfway hits the mark with this fascinat-
ing but emotionally under-involving 19th Century history lesson.  He
nails the slave ship sequences, to be sure-- they're as riveting as
anything you'll see this season.  Too bad they occupy no more than 20 or
30 minutes of screen time, tops.  The rest is talky courtroom stuff,
with a bit of punchy humor, here and there, in each culture's reaction
to the other.  (Particularly choice is the African take on Christian-
ity.)  The period detail is excellent and the actors are quite good,
even if the cast is populated by a few too many familiar faces.  (Look,
there's Stellan Skarsgard from GOOD WILL HUNTING!  Look, there's Daniel
von Bargen from THE POSTMAN!)  Most jarring is John William's score,
which intrudes to the point of embarrassment.  (The "give us free" mo-
ment is particularly painful.)  Schmaltz has its place in many Spielberg
movies, but not this one.  With Djimon Hounsou, Matthew McConaughey,
Morgan Freeman, Nigel Hawthorne, David Paymer, Pete Postlethwaite, and
in a small but critical role, Anthony Hopkins as John Quincy Adams.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
When Stephen Spielberg took a break from creating rampaging dinosaurs, hungry
sharks or wacky aliens, he came up with Schindlers List.  Now his second
serious film is Amist-ake, which destroys part of his reputation as an
unbridled genius of the directing industry.
Onboard the ship La Amistad (in 1839), 53 African slaves whom were held captive
take over the ship and viciously slaughter all but two of the crew.  Intending
to go back to Africa, they are tricked by the white survivors and end up on the
coast of Long Island.  The Africans are soon captured and charged with murder.
The question is, whom do they belong to?  Are they the property of the people
who purchased them, various governments whom own the lands they have been on  or
do they have the rights to their own freedom?
Abolitionists Theodore Joadson (Morgan Freeman) and businessman Lewis Tappan
(Stellan Skarsgerd) hire young real estate lawyer Roger Baldwin (Matthew
McConaughey) to defend their case.  This seemingly insignificant trial becomes a
symbol of human rights, and as Baldwin desperately tries to defend the Africans
their situation becomes ever more complicated with communication problems and
the threat of civil war if the slaves are released.
Led by Cinque (Djimon Hounsou), the Africans learn about different aspects of
American society as President Martin Van Buren (Nigel Hawthorne) wishes to
sacrifice them to please other world leaders including the 11 year old Queen
Isabella of Spain (Anna Paquin). Former President John Quincy Adams (Anthony
Hopkins)  a son of one of the founding fathers, helps defend them after much
persuasion when the case is taken to the Supreme Court. What kind of a land is
this, Cinque questions, Where you almost mean what you say? Where laws almost
work?
The real problem with Amistad is not that it fails to achieve brilliance or
potency, its that it does so very sparsely. When we are treated to its
occasional moments of gripping cinema they serve as a reminder of what should
have been rather than what Spielberg delivers on a continuous basis.
Anthony Hopkins performance as the wise John Quincy Adams is simply stunning
and the obvious highlight of the film; he looks and sounds so impressive that
Amistads viewing quality sky rockets whenever he takes the spotlight.  I would
go as far to say that he deserves an Oscar for this stellar performance  but
unfortunately his screen time is limited.  As for Morgan Freeman, this is the
first time I have ever seen him looking like an out of work actor desperately
seeking some lines to recite.
Djimon Hounsou is the only other main actor worthy of a mention, but is often
very annoying to watch as the use of sub titles is very inconsistent.  Half the
time we understand what he is saying (that is, when it is convenient), and the
other half he sounds like a wild ape rambling on about something to do with
freedom.  This is not an insult to the African language, but rather to
Spielbergs awkward choice of communication to the audience.  And John Williams
(whose composer credits include all three Star Wars films, Schindlers List and
Jurassic Park) music score is noticeably annoying and often far too
overpowering.
As an educational video, Amistad would be excellent.  But as a motion picture,
it teases us with a magnificent story put together in a far too ordinary way.
All through the films two and a half hours we are never quite sure whose story
it is  the characters of Cinque, John Quincy Adams and Roger Baldwin all have
interesting stories to tell yet Spielberg doesnt give any of them enough time.
This may sound terrible, but it is my opinion that American people will probably
appreciate Amistad more than most others.  After all, everyone likes to be
reminded that their country has made the right decision at one stage or another.
If this was a tactic that Spielberg used to disguise a fairly weak film, it sure
as hell didnt work on me.
2 stars out of 5
A film that doesnt give its fascinating true story the credit it deserves

