Title
Review for Nightflyers (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Kimiye Tipton
     I read the George R. R. Martin novella last year and was looking forward
to the movie.  He seemed to have taken the best ideas from ALIEN and 2001 and
combined them with a drawing room murder mystery--not the most original science
fiction but great drama.
     Unfortunately, I couldn't even recognize his novella in NIGHTFLYERS.
Instead of interesting and different female characters, we got three women who
looked so much alike I couldn't figure out who was supposed to be whom (all
blond, beautiful cheerleader types).  The male characters went to the other
extreme, with emphasis on physical differences (giant black chef, diminutive
blond wimp) rather than character.
     The special effects seemed decently done (I admit I wasn't concentrating)
but the logic of what occurred was absent.  I was too appalled at people
without spacesuits conversing in a spaceship with the hull breached above them
to notice whether the underpinnings were showing.
     But it was the ambience of the movie that proved to be the most crushingly
boring part.  Maybe we could call it spaghetti space opera.  It's that dark,
monotonous pacing that I associate with poorly dubbed Italian s-f or horror
movies (the kind Commander USA features).  I began wishing for major faux pas
so I could find *something* to enjoy in this picture.  Well, there was one
howler when a couple of women were trying to break into the ship's computer,
getting garbled machine language, and one of them suggested, "Look for a menu!"
     This is the kind of film that gives science fiction a bad name.  I rate it
2.5 on a scale of 10.  Don't even rent the video (probably due next month).
Kimiye  {ihnp4, ulysses, houxm, clyde, cpsc6a, mtune, moss}!ablnc!kimi

Author
Mike Caplinger
     You'd think I'd have learned after DUNE and 2010 that Hollywood is usually
incapable of transforming a science fiction work to the screen without trashing
it.  Still, both DUNE and 2010 had their moments.  So when I read about a year
back that George R. R. Martin's novella "Nightflyers" was being made into a
movie, I was awaiting it with some anticipation.
     I needn't have bothered.  There are a number of liberties I expected would
be taken with the novella.  For example, Martin's heroine is a black, very
athletic woman--though her being black was an incidental in her society, so the
casting of Mary Catherine Stewart was perhaps forgivable--as were the name
changes and the almost total disappearance of the enormously detailed
background universe that gives a Martin story an extra enjoyment.  In fact, in
general I have no complaints with the casting, the name changes, or the
illogical throwaway moving of the story's timeframe into the 21st Century.
     But they ruined and bastardized the plot.  Even the massive amount of
violence present in the novella, while still here in large part, is made
completely gratuitous--few of the violent events from the novella even happen.
And the subtle interplay of the characters' personalities, which made the
novella so terrific, is gone here.  The most glaring omission is the absence of
the heroine's superior generic makeup (though at least they didn't make her a
screamer).
     The special effects are poor by today's standards, but if they had gone
with the resources they had, casting, sets, and all, the producers could have
made a credible film version of "Nightflyers."  What they did make is celluloid
trash.  And what they did to the Volcryn!
     I'll be interested in seeing what people who aren't Martin fans think of
this film; I think it's poor by anyone's standards, but I've been a Martin fan
for a long, long time.  I give this film 0.5 stars out of 4.
     I'd like to hear the story behind this film's scripting.  I hope Martin
got a good deal for the rights, because he couldn't have been involved
afterwards.
     By the way: the main theme of the movie is a note-for-note steal of one of
the themes from BLADE RUNNER.  If I were Vangelis I'd sue, but I don't think
this turkey is going to make any money.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  An incompetent adaptation of a mediocre
     novella add up to a must-miss science fiction film.  Besides
     seeing how someone managed to turn an obviously inadequate
     special effects budget into an impressive set of effects,
     this film has little going for it--certainly not the
     characters.  Rating: -1.
     I was recently discussing the new "Star Trek" series with some fans who
were unhappy with it.  The series is certainly weak in ideas and my friends'
solution was to solicit stories from established science fiction writers.  I
was somewhat doubtful that a good story in incompetent hands would stay good
for very long; I remember the disappointment of seeing DUNE.  I think
another case in point of at least a fair story that did not fare well in the
transition to screen is "Nightflyers."  George R. R. Martin (who is a pretty
good writer) wrote the novella on which the film was based.  Admittedly, it
is not his best work but it deserved a better shake than it got in this weak
and boring adaptation.
     The story deals with an expedition to a celestial phenomenon which may
or may not be connected with a hypothetical alien race called the Volcryn.
The Nightflyer, the craft for the expedition, is piloted by a crew of one, a
mysterious young captain seen to the other members of the expedition only as
a life-sized hologram that can appear whenever and wherever he (it?) wants.
Then mysterious things start happening and people start getting killed and
the travelers suddenly have more to think about than an alien race.
     Well, that doesn't sound too bad.  That is all taken from Martin's
novella and this adaptation is at least Hollywood's idea of "faithful to the
original story," which is to say, yeah, much of the plot is there and the
plot of the film is more like the source story than it is like any other
story or film that comes to mind.  (Any better than that and you start
calling it a "literal adaptation.")
     So the story is recognizably Martin's "Nightflyers" and I will say one
more good thing for it: it has cheap special effects done really well.
Someone very intelligently knows how to get 4/5 the quality of effect at 1/5
the cost.  For that and other reasons I was reminded more than once of DARK
STAR.  But there is where my charitable feelings toward NIGHTFLYERS end
abruptly.
     I have rarely seen a bunch of characters I cared less about.  I started
counting the number left alive the way I used to count the days left till
summer vacation.  With the exception of the expedition cook, the characters
are developed pretty much by how they argue with each other.  The direction
is nearly humorless and you watch through the whole film without them ever
showing any personality at all.  The hero should be something like Ripley in
ALIEN, but instead she looks like a lawyer's wife who has just stepped out
of the beauty parlor, with her high heels, her frosted lipstick, and her big
earrings.  The captain looks like a 1980s rock star, complete with earring.
Much of the wardrobe and all of the hairstyles are from the late 1980s in
spite of the 21st Century setting.  The science was laughable (if they let
the air out of the ship it would implode; noisy, smoking explosions in a
vacuum--that sort of thing).  The continuity was confusing and error-ridden.
I know I would not want to fly a spaceship that uses burning torches and
candles for lighting.  The film even picks up a major fault of the story:
the audience can figure out what is going on much faster than the people on
the ship.  This is an amateur film which makes a lot of amateur mistakes.
Rate it a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
