Title
Review for Beguiled, The (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
A chamber piece of Southern Gothic by director Don Siegel.  It marks an 
intersection point between his films with Clint Eastwood and his 
made-for-television horror movies.  It's also interesting to note that even 
though Westerns dominated Eastwood's screen persona for many years, he and 
Siegel only ever made one such film together.  That aside, some Western 
motif would  usually work its way in to the Siegel-Eastwood productions: in 
COOGAN'S BLUFF Eastwood wears a cowboy hat; in DIRTY HARRY he is the 
modern-day equivalent of a marshal determined to clean up his town.  THE 
BEGUILED also has the feel of a Western to it: there are armed horsemen, 
shootouts, a feeling of lawlessness, and an opening montage of sepia 
photographs titled in the lettering we associate with Wells Fargo, saloons, 
and wanted posters (in this film Eastwood is a 'wanted' man in more ways 
than one).
THE BEGUILED is set during the last days of the Civil War.  Eastwood plays 
against type as a disheveled Union soldier hiding from rebel patrols.  He 
makes his way to the remnants of a girls' school which harbors a few 
students, two teachers and a servant, all female.  The severity of his 
wounds confine Eastwood to a bed and crutches for practically the entire 
film; despite this he tries to exercise some control over his environment.  
Eastwood is obliging, assured, and laconic, as we would expect him to be, 
but none of his screen adversaries to date could have prepared him for the 
trouble he has in store.  The school is a powderkeg of repression: he 
attracts the interest of a woman with an incestuous past, a sexually active 
teen flirt, a 12-year old with an irrational crush, and an inexperienced 
young woman who yearns for true love.  Crippled by his injuries and unable 
to leave the school, Eastwood begins playing one off against the other, 
delivering all sorts of false promises.  We're used to Eastwood playing a 
hero, so we accept his casual words and silky delivery without really 
questioning it.  He is, after all, a wounded enemy soldier doing what he can 
to stay alive.  But soon it becomes apparent that we don't know if Eastwood 
is capable of ever speaking the truth, even with the most incidental of 
remarks.
Despite the obvious sexual politicking going on in the film I don't see 
Eastwood's character as being misogynistic so much as opportunistic.  He 
turns brutish only after he gets drunk one time, and then becomes apologetic 
soon after.  By this time, however, we've become so accustomed to his 
convincing 'sincerity' that it's too late for him to earn any further 
credibility with either us or the rest of the characters in the film.  The 
story's ending isn't exactly problematic - it's almost a foregone conclusion 
- but while we don't feel sorry for what happens to Eastwood, we don't feel 
satisfied either.  It's this ambivalence, and the fact that Eastwood doesn't 
play an action hero, that caused cinema audiences to pass this by upon first 
release.  Siegel's direction and Bruce Surtees' lighting (diffused and 
pretty outside, unobtrusive and dim inside) make this look like a Hammer 
horror movie - that's probably to prepare you for one scene, late in the 
film, that will make your toes curl.  I like to imagine the odd goings-on in 
this house taking place just down the road apiece from an oblivious Scarlett 
O'Hara who is meanwhile preoccupied with her own romantic problems.  Maybe 
she should have dropped in on Eastwood, too.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com.
