Title
Review for SubUrbia (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SUBURBIA * 1/2 Directed by Richard Linklater. Written by Eric Bogosian, from
his play. Photography, Lee Daniel. Editing Sandra Adair;. Production design
Catherine Hardwicke.Cast: Jayce Bartok (Pony), Amie Carey (Sooze), Nicky
Katt (Tim), Ajay Naidu (Nazeer), Parker Posey (Erica), Giovanni Ribisi
(Jeff), Samia Shoaib (Pakeesa), Dina Spybey (Bee-Bee) and Steve Zahn
(Buff), et al. A Sony Pictures Classics Release of a Castle Rock
Production. 118 minutes. Not rated.
(deserves a strong R for foul language)
Texas-born Richard Linklater is a true-blue cinephile who left the
University of Texas after two years,  returned to Austin after two more,
founded the Austin Film Society, made Super-8 movies and the feature-length
"It's Impossible to Learn to Plow by Reading Books" (1988), unseen by the
public. The title smacks of an alibi for unfinished studies.  I believe
fervently in true education but I am also familiar with  academic
prententiousness, bla bla, and Jargonauts. So I am neither for nor against
Linklater's dictum.
I am a great fan of Linklater the filmmaker who has charted young people so
cleverly . "Slacker," hs firt released feature, popularized the term as the
film followed a huge variety of hangers on in Austin with deft sketches,
goodhearted irony and a para-Godardian style that was also genuinely
Linklaterian.
"Dazed and Confused" (1993) recreated the last day of high school among
1976 students. The generation was the identity-less, post-Vietnam one,
poised between the hippie, idealistic, politicized, psychedelic 60s and
early 70s, and the pragmatic, Me-Me 80s. Linklater followed the kids like
an experienced anthropologist. Though less ironical than in "Slacker" he
did not spare us the inner emptiness of the youths, but without judging or
taking sides he sifted nicely the mavericks from the herd, showed cool
understanding and regaled us with much droll footage.
"Before Sunrise" (1995), was the meeting of strangers on a train, a French
woman and an American man, both 23.  Their brief encounter lasted well
under 24 hours.Uncannily catching the sights and moods of Vienna, it added
to the influence  of Jean-Luc Godard that of  Eric Rohmer and even Jacques
Rivette, yet Linklater remained once more his own, original man.
"SubUrbia" is preciously spelled with a capital U for no reason I can
detect except that it sounds like a burp. The characters are contemporary
20-somethings; the place is an invented town in Texas (shot in Austin); the
film's time is again limited from an early evening to the next morning; the
locus is a suburban convenience shop's parking lot where five pals, mostly
same-high-school graduates, congregate. Whether or not they have temporary
jobs they are innate slackers, but slackers who are not interesting,
amusing or touching. More or less nihilistic, they suffer from delayed
adolescent angst, drink, smoke, are dazed and confused, and talk talk talk,
getting drunk on words and booze. They also beleaguer the young Pakistani
owners of the store, often in racist ways.
Jeff comes closest to being the central character. He philosophizes
nebulously, has existential and identity problems. Tim  received an
honorable discharge from the  Air Force after  he "accidentally" sliced a
bit of his finger.  He has a chip on his shoulder and much booze in his
system. Buff is an unbearably obnoxious, jerky, clowning loudmouth who
vaguely thinks of making videos. A spike-haired female called Sooze is no
souse but Jeff's girl-friend who wants to become a performance artist in
New York. She gives her pals a terrible sample performance  of mostly
four-letter vituperations. Her personal friend Bee-Bee, a fragile,
recovering alcoholic, is younger and  outside the clan.
The shiftless quintet has gathered partly to wait for the visit of former
classmate Pony who has broken into MTV. Nothing major, but enough to
qualify him for a chauffeur-driven limo and an accompanying publicist,
rich, spoiled Californian Erica. Following this Waiting for Godot spell
come reactions, permutations, jealousies, ingratiations, other tortured and
tortuous relationships, more inane talk.  No matter how much they pose as
desperate or soulful  characters or whatever, they remain cardboardishly
flat.   Particularly frustrating is  the case of Jeff  who has potential
but whose omphaloscopy makes him a kvetcher without a cause.
The movie has no closure, which is OK, but works in blurry red herrings
that toy with the audience, which is not OK. Vagueness is all. Speech and
behavior may be accurately imitating life among certain types, but the
species are indifferent and unappealing. (I suspect that in real life the
boys would smell like Parisian "clochards.") Some youths wallow in
self-pity, others get irrationally or stupidly aggressive. others yet are
plain dumb. The prevailing non-thinking is that society sucks, but no one
dreams of doing anything about it.
Watch "60 Minutes" and its investigations show you see vividly how much
rottenness there is in this world.  Our parking-lot denizens, however,
never pinpoint  anything specific. And we are left in the dark about the
backgrounds of the characters, their families, the influences on them. At
the very least, and by omission, the situation is no compliment to home
life, school life or American life in general.
For what they attempt to represent -- a dysfunctional segment of young
America-the actors are good and well-directed. But the script is one of
weak opportunism  --this from Eric Bogosian of, among others,  "Talk Radio"
fame.  A few flashes of behavior, action, dialogue and monologue shed no
light. We can only react with "OK, guys,  you're alienated, I'm sorry. So
what else is new?"  Before we start caring for them, they would need a
brain transplant, and we would need a Florence Nightingale or Mother Teresa
heart.
It is sad to be negative after years of admiration for Linklater's movies,
but the truth is that "SubUrbia" 's two hours are as boring as watching the
grass grow. Except that this grass also keeps making irritating, loud
sounds. And when it's up, it's not fescue but crab-grass.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Linklater
Writer: Eric Bogosian
Starring: Giovanni Ribissi, Steve Zahn, Amie Carey, Nicky Katt, Jayce 
Bartok, Parker Posey, Dina Spybey, Ajay Naidu, Samia Shoaib
Richard Linklater's fourth film, following "Slacker," "Dazed and 
Confused," and "Before Sunrise," is much like his previous efforts - 
they all depict slackers in a lovable fashion, allowing them to talk; 
all take place within a day (mostly night); and all are good.  However, 
"subUrbia" takes a whole new stance on the whole slacker-brand idealism 
- it's just a waste of life.
The characters in this film hang out at the Cicle-A gas station, the 
place where people fuel up and then go on with their lives.  Here, these 
guys are stuck at the gas station, just hovering around, wasting time 
and talking about all the things they're gonna do with their lives 
occasionally.  Of course, that's all they do is talk, but never act on 
them unless they absolutely have to.  Linklater has always viewed these 
guys as idealistic in that bad way, but he has never presented it in 
this kind of honest and dark fashion.
The pretty-much-understood protagonist is Jeff (Giovanni Ribissi, the 
first drummer in "That Thing You Do!" who broke his arm), a clueless 
slacker who has no clue what he wants to do and feels content in the 
fact that he knows this.  He is dating the multi-color-haired Sooze (Amy 
Carey), an also clueless future performance artist (who's bit "Burger 
Manifesto Part 1" is classic) who wants to move to New York, much to the 
dismay of Jeff, but is pretty much set in just saying "I'll get there 
someday."
There's also Sooze's best bud, Bee Bee (Dina Spybey, on "Men Behaving 
Badly" now), who has just gotten out of rehab, but is totally shaky and 
feels isolated from everybody.  She gets some consolation from Jeff and 
from Buff (Steve Zahn, also from "That Thing You Do!," but in a much 
bigger role), a hyperkinetic jokester who seems to be eternally drunk 
and on a combination of hash and speed, causing him to always be 
attracting attention.
Then there's Tim (Nicky Katt, one of the slain rednecks in "A Time to 
Kill").  Tim was in the Air Force but was honorably discharged so he can 
work on his alcoholism and nihilation.  He's the creepiest and most 
dangerous of them all because he presents the fact that the American 
dream is dead and becomes the big annoyance for everyone by sadistically 
preying on every single character's insecurities.
As far as the American Dream goes, it's represented by two Pakistanis 
who own the Circle-A (the first time I've seen a Pakistani owning 
American property in a non-comical role).  They are the married young 
couple, Nazeer and Pakeesa (Ajay Naidu and Samia Shoaib, respectively), 
and Ajay has two years left before he has completed his engineering 
degree.  He represents how people can further themselves, but is held up 
for contrast to the slackers who do nothing with their lives but bitch 
and complain and talk about how they're Americans and are somehow owed 
something.  Ajay also utters the devastating words that wrap up the film 
at the end.
There is no real plot, just talking, which just orchestrates that these 
people have nothing to do but talk.  The only kind of narrativeness 
comes in the form of a guy named Pony (Jayce Bartok), who was their 
friend back in the day but became a big rock-star.  He's not presented 
as a jerk or anything, but as a guy who has actually taken the time to 
work hard and, for some odd reason, wants to just lay back and do 
nothing for a night.  He's rather clueless himself - at one point he 
meanders about a subject, just as an excuse to have them tell him to 
play his music.  He whines about how his life is hard and how it's 
turned into just "Hotel, concert, airport," and etc, etc, whatever and 
ever amen.
Some things happen, couples become rearranged in the spirit of "A 
Midsummer Night's Dream," and in the end, they're all viewed as a bunch 
of losers who need to be given a shot of motivation or self worth.  The 
suburbia of the title refers to a kind of enclosed prison where they 
don't have to care about anything, but always have a quick-e-mart of 
some kind to hang out at and do nothing.
The film is wonderfully acted, with standouts by Ribissi, Zahn, and 
Katt.  But the whole cast works wonderfully.  We even get Parker Posey 
(who's been in, like, 30 films in 3 years) as Pony's journalist or 
something who's just along for the ride so she can get laid, no matter 
what slacker it is.  The cast has a lot to say, and they all give the 
dialogue in the most human manner and all play off eachother 
wonderfully.  I haven't seen large-group chemistry like this 
since..."Dazed and Confused."
The writing is also very well done.  Eric Bosogian has a knack for 
writing great dialogue, dialogue that is speakable and fun to listen to. 
 There's a ton of great lines and jokes, and all the characters are 
cleverly constructed.  But some of the lines are very satirical and 
don't seem like a normal person would say them.  But this isn't reality 
anyway.  It's a surreal kind of landscape of nihilism and 
self-destruction.
While Bogosian paints his characters as all being schmucks (except for 
the two Pakistanis), Linklater presents them in a loveable vein, causing 
them to kind of mirror us.  It's some of us on the screen, but we would 
only say some of the stuff if we're really being honest.  It somehow 
works.
And Linklater always seems to find the perfect everything for a scene.  
The whole film doesn't take place at the Circle-A; it ventures out 
everywhere in the bleak suburbia.  The mood and tone are dark and 
foreboding, like you know something bad is going to happen.  He 
carefully constucts everything, almost making it like stalled time for 
the characters to waste their lives.  It's never boring, kind of like 
listening to Spalding Gray talk, but more satirical (yet just as 
rewarding).
"subUrbia" is a very fantastically done film that not only proves that 
Rick Linklater is one of the finest young American directors, but also 
that we idealistic slackers who think if we think long enough, we'll 
suddenly come out kosher dill are all just wasting our lives.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
subURBIA
(Sony Classics/Castle Rock)
Starring:  Giovanni Ribisi, Nicky Katt, Amie Carey, Steve Zahn, Jayce
Bartok, Parker Posey, Dina Spybey, Ajay Naidu.
Screenplay:  Eric Bogosian, based on his stage play.
Producer:  Anne Walker-McBay.
Director:  Richard Linklater.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, brief nudity)
Running Time:  118 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In the production notes for subURBIA, director Richard Linklater
comments on his working relationship with writer Eric Bogosian that "we
decided somewhere along the way we were separated at birth," to which I
can only add that the nurse in question must have known what she was
doing.  No two sensibilities could be more dissimilar -- Bogosian the
high-energy Easterner and Linklater the laid-back Texan -- even when
addressing similar subject matter.  subURBIA is a frequently compelling
film, but there is a terribly fragmented feel to it.  While Linklater's
natural affection for his characters' generational anxieties gives the
story much of its charm, he frequently finds himself fighting with a
writer who seems to despise those characters.
     subURBIA takes place during one night in the generic (and poetically
named) American suburb of Burnfield, where a group of friends gathers as
they have gathered so many nights before by a corner convenience store.
Among them are Jeff (Giovanni Ribisi), a cynical would-be writer and
part-time community college student; Sooze (Amie Carey), Jeff's girlfriend
and aspiring performance artist; Tim (Nicky Katt), a surly Air Force
drop-out; Buff (Jeff Zahn), a hyper-kinetic pizza restaurant employee; and
Bee-Bee (Dina Spybey), Sooze's friend recently released from a rehab
clinic.  What makes this night different is the return of Pony (Jayce
Bartok), a former classmate now making it big as a rock star and visiting
town with his publicist Erica (Parker Posey) for a concert.  The friends
wander the night in search of entertainment, responding to Pony's presence
and dealing with the lack of direction in their lives.
     The opening images of subURBIA show an endless stream of tract houses
and strip malls, peppered with construction sites building even more of
the same.  Linklater films it almost as one uninterrupted drive-by take, a
numbing panorama of monotony representing a world which seems designed to
destroy imagination, and it suggests that the director's rage, such as it
is, is directed at the place rather than at the people.  The characters in
subURBIA were raised by parents who viewed the placid comfort of their
surroundings as the achievement of a dream and instilled that same idea in
their children.  While they realize that they want something different,
however, they young characters don't know what that something could be;
their souls lack the vocabulary to define their dreams in any other way
but "not this."
     Bogosian, on the other hand, is far less forgiving.  His script sets
up a counterpoint between the principal characters and Nazeer (Ajay
Naidu), the Pakistani immigrant whose family owns the convenience store
where the friends congregate.  In one blistering exchange, Nazeer mocks
Buff by noting that he will be an engineer after two more years of
college, while Buff and his friends will still be wasting their lives
sitting in front of convenience stores.  Nazeer also clashes with Tim,
whose racist tirades are an expression of his twisted sense of the way the
world ought to be.  It is Tim, the alcoholic who cut off part of his own
finger to get out of the service when he realized it was hard work, who
gets the film's best line, a brutal summation of Bogosian's disgust:  "I'm
an American; I'm owed something."  While Sooze plays at addressing
"issues" she knows nothing about and Jeff strips naked in an expression of
divine apathy, Bogosian can only shake his head at them through the words
of Nazeer:  "You people are so stupid.  You throw everything away."
     The schism between the perspectives of Linklater and Bogosian makes
subURBIA a film of mixed messages, but it is still worth watching thanks
to the talented cast members and some individual moments of genuine
clarity.  Dina Spybey is particularly affecting as Bee-Bee, who struggles
against a relapse after an unfortunate encounter with Buff; Steve Zahn
(THAT THING YOU DO!), who originated Buff on stage, channels what begins
as a Crispin Glover impression into a unique portrayal of blissful
oblivion.  The echoes of Glover call to mind another film about
disaffected youth, 1986's RIVER'S EDGE, but subURBIA is wittier and not
nearly as bleak.  Though you may find yourself wondering why these
characters would have been high school friends, the interaction between
them is almost always interesting enough to hold your attention.  The
problem is that, while your attention is held on those characters, you
can't get a handle on what you are supposed to think about them.  Critics
of films about Generation X-ers often repeat the criticisms of real-life
Generation X-ers, that they are merely whining children of privilege who
have never had to struggle for anything in their lives.  Bogosian is one
of those critics; Linklater seems intent on answering them.  subURBIA
would have been a more powerful film if between them they had chosen one
object of scorn:  suburbanites, or suburbia itself.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Director Linklater has at least two excellent films to his
credit, DAZED AND CONFUSED and the even better SLACKER.
However, subUrbia seems to be a variation on a theme and
this third time it tells us nothing new.   Using the same
cutesy upper and lower cases  in the title as in  Eric
Bogosian's play does nothing for the movie.
There are seven 20-year-olds  who have not a clue as to what
they should do with their lives or where they are heading.
This can lead to trouble and not surprisingly, it does. They
have nothing better to do than hang out each night in front
of a convenience store much to the annoyance of its owner, a
Pakistani, who feels their presence is driving away
potential customers.   Racism crops up when one of them has
had too much to drink.  One thing leads to another and none
of it is good as violence erupts.
The Pakistani husband is played by Ajay Naidu and his wife
is Samia Shoaib. The rest of the cast consists of Giovanni
Ribisi, Amie Carey, Jayce Bartok, Parker Posey, Nicky Katt,
Steve Zahn and Dina Spybey..

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "What are you doing now?" asks spaced out Buff (Steve Zahn) as he
hangs out one night outside the laundromat.  "I don't know," replies
his equally dazed friend Bee-Bee (Dina Spybey).  "You mean like now?
Like right now?  Waiting."
     The recent high school graduates in Burnfield are not having a
good time. Director Richard Linklater's marvelous picture BEFORE
SUNRISE (1995) was on my best of the year list in 1995.  Like it, his
new film SUBURBIA chronicles one night in the lives of its young
characters.
     Most of the film takes place outside the Circle A convenience
store where the young people in the story hang out to cuss and to get
drunk with their friends.  One of their sports is to taunt the young
man, Nazeer (Ajay Naidu), who owns the store since he is a Pakistani.
Tim (Nicky Katt) is the chief trouble maker and hurls racial epithets
at Nazeer for coming to this country.  Everyone in the show, including
Nazeer, is about twenty-years old.  Nazeer has worked his way up and
has two years left before his gets his engineering degree.  He tries in
vain to tell the other young people how they are wasting their lives.
     One woman with multicolor, porcupine hair, Sooze (Amie Carey), is
a painter and a performance artist.  She displays her "talent" to the
group.  She sings and tap dances a foul mouthed routine full of
adolescent angst, which she calls the "Burger Manifesto, Part I."  She
says it is about racism, sexism and environmentalism.  Her friend
claims that Sooze has never known any black people.  Racking her brain,
Sooze is finally able to think one.
     The philosopher of the group is Jeff (Giovanni Ribisi).  He claims
empathy for the oppressed, but Sooze laughs this off with, "you've
taken one night course about Nicaragua at a community college."
     In a show that has no narrative drive, the main event of the
evening occurs when their high school buddy Pony (Jayce Bartok) comes
back in his limo.  He had a hit record a year ago, and now he is a rock
star.  He brings along his mentor, Erica (Parker Posey).  Pony and
Erica hang out with the rest of the crew.  Pony agrees to sing his
latest song.  Prophetically, it starts, "I sound like an idiot."  Most
of the old gang resents Pony's success.  "I don't need a limousine to
know who I am," says Jeff.  "At least I know I don't know."
     The script of SUBURBIA by Eric Bogosian (TALK RADIO) is based on
his 1994 play of the same name.  Much of the dialog rings true, and yet
the characters he creates are not ones you would want to spend ten
minutes with, much less two hours.  Only Nazeer is a sympathetic
character.  Most of the characters Bogosian concocts are cliches.
Jeff, for example, makes a wide variety of crude sexual gestures and
lies about his sexual escapades to his buddies.
     Since the characters are close to parody, the story might have
been better if it had abandoned its pseudo-realism.  On the other hand,
many of the characters are so pathetic, the show could have been recast
into a tragedy.  As presented, it is a comedy that is sometimes funny
and sometimes insightful, but mainly tedious.
     Even if the acting is mediocre, the quality of the directing by
Richard Linklater comes through.  I think he did as much as he could to
make the story come alive.
     After the show meanders for about two hours, Bogosian throws in
its only creative tension with an ending out of left field.  The ending
is manipulative, but at least it signaled that my time with these
people was finally over.  I wish Nazeer well in his career as an
engineer.  He tells us that he is planning on leaving Burnfield when he
graduates.  Don't change your mind Nazeer.
     SUBURBIA runs way too long at 2:00.  It is rated R for alcohol
abuse by underage drinkers, sexual references, strong language, and
brief male frontal nudity.  Teenagers will probably like the show and
they and people in their twenties are probably the intended audience.
Still, I do not think the film is acceptable for teens unless they are
quite mature.  Although I had several good laughs, more often I was
bored so I give the film thumbs down and **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 2/97 (limited)
Running Length: 2:00
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Giovanni Ribisi, Steve Zahn, Amie Carey, Nicky Katt, Jayce Bartok, 
      Dina Spybey, Parker Posey, Ajay Naidu, Samia Shoaib
Director: Richard Linklater
Producer: Anne Walker-McBay
Screenplay: Eric Bogosian based on his play
Cinematography: Lee Daniel
Music: Sonic Youth
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     Richard Linklater's movies have always been talky affairs, and his 
latest, SUBURBIA, is no exception.  Even though Linklater didn't write 
the script, it's easy to see what attracted him to the project (which 
was adapted by Eric Bogosian from his stage play).  The characters here 
aren't all that different from those in Linklater's previous films, 
SLACKERS, DAZED AND CONFUSED, and BEFORE SUNRISE.  They're post-
adolescent pre-adults stuck in a state of inertia, rendered impotent by 
the lethargy that takes root in the absence of ambition.
     Watching SUBURBIA, I was reminded of the immortal quote from THE 
EMPIRE STRIKES BACK:  "Try not.  Do or do not.  There is no try."  The 
young men and women in Linklater's film seem forever stuck in the "try" 
mode.  They talk about doing something with their lives, make plans for 
the future, but never seem to act on anything.  Nestled in the safe 
suburban neighborhood of Anytown, U.S.A. (actually Burnfield, TX), they 
sit paralyzed on the side of the road while life rushes past at a 
frenzied pace.  SUBURBIA presents an uncompromisingly grim picture of 
the members of a generation so turned off by the realities of "modern 
life" that they would rather waste their existences than join the rat 
race.
     SUBURBIA is about 95% dialogue, some of which is clever, but much 
of which is pointless.  Bogosian has a fondness for meaningless 
profundities -- characters saying things that, on the surface, sound 
deep, but, when you examine them, aren't backed up by much substance.  
In a way, the movie as a whole is like that -- it's somehow not as 
powerful or original as it initially seems to be.  Watching this picture 
can be an exercise in both frustration and fascination.  Frustration, 
because it's difficult to spend two hours in the company of individuals 
whose defining traits are ennui and inadequacy.  Fascination, because, 
even though the storyline is a little too constraining, the characters 
are capable of holding our interest.
     Although SUBURBIA is an ensemble piece, certain individuals have 
more screen time than others.  The lead, if there is one, is Jeff 
(Giovanni Ribisi), a slacker in his late teens who lives in a pup tent 
in his parents' garage, has dropped out of college, and constantly 
questions the meaning of life.  His girlfriend, Sooze (Amie Carey), is a 
performance artist who dreams of going to New York.  His best friends 
are Buff (Steve Zahn), a would-be video maker with a flair for the 
absurd, and Tim (Nicky Katt), a disturbed ex-Air Force grunt who 
returned home after being honorably discharged.  Together, in what has 
become a nightly ritual, these five gather outside a Circle A 
convenience store to drink beer and talk.  They are joined by Bee-Bee 
(Dina Spybey), a shy, pretty blond; Pony (Jayce Bartok), a old high 
school classmate who has become a rock star with a video on MTV; and 
Erica (the omnipresent Parker Posey), Pony's publicist.  Meanwhile, the 
Pakistani owners of the store, Nazeer (Ajay Naidu) and Pakeesa (Samia 
Shoaib), do everything they can to dissuade the loiterers from hanging 
around.
     Aside from a ride in a limo, a rendezvous in an abandoned van, and 
a walk through the woods, SUBURBIA basically stays around the Circle A.  
Perhaps strangely, the film is at its strongest when little is 
happening.  During the second hour, as Bogosian's script begins building 
to a climax of dubious effectiveness, we start to feel manipulated by 
several incidents.  In the beginning, the storyline serves the 
characters; by the end, it's the other way around.
     SUBURBIA's two strongest assets are its acting and its attention to 
detail.  Linklater, as he has done in all three of his previous outings, 
conveys a sense of time and place.  Anyone who has been in or around a 
suburban convenience store that doubles as a teen hangout will 
understand how skillfully the director has captured the setting and how 
ably the actors have adapted to their roles.
     Singling out performers is hard, since all of them are effective, 
but Giovanni Ribisi and Steve Zahn (both of whom appeared in THAT THING 
YOU DO!) give memorable turns.  Ribisi plays the most frustrated of all 
the characters -- a smart, insightful young man who wants to act, but is 
anesthetized by his conviction that he's a victim of life's natural 
unfairness.  For one brief moment, in a drunken stupor, he believes 
himself to be empowered, but events quickly pull him back under.  Zahn's 
Buff, on the other hand, is the kind of character a high school class 
might vote "least likely to succeed," and the actor fully understands 
how to develop this off-the-wall personality without going over-the-top.
     If not for the manipulative ending, SUBURBIA could be viewed as 
more of a character study than a cautionary tale.  Ultimately, however, 
Bogosian and Linklater want to make a point about the fruit that this 
lifestyle will bear.  But, despite missteps along the way and an 
underwhelming final half-hour, the movie has enough compelling moments 
to get us through the rough patches.  SUBURBIA is far from a perfect 
film, but, for viewers who can look past the unevenness, there is value 
in some of what is being said.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bunch of GenX kids hang around a convenience shop for the night, while
they await the return of their friend from the past, who is now a big-time
drummer for a popular band on MTV. They talk, talk some more, and then talk
some more.
CRITIQUE:
Originally a play by Eric Bogosian, I could see how this idea might've
worked in the theatre, but on the big screen, it does little more than
perpetuate the ill-founded theory that most kids of our generation are
without direction, plagued with problems, and most importantly, boring and
self-important. The dialogue in this movie was pretty good and believable,
and Giovanni Ribisi sure comes out of it smelling like a solid acting rose,
but the rest of the cast was so-so and unsympathetic, the set seemed too
clean and contrived for the circumstances, and the plot, far from
compelling. I also hate films that don't "close themselves up" real well,
and this one decided to take that ol' "you figure out what might've happened
to these characters" approach. Listen pal, I just invested two hours of my
time into these cheesy characters, so the least that you could do it give me
a decent payoff! Didn't happen. Anyway, I hope to God people don't see this
movie and imagine our generation to be this lame and annoying (Could the
"fly-girl" Sooze with the earrings all over herself have been any more
irritating?!!?). All in all, a generic dialogue-intensive film with no plot,
uninteresting characters (save for Ribisi) and an open ending.
One saving grace: Giovanni Ribisi shows the whole world what his ding-dong
looks like. Congratulations Giova, you've officially been knighted
Keitel-Jr.  :)

Author
Louis Butler
A sort of cross between AMERICAN GRAFITTI and CLERKS, subUrbia (note the
capitalization of the central you -- er, 'u') dosen't have a lot in the way
of action, and the plot unwinds itself slowly.  There are many nice
touches, not least of which is the "Circle A" convenience store.  The film
is peppered
subtly with anarchy symbols hiding in background grafitti, and anarchy comes
through as a central theme.  There is an essential lawlessness in this
movie.  The police are shown as ineffectual, and there are several scenes
of near-violent confrontation.
This isn't a violent film.  It isn't a sexy film.  As a matter of fact, I
don't think there is any sex or violence in it at all.  A few cuts for
language and the movie could be on network tv.  This is not an edgy film,
it's just a story about the events of a single night in eight people's
lives.
While CLERKS glorified the slacker as a better-than-thou intellectual with
some sort of secret insight on life, this movie admits quite freely that
it has no answers.  The movie isn't about answers.  It isn't really about
questions either.  It's about futility, maybe.  Or maybe it's about trust.
I saw this movie at a screening, and I don't have a press kit, so I don't
know the names of the actors.  The woman who plays Bebe, currently seen on
the NBC show MEN BEHAVING BADLY, almost walks away with the film.  She is
a peripheral character, and yet, when all is said and done, the movie is
more about her than about anyone else.
The catalyst to this night is a fledgling rock star, coming back to his
home town to play "The Orpheum," a venue he last played for the Senior
Prom.  He shows up, in a nearly surreal way, in a stretch limo with his
puplicist to "hang" at the Circle A with these people he knew in High
School.
Yes, he pulls up on the side of the Circle A in a stretch limo.  And no
one else sees him there.
The movie does drag, though I'm at a loss to suggest what should have been
cut.  Still, perhaps a better editting job could have made the film not
feel quite so lathargic.  On the other hand, the movie's action occurs
between about 11pm and dawn, so to a certain extenet, the pace was surely
intentional.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
subUrbia (1996)
Giovanni Ribisi, Steve Zahn, Amie Carey, Samia Shoaib, Ajay Naidu, Nicky 
Katt, Jayce Bartok, Parker Posey, Dina Spybey. Directed by Richard 
Linklater. 118 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
"I can do anything I want just as long as I don't care about the results.
" That is the declaration of freedom, or admission of defeat, made by 20 
year old Jeff as he stands in the parking lot outside a convenience store.
 Jeff, played by Giovanni Ribisi (Phoebe's brother on "Friends",) is the 
intellectual member of a group of young people who do nothing in 
particular for two hours in "subUrbia", the latest film from Richard 
Linklater ("Slacker," "Dazed And Confused," "Before Sunrise".) Working 
from a screenplay by Eric Bogosian ("Talk Radio") based on his off-
Broadway play, "subUrbia" is a film both repellent and fascinating. The 
movie is a detailed portrait of emptiness; a character study of people 
with little character. SubUrbia reeks of hopelessness and wasted lives, 
yet it's difficult to take your eyes off the screen. You care about these 
people, even if they don't.
Eric Bogosian is renown for bombastic, talky scripts filled with anger 
and self-righteousness and subUrbia is no exception. Boy, do these guys 
talk! Every night they gather outside the Circle A (just like the symbol 
for anarchy  that Bogosian is so clever) convenience store, drinking, 
squabbling, spouting existential gibberish and trying the patience of 
Nazeer (Ajay Naidu) and Pakeesa (Samia Shoaib,) the Pakistani couple who 
manage the store. Nazeer, an engineering student working hard to achieve 
the American dream, is the moral guardian of the story as he repeatedly 
confronts the listless group and challenges their nihilistic lifestyles. 
"You people are so stupid," he shouts in utter exasperation, "You throw 
everything away." In return, he receives threats and racist insults from 
surly drunk Tim (Nicky Katt,) who proclaims "I'm an American. I'm owed 
something."
SubUrbia takes place over the course of one night outside the Circle A. 
The usual group is there. Jeff, seeker of truth who lives in a pup tent 
in his parent's garage; Tim, a Fonzie type who sliced off the tip of his 
finger to get out of the military, and Buff (Steve Zahn, the blonde from 
"That Thing You Do") a loud, stupid party-type who is prone to sudden 
moves of manic energy. On this night, the group is waiting for the 
arrival of Pony (Jayce Bartok,) an old pal whose rock band has became an 
MTV flavor of the day. The boys are joined by Sooze (Amie Carey,) 
performance artist wanna-be and Jeff's girlfriend, and Bee-Bee (Dina 
Spybey,) Sooze's deeply depressed, fresh-out-of-rehab pal.  
Pony shows up in a limo, along with his personal assistant Erica (Parker 
Posey,) and a night of drinking, talking, sex, talking, eating, talking, 
wacky hijinks, talking, violence and talking begins. There is action of 
sorts. Several of the group go for a limo ride. There's a walk in the 
woods and some sexual activity in a van, but mostly everyone just keeps 
jabbering. Oddly enough, the film only feels real during the long 
stretches of endless chatter. The action scenes feel inserted, mostly 
because it's hard to imagine these people actually doing anything. 
Towards the end of the film, Bogosian throws in a couple of incidents to 
bring the movie to a climax. Even these trumped up moments of drama 
become anti-climatic, just like the lives of these characters.
So why am I giving this film a qualified recommendation? Partly because 
of the acting. Giovanni Ribisi is compelling as the self-important, 
pontificating Jeff. As tiresome as his monologues become, Ribisi does a 
fine job of portraying the pain behind them. Jeff is annoying as hell, 
but you care about the guy. Parker Posey is a breath of fresh air as 
Pony's personal assistant; her optimism, tempered though it may be, 
provides a much-needed counterpoint to the cynicism of the others. 
Finally, Ajay Naidu has a commanding presence as the manager of the 
Circle A. His moral outrage, coupled with the frustration of being an 
eternal outsider, is both palpable and important. He voices the scorn 
that most viewers will feel watching these young people wasting the 
precious gift of life.
"SubUrbia" is a frustrating film. Bogosian's script is filled with 
contempt for its characters, while Linklater's direction shows clear 
affection for the same people. Perhaps that's why the movie is so 
fascinating. We all know people like those showcased in "subUrbia". They 
may drive us crazy, but they still matter. Maybe that's all "subUrbia" 
has to say and maybe that's all it needs to say.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        If SUBURBIA leaves no other legacy to American cinema, it 
will be known as the movie where you can see Cory from "My Two 
Dads" fully naked. Yes, TV's "Cory," Giovanni Ribisi and six other 
young talents bring Eric Bogosian's play to life in this Richard 
Linklater film. In SUBURBIA, Linklater successfully combines 
elements of his earlier three films -- the aimlessness of SLACKER, the 
fun of DAZED AND CONFUSED and the thoughtful dialogue of 
BEFORE SUNRISE.
        Ribisi is Jeff, the leader of a group of losers whose days 
consist of unemployment or low-paying jobs and whose nights are 
dominated by drinking beer and loitering in convenience store parking 
lots. There's a whole roster of Generation X angst here, most of them 
with stupid names. Sooze (Amie Carey) is Jeff's girlfriend, a 
performance artist who delivers an anti-testosterone manifesto called 
"Burger, Part I" at the beginning.
        Her friend Bee-Bee (Dina Spybey) is a recovering alcoholic 
and Tim (Nicky Katt) is a discharged Air Force officer on his way to 
becoming one. Then there's Buff (Steve Zahn), whose intellect is 
anything but. He's the token clown of the group, the kind of guy who 
will say or do anything crazy for a laugh. The fact that he's either 
drunk, stoned or both most of the time feeds the lack of inhibition.
        As the group of friends stands outside the convenience store, 
we meet another of SUBURBIA's central characters, Naseer (Ajay 
Naidu). He's the Pakistani night clerk of the c-store, who in the 
beginning is made out to be the Mr. Roper or Gale Gordon-type foil to 
the kids, the guy who will come out and chase them away whenever 
they start to act immature. As the movie goes on, we realize Naseer is 
the voice of responsibility and far closer to the American ideal than 
these five white kids who were born here.
        The movie would be almost plotless without the arrival of 
Pony (Jayce Bartok), the one friend in the bunch who has done 
anything with his life. He's on his way to becoming a rock star (with 
more than 90,000 units sold already!) and incites various responses 
from the friends. Tim is jealous and pissed at the MTV 
commercialization of life, Sooze begins to lust after him and Jeff 
suddenly realizes he's accomplished nothing in life. Pony's sexy 
publicist (Parker Posey, who is now by act of Congress required to be 
in every low-budget indie opus) also incites various unprintable 
responses from Buff.
        SUBURBIA seems like the setup for a typical, party-all-night 
comedy about a bunch of teenagers. Linklater did it well once with 
DAZED AND CONFUSED, but digs deeper here. The Bogosian 
screenplay is dark and ultimately rather depressing, a lot like his 
cynical script for TALK RADIO. Anyone between the ages of 16 and 
30 will realize the characters depicted in SUBURBIA aren't far from 
the truth and neither are the problems they either address or try to 
ignore. I liked it.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!
