Title
Review for Free Willy (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jason James Richter, Lori Petty, Michael Madsen, 
           Jayne Atkinson, Michael Ironside
Director:  Simon Wincer
Producers:  Jennie Lew Tugend and Lauren Shuler-Donner
Screenplay:  Keith A. Walker and Corey Blechman
Music:  Basil Poledouris
Released by Warner Brothers
     Traditionally, Man's (or Woman's) best friend is considered to be
his (or her) dog.  Sometimes, even a cat.  But rarely is the love and
affection of a boy won over by a killer whale.  Such is the case in
FREE WILLY, however, where young Jesse's unusual relationship with an
orca leads to his own redemption.
     Abandoned by his mother when he was little, Jesse (Jason James
Richter) has lived most of his life on the streets or in what is
euphemistically called a "childrens' home."  After Jesse is caught
spraypainting graffiti all over the observation windows to Willy the
whale's holding tank, his probation is to return to the scene of the
crime by day and clean up the mess he made.  Along the way, Jesse
strikes up an unusual friendship with Willy and manages to get closer
to the whale than Rae Lindley (Lori Petty), the trainer.  Meanwhile,
Jesse has been "rescued" from the home by Annie and Glen Greenwood
(Michael Madsen), a couple looking for a young boy to share their
home.  Even though Annie and Glen seem like nice people, Jesse isn't
sure it's a good situation for him, especially since he regards the
rules of the house as little more than a thinly-veiled attempt to
curtail his freedom.
     Back in the late seventies, Dino DeLaurentis, the master of
overbudgeted, poorly-written films, came out with a movie called ORCA:
THE KILLER WHALE.  Starring Richard Harris and Charlotte Rampling, and
clearly designed as a rip-off of JAWS, this movie presented whales in
the most negative light possible.  They were beasts who lived to hunt,
and man made a suitable prey.  Now, approximately fifteen years later,
we have been given this movie, one that presents the orca in a more
reasonable--and believable--light.
     FREE WILLY is not a great film--it relies on entirely too many
cliches and formulas for that to be true.  In fact, there won't be many
people going into the theater not knowing exactly how the movie is
going to end (take a look at a TV commercial, theatrical trailer, or
even the newspaper print ad).  Despite that, FREE WILLY is a solid
source of family entertainment, and a good reason to take the kids to
the movies.  This is one of those too-rare films that is capable of
enthralling those under and over the age of twelve.  There's a little
bit in FREE WILLY for people of all age groups.
     Formula motion pictures, if done well, can be entertaining.  Sure,
you know what's going to happen, but with good acting, direction, and
photography, not to mention a few believable characters and some
intelligent dialogue, it can still be fun travelling that oft-trodden
road to the expected resolution.
     ROOKIE OF THE YEAR and HOCUS POCUS are examples of this summer's
family fare that fall on their faces.  FREE WILLY avoids the traps that
ensnare these movies, keeping clear of the mind-numbing idiocy of
ROOKIE and the boredom of HOCUS POCUS.  Instead, this film weaves a
simple-yet-effective tale about a boy and his whale.  It's almost like
Lassie or Old Yeller in water.
     This is the second venture into family movies for executive
producer Richard Donner (of SUPERMAN and LETHAL WEAPON fame).  His
previous effort, which he directed, was a little-known and muddled
fantasy about abused children.  Called RADIO FLYER, it was a failure
with the critics and at the box office.  This time around, Donner has
involved himself in a family movie with more appeal and fewer
problems.
     It should be mentioned that FREE WILLY isn't an error-free film.
There are numerous scenes, especially those involving Jesse in his
petulant moods, that don't work.  While the ending wraps up the major
element of the plot, there's still a lot left unresolved, including
what the one-dimensional villain Dial (played rather flatly by Michael
Ironside) is going to do to those who stole his property.  There are
also various occasions throughout the running time when logic and
reality are conveniently ignored or abandoned altogether.  FREE WILLY
isn't a movie that stands up well to careful inspection.  Most of the
flaws aren't major, however, and are easy to overlook.
     The movie's biggest asset is its actors.  Twelve-year old Jason
James Richter does a credible job as Jesse.  This may be his first
film, but you can't tell it from the polished performance he gives.
Lori Petty proves that there are still a few worthwhile roles for women
in American films.  In her hands, Rae is every bit as strong and
capable as any of the men in this picture.
     Still vivid in my mind is the image of Michael Madsen dancing to
the tune of "Stuck in the Middle with You" as, with knife in hand, he
approaches a tied-up cop.  However, while Madsen doesn't bury RESERVOIR
DOGS' Mr.  Blonde, at least he temporarily removes the picture of the
psychotic killer from the minds of those in the audience who have seen
Quentin Tarnatino's bloody thriller.  Madsen's Glen is a somewhat-gruff
man who wants a child, but doesn't exactly know how to handle the one
that he gets.  On paper, this character may have been a cliche, but as
portrayed by a veteran character actor, he comes across as a real
person.
     Perhaps the best reason to see FREE WILLY on the big screen is the
photography.  Both underwater and above-the-surface scenes are filmed
with style, and much of the impact will be lost in a television
picture.  The special effects are good--it's almost impossible to tell
where the real whales end and the mechanical ones begin.
     Don't be put off by the stupid title.  FREE WILLY is actually an
above-average movie that most people will find something to like
about.  It only gets preachy once or twice about the "save the whales"
issue, and is never more obvious than a film like STAR TREK IV:  THE
VOYAGE HOME.  FREE WILLY has a good message, is enjoyably constructed,
and includes several small moments of majesty.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Emily L. Corse
     FREE WILLY is a formulaic tear-jerker for children, with a sad
killer whale and a misunderstood boy finding spiritual kinship and
beating the bad guys.  Kids should love it.
     However, within the confines of the kiddy formula, FREE WILLY
delivers its pathos effectively and with a certain dignity.  The
emotional manipulation is subtler than usual, the characters are better
developed, and the nature photography is beautiful.  Sentimental adults
with anthropomorphic sympathies (that's me!) will be able to overlook
the cliches and appreciate the age-old themes of freedom and
belonging.
     In a nutshell, the story is about an adolescent whale stolen from
his mother and a twelve-year-old boy, Jesse, abandoned years ago by
his.  A childless couple take the surly young human into foster care,
with the wife quite obviously more enthusiastic than the husband.
After Jesse gets caught in an act of vandalism, he is sentenced to do
chores at the local aquatic park, where he becomes fascinated by the
brooding young orca, Willy (played convincingly by real-life orca
Keiko).
     Willy hasn't responded to any of the humans at the park until he
is seduced by Jesse's soulful harmonica noodlings.  With the help of
the park's animal trainer, Rae, Jesse learns to communicate with Willy
and teaches him to perform for his supper.  Eventually the bad guys try
to kill Willy and Jesse saves him, with the help of his friends.
     So don't see this movie if you're interested in an original
storyline.  Obvious lessons are presented--the abandoned boy learns to
trust his new parental units, the limp-finned whale learns to lick not
bite, the suspicious foster father (and world's cleanest auto mechanic)
learns to love his mop-topped urchin.
     On the other hand, the beauty of the opening scenes alone may be
worth the price of admission.  Photography by Robbie Greenberg, backed
with a soundtrack by Basil Poledouris, presents a long, glorious
montage of wild orcas, swimming together and diving, leaping, and
luxuriating in the sun-sparkled waves of the Pacific Ocean.  It's as
good as a "National Geographic" special on the big screen, without
Marlin Perkins droning in the background.
     The sudden intrusion of whale hunters into this natural paradise
is almost sickening.  On board the Pequod (yo! literary allusion!),
the men are scary, loud, harsh, violent, and hideously ugly.  The
capture scene is certainly unsuitable for younger whales.
     The characters in FREE WILLY aren't quirky or original of course,
but neither are they offensively stereotyped.  Jesse is played by Jason
James Richter, who's only a little too white-bread to be interesting.
He's supposed to be half-way to irreversible delinquency, but looks
like he's on leave from the Mickey Mouse Club.  In Richter's defense,
he doesn't come across as smarmy or precocious.
     Lori Petty plays Rae with a refreshing twist.  After years of
cinematic embarrassments like Darryl Hannah as an astrophysicist or,
more recently, Laura Dern as a paleobotanist, Petty's portrayal of a
marine biologist gives new hope to girls across the nation.  This is an
attractive blonde woman as a professional scientist who doesn't seem
like a Hollywood bimbo wearing glasses!
     Other supporting characters, the unconditionally-loving mom, the
gruff-but-fair dad, the spiritually-advanced Native American
story-teller, the runny-nosed street kid pal, the no-nonsense social
worker, the butt-kissing corporate patsy, et al, are familiar but
competently played.
     A new Michael Jackson single "Will You Be There?" seemed like that
rare treat--an infectious end title song.  It's upbeat and pop (the
kids in the audience were *grooving*!), but disintegrates into a sickly
spoken piece that put an end to the clapping and started a mass
exodus.
     FREE WILLY deserves its share of the summer theatre crowd.
C'mon.  Take a kid along and cheer like crazy when Willy and Jesse find
their families.
