Title
Review for Dazed and Confused (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I wasn't alive in 1976, I've never been high or drunk in my 
life and I have a high I.Q. So why would I like DAZED AND 
CONFUSED? I'm not quite sure, but I did. Maybe it's because deep 
inside me, beneath the layers of contempt for the brain-dead, give-
peace-a-chance potheads running around the dorm with their double-
capacity brass water-bongs, I secretly want to experience the party life. 
Who knows, I might be missing out on something by not smoking 
joints and downing pitchers of beer on the weekends. I'm probably not, 
of course, but it's always possible that there's a reason people drink and 
drug themselves to excess.
        But the most probable reason I liked DAZED AND 
CONFUSED--it was a fun movie to watch. Sure, films like 
SCHINDLER'S LIST and GLORY are brilliantly-mad, but can you have 
fun watching them? Not unless you're incredibly sadistic. With 
DAZED AND CONFUSED, you actually get a sympathetic buzz as the 
characters toke themselves silly on the screen. Amid the scores of 
movies over the years that have painted a portrait of teenage life, too 
many of them are angst-ridden, depressing movies about the 
pointlessness of life. This one is all innocent, illegal fun.
        It also portrays the novelty of teenage life more accurately 
than most other teen nostalgia movies, at least my observations of 
teenage life. I've never actually considered myself "one of them," but I 
know exactly how the teen mind operates and what they do for fun, 
even if I'm absolutely nothing like them. And DAZED AND 
CONFUSED captures the "Have fun now before it's too late" mentality 
better than, say, THE BREAKFAST CLUB, which goes out of its way 
to show that teens from all walks of life have serious problems. I 
personally don't worry about the future, I'm not depressed, I don't feel 
the pressure to fit in, so how could I indentify with that movie? No, 
I've never done the things the DAZED AND CONFUSED characters 
do, but their outlook suits mine more fully, even if I do have a 
responsibility they don't.
        DAZED AND CONFUSED follows a group of high schoolers 
on the last day of school in 1976. (One liberated woman teacher tells 
them, "Remember as you're bombarded with all this bicentennial crap 
this summer that what you're really celebrating is the fact that a bunch 
of white, aristocratic, slave-owning males didn't want to pay their 
taxes.") As next year's seniors, they get to participate in the time-
honored ritual of hazing the incoming freshman. While the girls do all 
sorts of embarrassing activities, the guys get their asses repeatedly 
paddled. One boy in particular is singled out after his older sister 
pleads with the seniors to "go easy on him."
        The afternoon hazing ritual takes a back seat to the night's 
party activities, which comprise most of the movie. Proving teen life 
hasn't come along all that much since the 50's, most of the kids drive 
around the town aimlessly before some guys finally take the initiative 
to bring a couple dozen kegs of beer to a hillside water tower. The plot 
is naturally thin to accentuate the relative pointlessness of the party 
routine, with the movie instead focusing on the characters, who seem 
at the beginning of the movie to be your average mindless potheads. 
We find as the movie progresses that they all have distinctive human 
qualities.
        DAZED AND CONFUSED is, in effect, a coming-of-age 
movie for some of its characters, the "take it easy on him" boy in 
particular, who is accepted into the older boys' group after his ass is 
pummeled. In one night, he gets drunk, high and laid. If that's not a 
journey worthy of any epic poem's tragic hero, I don't know what is. 
Still, the movie isn't big on drama or long soliloquies, with the 
characters undergoing what are, for the most part, subtle changes 
amidst the celebration. It's not necessarily a funny movie, either. Even 
though I enjoyed the movie all the way through, I only laughed a few 
times. It was more fun than funny. I liked the movie, but I don't plan 
on indulging in any drugs or alcohol in the near future. So much for 
the assertion that entertainment affects people... I have to go kill my 
mom now. Slayer told me to.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
At some time or another, every generation has a movie made about it.  
DAZED AND CONFUSED is for the 70s' crowd:  that group of Americans who 
came of age when bellbottoms, love beads, mantras, and marijuana were the 
fashion, drinking and driving hadn't become taboo, and safe sex was used 
to only avoid pregnancy or VD.  As the United States reached her 
bicentennial, Vietnam was over - if the memories still lingered on - and 
the short-lived disco craze was building to a frenzy that SATURDAY NIGHT 
FEVER would both exploit and exacerbate.
This movie begins on the last day of the 1975-76 school year, and ends 
less than twenty-four hours later.  For Randy "Pink" Floyd (Jason London) 
and his friends, it's the end of their tenure as high school juniors, and 
with the final bell of the last period, they have reached the ultimate 
goal for teenagers - they are seniors.  At the local junior high school, 
Mitch Kramer (Wiley Wiggins) and his cohorts have a serious problem to 
consider.  They are members of the incoming freshman class and, as part 
of a time-honored tradition, they are about to be totally and painfully 
humiliated by the new seniors.  
DAZED AND CONFUSED explores the beginning of the 1976 summer from the 
varying perspectives of an unusual group of characters.  Just about every 
type is represented:  the timid nerd looking for a way to break out of 
his shell, the mindless jock, the overaged twentysomething guy who likes 
hanging out with teenagers, the blond bombshell, the stoned-out-of-his 
mind pot addict, and the timid newcomer.  In his attempts to avoid making 
his characters into caricatures, writer/director Richard Linklater is 
only partially successful.  Most of what works with the youthful 
population of DAZED AND CONFUSED is due more to the performances of a 
fine cast than the writing.
There isn't much to this picture.  The storyline is minimal and the 
characters' personalities are as hazy as the marijuana-drenched 
atmosphere.  What Linklater does exceptionally well is open the door on 
an era seventeen years in the past.  This is 1976, from the music and 
cars (which combined cost a huge chunk of the $6 million budget), to the 
people and their attitudes.  You'd have to climb into a time machine to 
get a better view.
Comparisons with AMERICAN GRAFFITI are warranted, remembering, of course, 
that this is the next generation.  Both have similar aims, but while 
GRAFFITI's plot may have been no less insignificant than that of DAZED 
AND CONFUSED, its characters are better defined.  At times, Linklater 
seems too wrapped up in getting everything about the time period right.  
While the directors of both films care about their characters, George 
Lucas does a better job of transferring that feeling to the audience.
The two characters that we get the most of - Randy and Mitch - manage to 
capture our sympathies - at least most of the time.  My complaint has 
nothing to do with them, but with everyone else.  Except during an 
occasional scene or two, I had no feeling one way or another about 
anybody except those two.  Had virtually the entire senior class died in 
a car wreck, I wouldn't have batted an eyelash.
The cast is one of new or barely-recognizable names and face (Michelle 
Burke, who went on to do CONEHEADS, is among the few who might tweak the 
memory), all of whom do excellent jobs.  None of the principals can have 
a clear memory of 1976 (unless they're a lot older than they look), yet 
they play their roles like they lived through it.  Most memorable of all 
is Wiley Wiggins' Mitch, who performs almost every scene (including one 
where he buys his first six-pack) with an affecting blend of charm and 
realism.
Ensemble movies are something of a rarity these days, so it's a bit odd 
that this is the third one I've seen in a week (the other two being 
TWENTY BUCKS and SHORT CUTS).  If done right, these types of films can be 
riveting.  And, while Linklater doesn't have all the pieces in place for 
a superlative work, he has chosen a group of young actors capable of 
doing all - and probably more - that he asks of them.
My impression of DAZED AND CONFUSED is that it's light entertainment 
suitable for a night out, but nothing more.  The comedy isn't as sharply-
honed as it might be, but it's effective in this context.  This film was 
made to celebrate a dead culture, and those who were part of, or are 
merely curious about, will find a path into the past through this motion 
picture.  
DAZED AND CONFUSED is irresponsible and politically incorrect - and 
almost worth applauding on those grounds alone.  Had it possessed a 
little more substance, I would have heartily championed the film, but as 
it is, I can give it little more than a lukewarm recommendation.  If 
nothing else, it surely defines the era, and reminds me more of the 
things I hated than loved about 1976.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jason London, Wiley Wiggins, Rory Cochrane, Adam
Goldberg, Anthony Rapp.
Screenplay/Director:  Richard Linklater.
     I have this sneaking suspicion that the extent to which viewers
can appreciate DAZED AND CONFUSED may be limited by how readily they
recognize it as a perfect capsule of mid-70s youth culture.  It's a
clever and completely un-self-conscious portrait of pot-smoking,
beer-drinking teenagers revelling in the awareness that right now,
nothing else really matters.  As frequently as people tend to toss out
comparisons between films, I think I can safely say that what AMERICAN
GRAFFITI was to 1962, DAZED AND CONFUSED is to 1976.
     Like AMERICAN GRAFFITI, DAZED AND CONFUSED takes place entirely in
one 24-hour period, the last day of school of 1976, and follows several
students episodically.  Randy "Pink" Floyd (Jason London), the starting
quarterback, is struggling with whether or not to sign the anti-drug
pledge required by his coach.  Mitch (Wiley Wiggins) is an incoming
freshman trying to escape the traditional hazing inflicted by sadistic
seniors like O'Bannon (Ben Affleck).  Mike (Adam Goldberg), Tony
(Anthony Rapp) and Cynthia (Marissa Ribisi) are nerdy school
newspaper-types philosophizing about the pointlessness of their lives.
And Slater (Rory Cochrane) is simply on an endless search for good
weed.  Their one collective goal for the evening:  to find a good
party.
     Writer/director Richard Linklater's first feature was SLACKER, a
quirky but gimmicky look at apathetic twenty-somethings that established
his talent for creating unique and amusing characters.  In DAZED AND
CONFUSED, he takes a look at the proto-SLACKER, with delightful
results.  While many of the characters are recognizable high school
types, what I found original was that these were types I actually
recognized from high school, not from *movies* about high school.  Cool
but basically decent Randy interacts convincingly with both his jock
buddies and the inexperienced Mitch.  O'Bannon is the classic high
school jerk, arbitrarily feigning a punch at someone walking by him in
the hall.  Tony is the nice guy/geek who timidly tries to impress a
cute freshman (the appealing Christina Hinojosa).  My personal favorite
was Wooderson (Matthew McConnagher), a slimy college-ager who hangs
around with high schoolers to remain king of the hill and to pick up
high school girls.  Linklater gives them sparkling dialogue, daring to
let his characters talk like teenagers actually talk.  The one major
character failing in DAZED is the absence of any equally interesting
female characters; many could be interchangeable.  This is a male
coming-of-age film first and foremost, but it could have been more
inclusive.
     As a film without a real plot, DAZED depends on set pieces and
atmosphere.  The success of the former is hit and miss.  There's a fun
chase as several junior high schoolers run for their lives from the
hazing-happy seniors-to-be.  The hazing of the junior high girls is
lively, as is a wacky monologue by the stoned Slater about George and
Martha Washington's fondness for marijuana.  However, there's a fair
amount of dead space, and it's left to the cast of unknowns to fill
it.  They are generally personable enough to do so, particularly
Wiggins and Cochrane, but not always.
     As for atmosphere, it's dead on.  DAZED captures 1976 brilliantly,
from the bell bottoms and feathered hair to the soundtrack of early
hard rock classics to a pair of statues painted to look like members of
KISS.  The drug and alcohol use is matter-of-fact, free of
anachronistic moralizing.  The production design had to be perfect, and
it is.  Anyone who can't quite recall a time when sex was safe and far
fewer kids "just said no" should take a look just for the sake of
historical accuracy.
     It's impossible for me to determine whether those not in my age
bracket will be as enamored of DAZED AND CONFUSED as I was.  It's a
slight, loopy little film with no pretensions, and it was a page right
out of my own youth.  I don't know ... maybe you had to be there.

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jason London (Randall "Pink" Floyd), Milla Jovovich (Michelle), Rory
Cochrane (Slater), Sasha Jenson (Don Dawson), Joey Lauren Adams (Simone),
Michelle Burke (Jodi), Wiley Wiggins (Mitch), Ben Affleck (O'Bannion),
Matthew McConaughey (Wooderson)
DIRECTOR: Richard Linklater
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language, drug use, and mild violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1993
First off, I must say that DAZED AND CONFUSED is definitely not my
favorite type of movie.  In fact, the only real reason I saw it was
because of how everyone kept telling me how good it was.  So, I decided to
finally watch it, and I must say that it was actually better than I
thought it would be, but it also could've been better.  
DAZED AND CONFUSED seems to be a type of "hit and miss" in it's portrayal
of the last day of school in a small Texas town in the year 1976.  The
incoming Seniors, now the rulers of the school, inflict the initiation
rituals upon the soon-to-be Freshmen.  For the Senior guys, the hazing is
more physical than that of the Senior girls, who basically humiliate the
younger Freshmen.  The main target of the Senior guys pain-inflicting
services, led mainly by O'Bannion (Ben Affleck), is Mitch (Wiley Wiggins).
Mitch stands up to the hazing as best he can, and proves that he can take
whatever they can dish out.  This proves him well to the Seniors, and he
is invited to "hang out" with them on their night of fun, which includes
drinking, smoking marijuana, fighting, and even more.
Randall "Pink" Floyd (Jason London) is the star quarterback of the high
school's football team.  Basically, all he wants to do is enjoy life over
the Summer.  But, the coach of the football team doesn't want this to be
an option for him or any of the football players, and asks them to
basically sign away their fun in favor of dedicating themselves to the
football team.  Of course, they all blow off this type of dedication and
decide to live it up, especially on the night of the last day of school.
And do they.  Everyone and anyone.  It's a night of fun, in their minds.
One strange thing about the movie is that you really never figure out who
it centers on.  At times, it looks like Randall "Pink" Floyd is the main
character, but then at other instances, it's almost definite that Mitch is
the centerpiece.  In my opinion, I think it is actually both characters
who share the spotlight.  Yet, I feel that the concentration on Mitch is
the best overall.  Here's a young boy, fresh out of junior high and
heading into high school.  After attempting to avoid the hazing of the
Seniors, he shows courage and strength by standing up to them.  Then,
after being accepted into the group, he blends in strikingly well with the
rest of the group.  Very well done, indeed.
For some reason, I really enjoyed the performance of another character in
the movie.  This character, who did not emerge until late in the film, had
a next to meaningless part in the film, yet I found him very likeable.
The character is Wooderson, a high school drop out doing nothing
with his life played very well by Matthew McConaughey.  I guess it was
just something about the character that I liked.  Wooderson, despite his
status, still hangs out with his old high school friends and does whatever
they do.  It was also his character who inspired Mitch to buy his first
six pack of beer, another very good scene.
DAZED AND CONFUSED, which could be argued on its accuracy, seems to be a
very well depicted look into the lives of teenagers of the 70's.  And the
diversity of the teenagers it expands on, from the respected jock to the
pot-head stoner, is extremely unique and well done.  Your interpretation
of this film depends on the way you look at it and the way you look at the
70's, in general.  Many people who experienced this era have said that
this is a very accurate portrayal, but I'm sure there are those who think
just the opposite.  Watch it and judge for yourself.


Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1993, R, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Jason London (Pink), Joey Lauren Adams (Simone), Milla Jovovich
(Michelle), Shawn Andrews (Pickford), Rory Cochrane (Slater), Adam Goldberg
(Mike), produced by James Jacks, Sean Daniel, Richard Linklater, written and
directed by Richard Linklater.
Richard Linklater is quickly becoming one of the most influential and
creative directors today. His debut film, "Slacker," was a surrealistic
journey through a strange Texas town which was more of an experiment in
dialogue rather than any type of commercial product. "Dazed And Confused" is
his second film, which plays more upon defining characters and presenting
teens as they really are.  It's not perfect, but it is original when compared
to most other movies of the genre.
There really isn't any one star of this movie as the focus of attention
never seems to last longer than a few minutes at a time (the same technique
used in "Slacker"). This time the camera does not wander too far, it finds a
bunch of characters and repeatedly comes back to them, showing them as a
collective group. 
The story takes place on the last day of school in 1976. All juniors who are
about to become seniors are getting ready to "initiate" the incoming
freshmen. The males make wooden paddles to whack the boys, while the females
round up all the girls and cover them in goo and force them to do humiliating
acts. The way this is told, so blatantly, as if this is socially acceptable
really freaked me out. Their attitudes were so intense, almost evil, it
borders on Sadomasochism, but maybe that is the point. Then again, after the
seniors whack the freshmen they invite them to hang out and party with them.
There are characters of all the typical high school cliques here: jocks,
nerds, sluts, princesses, drug users, and punks. But they're not really
fighting with each other, for once they all have something in common - they
just want to party and have fun. 
Meeting members of the opposite sex comes easily to almost all of the
characters There are a lot of scenes that have potential to build up
character and define a relationship, but Linklater doesn't spend much time
worrying about these characters' love lives. Teenagers fall in and out of
love so fast, and the story makes this obvious by ignoring it (what you don't
see is the most obvious I guess).
"Dazed And Confused" doesn't have the charm "American Graffiti" had, but I
admire its boldness in portraying suburban teens in such a pessimistic
manner. It could be seen as trying to make a condemning statement about their
lifestyles, but I think the message is open to interpretation.
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Jon A Webb
     DAZED AND CONFUSED is the story of the last day of school in 1976
for a collection of Austin, TX teenagers.  It's Richard Linklater, who
also made SLACKER, which has much the same style though DAZED AND
CONFUSED is more coherent and has a plot.
     This film does not evoke Austin's atmosphere as much as SLACKER.
There are few references to special features of Austin, except for the
Moonlight Tower.  These could be students at almost any high school in
the country.
     The point of this film is to evoke the feelings and atmosphere of
1976; it is Yuppie nostalgia.  It works petty well on this level.
There are some minor anachronisms: I don't think the drug culture was
still that strong in 1976, some of the clothing styles are wrong
(bell-bottoms were out, straight legs were in), music was beginning to
have a disco influence, and the reference to urine tests is, of course,
wrong.  But I think most people of age thirty or older will see this
movie as fairly accurate.  People younger than that will be surprised
to see how playful and unthreatening the drug culture was then.
     If this film has a political point, it is that there are other,
better ways of handling drugs and teenage rebellion than our current
approach.  The recent discussion of drug legalization at various levels
of the government make this message timely.
     The plot is coming-of-age; there are many good performance, but
the best is the central character of the film, a junior-high school
student who is initiated into the traditions of high school.  He really
takes control of the film; it's remarkable how someone so young can
display such depth.
     I was mainly struck by the wide range of good performances from
unknown actors.  Linklater has a special talent for creating a whole
raft of believable characters from material that in another director's
hands would look amateur and second-rate.  Undoubtedly his next film
will be a big-budget production, with real actors; I hope he survives
the transition.
