Title
Review for Germinal (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
There are many that feel that this is one of France's greatest novels of the
century.  Even if it is not, it certainly has been made into  a film that is
without a doubt, an excellent example of the quality of films that the
equivalent of the Academie Francaise, is coming up with.  Although the
themes may come off a bit political, still this novel is as much an attack
on the system as it is on the views that people undertake, in order to get
something done.  In the process, many things may happen which no one
desired.
It is the turn of the century and things in France are not well, with the
industrial revolution.  France was slow moving into the new world, and it is
paying a tough price.  Their workers do not produce enough, and their
ability to enter the international market, has caused the upper class many
problems.  Still, they survive on both fronts.
But the pressures that the lower classes in the mines are facing seem to get
tougher, instead of better.  No one can earn a living, except the well to
do, whose antics do not go by unnoticed in this film.
In due time, with the advent of outsiders coming around, the working
population gets aroused into a strike, and a revolution.  And with this they
hope that they could get better wages, and get the upper class to pay them
better wages and cut down the punishments they face.
But the strike does not get resolved, and turns ugly.  The upper class bring
in replacement workers from Belgium, and continue with their work, however
meager it may be.  And the striking workers, lacking unity and cohesiveness
of any kind, can not do much, except get angry. Their anger turns into a
revolution and they begin tearing apart the mines that once provided them
with jobs.  Some of the owners are, however, honest.  One neighboring mine
owner explains that he has no stock brokers, and no outside support and is
on his own, and his workers seem to be reasonably happy. But the main mine
in question is being run by a ruthless man intent on showing his inferiors
that they do not have what it takes to get the job done.  And his family's
main worry is the mother's desire to maintain her affair with the  ruthless
man, who is being courted to marry her own daughter so she  can also get to
him.
Amidst all this, are many ideals which tempt the working groups. A man who
has some inner strength, Ettiene, becomes a reluctant leader, and since he
is an outsider, he is a perfect man to speak up.  The locals do not lose.
And a socialist monger, expouses the ideals which would take away the
excesses of the upper class, whose style is grotesque, and class-less.  On
an eventual day, the socialist gets to one of the mines and undoes a water
duct, so it will eventually flood the mine and bust it.  This unfortunate
deed, ends up killing several miners, and placing many others in danger.
And in the process, of trying to save the ones that might be alive several
others are killed as well.  The end result, is that the family that owns
this particular mine leaves, and the mine is restarted. And the workers have
returned to their pits.
It ends with one of the miner's wives, who has lost her whole family in the
trenches, going to work, but forgiving Ettiene for having roused them.  The
people, the workers, have accepted their humility and returned to their
meager ways.  Nothing has
changed, but this time, one is sure that they will not strike again, for
quite some time.
Of special note is Maheu, with whom Etienne stays for some time, and who
becomes a strong figure when the strike gets going.  But, in an unfortunate
face off with the French police, he is shot, and many innocents lose their
life.  The French upper class will have
to pay for this one.  But it never happens.  The workers eventually need
some food for their families and there is nothing else that can be done for
work.
Emile Zola wrote a great novel, with the hope of creating some awareness in
the situation.  He never blamed anyone, directly, although the socialist
seems to be the one that causes the most harm, something that many a
political force in France never has liked.  But, even though, the socialist
ideal may have been right for this moment, the way it went about it was
totally wrong. The French, still are today, very much a people's nation, but
it is ( like everyone else ) hopelessly attached to romantic notions about
anything.  The grass is always greener in the other side.  Maheu's wife's
pardon of Etienne in the end, is a sad moment, but never a victory for
anyone.  The workers are
still trapped.  they have been beaten down, by the destruction. The upper
class moves on, and never faces its due.
Extraordinary performances all around, specially Gerard Depardieu as Maheu
and Renaud as Etienne.  As is typical of any Claude Berri directed film, his
characters are solid, and what could be a slow film, always proves to be
dynamic in some sort of way.  Some outstanding design in the cinematography
helps as well.  The film is quite claustrophobic when it needs to be, and is
almost always trapped in an over crowded space, be it Maheu's house or
elsewhere.
Outstanding music adds to this sad, but so very well done film.  If not for
a great novel, in lesser hands, this film would have come off preachy.
Instead, it comes out as a great story, beautifully told, by a master film
maker.

Author
James Berardinelli
     GERMINAL, based on the landmark novel by Emile Zola, presents a
startlingly authentic and powerful look into the tumultuous, tragedy-
riddled lives of 19th century French coal miners.  Forced to endure
hellish conditions, risk death and dismemberment, and work from before
dawn until after dusk, these men and women had only one alternative to
mining:  starvation.  GERMINAL is not a happy story, but it is
impossible not to sense the realism that pervades the project.
     The film opens with the arrival of Etienne Lantier (Renaud) at the
Voreux coal mine.  An out-of-work machinist, Etienne is willing to do
almost anything to make money, including descending into the pit and
taking pick-axe to coal.  He is befriended by Maheu (Gerard Depardieu),
who takes him onto his digging crew and invites him to lodge at his
house.  Once there, Etienne becomes enamored with Catherine (Judith
Henry), Maheu's daughter, and she with him--although neither of them
is willing to admit their feelings.
     As the drudgery of working in the mine worsens, and pay is cut
back, Etienne prods Maheu into organizing a strike.  At first peaceful,
it doesn't take long before the labor unrest explodes into violence,
with predictable consequences.
     Director/producer Claude Berri, who is perhaps best known for his
films JEAN DE FLORETTE and MANON OF THE SPRING, has dedicated GERMINAL
to his father, a furrier who toiled for most of his life in factories
and died at the age of 58 from inhaling animal hairs.  Actors Gerard
Depardieu and Miou-Miou participated in this film as tributes to their
own laborer parents.
     In a movie that could easily have become little more than a
platform for damning 19th-Century labor conditions, Berri has breathed
life and vigor into both characters and script.  We are drawn into
GERMINAL, not only by the finely-realized people who inhabit this
world, but by the ability of the cameras to evoke with claustrophobic
authenticity the labyrinthine tunnels of the mines.
     Berri refuses to gloss over the ugliness of what it was like to
work underground, and, in vivid contrast to soot-coated, sweating,
weary men and women trudging through candlelit darkness, he presents
the pampered lives of those who run the mines.  As a strike looms, one
such woman hopes that this unfortunate turn of events won't disrupt her
plans for a lunch party.
     Berri's indictment of plight of the miners is at once simple and
moving.  While Zola's impassioned cry for social reform is at the heart
of GERMINAL, the interactions of the individual characters represent
the picture's soul, and lift it above other movies with similar
messages.
     There is the unconditional love of one man, Maheu, for his family,
and the sacrifices he must endure for them.  Maheu is a hard worker,
and in his heart he believes in the innate goodness of man.  He cannot
accept, for example, that soldiers brought in to defend the mine would
fire on their own countrymen.
     GERMINAL, which cost $30 million to make, is a lavish production,
and it's clear that the money was well-spent.  The scenes in the mine
are remarkable in conveying the desperate circumstances confronting the
characters.  How many members of the audience experienced an irrational
desire to wash away the accumulating coal dust from their own skin?
     Aided in no small part by an exemplary cast, Claude Berri has
brought to the screen a masterpiece, interweaving personal tragedy and
social upheaval against the background of a way of life that would not
yield easily to change.  There is much that is right about GERMINAL,
and very little that is wrong.  When released in France, this film went
toe-to-toe with JURASSIC PARK.  Financial considerations aside, take
one look at this movie, and it will be clear which is the real winner.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     GERMINAL (1993) is based on Emile Zola's tragic novel of the same
name about the plight of the coal workers and especially of their
families in 19th century France.  It is an extremely moving tale that
points to the ultimate hopelessness of the human condition.
     The script by Claude Berri and Arlette Langmann and the direction
by Claude Berri pull no punches.  This is a movie that rarely considers
the gray areas, but paints everything in sharp contrasts.  Everything
is either good or evil; there is no middle ground.  Periodically, we
glimpse the possibility of a few redeeming features in the rich, but
generally they are portrayed as the devil incarnate.  Although the
number of contrasts the film metaphorically presents seem innumerable,
the ones that struck me the most were: rich vs. poor, day vs. night,
above ground vs. under ground, light vs. dark, opulence vs. frugality,
green vs. brown, workers vs. bosses, and capitalism vs. unionism.  If
you watch for them, you can see many more, and this contrast provides
an extremely effective and propagandistic albeit one sided reading of
history.
     As the film starts, Maheu (Gerard Depardieu whose best film is
COLONEL CHABERT) gives a lantern to his new fellow worker Etienne
Lantier (Renaud) and tells him, "Take good care of it.  For a miner a
lamp is his sun."  From the beginning we find the ungrateful owners
harassing the downtrodden workers.  They yell at them for not fixing
the timbering because that will mean the owners will have to pay
something to their windows if they die.  The workers in turn complain
that they can not afford to take time to fix the timbering since they
are paid by the amount of coal they bring up and they already have men,
women, and children working in the mines so that their families will
have enough food to ward off starvation.
     The first part of this epic length film is devoted to how families
live, e.g., everyone takes baths in front of everyone else in a tub in
the living room, and how families just get enough food to keep from
starving.  The subtext in the first part is the growing threat of a
strike.  This movement is lead by Lantier, but there are others to his
left who think a strike is not the best course.  One, a communist I
suppose, urges that the workers of the entire world must unite first in
which case strikes will unnecessary since the bosses will be gone.  The
other, an anarchist I guess, says the only solution is to burn down all
of the mines and factories and only out of this utter destruction will
salvation arise.  What a great bunch of choices Zola provides!
     Certainly, religion is not the answer as Lantier says, "Who needs
God and Heaven?  We can change this lousy world."  He goes on to say
later, the problem is that, "capitalist tyranny is destroying us."  The
owner of the Voreux coal mine questions the value in a strike, telling
the workers, "A strike is a disaster for everyone.  Within a week
you'll all starve.  Then what will you do?"  The other mine owner
Deneulin (Bernard Fresson) puts it, "Before you make a living I must
make a living first.  The smallest increase will bankrupt me."  The
film show the rich owners living extravagantly and thereby giving lie
to their words.
     The second part of the film deals with the chaos that ensues once
a massive strike is underway.  The vicious way the strikers deal with
workers who attempt to choose to work remind me of the controversy
today where workers in some industries are forced to join unions and
then the unions confiscate part of their wages as mandatory dues which
the union bosses funnel into political action committees which support
the politics of the union bosses.
     The film ends well, but it is both dramatic and frightening.  The
acting is brilliant all round.  Depardieu, Renaud and Miou-Miou as
Maheu's wife Maheude are the best.  There are many scenes where their
acting is right on the edge.  Miou-Miou is best in her anger scenes
where she excels.  The supporting cast is also good, except for the
bosses, but then again, they are made to seem so shallow that it would
be hard for an actor to shine playing one of them.
     The cinematography by Yves Angelo is somber and striking, full of
brown and black sepia tones.  Watch how the camera and the light caress
each of the poor people's faces.  The sets by Thanh At Hoang and
Christian Marti are evocative of great horror and misery.  The most
frightening scenes are those of the claustrophobic sets for the mines.
The make-up by Joel Lavau and Nathalie Louichon provide just the right
feel of the grit on a coal miner's face.
     GERMINAL runs too long at 2:50, and I would have preferred editor
Herve De Luze to have made the movie not such an epic length.  The film
is rated R for sex, nudity, and violence.  Most of the film has little
violence, but there are a few needlessly horrific scenes, including one
of castration, that should have been edited out.  Nevertheless, it is
my judgment that the movie would be fine for most teenagers.  I liked
the movie, recommend it to you, and award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
