Title
Review for Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Mark R. Leeper

Author
Sue Roberts
Features: Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott Thomas, 
          Simon Callow, David Bower, Corin Redgrave, James Fleet, 
          John Hannah, Charlotte Coleman and Rowan Atkinson.
     I feel the formula for British weddings is fundamentally bizarre
(archaic tradition meets nouveau riche aspiration) and as this movie
sets out to show, the comic possibilities are endless!  The real joy of
Richard Curtis' script, however, is the accuracy with which the events
are portrayed.  It starts off with something simple, the "howling up
the motorway in an unsuitable vehicle and changing when you arrive"
gag.  Well, I ask you, who hasn't?  Judging by the way the 2000 or so
audience present fell about, and the exact nature of their shrieking
laughter as events unfolded, a lot of the audience were seeing their
past life flash before them.  On a more serious note the wonderful
timing and the somewhat bemused delivery, reminded one of Buster
Keyton.
     The director, Mike Newell, has managed to bring out the and
flavour of this script beautifully by ensuring all of the balancing
acts within it are given room to breathe.  The counterweight to the
gloss of all those weddings being the devastating loss of a friend
loved by everyone.  A reminder that one may enter this world with
nothing, but may leave with rather more.  Simon Callow's dancing was
particularly memorable!
     The more subtle dichotomy between the American (Andie McDowell)
who marries for money expecting it to be the key to eternal happiness,
and the wealthy aristocrat who would settle for anyone and is eternally
rebuffed evokes the gap between British and American ideas.
     To shed some light on the character of Charles (Hugh Grant).  Once
upon a time in England, cricket was played by gentlemen who turned up
on the day of the match, tossed on a set of flannels, strolled
nonchalantly onto the green and scored a century.  Blood might have
been sweat, but the critical thing was to make it appear effortless,
and imply that it was, of course, a fluke!
     The director was both clever and fortunate to pick a team of
actors who worked so well together to make this film into an
outrageously funny piece of entertainment.

Author
Dragan Antulov
1990s saw great renaissance of British cinema. After many
years of stagnation appeared whole new generation of
talented filmmakers, able not only to create new,
interesting films that would enchant the critical
establishment, but also to get in touch with tastes of
general audience. The latter phenomenon could be seen in the
series of British comedies that proved to be better, and in
some cases even more popular and commercially successful
than their Hollywood counterparts. One of them was FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, directed in 1994 by Mike Newell,
immensely popular film that even competed for Academy
Awards.
The script by Richard Curtis (best known for his excellent
work on BLACK ADDER television series) lacks the plot in
usual sense. It is composed of the scenes that show the
circle of friends - all 30-something mid-to-upper class
Britons - gathering on each other's weddings. The only one
who still hasn't tied the knot is Charles (played by Hugh
Grant), self-confessed "serial monogamist" who simply
doesn't believe that he would ever end his bachelor
lifestyle. However, everything changes when he meets Carrie
(played by Andie MacDowell), fashion editor from USA.
However, long time is about to pass before two of them
realise that they are made for each other.
Success of FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is hard to explain at
first glance. The plot is not very solid, the length of two
hours seems a bit much for this kind of movie, and, finally,
the gags in this film are funny, but not exactly hilarious
(and that includes wedding scene scene in which famous
comedian Rowan Atkinson plays inexperienced priest). On the
other hand, director Newell had a good fortune to have a
truly stellar cast at his disposal, and that was essential
for the film which is character-driven instead of
plot-driven. Although Hugh Grant plays more-or-less the same
character he had played before (in SIRENS and BITTER MOON)
and would play again (in NOTTING HILL and countless other
comedies), his performance still carries the film. His
colleagues are equally impressive - Kristin Scott-Thomas is
very effective in her role, Simon Callow is excellent as
Charles' larger-than-life gay friend Gareth, while John
Hannah as Gareth's lover Matthew brings pathos in a powerful
scene that prevented this film from turning into
conventional Hollywood-style romantic comedy. Andie
MacDowell, although manages the role of Carrie very well, is
overshadowed by her British colleagues. FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL, with good acting, solid humour and adequate
proportion of crying and laughing, is nevertheless a very
good viewing experience and it could serve as a good
explanation why British romantic comedies became so popular
in the last decade.
Review written on September 21st 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott Thomas, Simon Callow,
           James Fleet, Charlotte Coleman.
Screenplay:  Richard Curtis.
Director:  Mike Newell.
     Where romantic comedy is concerned, I am a tough sell.  Too many
of them seem to put across the impression that all you need to do is
put two people on the screen and have them end up together, regardless
of whether or not they are developed with an interesting conflict (or
even speak to one another, as in the monstrously overhyped SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE).  I'm not going to turn into a pile of goo every time I see a
screen kiss, but I will respond if I've spent two hours with two
well-developed characters who seem to belong together.  The new British
comedy FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL delivers only halfway.  Hugh Grant
turns in a charming, star-making performance in this uneven character
piece, but Andie MacDowell always appears to be more of a prop than a
person.
     Grant stars as Charles, an inveterate bachelor who seems to find
himself going to a friend's wedding every weekend.  At one of these
weddings, he spots a beautiful American named Carrie (Andie MacDowell),
and finds himself instantly smitten.  Their encounter is brief, but
leaves him wondering about his own desire for a lasting relationship,
and his ability to make it succeed.  Then, to Charles' surprise, he
meets Carrie again, at yet another wedding.  However, there is an
impediment to his affections:  Carrie is engaged.  While their flame
smolders throughout their periodic meetings, Charles is ultimately left
to deal with his own fears and to make some difficult decisions about
what he really wants.
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL was written by Richard Curtis,
co-creator of the popular British television import "Black Adder," a
series not renowned for its sentimentality.  And FOUR WEDDINGS is
extremely winning when it's not focusing on relationships.  The film is
loaded with goofy moments--Charles the best man frantically trying to
improvise for the forgotten wedding rings in the first ceremony; "Black
Adder" vet Rowan Atkinson as a nervous novice priest malapropping his
way through the second wedding; Charles trapped in a room with two
newlyweds with impressive stamina.  There are enough of these lively
set pieces that FOUR WEDDINGS rarely lags for too long, and the laughs
come at fairly regular intervals.
     It is when Curtis shifts to his characters that he stumbles.  Part
of the problem is that in an attempt to create yet another ensemble
friends piece he overloads the film with supporting characters, giving
short shrift to the crucial relationship between Charles and Carrie.
What's worse, almost all of the friends are drawn in only the
sketchiest of terms; characters like Charles' cynical friend Fiona
(Kristin Scott Thomas) and flatmate Scarlett (Charlotte Coleman) are
given a few lines to establish their particular romantic dilemma, then
sent to fade into the background.  Only James Fleet, as befuddled
aristocrat Tom, provides any spark to the proceedings.  The simple fact
is that I kept losing track of the relationships between all these
people, and didn't particularly care when I could figure them out.
     This lack of focus is inexcusable considering the cursory
treatment Carrie's character is given.  Part of FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL's message about love is that we should all be looking for that
one person who makes "lightning strike," and while the romantic
sentiment is laudable it also assumes that we as an audience should
recognize it when we see it.  Hugh Grant, looking frighteningly like
Harold Lloyd in his horn-rims, is an absolute delight; he turns Charles
into a wonderful, funny, fallible character, and we want to see him
happy.  But Carrie is simply a plot device.  We know virtually nothing
about her except that Charles has a crush on her, and Andie MacDowell
is not subtle enough an actress to fill in the blanks.  It also might
have been helpful to understand Charles' romantic history better, which
could have been accomplished through a more complete picture of
ex-girlfriend Henrietta, but that too is absent.  There is much to
recommend FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL as a comedy; it's bright and
spirited and well-paced.  As a romance, it leaves much to be
desired ... primarily a second party for the romantic pairing.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  3/11/93 (limited) 
Running Length:  1:57 
Rated:  R (Language, sexual situations, mature themes) 
Starring:  Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott Thomas, 
           Simon Callow, James Fleet, John Hannah, Charlotte Coleman,
           David Bower, Rowan Atkinson 
Director:  Mike Newell 
Producer:  Duncan Kenworthy 
Screenplay:  Richard Curtis 
Music:  Richard Rodney Bennett 
Released by Gramercy Pictures 
     The simplest and most honest expression of praise that I can offer
Mike Newell's latest movie is that this represents two hours of solid
movie magic.  FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a film with the rare
ability to make an audience laugh (and laugh hard) and cry, without
ever seeming manipulative or going hopelessly over-the-top.
     Charles (Hugh Grant), now in his fourth decade of life, is a
"serial monogamist"--someone who moves from girlfriend to girlfriend
without ever falling in love.  His friends have started down the
matrimonial road, but not Charles.  Thoughts of spending the rest of
his life with someone never enter his head, until one day at a wedding
when he encounters Carrie (Andie MacDowell), an American fashion
editor.  And, although the two enjoy a brief tryst at an inn, Charles'
typical British reticence kicks in, and Carrie is on her way back to
America before he realizes he should have said something.
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is about, well, four weddings and a
funeral (actually, if you want to be picky, it's about three weddings,
a funeral, and another wedding).  While the central story of this
charming motion picture is fairly common romantic comedy fare, it is
framed in a plot filled with little twists and turns, lots of laughs,
and a frothy atmosphere that is nothing short of intoxicating.
     Mike Newell, whose recent directing credits include ENCHANTED
APRIL and INTO THE WEST, continues to show a deft hand when it comes to
good, escapist fun.  Mr. Newell's direction is understated--he allows
his actors and the script to carry the film, which results in a
satisfying mix of lighthearted comedy with a dash or two of pathos
(including an emotional reading of W.H. Auden).
     Screenwriter Richard Curtis (who also penned THE TALL GUY) is
quick to let the humor start flowing, and once it starts, it never
stops (although it slows a little during the film's second half,
especially during the funeral).  The scenes most likely to cause
uncontrollable laughter occur during the second wedding and center on
Rowan Atkinson as a somewhat confused priest.  That Mr. Atkinson feels
at home with a Curtis script isn't surprising, since the two
collaborated on the British TV show BLACKADDER.
     Hugh Grant, currently stealing scenes in SIRENS, is equally as
good here, playing a likeable if somewhat twitty character.  This is
truly a case of perfect casting, as there's no scene, whether comic or
serious, that Mr. Grant is incapable of carrying off.  In the process,
he evokes memories of a young David Niven.
     Andie MacDowell, playing opposite Grant, is perhaps somewhat less
of a perfect choice, but she's more than adequate as the carefree
American who connects with Charles.  The supporting cast varies from
good to excellent, and features a number of vaguely-familiar faces for
those who are used to watching productions from across the Atlantic.
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a modern comedy with a very
traditional theme.  It blends good breeding and bad language; laughter
and tears; and marriage and friendship into a thoroughly enjoyable
result.  Mike Newell knows what his viewers want, but appreciates them
enough not to give it in a predictable or obvious manner--and that is
the greatest pleasure of all in watching this movie.
James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Frank Maloney
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a film by Mike Newell and written
by Richard Curtis.  It stars Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott
Thomas, Simon Callow, James Fleet, John Hannah, Charlotte Coleman,
David Bower, Corin Redgrave, and Rowan Atkinson.  Rated R, for language
and sexual references.
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is a romantic comedy directed by Mike
Newell, the English directory previously responsible for SOURSWEET,
DANCE WITH A STRANGER, INTO THE WEST, and ENCHANTED APRIL.  It is
obvious Newell is more than fond of the characters in Richard Curtis's
script.  Indeed, there is barely mean bone in the film's entire body.
Curtis has given Newell and us a somewhat gimmicky story that follows
Charles (Hugh Grant) through the four weddings and the funeral of the
title as he finds and loses the love of his life, a mysterious American
(Andie MacDowell).  The gimmicks work because Curtis crafts every scene
until it gleams with a polished wit that slices up the genteel society
of posh people who seem to do nothing but go to posh affairs into
delectable hors d'oeuvres.
     The script provides precious few explanations of who all these
people are and what they do when they are not got up in cutaways and
big hats.  It gives us not a hint of who the MacDowell character is or
why she goes to so many British weddings.  She remains an enigma,
mostly because she like everything else is seen strictly from Charles's
point of view and Charles's is befuddled as only an English gentleman
can be.
     Hugh Grant's performance as Charles carries the film.  It's hard
to imagine any other British star carrying off this difficult role
quite so well.  For not only must Charles mutter, run his finger
through his hair, and generally fret in his singularly confused way,
but he must make himself likable to the audience in spite of the fact
that he is, as one ex-girl friend says, a serial monogamist,
well-intentioned enough, but a bit of a bounder.  We forgive him
because Grant's Charles possesses charm, charisma, and a pained
vulnerability and a wonderful cast of oddly sorted friends.
     Amongst these friends is Simon Callow, the gay actor/director
(ROOM WITH A VIEW, BALLAD OF THE SAD CAFE) who plays one half (or
perhaps two-thirds, given the size of his person and his personality)
of a gay couple.  These two gay men are held up explicitly as the very
type of the perfect lovers, the standard against which all the straight
characters judge their own efforts to mate well.
     For that is the subject matter here: finding and keeping the right
person.  This is an intensely romantic film, despite all its hilarious
humor and satiric pokes, a film that says loves is the point  and the
purpose, if there be any point and purpose at all.  And the ways to
mate are as endless and varied and personal as the people in the
world.
     I unreservedly recommend FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.  It will be
a great date movie, a great couple's movie, even a great singles'
movie.  It is very funny, very sweet, and the feeling you have at the
end is worth whatever you paid to get in.

Author
Pedro Sena
There is only one word to describe this film. FUNNY.
A group of friends have lived proudly of their ability to stay single for a
long time.  Their life seems to consist of school, and a few parties here
and there to entertain themselves, and their friendship.  But they are all
reaching the age, when the partying is fun, but the being alone part is not.
And they all set out to score a partner for marriage.  They all succeed
except our hero, who has fallen in love with an American socialite ( if that
is the word ) that has decided to take up with an Irish man.
And when all is lost, our hero has settled for second best, the woman that
has liked him for a long time, but is ill suited for his tastes.
Fortunately for him, he has just enough of the free spirit in him to not
forget the one person he has come to love, even if she is impossible to
reach.
The film is full of situations that are extremely funny.  The rookie priest
performing his very first wedding can't help mix up, and forget the words he
is supposed to say on account of his nervousness.   Our hero's younger
brother saying the wrong things at the wrong time.  And our hilarious and
crazy man who is the oldest of the group, who is
ever ready for a party and another drink.
In between, each member of the group gets acquainted with someone they end
up marrying.
The funny way this film is done is very entertaining, and while the language
is on occasion a bit on the fowl side, the film is very enjoyable.  These
kind of comedies do not come around all the time, and they are a treat when
they do.
Hugh Grant is exceptional, as is Andie Macdowell, and the various members of
the group, all of which have very extreme personalities. And to see one of
them hook up a Texan cowboy, is odd, but then, this group is odd.
Should see.  Very funny, and hard for a reviewer not to give away. The first
six words in the film tell it all.  Fast, funny, weird, and hilarious.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL is about a man (Hugh Grant from
Sirens) and a woman (Andie MacDowell from Sex, Lies, and Videotape) who
keep running into each other at weddings (4) and funerals (1).  A
delightful plot.  Grant is in instant love with MacDowell.  She likes
him, but he is merely her "32nd lover".   The scene where she tells him
his number is priceless as is all of the witty script by Richard
Curtis.
     Grant on the other hand is scorned as "a serial monogamist" who
has, with MacDowell, fallen in serious love for the first time.  He has
not had as many (8) lovers as MacDowell, and he has been unable to
commit to any of them.  There is a great scene where they seat him at a
table with many of his  ex-girlfriends - a real dinner party from Hell
as they recount old stories.  The direction by Mike Newell in this and
most other scenes is right on the mark.
     The characters are all written as fairly shallow people, and their
lines have no subtle hidden meanings.  The writer was content with just
making a very funny and light hearted comedy.  It really works.  Many
lines are hilarious.  He has filled the script with more interesting
characters that you can count.  The third string characters in his
script are quite funny.
     The major scene stealer is the brother (a newcomer named David
Bower).  He cannot speak, but there is more funny sign language than I
have ever seen in a movie.  Bower is handsome and wise.  His scene at
the last wedding is the high point of the show.  The funniest scene
however goes to Grant's speech as the Best Man at the first wedding.
     Although this is not the sort of movie that you will think about
next year or even next month, you will have a very good time at it.
FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL lasts 1:57, but it seems much shorter due
to careful editing (Jon Gregory).  It is rated R, but it is a light
weight R.  Teenagers should love this show as well as adults.  Take a
date; it's great fun.  It made *** in my book and is certainly a thumbs
up.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
