Title
Review for Thrill Killers, The (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
After force-feeding my brain RAT PFINK A BOO BOO, I'd pledged never 
again to watch any film by Z-grade writer-director-actor Ray Dennis 
Steckler.  But I was surprised to find THE THRILL KILLERS a much more 
tightly-made piece of work.  As it stands, it's probably Steckler's best 
film, though admittedly that isn't saying a lot.  Tightly edited, with a 
jazzy score and some involving sequences, it's a cut above most other 
Z-features, but also shares their pitfalls.  Story basically recounts 
the encounters between psychotics and anyone unfortunate enough to run 
into them, providing Stecker with an excuse to string together a number 
of set pieces.  Its main problem is that characters belong to different 
stories - it's like Steckler started filming four different projects and 
then decided to put them all together for the last half.  At the start 
we're not even sure who the main character is supposed to be, or how 
other characters are meant to relate to each other.  
THE THRILL KILLERS' best feature is that it's wonderfully unpredictable, 
although this may be a natural consequence of Steckler's seemingly 
undisciplined approach.  He doesn't play by the rules of conventional 
movies and doesn't guarantee the safety of any of the characters.  This 
results in some inspired, demented moments.  My favorite is when one 
psycho makes a phone call to an even more psychotic acquaintance, asking 
for help to get away from his 'crazy' friends!  Steckler isn't really 
playing for laughs, though.  In fact much of the violence, though 
offscreen, is unsettling (Steckler himself is well cast as thug 'Mad 
Dog' Glick).   As a one-man show, Steckler has talent (next to Z-grade 
alumnus Herschell Gordon Lewis, he's Orson Welles), but it is uneven.  
It would have been interesting to see what he would have done if 
contracted by a studio with a bigger budget - I believe this could have 
been regarded as a classic B-feature if it had been made with more 
experienced actors and writers.  If you've never seen a film by an indie 
director before, have a look.  Just don't spend more than a dollar on 
it.

