Title
Review for Alexis Zorbas (1964)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
It shouldn't be that way, but expectations can change 
the way one perceives a film.  If not much is expected, 
such as with "High Velocity" (1977), but the film turns 
out to be relatively good, one is pleased.  On the other
hand, if expectations are high, one is disappointed even 
if the film is still marginally good.
This was my reaction to "Zorba the Greek".  The great, 
relevatory entertainment never arrived.
Anthony Quinn stars as Zorba, an impetuous, aging
journeyman capable of noble action and impulsive sentiment.
He takes a liking to distant, well-dressed Englishman
Alan Bates, who takes Quinn with him to remote area of Greece
to work an abandoned mine.  While Bates struggles to make
his fortune, Quinn is busily trying to teach him
hedonistic and extroverted ways.
Quinn gives an excellent performance in a difficult role.
The trouble is, his supporting characters aren't very
interesting.  Bates is ever out of place, dependent upon
alter ego Quinn for all social and business interaction.
Pathetic landlady Lila Kedrova is boring and often unintelligible.
She did win Best Supporting Actress, however.
Spoilers follow, but are necessary for further picking
apart this over-rated classic:
A beautiful widow is hated by the men in the town, primarily
because she won't marry any of them.  She ends up terrorized
and brutally killed, in a public, extended, unpleasant, and 
unnecessary sequence.
The village folk are portrayed very badly.  Besides committing
the aforementioned pointless murder, they rush to plunder
Kedrova's estate even as she is on her deathbed (her death happens
rather suddenly, her cold kills her in a few minutes).
They are cowardly workers, fleeing in terror at the first
sign of trouble.  As monks, they drop everything to gorge 
themselves on wine.  They are depicted without any sympathy
to their poverty or lack of education or opportunity.
To be fair, there are moments of drama and entertainment.
Quinn surely deserves his Best Actor nomination.  Unlike the
vast majority of Hollywood's output, it is not formulaic
or manipulative.  But it is not the great movie that was
hoped for.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
