Title
Review for Bandit Queen (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
S Ananthasubramanian
Shekar Kapoor's Bandit Queen is not an entertaining movie. It is made 
with the sole purpose of making us realize the atrocities done to lower 
caste people, especially women, in India. It is the real story of a woman 
who lead a group of bandits in the late seventies in India. 
Peppering the scenes with foul language and without a single known actor or 
actress in the movie, the director manages to create realistic and brutal 
characters and tear your heart apart. In the end, he makes us wonder 
whether there is anything to be happy about being an Indian.
The movie begins with a quote from Manusmrithi(an ancient book on social 
values in India) that equates the women, the uneducated and the 
lowercaste people to cattle and justifies beating them 
for making them obey.
The early parts of the movie deal with Phoolan's marriage when she is a 
kid. Sold by her father to a man thrice her age for a cycle, a cow and 
Rs.100 ($3.00) the 11 year old Phoolan is beaten and sexually assaulted, 
which damages her personality completely. The film crew, with their 
artistic and candid work, take you to dry, poverty ridden villages of Madhya 
Pradesh ( a poor state in central India). This part ends with helpless cries 
from the kid that fill your ears and pain that fills your heart.
A teenage Phoolan is branded a hooker by the village when she refuses to 
comply to the sexual advances of a young Thakur. As the story goes 
on Phoolan is kidnapped by a group of gangsters whose leader takes 
pleasure in raping her day in and day out. Now, coming to the 
picturization of these rape scenes, Shekar Kapoor has taken Indian cinema 
to the next level. 
So far rape in Indian movies has been portrayed in only two ways, either 
in a symbolic way or as a cheap substitute for love making scenes. Showing a 
painting  of a tiger feasting over a deer or a flower burning in the oven 
with appropriate music has been enough for Indian film fans to understand 
the happenings on the screen. The pictures made with cheap actors and
advertised with obvious posters, which have rape scenes with erotic music 
and obscene images to satisfy the front bencher, make up the second category.
In B.Q., as in real life, rape is painful, vulgar, repulsive and an 
expression of the beast inside every man. Phoolan's voice filled with pain 
is heard initially, and as the camera moves in, one can see the most 
obscene and hurting image ever shown on Indian screens. The semi-naked 
rapist lying over Phoolan goes on raping her violently as we remain 
helpless and bewildered. After Phoolan is rescued from  her tormenter by 
the smart Vikram Mallah, another gangster, Shekar Kapoor  portrays the 
affair that develops between these two with equal vigor. Their 
relationship is short lived, as everything in Phoolan's life is.
Once Vikram is killed by another gangster, Sriram, she is taken away by  
Sriram's gang. All the 16 members of this gang rape her one after the 
other. After  this, she is paraded naked in the streets of Behmai as the 
whole village  watches on. Though there is a very strong possibility for 
this scene to get censored in India, there is nothing cheap or vulgar 
about this when you see it on screen. In an industry set up where, 
"double-meaning" lyrics and dance movements with obvious messages are 
shot for the mainstream cinema, an anti-Bollywood (Bollywood - the 
heart of film production in India) scene like this, which 
does not portray woman as a sexual object, is sure to evoke flames. As 
Phoolan is "punished" for not behaving like a lowercaste woman the 
biased social set up in India looms large in our minds. 
Coming out of such a nasty experience is not easy. Phoolan manages to and 
takes the gun in her arms. Even now, no move by the director justifies 
her taking the law in her hands. Most importantly, you don't see action 
packed scenes for clapping or whistling. The director is just a narrator 
and thankfully he hasn't brought in commercial elements to hinder the 
flow of the story. The rise and fall of Phoolan as the bandit queen and her 
eventual surrender are shown with equal sincerity.
Seema Biswas in the title role gives a very powerful and memorable 
performance that is sure to fetch her critical acclaim and numerous awards.
With her ordinary looks she may not make it big in mainstream cinema, 
but, this is what they call, "role of a life time". She's definitely 
given her best and that is more than enough.
Fateh Ali Khan's (remember the voice in Oliver Stone's "Natural born 
Killers" ?) music adds depth and soul, thankfully not color, to the images. 
A very strong heart is a must for watching this film. Accepting the 
negative points of our society needs a much stronger one. If our society 
is/was half as bad the one portrayed in this movie then there is no point 
in being proud about our social set up.
Reports say that this is one of the biggest box office hits of the year 
in India. Let's hope its an eye opener to those who breed social injustice.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     On the face of it at least, and for filmgoers who are not truly
familiar with Indian film, BANDIT QUEEN is as far as can be from the
West's impression of what Indian movies are, assuming of course that
there are impressions, since the huge Indian production is "terra
incognita" to the non-Indian public or at best something merely
glimpsed.
     For those who have some familiarity with Indian film, there is, on
the one hand the huge output of pop-commercial, formulaic works,
romances and adventures punctuated by songs and dances.  On the other,
a much smaller number of comparatively "elitist" works.  Yet there was
never merely "an Indian Cinema" but various "Indian Cinemas." These
developed in eleven major languages and some twenty others, including
dialects.
     Bengali cinema, though in quantity about one-fourth of the
dominating Hindi films, has been the most prestigious.  It was Satyajit
Ray's 1955 PATHER PANCHALI and his other two works of the great "Apu
Trilogy" (APARAJITO and THE WORLD OF APU) that put India on the
international map.  Ray was much influenced by the Frenchman Jean
Renoir.
     This is not too unlike the case of the once-famous Swedish cinema
which fell into bad times, underwent a small renaissance in the 1940s
under the influence of French poetic realism, and re-entered the world
scene in the 1940s thanks to the works of Ingmar Bergman.
     Ray practiced what strikes me as thoughtful, poetic neo-realism.
He ushered in the New Wave of directors' cinema, much of it Bengali but
also from many states, such as enlightened Kerala which had a policy of
aid to quality films.  Even then, this production, though deserving a
wide Western exposure, is principally seen in film festivals and little
known to outside India.
     BANDIT QUEEN does not fall into familiar categories.  It is based
on the story of Phoolan Devi (Seema Biswas) who was the leader of a
dacoit (brigand, outlaw, etc.) band for about five years.  She became a
major media figure as well as a pop-icon because she was low caste
while her attacks were against upper caste people.  In 1983, she
surrendered to the authorities.  She was charged with four dozen major
crimes, including kidnapping and murder, notably the February 1981 raid
on the town of Behmai where between 22 and 30 (figures vary) people
were massacred.  Phoolan was released after 8, 11 or 12 years in prison
(figures vary) and now is either in politics or planning to be.
     BANDIT QUEEN purports to be a filmization of Phoolan's biography
as written by Mala Sen whose book was based on information gathered
from co-prisoners of Phoolan, who in turn related what Phoolan had told
them.  Historiography needs more than that, but let it pass...
     In the movie, Phoolan is introduced as short, homely,
foul-mouthed, lower caste eleven-year old who is sold as a wife to a
higher caste "old" (make it early 20s).  His mother is getting old and
needs a housekeeper-slave.  He pays with a rusty bicycle and a skeletal
cow.  This is already a form of rape.
     At her husband's place Phoolan is discriminated against for her
caste and ill-treated.  Immediately after giving her a beating, the
husband, while saying that she "is still not ripe" rapes her.  The rape
motif seems to be Ariadne's thread in the entire story.
     Phoolan runs away to her family.  Several years later the grown-up
woman also escapes from her village where the higher caste headman's
son tried to rape her, beat her up and lied to the village elders.  One
thing leading to another, she comes in contact with the dacoits who
first mock her then accept her.  She becomes the leader's mistress, her
status grows, eventually she is chief.
     Actor-director Kapur has taken many liberties (some of which he
defends on artistic grounds) with the life of Phoolan, including a
marriage which was very different in real life.  Phoolan, now married
to an upper caste man, brought suit against Kapur and tried to have the
film boycotted by festivals.  She settled for a generous (for India)
sum.
     No doubt, much of the film deals with acute discrimination and
ill-treatment of lower castes and of women in general.  But much of
that gets vaporized by the movie's artiness, effective at first, then
becoming artificial.  While it skips songs and dances  BANDIT QUEEN
seems to slow down past the early parts and to get lost in looseness
and vagueness.
     The action, relationships, the passage of time, the geography of
the place, the situations and the characters' purposes are often
unclear, confused and confusing.  You may wonder about the double-faced
high caste fellow who is both in with the bandits but plans their
destruction.  Or, later, about Baba Mustaquim who is apparently a local
Godfather to whom the gang goes for approval of plans.
     The rapes continue.  Phoolan is stripped naked in public.
Violence escalates.  But the movie does not master the building of
tension or suspense.  It lacks tightness and selectivity.  Nor does the
often fine photography avoid excesses, as when some of the agitation at
the Behmai Massacre is shot in dreamy, washed out, slow motion.  Or
when Phoolan in a red bandana recalls Geronimo flicks.  You'd think
that the director had seen too much Sam Peckinpah but was unable to
emulate him.
     Had the film been more neatly made, even as a kind of mythological
Joan of Arc or Robin Hood story--or generally on discrimination and
abuses of human rights--it would have been more convincing.  As it is,
though Phoolan is not really romanticized, we still don't know who she
is, what motivates her, what she thinks, what makes her tick.  The
movie is promising at the start and remains quite watchable, but it
affects you far less than the better, often quiet, intimate,
politically and sociologically committed works of the Indian New Wave.

Author
James Berardinelli
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema 
U.S. Release date: June 1995 
Running Length: 1:59 
MPAA Classification: Not Rated (Rape, violence, mature themes, 
                     sexual situations) 
     Controversy is swirling around BANDIT QUEEN, likely to be one of 
1995's most discussed features.  Supposedly based on the real-life 
experiences of a modern Indian folk hero named Phoolan Devi, the 
authenticity of the film's script is now under attack by none other than 
the subject herself.  Devi has not only disavowed her autobiography, but 
has filed a lawsuit to keep BANDIT QUEEN from being released in Indian 
theaters.  At this point, there is enough confusion surrounding the 
factual accuracy of the movie that its claim to be "a true story" should 
be accepted with reservations.  Nevertheless, regardless of its 
historical veracity, BANDIT QUEEN is an excellent examination of caste 
discrimination, human suffering, and the role of women in India's 
changing culture. 
     Two phrases encapsulate the backdrop against which this story 
unfolds.  The first is a quote shown on-screen at the film's start:  
"Animals, drums, illiterates, low castes and women are worthy of being 
beaten."  The second is a statement by Phoolan Devi's father:  "A 
daughter is always a burden..."  It is into this male-centered culture 
that Devi is born in the late 1950s.  Her entire life from the age of 
eleven, when she is married to a much older man, is devoted to fighting 
for the rights of women and striking blows against a viciously 
prejudiced social structure. 
     After running away from her husband, Devi is captured and abused by 
bandits.  Eventually, she joins a gang, and it isn't long before her 
reputation as a Robin Hood-like figure becomes known across India.  She 
exacts revenge on those who betrayed her, becoming the chief instigator 
of 1980's Behmai Massacre, where 24 men are killed.  The authorities 
prove unable to capture Devi, and she remains on the loose until 1983, 
when a deal with the Indian government brings about her surrender. 
     The picture of human indignity and suffering painted by BANDIT 
QUEEN is on par with that  of SCHINDLER'S LIST.  As the Nazis treated 
the Jews like animals, so too do the upper caste Indians regard those 
born into poverty and squalor.  Compared to some of the indignities 
experienced by Devi, death would have been quick and merciful.  Multiple 
rapes and public humiliation are only a few of the torments she must 
endure, and each atrocity further hardens her heart.  When it comes, 
Devi's revenge is indeed a dish best served cold. 
     Making the film was an undeniable challenge for director Kapur, an 
upper-caste Hindu who, along with writer Mala Sen, based as much of 
BANDIT QUEEN on interpretations of what Devi didn't say in her diaries 
as on what she did say.  There is also no doubt that the movie will have 
a vastly different impact in its country of origin than in the West, 
where we bring a foreign cultural perspective to a viewing.  But there's 
no question that this is the sort of picture capable of causing waves of 
world wide contention, regardless of how true or untrue particular 
elements are.  Fiction can often have as much impact as fact, especially 
if it is well-grounded in reality.   
     Tightly-paced, powerfully-written, and well-acted, BANDIT QUEEN is 
a first-rate adventure movie.  Like SCHINDLER'S LIST, there is no 
political diatribe here.  Actions and events are allowed to define the 
social climate.  The film manages to grip the audience in a way that no 
preachy commentary ever will.  Devi, as strikingly portrayed by actress 
Seema Biswas, becomes real, and it doesn't take long for us to feel her 
seething rage at the mountain of injustices rising above her.  It is 
uncomfortable to sympathize with someone who becomes so ruthless and 
uncompromising, but that is the gut-wrenching path along which director 
Kapur drags us.  BANDIT QUEEN is not for the squeamish, or for those who 
prefer not to be challenged or unsettled by a motion picture.  Because, 
whatever your feelings about the movie or its protagonist, BANDIT QUEEN 
will not leave you apathetic.  
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Jim Moody
     Shekhar Kapur's BANDIT QUEEN is a stinging attack on the way
low-caste women are regarded and treated in India.  From her
marriage at age eleven, Phoolan Devi, the main character resists,
however.  She comes back against her tormentors, learning as best she
can in the school of hard knocks.
     The real life Phoolan Devi, upon whose dictated story this film is
based, has just agreed a claim against the production company; she
objected to her depiction on two grounds: showing her character being
multiply raped and then her gang taking vengeance on those
responsible.  But this is not a rape/revenge film in the style of
Michael Winner--or anyone else.
     Phoolan Devi becomes a bandit, India's nationally notorious Bandit
Queen of the title, through a painful succession of rejections.  These
are pains that Kapur ensures the audience shares, rather than just gaze
upon.  Her degradation in her parents' village is taken further at the
hands of the police, when she is wrongly accused of theft; we are there
with her in the prison cell.  This experience pales when the higher
caste Thakurs who want her to knuckle down to their rule and arrange
for her to be kidnapped and tormented further by local bandits
(dacoits).
     But Phoolan's strength of mind carries her through.  A young
dacoit, Vikram, who becomes her second lieutenant and her lover, and
they lead a band of outlaws.  Later, following capture by her Thakur
enemies, Phoolan is subjected to multiple rape and even further
humiliation.  Kapur apparently shut himself up in a small, dark room
and tried to imagine himself being raped in order to get his depiction
of this scene to express the horror of rape as violence to a woman,
rather than the salacious way Hindi films sometimes show it.
     Phoolan forms her own gang, becoming notorious throughout the
Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.  Audaciously raiding towns one step of
the police, the state government launches a massive operation to catch
her and her mainly Muslim gang members following a massacre of those
Phoolan holds guilty of her multiple rape.  Her gang is whittled down
in numbers until she has no option but to surrender, which she does in
a glare of publicity.
     The real Phoolan and her supporters have managed to stop this film
being shown in India; the Indian High Court has even tried to stop it
being considered for an Oscar.  But whether it tells Phoolan Devi's
story exactly as it happened or not, the wider truths of BANDIT QUEEN
are powerful.  Indomitability of the human spirit in deepest adversity,
reaction against injustice, and the struggle to keep oneself true are
all here in this film.  Be seared by it.
     BANDIT QUEEN opened in London on Friday 17 February.  A US
distributor has still to be found.

Author
Pedro Sena
Few films will ever punch you as hard as this film does. Perhaps it is not
the film itself that matters but its story and subject matter.
This is an extremely brutal film, one that speaks for many women, although
how it does so, is not something that many people in a western society is
willing to go through, even in a movie.
Phoolan Devi, is married off at age 13 to support her parents. The man who
buys her, is more interested in satisfying his own social status than he is
interested in a woman, or marriage. But he succumbs to the tradition, and he
takes up his wife, even when people make fun of him for not finding
anyone but a child.
Phoolan is raped. And she runs away. In the running away, she manages to
find some work, but ends up in a place where a few young boys are expecting
to get their satisfaction out of her. She has very little taste for men,
specially patience, and one of the boys makes a strong pass at her. She
fights her way out of it, but ends up in the village court where she is
found guilty and jailed. Here her assault continues and she is raped by the
guards as "penance" before being allowed to leave. She has to leave town
because it is basically run by a family that does not like her caste. They
continue the abuse.
By chance, she ends up joining a group of outlaws, whose job seems to be to
chase food for their own members at the cost of the authorities. And here
she seems to get better known, and respected, and even finds a lover that
she can take up with. However, it is not without pain and struggle with
herself that she can finally give herself to him and not suffer from her
past abuses.
Phoolan eventually becomes a leader in the gang, something that many men do
not like at all, but for the most part, they realize that this is an
important move as it gets her heard about and famous. She returns one time
to the town that abused her seriously, and she gets her revenge in an awful
display of carnality, not unlike the abuse that she suffered. She even says
so. The Hindu authorities begin going after her, and use the brother of the
one man that accused her in the first time. They do not succeed,
but by this time the press is all over the situation, and the Hindu leaders,
now know that they can not kill her, or risk a serious war, or political
upheaval. Although many of the local people do not care
for this situation, they give in. She is asked to turn herself in, and to
her credit when this happens there are thousands and thousands of people
waiting for her, and the news media.
We know that now she will be heard and that her suffering may not exactly be
in vain, although most of India is still involved in a caste system that the
British fostered as a way to keep many of them under control. And Phoolan
Devi's story is heard.
This is the film of a true story. And her story had some very serious
consequences in the political life of many people, specially those who were
the authorities in the areas she came from. Many are still in prison for it.
Eventually, Phoolan was released and she has been treated since then as a
heroine, who stood up for something very important, dignity, and specially
that of WOMAN, in a system that doesn't give a shit about women, but uses
them mercilessly.
One of the most powerful films I have ever seen, and the abuses that it
displays is no less serious that a reality the whole world over. It is
indeed sad that for these situations to get an ear, many have to die,
and that one has to suffer such a hard punishment, but all we can hope is
that their plight is not in vain. In this case it was not, but it is clear
that many have failed where Phoolan did not. The fact of the matter may have
been that women were/are not respected as women at all, but are meant to be
subservient to men in all aspects of life. This is the 20th century, and
this is something that is very
much alive, the whole world over, and many countries still have this type of
insulting and demeaning behavior in their social mores. It is time that we
make it clear that this is not needed, and neither is
it supported.
This film is the clearest attack on this matter I have ever seen. They say
that India has power because of its history. In this case its history is
also the power that is destroying it in the modern day. Can
it be saved and changed.? I think this is the real point of the film.
Extremely brutal, savage is the word, film, not only in the violent aspects
of it, but with its unbelievable sexual attack. Phoolan Devi, I'm sorry that
you have suffered so much, but I praise your spirit, and
what you have stood for, and we need more of you in this day and age over
run in many places by savage men.
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Moderator of Centipede's THE FILM.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Mina Kumar
     On the surface, the story is full of ironies.  The low-caste
outlaw woman repudiates the hagiography made by a bourgeois high-caste
man for British television's Channel Four.  Phoolan Devi alleges that
the film is full of inaccuracies, and that he is exploiting her rapes
to sell a movie.  Director Shekar Kapur counter-alleges that she is
disowning her past--after all, he notes in his interviews, she has
married a Thakur now.  BANDIT QUEEN is briefly banned in India, and
becomes a cause celebre.
     Shekar Kapur becomes hard to miss in the Indian media.  Here he is
championing the right of his art not to be censored.  There he is
claiming that his film is an accurate portrayal of Phoolan's life, even
though the film diverges from Mala Sen's biography, which itself was
pieced together from accounts Phoolan told others in prison.  Kapur
finally admits to India Today that there are factual errors in his
film, but still avers that he has found a truth beyond mere factual
truth.  He knows after all that his "interpretations of what she
[Phoolan Devi] was hiding behind her words" (Director's Statement) is
the "True Story" (opening title of the film).
     In this post-Foucauldian age, it's hard to know what to make of a
film that begins with the title, "This is a true story."  Kapur's true
story shows Phoolan sold as a child to her first husband and brutalized
by a stereotypically cruel mother-in-law.  These episodes don't appear
in Mala Sen's book--Phoolan Devi was married with pomp, circumstance
and a dowry and her mother-in-law had died before she married.  Kapur's
true story also inserts extra rapes.  The filmi Phoolan is raped by a
Thakur, and then arrested by Thakurs for resisting sexual advances, but
the real Phoolan was beaten and jailed by her cousin Maiyaddin, who had
previously stolen Phoolan's father's land.  In the film, the Thakurs
bail Phoolan out to rape her further; in real life, her father got a
Thakur friend from a near-by village to bail her out.
     Maiyaddin, who had Phoolan Devi kidnapped by dacoits, does not
appear in this film.  Poverty and struggles over land ownership don't
figure in the filmi Phoolan's life even though they are the reasons the
real Phoolan turns to dacoitery.  The filmi Phoolan is shown at the
Behmai massacre but Phoolan Devi denies having been present, and other
survivors corroborate her claim.
     Kapur, and some leftist critics, defend these omissions and
inventions as cutting corners to tell the larger story the oppression
of low-castes and women in India.  In effect, Kapur (and Sen, who wrote
the screenplay) admit inserting and deleting episodes in the story of
Phoolan Devi to turn a complex life into a hagiography of a martyr.
Even as feminist propaganda, however, the film is unsuccessful.  BANDIT
QUEEN depicts gender oppression, but almost always as rape, and many,
many of those.  Phoolan Devi's letter to various film festivals asking
them not to show BANDIT QUEEN concentrates on her shame at the
depiction of her rapes, but what is even more problematic is that her
life has been devolved to one long blur of rape.  It certainly makes
for a monotonous view of women's oppression--and one that is fixated on
Phoolan's genitals to the extent that it even invents rapes for her.
     BANDIT QUEEN is really not feminist at all.  Antonia Fraser, in
her study of female leaders in war, notes that men have historically
explained away strong women by depicting them as singular--as tomboys
from birth, as exceptional women who are in fact "masculine" in some
way--so that their abilities cannot be extrapolated to other women.
BANDIT QUEEN fits this pattern:  its Phoolan calls men sister-fuckers
at the age of seven and can ride a bike better than her fat (i.e.,
effeminate) male cousin so there need be no depiction of the kind of
feminist radicalization other women could emulate.  Although BANDIT
QUEEN's heroine is always depicted as a singular woman--other women in
the film are off making chapatis-- in real life, Vikram Mallah's
previous lover also joined a gang.
     The film promulgates ridiculous stereotypes.  The real Phoolan
Devi was a tough gang-leader charged with 48 serious crimes including
22 murders, but the filmic Phoolan, in the midst of the Behmai massacre,
is mesmerized by a pair of anklets.  The filmic Phoolan ignores the
violence swirling around her because jewelery is apparently far more
interesting to women!
     During a mid-raid stop at a Kali temple, Vikram Mallah (despite
Seema Biswas' appearances to the contrary) dubs Phoolan "the beautiful
bandit," and this sums up the movie's basic attitude.  The filmic
Phoolan's only identity is as a sexual object (or subject, when she is
romping around with lover Vikram).  BANDIT QUEEN is not interested in
Phoolan's feelings about her poverty, banditry, other gang members,
family, any women friends--in any other aspect of her life.
     One of therst titles in the film translates Phoolan Devi's name,
"Goddess of Flowers."  No one who knew Phoolan Devi would think of her
in those terms--just as no one who knew a Peter would think of him as
"Rock"--but Kapur has obviously conceptualized the Phoolan he is
presenting in his movie as a "goddess of flowers."  The sinewy dacoit
from the Chambal ravines is transformed into a flower queen, just as
she was in a previous movie based on her life.
     The first was a conventional Hindi masala movie complete with
songs and dances around trees.  Though BANDIT QUEEN has no songs (a
concession to Western tastes?), it is many ways just as conventional,
but without any of the fringe benefits of conventional cinema.  Part of
the problem with BANDIT QUEEN is that it can't make up its mind what it
wants to be.  For a biography, the film's entry into Phoolan's mind is
shaky and uneven--some scenes are from her point of view and others
from a viewer's or other character's.  The film in some ways tries to
be realistic--the heroine is fairly unattractive, Phoolan's rapes are
depicted in a restrained, unleering way--but it doesn't maintain this
pose, descending into hagiography and Bollywood clich s.
     Flashbacks to tortured screams during revenge sequences, first
shots that heavy-handedly establish the heroine's character, a
conventionally movie-star handsome hero (Nirmal Pandey, a gorgeous
Sunjay Dutt) who is filmed from the bottom-up against an azure sky when
he defends the heroine, a first embrace when the hero holds the heroine
tight to hide her from the police, several parallels to childhood
incidents (mid-shoot-out, Phoolan gives a girl anklets to keep during
the girl's own during marriage as Phoolan's mother gave her earrings
before her marriage), babies symbolizing lost innocence, all make an
appearance in BANDIT QUEEN.  Even the phallic imagery has no subtlety:
hero Vikram Mallah is shown lying down with his rifle sticking traight
up and quite long between his legs.  Despite such Bollywoodisms,
however, BANDIT QUEEN does not have the masala power of a commercial
movie--no real fight sequences, beautiful songs, tense pacing,  The
lush cinematography and a few moving tableaus--particularly a panchayat
scene where the low castes sit on their haunches and the high castes
sit in chairs--leave BANDIT QUEEN as an artfully-filmed, inchoate
spectacle.
     If BANDIT QUEEN fails on artistic terms and on political grounds,
how is it succeeding?  As sleight of hand.  When asked about his
omissions and inventions in the plot, Kapur says, "You don't want to
confuse the audience.  Either you have to tell the whole tale or tell a
selected tale.  When you tell a selected tale, it has to have a
context."  The context of BANDIT QUEEN is this:  Kapur has attributed
Phoolan Devi's objections to the fact that she is now married to an
upper-caste man, and wants to be respectable, disowning her past.  He
claims that he can better tell the truth about her life even if that
means inventions and omissions, that he is a better voice for the
oppressed than she is even though she is the low-caste woman, that he
knows the meaning of her life better than she does.  And people are
believing him.
     The Indian government has allowed the film to be released after
some minor cuts.  Channel Four, the producers, have paid Phoolan Devi
$60,000 and she has dropped her lawsuit.  The film is opening across
America, complete with press packets heralding its championing of the
underprivileged.

Author
M.Srikanth
     BANDIT QUEEN is the real life story of India's Phoolan Devi, a
low-caste woman who rose to become one of the most feared dacoits of
her time.  In a sense, it is also a chapter from the real life story of
India today.  In another sense, it is also a chapter from the real life
story of world's women.
     Here is no stylised narration of truth; this is real life viewed
under the glaring arc-lights of brutal honesty.  The director was
walking a very thin line--one false step and this would turn into a
sleazy, irreverent portrayal and would betray all good intentions.  The
viewer is taken through an emotional roller-coaster ride--I felt
hatred, extreme anger, embarrassing helplessness, enormous pity and
at last, a sense of guilt-ridden relief when it was all over.  If such a
movie can only be judged by the effect it has on its viewers, BANDIT
QUEEN is a huge success.
     This movie, completed a year ago, has been embroiled in
controversy from multiple fronts.  Initially, Phoolan Devi strongly
opposed the screening of the movie saying that it was a warped account
of her life.  However, as Shekar Kapur (the director of the movie who
was present during the screening) explained, she had not even seen the
movie then and was going entirely by hearsay.  Recently, however, she
has been shown the movie in private screenings (the movie is still
banned in India) and she has both "approved it for worldwide release"
and withdrawn her case from court.  After watching the movie, the only
comment she had was "My life was much harder."
     >From another front, Shekar has also been fighting to get the
censor board of India to clear the movie.  This is unlike any Indian
movie ever made--graphic violence, explicit language and even a scene
with full frontal nudity.  But again, this is reality and if people can
see it in the streets, why can't they see it on the screen?  Shekar has
vowed to fight the censors "tooth and nail" and is confident that the
movie "will be screened without any cuts in the near future."
     Is Shekar commercialising India's current moral depravity? Given
the thoroughly deglamourised, non-dramatic portrayal of potentially
cinematic contexts, the answer would have to be a no. "Are you saying
this is India?" asked a viewer after the movie.  "No," Shekar said
emphatically, "I don't think I ever did."  How did he feel as an Indian
filming this shameful side of his country?  "I feel ashamed about how
things are ... I think we (Indians) all need to.  But I think any other
director from any other part of the world--be it from Yugoslavia or
Russia or South America would do the same thing as I did.  We are
mature enough to face reality.  Aren't we?"
     From the outside, it seems an improbable task--Shekar Kapur is a
high-caste, city-bred man trying to portray the life of Phoolan Devi, a
low caste woman from a village.  However, the fact that, at the end,
this positioning vis-a-vis the artist and his subject only serves to
accentuate the merits of the films's artistic achievement, is a
statement on the sincerity and involvement of the artist in his
endeavour.
     The film opens in the year 1968 when as a 11 year old girl,
Phoolan is sold away by her father as a bride to a heartless man whose
sole concern is that he "needs his wife since his mother is getting too
old to do the house work."  We are introduced to a girl who freely uses
foulest of languages and who has a game confidence that she can take on
any of these "sister *******."  In her new environment, she is
confronted with the caste discriminations of the local high caste
Thakurs whom she would live to hate for the rest of her life.  Here is
also the first of the countless times she would be violated.  This
first act of violation was a powerful piece of work, with the camera
initially showing both the husband and the scared girl, then slowly
moving to close-in on the girl's tormented face, while in the
background one can hear the screamings grow shriller and shriller till
the moment when it mixes with a voice that is singing a high-pitched
lament.  Genuinely gut-wrenching.
     The initial fifteen minutes of the movie, in which all this happens,
sets the tone and the pattern for the remaining 105 minutes.  We see
the turbulent, often traumatic life of Phoolan Devi with little left to
imagination.  She runs away from her husband after the incident, is
driven out of her native village for having "enticed" a higher caste
youth, lives with her cousin for a while till the time that Vikram, a
low caste bandit, falls in love with her and rescues her from his
high-caste fellow bandit.  There is a brief relief for Phoolan (and the
audience) as she adjusts herself to the new life as a bandit, her new
image and the prominence.  However, things get rough again with the
release of the high caste ex-leader of the gang from prison.  How this
changes her life irrevocably and how she rises again from the ashes to
become the bandit queen is the rest of the movie.
     There are several sequences in the movie where the art of
portrayal of reality has been taken to new heights.  I will not go into
all the details and let you experience it first hand, but it would
suffice to say that much of the movie is not for the faint-hearted.
     While handling a story such as this, the role of  the director of
a movie changes dramatically.  He is more of an interpreter; constantly
making choices of what to show and what to leave out, there is an
abundance of material, and constantly "coalescing" truth into
understandable unifications and using them as vehicles to convey a
sense of the reality.  An overwhelming priority is also his role as a
watchdog to protect the film from veering into the dimension of
celluloid entertainment, while all the time maintaining an eye on both
the sincerity of his own intentions and the authenticity of his
interpretations.  Thankfully, Shekar has scored well in all departments
relieving us from having to digress into pedantic details.
     Seema Biswas is Phoolan Devi.  It is difficult to believe that
this is her first movie.  The hatred and anger in the eyes are real,
the confidence in her manner in the latter part of the movie is real
and on the whole a near faultless performance.  Only during the scenes
when she tries to portray the feminine side of Phoolan can one sense a
measure of discomfort as if she is not wholly sure of what to do.
However, on second thought, there might be some truth in saying that
Phoolan herself, after all the trauma she has gone through, had lost
touch with her feminine side and as such the hesitation on Seema's part
was deliberate.  Also, one has to admire and appreciate the courage of
an Indian artist to come forward to be cast in such a portrayal.
     The screenplay is mostly tight.  The first half of the movie moves
very fast and so do the final segments.  The middle portion, showing
the life of Vikram and Phoolan as bandits seems a little sagging,
though.  Towards the end, the attempts by the government to get Phoolan
to surrender are shown in a hurried detail.  Also, we get no real
understanding of how Phoolan was perceived by the general public
outside the valleys of Chambal.  What we get is a tight close-up on
Phoolan the person and her social position as a bandit queen is almost
considered an irrelevance (Shekar did mention after the movie that he
had to make many difficult choices and that he was contractually
obligated to make a two hour movie).
     The music by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and the photography by Ashok
Mehta lend able support.
     From a totally different view point, this is a positive film about
resurgence.  The fact that a physically traumatised, mentally
tormented, low-caste woman from a depraved Indian village chose not to
give up but stand up and fight her own battle is amazing.  This movie
stands as fair testimony to this life of resurgence.
Needless to say, I highly recommend the movie.
