Title
Review for Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Jim Griffith
     Well, I went to a sneak preview last night, and I naturally have to
say a few words about this movie.
     Drop whatever you're doing, sell your children if necessary, and go
and see this movie.
     Siskel and Ebert apparently called it "the best action movie since
DIE HARD 2" in their review.  I don't think they're doing it justice.
I would call it "the best action movie since RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK".
     I gotta start by commenting on the plot (without spoiling -- yet).
The plot was very well done, making it the best *sequel* I've ever seen.
The story makes sense, there aren't any gaping logic flaws (if you
ignore some of the technological explanations they make), and it fits
very well with the original, without being even slightly contrived or
generally predictable.  While there aren't any violent twists, there
weren't a lot of places where they went with what I considered to be the
obvious route.
     The special effects are superb, and well worth the serious amount
of money they spent to make them.  Admittedly, I'm sort of biased, since
my graphics professor worked on them (Mark Dippe', HI MARK!).  Those of
you who saw THE ABYSS will recognize the technology involved, and you'll
see how far they've taken their techniques.  The ABYSS effects were
fairly obviously computer generated, although at the time, they were
quite impressive.  I sat through the movie knowing full well how the
advanced Terminator effects were done, and I never consciously thought
of them as effects -- they looked real and I took them for reality.  In
my opinion, that's the ultimate sign of special effects success.  The
movie is worth seeing for the advanced Terminator effects alone.  More
than anything, I think this movie really showcases what computer
graphics are capable of, and I think this is the first time I've ever
seen a computer graphics effect that truly doesn't look like a computer
graphics effect.  If I seem to be raving here, there's a reason.  As far
as I'm concerned, this film is as much a pioneer special effects film as
either 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY or STAR WARS were.
     The characterizations leave something to be desired, I think.  At
times, Arnold is too much Arnold and not enough Terminator.  And the
advanced Terminator (Robert Patrick) was far less ... abrupt than Arnold
was as the first original Terminator.  I think that most of the blame
for this lies in the writing -- if Patrick was told "say this line", he
had to say that line, regardless of what it did to the character.  In
terms of the acting, I have no complaints with Patrick.  He looked
appropriately nasty at the right times, and he was convincing as a
killing machine.  I think he portrayed the character as it was written.
I just think it was written a bit off-base.
     As for the character of John Connor, I think he was portrayed well.
I would have preferred the character to have been written such that the
audience gets a glimpse of the character growing towards the successful
rebel that he is as an adult.  We really don't see any of that, and I
think it's too bad.  But as a ten-year-old, he's quite believable.
     The interesting character is Linda Hamilton as Sarah Connor.  In
the original, she was a strongly sympathetic, somewhat helpless heroine.
In this one, she's essentially a psycho.  This takes a little getting
used to, but it makes for some interesting scenes.  A lot of Sarah's
character and actions are rather cliche -- I think Linda's watched ALIENS
a few too many times.  But her character is essential for the movie.
     These are really minor nits.  The characters are believable in the
situations they get into, and that's all that's really required.  This
movie is no TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, and it doesn't need to try to be.
     I think the advanced Terminator really didn't use his full
abilities until the fight sequences with Arnold at the end.  There was a
lot that the thing was capable of that it should have done that it
didn't.  For instance, it almost always attacked in a humanoid form.
There were a number of cases where a tentacular form (or even a simple
fifth limb) could have accomplished quite a bit, but it wasn't done.
Essentially, the advanced Terminator is so nasty that if it can get
within three feet of its target, its target is dead.  As such, the
Terminator's efforts should always have been to get in as close a
proximity to its target as it could.  When it was in the nitrogen truck
chasing Arnie in the truck, it should have oozed into Arnie's truck and
attacked directly, rather than trying to run them down.  It didn't
seemed as focused on its mission -- killing John Connor -- as Arnold's
Terminator was in the original.
     The advanced Terminator generally wasn't single-minded enough.
Arnie as the original Terminator was single-minded.  He went straight
after whatever he needed to do the job, whether that meant shoving his
hand through a guy's chest, blowing away a police station full of 17
cops, or whatever.  The advanced Terminator went through a lot of effort
to remain within human society, and that seemed strange.  It paused far
too often for dramatic effect, rather than finishing off its target.  I
think I counted three instances where the Terminator could have
accomplished its mission if it hadn't stopped for a dramatic pause.
That kind of ruined it for me -- I knew because of the pauses and who
was involved which characters would survive at the end of the film.
     Arnie was also too gregarious a Terminator.  Admittedly, he was a
"learning" Terminator.  But he still went in for chit-chat far too
often.  I think the writers wanted to portray the older Terminator as a
sympathetic character, and I'm not sure it worked for the film.
     I also had a hard time accepting the nature of the advanced
Terminator in general as being realistic, but I'm willing to file that
under "willing suspension of disbelief".
     Enough said.  My complaints are minor and generally technical.  As
a piece of entertainment, this is the best I've seen in a long time.
I've never been to a movie that had me as thoroughly engrossed.  Go see
it.

Author
Frank Maloney
     If you have completely insulated yourself from the trailers and the
press in re TERMINATOR 2, you may discover a spoiler or two in the
following notice.  If you have picked up some clues already as to the
basic story, carry on; I reveal nothing you don't already know.)
     TERMINATOR 2 is a film by James Cameron, written by Cameron and
William Wisher.  It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, Edward
Furlong, Robert Patrick, and Joe Morton.
     I have never seen the 1984 film TERMINATOR, so this review will not
be discussing the sequel in terms of the original, except to note that
the budget for original is said to be $6.5 million and for the sequel
$88 million.  Amazing inflation.  I think I can say that almost every
dollar of that 88 million is visible on the screen.  This is first, and
foremost, a F/X hit of major intensity.  The evolution from the friendly
tentacle of "polymerized water" in THE ABYSS to the demonic power of the
polymorphic, liquid-metal T-1000 is the evolution from a single
pictograph to a sophisticated vocabulary.  The T-1000, played with cool,
boy-next-door menace by Robert Patrick (who looks like a psycho escapee
from CHIPS with his lean, white-bread, bland good looks), is more living
metal than merely liquid metal; after all, mercury is a liquid metal and
although it used to be called quicksilver (as in "the quick and the
dead") it is nowheres near as determined to live and destroy as the
T-1000.
     Of course, it is the inevitable fate of super-villain-turned-
superhero T-800 (played by Arnold Schwarzenegger) that it must confront
a villain at least it's equal, just as Robocop came back to wrangle with
a better, evil version of itself.  Arnie, I understand, became the
enormously successful multi-national industry that he is today as a
direct result of TERMINATOR.  One need hardly say that he is perfect for
the part, which is custom tailored to both his physique and his dramatic
skills.  It is great fun having a hero who is every bit as villainous in
his demeanor and appearance as the real villain.  And for those of you
who know the original, it must be something of a mind-f*k to have the
T-800 reprogrammed to do good.
     It certainly is a shame that this detail is so well publicized in
advance by the trailers.  This has been discussed already, so I need not
rehash it here, except to agree with the poster who commented on the
terrific efforts the movie goes to set you up for a revelation that the
trailer gave away two months ago.
     But back to Arnie.  I like to have a certain amount of fun at
Arnie's expense; I don't get the impression that he thinks he's any
great shakes as a thespianic artiste.  But I do think that he does have
a flare for comedy, even if he can't read lines for anything.  A lot of
his comedy comes from the context of his usual screen persona: the
hulking monosyllabic muscle that walks like a man.  When this Hulk
smiles (half-smiles, actually) it's more exciting, and a lot funnier,
than when Garbo laughed.  Of course, he has his schticks which we love,
which we eagerly await: the lines, the shades.  It's obvious that people
love Arnie, and someone ought to seriously examine why.  I mean, if we
could bottle it, we'd all have $16 million airplanes, wouldn't we?
     And then there's Linda Hamilton as Sarah Connor.  She struck me
very as Sigourney Weaver did in ALIEN and even more so in ALIENS.  She's
physically powerful, she's brave, she's seen the future, the enemy, and
it's left her more than a little obsessed.  I don't think Hamilton is as
drop-dead beautiful as Weaver, but she's impressive in her own way.  The
Connor character is fairly interesting in its own right.  She is a
crazy-person, desperate, driven, a monomaniac (to use an old-fashioned
word; as her son John (played by Edward Furlong) says, "One thing about
Mom, she believes in planning ahead."  (Quoted from memory.)  The only
thing she leaves out of the plan is her son's need to be loved.  Connor
has a recurring nightmare of a playground being nuked; it is the most
emotional, human moment and the most humane F/X, in what is largely a
very cold, mechanical movie.
     Edward Furlong as John Connor, future savior of mankind, is pretty
good; I liked him least when he was teaching the T-800 How to be a
Human.  He has a moral vision that balances and overrides the monomanias
of Mom and the Cyborg.  He is the krypton in some ways, the limitation
on the behavior of two rather determined killers.  Unfortunately, he is
little too glib in analyzing his problems to be the perfect valley brat,
but then he is a savior-in-training so I guess we can expect a little
extra horsepower in analysis department, too.
     Robert Patrick has the enviable role of being the vehicle for the
real star of TERMINATOR 2, the special effects and especially the
shape-shifting effects that make the T-1000 an ultimate demon.  Arnie
lays down the few rules that limit the shape-shifting early on, but
within those rules, watch out.  Patrick never sweats, but as a
shape-shifter he can imitate a smile.  The best stuff in TERMINATOR 2 is
reserved for Patrick's long-suffering but resilient screen body.  O
lucky man!  
     TERMINATOR 2 is a rowser of an action movie.  Absolutely nonstop,
sustained, one-long chase-cum-fight, with plenty of mind boggling
visuals along the way.  The Industrial Light and Magic people created
almost completely seamless effects; once or twice, I saw past the
illusion, but only for an instant.  The story is negligible, very
standard-issue, a rehash-cum-spin, as I understand it, of the original
TERMINATOR.  And, of course, the Message and the Medium are totally at
loggerheads.  The movies says "value human life", but the level of
violence is pretty intense and survivable only because in a comic-book
context.  I read that Cameron in the press kit admits this is "a violent
movie about peace."  Like f*king for virginity?
     But be that as it may, I enjoyed TERMINATOR 2.  The chances you
will, too, even at full ticket price.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A big sci-fi (as opposed to "science
     fiction") film with amazing special effects has Arnold
     Schwarzenegger again playing a robot caught up in a battle
     for the future being fought in the present.  Stronger on
     action than intelligence, it still manages to expand the
     ideas of the first film.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     (There are films plotted in such a way that it is very difficult to say
anything without giving away twists in the plot.  This review has been
worded carefully to avoid spoilers that have appeared in *every* other review
I have seen.  A spoiler section will follow the review to discuss matters
that could not be addressed in the main body of the review.)
     On August 29, 1997, so the story goes, the world is plunged into
nuclear war, though of about six billion people, only about half are
actually killed.  The remaining three billion people are locked into a
life-and-death struggle of humans against machines.  The machines achieve
sentience and set out to kill all humans to make the world safe for
machine-kind.  But the one human who most stands in their way is John
Connor.  So the machines send a killer robot, a "terminator," into the past
to the year 1984 to kill Sarah Connor, who is destined to be the mother of
John.  The humans manage to send back a human to protect Sarah Connor.  The
struggle of these two time travelers and the conception of John Connor is
the plot of the 1984 film THE TERMINATOR.  The first robot, played by Arnold
Schwarzenegger, failed in his mission so the machines, who could send only
one robot back before, suddenly found a way to send a second robot.  The
humans, too, who could send only one human before, find the means of sending
back their own representative for their own second shot.  This time each
sends to somewhere around the year 1995, one with a mission to kill the now
ten-year-old John Connor, the other with a mission to protect John Connor.
Their conflict is the story of TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY.
     Sarah Connor's reaction to the events of the first film bordered on the
psychotic.  She made it her mission to learn everything she could about
guerilla warfare and survival tactics to pass on to her son.  She slept with
mercenaries and made friends with military personnel to help achieve her
goal.  She was eventually placed in a mental institution and John was given
to foster parents.  He seems to have aged fast and behaves like a much older
boy.  He even apparently has a license for a dirt-bike that he rides like a
teenager and has broken the security on local cash machines.  One might
assume that the sequel is more of a juvenile film if the main character is
so young, but director James Cameron uses that device only to widen the band
of audience appeal to include younger people.  Arnold Schwarzenegger is as
tough as he was in the first outing but this time has more of an opportunity
to put personality into his character.
     The new script adds some new concepts and forgets about some of the
old.  And both actions are welcome.  We discover this time around that the
nuclear war was not with the Soviets.  This might have been considered a
necessary change since month by month the possibility of nuclear war between
the United States and the Soviets seems more and more remote.  But without
the Soviets as foes, the question would be whom would we be fighting with.
The film provides an answer, as Cameron often does, by borrowing a concept
from another major science fiction film.  (See the spoiler section if you
dare.)  Not entirely gone but soft-pedaled is the ridiculous idea that only
living matter can go through the time portal.  So the time portal strips
away clothing and weapons but for some reason leaves intact other dead
matter like hair and fingernails.  However, at one point in the film, the
machines of the future send back a piece of metal and it makes it through
just fine without being living tissue.  The concept that some physical
process in the time portal recognizes what is living and what is not is
dubious at best.  This of course does raise an inconsistency in the plot,
but then Cameron considers and develops the ideas of the film only enough so
they do not get in the way of all the action scenes.  Along those lines it
still has not occurred to the humans of the future (is "still" the right
word for events in the future?) that their efforts might be better spent in
sending back agents actually to avert the war, rather than just to lessen
its impact.
     The action scenes and special effects--what most of the audience has
come to see--are delivered, even if not always in the most intelligent
manner.  I consider Cameron's last film, THE ABYSS, a much more intelligent
and interesting action film.  It had better characters and a much more
engrossing story.  In one sequence of TERMINATOR 2, one of the good guys is
sprayed with machine gun fire that should have been instantly fatal, but he
lives considerably longer to exact his revenge.  It is a little redundant,
incidentally, to say that it is a good guy sprayed with machine gun fire.
From a certain point in the plot on, the good guys undertake to do what has
to be done without killing any more of the bad guys, much like in the
Japanese action film SANJURO.  The special effects are extremely well done
and undoubtedly account for a big piece of the film's price tag of somewhere
around a tenth of a billion dollars.  That cost was apparently partially
defrayed by rubbing the audience's collective nose in the name of a well-
known soft drink.
     While much of the special effects budget went into creating some really
impressive robot effects, there was enough left over to spend some very
impressive effects on a dream sequence.  In the film THE MOUSE THAT ROARED,
in the midst of showing some screwball characters playing tag with a nuclear
super-weapon, we see a huge nuclear detonation.  The narrator reassures us
that it did not really happen in the plot and the scene was just to remind
us what could happen any moment.  Similarly, we see some of the most
frightening and realistic scenes ever created of a city destroyed by a
nuclear bomb.  And we see them in a dream sequence to tell us, this is what
Sarah Connor is trying to avoid.  In those scenes and many others the
audience can only marvel at the incredible technology used to create this
fervently anti-technology film.
     TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY is a large film with large virtues and large
faults.  Like Mt. Rushmore, it is huge and a must-see, but one wonders if it
really was such a good idea in the first place.  I would rate this
Mt. Rushmore of a movie +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
       ***SPOILER SECTION****SPOILER SECTION****SPOILER SECTION***
     One of the nice touches of the script is its use of the audience's
expectations from the previous film to surprise the audience this time
around.  Once again you have a mean-looking Arnold Schwarzenegger and a
smaller and more human-looking guy--thin, short, and his ears stick out--
arriving from the future.  The natural assumption the audience has is that
the Schwarzenegger robot will be a killing machine aimed at John Connor, and
the other visitor will be playing defense.  It would have caught the
audience nicely off-guard when each does precisely the opposite thing.
Unfortunately, you are looking at the first and only review I have seen that
does not spoil this twist for the audience.
     Every review also gives away the nature of the bad terminator, a truly
awesome idea for a killing machine which it strikes me was borrowed from a
1960s DC comic book called "Metal Men."  Visually the effect, a close
relative of the "water-tentacle" used in THE ABYSS, is very impressive.
However, the story simply did not carry through with the power of this
killer.  In at least three of the scenes, he should have been able to take
out John Connor by turning himself into a strong clamp and a very long
sword.  He should have been able to kill any human within twenty or thirty
feet of him fairly easily.  There may have been some rule that said only a
certain percentage of his weight could go into the sword, but if that were
the case they should have said so.  And this thing is many orders of
magnitude advanced over the old-style terminator.  Where did the new
technology come from?  It seems unlikely for 2029 that any such technology
will be possible.
     It is nice that Sarah Connor starts to use her head, but why does
nobody in the future think in terms of stopping the nuclear war?  And
destroying the computers is a good thought for someone like Sarah, but it
probably would not work.  It is a standard security precaution to store
important software backups off-site just in case two robots from the future
decide to use your lab as a battleground.  Or in case a defense computer
becomes sentient and starts dictating terms.  I think Cameron probably
borrowed that idea from COLOSSUS: THE FORBIN PROJECT.
     One last question: When the liquid nitrogen truck took the liquid robot
into the foundry, am I the only one who knew the next two forces that would
be used against him?  No, I thought not.

Author
Randy Parker
        1984's THE TERMINATOR is generally regarded as one of the most
influential films of the '80s, which gives its sequel, TERMINATOR 2:
JUDGEMENT DAY, gigantic shoes to fill.  T2 could have simply been a rehash
of the first film, but, happily, writer-director James Cameron has come up
with an inventive story line which cleverly continues the plot of part one.
Given the sorry state of most sequels, T2 is 100 times more creative--and
more satisfying--than we had any right to expect.  The movie has all the
ingredients of a classic sci-fi thriller, and Cameron combines and seasons
them to near perfection.
        His recipe starts with 215 pounds of prime Schwarzenegger, who
returns triumphantly to his breakthrough role as a devastatingly lethal
cyborg.  Arnold's T-800 model Terminator is back and battle-ready, but this
time he has new programming--a plot twist which breathes new life into the
character and allows Schwarzenegger to give a surprisingly rich
performance.
        Linda Hamilton's character has also undergone radical changes since
the first film, in which she was fairly helpless against the Terminator's
vicious attacks.  It has been ten years since Hamilton first encountered
the cyborg, and in that time she has become tough as nails, amassing
muscles and an arms supply in anticipation of his return.  Hamilton is
remarkably convincing in the gritty role of a disturbed woman desperately
fighting for her life and for her sanity.
        The new spice in the mix is Edward Furlong, who shows natural
charisma as Hamilton's son, the disturbed 12-year-old juvenile-delinquent
who is the assassination target in T2.  Furlong's interactions with
Schwarzenegger give the movie heart, soul and--most
impressively--psychological depth.
        Of course, Cameron's concoction wouldn't be complete without his
special sauce: whirlwind action and new technology.  The movie's amazing
state-of-the-art special effects (which feature the most advanced computer
animation ever captured on celluloid) boggle the mind and dazzle the
senses.  And with his vigorous direction, Cameron clearly reestablishes
himself as the one and only true master of action, even if the tumult is
not quite as intense as it was in the original.
        More than anything, however, it's T2's riveting story line and
unexpected humanity which make it not only a smashing piece of science
fiction, but also one of the year's best films.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: James Cameron
Writers: James Cameron and William Wisher Jr.
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, Edward Furlong, Robert
Patrick, Joe Morton, Erin Boen, Don and Dan Stanton
I moved to college on Ausust 29th, 1997, which is the same day as
"Judgment Day" in "Terminator 2," which was basically the big apocalypse
that killed most of the population, and, of course, launched the
"Terminator" films.  In a typical film version of this, the action
sequences would be half-assed, and it would be as deep as a Seagal
film.  But under the helm of James Cameron, who's the world's biggest
perfectionist, we get a film with depth and some totally ass-kicking
action sequences, which he's famous for.
In the original film (also done by Cameron), a Terminator (Ah-nold)
arrived from the future to assasinate the mother (Linda Hamilton) of the
leader of the rebellion against the robots in the future, who ruled the
earth after the big apocalypse until the humans rebelled.  But another
human arrived too (Michael Biehn), who not only killed the Terminator
(and was also killed), but ended up being the father of the leader of
the rebellion (a lovely twist).
Jump ahead about 10 years or so, the mother's now in an asylum; the son,
John (Edward Furlong), is a rebellious Bart Simpson-type, living with
foster parents, and riding around on a little moped with his friend; and
two terminators have arrived with different missions: T-1000 (Robert
Patrick), a liquid terminator, sent to kill John; and T-100 (Ah-nold) ,
this time sent to protect him from T-1000.  They both arrive in electric
lightning, totally buck naked, and on other parts of a bad city.
They both get clothes (although T-1000 has a cool thing where he can
imitate anything it impales, and can do other liquid things), and they
both set out to find John.  They both pretty much find him first, duke
it out a bit, ending in a giant Cameron-esque explosion, and soon they
rescue the mother from the asylum, who has also begun to attempt an
escape.
Part of Arnold's programming not only makes him protect John, but do
whatever he commands.  And he soon not only becomes his friend and
pretty much his bitch, but soon he has become a father figure to him,
and with the mother there, they form a kind of family unit.
The plot twists a bit, and we find out that a blooming company found the
chip and arm from the first terminator and has taken that direction. 
But on August 29th, 1997 (a day I still think about), they somehow blew
up the world, and all their robots took over the world, fighting the
remaining humans, led by a grown-up John.  Once this is found out, the
mother decides to make it her business to stop it all by assasinating
the head of the company (Joe Morton), who instead of being a jerk, goes
ahead and helps them stop it by blowing up all the information.  This
leads to about 30 minutes or so of straight action sequences, right up
until the end (which pissed me off when I rewatched it on NBC last night
because they had to cut to commercial at several inconvenient times).
Now, is "Terminator 2" the greatest single action film ever made?
Nearly.  The plot is so creepy and ominous that it's totally
intriguing.  The elements of depth are very well handled, causing us to
care about the characters and even to question the mother's choice in
killing Morton, and even think of Arnold as a near human.  There are
elements to humanize Arnold, and he almost becomes one, though he can
feel nothing, but later on love for who he's protecting, and care for
the mother, as well as a nifty way to not kill people all the time,
causing this to have a surprisingly low body count for such a riveting
action pic.
And Cameron is a master of action scenes.  And since Arnold cannot be
killed by mere bullets, he can go way, way, way over the top with his
scenes.  He also equips T-1000 with a bunch of cool new perks.  For one,
he can mutate, and everything.  But also, when you shoot him, it merely
makes a hole, which is covered up within seconds.  A master of using an
idea to its fullest limits, we not only get him shooting him with a gun
to stop him for a couple seconds, but he later freezes him, uses a
machine gun on him, etc.  His action sequences are not just there to
look cool, but to advance the plot.
This is one instance where the special effects work perfectly.  They
look realistic, they help with the cool action sequences, and they are,
basically, jaw-dropping.  Of course, James Cameron always makes the best
special effects, I mean, other than Spielberg.  The whole idea of T-1000
is an ingnius idea, and the film has the special effects to back his
innovativeness up.  There's also a cool bit at the end involving what
looks like outtakes from John Carpenter's "The Thing."
There is one question of a potential flaw in the film.  A big ass
paradox.  This involves the fact that if they stop "Judgment Day," then
how was John Connor conceived, since his father came back from the
future, which has been stopped by the end...unless they didn't actually
stop it.  I mean, the company could have had diskettes elsewhere when
the plant was blown up.  I dunno.  But I remember discussing this with
other people, and someone pointed out the theory of time lines, where
there are alternate realities that come out (also used in the "Back to
the Future" trilogy).  But, I'm still a believer in the "12 Monkeys"
theory of time: that it's linear.  But oh well.  Let's not try to think
to hard on this one.
The film also features some actually excellent performances.  Arnold is
pretty much at his best here, combining zombie-like creepiness with some
human depths that are meticulously added in the right places.  Linda
Hamilton continues on the Cameron streak of strong female leads (started
with Ripley), and also proves herself a talented actress and powerful
action lead (and has never looked so attractive).  Eddie Furlong is
good, best he ever was.  Joe Morton, as always, rocks.  
And Robert Patrick gives a perfectly delicious creepy performance.  He
has this kind of Malcolm MacDowell "Clockwork Orange" stare, equipped
with greasy pushed-back hair, (big ears) and some little doses of
mechanical humor - like staring as one of his victims struggles or
almost being beaten, then looking up at his enemy, and mocking them
pretentiously.  He has never been this awesome, and I doubt he ever will
(the poor guy's career never really took off, save a cool performance in
"Copland," a cameo in "Wayne's World" as his T-1000 character, and he
also did a grade-Z erotic thriller with Teri Hatcher where he got to
touch her bare breasts - for all you horny bastards, it's called "The
Cool Surface," and it sucks).
But "T2" is probably the second best action film ever made, close by to
"Die Hard."  It involves some of the most amazing action sequences ever
executed, a story that's so engrossing that the film has become one of
the ten most defining films of the past decade (from the "Premiere"),
and features good acting, and a good old paradox or two.  "Terminator 2"
is basically how one makes a great big-budget action film.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     In THE TERMINATOR there is a very bleak version of the future.  The
nuclear war has already happened (in the year 1997), and some survived.
Those who have survived face even a tougher battle.  Machines now have
artificial intelligence and can run themselves.  They see the errors in
the ways of humans, so have set out to cease their existence.  The
humans, though, have a leader, a man named John.  The machines, afraid
that John will lead the humans to victory, had sent Arnold
Schwarzenegger, a Terminator T800 robot, back in time to 1984.  His job
is to kill off Hamilton who is going to give birth to John.  The humans
learning of the machines move send back in time a human to stop the T800
(who was played by Michael Biehn).  The T800 failed it's mission.
     In TERMINATOR 2 the machines are now desperate to kill off John
(who is played in TERMINATOR 2 by Furlong).  They send back a Terminator
version T1000 (played by Patrick) to kill off Furlong, now ten.  The
humans in an effort to stop the T1000, send back the T800 model of the
Terminator robots (played again by Schwarzenegger).
     On a 0 to 5 scale I give this film a 5.  The special effects in the
film, done by Industrial Light & Magic I have heard, were exceptional
(they should be for the $88 million budget the film had).  The film is
nowhere near as brutal as Arnold's tend to be, but don't be worried
though because there is still a considerable amount of violence in it.
I suggest seeing the film while it is still in the theaters for it will
lose some of its impact on a small television screen; it is well worth
the $7 for the ticket.  For more on the film for those of you who have
already seen the film you can see the next page.
     TERMINATOR 2 is rated R for explicit language and graphic violence.
     WARNING - the following may contain spoilers that may hinder your
enjoyment of watching TERMINATOR 2 and/or may spoil the end.
      The plot on the whole was quite well done although in a couple
spots it was obvious what was going to happen.  Like at the metal works
at the film's finale it was quite obvious where Robert Patrick was going
to end up.  The other place that comes to mind that was a bit obvious
was the inevitable end of the poor guy who, unintentionally, made the
robots who will fight the humans for the earth.
      Linda Hamilton plays the psycho role of John's mother to the
extreme.  I feel that she has seen too many films with Jack Nicholson
in them.  If she is really as crazy as shown in the film maybe she
should be in a mental institution.  The T1000 robot, made of a liquid
metal, could have better used its ability in some of the fight/chase
scenes.  But if it did Arnie might not have lasted through the film.  My
only other compliant is the boy, John, is supposed to be ten years old.
From his behavior I would have put his age at around sixteen.  Other
than those few problems, which don't distract from the viewing pleasure,
the film is one of the best I have seen in a long time!

Author
John Beachem
It's been ten years since the first terminator came from the future and 
tried to kill Sarah Connor (Linda Hamilton), the mother of John Connor 
(Edward Furlong), who will grow up to lead the human resistance against the 
machines. Now, two such machines have come to the past. One, the T-800 
(Arnold Schwarzenegger), has been sent by the resistance to protect young 
John Connor. The other, an advanced prototype called the T-1000 (Robert 
Patrick), has been sent to kill John. At this point in time, John is a 
juvenile delinquent, living with his foster parents (Jenette Goldstein, 
Xander Berkeley), who he can't stand. Sarah Connor is locked in a mental 
institute, under the "care" of Dr. Silberman (Earl Boen). Now that the 
machines have returned, Sarah realizes there may be only one way to defeat 
them once and for all: kill Miles Dyson (Joe Morton), the man directly 
responsible for the creation of the machines; or destroy Skynet, the massive 
computer, now in its infancy, which will one day control the world.
Even now, nine years after its release, the special effects in James 
Cameron's "Terminator 2: Judgement Day" are astounding. In honor of its 
recent re-release on DVD, I've decided to write a review for this classic 
film. This was a film released just at the end of the really special special 
effects era. Back when we could still be dazzled by what was on screen. Now 
it's grown quite impossible to do that. After all, most people weren't 
particularly impressed by the latest "Star Wars" film, and that featured 
some of the most dazzling effects ever. Still, because it was released when 
it was, people will always remember spectacular shots of the T-1000 
reassembling itself after Arnold blasts it into a million pieces, or turning 
into liquid, squeezing through a window, and changing back to human form. 
These are the kind of astounding scenes that, if released today, would be 
viewed as nothing new. Is that a testament to how far we've come, or to how 
much we've come to expect from our movies? End of philosophical moment.
"Terminator 2" is a Schwarzenegger movie, through and through. It hides 
behind a fairly intelligent plot, but when Arnold gets lines like "Hasta la 
vista, baby," you know what kind of movie this is. If you're not a fan of 
Arnold, in all his cheesy glory, stay away from this movie. Otherwise, 
you'll love seeing him in his prime. Robert Patrick gives a remarkably good 
turn as the T-1000, but he's no Arnold (as if you needed to be told that). 
Linda Hamilton plays Sarah Connor more than a little differently this time 
around. In the first film Sarah was obviously confused by what was 
happening. In this one she's so prepared it's almost frightening. She has 
hidden gun caches, training in the use of every weapon imaginable, an 
insanely high tolerance for pain, and a mean streak that would scare 
Hannibal Lecter. Finally, we have newcomer (at the time) Edward Furlong. He 
actually gave a fairly good performance for a first time actor, only 
overdoing it on the emotion every now and then. I'm not sure if this is a 
sign of real acting talent from Furlong, or directorial ability from Cameron 
(back before he sold out to the man and made "Titanic"). Whatever it was, 
I've been sorry to see Furlong wasted on useless movies since his debut 
("Detroit Rock City", anyone?).
I have only one major complaint with "Terminator 2", but it's a doozy. In 
the first "Terminator" film, the story revolved entirely around Sarah Connor 
and Kyle Reese trying to escape the killing machine. There was nothing that 
could stop it, nothing that could slow it down. It just kept coming and 
coming. This filled that movie with a wonderful sense of dread and 
foreboding, as we watched our heroes try in vain to stop their enemy. In 
"Terminator 2", the story shifts drastically. It's no longer about trying to 
escape the terminator, this one is about trying to stop Skynet and change 
the future. Now I know they couldn't make this movie about the exact same 
thing as the first one, but I think if you compare the two the first script 
is superior. That's not to say this one is bad, it's just not as dark, 
twisted, and (frankly) entertaining as its predecessor. Through most 
segments of this movie, all I could think about was wanting the T-1000 to 
come back on screen. I really didn't care about a computer factory being 
destroyed.
Special effects aside, there are a few other really great things about 
"Terminator 2". The action scenes are marvelously shot, both gun fights and 
the hand to hand combats. There are two really well done car chases in the 
film: one involving John Connor on a motorcycle and the T-1000 in a semi; 
the other involving a helicopter and a police van. Both these chase scenes 
do a great job building suspense, and Cameron knows exactly when to call 
them to a halt. The film's score, by composer Brad Fiedel ("True Lies") is 
simply perfect. It uses a lot of the same music he created for the first 
film, but it sounds more metallic and machine like this time around. The 
film does run a long 137 minutes (152 for the director's cut), but the 
action seldom lets up and it shouldn't feel half that long. I'd recommend 
"Terminator 2" to those who enjoyed the first one, and to fans of science 
fiction in general. I wouldn't recommend it to those looking for a movie 
about time travel because Cameron generally ignores all the traditional 
arguments regarding paradoxes and such (rightfully so, I might add). I give 
the movie four out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Subrata Sircar
          Capsule Review:  Arnold Schwarzenegger returns to modern-day
     LA from 2029 as a Terminator assigned to protect John Connor against
     another Terminator with advanced mimetic powers.  Linda Hamilton
     turns in an excellent performance, but the actors play second fiddle
     to awesome special effects.  Rating:  8+ [1 to 10 scale].
     Arnie is back as a Terminator, only this time he's a generation
behind in technology.  The new T-1000 series Terminators are made of
mimetic metal, and can take on any form with the same mass, able to form
any solid metal object.  The new Terminator takes out a police officer
and assumes his form to hunt John Connor, while Arnie appears nude near
a biker bar.  Some nasty mayhem later, he's got clothes, boots, a
shotgun, a Harley and the all-important  shades.  The two machines find
John at nearly the same time, and battle it out through the mall,
several roads, and a few trucks, with Arnie finally saving John.
     In the last few years, things have not gone so well for Sarah
Connor.  She has been shacking up with anyone who could teach her and
her son about combat and survival, and eventually went over the edge and
attacked a computer factory.  She's been locked up in a mental
institution for a few years, while John Connor has been turning into a
juvenile delinquent with foster parents.
     So of course, Terminator and John go to bust Sarah out, minutes
ahead of the evil Terminator ....
     The movie also seems to be the last Terminator flick, as there was
a good effort to wrap up all the loose ends from both movies.  The first
movie pointed out the alternate reason for sending a Terminator to the
past the first time; his remains were needed for the cybernetic
breakthrough which triggered Armageddon.  This time, all remains of all
three Terminators are incinerated, and the movie ends on a somewhat
positive note, implying that the future the Terminators came from is no
longer inevitable.
     Overall, this movie was just as good as the original, which is an
amazing accomplishment.  There are two science-fiction gimmicks; time
travel and mimetic metal.  Get past those and the rest is one hell of an
action movie.  Usually, when watching a science-fiction movie, I tend to
think of six  different ways the villains could use their powers to end
the movie somewhere after the first half hour; not so this time.  The
mimetic Terminator uses his abilities very intelligently, especially in
combat; reforming around bullets, sliding through grills, reforming
around Arnie's hand when he punches him, etc.  About the only trick he
missed was abandoning the human form altogether and going to the octopus
mode for combat, but overall the evil Terminator was right on the money.
     Linda Hamilton plays Sarah Connor as a woman driven by the specter
of global annihilation; she has a recurring dream of the world ending,
destroying all the children in a playground.  She is not quite sane, and
has become  determined to prevent the holocaust by any means necessary,
including the sacrifice of other lives as well as her own.  I kept
seeing Sarah Connor as someone who was alternately trying to be a mother
and a soldier, never sure which one was right, knowing which one was
practical.
     I won't attempt to describe the special effects, except to say that
Industrial Light and Magic did themselves proud.  The evil Terminator
looked convincing and very very menacing.  Lots and lots of explosions,
gunfire and mayhem, and all of it was spectacular.  The opening scene
was wonderful, as were the two knock-down drag-out fights between
Terminators.
     In short, I loved this movie.  Great special effects, a good
performance by Linda Hamilton, and some excellent science-fiction to mix
into a truly excellent Arnie action film.  You'll like this, and it will
make back its $100 million (rumored) budget.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, Robert Patrick, and
          introducing Edward Furlong
Produced by Gale Anne Hurd
Written by James Cameron and William Wisher
Directed by James Cameron
     Kudos!  Kudos!  James Cameron has done it again.  All the rumors
about its humongous budget and all the hype about its special effects
have paid off.  This movie is a well done, well executed action
adventure movie worthy of "sequelizing" the first one.  The effects are
great, the action scenes are great, and the acting is great.  All in
all, one hell of a movie!
     TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY is a sequel to the surprise hit of 1984,
THE TERMINATOR.  As the rumors of the budget of TERMINATOR 2
skyrocketed, the budget of THE TERMINATOR seemed to get more and more
insignificant (its budget was only $17 million, whereas T2's budget was
somewhere near $88 million).  THE TERMINATOR was a movie that got by not
only because of its special effects, but because it used them
effectively and it had a good plot to go along with it.  This has been
the major factor in the success of Cameron's movies.  Special effects
don't do it alone.  And this movie does not skimp on them.  They were so
amazing that I think I will devote a whole paragraph to them!
     TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY is the continuing story of Sarah Connor,
who now has a son, John.  In THE TERMINATOR, she learned through Kyle
Reese (Michael Biehn) that the world is going to experience a nuclear
holocaust on August 29, 1997.  Since her encounter with Reese and the
T800 who was trying to kill her (to put it delicately), she has been
plagued by visions of the destruction to come.  She has been devoting
all her efforts to her son, to get him ready to be the ultimate rebel
leader.  In the process, she has gone mad, and has wound up in a mental
institution.  John is placed with foster parents, and has gone about his
own business, alienating himself from them.  Meanwhile, two Terminators
are arriving on the scene: a T1000, a new prototype sent by Skynet to
kill John Connor this time, and a T800, sent by John Connor to protect
himself as a child.  They both eventually find John, and then the sparks
begin to fly.
     TERMINATOR 2 is clearly a film aimed at promoting world peace.  If
it wasn't, the movie would only take about an hour and thirty minutes to
tell (as it is, the movie lasts two hours and twenty minutes).  Half of
the movie is devoted to the conflict between Sarah, John, the T800
(Schwarzenegger), and the T1000 (Patrick), and the other half is devoted
to Sarah's dealings with the destruction to come from the coming nuclear
holocaust.  In fact, the T1000 drops from the scene for a spell so the
film can focus on the holocaust.  Another aspect that promotes peace is
the "kinder, gentler" cyborg image of Schwarzenegger.  Cameron and
Schwarzenegger both feared that if the T800 was portrayed as a killing
machine again, it would ruin Schwarzenegger's present image of a
wholesome, humane muscleman, so they decided to present him as a
"learning" Terminator, who could adapt to human traits.  But for all you
die-hard action fans, don't let this get you down.  T2 certainly
delivers with flying colors.
     I believe Robert Patrick was an excellent choice for the T1000.  He
has what I would call a sort of 'neutral' looking face.  He can look
non-threatening and menacing at the same time.  He has this evil air
about his looks, and it makes him perfect for this role.  Arnie has
changed a lot from what he used to look like in the first movie, but he
manages to pull off the coldness of the first T800.  Linda Hamilton has
almost gone through a metamorphosis due to her character's changes in
this movie, and she executes them expertly (she's come a long way from
that soft little waitress in T1).  Edward Furlong does pretty well as
John Connor, considering Cameron's casting director found him playing
baseball at a Boys Club in Pasadena.  I thought if anything was going to
be wrong with this movie, it would have to be Furlong, but he did very
well for his time.  Overall, the acting was pretty good.
     The storyline is, of course, predictable.  But don't let that fool
you.  It's the execution that makes this movie so good.  All the action
scenes in here get you to thinking, how in the hell did they do that
one?  It's not like these type of scenes haven't been done before, but
there are a few that make you wonder how they did it without anyone
getting killed.  They are not overtly amazing, but they do have their
baffling qualities.  And all this talk about time travel and such; this
movie is only going to feed the fire.  But that's good--it's not often
that a movie like this one becomes a topic for household conversation.
Someone must be doing something right!
     And believe me, they are.  Everyone was saying ILM, ILM, ILM.  They
didn't do it alone, but when you see the movie, the only thing you tend
to notice IS the ILM effects.  ILM (Industrial Light & Magic) was
responsible for the amazing computer graphics effects that make the
T1000 so menacing.  ILM had the enormous task of animating pure liquid
metal (which is what the T1000 is made out of) and boy did they do a
number on this film!  This movie left me with my chin in my lap and
dragging out of the theater.  The most common question I asked
throughout the entire movie was 'how the hell did they do THAT?!?'  The
computer graphics were astounding, superb, and out of this world.  It
made the pseudopod in THE ABYSS look like a stop-motion Godzilla effect.
I'm sure potential Wall Street investors will have no qualms about
investing in the giant that is ILM.  You have to see them for yourself.
And if you're not impressed, then you are probably one of the guys who
worked on the film.
     Enough said, this is a definite must see.  Don't see it to
criticize it, don't see it casually, and don't see it alone.  This movie
is one to be experienced, not just seen.  If I seem ecstatic about this
movie, then it's because I am.  I can just see the 1991 Oscars now:  And
the Oscar for special achievement in special effects goes to...guess
who!
