Title
Review for Buono, il brutto, il cattivo, Il (1966)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
Even in the heavenly realm of the Best Movies Ever Made
there are titles that happen to be more obscure than others.
THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY is one of them. For most of
the people it is nothing more than a cool title. Obscurity
of this film is easy to explain - it was made decades ago,
its length is epic and it belongs to the much despised genre
of spaghetti westerns. Most of the people would have trouble
connecting words like "spaghetti western" and "epic", unless
director in charge happens to be Sergio Leone. THE GOOD, THE
BAD AND THE UGLY, made in 1966, represents the final segment
in his celebrated Man With No Name movie trilogy.
Unlike most of the final segments in movie trilogies, THE
GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY might be viewed as a prequel to
first two films - A FISTFULL OF DOLLARS and FOR A FEW
DOLLARS MORE. The plot is set in American Southwest during
the Civil War. Tuco Ramirez (played by Eli Wallach) is a
Mexican bandit with a bounty on his head. That means that he
is targeted by many bounty hunters and similar shady
characters interested in quick cash. The smartest of them
all is Man With No Name a.k.a. Blondie (played by Clint
Eastwood) who not only manages to capture Tuco but also
finds a way to make him more profitable. After handing Tuco
over to authorities, Blondie arranges his escapes, shares
the prize money and repeats the scheme in the next county.
After a while, the partnership goes sour and Tuco is left in
the desert without a penny. Furious Tuco begins tracking
down his former partner, but before he gets his revenge, an
unusual set of events would cause him to reconsider. Both
Tuco and Blondie find out about huge pile of stolen
Confederate gold, but each of them knows only a part of the
exact location. So, two of them decide to set aside the past
differences and strike another partnership in order to get
their hands on the gold. However, before they find this
treasure, they must face the battling armies that stand in
their way. But the deadlier obstacle to their plans comes in
the form of Angel Eyes (named Sentenza in Italian version,
played by Lee Van Cleef), ruthless but efficient
professional killer who also knows about the hidden gold.
Same as in the first two parts of the trilogy Sergio Leone
paints a revisionist picture of the Old West. Instead of
using its primordial state as the perfect setting for the
archetypal and simplistic fight between Good and Evil, Leone
shows Old West as a place where the lack of civilisation
leads to the utter lack of morality. Friendship, loyalty,
common decency and even the human life means nothing in this
world; its characters are guided only with their most
primordial instinct or, as it is much evident here, pure
greed. Therefore, the line that separates heroes from
villains in this piece is blurred - they all have the same
motives and same lack of scruples. Such moral ambiguity is
underlined even in the title of the film, quite ironic in
the context of the story and its characters. Leone used such
motives in the first two films, but this time it gives it
another dimension. The story is set in the broader context
of American Civil War and the murderous quest by three major
protagonists is dwarfed by the sheer amount of carnage and
destruction that goes around them. In their quest for the
gold they might kill dozens of people, but the war kills
thousands. Leone's pacifist and anti- militarist stance in
this movie was not just in tune with the opposition towards
Vietnam War, quite popular stance among late 1960s European
intellectuals. It was also inspired by the events in
European past that found way to reflect them in this film.
The movie was shot on location in Spain, country which
endured its own civil war, with atrocities and destruction
not very different from those depicted in some of the
movie's most memorable scenes. The battle scene in the film,
although one of the most spectacular in the history of
western and although it features uniforms weapons and
military equipment of 1860s America, is actually more
inspired by the traumatic experiences of Italian military in
20th Century, especially WW1 and utter pointlessness and
bloodbath symbolised in twelve Battles of Isonzo 1915-17.
Background of Civil War not only puts moral alignment of the
characters in another context, it also gives opportunity for
Leone to paint brighter or darker shades in their
characters. Epic scope of the story allows Leone to also
give some hints about their background. In doing that, Leone
is playing with old western conventions. Angel Eyes is named
Bad solely because he wears black hat; only later we see
finally justify that perception when we see him as ruthless
and sadistic. Lee Van Cleef obviously enjoyed playing this
role, so different from righteous Colonel Mortimer from FOR
A FEW DOLLARS MORE; there was only one good thing about
Angel Eyes - he always adhered to his own code of
professional killer. Clint Eastwood, the star of this
vehicle plays the character which is the only link with two
other films. Since this is a prequel, there is a little
place for some evolution of the character. Eastwood is great
as usual, playing the same immoral yet capable, intelligent
character we enjoyed seeing in first two films. There is,
however, some opportunities for Eastwood to show some subtle
hints about his character's humanity, especially in the last
segments of the film. Eastwood and Van Cleef are, however,
dwarfed by the third major actor - Eli Wallach who found the
role of his career in Tuco. Unlike the previous Mexican
bandit role he had played in THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN, Wallach
gives great texture to his character. His Tuco is neurotic,
clumsy, not very bright and he would be considered a
laughing stock without his deadliness with pistols. By the
usual western standards, he is not very nice person, but
Wallach finds a way to make him likeable to the audience. In
the end, even Leone gives opportunity to this character to
tell his side of the story, in a memorable verbal exchange
with his brother, played by Luigi Pistilli. This scene not
only features Tuco's humanity, but also gives opportunity
for Leone to implement his Marxist views in showing the
poverty as the major cause of the crime.
Apart from the actors (including the supporting cast), THE
GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY, excels in flawless direction.
With this film Sergio Leone finally matured as serious movie
artist and developed his own style which many critics called
"baroque". The film lasts more than two and a half hours
(even longer in Italian version), but not a single scene
looks unnecessary or overlong. Leone's directorial skills
are at his finest, and he is equally effective in long
panoramic shots (which lose much of its impact on TV, being
subjected to pan&scan butchery) and his trademark short
extreme close-up. Superb editing mixes those elements in
perfect combination. But the most memorable element is, of
course, the music. Ennio Morricone, in his long and
hyperproductive career worked with many directors, but none
of them used his talents as much as Leone. Entire scenes in
the film are staged around Morricone's music, and not the
other way around. Those themes are not self- serving - they
provide the atmosphere of the film and, according to each
scene, this atmosphere might be sentimental, melodramatic
and sometimes even ironic (including the title theme, most
recognisable, which gives humorous angle to certain events
on the screen). Morricone's soundtrack is one the most
powerful in the history cinema and it alone is the reason
why this film should be so highly appreciated.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Sergio Leone
Writers: Argenore Incrocci and Furio Scarpelli (from a story by Sergio
Leone and Luciano Vincenzoni)
Starring: Clint Eastwood, Eli Wallach, Lee Van Cleef
The classic American western, we have John Wayne, the totally,
all-around good guy, being tough, beating up the outlaws, and then
perhaps having a wholesome fling with some chick at the end.  But in the
world of the spaghetti western (a name given to the Italian-made
westerns), pretty much everybody's an asswhole.  Kind of life life.  Of
course, a lot of them suck, but the ones by one particular director
stand-out for their amazing style, interesting stories, wild characters,
and, of course, the music.  That would be Sergio Leone, and the music
was by Ennio Morricone, second greatest film composer to ever live.
"The Good" is, of course, Clint Eastwood, returning to his role he has
played, The Man With No Name, who was in the previous two Leone flicks,
"A Fistful of Dollars," and "For a Few Dollars More."  The Man With No
Name is dubbed "Blondie" by another character in this one, so they could
actually call him something.  Of course, he is in no way a good man. 
He's more of the anti-hero of the story.  He's good in a sense, but he's
also an amoral crook who sometimes double-crosses partners, but with
good reason.  With his three-day beard, his squint (that Seagal would
rip-off, but not to the cool effect of Eastwood), his hushed speech, the
eternal cigarette in his mouth, and the occasional mexican rug around
him, the presents one of the most interesting looks and characters I've
ever seen.
"The Bad" is Lee Van Cleef, also called "Angel Eyes," due to his bizarre
stare.  He's a totally amoral bounty hunter who screws over two
different employers of his in the beginning, and goes on to screw some
more people over as the film goes on.  He's actually not in a lot of the
film, turning up here and there, and there for the breathtaking finale.
"The Ugly" is classic actor Eli Wallach, also called "Tuco."  Tuco's a
ranting, raving, somewhat neurotic in a way, and kind of incompetent
bandit who is working with Blondie in the beginning but keeps on going
between partner and enemy throughout the film.  He's one of the more
interesting characters, and is even one who gets some real depth when he
runs into his priest brother.  He's also the loudest, in what is pretty
much an almost silent film, with sometimes mechanical dialogue and
one-liners.  He gets to shout out obscenities to other characters, and
is all around loud.  He's also the funniest, of course.
The whole motivation in the storylines of all three Man With No Name
films is money.  Leone sees the west as a place where everybody's amoral
and they're all greedy as hell.  The film's plot (which takes about an
hour or so to really get started) deals with a chest of gold buried in a
grave at a faraway graveyard.  Angel Eyes knows of it.  Blondie knows
which grave it's buried in.  Tuco knows which graveyard.  What results
is a plot-twisting, satirical, and stylishly entertaining film.
The film takes place during the Civil War, so it takes a kind of
satirical stance towards it.  The politics really don't matter when
viewed this way (one time the characters can't tell which color the
soldiers' coats are), they're all just fighting a stupid cause.  Blondie
and Tuco run into an army fighting over a bridge, suffering many
casualties.  And there's even a bit in a prison camp, due to a stupid
mistake by Tuco.
What's cool about this film is the style.  Leone makes a film that is
rich in substance, and rewards us with some bitching stylistic scenes. 
The editing and the music combines to create tense scenes, filled with
humor, irony, and some deaths.  The film is almost all full of his
style, prohibiting some characters to speak in certain scenes, so the
film creates tension.
And, by God, the closeups!  Leone is famous (and sometimes infamous,
which does NOT mean more than famous) for nearly ODing on the close-up. 
There are scenes where, to build tension, he shows us literally hundreds
of close-ups on the characters' faces.  I mean, the finale, where the
three leads are all standing there with their fingers on their holsters,
waiting for the first person to go for their gun(s), Leone gives us what
felt like 10 minutes of close-ups on each of their faces.  But the thing
is that they start out slowly, and speed up as the tension increases. 
Filmmakers ever since have been ripping off of Leone, for this is just
one cool-ass effect, and his finale is one of the all-time greatest
scenes.
The music is also brilliant.  Ennio Morricone (who also did such
mainstream films as "Wolf" and "Bugsy," as well as all of Leone's films)
has created a soundtrack that is gorgeous and barbaric.  He has one
underline theme going throughout which is instantly memorable: starting
off with what sounds like a screaming hyena, we get then get a
high-pitched phrase, repeated, and launching into a barage of
high-pitched trumets, which sounds like Dick Dale's "Miserlou."  Leone
uses this throughout the film, especially in some of the more perfectly
ironic parts in the story.  His theme, like the squealing knife sounds
in "Psycho," is something that is hummable (it was a big hit on Top 40
radio), and has been recycled over and over and over and over and then
even over and over and over again.  It's just one hell of a great
soundtrack.
The film runs about two hours and forty-five minutes, but is absolutely
absorbing, and goes by quickly and smoothly.  Leone's scenes are
drawn-out with sometimes no dialogue until a burst of it nearly
three-quarters of the way through the scene, creating a film that is
fascinating to watch as it unfolds in front of you.  His gunfights are
classic scenes, even if they're not always bloodbaths.  Sometimes you
don't even see the action (i.e. the first scene).  But his scenes are
well-directed, and are filled completely with a kind of hypnotic draw.
I don't even LIKE westerns.  I mean, I liked "Rio Bravo," but I usually
don't dig those kinds of films.  But Leone's films are so well-directed,
with such an odd quality to them, that you just have to adore them. 
Even if you hate westerns, you'll agree that this is one bitching film,
and what I think to be the greatest Western ever made.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
