Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Pierce Dalton
 But, definitely a 10 on the cheap shock scale.
 An overly hyped film by the director of the equally trashy Alien 3, and the
future director of the Michael Douglas thriller The Game, Seven is what a cheap
knock-off of Silence of the Lambs looks like.
 If you haven't heard the tale, it's about two cops tracking down a serial
killer who kills by the way of the seven deadly sins: sin, greed, lust, etc.
 Brad Pitt and Morgan Freeman offer good performances, but, poor Kevin Spacey
is reduced to slasher-flick-madman gimmicks.
 Worth a look if you like gruesome make-up effects.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Author
Boyd Petrie
Se7en (1995)
Rated R for graphic portrayals of grizzly and unusual murders, and harsh language.
----------  Out of 4 stars: **** (4 Stars)
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow.
"I have never seen a film like SE7EN before in my life.  I don't think I will see one like it again.  SE7EN is
not just a film--it is a work of art."  My high school drama teacher considers SE7EN the best film he has ever
seen.  This statement from one of my favorite teachers sparked my interest in this film.  I had heard other
critics give it great reviews, and then others gave it lesser reviews.  However, since my teacher has great
taste in film, I decided to see what all the hype was about.  My expectations were set very high for this
film, and not only did it reach those expectations, but it far exceeded them.  SE7EN is definitely one of the
best films ever made.
SE7EN is directed by David Fincher, the creator of ALIEN 3, and the new film THE GAME.  When first released,
SE7EN became an enormous box-office hit because it finally did something most audiences had never seen for a
long time: it dazzled us with spectacular visuals, and enthralled us with a frightening story.  Not only did
it gain popularity with audiences, but it sparked controversy over many of the graphic murders portrayed.  If
you don't know by now, SE7EN centers its plot around a killer who bides by the Seven Deadly Sins.  Sure, this
is a very original idea, but we have all seen serial killer movies before.  However, we have never seen one
done so thoroughly or emotionally involving.  Fincher knows exactly how to play with his audience and their
emotions.  He creates interesting characters that we grow to like, and then he spins the film around and makes
us sick to our stomach.
Perhaps what makes SE7EN work isn't necessarily the plot or the characters, but the visual accuity of Fincher.
The title sequence has earned praise for the fast editing, symbolism, and foreshadowing involved.  But this is
just the start.  The film opens with a couple moving to New York to begin a new life.  Detective Mills (Brad
Pitt) and his wife Tracy (Gwyneth Paltrow) move into a good-sized apartment, and Mills goes to work alongside
veteran and retiring Detective Somerset (Morgan Freeman).  Somerset doesn't exactly take a liking to his new,
impatient partner, but he likes Mills' wife.  They are sent to a murder scene to investigate the brutal and
torturous killing of an extremely obese man.  The man was tied with barbed wire to a chair and forced to eat
himself to death.  The grizzly murder is just the start of an ensuing game of cat-and-mouse, with an
undetermined killer as the mouse.  Clues around the obese man's home reveals the word Gluttony, the first of
seven murders.
As these two detectives investigate the murder, more show up: Sloth, Greed, Lust, Pride.  One man was forced
to cut a pound of his own flesh off, and another man was tied to a bed and barely kept alive for one year.  It
soon becomes apparent that the killer might be trying to give a sermon of some kind, and as the two detectives
get closer to the killer, they find their own lives getting mixed into the mess.  As they get closer to
solving the case and catching the killer, the "preacher's" message begins to appear directed more towards
Mills and Somerset.  Mills' family life is deteriorating, and Somerset gets closer to Tracy, who reveals
secrets to him that she hasn't even told her husband.  All of this leads up to the inevitable, but shocking
conclusion which answers all the questions we have been asking, and gives us something to think about on the
way out of the theater.  Revealing the ending would be a mistake, and all I will say is that the killer shows
up at the police station to turn himself in.  Why would he turn himself in without finishing his goal?  Has he
already done Wrath and Envy?  These questions are answered, but the answers may not be exactly what we
expected, or wanted.
As I have mentioned above, SE7EN is mostly a film about mood and atmosphere.  It rains most of the time, and
the sets are dark and dreary.  The victims' places are usually lit with dim lights, and shadows are cast all
around the place.  Many places are only lit by the detectives' flashlights which bounce around the room,
illuminating key pieces to the plot of which Fincher wants you to see.  As with THE GAME, Fincher is capable
of shifting your attention from one thing to another by his camera angles and lighting effects.  This is one
of those films in which you may only want to see on the big screen, or the letterbox version on video.  The
big screen holds so many small details which become fuzzy and sometimes unextinguishable on the transition to
the small screen.  However, if you are able to get ahold of a copy of a letterbox version of SE7EN, I suggest
watching it on a big-screen TV, to get the maximum effect.  As my drama teacher said about SE7EN, "You can
pause this film at any point, take a picture of it, and hang it on the wall."  Like TWELVE MONKEYS, SE7EN
mixes a fiercely frustrating story with creepy visuals and grotesque murders.
SE7EN does have some minor flaws, although they are hardly noticeable unless you scrutinize over the ending.
The first hour and a half, we never know who the killer is, and then he reveals himself in the final thirty
minutes.  This is extremely well done, because it doesn't rely on the action ending that so many films as this
one would use.  However, a couple plot holes arise from his appearance, but it's almost pointless to point
them out.  Besides, Fincher's direction and the star power of Pitt, Freeman, and the mysterious killer (who
most of us should recognize nowadays) give the ending enough speed and power to leap over the holes with the
greatest of ease.  Now that I think about it, I don't even know why I brought this up.
Choosing the correct actors for SE7EN was crucial for the film to work.  Brad Pitt will probably draw female
viewers, and Gwyneth Paltrow will draw male viewers.  However, Pitt gives a stunning and inspired performance,
proving that he isn't just another pretty face.  Freeman, on the other hand, steals the film as the veteran
detective.  His poetic dialogue is given an added touch by Freeman's almost monotonous tone which fits the
style of SE7EN.  Pitt's talkative character gives Freeman the perfect opposite to work with.  Paltrow is a key
to the plot, but for most of the film, she remains off screen.  The mysterious killer, who gave an uncredited
performance, is played by an actor who most people know today.  However, taking Roger Ebert's lead, I will not
reveal his name in my review.  Pitt and Freeman are the central characters and they fit in with the
atmospheric setting Fincher applies to his sets.  Freeman almost blends into the background, while Pitt stands
out like a sore thumb.  My guess is that this is symbolic because of Pitt's kick-ass style and Freeman's
withdrawn but intelligent character.
SE7EN is rated R for graphic afterviews of grizzly and gruesome murders, and harsh language.  Fincher has
given us a nearly perfect film, and he will most likely become a big Hollywood director.  On seeing SE7EN, I
almost forgot that it was a commercial film.  The depth and layers of the story is usually seen in independent
features, but the graphic killings can be too shocking for some viewers.  However, despite the graphic nature
of this film, most people will look back at this film and remember the ending.  Like THE USUAL SUSPECTS, the
ending shocks everyone, and usually creates repeat viewings.  SE7EN is one of the best films ever made, and
will be remembered for a long time to come.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Kevin Patterson
I'm going to begin this review by explaining that when I saw SE7EN on
video, I watched about the first 30 minutes, was interrupted for about
another 30 minutes, then resumed and watched the remaining hour and a half.
Why, you may wonder, am I telling you this? Well, because it's put me in a
bit of a pickle: I found much to admire about the film, and looking back on
it, I can see how all the different scenes fit together into a coherent
whole. My gut reaction, however, was that it still felt  kind of
disjointed. One side of me says I should go with my gut reaction. The other
side says, "Well of course it felt disjointed, you quit watching the thing
for half an hour in the middle!" As you've probably guessed from the
rating, I've decided to give SE7EN the benefit of the doubt, so I'll spend
most of the review explaining why I think it's actually a better film than
it seemed to be while I was watching it.
SE7EN tells the story of David Mills (Brad Pitt), a young homicide
detective working his first case in a new precinct under the tutelage of
retiring veteran William Sommerset (Morgan Freeman). The case is a
particularly horrifying set of serial killings, each murder meant to punish
someone for one of the seven deadly sins. The murderer is clearly
intelligent and deliberate, killing each victim in a way that symbolizes
his or her sin. An obese man is punished for Gluttony by death through
force-feeding, a drug dealer is punished for Sloth by being tied to a bed
and left to waste away, a model is punished for Pride by the disfigurement
of her face, and a prostitute is punished for Lust by . . . well, on second
thought, I don't really want to talk about that one. Suffice it to say that
all of these scenes are shocking and gruesome, some a little too much so:
while a certain amount of this is necessary if one is to take this subject
matter seriously, there are a couple of scenes in which director David
Fincher really shows us more than we need to see.
At the core of SE7EN is the relationship between the two detectives. Mills
is a cool, arrogant young cop who's comfortable investigating horrifying
murders during the day and still cheerfully going home to his wife (Gwyneth
Paltrow) and roughhousing on the floor with his hyperactive dogs. Somerset,
we sense, lets these things get to him: his manner is usually very somber
and morose, and from what we can tell, he lives a solitary and subdued home
life. Mills writes off the killer, whom we only ever know as "John Doe," as
a simple lunatic, while Somerset warns that this is a dangerous
underestimation and instead tries to understand how the killer's mind
works. And when it becomes clear what exactly the killer is up to, Somerset
goes to the library and reads Paradise Lost  and The Divine Comedy. Mills,
on the other hand, settles for the Cliff's Notes. Slowly but surely, SE7EN
emerges as a compelling argument for Somerset's approach, suggesting that
one must accept the horror for what it is before one can really defend
oneself against it. The two detectives are put through a gut-wrenching
moral test at the end, and we find that it is Somerset who keeps his cool
and Mills who discovers that he's a little closer to the "lunatic" than he
ever would have imagined.
The only noticeable flaw in SE7EN aside from the occasionally excessive
gore is that the screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker doesn't quite have a
handle on the killer. He's obviously a religious fanatic of sorts, and he
seems to believe his fire-and-brimstone sermons about sin and corruption.
On the other hand, the games he plays with Mills and Somerset seems to
indicate that he subscribes to the idea of "the devil is inside all of us,"
which is a strange ideology for someone who issues such venomous
condemnations of others. I also found it a little odd that someone with his
personality would even indulge in the stereotypical serial killer routine
of taunting the authorities. The character is certifiably 100% insane, of
course, so it may be a mistake to insist on too much logic in his behavior,
and I must admit that I am probably fairly picky when it comes to serial
killer stories, having watched Fox's "Millennium" and NBC's "Profiler" for
the past three years. Still, it might not have hurt to make the method to
his madness a little more consistent and focused.
David Fincher does an excellent job holding all this together, instilling
SE7EN with a consistent feeling of dread to accompany the disturbing story.
His moody visual style, which he would later put to use in THE GAME, is a
large part of what makes SE7EN work, and his direction is remarkably
effective and sure-handed, especially considering that his only previous
experience had been on the reportedly chaotic production of Alien 3. While
I must admit to being somewhat puzzled as to the masterpiece status this
film has been accorded on numerous Internet web sites, it's a very
successful film that tackles challenging subject matter without flinching
and yet still manages to be human.

Author
Jamahl Epsicokhan
(Warning to those who have not seen SEVEN: This review contains some
spoiler information.)
     SEVEN is a powerful, fully-realized film on the level of THE
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.  It is a disturbing film that accomplishes its
biggest of goals--it occupies the viewers mind long after the closing
credits have rolled.  While this film is not for the squeamish, there
is no denying that SEVEN demands attention, for it is a film that
transcends its genre in both style and substance.
     For starters, classifying SEVEN as a "thriller" would not be an
altogether complete classification of this film.  While I was genuinely
thrilled throughout, I would rather call SEVEN an "intense drama,"
because that is what it delivers--meaningful scenes with a
relentlessness that does not readily let up.  Part of Director David
Finchers accomplishment is in style.  He seems to have a knack for
knowing exactly how the average person fears something as "simple" as a
corpse.  And visually, Fincher shows us the remains of murder victims
in all-too-realistic and graphic terms (courtesy of Rob Bottin's
always-grisly special effects).  Throw in the appropriate but
not-to-be-underestimated effects of lighting and a foreboding score and
the result is a technical masterpiece of the murder scene.  These
scenes alone are quite impressive; as fascinating as they are
harrowing.
     Yet, SEVEN is more than just a technical accomplishment.  In
addition to style, Fincher supplies substance.  SEVEN has compelling
characters that it wants us to know and understand, and Fincher ties
them all together in a completely pessimistic view of society.
Detective William Somerset (Morgan Freeman) is a man who has nearly
given up on the world.  Its easy to see why.  The world doesn't make
sense.  (Somerset drives this point home with a rather ghastly story of
a robbery victim who was attacked just blocks from the police
precinct.  After knocked down and robbed of his wallet, the attacker
stabbed the helpless man in both eyes.) Why should Somerset believe
that by following this murder investigation and "picking up the pieces"
he will be able to catch the killer?  Somersets new partner, David
Mills (Brad Pitt) has not given up on the world, perhaps because he is
still young (and perhaps by having this optimism he's naive in this
films portrayal of the world). He completely disagrees with Somersets
abandonment of hope.  However, David's wife (Gwyneth Paltrow) has so
much fear of her urban surroundings, she isn't even sure if she wants to
*tell* her husband about her recent pregnancy, let alone carry it until
birth and attempt to raise it in this environment.  These three
characters are all performed with skill and authenticity that makes
them feel like real people and not the typical Hollywood characters a
lesser film might have offered.  And in addition to making clear how
each of these characters sees the world, Fincher gives us support for
*why* they feel the way they do.
     But if there's one character that underlines the message SEVEN is
trying to convey, it has to be the killer, John Doe (Kevin Spacey).
SEVEN's payoff lies in its ability to allow us to see how the killer
views the world and what drives him to do what he does.  One important
thing to remember about Doe is how easy it is to simply dismiss him as
a "psycho," with no motives behind his slayings.  This is exactly the
mistake Mills makes.  In the extremely intense and superbly performed
closing scenes, were allowed to see that Doe is, in his mind, merely a
product of society.  He's a killer who kills those who are bringing
society down.  In his mind he didn't kill "innocent" people, and,
perhaps, they were not completely innocent (but, then again, who is?).
Hes absolutely infuriated that Mills believes that the murder victims
were innocent.  Really, SEVEN doesn't just comment on the superficial
obviousness of how screwed-up John Doe is.  SEVEN makes larger
statements about how screwed-up society is, hinting that society's
degradation is simply conducive of creating more John Does.
     Besides the stylistic and larger-issue arguments for seeing this
film, I recommend SEVEN because it is, after all, also a very slick and
well-made thriller.  It features exciting plot developments, commanding
performances, lots of suspense, and a conclusion that is chilling,
riveting, and quite unfair.  But then again, its a cruel world.

Author
Phineas Narco
     It's a delicate matter writing a review for this movie because one
could say that going into it, the less you know the better, so I'll be
tip-toeing around plot points here, in fact I'm not going to say that
much about the story except the basics....
     Ever since PSYCHO came out in 1960, the insane serial killer
maniac has really taken the place of the likes of Frankenstein and
Dracula as our favorite boogey man.  There have been a TON of movies
since then done in this vein, some better than others.  All this ...
"coverage," both in real life and in fictional movies, has served to
desensitize those, to some extent, who have been paying attention to it
on a regular basis.  Would Norman Bates have caused such a sensation if
PSYCHO came out today?  Or would he be quickly relegated to the growing
ranks of somewhat more or less interesting murderous movie maniacs?
Would the world react the same to the Manson murders if they happened
in 1995?  Hannibal Lecter and his fava beans have become throwaway
lines in stand-up comedy routines, or spoofed in movie parodies.  In the
real world it took Jeffrey Dahmer and his almost unimaginably over the
top atrocities to get the public to even sit up and take notice.  It is
in the midst of this dreary, numbing state of complacency and
desensitization to the rising tide of horrors in the modern world that
John Doe starts his sermon/reign of terror and SEVEN unveils it's
morality play.
     Brad Pitt plays Detective David Mills, an idealistic, hyper and
impatient newcomer to an over-worked violence ridden city with no name
which he begged to be transferred to in the innocent hope of "making a
difference."  His first week on the job coincides with Detective
Somerset's (Morgan Freeman) last week on the job.  Somerset is burned
out, jaded, cynical, world-weary and despairing of ever making a
difference in the world.  Enter John Doe, a similarly no- named serial
killer who has taken it unto himself to preach to the world through a
string of grisly and sickeningly cruel murders, creative as they are
destructive ... each murder corresponds to one of the classic seven
deadly sins:  gluttony, greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and wrath.
     Let me say that I kind of identify with Freeman's character's
position when it comes to horror movies of this sort, I've seen so many
of them that they hardly faze me anymore, but SEVEN had me just about
climbing onto my seat back many times.  Freeman does a great job in a
role that requires him to make his character real and sympathetic while
at the same time not emoting a whole hell of a lot.  He's able to
convey in his barely restrained outwardly calm demeanor how much this
case is getting under his skin.  Pitt is earning more and more of my
respect with each role he takes.  Unlike the other "Hollywood hunks"
which play it safe by taking roles of likable, heroic, handsome,
winning, charismatic leading men, Pitt has taken admirable chances
since his Calvin Klein pretty boy days of Thelma and Louise and taken
such roles as Early Grace in KALIFORNIA which made me sit up and take
notice of his acting range.  There's a key moment in SEVEN where the
camera closes in on his face as it goes through an agonizing second by
second vaccilation between extreme rage and profound grief and it's
devastating.  Pitt's character is out of his element here, full of
energy to go out and "do something" but not sure exactly what ...
there's a wonderful synergy between this and the by the book,
methodical, jaded, quiet and experienced approach of Somerset.  The
killer wants to make a difference too ... one of the faults of the plot
is that as it happens over the course of a few days, it doesn't really
allow Mills and Doe (the killer) a chance to develop any kind of
relationship ... perhaps they know each other only too well, or think
they do.  And perhaps this isn't a fault, but an avoidance of cliche
'the-anonymous-killer-over-the-phone' situation ala IN THE LINE OF
FIRE.  The value of this has been debated in the movie newsgroups but
without revealing anything about the ending, just let me say it's not
your typical big-battle-on-the-ledge-of-a-building-villain-falls-
down-and-gets-impaled-hero-cracks-a-wry-joke-and-walks-off-
with-the-girl hollywood type ending.  The ending in SEVEN, IMHO, was
brilliant, thought-provoking, devastating, certainly talk-provoking and
debatable ... perhaps it tips its hat a little early in some places, the
"moment of truth" comes during the crisis, at least *I* never really
knew for sure.  SEVEN's ending left me walking out of the theater
wide-eyed, light-headed and shaken.  Keep in mind that when it comes to
thriller/action movies, it's no small task to surprise audiences of any
intelligence at all, which why so many films are rife with cliche's
worn out formulas.  SEVEN has more than a few compelling twist and
turns up its sleeve.
     I wanted to say something about the "grisly goriness" that the
movie has a growing reputation as having.  SEVEN is a dark, disturbing,
depressing, nightmare-inspiring ride through a dark world of murder,
horror and madness that makes SILENCE OF THE LAMBS look like DUMBO, but
it's a thinking man's horror movie and one that was obviously created
patience and skill and well-roundedness of the script (whoever wrote it
should get an Oscar), acting and what the camera SHOWS.  When are
horror filmmakers going to realize that the real horror in these types
of movies is in what they DON'T show?!  (Or at least show very very
briefly).  You see this demonstrated in movies like PSYCHO where you
never see the knife touch flesh or in THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE, PULP
FICTION, IN COLD BLOOD, and to an extent HENRY-PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL
KILLER and JAWS.  It's easy for a filmmaker to go for a gross-out
gore-ride, just leave the hard-work up to the make-up technician.
SEVEN has only ONE act of violence that happens ON CAMERA.  The rest
are horrifying aftermath murder tableaus that are brilliantly staged
but effectively shot in ways that we never get REALLY visually up close
to the horror for very long at a time.  And it's all the more intensely
effective because of this!!
     One last thing about the killer.  You don't "get" him at a glance,
he's an enigma, but an enigma with a purpose.  Pitt's character would
love to dismiss John Doe as a just some sick psycho.  Freeman warns him
against this and indeed it's hard to determine where Doe's madness ends
and where any kind of rational message begins.  That's the question
we're left to ponder at the end of this film.  I for one still am.

Author
John Beachem
Detective David Mills (Brad Pitt) just moved to a new city with his wife, 
Tracy (Gwyneth Paltrow). His temporary partner is Detective William 
Sommerset (Morgan Freeman), an old veteran who is retiring in seven days. 
Greeting Mills is the corpse of an overweight man, found in his own home, 
who was apparently forced to eat till he burst. While the police are willing 
to file the murder away as just another typical homocide, Sommerset believes 
this is the start of something much larger. Soon his suspicions are proven 
when more corpses show up. It seems our serial killer has an affinity for 
Dante and the like, and he is killing those people he believes have 
committed one of the seven deadly sins. While Mills decides to pursue the 
killer through traditional police methods, Sommerset researches deeply into 
the seven deadly sins in an attempt to find the killer's current interests. 
Yet despite both their efforts, the killer seems to always be two steps 
ahead. As Sommerset points out, the killer is methodical, exacting, and 
worst of all, patient.
Making a film in the serial killer sub-genre is fraught with peril. One has 
only to look at failures like "The Bone Collector" and "The Cell" to see the 
dangers inherent in these types of films. For every "Silence of the Lambs" 
we get a dozen films like "Fallen". However, every so often, we get a movie 
like David Fincher's "Se7en". This is the kind of movie that will be hated 
by some for its blatant depictions of horrifying murders. Truth be told, I 
can't blame people for disliking it for that reason. If you can look past 
that (and I can't blame you for not being able to), you'll find that "Se7en" 
is a fascinating look into the mind of a truly twisted killer. This is the 
sort of plot-driven, atmospheric, suspense filled movie Hollywood only puts 
out once in a great while. Fincher manages to deftly side-step every Serial 
killer cliche. There's only one chase scene, but it's short and essential to 
the plot; the ending doesn't come flying at you out of left field ("The Bone 
Collector", anyone?); and the killer isn't just your typical nutcase. In the 
film's most chilling scene, he actually presents the reasons for his crimes. 
Why is this chilling? Because he presents his arguments in such a cold, 
calculated, logical fashion, you'll almost find yourself buying into what 
he's saying.
"Se7en" is a film which requires only two actors to carry the entire acting 
burden on their shoulders alone. Thankfully, Fincher chose two actors who 
are up to the task; one good, and one great. The good actor is, of course, 
Brad Pitt. Anyone who doubts Pitt is a good actor has only to go back and 
watch his performance in "12 Monkeys". In this case, Pitt is actually the 
perfect choice for this role. The character of David Mills is so impetuous, 
headstrong, and reckless, you can only picture an actor like Brad Pitt 
playing him. On the other hand, the character of William Sommerset is one 
who displays nothing but patience, intelligence, and thoughtfullness. Morgan 
Freeman is the very embodiement of these three traits. To call his 
performance in "Se7en" excellent should go without saying, because I've 
never seen Freeman deliver anything less than a great performance. The two 
actors play off each other perfectly; each antagonizing the other with 
opposite character traits, without ever causing the situations to descend 
into cliche and melodrama. The only other actors worth noting are Gwyneth 
Paltrow ("The Talented Mr. Ripley"), who delivers a nicely understated 
performance, and the man playing the serial killer, whose name I will not 
mention (on the off chance you haven't heard who it is). Let's just say the 
actor delivers the creepiest performance this side of Anthony Hopkins as 
Hannibal Lecter. Watch for Richard Roundtree ("Shaft") in a small appearance 
as the DA.
Fincher and Walker ("Sleepy Hollow") take an interesting approach to dealing 
with the detectives' roles in this story. Detective Sommerset states their 
parts in the film perfectly at one point: "We're picking up the pieces, 
putting everything into neat little piles and filing it away on the off 
chance it will ever be needed in the courtroom." This means that throughout 
the film the detectives never get all that close to catching the killer. 
Some people won't care for that approach, since they'll think it takes the 
suspense away from the story. I have the opposite view. I think it adds 
suspense because it makes the killer that much more frightening. The police 
are completely at his mercy, unable to predict what he'll do next. Each 
scene shows us the aftermath of the murders and how everyone reacts to them. 
A word of caution - these are very powerful and disturbing scenes. If you've 
got a weak stomach, steer clear of this one. Back when I saw the movie in 
theaters I actually remember people running for the exits in a panic, their 
hands over their mouths. You have been warned.
One thing I really have to hand Fincher is that "Se7en" is beautifully 
paced. The film never feels rushed, and it never drags. When we're not 
looking at the disgusting aftermath of a murder, we get scenes like the two 
detectives sitting in a bar, discussing the lives of people in a big city. 
Sounds boring right? Not at all. In fact, I would have liked even more 
scenes like this. They never go on for very long, and with two actors like 
these (one good and one great) delivering the dialogue, they're really a 
treat. There's another excellent scene where we see the two conflicting 
detection styles of Mills and Sommerset. While a beautiful classical piece 
(Bach's suite no. 3, for those who care) plays softly in the background, 
Mills sits and stares at crime scene photos all night, while Sommerset stays 
in the library studying the seven deadly sins. The soundtrack, by Howard 
Shore (who also scored the reprehensible "The Cell"), is perfectly low-key 
and dreary for the film. "Se7ven" does run a full 123 minutes, but it's well 
worth two hours of your time. I'd recommend the movie to anyone who thinks 
they can handle disturbing images in favor of a truly interesting story and 
give it a full, well earned five out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.

Author
Laurence Mixson
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow, Richard Roundtree
Review by Laurence Mixson (venom8@hotmail.com)
>From Fully Loaded Entertainment: http://www.geocities.com/~fullyloaded
        It always takes me a while to review a movie after I see it. I
can't sit down immediately after viewing a film and write a review of
it. I have to sort it out, think it over, go through the ending and
beginning and everything else. When I finished watching Seven last night
after watching it, I didn't know quite what to think. I knew it was a
good movie, sure, but I still couldn't form any true impressions of it. 
        When I woke up this morning and thought about it, I got a
depressed, unsettling feeling. Seven is, in no ways, a happy movie. Of
course, you probably knew that already, unless people being killed by a
nutball based on the "deadly sins" sounds like a hilarious romp to
you(and believe me, where I live, this sometimes isn't too far from the
truth.) It has a brutal, unrelenting finale, that not only is superior
to the overrated Silence of the Lambs but is much darker and grimmer.
All though not very realistic, I was able to forgive it for that
because, hey, like there's ever been a realistic ending to a serial
killer movie. C'mon, Silence of the Lambs was less believable...
         The movie follows two detectives: Sommerset(Freeman), a cop
retiring in a week who is paired with a young, break-all-the-rules wild
card named Mills(Pitt). Formulaic? Sure. But the movie rises far above
the cliched characters, and both actors, especially Freeman, breathe
energetic wisps of breath into their roles.
        The detectives are assigned one day to investigate a truly
bizzarre homicide: an obese man was forced to eat spaghetti until he
died. The only clue they have is "gluttony" written on the wall and a
brief note tacked behind the refrigerator witha  quote from the author
Dante.  More killings follow, based on the sins of Sloth, Greed, and
others. Viewers beware: although the movie contains little on-screen
violence, the afterviews of the killings are graphically intense and
sometimes disgusting, especially when you begin to replay in your mind
the murders and how long they took to committ.
        Although he doesn't appear until about the last 25 minutes of
the movie(well, he makes a brief appearance before then, but you don't
acutally see him and he doesn't talk), no serial killer movie is
complete with out a captivating, creepy killer. I won't spoil the
surprise for people who haven't seen the movie by naming the killer, but
I will say that you've probably seen him before, he's a recent Academy
Award winner for a movie I gave ****, and he's excellent in his role.
        There are very characters in Seven other than Mills and
Sommerset. The only other person who has a signifagant role next to Pitt
and Freeman is Paltrow, who brings shimmering glimpses of hope to the
dispairing and gloomy atmosphere created by the director, David
Fincher(Alien 3, The Game). Although her role is very small, its
signigant more in idea, especially with the shocking conclusion.
        So is Seven a must see movie? That's hard to say, I don't really
believe in the concept of must see movies. But if you are into movies,
and are looking for a good one, then Seven is a very strong
recommendation. It's entertaining, but don't expect a good time.

Author
Ted Prigge
The writer of this film, Andrew Kevin Walker, went to my high school.
There I said it, and I'm not lying (Andy, if you're reading this, I went
to MASH and the school colors are maroon and grey).  However, this may
have influenced me more to become a writer (though not a good one yet),
I viewed this film with a totally open-mind.  Anyway, this is a
near-brilliant film, written and plotted ingeniusely, and directed by
one of the most amazingly visual directors working right now, David
Fincher (of "The Game" and the underrated third "Alien" flick).  Yet,
I'm still not biased.  Okay, maybe just a bit, but this film is still
near-brilliant.
This film deals with a super-smart serial killer in the tradition of
Hannibal Lecter, but, in a genius idea by Andy, is not even seen until
the end.  And, of course, he's played by one of the best actors right
now, Kevin Spacey (who I knew of back in junior high, just to brag).
The two cops are: Sommerset (Morgan Freeman), a brilliant old
intellectual detective, who thinks rationally and is just generally
intelligent (the guy has a chess board and uses a metronome to go to
sleep); and - (Brad Pitt), a overzealous rookie who is almost the exact
opposite of Sommerset.
In the not-so-genius vein, we get the cliche of the retiring detective
(Sommerset) helping the rookie (Mills) start out in the big city.  Of
course, look what he has to start out with - a case that starts off with
a giant Orson Welles type who is found to have been fed to death by
someone.  Then they find a lawyer who was tortured to death in his
office over the weekend, with the word "Greed" printed on the floor in
blood.  Sommerset goes back, finds the word "Gluttony" in the fat man's
dark apartment, and, following a trip to his local library, comes up
with the conclusion that this killer is killing non-anonomously and
according to the seven deadly sins.
No matter what the trailrs suggest, this is not a race car of a film.
The plotting is very leisurely and allows us to take everything in.
David Fincher is a master of creating memorable visuals and creating
atmosphere (again, look at "Alien 3"), and we see some of his
spectacular visions, even if we have to squint because this film looks
like they canned all the lighting crew on the first day.  Things are
VERY dark, and the flashlights only help in a minimal way.  But shots
inside the killer's apartment, not to mention all the other ones, are
chilling and damn-near flawless.  Even though the pacing isn't fast and
ferocious, we become tense watching it, mainly due to the direction, and
the dazzling editing, which was snubbed at the Oscars for the more
politically correct choice, "Apollo 13."
And the writing by Andy is amazing.  He has created a memorable film out
of what could have been just a typical run-of-the-mill "Oh, no!  There's
a serial killer on the loose!" film (i.e. that season's "Copycat").  Not
only is the killer a genius, but he has devised a plan where there's
almost no way he can loose.  Praying on the character flaws of the two
detectives, he brings them into his web, allows them to get close
enough, then uses them for his "message."  Andy has created a man who
has a strong message that is almost indisputable and would probably be
made by some "wacko" down the road sometime.  He has pretty much made
this guy useless by creating a character who gets his message across.  I
mean, after I left, I was depressed because the message was so true.
And besides, the bad guy won, which is a Hollywood no-no.  And this guy
went to my high school (another interesting fact, Dean Koontz taught
English at my high school before he was what he is, I guess).
The acting, of course, is great too.  I mean, look what they're working
with.  Morgan Freeman, who seems to me to be kind of underrated, is
perfect.  I mean, this guy is just one hell of an actor, and he's
likable and intelligent thorughout the whole film.  The way he speaks
slowly, and all his expressions, deem a man who is no less than
brilliant.  And Brad Pitt is very good here.  He's a put of misplaced
energy, which is exactly what his character is.  And Gwyneth, who has
three whole scenes (four, if you count...well, just see the flick), is,
of course, awesome.  Trite, but awesome.  R. Lee Ermey, who was the
drill sergeant in Kubrick's "Full Metal Jacket," has a small role too,
but he makes the most of it (one scene involving him, a phone, and the
wrong desk is a classic short joke, in my humble opinion).  And, of
course, Kevin Spacey, captured in the year where he did four films, and
finally got attention, is nothing short of brilliant.  Like Sommerset,
he speaks slowly and seems to always be deep in thought, sometimes
rational, if you go along with what he was doing.
Still, with great direction, amazing writing, and wonderful acting,
somehow this film got mixed reviews.  I mean, what is wrong with this
film?  Is it nothing short of a genious film?  It's dark, brooding,
occasioanlly funny, satirical, smart, and entertaining.  Along with
"Silence of the Lambs," this is one of the two greatest serial killer
films ever made.  And the guy who wrote it went to my high school (I'm
not bragging, am I?).
In short, "Se7en," if you've never seen it, is a great film, a highly
underrated film, even if it grossed $100 million at the box office
(mostly because of Pitt), and definitely should be worth seeing.  And
Andy, if you read this, e-mail me, man.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Eugene Novikov
 "Ernest Hemingway once wrote, "The world is a fine place and worth
fighting for." I agree with the second part."
Starring Morgan Freeman, Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow, Kevin Spacey. Rated
R.
*NOTE: This review contains SPOILERS
Four years after its release, some fans and critics are putting David
Fincher's Se7en at the top of their lists for best/scariest movies of
all time. I maintain that its just another serial killer movie, albeit a
well-made one. It's certainly unnerving -- gory and sometimes
frightening -- but it's also fairly standard, even predictable.
Retiring Detective William Somerset (a stone-faced Morgan Freeman) is
given one last assignment: the bizarre murder of a grossly obese man. He
is joined by David Mills (Brad Pitt) an inexperienced, young, obscenity-
sputtering gumshoe who doesn't seem to know how to do anything other
than demand a little respect. After another murder is committed,
Somerset and Mills realize that this killer is murdering people that
exemplify one of the seven deadly sins (namely gluttony, sloth, greed,
lust, envy, wrath or pride).
Seven sins most likely means seven planned murders, so Mills and
Somerset are off to try and stop the perverse killer before he does more
dirty deeds. Inevitably they fail because more gruesome killings are
uncovered, but the killer (a riveting Kevin Spacey) comes to them and
wants to lead them to the final two bodies.
David Fincher (Alien 3, The Game) is impressively adept at building
tension. This is an exciting movie: suspenseful and intense, with
scarcely a hiatus. The way the murders are committed is effectively
shocking (although I couldn't help but think that Fincher staged them
for shock value alone) and the images linger in your mind long after the
movie is over. For pure, unadulterated visceral thrill, there is little
beating Se7en.
But if a movie is only as good as its villain then Se7en is kinda
"blah". Kevin Spacey does his best to make him frightening but never
succeeds in being much more than obnoxious. His "John Doe" is no
Hannibal Lecter and thus the revelation of the killer's identity proves
anticlimactic.
All the acclaim that Se7en has received borders on undeserved. I liked
the movie well enough but I fail to see what people find so
extraordinary about it. It's a solid, suspenseful, exciting thriller
that entertains mightily, but it has no life message nor is it a
particularly meaningful parable about the world we live in. This is one
movie where the best thing to do is watch, rather than think.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Steve Kong
There are films that try to scare by going for the gratuitous gore and the
all out disgusting scenes.  David Fincher (Aliens 3) goes a different route
with SE7EN.  Se7en is a film about a serial killer.  This serial killer is
smart, intelligent, and wants to say something to the public.  He wants to
preach to the public about the Seven Deadly sins: Gluttony, Greed, Sloth,
Envy, Wrath, Pride, and Lust.  The way he wants to preach is different than
most.
He murders people using a deadly sin as the method of murder.  For
instance, the first murder a obese man is forced to eat until his stomach
bursts open and hemorrhages internally.  He uses this to preach gluttony.
And for each day of the week, he illustrates one sin with one murder.
Following the case is the almost retiring Detective William Somerset
(Morgan Freeman) and the newbie Detective David Mills (Brad Pitt).  With
these strange murders, Fincher could have gone all the way and just showed
everything, but he stays away from that.  Instead he takes the quiet
approach and forces the audience to imagine how some of the murders took
place.  This is far scarier than doing it with gratuitous gore.  Most of
the murders are scene after they have been committed, usually in pictures,
and sometimes in person.  But, the murders themselves are not shown.
There are a few interesting things to watch for when watching Se7en.  Se7en
was shot on a special, more expensive, film that gives a high contrast
between lights and dark.  This gives a strange eerie look and feel to the
film.  There are many scenes where Somerset and Mills are working in a
darkroom with only flashlights and this makes for some pretty scary scenes.
 The opening credits are also very interesting.  They look like they were
carved straight onto the film.  And with this strange look and a remix of
Nine Inch Nails' "Closer" song, this makes for one of the most creative
opening credits I've ever scene.  The serial killer, for whose name I won't
tell, is the most interesting of all.  The actor that portrays him is the
perfect actor for this role.  Quiet, intelligent looking, and just insane.
The ending of the movie will surprise most.  My sister predicted it, but
she does that a lot.  Se7en should be seen in a dark room with all lights
turn off and all disturbances pushed away.  This film will scare you with
the pure thought of how and why the murders were done.  The ending is
satisfying, but don't expect anything happy.

Author
Ken Furlong
     The opening credit sequence of any film can tell you a great deal
about the director's emotional attachment to the task at hand.
Occasionally, an inspired director will hire Elaine and Saul Bass, who
are credited with creating some of the most memorable opening credit
sequences in American film history.  Remember PSYCHO?  Scorsese's remake
of CAPE FEAR?
     The nightmarish world of David Fincher's SEVEN opens with the
daring and detail that one would expect from a careful, dark
combination of manipulation and terror.  The film is beautiful in its
dark tones, in the way an armchair melts to black in a corner of the
screen with the rain falling hard, even like a sheet.  There is a
desperation present in this film that is tangible in the way paint can
sometimes be.  A street corner, a lonely bedroom takes on the mellow,
moody tone of a Hopper glow, slowly exposing a black and white world in
colour.
     SEVEN actually looks black and white in some of these early
compositions and the spare dialogue, the quiet looks allow you to
linger and explore in the darkness.  Fincher possesses a solid vision
of urban sickness, and he leaves you wanting more.
     All this production design lends an accomplished touch to a simple
plot.  Veteran homicide detective (Morgan Freeman) gets assigned a
young, volatile partner (Brad Pitt) in a serial killer case of Biblical
proportions.  Freeman does an exceptional job at convincing us of the
loneliness and frustration of a cop who's spent a lifetime trying to
create an impossible personal/urban environment where no one gets
hurt.  In a role that depends more on gesture than speech, he has
delivered a performance as graceful as anything he's done.  It is a
textured portrait of dedication that prefers to communicate through a
look rather than a line.  Of course, he sees his raw partner as he once
saw himself.  Hopeful, passionate, destined to fail.
     It's corny.  It's derivative.  With the right direction and
casting, it works every time.
     It's the structural, manipulative gymnastics that always leave the
audience feeling worked over in the creepy, appealing ride of a
confident thriller.  But suspense and terror, though attractive, can't
always be enough.  SEVEN successfully keeps you busy enough to ignore
its flaws; the unnecessary buddy movie humour, the female figure as
plot necessity.  It does so by following a carefully constructed and
boldly executed structure that allows an audience little energy to
reflect, to analyse.
     One obvious example is a chase scene of Hitchcockian dimensions
engineered and placed very carefully in the centre of the film.  It is
one of the main reasons David Fincher should be recognised as a major
visual stylist.
     Brad Pitt, when given the right role (young, ambitious, and a
little on the dull side) has finally proven he can deliver.  His work
is actually believable here.
     But the real star of this black, oppressive mass is the urban hell
that seeps from the screen in every interior, every impressionist
study.  Fincher has created a world that is at once completely over the
top and completely authentic.  While confidently creating mystery in
its imperfections, SEVEN hints at a director who may be ready for more
than manipulation.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     David Fincher, whose brilliant career as a director of music
videos encompassed such highs and lows as Madonna's "Express Yourself"
and Rick Springfield's (weird but forgotten) "Bop 'Til You Drop," has
helmed an almost overly stylish thriller about the evil that men do and
the myriad ways to punish them.  And this thriller is so unlikely on
its surface that when the machine kicks into high gear and the movie
really starts to matter to us, its impact seems all-encompassing and
lingers for days after viewing.
     So whether we like it or not, we've got SE7EN to keep us company
at night.  That's not a typo--that's how the title appears on-screen,
flickering white on black during the opening sequence as though
scratched directly on the film, while a remix of Trent (Nine Inch
Nails) Reznor's singularly creepy hit "Closer to God" throbs on the
soundtrack.  We're brought full-circle a couple of hours later, when
the credits roll backwards as the brand-new David Bowie/Brian Eno tune
"The Heart's Filthy Lesson" blares in digital stereo, releasing us to
the open air outside this hermetic little nightmare.  It's obvious that
Fincher has mastered the fine art of creating a mood.
     Saddled with a script that's mostly middle-of-the-road, despite
its fashionable proclivity toward the grotesque, Fincher fashions a
mean little movie about sin, the city, free will, and the most
grotesque notions of justice.  Fincher's feature debut was the
ambitious ALIEN 3, a cerebral, nearly charmless meditation on bodies
and alienation that was reviled by fans of ALIENS, James Cameron's
space fantasy about marines with big guns.  The followup already seems
to be a bigger success, thanks in large part to a more conventional
premise and the presence of two big Hollywood guns--Morgan Freeman and
Brad Pitt.
     The story is conveniently divided into days of the week.  Pitt is
Mills, the new detective on the force.  Freeman is Somerset, the mentor
who's trying to ease the younger cop into the bowels of the city while
defusing his impatience.  Near the film's beginning, the corpse of a
grossly overweight man is found in a dark room, face down in a heaping
bowl of pasta that he was fed from until his insides ruptured.  Behind
the fridge: the word GLUTTONY is scrawled on the wall.  Soon after,
police discover the body of a rich and prominent defense attorney who
has literally been bled dry.  Writ in large letters of grue on the
carpet: GREED.  Somerset is onto this one right away--gluttony and
greed are two of the seven deadly sins.  The killer of both men, he
surmises, is an intelligent psychopath who intends to continue his
grisly ways until all seven sins have been illustrated in a fashion
that may put you off your popcorn.  The two go after the killer, Mills'
brash style countered by the wary, jaded technique of Somerset (who is,
natch, set to retire at the end of the week).
     The screenplay, by a fellow named Andrew Kevin Walker who
supposedly got his nastiest ideas while working at Tower Records in
Manhattan (hell, I believe it), isn't much on the surface, just a whole
bunch of musings about moral vigilantism and the absence of goodness
and light in urban America tempered by the buddy-buddy banter of the
two cops.  There's even a thankless role for the cop's wife, Tracy
(Gwyneth Paltrow, who is as good as everyone else), and an unlikely
breakthrough that puts the cops right on the killer's tail at the
beginning of the second act.  But it sure works.  The outlandish nature
of at least one of the murders swings the script firmly into comic book
territory, and there's nothing wrong with that.  If the Batman movies
were being made with the sensibility of master comic book creator Frank
Miller, they might look something like this--here's a thriller with a
visual impact so tremendous that it can get away with some shamelessly
outre melodrama.
     Maybe if I watched SE7EN again, I could detect how the whole
becomes something bigger than the sum of its parts, but the work as it
stands is pretty seamless.  Razor sharp performances--especially by
Freeman and the unbilled star who plays the killer--miraculous
cinematography in the near dark by Darius Khondji, and a swirling,
enveloping sound mix all contribute to a dazzling movie experience.
Fincher has us in the palm of his hand about halfway through, when the
film's centerpiece--an extended chase scene riddled by gunfire and
shafts of sunlight--breaks the tension of the long exposition.  The
killer leaps over barriers and ducks in and out of shadows like the
phantom of the opera, and Fincher distills that neo-Gothic atmosphere
without clogging up the works.  The relationship between cops and
killer becomes very real, almost mythic, and SE7EN goes from there like
a greased pig.
     At the climax, screenwriter Walker confronts his characters with
one humdinger of a bad situation.  There's a palpable sense as the
story winds down that something very real is at stake, and the movie's
ultimate moral structure seems to extend into the world outside like a
fog.  As pessimistic as SE7EN ultimately becomes, it's refreshing in
its belief in something larger than the typical bogus moral dilemma.
Because the movie believes in its mission, the climax is likely to
resonate in your head for hours, perhaps days after viewing.  Searching
for meaning in the world it creates, SE7EN finds the dark heart of the
soul and pokes at it 'til it bursts.

Author
Christopher Null
     Would somebody turn on the lights already?  Geez ... in the
nameless city that is the setting of SEVEN, it seems you can only get a
ten-watt bulb, and that's when the power works at all.  I liked the
film, but with the constant thunderclouds, rain, and shadows, it's
terribly difficult to tell what's going on.
     The title refers to the Seven Deadly Sins--and a serial killer who
is planning to knock off one "evil person" for each vice.  The first to
go is "gluttony," an obese man whom the killer force-feeds until he
pops.  And trust me, after that, it only gets worse.
     On the case is veteran detective Somerset (Morgan Freeman) and
new-to-town Mills (Brad Pitt).  After 30 minutes of wry chit-chat, the
pair finally get down to business, as two more victims are found.
After that, it's a perfectly choreographed game of cat and mouse,
culminating in a horrific finale that will have you on the edge of your
seat.  I won't reveal the identity of the killer, but I will say he's
very well cast.
     The story (written by schlock horror veteran Andrew Kevin Walker)
is excellent.  Some unfortunate problems get in the way, especially the
constant lack of light and the use of quick-image shock photography,
which make things all the harder to follow.  But I suppose with Pitt
sleepwalking through the opening of the film, at least that gives you
something to watch instead of his droll acting.  I guess when he breaks
his hand (both the character and Pitt himself) during the movie's
dynamic foot chase, the adrenaline finally starts to flow, and Pitt
appears much more alive.
     Also, while the "suspense" is great, watch out for the
touchy-feely family scenes with Mrs. Mills (Gwyneth Paltrow) and the
occasional soliloquies the characters get into about the nightmares of
city life and the evils of the world.  None of this is very well done,
but it is rather important to the film, and thankfully, there's always
another gruesome murder around the corner to distract us.
     Despite its faults, SEVEN remains a worthwhile and very watchable
film, but don't look for a lot of deep social commentary.  Lean back,
peer into the darkness, oh, and hold on to your popcorn and your date
exceptionally tight when they get to "sloth."
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter & Novelist
-Contributing Editor, Mike's FEEDBACK  /  Film Critic, Texas Business Weekly
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
One of the more unusual and suggestively violent films ever made,
"Se7en" is just a few steps away from brilliance. However, those
few steps away are only a few steps from a level of evil and
depravity that few people want to discuss. The film received
mixed reviews upon release, but there's an underlying sinister
appeal and intrigue to this that many critics perhaps did not
notice. At times it gets preachy about the horrors it seems to be
criticizing, but the script and the ultimate pay-off are
excellent. The shocking conclusion is just as unpredictable as
the endings of most films ARE predictable.
This piece of work is 100% intensity. It's uncomfortable to
watch, yet compelling. "I want not to look, yet I cannot turn
away." The story creeps along slowly and deliberately, crafted by
visionary director David Fincher. He has experience in
tantalizing his audience with information and visions, but not
giving away too much too soon. This is the guy who directed the
ominous "Alien 3". "Se7en" is even more ominous because the
threat is real. It's human and, while the script takes some
artistic licence, the way in which the diabolical killer works
here is actually realistic. That is, if a human being could be so
intelligent, patient, wealthy, and disillusioned.
After the most bizarre opening credits I've ever seen
(refreshingly different in editing style and musical
accompaniment), the initial character development takes place.
Morgan Freeman stars as Detective William Somerset, a
knowledgeable veteran who is ready to give up on his job and the
sickness of society. Brad Pitt co-stars as Detective David Mills,
the young hotshot who is brand new to this unnamed city and full
of fury to catch the bad guys. These two fine actors give the
film its human qualities (along with the appealing Gwyneth
Paltrow, who plays Tracy, Mills' wife). However, none of them
stands out above the material. No disrespect intended, but two
other actors could have played these parts and the film probably
would have been about the same.
An ironic note is that Somerset has only a week (or 7, that's
SEVEN, days) left on the force to train his young protege. The
title of the picture also refers to the 7 deadly sins, as
chronicled by John Milton in "Paradise Lost"--Gluttony, Greed,
Sloth, Lust, Pride, Envy, & Wrath. Incidentally, I wrote the sins
in order of how each victim was found. It's the last two sins
that are the most intriguing and shocking, but I won't give that
away. As I said, this has a great ending and no one should spoil
it. Anyway, the brilliant killer sets out to make a statement to
the world that these sins will no longer be tolerated and he
makes the "sinners" suffer for it.
The two partners stumble over the corpse of a grotesquely obese
man. They learn that he was murdered--forced to eat himself to
death. The killer leaves small clues at this and other murders
and, of course, Somerset and Mills are smart enough to stay with
him all the way. If they didn't, it would be one short movie! The
deliberate pace allows for craftsmanship of detail and story. We
see a lot of blood, but it's not especially violent. The
suggestion of what happens is far more disgusting than anything
actually shown--like most of the violence in "Pulp Fiction".
"Se7en" is gory, graphic, and disturbing, but all the gore is
post-death. Still, if you tend to get queasy, don't eat food
during this film.
Kevin Spacey plays John Doe, the avenging angel who claims that
he's the messenger who will right the wrongs with his teachings.
Like many crazy men, he has some fine ideas, but some sick ways
of expressing himself. Spacey doesn't appear until the final 30
minutes and also doesn't receive billing in the opening credits.
However, it's HIS appearance that turns this film upside down and
for that he should have gotten an Oscar nomination. A great
villain manages to make you either root for him or feel compelled
to listen to his ramblings regardless of whether you agree with
him or not. This character is so well written that it's hard to
disagree when he says that what he is doing will be remembered by
everyone. No serial killer has ever been so creative.
"Se7en" is blatantly unsubtle with its messages about the horrors
of the world and it's often a little too depressing. What it
lacks in those areas, it makes up for with believable dialogue,
top-notch screenwriting, unexpected twists, and realistic
characters. The technical aspects of the film are unobtrusive.
Fincher uses lighting, music, and editing quite well, but his
story is always the thrust of the film. Fortunately, we don't
find out what happens to Mills and Somerset after the closing
credits (which are run backwards UP the screen!). It's better to
imagine what paths they will follow. This is not the kind of film
you turn away from and quickly forget. It's got a sinister
message and John Doe is right about one thing--the evils of the
world aren't going to cure themselves. "Se7en" raises some tough
questions and it's intelligent enough to allow its audience to
answer many of those questions for themselves.
USELESS TRIVIA--Co-stars in 1995's "Se7en", Brad Pitt and Kevin
Spacey also competed for the 1995 Best Supporting Actor
Oscar--Pitt in "12 Monkeys", Spacey in "The Usual Suspects" (for
which he won).


Author
Steve Rhodes
     SEVEN is film that pushes the edge of the movie envelope.  Its
artistic ancestors are probably SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and PULP FICTION,
and yet SEVEN stands alone as a totally unique cinematic experience.
Although a lot of the critics love it, there are many frightening and
gross images that may have the squeamish heading for the exits before
even the first scene is over.  On the other hand, if you have a strong
stomach and you liked either of SEVEN's above putative relatives, there
is a good chance you may love this show as much as I did.
     From the opening you know something unusual is unfolding in front
of you.  First, the initial credits are shot with flashing images, type
going in and out of focus to strange sounding music, and cross hatch
marks on the film like this is some ancient print.  Do not go complain
to the poor guy working at the snack bar, this is what the film maker
intended.
     As soon as you learn to accept the bizarre credits, you realize
that the cinematography (Darius Khondji) is on the dark side of black.
You had better see this show on the big screen.  Its low contrast,
black images will never transfer well to TV.  The colors in it are
mainly shades of grays so that any images with primary colors really
stand out.  At first I did not know what to make of the filming, but
then I realized how well the technique fit and set the mood of the
picture.  Many scenes had pouring gray rain to further enhance the
dismal ambiance.  In the end I decided the cinematography deserved an
Academy Award nomination.  It was that innovative and involving.
     Along with the camerawork, the sets by Arthur Max were
depressingly and shockingly perfect.  Many of the sets were lit by 25
watt bulbs so that the detectives had to use big flashlights to inspect
the crime scene even though the room lights were on.
     So what is this show about you ask?  Is it just another mood piece
where the techniques are the show?  Oh no, this has a well written
script (Andrew Kevin Walker) and a director (David Fincher) who is in
total control.  You may or may not mind the gore, but you can certainly
respect someone who can fashion a picture with such attention to detail
and such careful planning.
     The movie is about an extremely smart serial killer known only as
John Doe.  He is played to perfection in a small but excellent part by
Kevin Spacey who is one of the best bad guys in the movies today.  See
CONSENTING ADULTS or THE USUAL SUSPECTS for more examples of his
villainy.  This serial killer is out to kill people in a recreation of
each of the seven deadly sins.  The first sin we see is gluttony.  Try
to imagine a horrible way to kill a guy so big he can not leave his
house.  You did not guess horrible enough.
     The movie uses the cliche of an old retiring cop, William
Sommerset (Morgan Freeman), breaking in a new cop, David Mills (Brad
Pitt).  It does it in such fresh ways, that you do not mind you have
seen this setup a hundred times before.  Much as a chess master may use
a standard opening and yet craft an entirely unique game, the writer
weaves a compelling story out of formula ingredients.  Here Freeman
gives another Academy Award caliber performance as a low key but very
sure master detective.  Pitt, whom I rarely like, does the best piece
of acting I have ever seen him do.
     So much about this movie is outstanding in so many ways.  The
music is dramatic and helps set the mood.  I think the editing by
Richard Francis-Bruce deserves another award.  The way he can use cuts
from slow pieces to fast ones and then quick cuts in the fast ones gets
the audience's adrenaline pumping.  A good example of this is when the
police cars come flying out of the police station when the police think
they finally have the killer's location.  One minute we have a
contemplative scene, and the next your heart is racing with the fast
edits.
     The script has so many examples of fine writing a la PULP FICTION
that I would be happy to see an award here as well.  When Detective
Mills gets frustrated trying to track down the killer through the
library, he says, "He's a nut case.  Just because he has a library card
doesn't make him Yoda."  When the killer muses on his place in the
scheme of things, he declares that, "If you want people to pay
attention, you can't tap them on the shoulder anymore.  You have to use
a sledgehammer to get their attention." Finally, Detective Sommerset
reflects that "Ernest Hemingway once wrote that 'the world is a fine
place and worth fighting for.'  I agree with the second part."  A show
is only as good as its ending.  Suffice it to say that SEVEN's ending
is on par with the rest of the movie and is filled with many surprises,
large and small.
     I was flabbergasted when I read that SEVEN runs 2:07.  It feels
like 1:30 at most since it is so well paced.  It is incorrectly rated R
for massive gore and violence.  Personally, I think the MPAA should be
more generous with the NC-17 rating which is what I would give SEVEN.
It is not suitable for teenagers, but I recommend it highly to adults
who like cop shows and who like films that are willing to be out on the
fringes, and I award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jason Wallis
"Se7en" * * * * 
Starring Morgen Freeman, Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow, Kevin Spacey, R. Lee
Ermey and Richard Roundtree 
Directed by David Fincher 
It is very rare that you find a good serial killer flick. The only one I
can think of is "Silence of the Lambs" (of course, I haven't seen "Henry:
Portrait of a Serial Killer" as of yet). Whenever someone tries to make one
intelligently, they end up failing miserably (just look at the crap-fest
that is "Copycat"). 
This is exactly why David Fincher's masterpiece "Se7en" is so refreshing.
Lately, America has been bombarded with immature slasher flicks that
disguise themselves as "thrillers". Each one is exactly the same: more
guts, more gore, more horny teenagers, etc. Well, "Se7en" definently
derveres being called a thriller because (gasp!) it actually thrills. 
When talking about how great this film is, the first thing that springs to
mind is the performances. We all know Morgen Freeman is one of the better
actors of the 90s. It seems that each film he makes is better than the
last. In 1994, with "The Shawshank Redemption", he delivered one of the
most brilliant performance I have seen since the early days of Jack
Nicholson. And it is safe to say that in "Se7en", he gives his best effort
yet. High praise should also be given to Brad Pitt and Kevin Spacey for
their also-excellent performances. I mean, I was shocked that Brad could
actually act (but, I guess he proved that with "12 Monkeys", didn't he?). 
Then there's the story. Freeman plays Lieutenant Somerset, a
super-intelligent (I mean, the guy plays chess, hangs out in libraries and
falls asleep to a metradome!), world-weary, Dante-reading detective, tired
of all the crime and suffering that surrounds him every day. With his
retirement only a week or so away, he plans to move out to the country,
work on his house, and do everything else you can't do in a big city. 
Fairly early on (about five minutes, actually), Detective Mills (Brad Pitt)
enters the picture. Mills is a cocky little bastard who thinks he knows
everything just because he worked Homicide five years upstate. So,
naturally, Somerset does not take an instant liking to him. 
The two are called to the scene of a grisly crime: a very obesse man has
been found dead in his kitchen, apparently force-fed to death. The cops
seem to think it was just some crazy guy who wanted to torture poor ol'
porky to death. But after another body is found, murdered in equally
bizarre fashion, the two detectives discover that the killings are
connected and are the work of a serial killer, bent on murdering according
to the seven deadly sins (which, by the way, are gluttany, greed, sloth,
lust, pride, envy and wrath). As Somerset says, "You can expect five more."
But "Se7en" does not turn out the way you think it is going to. And,
despite what some people say, it is not just an excuse to show bizarre
deaths. On the contrary, it is a truly superb film, easily one of the best
to be released in the past ten years. 
However, there are many people who will not want to see this movie. Tho the
violence is not too graphic, the subject matter is extremely disturbing. I
mean, this is the kind of film that could totally jar your psyche. But if
you have the stomache to take it, "Se7en" is one of the greatest films of
the 90s and also one of my favorites (I'm talking top ten or twenty here).
I give it one of my highest recommendations. 
Check out Jason Wallis' Filmaholics Anonymous web page at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I used to avoid Brad Pitt movies like the plague, like famine, 
like a Bob Dole presidency... but after watching INTERVIEW WITH 
THE VAMPIRE and 12 MONKEYS, I realized the guy actually can act. 
Imagine my surprise that his success isn't solely based on being a 
greasy-haired pretty boy. Part of that is also because, with the 
exception of the dreadful horror flick STUDENT BODIES, he manages 
to somehow pick compelling and original movies to star in, something 
you can't always say about the other what-a-cute-butt stars like Mel 
Gibson (BIRD ON A WIRE) and Tom Cruise (DAYS OF THUNDER).
        SEVEN is a stylish thriller you should be able to follow even 
if you haven't seen ONE through SIX. There's a serial killer on the 
loose committing brutal murders for each one of the seven deadly sins 
(kind of like that "Batman" story I wrote four years ago in which the 
Joker commits crimes based on holidays... I wonder if there's a 
possibility for a lawsuit.) and detectives Pitt and Morgan Freeman 
have to discover the freak's identity and stop him.
        Here comes the formula we've seen a hundred times before. 
Rookie cop Pitt has to earn the respect of about-to-retire cop Freeman, 
who keeps going on and on about how he's only got a week left until 
retirement. Uh-huh. We know what his final decision will be because 
no movie cop has ever been able to bring himself to leave the force. 
We're left to believe that, in the movie realm, police officers die and 
decompose at the station.
        There's also a plotline with Pitt's wife coming to Freeman for 
advice on how to cope with the coming lifetime of stress and heartache 
in a miserable, crime-ridden city for them and their unborn children. 
This is a movie with an incredibly grim view of humanity, potentially 
depressing for people who don't like to hear about naked, obese men 
being force-fed to death (because I know that hits a little too close to 
home for me). The murders in the movie are definitely creative to the 
point of disgust, I'll give them that. It's hard to work people up about 
sins like sloth and gluttony, but SEVEN manages to make it 
interesting.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Alex Brenner
   Much has been made of this film, and indeed it is portentous for the
thriller genre.  The dark cinematography breaks new ground for colour
noir, and it pulls no punches to deliver the most substantial and
breathtaking climax to any popular film since Star Wars.  However, it is
of interest to briefly study Se7en's place within the literary tradition
of tragedy. 
   The history of the genre is punctuated by innovative landmarks: Oedipus
Rex (unwittingly) introduced psychology, the Book of Genesis mythology and
Hamlet, character.  The themes explored are traditionally the same: a
hero, disconnected and alienated by fate, or destiny; and an epiphany in
which the hero matures into disillusionment, or a kind of spiritual
adulthood.  These are evinced by my earlier examples: Oedipus provides a
disturbingly literal realisation.  Oedipus,  not just disconnected, but
actually banished for his future sin, marches inevitably towards his
apotheosis.  Upon learning the truth of his relations with his parents, he
enters into a new stage of awareness, blinding himself, signifying his
loss of faith in both noumena and phenomena.  Fundamentally, this figures
a maturing, a growth, from a naive faith in literalism and superstition,
into a sight of the true loneliness and desolation of human existence. 
Like a child moving away from its mother, like humanity moving away from
God, he loses the sense of security in which infantility is founded.  In
the Christian creation story, these themes are largely reiterated, but
upon the gaining of knowledge, the protagonists are cast out of Eden,
which is an unsually pungent statement of the religious implications of
the tragic form.  
   Shakespeare, and, for the sake of argument, Hamlet, is worthwhile
covering here.  As any nascent critic should know, he shifts the focus of
the tragic form from plot to character, and distorts it in other ways
without interrupting its fundamental impetus.  This is a work of subtlety
and emotional resonance probably unmatched until Joyce's Dubliners and
Ulysses.  The subtlety stems from new insights into the nature and
motivation of the tragic hero: rather than being a simple plot device,
Hamlet brings to the proceedings a pre-existant self-awareness and a rally
against the play's necessary conclusion, which is probably the first time
that such a work suggested that self-consciousness renders the tragedy of
gnosis evitable, though in the end Hamlet of course suffers the
revelation: 'The rest is silence.'
   All these are important in discussion of Se7en, which follows the
twentieth century tradition of combining the emotional power of
Shakespearean tragedy of character and the dramatic power of Classical
tragedy of plot: witness Joyce, Eliot, Hughes and Golding as forebears. 
The critical innovation of Se7en is to devolve the tragic responsibility
upon both Somerset and Mills.  Somerset is as Hamlet, seperated from his
colleagues by education and perception, who brings to the film the same
sense of unease, and desire to prevent the revelatory pain.  Mills is more
traditional: literally naive.  As the film progresses, we are given clues
that Somerset's alienation derives from more than intelligence, and that
he has himself undergone some kind of maturing epiphany, though we are
told that 'It wasn't just one thing.'  However, at the climax, there is no
doubt that Somerset is aware of what is about to happen to Mills.  He
rails against Mills's destiny, implores him not to fulfil the sin which
will give him view upon despair.  Freeman's impeccable performance implies
that, inwardly, his character is aware of the futility of this exercise. 
Such realisation of subtle, obscure nuance is the mark of a superb
portrayal; Freeman's lack of Oscar nomination is in itself a tragedy.
The last reel reveals the cript's only moments of facility, Doe rather
obviously stating 'He didn't know.'  However, this does not diminish
Se7en's true value.  Though its innovations are minor, they work
beautifully, and it deserves full marks for three main achievements. 
First, it is the best delineation, of tragic revelation and redemption, of
the latter half of the twentieth century.  Disregarding the critic, it is
also the most stark and shocking delineation of the same ever, possibly. 
Thirdly, it deserves full marks for being populist.  Although its success
hinges upon exploration of the same tenebraic ideas that fuel Crow and
Finnegan's Wake, it is greatly more accessible than any other major
tragedy one might care to name.
   With reference to Eden, one might say that Brad Pitt has truly become a
'legend' of 'the Fall.'  Se7en is a stunning and important film.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1995, R, 125 minutes [2 hours, 5 minutes]
[thriller/mystery]
starring: Brad Pitt (Detective David Mills), Morgan Freeman (Detective
William Sommerset), Gwenyth Paltrow (Tracy Mills), written by Andrew  K.
Walker, produced by Arnold Kopelson, Phyllis Carlyle, directed by David
Fincher.
"Seven" is one of the best mystery movies I've ever seen. It's extremely
intriguing and suspenseful, but it's also quite fun. It's a serial killer
mystery, but you don't care so much about making the killer pay as much as
hope they just catch the killer.
The story is a cops-on-the-trail-of-serial-killer mystery. Someone is
murdering people who are offenders of "The Seven Deadly Sins." A fat man
(gluttony) was forced to eat himself to death, a lawyer (greed) is
slaughtered by his own rich possessions... I could go on but revealing any
more would give away entirely too much.
What makes this film so unique is the characterization of the "good guys"
which makes the unseen villain seem so vile. Brad Pitt stars is quite
excellent as Detective David Mills, the cocky rookie. However, Morgan Freeman
is even better as Detective William Sommerset, the wise veteran on the verge
of retirement (and he doesn't get killed by the end). There is a great sense
of camaraderie here which often provides for a breath of comic relief. This
is impressive because the mood is so tense, and the fact that it can be
down-played as well as it is here (let alone at all) is quite an
accomplishment.
The setting takes place in present day New York City but the art direction
is able to give the city a feeling of the evil, scary place many believe it
to be. The production design is superb, in the spirit of "Batman" and "The
Crow," this film embodies the Gothic mood. The way the words fade in and out,
along with the freaky Nine Inch Nails music really add a lot to the story on
a subconscious level - even the credits are scary!
The killer's victims have no connections at all, and thus Mills and
Sommerset don't have much to go on to solve the case. They can only wait for
the next murder to occur which makes for tremendous suspense. We become just
as tense and worried as the detectives because of this thick atmosphere of
the unknown. Not that many films have such an interesting and intriguing
screenplay as this. 
The only problem I had with the film is the way in which Mills and Sommerset
are lead to a suspect. Let's just say it seems a little too "mystery movie,"
or too convenient in other words. When they are led to a suspect by the name
of  John Doe, a terrific chase scene ensues. This is a typical thrilling
element, but it works perfectly here because of the process of the story. 
If anything, this film is the epitome of twist endings. I don't have to tell
you Mills and Sommerset finally catch the criminal, but the way in which this
happens is surprising. There is a scene of intriguing philosophy between the
killer and the detectives, and even though he's obviously insane, his
charisma makes for some good points. What's even more surprising is the last
few scenes themselves as the suspense comes to a terrific climax as the
film's resolution comes down to a question of what justice really is.
"Seven" is not just a film about crime, but about the evil within man. John
Doe felt he was doing society a favor by ridding it of "scum." But as
justified as he makes himself seem, we must never be tempted by such twisted
ideals of justice.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 9/22/95 (wide)
Running Length: 2:03
MPAA Classification: R (Gory crime scenes, violence, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Brad Pitt, Morgan Freeman, Gwyneth Paltrow, John C. McGinley,
      Richard Roundtree, Kevin Spacey
Director: David Fincher
Producers: Arnold Kopelson and Phyllis Carlyle
Screenplay: Andrew Kevin Walker
Cinematography: Darius Khondji
Music: Howard Shore
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     Frequently, mystery/thrillers present us with a cast of about six
or seven characters, set up a sequence of grizzly murders, then
"surprise" us by revealing which of those six or seven characters is the
guilty party.  It's a time-honored method that's repeated in at least
several movies each year.  At the outset, SEVEN has all the hallmarks of
this kind of motion picture.  Fortunately, it turns out somewhat smarter
and less predictable.  Though not without significant flaws, SEVEN isn't
transparent or moronic, and it doesn't insult the average viewer's
intelligence.
     When all is said and done, the mystery of SEVEN is not who the
killer is--there's never any question about the identity--but how he
will outsmart the police next, and what he will do as a climax to his
killing spree.  It's refreshing to find an intelligent maniac who is not
undone by a moment of sheer stupidity.  From beginning to end, SEVEN's
murderer has the situation under control.  The police are his pawns, not
the other way around.  Shades of SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.
     The good guys are a pair of detectives at opposite ends of their
careers.  David Mills (Brad Pitt) is new on the job, full of energy and
high ideals, and ready to "make a difference" by catching the crooks.
William Somerset (Morgan Freeman) is in his last week on the job.  His
long years studying crime scenes and following up on clues have left him
weary and jaded.  To him, being a detective isn't about nabbing
criminals--it's about methodically collecting and cataloguing evidence
in case a prosecutor ever needs it.
     The serial killer pursued by Mills and Somerset is choosing each of
his victims based on which of the seven deadly sins (gluttony, greed,
sloth, lust, pride, envy, wrath) they have most clearly violated.  The
deaths form a portion of a decidedly warped sermon..  In their quest to
end this bloody, sadistic spree, the two cops appear well-paired, as
together they make the perfect detective.  Mills is all brawn and little
brain.  Somerset, on the other hand, spends long hours in the library
researching Dante and Chaucer, looking for clues that will enable him to
prevent the next killing.
     One of the problems with SEVEN is that Pitt's Mills is not an
especially likable character.  He's cocky and arrogant, with an inflated
opinion of himself.  Up until the end, he's convinced that his way is
always the best.  Pitt doesn't turn in one of his most impressive
performances here, either.  There's no subtlety whatsoever.  In this
film, the actor has a single mode:  overdrive.  Somerset, on the other
hand, is a subdued and balanced personality perfectly essayed by Morgan
Freeman.  By emoting less than his co-star, Freeman frequently steals
scenes from him.  Gwyneth Paltrow (FLESH AND BONE, JEFFERSON IN PARIS),
one of today's better young actresses, is woefully underused in the role
of Mills' wife, Tracy.
     SEVEN is unnecessarily gory and runs for a little too long, but
neither of these elements detracts much from the film's enjoyability
(unless you have a weak stomach).  The same is true of several logical
flaws--they're there, but not overly apparent while the film is on-
screen (they can be ruminated about after the credits have rolled).
While SEVEN lacks the cleverness of the superior UNUSUAL SUSPECTS, it's
strong enough to hold its own against most other thrillers.  SEVEN may
always be grim, dark, and rainy, but at least there's a little substance
beneath the atmosphere.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
