Title
Review for 200 Cigarettes (1999)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Matt Prigge
Starring: Christina Ricci, Paul Rudd, Courtney Love, Ben Affleck, Gaby 
Hoffman, Casey Affleck, Jay Mohr, Kate Hudson, Martha Plimpton, Brian 
McCardie, Angela Featherstone, Nicole Parker, David Chapelle, Janeane 
Garafolo, Guillermo Diaz, Elvis Costello
So I guess this kind of film has rubbed off onto the indie crowd as 
well, eh? Though they've always been made, the kind of retro-John Hughes 
kind of film only came back into popularity amongst everyone else a 
couple years ago, I suppose thanks to "Scream," the first film to really 
bring back that whole 80s feel, albeit with a sharp, self-conscious 
twist that made it admittingly enjoyable (too bad, I guess, that the 
sequel blew). Then came the traditional Hughes-ian films, like the 
dreadful "Can't Hardly Wait" of the previous summer (currently 
collecting dust on my top 10 worst list of the year), and now this whole 
trend has come to us courtesy of a ginormous cast of actors who work 
nearly exclusively in the independent film circuit, and whose range of 
actual acting talent spans the spectrum of "annoying" (Casey Affleck, as 
from my experience of him in "Good Will Hunting") to "pretty damn great 
(Christina Ricci, obviously). It's too bad that the only thing that 
differentiates this film from another film like it is that instead of 
godawful actors taking the helm (oh, Jennifer Love Hewitt...), it's 
these guys making asses of themselves.
If nothing, "200 Cigarettes" proves that even if you put a mighty cast 
of Indie actors in one movie together, Altman-esqueness or not, you're 
still going to come up with a relatively shallow, mostly unwitty, albeit 
minorly-energetic movie. It's like if "Nashville" had been set during a 
certain time to only sell records, was populated by characateurs, and 
had the depth of insight as a petri dish. The characters in this film 
are flat, under-developed, and worst of all, smug and hip - this film 
contains about 20 characters, but all of three, maybe four, are evenly 
remotely interesting, mostly thanks to the actors who inhabit them with 
their own self-created aspects. Not a very good omen when you're trying 
to make a film that's overly an hour and a half.
The film, though basically plotless, follows a large group of people, 
usually in small groups, trying to get to a certain party. There's two 
Long Island teens (Ricci and her pal, Gaby Hoffman, unrecognizable to me 
until the final reel) up in the city sans their parents' knowledge, but 
unaware where the party's supposed to take place who run into some young 
punk fans (Casey Affleck and Guillermo Diaz) who at first frighten them 
then win them over, sorta (as a side note, I hereby officially deem the 
Long Island accent the single most annoying accent on the face of the 
planet earth). There's a birthday-plagued, morose guy (Paul Rudd) who 
was just dumped by his performance artist girlfriend (Janeane Garafolo), 
on the town with his best bud (Courtney Love), who offers herself as a 
birthday present to him to cheer him up. There's a clumsy, young deb 
(Kate Hudson, daughter to Goldie Hawn) who's out with the guy who robbed 
her of her virginity the night before (Jay Mohr). There's a bartender 
(Ben Affleck), who's being constantly eyeballed but never followed 
through with. There's two girls (Nicole Parker and Angela Featherstone) 
who are going to the party with the one's Scot boyfriend (Brian 
McCardie), who is then dumped beforehand. And there's the Scot's ex 
(Martha Plimpton), the girl who's throwing the party. This is all tied 
together by a joyful cabbie (Dave Chapelle), who ends up giving at least 
most of them a ride during the film, and dispenses a bit of advice free 
of charge.
It's all incredibly fake, and not only does every single plot thread 
seem like it'd fit in comfortably with a sitcom on NBC, it also feels 
incredibly cliched and reminiscent of something else that wasn't much 
fun the first time around. And of the entire cast, several of them very 
good actors, only three make any kind of impression: Rudd, who merely 
shows that he's one of the more charismatic and likable actors around 
once again; Love, who shows that she can do fluff as well as more 
dramatic stuff; and Hudson, the biggest surprise of the movie, who gives 
if not a minor-star-making performance, at least a memorable one. She 
posesses something that's not unlike her own mother's early charm: she's 
flustered, cute, and unpredicatable, and whenever she was on screen, I 
was always interested in seeing what bizarre nuance she'd come up with 
next, and was for the most part pleased. Everyone else, though, is just 
so-so, even Ricci, usually the only good thing amongst a pile of crap 
(see, or rather don't see, "Pecker"), though both Afflecks turn in at 
least aimable performances (Casey, in fact, was much more digestable 
here than in "Hunting" - a couple more roles, and he could be even above 
average someday). But everyone else slips into dullsville, sacked with 
lame roles that require them to spout bad dialogue and go through cheap, 
petty emotions, and, well, smoke cigarettes (haven't seen smoking this 
fake since Faye Dunaway in "Bonnie and Clyde").
And I could very well go on from here, blasting every part of it, 
destroying everything that this film stands for, point out that the sole 
reason this takes place in the 80s is for a cheap, retro feel, and make 
hyperbolic statements like "'200 Cigarettes' represents the dreg of our 
country's filmmaking capacity and the low end of the indie field"...but 
I shan't, because, truth be told, I nearly liked this film. The opening 
almost killed it immediately, and its introduction to our cast of 
characters was hardly at all proimising. But after awhile, as slight as 
the film as a whole was, it grew on me, and even if I wasn't flat-out 
enjoying it, I was at least occasionally grimacing and even chuckling 
here and there at things I just knew I shouldn't dare chuckle at. Even 
with terrible dialogue and bad subplots throughout that weren't tres 
involving, it has an energy that makes up for a bit of the crapness of 
the whole, even if it only makes up for about half of it. The 
performances were genuinely likable by all, if not too memorable, and I 
was shocked to see that I soon started caring about the whole Rudd/Love 
subplot, and that I was soon looking forward to it coming up again via 
the plot rotation.
But there's still more to not like than to like here, and all I can say 
is that though it's not annoying like "Can't Hardly Wait" or other 
Hughes-ian films, it's not exactly a wonderful, even totally likable 
flick. Not more than week after seeing it, I'm surprised that I can 
remember so much about it. Luckily, it's mostly the stuff that I did 
like about it (Love, Rudd, Hudson, for instance), 'cause otherwise it'd 
be a pretty much all scathing review. As such, it's nearly a guilty 
pleasure, and my subsequent rating seems balls-out generous for a movie 
I nearly despised if it hadn't become so progressively likable.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Matt Williams
>From the title of 200 Cigarettes, one might assume that it is either a
propaganda film from the tobacco lobby, or a comical entry for the
Guinness Book of World Records.  However, in actuality, the film turns
out to be a threadbare ensemble comedy, struggling to be an 80s
nostalgia film, and failing.  In fact, the 200 of the title could be a
reference to the number of minute subplots in the film, each of which
holds about as much substance as a wisp of cigarette smoke.
The film is set on New Year's Eve, 1981.  Monica (Martha Plimpton) is
hosting a party, and the film cuts back and forth between many of her
invited guests as they meander their way across New York City, slowly
making their way to her apartment.
There's not really a main plotline, but the subplot with the most
prominence is that of Lucy (Courtney Love) and Kevin (Paul Rudd). Kevin
has just painfully broken up with his girlfriend, Ellie (Janeane
Garofalo), and Lucy wants to cheer him up by taking him to the party.
However, as the night progresses, it is obvious that a romance is
budding between the two.  But, can Paul recover from his break-up in
time to notice Lucy?  Or is this match not meant to be?
The search for love is common throughout most of 200 Cigarettes' myriad
subplots.  For example, a clumsy, but earnest girl (Katie Holmes), can't
help falling in love with a love-phobic lout (Jay Mohr).  Or, two lost
Long Island girls (Christina Ricci and Gaby Hoffman) discover love in
the most unlikeliest of places.  The emcee for the evening is a
disco-friendly cab driver (Dave Chappelle) who manages to meet just
about everyone that night.
The main problem with 200 Cigarettes is a common one to the ensemble
comedy.  Very few of the film's subplots actually work, and the film
spends far too little time with them.  Instead, we are constantly
reunited with barely recognizable characters we care little about in
situations both tedious and contrived.
The actors in 200 Cigarettes aren't able to help matters much. Christina
Ricci is buried beneath her screech of a New Yawk accent. Ben Affleck
wanders aimlessly through his scenes as a highly desirable bartender.
Jay Mohr's character inexplicably takes a 180 degree turn halfway
through the film.  Katie Holmes is lost amid some uninspired bits of
slapstick.  Paul Rudd and Courtney Love are nearly the only appealing
ones in the film, but there is far too little of them to be spread
around.
The film is set in 1981, but that seems to be more of a marketing ploy
than an actual setting.  There's nary a nostalgic bone to be found in
this body. Sure, barely a moment goes by without an early 80s song
floating by... but, if you're wise, you'll buy the soundtrack, and skip
the movie.
200 Cigarettes is not an absolute disaster.  It's more like a crowded
party in which there are only one or two interesting people.  Awkward,
overcrowded and mostly boring...it's not a party to remember.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Just as the 1970s begot a widespread cultural nostalgia
for all things '50s, the end of the '90s has brought forth an
eruption of longing for the '80s.  Filmmakers have been quick to
capitalize on this trend: witness "Boogie Nights," "The Wedding
Singer" and "The Last Days of Disco," three recent films which
used the '80s as joke fodder, to varying degrees of success.
        "200 Cigarettes," the latest entry in the 1980s nostalgia
wave, does not follow suit.  Dumb and lumbering, the film confuses
its quantity of characters with quality characterization.  Rather
than developing any of the relationships it establishes early on,
the movie simply piles more actors on the screen any time the pace
lags, making it virtually impossible to keep track of everyone
without making a chart.
        The story opens on New Year's Eve, 1981, and the Big Apple
is bustling with lonely people in search of sex partners with
whom to celebrate the special night.  Let's run down the list.
It gets complicated, so try to pay attention:
        Kevin (Paul Rudd) and Lucy (Courtney Love) are two friends
in search of a good time.  Kevin, who has just been dumped by his
girlfriend Ellie (Janeane Girafalo), would have preferred to sit
at home and mope, but Lucy convinces him to attend a New Year's
party with her.  It's a time to celebrate, she explains, especially
as it happens to be Kevin's birthday.
        Val and Stephie (Christina Ricci and Gaby Hoffman,
respectively) are two teenagers in search of the same party,
which is being hosted by Val's neurotic cousin Monica (Martha
Plimpton) and Monica's friend Hillary (Catherine Kellner).  But
when Val loses her cousin's address, the duo is stuck wandering
the streets without a destination.
        Ben Affleck is a handsome bartender whose company is
much desired by the aforementioned Lucy, plus two customers,
Bridget (Nicole Parker) and Caitlyn (Angela Featherstone).
The bartender, whose name is never given, promises to stop by
the much discussed party after he gets off work that night.
(What kind of bar closes before midnight on New Year's Eve,
anyway?)
        Meanwhile, Monica thinks her party will be a disaster:
apart from Hilary, only Eric (Brian McCardie), her Scottish
ex-boyfriend, has stopped by.  Eric doesn't want to party,
however: he only wishes to bombard Monica with questions about
his perceived sexual inadequacy.  (Bridget, his girlfriend for
the past six months, dumped him earlier that evening.)  But
Hillary and Eric soon hit it off, leaving Monica even more
depressed than before.
        Jack (Jay Mohr) and Cindy (Kate Hudson) are on their second
date, about to head to (you guessed it) Monica's New Year's party.
Jack is walking on air after discovering that he claimed Cindy's
virginity the previous evening, though she quickly grows tired of
his constant queries about the event.  ("Why me?  How was it?")
        In the interim, Val and Stephie (remember them?) hook up
with Tom (Casey Affleck, brother to Ben) and Dave (Guillermo
Diaz), a pair of friendly punks who are looking for a good time.
Val accommodates, although Stephie just wants to go home and spends
most of the film whining (very loudly) about this fact to anyone
who'll listen.
        Dave Chappelle, perhaps the funniest guest ever to appear
on Comedy Central's "Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist," valiantly
tries to anchor "200 Cigarettes."  He plays a cab driver (the only
one on duty in all of New York, apparently) who sees his job as an
opportunity to dispense advice to his customers.  He approaches
life as though he were a set of Isaac Hayes lyrics: everything
revolves around sex for him.  ("Music makes booty spin round!" he
cheerfully explains to a perplexed Kevin.)
        There's no plot, per-se; people exist here only to be
cross-referenced and indexed, not to advance a coherent storyline.
I scribbled page after page of notes while watching this movie,
trying to sort out the knotted web of relationships that the film
drapes over us.  It's not an easy task.  By the time the story is
over, most of the characters have been gotten jiggy with at least
one of the others, even though the relationships appear doomed
before they even begin.  The main question asked by the film seems
to be, "Who is going to leave Monica's party with whom?"  I have a
better one: "Who cares?"
        Most of the cast looks uncomfortable.  The usually
flawless Christina Ricci seems unsure of how to handle the Val
character, and chokes on her own Northern accent.  Ben Affleck,
given nothing of consequence to do, is content to stand back
and look pretty, giving brother Casey the chance to upstage him.
As for the rest of the cast, only Martha Plimpton, Brian McCardie
and Dave Chappelle really seem to come alive, emerging as
interesting people despite the screenplay's attempts to relegate
them to the background.  I don't blame the other cast members for
their performances, though: they had almost nothing to build their
roles upon.  Whether this is due to a poor screenplay by Shana
Larsen or simple inexperience from first-time director Risa Bramon
Garcia is unclear, although it may be a combination of the two.
        "200 Cigarettes" is bursting at the seams with characters,
so many that no one has the opportunity to emerge as anything more
than dialogue placeholders.  We don't once care about anyone here,
because they've breezed past us with such rapidity that we have a
hard time remembering who they were.
        The film also makes poor use of its setting: why set the
story in the '80s if none of the humor or drama reflects the time
period?  "200 Cigarettes" could have been set in 1999 with zero
changes to the script, apart from a throwaway gag involving Elvis
Costello in the final scene.  Had the date not been revealed as
1981 at the outset, I would have assumed we were watching a story
set in contemporary times.  Nothing about the slang, costumes or
hairstyles indicates otherwise.
        "200 Cigarettes" is an incoherent, sprawling mess.  Although
it does occasionally throw in a clever joke or gag, much of the
"humor" stems from unflattering stereotypes (such as Cindy's constant
clumsiness) or crude visuals (an unappetizing stain which appears
on the dress of one of the characters, for example).  Lacking all
but the cheapest of payoffs, "200 Cigarettes" deserves a warning
from the Surgeon General's office: "This film may be hazardous to
your intellect."

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb

200 Cigarettes **
rated R
starring Ben Affleck, Casey Affleck, David Chappelle, Guillermo Diaz, Angela
Featherstone, Janeane Garofalo, Gaby Hoffmann, Kate Hudson, Courtney Love,
Brian McCardie, Jay Mohr, Nicole Parker, Martha Plimpton, Christina Ricci,
Paul Rudd
written by Shana Larsen
directed by Risa Bramon Garcia
Filmmakers love making ensemble pieces. Why? Maybe because it is a way in
which you do not need to develop your characters in order to prove a point.
You just need some witty dialogue and good direction to keep the viewer
intrigued, and all the characters must come together at the end in some
mysterious way. In the case of PLAYING BY HEART, this kind of film is done
well, but in 200 CIGARETTES the viewer leaves unintrigued. 
200 CIGARETTES loosely tells the story of many New York couples during New
Year's Eve 1981. Somehow, these people are all supposed to attend a party
being held by Martha Plimpton, but they don't seem to show up. First, there
is Paul Rudd(CLUELESS), who has just been dumped by his girlfriend and is
spending New Year's Eve(ironically, his birthday) with his good friend,
played by Courtney Love, and contemplating whether to start a relationship
with her. There is also Jay Mohr, a typical player who is tired of women
with whom he's had one night stands telling him they love him. His latest
victim is Kate Hudson, who sports dog feces on her dress for half of the
film. Then there are Christina Ricci and Gaby Hoffmann, who are spending a
night on the town without their parents' knowledge, and they meet punks
Casey Affleck and Guillermo Diaz in an East Village club. And Ben Affleck,
Janeane Garofalo, Nicole Parker, and Angela Featherstone all show up in
small roles. The closest the film has to a protagonist is a cab driver(David
Chappelle) who seems to be driving each couple around. 
The problem with 200 CIGARETTES is that it tries to be many things without
succeeding in any particular way. The film only works as an homage to the
80's in its superb soundtrack, showing that even a movie like the WEDDING
SINGER can be more insightful in its knowledge of a period in time. The film
also doesnt work as a comedy or a romance, because there is not enough of
either to take note of. Shana Larsen's script is quite mediocre, and makes
most of the conversations a bore, and the film itself only mildly amusing.
200 CIGARETTES also sadly has no message at all to speak of, and it makes
you wonder as to just when MTV Productions plans to put out a real movie.
Former casting director Risa Bramon Garcia turns her first film into a 2
hour long music video, without even getting much out of her cast. Even CAN'T
HARDLY WAIT, a far more superb film, deals with some kind of a message. If
200 CIGARETTES is any indication of what kinds of films we'll be seeing in
this upcoming year, then I guess I'd just as well stay home. 


Author
Dennis Schwartz

200 CIGARETTES (director: Risa Bramon Garcia; screenwriter: Shana
Larsen; cinematographer: Frank Prinzi; cast: Ben Affleck (Bartender),
Paul Rudd (Kevin), Kate Hudson (Cindy), Courtney Love (Lucy), David
Chappelle (Cab Driver), Guillermo Díaz (Dave), Angela Featherstone
(Caitlin), Gaby Hoffmann (Stephie), Janeane Garofalo (Ellie), Martha
Plimpton (Monica), Christina Ricci (Val), Hillary (Catherine Kellner),
Jay Mohr (Jack), Brian McCardie (Eric), Nicole Parker (Bridget), 1999)
There's not much excitement to this New Year's Eve of 1981 film, taking
place in the East Village of New York City, except for the attempt at
some revelry by pairs of teens and twenty-somethings trying to make a
statement about their desperate lives, their loneliness, their neurotic
lives, their one-night stands, and their need for partying, smoking and
drinking.
Numerous sketches take place at a party hosted by Monica (Plimpton), who
fears that no one will show up. Her place becomes the focal point for
introducing all the so-called zany characters who try and eventually
will find their way to her party.
The best part of the film, is that it did capture the East Village feel
of the Reagan 1980s. But, for the most part, this was a dull film that
had nothing to say and soon wore out its welcome as the story became
insipid and the characters grating. It was difficult to like anyone in
this motley group of users, wannabes and punkers. In the end, the film
proved to be as shallow as the characters were.
Director Risa Bramon Garcia, making her debut after a successful career
as a casting director, seems to be more interested in getting the pop
music of the 1980s heard and the bizarre dress of party goers viewed,
than in telling a cohesive story. She succeeded in scoring in both of
her limited objects, even getting Elvis Costello to make an appearance.
In this ensemble piece, there are far too many characters to really get
to know them and too many sub plot developments to keep your interest.
Everyone fades in and out of the scene, for no rhyme or reason, each
with some tale to tell. Among all these whites is a wise-guy black cab
driver (David Chappelle ), riding in a disco cab, who is also out there
trying to score women. He offers what goes for words of wisdom to his
passengers. "If you relax, you can get what you want, even if you smell
like dog shit."
The ones with the most screen time are: Monica, who collapses and misses
the tremendous crowd that attends her party, including the one she
idolizes, Elvis Costello; Kevin (Paul Rudd) is an unhappy sourpuss who's
not enjoying his birthday because his girlfriend left him; Lucy
(Courtney Love) is Kevin's best friend for the last five years, who is
accompanying him around town and who has had sex with seemingly everyone
but him. They tempt each other with sex this entire evening. Then
there's - Christina Ricci and Gaby Hoffman - as teenagers from the
'burbs in  Ronkonkoma, Long Island, who are just looking for a party or
in the case of Gaby, just to get home alive; Janeane Garofalo (Kevin's
ex-girlfriend) is someone who angrily thinks she deserves better than
Kevin and tells this to the cabbie; Ben Affleck is a smug bartender
looking for sex; he has the best line in the film, as he asks two
sex-crazed wannabe punkers, competing for the same guys, Angela
Featherstone and  Nicole Parker, "By the way, how do you like your eggs
in the morning? Scrambled or fertilized?"; Kate Hudson is clumsy, she is
always knocking things over and slipping in dog shit. She is a virgin,
who was deflowered last night night by the ego driven Jay Mohr, a real
lady killer and phony; and, then, there is Brian McCardie, who has a
noticeable Scottish accent. He is an artist not able to keep a woman
because he's lousy in bed.
If I kept scored correctly, each party goer finds a new mate to bring in
the New Year. The film is almost bearable when it just goes for the look
and feel of the times, but when it tries to pontificate, such as when it
sums up the film by comparing relationships to the way smokers have a
need for cigarettes, and asks the question from the pair that got the
most screen time, Rudd and Love, "Why are people so scared of each
other? Why are they scared to be honest with each other?" Then I felt
the party was really over and this MTV produced story faded out with not
one interesting character in the film. I bet you a dollar to a donut,
that you could have gone to most any other New Year's Eve party in
Manhattan and met more interesting people!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jamie Peck
200 CIGARETTES
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
What is it that makes this retro-comedy such a downer? It's certainly 
not the cast, which includes enough hot, young talent for several 
movies. There's Courtney Love, cementing her reputation as a serious 
actress; Christina Ricci, hot off her shoulda-been-nominated turn in 
"The Opposite of Sex"; Paul Rudd, who gets even more appealing with 
every role; Kate Hudson, inheriting some fine acting genes from mom 
Goldie Hawn; and Affleck brothers Ben and Casey, two of the best things 
about "Good Will Hunting." Perhaps the question is this: What drew these 
and other immensely talented actors to such a dreary project? 
Maybe it looked good on paper. "200 Cigarettes" is composed of a series 
of vignettes, as various characters make their way through New York's 
festively decorated East Village to a holiday bash thrown by a jittery 
bundle of nerves named Monica (Martha Plimpton, all dressed up in her 
best Cyndi Lauper). Among the potential guests are likeable cad Kevin 
(Rudd) and his best friend Lucy (Love), busy bickering over his recent 
break-up, and a clumsy but seemingly charming bartender (Ben Affleck) 
who opens his mouth only to spew forth bad pick-up lines. 
More subplots - _many_ more - dot the big picture, but those listed 
above are the only ones worth noting in a positive light. All the other 
story tangents are as frazzled as a cokehead trying to solve a Rubick's 
Cube. Ricci and Gaby Hoffman grate as two Ronkonkoma gals (the kind that 
have trouble pronouncing hard consonants) out to have a high time in the 
big city. Infamously acerbic comedienne Janeane Garofalo is wasted in 
what amounts to a several-scene cameo. Hudson, as a pretty-in-pink klutz 
recently devirginized by a reprehensible ladies' man (Jay Mohr), trips, 
pukes and gets smeared with dog poop. Are we laughing yet? 
The film boils down to a mixture of the good, the bad and the gaudy, 
with the latter two overtaking the former. Game performances - 
especially by Love, Rudd and Plimpton - are almost shot down by the 
bizarrely colorful parts and a constantly roving focus, here a 
combination that mostly sputters when it should crackle. Too many 
sidetracks rate as uninteresting and have little payoff until a lengthy 
final montage where we find out many of the performers served as one 
night stands for each other. If this is "200 Cigarettes," then get me 
200 nicotine patches. 

Author
Ross Anthony
"Hey man, no smoking in my taxi," the disco cabby (Dave Chappelle) scorns as
he lights up one of his own. "You just told me there's no smoking!" the
passenger protests. Cabby, "I ain't smoking what you're smoking."
Despite these quotes and the scores of butts, "200 Cigarettes" isn't about
smoking. It's a relationship flick showcasing the interactions of 10 or so
young techno-freaky people on New Years Eve 1981. Although I was young in
1981 ... I didn't smoke, I wasn't into techno and my hair wasn't a primary
color. For these reasons I struggled to find someone in this film with whom
to relate. As the sometimes twisted, but nonetheless intriguing,
relationship stories developed, I was admittedly lured into the picture ...
until finally the interactions transcended the stereotypes.
There's the desperado (Paul Rudd) whose doomed love affairs keep him from
launching a romance with loose galpal Lucy (Courtney Love). There's the
Romeo (Jay Mohr) who is burdened by nameless flocks of women falling in love
with him at the snap of a finger. Accident prone Cindy (Kate Hudson -- is
simply stellar!) fumbles through most of the picture with dog poopie on her
back. Eric (Brian McKardie) is adorable, but sorely lacking in the manly
duty arena. And still a host of others populate the script including Ben
Afflect as the studly bartender and his brother (Casey Afflect, an excellent
"real person" actor) as your average leather-clad, mascara-wearing street
punk.
This odd mix of romantic web-winding culminates at a New Year's Eve party
that is cleverly left to your imagination ... which may well be the norm for
those of you who drink heavily on such occasions.
Starring Paul Rudd, Courtney Love, Kate Hudson, Ben Afflect, etc.
Directed by Risa Bramon Garcia
Produced by Betsy Beers, David Gale Van Toffler at Paramount Pictures,
Lakeshore Ent., with MTV and Dogstar.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Greg King
200 CIGARETTES (M).  
(Paramount Pictures/MTV Films/Buena Vista International)
Director: Risa Bramon Garcia
Stars: Ben Affleck, Casey Affleck, Dave Chappelle, Guillermo Diaz,
Angela Featherstone, Janeane Garofalo, Gaby Hoffmann, Kate Hudson,
Courtney Love, Brian McCardie, Jay Mohr, Martha Plimpton, Christina
Ricci, Paul Rudd, Jennifer Albano, Elvis Costello, Catherine Kellner.
        It is New Year's Eve in New York, 1981.  Punk rock is in its
death throes.  This is a more innocent time, before the era of
political correctness, smoking bans, and the spectre of AIDS.  This
low budget comedy follows a disparate group of twentysomething New
Yorkers as they look for love and a hot time in the city in the hours
leading up to midnight.  The common link is that they have all been
invited to a party in a loft apartment.
        While Monica (Martha Plimpton), the hostess, grows
increasingly frustrated with the fact that no-one has yet shown up,
her potential guests are sorting out a number of personal
relationships and trying to organise their dates for the evening.  The
film cuts between the various characters, but we never really get any
feel for them as real people.  If the film has anything resembling
central characters it is Lucy (Courtney Love) and Kevin (Paul Rudd,
from Clueless, etc).  Both long time best friends they are without a
date for New Year's Eve, and gradually come to realise that may well
be perfect partners as the night wears on.
        First time screen writer Shana Larsen doesn't get overly
sentimental about the spirit of the celebrations here.  Rather, her
script offers up some witty and acerbic observations on relationships.
The film is also suffused with a nice touch of irony that is oddly
appealing.
        200 Cigarettes is the first feature from director Risa Bramon
Garcia, a former high powered casting agent, who has assembled an
ensemble group of hot young things and rising young stars to bring the
characters to life.  They deliver enthusiastic performances that
capture the spirit of the film.  Love in particular is superb, and her
flamboyant, brassy screen presence reminded me of a brash, younger
Bette Midler.  Janeane Garofalo lends her lacerating wit to a small
role as Kevin's past lover, a pretentious performance artist named
Ellie.
        Ben Affleck is wasted in a small and meaningless role as a
bartender, while younger brother Casey is solid as a young punk who
attracts the attention of Val (Christina Ricci), a tough and feisty
teeny bopper.  Jay Mohr (from Jerry Maguire, etc) plays the womanising
Jack, who is desperately trying to ditch the clinging Cindy (Kate
Hudson), with whom he spent the previous night.  Comic Dave Chappelle
is enjoyable as a spaced out cabbie who ferries many of the characters
around the city.  Singer Elvis Costello contributes a brief cameo for
the film's final, delightfully ironic joke.
        But the film's setting is also a good excuse to crank out yet
another great soundtrack of '80's songs, which, in hindsight, is one
of the major plusses of this rather slight, but nonetheless
entertaining, nostalgia trip.  The costumes also beautifully evoke the
era.  200 Cigarettes will largely appeal to audiences who still
remember this era with a great deal of fondness and who have not yet
grown sick of this whole '80's shtick.

Author
Michael Dequina
_200_Cigarettes_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
As much fun as they may be to make, and as interesting as the assembled
talent often is, multi-story and -character ensemble films have a built-in
problem: all the stories and characters never hold the same amount of
interest.  While Robert Altman has shown that it is possible to come up
with a consistently engaging pastiche of narrative threads, more often than
not similar efforts by others come out wildly uneven.  Such is the case
with Risa Bramon Garcia's somewhat amusing but underachieving
_200_Cigarettes_.
Within the loose narrative framework of people finding their way to one
big Big Apple bash on the Eve of 1982, Garcia and screenwriter Shana
Larsen, both first-timers, do come up with one completely successful plot
thread: that of platonic friends/roommates Kevin (Paul Rudd) and Lucy
(Courtney Love).  Kevin is depressed over his recent breakup with
performance artist girlfriend Ellie (Janeane Garofalo, as hilariously
acerbic as ever) and the fact that it's also his birthday, and Lucy wants
to cheer him up and make him forget about Ellie--in any way she can.  Right
off the bat one can see where this storyline will lead, but the terrific
pairing of Rudd and Love makes it never less than involving.  Love is
particularly impressive, displaying a warmth and vulnerability that is as
delightful as it is surprising; her performance here--in tandem with her
breakthrough work in _The_People_vs._Larry_Flynt_--reveals Love to be the
real thing, actingwise.
Unfortunately for Garcia and Larsen--and even worse for us--there is one
huge dud of a storyline involving two Long Island teens, Val (Christina
Ricci) and Stephie (Gaby Hoffmann), who get lost on the mean streets of the
East Village.  Along the way, they hook up with a couple of punk rockers,
Tom (Casey Affleck) and Dave (Guillermo Diaz).  It's always nice to see
Ricci onscreen, but her talents are wasted in this story, which is an
absolute waste of time--it's not funny; there is no payoff whatsoever; and
only two of the characters play notable roles in Garcia and Larsen's grand
scheme.  Making this thread even more unbearable is a truly grating
performance by Hoffmann, who is actually given more to do than Ricci.
The other stories in the hodgepodge that is _200_Cigarettes_ are varying
degrees of just-passable, with some of the actors turning in standout
character work.  Dave Chappelle is amusing as a slick cabbie who taxis many
of the characters around town.  Ben Affleck is a hoot as an incredibly
square bartender who catches the attention of many a patron, most notably
starving artist friends Caitlyn (Angela Featherstone) and Bridget (Nicole
Parker).  Martha Plimpton is nicely neurotic as the big party's harried
hostess, but she's saddled with a tedious thread revolving around her ex's
(Brian McCardie) sexual inadequacy.  But the one person, other than Love,
who makes the strongest impression is newcomer Kate Hudson, who plays the
purehearted Cindy, who spends her New Year's Eve with Jack (Jay Mohr), whom
she doesn't know is quite the ladies' man.  Hudson is effortlessly likable
and charming, but Garcia and Larsen too often have her engage in cheap
pratfalls and other acts of clumsiness.
 "Clumsy" can also describe the way Larsen chooses to close out the film,
with a hamfisted monologue about how people "hide" behind cigarettes--as if
she were somehow required to explain her title (as if the virtually
non-stop lighting and puffing weren't explanation enough).  Yet as
heavy-handed as that touch and statement is, it also pretty much sums up
_200_Cigarettes_: what's good about it is hidden behind the smoke of
mediocrity.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Paramount Pictures
 Director:  Risa Bramon Garcia
 Writer:  Shana Larsen
 Cast: Ben Affleck, Casey Affleck, Dave Chappelle, Guillermo
Diaz, Angela Featherstone, Janeane Garofalo, Gaby
Hoffmann, Kate Hudson, Courtney Love, Jay Mohr, Martha
Plimpton, Christina Ricci, Paul Rudd
   Have you noticed that the more pressure the government
puts on the tobacco industry, the more smoking we see on
the screen?  Risa Bramon Garcia's movie, a case in point,
apparently takes its title from the large number of butts
consumed by a sizable group of celebrities.  This makes me
think: why do so many people smoke at all?  Oh, there are
the usual explanations--just a habit; addicted at an early age;
to fit in with the cool crowd; to have something to do with
your hands.  But the principal character of "200 Cigarettes,"
Kevin (Paul Rudd), hits the nail on the head, I think.  After
going through what at first looks like a New Year's Eve from
hell, he has an epiphany: "We use cigarettes as a shield
against relating to each other."  But when the New Year's
blast turns out A-OK for him, he resolves, "I guess we won't
be smoking much any more."
   "200 Cigarettes," the directorial debut of Risa Bramon
Garcia (known in the industry as a successful casting
director), employs a sparkling soundtrack of 1980's tunes--
which makes some of us think that the real purpose of setting
the film eighteen years back is to sell CD's.  Elvis Costello
pieces like "Pump it Up" compete with such Eighties hits as
"Our Lips are Sealed," "Who Does Lisa Like," and "Rap
Party" to give the whole movie the feel of "The Last Days of
Disco" and "54."  "200 Cigarettes" features a veritable who's
who of film personalities who do shtick, as Frank Prinzi's
camera pans from one couple or trio to another, all of whom
have in common only that they are all heading to the same
pad for a 1981 New Year's Eve Party.  On the way, things
happen to them that cause the men and women to change
partners, cement relationships with the ones they have,
and wind up for the most part feeling good about what the
new year will bring.
   Quite a few of the one-liners work, others fall as flat as the
accident-prone but mighty pretty Kate Hudson in the role of
Cindy, an awkward woman attending the party with the love
of her life, Eric (Jay Mohr)--who, she insists, is the first
person she ever slept with.  Hudson provides the lion's share
of physical humor, in one situation falling into a pile of doggy-
doo on the sidewalk, in others knocking down plates in an
Indian restaurant on Manhattan's East Sixth Street and
smashing a lamp over a pool table at a local pub with her cue
stick.  Otherwise, the performers depend on screenwriter
Shana Larsen's lines to develop the laughs, which do not
come as readily as she may have wished.
   New Year's Eve begins as Kevin (Paul Rudd) and his party
date Lucy (Courtney Love) head into town in a Checker cab
driven by a charming Disco Cabbie (Dave Chappelle).  While
most cab drivers are hustling fares, Disco Cabbie is more
interested in hustling women, but he is not averse to giving
advice to couples on how to win friends and influence people. 
"Smile, don't speak of death, and play good music," he
counsels, emphasizing the first quality by frequently showing
his sparkling teeth.  Kevin and Lucy, who consider
themselves to be just friends, challenge each other to have
sex and wind up in the women's room of a pub trying just that
until Kevin's current girl friend Ellie (Janeane Garofalo)
catches them in flagrante.
   Aside from Love and Rudd, much of the activity looks like  
extended cameos, though Jay Mohr gets his chance with
some larger-than-life closeups to express his pet peeve:
every woman he goes out with falls in love with him, he says
regretfully to his gorgeous and bemused date, Cindy, who
cannot understand why the man of her dreams considers this
a handicap.
   The 1980's may have been an era of Reaganomics,
prosperity in some circles, and a fairly casual attitude toward
sex, but neuroses never take a holiday.  Director Garcia is
intent on cramming a sample of all varieties of youthful
dysfunction into her 100-minute movie but succeeds only
somewhat in making them entertaining. Nor can her all-star
cast do much, given the generally middling-quality dialogue. 
For describing sexual merry-go-roundelays, Arthur
Schnitzler's "La Ronde" is still champ with its sparkling
dialogue and representation of every social level--all playing
out common self-deceptions of turn-of-the-century lovers. 
Twenty-somethings just do not have the maturity to develop
great and universal stories, but these performers try their
mightiest.  Look for a few good turns from Martha Plimpton
as Monica, who is giving the party but wondering why no one
comes; Christina Ricci and Gaby Hoffman as suburban teens
from Ronkonkoma with different agendas; Ben Affleck as a
smooth, manipulative bartender looking for action with two
women; and Brian McCardie as a guy with a heavy Irish
brogue who is dumped by every woman he dates because he
is the worst lover they've ever met.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Attention moviegoers: you are about to enter a meaning-free zone.
Should the sound system malfunction during your viewing of 200
CIGARETTES, do not panic.  The film will work just as well as a silent
movie.
Chronicling the meaningless lives of vain, yuppie types, the movie
covers the same ground as the Wilt Stillman films (LAST DAYS OF DISCO,
BARCELONA and METROPOLITAN) but without any of his acerbic wit and the
inviting style of his writing.  First-time writer Shana Larsen makes the
mistake of creating a couple of dozen characters and not giving any of
them any depth.  There isn't one of these characters worth caring about.
The movie features such a cornucopia of hot young stars that it looks
like a celluloid version of "People Magazine."  Among others, the movie
features: Ben Affleck, Casey Affleck, David Chappelle, Janeane Garofalo,
Gaby Hoffmann, Catherine Kellner, Courtney Love, Jay Mohr, Martha
Plimpton, Christina Ricci and Paul Rudd.  And unlike People Magazine,
the people speak, not that they have anything interesting to say.
It's New Year's Eve in 1981, and Monica (Martha Plimpton) is preparing
her big party.  Structured as a series of relatively unrelated stories
about her guests on the way to the party, director Risa Bramon Garcia
flits back and forth among her stars.  Monica's apartment is in "NoHo,"
an area that one of the guests describes as "so cool, all of the poor
people live there."
Typical of the shallow couples in the movie are Kevin (Paul Rudd) and
his friend and would-be sexual partner Lucy (Courtney Love).  They argue
about whether Lucy is a slut or not since she sleeps with everyone,
except him, of course.  She dares him to go immediately to a bathroom
stall and have sex with her, which turns out to be neither erotic, funny
or successful -- rather like the rest of the story.
The movie gets its title from the carton of cigarettes that Lucy gives
Kevin for his New Year's Eve birthday.  "Cigarettes are a shield against
emotional interaction with other people," Kevin later tells Lucy in a
snippet of dialog that sounds profound only outside the context of the
movie.
Another character, played by Jay Mohr, has a problem with his sexual
triumphs.  Every woman he beds falls deeply in love with him by the next
morning.  When his latest conquest tells him of her affection for him,
his response is "I like a lot of people."
As the movie finally draws to a close, the characters awaken from their
post-party game of musical beds.  Some have passed out early from
alcohol abuse and remember little, while others actually have some clue
as to what happened.  The movie itself is so forgettable that by the
time you reach your car in the parking lot, all trace of the film will
have vanished from your mind, which is probably the best thing that can
be said about the movie.
200 CIGARETTES runs 1:40.  It is rated R for profanity, sex and one dope
smoking scene and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
DeWyNGaLe
200 CIGARETTES by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: D+
200 Cigarettes takes place on New Year's Eve 1981.  Monica, played by Martha
Plimpton is having a huge New Year's party.  Everyone in town is trying to get
there, but some are caught up in other things.  This is the basic plot of 200
Cigarettes.  As we meet the characters headed towards the party, we are sent
into many subplots which are unoriginal, and not interesting at all.  This
disappointed me greatly.  The film should have been more about the party than
the people trying to get there in my opinion.
Lucy, played by Courtney Love, is with Kevin, played by Paul Rudd.  The two are
in a relationship that is more of a friendship, but starts to blossom into
something more than that.  This subplot is extremely boring and dull, and I am
getting quite sick of plots like that.  Janeane Garofalo is involved in another
subplot, dealing with Kevin.  She plays Ellie, an ex-girlfriend of Kevin's. 
This subplot is completely a waste of Garofalo's talent.  There was no point to
it at all, and it was hardly even in the movie.  When Lucy runs into a
bartender, played by Ben Affleck, another subplot is formed.  The bartender is
invited by Lucy to come to Monica's party.  At the bar, he runs into two more
girls.  The girls are played by Angela Featherstone and Nicole Parker, but
unfortunately, due to the terrible acting of both of them, I don't even
remember their characters names.  Ben Affleck is a good actor, but his
character doesn't go anywhere so he doesn't have much screen time to give a
good performance.  Featherstone and Parker are horrible in their roles, and
they are part of the reason the film is so bad.  
Christina Ricci plays Val, and Gaby Hoffman plays Stephie.  The two girls are
trying to get to the party but are extremely lost.  They meet some guys and end
up going around with them all night.  This subplot was alright, but it was
quite annoying with Stephie's accent.  Hoffman did an okay job of acting, but
Ricci did good.  She was underused, considering she is such a wonderful
actress.
Another subplot in the film is the relationship between Cindy, played by Goldie
Hawn's daughter, and Jack, played by Jay Mohr.  Jack is an actor who doesn't
care about the girls he goes out with, he just likes dates for one night, and
the next day he doesn't.  Kate Hudson is a huge klutz.  She gets herself into
very funny situations, that are the funniest parts in the entire movie.  They
are probably the only funny parts in the entire movie as well.  This subplot
could have been used more, mainly due to Hudson's performance.  Mohr wasn't
good, but he wasn't bad.  He was just alright, which I didn't find acceptable. 
There is not much to say about the performances in the film.  None of the
characters are developed or shown enough to really tell if the acting is good
or not.  The only performances that I can judge are Christina Ricci's as always
good performance, Kate Hudson's funny role, Courtney Love's mediocre
performance, and Paul Rudd's annoying and overused performance.  I was hoping
for a little more out of Jaw Mohr, Ben Affleck, Casey Affleck, Gaby Hoffman,
Dave Chapelle, and especially out of Janeane Garofalo.
The two strongest things in the film were the great soundtrack and the original
costumes.  Martha Plimpton and Christina Ricci had very different and original
outfits which made me feel like I was in the year 1981.  The soundtrack is full
of 1980's tunes, ranging from "I Want Candy" to "Tainted Love."  The songs in
the movie also helped create the feel that you were back in the 1980s.
During the film, I often found myself asking the questions, "Is there a reason
to this?  Is there any moral story?  Is there a point?  Are any of the events
going on in the film necessary?  Do I care what Lucy and Kevin are going
through?"  The movie is extremely boring, and by the time they reached
eleven-o-clock, one hour before midnight, I could not wait for the movie to be
over.  The plot is okay, but the subplots make it terrible.  Maybe if the film
was about the party, not about the people at the party, it could have been a
lot better. 
The Bottom Line: Just like a slasher movie, this 80s comedy is just one too
many.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "200 CIGARETTES" (Paramount Pictures)
This MTV-production revolves around frantic, fateful New Year's
Eve party in 1981 in a downtown loft in the funky East Village, where
the lives of various young couples and friends intersect. Anyone who
has ever spent a dismal New Year's Eve with strangers - virtual or
otherwise - can relate to their depressing and desperate angst. Risa
Bramon Garcia, a highly respected casting director, makes her
directorial debut so, predictably, despite the modest $6.5 million
budget, there's a star-studded cast, like Christina Ricci and Gaby
Hoffman as wannabe groupies from suburban Ronkonkoma, Long Island,
lighting up with Paul Rudd and Courtney Love, two platonic friends who
agree, if all else fails, to have sex with each other. Jay Mohr, Casey
Affleck, and Brian McCardie cruise the crowd as Ben Affleck plays
bartender. Goldie Hawn's daughter, giggly Kate Hudson, makes her
feature film debut as an awkward Upper West Side princess, prone to
pratfalls, but, nevertheless, holding her own with Martha Plimpton, as
the sad-sack hostess, Dave Chappelle as a slick disco taxi-driver, and
Janeane Garofalo in a cameo. Ms. Garcia describes the filming as "a
revolving door of actors, coming in and doing their bit and leaving" -
and it looks it. Despite the fact that an appropriate early '80s song
underlines each scene, there's not much to Shana Larsen's unstructured
script and dreadful dialogue, particularly when you realize that AIDS
will bring this kind of promiscuity to an end very soon. So, as a
result, all these actors have very little substance to puff on. Or, as
Paul Rudd concludes, "We use cigarettes as a shield against relating
to each other." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "200
Cigarettes" is a vapid, clumsy 3, making you long for the morning
after to come quickly.

Author
Alex Fung
200 CIGARETTES (Paramount - 1999)
Cast: Ben Affleck, Casey Affleck, David Chappelle, Guillermo Diaz,
      Angela Featherstone, Janeane Garofalo, Gaby Hoffmann,
      Kate Hudson, Catherine Kellner, Courtney Love, Brian McCardie,
      Jay Mohr, Nicole Parker, Martha Plimpton, Christina Ricci,
      Paul Rudd
Screenplay by Shana Larsen
Produced by Betsy Beers, David Gale and Van Toffler
Directed by Risa Bramon Garcia
Running time: 101 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Industry cynics and detractors of the recent groundbreaking agreement
   between Columbia and top WGA screenwriters need only consider Risa
   Bramon Garcia's feature film debut 200 CIGARETTES to be persuaded of
   the necessity of a good script.  Shana Larsen's tepid, exasperating
   screenplay is so consistently witless that even the gifted ensemble
   cast on display here is largely helpless to salvage much of
   consequence from this mess.
   In this case, it's a remarkable assemblage of thesps: the list of
   players reads like a roll-call of some of Hollywood's most promising
   and appealing young actors.  Among them include Martha Plimpton, a
   consistently underappreciated talent; Janeane Garofalo, who
   invariably can be counted upon to walk in and steal the scene in
   everything she does; Paul Rudd, such an affable presence in CLUELESS
   (and who survived the lame THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION); Courtney
   Love, whose beguiling turn in THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT was a
   revelation; Christina Ricci, now clearly among the top actors of her
   generation; and both Affleck brothers (Casey provided particularly
   strong support in TO DIE FOR).  These are performers whose mere
   presence in a film would merit minor interest -- package them all
   into one movie, and my curiosity is piqued.
   Crushingly, the cast is wasted in a tawdry collection of would-be
   comic pratfalls, paired off in meandering threads to preen and
   screech and volley lousy dialogue back and forth.  The whiny
   characters are so thoroughly and relentlessly obnoxious (save for
   Kate Hudson's poised, prim young lady, who naturally become the butt
   of the picture's running gag and gets to spend half the movie
   wandering through scenes with dog excrement liberally smeared on her
   jacket -- yes, this is indicative of the film's level of humour) that
   none of the subplots are remotely engaging.  The rambling multiple
   storylines weave and ultimately intersect during the
   seemingly-interminable running time, but I'd hesitate to describe the
   overly-cluttered 200 CIGARETTES as Altmanesque: here's a film where
   the destination is not only inevitable, but it's no fun getting
   there, either.
   Set in New York City's East Village on New Year's Eve, 1981, the
   theme of the film is, of course, love -- or at least its distant
   cousin, sex.  On their way to a party, in rapid succession we
   regretfully meet our dozen-odd characters: longtime pals Kevin (Mr.
   Rudd) and Lucy (Ms. Love), who may or may not take their friendship
   to the next level; neurotic party host Monica (Ms. Plimpton) and
   ex-flame Eric (Brian McCardle), who analyse their failed
   relationship in pseudo-comic fashion; Val (Ms. Ricci) and Stephie
   (Gaby Hoffman), who (in the movie's most ineffectual subplot) teeter
   around in high heels and constantly squabble with ridiculously
   unauthentic accents while in frantic search of the festivities;
   Bridget (Nicole Parker) and Caitlyn (Angela Featherstone), scrambling
   to find some male companionship of the one-night stand ilk before the
   stroke of midnight, and so on.  Ambling through the threads is Disco
   Cabbie (Dave Chapelle), suavely doling out sagelike advice like a
   Venus Flytrap on wheels.
   Although the ostensible destination is Monica's year-end bash, amidst
   the overbroad slapstick it remains clear that the plot-thin picture's
   interest lies with the humour-tinged dissection of the convoluted
   nature of relationships amongst the self-absorbed twentysomething
   crowd depicted here: in this respect, it's a bit like a Kevin Smith
   script -- albeit without clever dialogue, wryly astute observation,
   endearing characters and Star Wars references, which doesn't leave it
   with very much.  Love can be funny, in all sense of the word, but
   with these repugnant characters run through such startlingly unfunny
   scenarios, it's all too easy to not give a hoot about their romantic
   fates.
   The only thing this excruciating picture has going for it is its
   retro soundtrack, chock-ladened with pop hits of the era -- some 49
   in total -- which run throughout the entire film to evoke the period
   (although the gaudy costume work is more than enough to consequently
   negate this).  Befitting a casting director in her helming debut, Ms.
   Garcia has filled the picture with much talent -- I have to assume
   that the cast was largely drawn to this venture because of her
   relative clout (casting credits include such big-budget Hollywood
   spectacles as TWISTER, THE PEACEMAKER, SPEED 2, and HARD RAIN) --
   only to maddeningly see it go to waste.  For the most part, the cast
   are real troupers and dutifully wade through this morass of tripe
   (Ms. Garofalo arguably comes off the best, although Ben Affleck goes
   through the picture with a vaguely pained expression with which I
   could empathise), but are understandably unable to surmount the level
   of this material.  A superior showcase for Kate Hudson, Casey Affleck
   and Christina Ricci would be the upcoming Morgan J. Freeman film
   DESERT BLUE -- but then again, this isn't too difficult of a feat.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them
 in on the whole conspiracy.  Half the time I have no idea what they're
 talking about." - Martin Landau

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Risa Bramon Garcia.
Cast: Courtney Love, Paul Rudd, Martha Plimpton, Gaby Hoffmann, Kate 
Hudson, Jay Mohr, Angela Featherstone, Nicole Parker, Christina Ricci, 
Brian McCardie, Casey Affleck, Dave Chappelle, Guillermo Diaz, Janeane 
Garofalo, Catherine Kellner, Ben Affleck, Elvis Costello.
1999 - 100 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity).
Reviewed February 27, 1999.
Obviously obtaining its inspiration from 1973's classic, "American 
Graffitti," "200 Cigarettes," casting director Risa Bramon Garcia's 
uneven feature film directing debut, is set exclusively on the night of 
New Year's Eve on New York City's East Side, circa 1981, as we follow 
sixteen different characters, all of which are set to attend a big New 
Year's blowout at the heavily-decorated apartment of Monica (Martha 
Plimpton) who, as nine o'clock rolls around, fears that no one is going 
to come and everyone hates her. Even her friend (Catherine Kellner), who 
has kept her company for the early part of the night, ends up running 
out on her. And to make matters worse, her first guest turns out to be 
her Scottish ex-boyfriend (Brian McCardie), whom she claims is "the 
worst lover I've ever had...including high school." This is one of the 
brightest vignettes of the film, thanks fully to Plimpton's stand-out, 
high-enegy, hilarious performance. 
As for the rest of the wide array of characters, Lucy (Courtney Love), 
who has had her fair share of boyfriends, is trying to cheer up her 
friend, Kevin (Paul Rudd), who is not only burdened with having his 
birthday fall on New Year's Eve, but is also suffering from his recent 
break-up with his long-time girlfriend, Ellie (Janeane Garofalo). 
Although this subplot, perhaps, is given the most attention in the film, 
it is also one of the more dull sections and doesn't really go anywhere. 
Garofalo, alas, is also wasted with only three scenes, although she is 
given one of the funniest lines of dialogue. As she tries to light a 
cigarette with no luck, she exclaims, "these matches are disappointing 
me!"
One of the better stories in the film belongs to the klutzy Cindy (Kate 
Hudson, Goldie Hawn's daughter), who has just lost her virginity the 
night before and after telling the guy, Jack (Jay Mohr), who is afraid 
of commitment, he becomes overjoyed, that is, until she tells him she 
loves him. Hudson is so winning in this, her film debut, and appears to 
have such a firm handle for comic situations, that she is always fun to 
watch. I wonder, however, if director Garcia could have focused more on 
her character, rather than her on-going pratfalls (she slips on some 
doggy poop, knocks drinks over, stumbles over people, smashes 
chandeliers, etc), even though they are a hoot.
Meanwhile, Val (Christina Ricci) and Stephie (Gaby Hoffmann) are two 
teenage girls from Long Island with accents as thick as thieves who have 
stopped over into NYC to go to the party (Val is Monica's cousin), but 
get hopelessly lost. Val doesn't mind so much, since all she's worried 
about is getting laid, while the more uptight Stephie fears for her own 
life on the mean streets, particularly the dreaded "Ave. B!" A movie 
that wastes the talents of Christina Ricci should be ashamed of itself, 
and that is exactly what happens here, as Ricci is forced to portray a 
one-note character without any distinctive qualities. Faring better and 
given a little bit more screen time is Hoffmann, who I can't recall ever 
being so funny in a film before. With her heavy, caricaturized Brooklyn 
accent and clever way with words, Hoffmann gives one of the few notable 
performances, along with Hudson and Plimpton (whom she shares a 
hysterical moment with in the last scene of the film, as she keeps 
saying, with her accent, mind you, "Yea! Yea!").
The last and least vignette in the film goes to two women and so-called 
friends (Angela Featherstone and Nicole Parker) who both are vying for a 
hunky bartender (Ben Affleck), until he actually speaks and reveals how 
cornball he actually is. There is nothing of interest here, and Affleck 
especially is given nothing to do.
Like the recent "Playing by Heart," "200 Cigarettes" is a toss-up 
between wonderful moments and weak moments. The former, however, spent 
an adequate amount of time with its character so that I felt that I got 
to know them well by the end. On the contrary, director Garcia has cast 
"200 Cigarettes" with a virtual who's-who of young, hot stars and then 
has chosen to put very few of them to good use. As mentioned, Plimpton, 
Hudson, and Hoffmann are irresistible high points in a marginally 
entertaining film that spends too little time with too many characters, 
and then never really adds up to much. The only suspense coming from the 
film (or more like the only twist) is that the conclusion reveals who 
each character got together with the night before. Some of them are 
surprising, others are inevitable, but it didn't really make much 
difference to me since I didn't necessarily care about any of them. If 
there is any sort of compensation for this non-payoff it is the ending 
scene in which we are shown photos of the New Year's party (it is never 
actually shown in live-action), narrated hysterically by a cab driver 
(Dave Chappelle) who has a run-in with all of the characters throughout 
the movie. And what is revealed that occurred to the Plimpton character 
is almost worth a marginal recommendation, but not quite. "200 
Cigarettes" blares '80s music from scene-to-scene, but other than that, 
this picture could have taken place during any time period since no 
mention is made of even the smallest current event of the time. 
Something tells me director Garcia was a little lazy while researching 
the year of 1981, and something also tells me that writer Shana Larsen 
was a little too lazy to even run the screenplay through another 
rewrite. Believe me, it certainly needed it.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Mac VerStandig
Ironically, one of the themes of 200 Cigarettes is that you should try to make
the best of every moment in life. Unfortunately I will no longer be able to say
that I lived every moment of my life to the fullest, because I spent 95
otherwise perfectly good minutes, watching this sad excuse for a movie.
Actually smoking 200 cigarettes in the same 95 minutes couldn't be any worse
for you than it is to watch the movie. Not only is it a pathetically bad film
overall, but 200 Cigarettes actually has no redeeming qualities whatsoever. The
plot is scattered, thin and predictable; the acting is monumentally bad; and
the style of film making resembles a home video. 
It is December 31, 1981 and the big party is at Monica's (Martha Plimpton)
house. But no one has arrived yet. Her 8 invited guests and several people that
they have picked throughout the evening are wandering the streets of New York
City in various groups. Some of them know each other through their common bond
of having slept with Monica, and some are total strangers. But they all are to
face their own personal neuroses before night's end. 
Those who are invited are the ones that have the issues. It is up to those who
aren't to help them come to terms. First there is Eric (Brian McCardie) who is
a former boyfriend of Monica's and is just getting over the heartbreak of their
relationship terminating prematurely because of his sexual performance, or lack
thereof. He is one of the most bland characters, in a film full of dullness,
because he is so utterly predictable and stereotypical, a common trait of this
poor production.
Bridget (Nicole Parker) and Caitlyn (Angela Featherstone) who are both
extremely sensuous young women looking for someone to handle their desires on
New Year's Eve and tag along to the party with them. They stumble across a
nameless bartender (Ben Affleck) who is the one truly perfect character in a
film of imperfections. He is nether sexually deprived, nor uncertain about his
future, as he is in law school. His lack of flaws is both boring, unrealistic
and painful to watch. As Bridget and Caitlyn make passes at him you are neither
entertained nor humored by the sub-standard comedy. 
Moving on, there is Val (Christina Ricci) and Stephie, (Gabby Hoffman) 2
teenage girls with fake identification and very different thoughts. Val is
Monica's cousin and a true fan of the New York scene. On the other hand,
Stephie is convinced that she is vulnerable to crime when the two venture out
of their usual locations in search of the party that they just can't find.
Paradoxically, it is 2 punks that they meet at a bar (actually they attempt to
flee from their presence, but aren't successful) who guide them through their
fears and force a level of relaxation upon their warped minds.
Of all the insanely dull and uninteresting couples, only one approaches a level
of decency in both acting and plot. Wisely, the movie's creators have put heavy
emphasis on Lucy (Courtney Love) and Kevin (Paul Rudd) who are best friends and
share the common bond of being dateless. Paul has just broken up with long time
steady Ellie (Janeane Garofalo) and is starting to come to terms with his loss
when Lucy informs him that Ellie had been sleeping around during their
relationship. However, the only complexity to these two characters is that they
seem to want to be more than friends, and that is reiterated when they attempt
sexual intercourse in a bathroom stall on more than one occasion during this
strange evening.
Finally, there are the two worst performances and worst sub-plot of the film.
Jack (Jay Mohr) and Cindy (Kate Hudson) have been going out for a short period
of time and Jack just learned that he took Cindy's virginity the night before.
While she attempts to play this down and be her usual self, he is a predictably
self loathing male as he attempts to deal with a string of one night stands
that includes the recently deflowered Cindy. 
Very often, when a film is as putrid as this production, there will at least be
a decent quality of film making to reveal an occasional moment of glory.
However, this film has neither the quality of cinematography nor the moments of
glory to be highlighted. Instead, what you get is a collection of rough and
inconsistent cuts, bad continuity and inaccuracies. First, and most noticeable
is that as the film goes from one subplot to another, there is no apparent
order that it follows, and it is also weekened by unnecessarily edgy edits from
scene to scene and shot to shot. At other times, objects seem to get up and
move and hairstyles and costumes change from shot to shot. There are also at
least 4 scenes in a taxi cab that go from start to finish. Not in a single one
of them does anybody pay the driver. 
And yet, no matter how miserable this film may be, and no matter how poor the
acting is all around, there was a ray of a hope for these many bad plots.
Perhaps, if the makers had just decided to concentrate on one or two or,
perhaps, even three, there might have been the time and opportunity for some
character development, or quality acting, or even a decent plot payoff at the
end. But it didn't happen that way. The cast of quality name actors was forced
into roles that not even one of them could convert into a mediocre performance,
and every story line crashed and burned quicker than it takes for the ball to
drop at midnight. 

Author
Dustin Putman
Paramount; rated R (brief nudity, language, sexual situations); 97 minutes
Cast: Courtney Love, Paul Rudd, Martha Plimpton, Brian McCardie, Gaby Hoffman,
Kate Hudson, Jay Mohr, Christina Ricci, Angela Featherstone, Nicole Parker,
Dave Chappelle, Casey Affleck, Ben Affleck, Catherine Kellner, Janeane
Garofalo, Elvis Costello, Guillermo Diaz.
200 Cigarettes is a charming enough diversion and these days that ain't bad.
The feature directing debut from veteran casting director Risa Bramon Garcia
ably displays her well known talent for casting but is unlikely to help her
reputation much beyond that.
The film follows five interconnecting stories concerning people who are all
about to converge at a New Year's Eve party in New York City, 1981.
Monica (Martha Plimpton) is the worried hostess of the party who tries
desperately to keep her friend Hillary (Catherine Kellner) in her apartment
while they wait for someone, anyone, else to show up.
Monica's ex-boyfriend Eric (Brian McCardie) is about to be dumped by his
girlfriend Bridget (Nicole Parker), who receives moral support from her friend
Caitlyn (Angela Featherstone).
Lucy (Courtney Love) and Kevin (Paul Rudd) are long time friends who are
beginning to discover their attraction to each other after Jack's performance
artist girlfriend Ellie (Janeane Garofalo) dumps him.
Val (Christina Ricci) is desperate to experience the pleasures of the flesh
and sees her cousin Monica's party as a perfect way to do this.  So she
convinces her cautious friend Stephie (Gaby Hoffman) to leave Long Island for
the city with the promise they'll meet up with a band.  They get lost and meet
up with two young roadies (Casey Affleck and Guillermo Diaz).
Finally, there is Cindy (Kate Hudson), a neurotic klutz who has fallen in love
with vain actor Jack (Jay Mohr).  She continually embarrasses herself as the
two of them have a date from hell.
Also involved in various stories are a goofy bartender (Ben Affleck) and a
"disco cabbie" (Dave Chappelle) who sees himself as super fly and dishes out
love advice whether his passengers want it or not.
200 Cigarettes is a light romantic comedy which cruises along on the charm of
its large, and talented, cast and tries to cash in on 80s nostalgia.  There's
really no reason for the film to be set in 1981 and the only real references
made to this are the occasional appearances of Elvis Costello (who plays
himself).  Instead it feels more like a tool to sell a soundtrack full of
retro-hits and draw in the MTV crowd (the film happens to be a MTV production)
who helped make The Wedding Singer (1998) an unexpected smash hit.
The performers are all solid but a few especially stand out.  Love, in her
first film since her acclaimed work in The People Vs. Larry Flynt (1996),
further proves herself a natural screen presence and develops the film's
strongest romantic chemistry with the equally charismatic Rudd.  Ricci is a
comic delight in a small role and Plimpton displays her expert timing.
McCardie and Hudson (who has been generating a lot of press because she is
Goldie Hawn's daughter) make very strong impressions in their first major
screen roles.  McCardie's Eric is faced with a self discovery that is every
man's worst nightmare and the actor gets a lot of mileage out of it, he has
some terrific scenes with Plimpton.  Hudson proves to be an immediately
likable personality and she gets several physical comedy bits which she
handles like a pro.
The ending is a bit of a let down.  Most of the characters break off into
random couples after the party which only shows how little emotional
investment is developed with them.  The filmmakers also choose to show the
party at the end of the film in a series of Polaroids with narration from
Chappelle.  This provides a couple of funny bits but lacks any real impact.
Still, 200 Cigarettes is decent mindless fun that's perfectly appropriate if
you're just looking for some light entertainment.
