Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Bob Bloom
 "The Red Violin" is a cold, sterile feature that leaves you uninvolved and
detached.
 It's a movie that seems almost clinical, as it traces the 300-plus-years
history of the legendary musical instrument of the title.
 Opening in the 17th century, the story shows how violin-maker Nicolo
Bussotti created the instrument as a gift for his unborn son. But when
tragedy strikes, the violin becomes the personification of its maker's
grief.
 From there the violin comes into the hands of an orphaned child prodigy at
an Austrian monastery. Again, tragedy strikes as the child is struck down
at the moment of his triumph.
 We follow the violin through the centuries as it finds a home in England
and in Mao's communist China before being discovered by expert Charles
Morritz (Samuel L. Jackson), who mounts a painstaking investigation to
prove its authenticity.
 The violin becomes Morritz's obsession, just as it is for all those who
converge on a Montreal auction house to bid on it. Morritz, however, is the
only one who knows the secret of the instrument and can understand and
appreciate its creator's intention.
 "The Red Violin" could have been a touching, inspirational story, as
soaring as a Beethoven symphony.
 However director Francois Girard fails to make any emotional connection
with the viewer. Here is a story that could have made use of various camera
angles and lighting to heighten its impact.
 Girard, for some unknown reason, uses mostly master shots, keeping his
camera - and thus us - at a distance. We get no feel for the miracle that
is the violin. It's resonance, its purity of sound are not emphasized
enough to make an impression.
 Nor are any of the performances memorable. It's as if Girard wanted all
his actors to play second fiddle to his violin.
 "The Red Violin" promises much, but delivers little. It is dull at times,
a bit pretentious and a might murky. The movie's music soars over its story
and performers. And that is its only saving grace.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
not rated
Lions Gate Films
in English, Mandarin, Italian, German, and French with English subtitles
starring Samuel L. Jackson, Don McKellar, Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli,
Jean-Luc Bideau, Christoph Koncz, Jason Flemyng, Greta Scacchi, Sylvia Chang
written by Don McKellar with Francois Girard
directed by Francois Girard
In Francois Girard's "Red Violin", the title object changes hands many
times over the course of two centuries, but it is never made clear to
whom, how and why this happens. The journey takes us from a modern
Canadian setting where the flawless violin is being auctioned, to
Vienna, China, Oxford and Italy before returning to the auction. This
foreign-language ensemble piece has some noteworthy moments in each of
its segments but on the whole it's a mess. As I already mentioned, not
much is made clear, so the segments don't have a connection. It seems
to be a different violin in each part.  The standout in a fine cast is
Samuel L. Jackson, taking a different path this time around as a
Canadian violin expert. Don't worry, fans; Jackson shows off his
trademark tenacity yelling at a hotel manager. Director Francois
Girard and writer/actor Don McKellar, who combined their talents on
"Thirty-Two Short Films About Glenn Gould", have crafted a film that
is interesting at times, and dull at times. The main flaw of "The Red
Violin" is that it doesn't use its title object to connect the
stories.  I recommend this film to fans of classical music; all others
steer clear.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Long Che Chan
Le Violon Rouge (The Red Violin)
directed by Francois Girard
starring Samuel L. Jackson, Don McKellar, Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli,
Christopher Koncz, Jason Flemyng
Not Rated (some sexuality)
Why do people buy antiques?  They're old and frayed materials that have
passed through time, faded by each passing year.  We pay gigantic sums
of money to obtain them, receiving what can easily be called
disposable.  In The Red Violin, an auction is being held and many people
ferociously covet a centuries-old violin; one that has been restored,
but nevertheless, is worn.  They all desire this relic for different
reasons.  They know something about it.  It has been touched by history,
by their ancestors, by those they profoundly admire.  Francois Girard's
flawed but pleasing film, The Red Violin, discusses this and more- the
yearning for "perfection," as Roger Ebert pointed out; and the need and
importance of music and an emotional outlet.
The film follows the journey of this red violin, from its native Italy
to when it resides in Communist China.  The violin's odyssey begins in
Italy, where a pregnant woman, Anna Bussotti, has just discovered from
her fortune-telling servant that she will have a difficult, possibly
fatal, childbirth.  Her husband, Nicolo, a man who makes violins for a
living, has made a beautiful one for his coming baby.  When Anna dies
from labor difficulties and the baby dies too, Nicolo bathes this
priceless violin in her blood.  It is then shipped to an Austrian
monastery.  For a century, it is used for teaching little boys how to
play, until finally it comes into the hands of a very young musician, a
boy, Kasper Weiss,  who is possibly as precocious as Mozart was.  He is
nurtured by Georges Poussin, who auditions him in front of royalty.
>From there, the violin comes into the hands of gypsies in England and
then to a famous, genius musician, Frederick Pope, who is inspired by
the violin's utter perfection to begin playing it again.  He woos his
women and makes love to them with this instrument.  The red violin turns
up, later, in China during the Cultural Revolution, where a woman must
hide it from Western-hating officials.  Its final stop is at the home of
the auction, Canada, where it is discovered after being much sought
after, and is restored and about to be sold.
All the people who gather at the auction to purchase this artifact are
aware of its importance, that it has journeyed several continents and
countries and has been in the hands of such famous and prodigious people
as Frederick Pope.  A pair of Chinese people are after it because of its
history in China; one man longs for it because it has been used by
Pope.  So much emotion has been poured into and been released through
this instrument, "the perfect marriage of science and beauty."  The
violin has been painted with a woman's own blood, the maker's muse and
wife.  It is not insignificant.  In Austria, it was played by a small
little boy who could have resulted into great and famous things had he
not died.  Kasper's performances were startlingly superb, filled with
longing and vibrancy.  This orphan expressed his sadness and loneliness
through the instrument.  When it was found with gypsies, it was one of
the only things that brightened up their lives.  Pope used it to express
his sexual desires and lusts.  His orgasmic playing was inspired by
making love to his women; he played while having sex.  In China, it is
the one greatness in the cloudiness of Communism.
Samuel L. Jackson has a little role here as a collector who lusts after
it more than anyone- not only does he want it for its historical
context, he also thinks it is the most "beautiful acoustic machine" ever
made and he wishes to share this with his daughter, his family, pass the
soul of Anna Bussotti and history and continents down.
The Red Violin also tells of the need for perfection, for music, for
uplifting.  The symbol of perfection for those attending the auction is
Bussotti's violin and the cinematography aids in making the instrument
seem priceless; meticulously and closely inspecting its lines, wood,
strings, the red color.  The Red Violin is about the need and wish to
preserve this perfection, to never let it die.  When a violin is
confiscated by Communist officials in China from a music teacher, he
wearily throws it into the fire.  He is infinitely glad when he learns
that this instrument is still alive in China, the woman who owns the red
violin gives it to him as a present.  The score is wonderfully
evocative; the little orphan in Austria doesn't speak much, but we
understand him clearly through his glorious violin performances.
There are flaws, of course, in the film.  There is a particularly erotic
scene in which Frederick Pope is making love to his girlfriend; as she
kisses him, he plays fiercely, aroused- spelling, musically, his passion
and gratification.  I wish the film had made the sexual details elusive;
it would have been more intense and interesting to listen to the music
alone instead of hearing the music and seeing the activities producing
its ardent quality simultaneously.  The imagery gets in the way of the
powerful violin.
There is also a supernatural subplot that is painfully obvious in its
absurdity.  The fortune-teller, who is intercut with the violin's
journey and the auction, throughout the film, tells that whoever comes
in contact with Anna Bussotti will have tragedy befall them.  When the
violin, drenched in her blood, is in the hands of players, they die soon
later.  This adds childishness and silliness to otherwise serious and
sophisticated material.
I especially enjoyed the scenes in which the violinists perform.  They
are obviously playing with all their heart and soul; they breathe
deeply, in and out, frequently, as if all their strength and emotions
are fueling the music's fire.  The Red Violin is mightily ambitious: is
in five languages and more than five countries.  It attempts to document
the life of this gem, this invaluable violin that has touched and
brought harmony, passion, and fervor to the lives of unhappy people.  It
has gone through centuries of war, sex, and deceit.  The Red Violin
borders on greatness and mediocrity, pushing more towards the mediocre;
but what is great about it: its mapping of the human desire, is more
than sufficiently absorbing.

Author
Greg King
THE RED VIOLIN (M).  
(New Line Features/Village Roadshow)
Director: Francois Girard
Stars: Samuel L Jackson, Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli, Jean-Luc
Bideau, Greta Scacchi, Jason Flemyng, Sylvia Chang, Colm Feore, Anita
Laurenzi, Chistoph Koncz, Liu Zi Feng, Don McKellar
Running time: 131 minutes.
Canadian director Francois Girard, best known for his
inventive Thirty-Two Short Films About Glenn Gould, again uses music
as an inspiration in his new film, which is ostensibly five short
films about a fabled violin.  This beautiful, visually lush, and
breath-takingly romantic epic tells the story of a fabulous violin,
the last creation of master builder Nicolo Bussoti, and follows the
instrument across three continents.
The film opens in 17th century Italy, where Bussoti (Carlo
Cecchi) creates the violin as a lasting legacy for his beautiful young
wife, who died during childbirth.  Supposedly possessed by his wife's
soul, the magnificent violin plays haunting music that inspires all
who come in contact with it, and it becomes an object of obsession for
all who cross its path.  Over the centuries the violin passes across
Europe to England, and then on to China, where it narrowly escapes
destruction at the height of the Cultural Revolution.  The 300 year
old instrument then finds its way to a famed Montreal-based auction
house, where it is put up for sale.
The thread that links all the various stories is the auction
itself.  This key sequence is replayed several times, from the
different perspectives of the various interested parties who have come
to bid for the violin, which brings an element of suspense to
proceedings.
Girard has written the film in collaboration with Canadian
writer/director/actor Don McKellar (Exotica, etc), who plays a small
role here as an antiquities expert called in to help verify the
violin's authenticity.  However, not all the strands of this
multi-layered narrative dealing with lust, greed and the enduring
power of love and music, are successful.  Subsequently, the film is a
little uneven.  The modern day scenes in particular lack a sense of
passion and beauty.
Girard has assembled an impressive international cast to
breathe life into the story and the characters, but many of them play
small roles.  Samuel L Jackson lends dignity to his ambivalent role as
an expert called in to trace the provenance of a shipment of rare
violins due to be auctioned.  He becomes obsessed with the famed red
violin of history when he discovers it amongst the collection.  Jason
Flemyng (from Lock, Stock And Two Smoking Barrels, etc) and Greta
Scacchi steam up the screen as a flamboyant nineteenth century English
musician and his demanding and jealous mistress.  Christoph Koncz is
memorable as Kaspar Weiss, a young child prodigy.
The film has been beautifully shot by cinematographer Alain
Dostie, and the stunning visuals are further enhanced by John
Corigliano's compositions.  Francois Seguin's production design is
also impressive and brings alive the 17th century European settings.

Author
Michael Dequina
Francois Girard's _The_Red_Violin_ is at once a film of great ambition
and simplicity.  In the latter sense, the film is ultimately about its
title: a violin that is red in color.  The ambition comes in following
the title object as it is passed down from person to person, place to
place over the course of three centuries.  The film's artistic success
comes in how it makes its individual pieces interlock smoothly as a
whole.
Although not an anthology film per se, _The_Red_Violin_ suffers the same
pitfall that those films often encounter: inconsistency.  With its main
character an inanimate object, one's interest and involvement depends on
the flesh-and-blood characters and plotline that surround the violin in
any given vignette; as such, some episodes are bound to be more effective
than others.  A major reason for some pieces' greater success than others
is that they simply work well within a limited space of time.  For
example, one affecting story about a orphaned six-year-old violin prodigy
(Christoph Koncz) who is taken under the wing of a French music teacher
(Jean-Luc Bideau) teacher in Austria is simple yet nuanced enough to work
within a 20-minute or so time frame.  On the another hand, the tale that
immediately follows it, about the strange erotic power the violin holds
on a popular concert violinist (Jason Flemyng) in England, feels
truncated and superficial, its enticing psychosexual themes barely
touched on.
Others who come into contact with the violin are a group of gypsies
(their brief, wordless musical interlude bridging the Austria and England
stories together) and a Chinese woman (Sylvia Chang) caught up in her
country's Cultural Revolution, when all instruments of Western
Culture--such as a violin--were destroyed.  While each section of the
film has its merits and importance, the most pivotal points in
_The_Red_Violin_'s journey is its beginning--its creation in 17th century
Italy--and its end: in contemporary Montreal, where the instrument is set
to go on the auction block after a thorough investigation by an expert
(Samuel L. Jackson).
Girard and writing collaborator Don McKellar (who also appears in a
supporting role in the Montreal segment) have come up with two strong
points of unification for the individual stories, one stemmed in Italy,
with one taking strong root in Montreal.  In Italy, the violin maker's
(Carlo Cecchi) pregnant wife (Irene Grazioli) gets a tarot card reading,
which eerily foretells the points of the violin's journey.  Key to the
investigation in Montreal is the mystery behind the instrument's unique
coloring; though the answer doesn't come as much a surprise, the mystery
is an effective unifying overlay.
Of course, the strongest unifying device is the beautiful score,
composed by John Corigliano.  Filled with haunting, often melancholy
melodies that seem to longingly weep, it is a carefully constructed work
of passion--a description that can be applied to the entirety of Girard's
lovely _The_Red_Violin_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Rose "Bams" Cooper
"The Red Violin (1998); aka "Le Violon Rouge"
Rated R; running time of 126 minutes
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0120802 
Official site: http://www.redviolin.com/ 
Written by: Don McKellar and Francois Girard 
Directed by: Francois Girard
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Don McKellar, Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli,
Jean-Luc Bideau, Christoph Koncz, Jason Flemyng, Greta Scacchi, Sylvia
Chang, Liu Zifeng, Ireneusz Bogajewicz
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsredvi.html
Movie-wise, today was a day of Color for me--in more ways than one: first,
"Blue Streak" with Martin Lawrence, and now "The Red Violin", featuring
Samuel L. Jackson. I might just get used to having so much Color on the
screen. The question is, were these Colors just eye candy, or something
more?
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
First things first: if you're not the type that likes Films (as Steve
Martin said so well in "Bowfinger", "I don't make films, I make movies!"),
ya might want to Exit, Stage Right. Do so quietly, please, so as not to
disturb the other patrons[1]. Ok, now that that business is done... 
The excellently-executed website for this Film says it much better than I
ever could (do yourself a favor: if you don't plan on seeing this
movie--heck, even if you do--read through the Storyline on that page; it
helped to clarify a lot of things that I saw but didn't quite Get at
first; plus, it's extremely well-done. Kudos to all involved with this
website):
  "THE RED VIOLIN is a stirring and sumptuous epic about a fabled musical  
   instrument that changes hands - and lives - over the course of three 
   centuries. Depicting signature chapters in the violin's history, from its
   creation in seventeenth-century Italy, to the court of Imperial Vienna in
   1790, to Victorian England in the late 1800s, to the People's Republic of
   China in the mid-1960s, and, finally, to an auction house in modern-day
   Montreal, THE RED VIOLIN is a grand tale that spans five countries, four
   languages, and more than three hundred years of history and cultural change.
   These successive movements, each evoking a different musical style, from
   Baroque to modern, combine to tell a tale filled with poetry, pageantry,
   tragedy, romance, adventure, and intrigue."
I need to admit my bias: as a writer of primarily short stories and
poetry, I'm a sucker for a well-told story; given one, I could sit through
almost anything. I went in knowing that this film was somehow Different,
but I didn't quite expect what I saw (including the subtitles, which I
very much appreciated). And since I stayed up all night working on various
3BC projects, I was incredibly sleepy before the film started (having just
finished watching "Blue Streak" less than an hour before this one, my
weariness was all the more pronounced). That "The Red Violin" could cut
through all of that and hold me enthralled for two hours, is a tribute to
the quality of this film.
As much as I loved this movie, I find it hard to describe it adequately.
It had action, passionate sex/romance, intrigue (if only in how the violin
changes hands over centuries), humor, pathos--but not like your
standard-fare mainstream flick.  Neither, though, is it dry and lifeless
as Films tend to be. It took a couple minutes to get into the
story--during the Italian segment, I was distracted[1] for a few minutes
and didn't quite follow what was happening there--but by the time the
violin, and the viewer with it, moved on to Vienna, I was hooked. 
The storytelling was done beautifully both in the narration and in the
filming itself; the flashbacks necessary for this movie were done well and
made perfect sense, leaving the viewer wanting to know more and more about
what happens next. As it went back (forward?) to present-day Montreal, the
camera angles revealed repeated scenes from viewpoints that we didn't see
before as it advanced the tale; the shifts in focus were done subtly
enough so as not to confuse the viewer, but didn't insult the viewer's
intelligence (as, unfortunately, far too many flicks I've seen this
summer, did). The events that took place in each vignette tore at my heart
(especially the one in Vienna, with Christoph Koncz as Kaspar Weiss; I
just wanted to take that poor boy home with me!), made me laugh, made me
angry in turn--but not in a manipulative way. Each one was like a puzzle
that fit almost perfectly near the end. I had Issues that I'll address in
a minute, but most of them were resolved by reading carefully through the
story (and The Story Behind The Story) on the Official Website. I can't
recommend a read-through of that page, highly enough.
The actors were equally outstanding, each in his or her own right; having
the overall story told in small vignettes helped to make each segment's
featured players get the highlight they need. Standouts include the
aforementioned Koncz, Jason Flemyng as Fredrick Pope (the passionate
"devil"), Sylvia Chang as Xiang Pei and her own mother, and Ireneusz
Bogajewicz (Cesca the tarot reader). The violin itself didn't impress me
(and the supposed "secret" about it was pretty transparent from the
start), but I suppose I could see the obsession in, say, a rare Mac clone
being passed down through the ages and...uh, never mind. I liked most of
all that it wasn't until nearly the end that everything came together; and
did so logically, not clumsily so-we-can-END-this-thing! like most of
today's flicks [can you say "The Muse"? I knew you could!] 
Do you get the vibe that I liked this film? "Liked" isn't strong enough.
It now holds a rare spot alongside "The Matrix", "Mystery Men" and last
year's "What Dreams May Come", as the only movies I cared to spend my
hard-earned dough on to see again before they went to video. I am
surprised at myself, though, for liking it as much as I did; not that I'm
not Cultured--I have Kulcha oozing from my sweet lil' pores--but because
violins normally don't Do it for me (unlike the film's producer, I think
the saxaphone is the most romantic instrument). Maybe I'm getting more
conservative (Blacktionary time: bougie) in my Old Age, but give me more
Red Violins over "Chill Factor" and its bretheren, any day.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
    As a Black woman, I see the "Black Factor"--things that affect me as a 
    "consumer of color"--in many aspects of life; movies included. Whether 
    from the standpoint of noting Black (and other "minority") cast and crew
    members (if any), to the (lack of) focus toward "people of color" (dag, I
    hate that term), to the out-and-out antagonistic attitude toward Us 
    (Jar-Jar, anyone?), the "Black Factor" (BF) is something that plays as 
    much a role in my film enjoyment as any other aspect of the movie itself.
As promised, my Issues: Samuel L. Jackson; more specifically, his
character's actions in this film.
(WARNING: some spoilers contained below.) Of all the actors in this film,
Jackson sticks out like a sore thumb at first viewing. Point blank, it
felt like he did not belong there. Don't get me wrong: I'd pay to listen
to The Man read a telephone book, but his was the only role that didn't
synch for me. And don't go assuming that it's because he's Black; that
wasn't it. It's because he's so GOTdam intense--which, ironically enough,
seems to be exactly why he was cast in the role.
For me (until I read the story on the site, anyway), both his
unreasonable, Jules-like anger, and his out-and-out thievery in the end,
were misplaced. After reading the story, though, both are explained;
still, it changed the timbre of the movie as a movie for me. Having gone
to see the movie primarily because he's in it, I left the theater bothered
by his actions within it, and feeling that something just wasn't right.
Maybe if it wasn't for the situation I'm about to Dish about, I would've
been able to Feel him more immediately; who knows...
Bammer's Bottom Line    
[1]A Bammer Rant, if I may...I finally found something more irritating than 
Black Folks bein' Loud in the theater (oh, don't look at me like that; y'all
know it's true): a big fat greasy nasty IRRITATINGLY LOUD man--who
happened to be of the Caucasian Persuasian--suckin' down a HUGE vat of
popcorn as if he hadn't eaten in days. That fool was smackin' his lips
like he was eating filet mignon or something, like his mama didn't teach
him better than that. Next time I go to an art flick, I'm takin' my belt,
daggonit.
That, and other issues with Jackson aside, I encourage my readers to spend
a few bucks on something they might not normally go to see; it's worth it
(and if you're one of my cherished Ghetto Readers, just wait'll you see
this pasty paleface do it with a violin! He so nastee!)
"The Red Violin"--high marks for both the film and its accompanying
website.  I may have finally found my movie review niche: foreign
artsy-fartsy films. Who'da Thunkit?

Author
John Sylva
The Red Violin by DeWyNGaLe (John Sylva)    Rating: A
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Francois Girard directs this arty movie which consists of five languages,
English, German, French, Italian, and Mandarin Chinese. The Red Violin follows
the travels of a violin built in 1681 by Nicolo Bussotti, (Carlo Cecchi) who
spends hours working on perfecting his violin.  After the death of his wife
Anna (Irene Grazioli) during childbirth, Nicolo commemorates the violin to
Anna, building it to perfection.  After around one hundred years, the violin
resurfaces in Austria.  At an orphanage, the young Kaspar Weiss (Christoph
Kocnz) plays the red violin with great talent.  After seeing Kaspar play the
instrument, music teacher Georges Poussin (Jean-Luc Bideau) takes on the
responsibility of preparing Kaspar for a concert in front of the Vienna
emperor.  From Vienna, the violin ends up in Oxford, England where musician
Frederick Pope (Jason Flemyng) has possession of the violin, and with his great
technique and playing style, Pope quickly becomes a famous violinist.  From
England, the violin is shipped to Shangai, China, where Xiang Pei (Syvlia
Chang) owns the violin, but must keep it hidden because China considers music
pointless and offensive.  The last journey the violin goes on in the film is to
Montreal, Canada, where Charles Mortiz (Samuel L. Jackson) is investigating if
the violin is authentic for an auction that is going to take place.  In each of
the five stories, the violin brings good fortune, followed by bad fortune. 
Each chapter of the film unfolds as Cesca, (Anita Laurenzi) a fortune teller,
turns over a new tarot card, telling Anna Bussotti her future, which
mysteriously becomes the fortune of the violin's.  Director Francois Girard
makes this film seem like five short movies, all starring one main character,
the red violin.  Over the three hundred years that the film takes place, we are
bombarded with dazzling costumes, realistic set pieces, and beautiful,
classical music written by John Corigliano.  The music is mysterious and sets
the mood for the different sections of film.  Joshua Bell, who composes the
solo violin pieces, executes each song with great feeling, just as every actor
playing the violin does.  The music matches each section well, as the sections
become closer to the present, the music seems more fresh and modern. 
The Red Violin has no lead human character, only about fifteen actors that
support the performance of the lead character, the red violin.  Each supporting
character gets around fifteen minutes of screen time, making the best of their
time, performing to their potential.  Each character had their own, unique
personality which was developed well in the short time they had on screen.  The
strongest performances come from Samuel L. Jackson and Sylvia Chang, whose
performances are effective as they perform every line with great feeling.
Leaving the theater, I felt spellbinded by what I saw.  The Red Violin, with
its mixture of mesmerizing music, vast settings, and the innovative way of
presenting the film makes for a film that left me stunned when the credits
started rolling.  The Red Violin is an international movie, using five
different languages, so the dialogue cannot be understood by the average
citizen of any country.  Although those five languages may not be familiar to
one individual, The Red Violin has a language everyone can understand,
wonderful music.  Being a musician, and a music lover, The Red Violin may
appeal to me more than many others, but all of the elements of the film work
and make a great movie.  It is amazing that one violin has been through much
more than any human will ever be through, and the film got me thinking.  Where
has the penny in my pocket been?  Where has my trumpet been?  I am left with
one final question about the film- Like the violin whose story was told, the
film is high quality.  Where will this movie go, concerning awards and the
thoughts of the viewers?
The Bottom Line- The Red Violin was music to my ears.

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Samuel L. Jackson, Don McKellar, Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli,
Jean-Luc Bideau, Christopher Koncz, Jason Flemyng, Greta Scacci, Sylvia
Chang, Liu Zifang, Colm Feore. Not Rated.
Perfection is elusive. In fact, many will argue that nothing on Earth
has ever truly achieved it. Some will even say that there really is no
such thing as perfection because everything has flaws; be they concrete
or abstract, large or minute. The Red Violin, a stellar new movie from
Canadian director François Girard, explores the concept of perfection
and what it takes to achieve it.
One of the first scenes in the film takes place at a very prestigious
auction. As we enter, the auction is drawing to a close with what is the
last lot of the evening, an instrument introduced as "The Red Violin."
The camera lingers on the gorgeous piece as we are transported back 3
centuries, to the time and place of the violin's creation.
So begins the story of this uniquely powerful instrument. It's told in
an offbeat manner via a fortune teller reading into the future of the
violin creator's wife through tarot cards. This is deceptive because she
is telling the future of the violin rather than of the woman, who is to
die during childbirth soon after. The kicker, however, is that the
violin was painted red by her husband using a brush made from his
deceased wife's hair and paint colored by the red of her blood. Made
with love and out of love, the violin becomes a character in the movie;
analogous with the violin maker's wife.
The Red Violin tracks the history of its subject as it changes hands and
travels the world, introducing us to many a fascinating character along
the way. We come back to the auction scene on numerous occasions, as the
movie slowly reveals the motives of the characters we see in present day
(one of whom is played by Samuel L. Jackson). Girard is master of his
domain -- time -- to the point where his film flows freely through it
every which way, manipulating it at will while maintaining the narrative
cohesion necessary for the film to work as a story.
As The Red Violin progressed, the violin -- an inanimate object --
established a veritable personality of its own, a feat only the most
deft of directors can achieve. This instrument, which drastically and
almost consciously changed the lives of everyone it touched, is
established as something perfect from the start: a masterpiece. It is
shot at, buried, mutilated and subjected to numerous trials and
tribulations and yet it always survives: inevitable for a completely
flawless entity.
Making a film like this is dangerous because it has the potential to
become a pretentious bore (give the project to Terrence Malick or John
Sayles and voila!). There is enough theme here to make this a self-
indulgently abstract, philosophizing movie, sticking in voiceover
narrations and adding excess symbolism. François Girard, however, keeps
this movie cerebral yet down-to-earth. He also proves that a movie about
a 300 year old violin can be mesmerizing: I did not suspect that this
film might be capable of genuinely entertaining me, but alas I'm happy
to report that aside from making think, The Red Violin engaged me and
kept my eyes glued to the screen.
The story and concept of the violin is intriguing and scintillating, but
what is most impressive about this movie is how each of the many
characters is interesting as well. From the passionate dedication of
George Poussin to teaching his prodigy to Frederick Pope's bizarre
connection between sex and music, each of the people in The Red Violin
is worth exploring and analyzing. This is an added bonus to what is
already a gloriously multifaceted film.
It is films like The Red Violin that keep me coming back to the movie
theaters week after week, day after day. It works at an astounding
number of levels, entertaining casual moviegoers with its plot twists
and its suspense, impressing classical music lovers with a powerful and
poignant score, all the while engaging cineasts with its thematic
intricacies. It could very well be that nothing in the real world can
achieve perfection, but The Red Violin is as close as films come.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov

Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Mariane Desautels
The Red Violin is the story of a journey across centuries and
continents, with the intrument as traveller, and as the catalyst of the
human lives it strings together. As a movie, it is uneven but entirely
worthwhile. I did not enjoy the segments set in Vienna and Oxford much:
they didn't appeal to me. However, the ones set in China, Italy and
Canada did sustain my interest. Here, production values and direction
are enough, in my opinion, to allow the audience to turn a shortsighted
critical eye over this movie's faults. Bravo to Niv Fichman and François
Girard.
While the violin itself is unarguably the movie's central character, the
matter of protagonists is manifold. Samuel L. Jackson gets top billing,
and I estimate that he also gets the most screen time, but he is a great
actor and he fills his segment with a sense of purpose that perfectly
espouses the narrative. The other protagonists in each segment act in
reaction to circumstances and emotional shocks, the actors' performances
are strong, but the movie's momentum lulls; the violin has no will of
its own, despite its mystique. If it had, the film would have achieved
its desired epic scope. The Red Violin is beautiful, certain to pluck
heartstrings, and moving; but it's also a cripple. Listen to the music:
that's as far as it will go.
It's a cathartic but unchallenging drama. See it. Listen carefully.
__THE RED VIOLIN directed by François Girard stars Samuel L. Jackson
and was co-written by Don McKellar and François Girard, who have often
expressed their eternal gratitude toward their translators__
-this review copyright 1999 by mariane desautels- 
http://pages.infinit.net/amneria/7.html

Author
Ross Anthony
"The Red Violin" is really a composition in five movements. Although the
primary theme (the violin) ties all the segments together, it is but a thin
string.
The violin has a history five centuries long, and five separate tales of
it's existence are shown. Starting in Italy, but roaming (no pun) to several
other countries. Each story is savory and delicately filmed. But they don't
sing in harmony with one another, nor do they build for a crashing
crescendo.
Still, it's a curious piece that held my interest and stirred my heart with
beautiful music.
Starring Jason Flemyng, Greta Scacchi, Don McKellar and Samuel L. Jackson.
Directed by Francois Girard. Produced at Lions Gate/Red Violin/Sidecar/TV
Srl/Mikado.
Grade ......................................... B+
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Lars Lindahl
Written by Francois Girard and Don McKellar.
Starring Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli, Christoph Koncz, Jean-Luc Bideau, Jason
Flemyng, Greta Scacchi, Sylvia Chang, Liu Zifeng, Don McKellar, Colm Feore, and
Samuel L. Jackson.
The titular violin is more than just an instrument. Any object that survives
for centuries and plays an integral role in the lives of numerous people from
numerous cultures is something more than just a piece of wood and some strings.
In The Red Violin, the violin is a manipulative device which society revolves
around. The beautiful violin, as it passes into the hands of several different
kinds of humans, is coveted, cherished, envied, and rivaled to a point where it
controls the emotions and actions of the individuals around it. There is
something uniquely vivacious in such an inanimate object. 
The Red Violin is not only a film which celebrates the power of music in past
and present society, but it also, using the violin as a central focus, examines
cultures from around the world, just how different and similar they are. The
similarity is that music is an influential factor of their lives, however the
motive of why it is so influential differentiates the cultures. Some people
desire the violin because they desire money, fame, and ultimate power. Others
lust for the violin because it is a way of expressing their true self. A way to
speak out to others that is not possible with the use of words or gestures. The
violin, which enters the lives of the supporting characters, is almost like a
genie in a lamp. Inside it contains the answers to all of their problems.
However, when these victims get their hands on something so potent the outcome
is either total greed or grief. 
This Canadian film, from co-writer/director Francois Girard, parallels the
creation of the violin in Italy to its highly anticipated auction in Montreal,
Quebec. At first, we know there is something special about the violin. Created
by a skilled Italian merchant in the 1600's, the instrument is originally made
for his newborn son. However, when his wife and child die during the delivery,
the merchant finds the most obscure way of putting his late family into his
work. In Quebec, during present time, many different nationalities including
the Chinese, Italian, French, and English are bidding top dollars for the
merchant's work. From these two scenes, we know the violin has traveled a long
way before it has reached the auction. The Red Violin tells of its journey. 
The film is split into five sections, each in a different language because the
settings are in different countries. This type of universal style reminded me
of Jim Jarmusch's creative Night on Earth, which follows the lives of taxi
drivers in different countries. Unfortunately like Night on Earth, The Red
Violin contains some memorable segments and some awful segments.  The parts
with the more famous actors, Greta Scacchi and Samuel L. Jackson were both dull
and banal especially in comparison to the remaining segments, such as the
Austrian boy pressured into performing well and the Chinese Communist woman who
secretly adored Western music. 
The Red Violin frequently displays the violin staring back at you with a
particularly creepy appearance. The violin, which gradually gets more fragile
as it travels through time, stands out from others of the same structure for
some inexplicable reason, maybe because we know of it's energetic past or of
its odd Frankenstein-like creation. For some mysterious reason, it is
frightening to watch. 

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE RED VIOLIN" (Lions Gate Films)
Francois Girard's stirring, sumptuous epic follows the
turbulent, if convoluted, journey of a legendary violin, famous for
its perfect acoustics and unusual reddish hue. Up for auction in
Canada, the stringed instrument has traveled around the globe for more
than 300 years when an American expert (Samuel L. Jackson) is summoned
to authenticate its worth. Created by a 17th century Italian, Nicolo
Bussotti (Carlo Cecchi), as a legacy of love for his unborn son, the
violin becomes an embodiment of his grief when his beloved wife Anna
(Irene Grazioli) and child die in childbirth. Mysteriously, a
Tarot-card reader has predicted a long, nomadic, adventure-packed life
for Anna, coupling her fate to the future "life" of the Red Violin. As
the intriguing story evolves, the spell of the violin seems to bewitch
the lives of its various owners. It travels to monastic Austria, where
it goes to a six year-old child prodigy. In England, it falls into the
decadent hands of a Byronic musician (Jason Flemyng) who uses it in
his flamboyant courtship of a volatile novelist (Greta Scacchi). From
there, it's brought to Shanghai, where it winds up as a treasured
artifact in the midst of the Chinese Cultural Revolution. Finally,
Chinese authorities send it to the auction hall in modern-day
Montreal, where eager bidders, descendants and friends of the people
it has touched, are obsessed with acquiring the instrument. The
mystery, of course, is who will wind up with this fabled masterpiece?
Although the pace and quality of the sprawling flashback episodes
differ greatly, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Red
Violin" is an exquisite, captivating 9. It's a sweeping, cinematic
symphony, a unique combination of classical and contemporary, both in
music and imagery.

Author
Jonathan Richards
"The Red Violin" does for the violin what "Babette's Feast" did
for food.  It draws you in with such visual beauty and extravagant
lushness that you lose yourself in the sheer sensual pleasure of it,
even when -- unlike "Babette's Feast" -- it spirals over the top into
Ken Russell territory.  "The Red Violin" is like a can't-put-down
bestseller, enthralling even through its moments of guilty pleasure.
In a 17th century workshop, a master violin-maker (Carlo Cecchi)
crafts his masterpiece: a near-perfect instrument, which he will give
as a gift to the son he is expecting.  His very pregnant wife (Irene
Grazioli) sits in the kitchen of her home and listens to a tarot
reading from her cook.  The future the old woman tells is puzzling,
full of travel, adventure, romance, and danger.  As the movie spins
on, it quickly becomes apparent that some astral wires got crossed;
the predictions aren't for the woman, but the violin.
The film, written by director Francois Girard and actor Don
McKellar (who previously collaborated, along with cinematographer
Alain Dostie, on "32 Short Films About Glenn Gould"), uses as a frame
a Montreal auction house's sale of the legendary Red Violin, so named
for its unusual reddish varnish.  This lost treasure has been recently
rediscovered and authenticated by American expert Charles Morritz
(Samuel L. Jackson).  As the dark-hued instrument hesitantly swings
into view on its auction house panel and tension mounts with the
bidding, the story keeps reaching back to a succession of owners -- an
Austrian monastery, a Viennese child prodigy (6-year-old Christoph
Koncz ), a band of gypsies, a 19th century British virtuoso (Jason
Flemyng) and his passionate mistress (Greta Scacchi, naked again!)
Then it's off to the Mysterious East for this tough little number,
where it languishes in a pawnshop, survives China's Cultural
Revolution, and finally makes its way to our auction in a consignment
of decadent Western instruments put on the block to raise a little
decadent Western currency for the People's Republic.
There are, to be sure, moments of cheesy excess at which you can
only grin -- Flemyng lying nude and stroking the neck of the
instrument protruding from between his legs -- but that's all part of
the fun.  The ending is a bit hard to swallow.  But there are moments
of music so exquisite they make you weep.  The magnificent score is by
John Corigliano, and Joshua Bell performs the violin solos with the
London Philharmonic under the direction of Esa-Pekka Salonen.
"The Red Violin" won't win over all the critics.  But audiences
will love it.  It's a real page-turner.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lions Gate Films
 Director:  Francois Girard
 Writer:  Francois Girard, Don McKellar
 Cast: Carlo Cecchi, Jean-Luc Bideau, Greta Scacchi, Jason
Flemyng, Sylvia Chang, Don McKellar, Samuel L. Jackson
    As the most abstract of the arts, music is the only truly
universal language.  Bach, Beethoven, Brahms, Vivaldi, and
Scarlatti can be understood and appreciated in any culture
just as the rock, punk and discotheque music have traveled
the globe, devoured by young people wherever governments
have allowed it entry.  No wonder, then, that a single violin
can make its way from Italy to Austria to England to China
and then cross the seas to Canada.  The sounds which this
instrument can produce afford uplift to those who inhabit
many cultures.  A well-made vehicle for delivering such
pleasure is bound to be in demand, particularly if the
instrument is an Amati, a Guarneri or a Stradivari.
   A stringed instrument is the principal character of this
masterful Canadian-Italian production.  The red violin is a
three-hundred year old piece of the finest craftsmanship,
constructed with particular love in 1681 by Nicolo Bussatti
(Carlo Cecchi), who dedicated it to his wife, Anna (Irene
Grazioli).  After Anna had died in childbirth (ironically enough,
since her fortune-telling servant assured her a long and
fruitful life), her husband secretly drained some of the blood
from the limp wrist of the corpse to create a unique rust color
for the instrument.  He could hardly have forseen the journey
this singular instrument would make during the subsequent
three centuries.  Had the violin been given the breath of life,
it would have experienced a dizzying range of incidents and
ordeals, shifting ownership and countries with the persistence
of a dedicated travel agent determined to grasp the soul of a
few of the world's most dramatic locales.
   "The Red Violin" beautifully exploits the qualities inherent in
the film medium.  The picture is exquisitely photographed  by
Alain Dostie to evoke the 17th Century continental charms of
Cremona in northern Italy, the stately pomp of Vienna as it
approaches its imperial glory, the Victorian countryside of
Oxford, England, the spirited revolutionary bustle of 1960s
Shanghai, and the cosmopolitan enticements of modern
Montreal.  We get a feel for the devotion which a master
craftsman has for his product, the sweat that goes into the
training of a gifted musician, and the financial rewards which
are promised to those who can competently exploit the
arduous work of others.  As the eponymous red violin makes
the rounds across borders and centuries, it is handled and
discussed by people of diverse temperaments until it lands in
the hands of its current owner by dint of an
uncharacteristically tension-filled conclusion.
   Following a screenplay penned by Don McKellar and his
own hand, director Francois Girard eschews the strictly
conventional narrative, peppering the chronicle with frequent
flashbacks and focusing particularly on an auction being held
at the Duval House in Montreal, where wealthy bidders from
various backgrounds have gathered to make offers on a set
of costly string instruments.  In the flashback style now
known by the tens of millions who have seen "The Phantom
of the Opera" on stage, director Girard takes us first to a
modern-day collection of affluent bidders and, upon the
dramatic presentation of the red violin, he transports us to
17th Century Italy, where Anna Bussotti is consulting with her
servant-diviner, Cesca (Anita Laurenzi).  As Cesca turns over
the Tarot cards she slowly reveals the future.  With each
card's turn, Girard takes us to a new country, another period,
as each prediction is played out.
   The violin turns up in Austria some one hundred years after
its creation, as Georges Poussin (Jean-Luc Bideau) takes his
very young prodigy, orphan Kaspar Weiss (Christoph Koncz),
under his wing to prepare the six-year-old lad for a concert
before the emperor in Vienna.  The violin ultimately passes to
a band of gypsies who have purloined it, commuted to
England, and find a buyer in landowner-musician Frederick
Pope (Jason Flemyng)--who utilizes it well in an inspired
concert--following a brief and impassioned and decidedly un-
Victorian tryst he enjoys with his mistress, Victoria (Greta
Scacchi).  When Pope's servant (Stuart Ong) slinks with it
across the seas to his Shanghai home in the 1960s, it is
almost destroyed by cadres of the Cultural Revolution, who
consider it a symbol of western decadence.  Winding up at
auction, the Duval house in Montreal commissions expert
Charles Morritz (Samuel L. Jackson) to certify its authenticity.
The violin is then poised for transfer to some lucky tycoon
with a couple of million dollars to spend, at which point the
handsome instrument can presumably prepare for another
three centuries or so of high adventure.
   One can understand the film's success in Canada, where
the movie industry has been following paths other than those
commonly trodden by Hollywood.  Since that country's
production of motion pictures began with "Evangeline" in
1914, Canada has had to compete with the far greater capital
enjoyed by its prosperous neighbor to the south.  After
decades of timidity and mediocrity, Canada broke through its
historic sluggishness in the 1980s and during our own
decade, making its mark even in some American circles with
the productions of David Cronenberg and Atom Egoyan.  If
any recent motion picture affords evidence that this vast
country has the scope, the confidence, the flair for sustaining
large-budget yet tasteful work, it would be "The Red Violin." 
Acted with intelligence, humor, wit and elegance by
performers as diverse as Chinese actress Sylvia Chang, the
American Samuel L. Jackson, and the absolutely superb
English thesp Jason Flemyng, "The Red Violin" joins vastly
appealing vistas with a powerful and original soundtrack
composed by John Corigliano--which is played with fervor by
Joshua Bell and the London Philharmonia Orchestra.  So
much care is placed on authenticity that cognoscenti will be
competent to identify time periods simply by feasting their
eyes on Renee April's lush costumes.  
   Francois Girard is no stranger to the genre, having favored
us six years ago with the stirring and innovative "Thirty-Two
Short Films About Glenn Gould," told to us like his thoroughly
accomplished current work in vignettes.  He has built upon
this forerunner exquisitely.  "The Red Violin" is a wholly
realized amalgam of sight, sound, and narrative.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There are several different ways to write an anthology film, a
film made up of several episodes.  Some films manage to have the whole
be greater than the sum of the parts.  One that does rise well above
the parts is this history of the Red Violin, a violin of astounding
acoustical properties.  Francois Girard, who directed, co-authored the
screenplay with Don McKellar, who appears as a scientific violin
expert.  The two Canadian filmmakers previously worked together on
THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD.  While it is not true that
each episode stands on its own as a good story, the combined film is
actually quite well-written.  The story is set at the Montreal auction
of the violin and then flashes back over the history of the violin and
its travels from Italy to Montreal.
     ITALY: We have the greatest violinmaker of his day Nicolo Bussotti
(played by Carlo Cecchi) of Cremona, Italy, creating a masterpiece of a
violin to coincide with the birth of his first child.  ITALY and
AUSTRIA: A young boy Kaspar Weiss (Christoph Koncz) with a Mozart-like
brilliance for music is taken from his home in Northern Italy and taken
to Vienna where he will find that his greatest impediments are not in
competition but in himself.  AUSTRIA and ENGLAND: A band of gypsies
plays the great violin for years without ever knowing its true value.
ENGLAND:  The Red Violin inspires a scoundrel (Jason Flemyng as
Frederick Pope) to make great music, but Pope does not realize how
dependent on it he becomes. CHINA: The political orthodoxy of the
Cultural Revolution teaches a cadre the price of fanaticism and forces
her to choose between love of the violin and her loyalty to the fanatic
new brand of politics sweeping China.  MONTREAL: An auction house
prepares for a public sale of musical instruments acquired from the
Chinese government.
     Contrary to expectation the film is at its most interesting when
it gets to the 20th Century.  We have seen other films like THE BLUE
KITE tell us how China allowed political fanaticism to impoverish and
destroy the country, but this film makes the same point much more
succinctly and at the same time plaintively. In the Montreal segment we
get a tantalizing look at 20th century analysis of a 17th century
musical instrument, from acoustics to chemical and even biological
analysis.  In addition the final segment answers several previously
unanswered questions and fits some apparently disconnected pieces
together.  We get a much better understanding of the Red Violin, what
makes it unique, and why is it red?
     Don McKellar seems to be becoming as ubiquitous in Canadian film
as Denholm Elliot used to be in British film.  At the 1998 Toronto
International Film Festival (where I could not get into THE RED VIOLIN)
he seemed to be associated with one film after another.  Here he
writes, directs, and acts.  Top billing goes to Samuel L. Jackson,
whose role does not become important until the final segment of the
film.  There are few familiar actors to stretch the budget, but there
is some nice location scenery.  But what is really enjoyable, as one
might suspect in a film about a great violin, is that the film has some
really excellent violin music.
     In short, people who are pleased with the current vogue to have
arthouse films on the theme of behind the scenes looks at how classical
music gets created, films like SHINE and HILARY AND JACKIE, films with
potent samples of good music, should find THE RED VIOLIN an
entertaining entry.  I give it an 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high +2
on the -4 to +4 scale.  (Historical note: all characters, musical
instruments, and events are fictional.)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

RED VIOLIN, THE (Violon Rouge, Le) (director:François Girard;
screenplay: Don McKellar/François Girard; cinematography: Alain Dostie;
cast: Carlo Cecchi (Nicolo Bussotti), Irene Grazioli (Anna Bussotti),
Anita Laurenzi (Cesca), Jean-Luc Bideau (George Poussin),Christoph Koncz
(Kaspar Weiss), Clothilde Mollet (Antoinette Poussin), Rainer Egger
(BrotherChristophe), Wolfgang Boeck (Brother Michael), Jason Flemyng
(Frederick Pope), Greta Scacchi (Victoria), Eva Marie Bryer (Sara ),
David Gant (Conductor), Sylvia Chang (Xiang Pei), Liu Zi Feng (Chou
Yuan), Tao Hong (Comrade Chan Gong), Han Xio Fei (Young Ming),  Samuel
L. Jackson (Charles Morritz), Colm Feore (Auctioneer), Monique Mercure
(Madame Leroux), Don McKellar (Evan Williams), Paula De Vasconcelos
(Suzanne), 1998)
It is difficult to fall in love with a material thing like a violin,
except when it is played as beautifully as it is by solo violinist
Joshua Bell, as Esa-Pekka Salonen conducts the London Philharmonia
Orchestra, playing John Corigliano's score. When the music they play
stops and the story begins, that is where the problem lies for this very
awkwardly told arty story. Its ill-conceived plot is so sloppily
directed and trite, that it was a very trying experience just to try and
figure out what the director was trying to say about the violin that
made him think that this story was so mysterious and worth telling. That
the film is about the changing ownership of a red-stained violin
(stained with the blood of the violin maker's dead wife), and it being a
curse on those who own it, and that the main excitement centers around
it being auctioned off and sold in Montreal for a whopping sum of over
two million dollars after travelling through several countries and
centuries, does not make this tale rise to the level of exhilerating
suspense.
The film tells the fictionalized account of a great violin maker in
Cremona, 1861, named Nicolo Bussotti (Cecchi), who has made the perfect
violin for his expectant son. His wife's servant Cesca (Laurenzi) reads
the tarot cards and sees in them the future, predicting a tough delivery
for the mother but a long life. But the mother dies at childbirth and
the long life the tarot will refer to, is for the red violin. We will
repeatedly return to the five cards turned over in the tarot for updates
on the uncannily accurate predictions made, as over the time-frame of
three- centuries, the violin makes its way from 17th-century Italy
(Cremona), to 18th-century Austria (Vienna), to a tribe of gypsies, to
19th-century England (Oxford), to Communist China (Shanghai) and finally
to contemporary Canada (Montreal). Each century is a primer for relating
the current society's love for classical music compared to the love
shown for it by the violin's creator.
All the vignettes involving the violin changing hands in different
countries made me cringe with embarrassment, as the tales were so devoid
of any logic and so ridden with cliches, as to make them unintentionally
laughable.
In the first vignette, a  fragile child prodigy, Kaspar Weiss (Christoph
Koncz), raised by monks in Austria, is turned over to a violin tutor
(Jean-Luc Bideau) who teaches him to keep musical time with a metronome.
The child sleeps with the red violin and dies in a swoon at an audition
that will have given him a chance to become famous.
A ludicrous vignette takes place in England, as its greatest violinist,
the egotist Frederick Pope (Jason Flemyng), composes great compositions
playing the red violin while his girlfriend, Victoria (Greta Scacchi),
slobbers all over him while making love to him in gymnastic postions.
What could this team of writer and director have been thinking about? It
is hard to believe that this is the same team that made the very
pertinent and inspiring "Thirty Two Short Films About Glenn Gould."
The scenes in Shanghai during Mao Tse-tung's Cultural Revolution, in
which Western culture is demonized and its books and musical instruments
are unceremoniously tossed into a bonfire, are flatly and uninspiringly
done. Sylvia Chang is featured as a leader in the Cultural Revolution
spouting dogmatic propaganda, but who hides the red violin, given to her
by her bourgeois mother, from her own party members.This vignette left
no lasting impression on me, except as a further illustration of how the
story got the costumes right but distorted the historical events.
That the film has lost all track of itself in these tedious vignettes,
so much so that it has no chance of ever uncovering what it probably
wanted to show, of how the universal message of  music brings harmony to
the world and how it transcends all cultures and kinds of people.
The most tawdry scene is saved for last, as a rude and corruptible New
Yorker, Charles Morritz (Samuel L. Jackson), is in Montreal working for
an auction house to restore and appraise the worth of the violin and
ends up authenticating the legitimacy of it. If that was all he did, it
would have been enough and perhaps the film could have ended with some
dignity, and the music presented would have left a big enough impression
so that the film could at least be worth seeing for that. But no! For
some unfathomable reason, we are supposed to get worked up about a
bidding war for the violin and who would possess this perfect instrument
when for the entire film there was not one person in the movie covered
in enough depth that we could get emotionally involved with, and to care
at this late date about who owns this material object, when it has long
since been viewed as a mere trophy, just doesn't make sense. That the
one who does walk away with the trophy, confirms my feeling that every
judgment the director and writer made about this film was a wrong one.
What makes this film seem worse than the usual Hollywood blockbuster, a
film that it is most imitative of, is that it is presented as a
high-brow art film and will draw its audience from those who see such
films, but it is done so pretentiously, lacking in any kind of subtle
mannerisms and humor, that all it has to offer story wise is its
superficial dialogue and pretty costumes. Its high production costs to
attain accuracy of story only resulted in a film of kitsch art. If you
see it, it should be only for the wonderful solo violin of Joshua Bell.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Watching THE RED VIOLIN is rather like going to your mailbox and getting
pretty picture postcards from your vacationing neighbors.  As they fly
all over the globe, they send you gorgeous pictures of the places they
visit.  These images may be evocative but hardly involving.  You're glad
that they're having a good time, but receiving their cards isn't the
same as experiencing the joy of travel yourself.
So it is with THE RED VIOLIN.  Writer Don McKellar and writer and
director François Girard, using a similar structure to the one they used
on THIRTY-TWO SHORT FILMS ABOUT GLENN GOULD, take a series-of-vignettes
approach to telling the story of a fictional famous violin.  With
handsome cinematography and lush sets, the movie is a treat for the
eyes.  Watching it is rather like admiring those postcards.  The mind,
however, is likely to become bored, as the vignettes, save the rewarding
and fascinating one starring Samuel L. Jackson, are dull and
unimaginative.  Although we have glimpses of Jackson's story along the
way, it doesn't take center stage until an hour and a half into the
movie, which will test the resolve of less patient moviegoers.
The plot is an intriguing one.  A dishonest violin restorer, Charles
Morritz (Jackson), believes he has located Nicolo Bussotti's famous red
violin.  Described as the "single most perfect acoustical machine" ever,
the violin has had a long and troubled history.  The movie skips back to
its controversial birth in 1681 and then flashes forward and backward in
time as it traces the violin's world travels.
The stories have a few nice moments.  One child prodigy trains with the
newly invented metronome.  The teacher assures his student that speed
will prove his ticket to success.  All the boy need do is learn how to
follow the music when the beat is at the fastest possible.  The scene is
reminiscent of the one from THIS IS SPINAL TAP in which one of the band
members decides that loudness will provide their claim to fame and
fortune.  The volume knob on their amplifier has a top marking of 11
rather than the normal 10, so they are assured of being the best band in
the business.
The heavily cliched characters are never on the stage long enough to
develop any depth.  The filmmakers spend so much energy getting the
images and the plot structure just right that they shortchange the
script.
One of the episodes is set in China in the slogan-happy Red Guard era.
As the comrades spout trite propaganda ("To every problem, there is a
solution"), one is struck by how similar their lines are to the rest of
the movie.  The script also suffers from its absurd and labored plot
devices, which are used for transitions.
An interesting contrast can be made between THE RED VIOLIN and David
Mamet's THE WINSLOW BOY.  The former, although unrated, contains a few,
generally ludicrous, scenes that would change the picture from a PG to a
R.  In one, a naked violin player is lying in bed fondling his violin
for erotic pleasure.  This is so off-the-wall that most audiences will
laugh at its ridiculousness.  Trimming back on these few lurid scenes
would improve the movie and make it more generally accessible.  Mamet
brought his picture in at a G rating.  He could have thrown in some
expletives and flashed a little nudity for cheap thrills; but he didn't,
and his picture is better for it.
Only when the story drags -- and I do mean "drags" -- its way into the
present does it finally come alive.  The compelling ending segment has
genuine tension and carefully crafted scripting.  As Morritz schemes,
viewers will finally move to the edge of their seats.  There isn't much
surprise to the action, but Jackson brings a warm and inviting humanity
to his part that the rest of the movie lacks.
The audience will probably figure out most or all of the mysteries
behind the violin.  What will prove more perplexing is why the writers
couldn't have put more spark into the other parts of the film.  As the
ending credits roll, the audience is left with little more than a
collection of nice postcards for their album.
THE RED VIOLIN runs too long at 2:11.  The film is in Italian, German,
French and Mandarin with English subtitles and in English.  It is not
rated but would be an R for brief nudity, sex, profanity and drug usage.
The film would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
