Title
Review for Fighting Seabees, The (1944)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Fighting Seabees" is an entertaining,
action-packed war picture.  While racist and
exaggerated, the film compensates for this
with good dialogue and energetic direction.
John Wayne stars as Wedge Donovan, who runs
a construction company hired by the Army.
The workers build fortifications on war-zone
pacific islands, but are continually picked off
by Japanese snipers.  After the construction
workers have a disastrous offensive against
the Japanese, Donovan is convinced by Navy
brass Robert Yarrow (Dennis O'Keefe) that the
workers need to be trained as soldiers.  Wayne,
now a Lt. Commander, leads his men into further,
more successful battles.
The war battles and military politics take
up about half of the film.  The other half
involves a romantic triangle between Donovan,
Yarrow and reporter Constance Chesley (Susan
Hayward).  Yarrow is in love with Chesley,
Chesley is in love with Donovan, and Donovan
is in love with himself.
Yarrow's lack of romantic confidence results
in his constantly asking Chesley whether she
is in love with Donovan.  Meanwhile, Chesley
has to work harder and harder inventing
plausible pretexts for her attention to Donovan.
But Donovan coyly sidesteps Chesley's advances,
and is only interested in the welfare of his
workers.
William Frawley (later of "I Love Lucy" fame)
has a comic relief supporting role as a
construction worker.  There are unlikely scenes
of the flabby, middle-aged man undergoing basic
training: it just doesn't look right.  But his
comic timing is still on target.
"The Fighting Seabees" was released during
World War II.  There are derogatory script
references to the Japanese (they are called
'animals', 'nips', and 'bug-eyed monkeys') that
are excusable only in that soldiers of that era
would actually say things like that.  Japanese
snipers and pilots are shown grinning malevolently
before firing, as if taking pleasure in killing.
This revealing hatred of the Japanese helps
explain why thousands of Japanese Americans were
stripped of their possessions and herded into in
internment camps during WWII.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
