Title
Review for Great White Hype, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Jeff Goldblum, Damon Wayans, Peter Berg, 
      Jon Lovitz, Corbin Bernsen, Cheech Marin, John Rhys-Davies, Salli 
Richardson, Michael Jace
Director: Reginald Hudlin
Producers: Fred Berner and Joshua Donen
Screenplay: Tony Hendra and Ron Shelton
Cinematography: Ron Garcia
Music: Marcus Miller
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     Not since Robert Altman's THE PLAYER has a film been this 
relentless in its satirical attack.  THE GREAT WHITE HYPE takes the 
boxing industry and rips it open, displaying the rotting, putrid innards 
for all to see.  There are times when this movie is so vicious that it 
ceases to be funny.  While THE GREAT WHITE HYPE has its share of 
comical, occasionally-hilarious moments, don't expect a non-stop 
laughfest on par with THIS IS SPINAL TAP.  
     Co-writer Ron Shelton is no stranger to sports movies -- he 
scripted five before this (three of which he directed):  THE BEST OF 
TIMES, BULL DURHAM, WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP, COBB, and BLUE CHIPS.  Shelton 
is familiar with the behind-the-scenes machinations, and this knowlege 
is crucial to the film's success.  THE GREAT WHITE HYPE works primarily 
because its excesses aren't far removed from reality.  Perhaps the most 
disturbing thing about the movie is the recognition of how true-to-life 
the most outlandish and absurd aspects are.
     James "the Grim Reaper" Roper (Damon Wayans) is the most 
devastating heavyweight champion since Mike Tyson.  With his 38-0 
record, he's a force to be reckoned with.  Or is he?  Is Roper 
undefeated because he's so good, or because his flamboyant, publicity-
loving manager, Reverend Fred Sultan (Samuel L. Jackson), only lets him 
fight stiffs.  That's the question Roper's would-be-rival-in-the-ring, 
Marvin Shabazz (Michael Jace) would like answered.  He can't get a match 
with Roper because Sultan won't commit to a date. 
     The pay-per-view revenue for Roper's last fight is down -- way 
down.  The money isn't rolling in the way it used to, and Sultan knows 
the reason.  People have lost interest in the heavyweight championship, 
he claims, because they're tired of watching black men beat up each 
other.  They need a white hero -- someone with a "clean-cut", "all-
American" image.  And, Sultan adds, if he doesn't exist, "I'll create 
him."  When one of Sultan's assistants uncovers the name of Terry 
Conklin (Peter Berg), the only man ever to knock out Roper (albeit in an 
amateur bout more than 10 years ago), Sultan has his man.  With his 
entourage in tow, the promoter pays a visit to Cleveland, where Conklin 
is acting as lead singer for a bad heavy metal band.  After making one 
$10 million offer to the ex-Golden Glove Champ, Sultan has his "great 
white hope" -- Irish Terry Conklin (who's not Irish), defender of the 
homeless (he gives large donations to that cause) and challenger for the 
heavyweight championship.
     The secondary plot of THE GREAT WHITE HYPE involves the rise of 
Mitchell Kane (Jeff Goldblum) from tabloid reporter and self-styled 
"freelance crusader" to a major force in the boxing promotion business.  
Kane, who starts out trying to expose Sultan as a fraud, ends up 
becoming another cog in the Don King-like promoter's machinery.  Jon 
Lovitz, Cheech Marin, Salli Richardson, and Corbin Bernsen all have 
small roles as Sultan's flunkies.  And, although Jackson's performance 
is the one to watch, everyone else is more than capable, especially 
Damon Wayans, who finds the right balance between seriousness and 
comedy.
     Ably directed by Reginald Hudlin (BOOMERANG), THE GREAT WHITE HYPE 
never lets up with its pummeling of the boxing industry and its image-
obsessed attitudes.  The film also presents a timely message about how 
racial divisiveness can be exploited in sports (especially boxing) to 
bring in big bucks.  Shelton and Tony Hendra's script sparkles with 
nasty, incisive wit -- their pens were sharpened to finely-honed points 
before they began this skewering.  And the boxing match at the end is 
actually suspenseful, because we don't know how things are going to turn 
out -- there's potential for more ridicule no matter who wins or loses.
     There are occasions when THE GREAT WHITE HYPE goes too far, and 
rarer instances when it doesn't go far enough, but those moments are 
only apparent upon close examination.  This movie isn't the unqualified 
success that THE PLAYER or SPINAL TAP were -- both of those films had 
more artistry than is evident here -- but THE GREAT WHITE HYPE is still 
the kind of first-rate satire that would make Jonathan Swift proud.  By 
the time this hyper-energetic, unapologetically politically incorrect 
motion picture draws to a close, boxing has been dealt a knock-out 
punch. 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     A big, busy boxing satire with a surprisingly paltry punch, THE
GREAT WHITE HYPE stars Samuel L. Jackson as a shameless boxing promoter
whose plan to boost sagging pay-per-view revenues is to "invent" a white
contender (Peter Berg) to challenge his black heavyweight "champ" (Damon
Wayans).  (The logic is that people will pay more to see black vs. white
than black vs. black.) He may be right, in an absurdly accurate way, but
the film doesn't give us a reason to care.  As a scathing sports spoof,
HYPE is just that:  unfunny, unfocused, and, at times, just plain
pointless.  As a commentary on race relations, it's even *less*
effective.
     The dialogue is the best of this mess, lines like Jon Lovitz
exclaiming "I cannot make caviar out of fish eggs!" Writers Tony Hendra
and Ron Shelton also do good on the street slang, though we never hear
enough of it.  The script isn't strong enough, though, to support the
aggressive camera work of director Reginald Hudlin (HOUSE PARTY).  He
comes across as absolute overkill.  THE GREAT WHITE HYPE *almost* turns
around at the end, at the Big Match, when Hudlin attempts an extended
gag of rock-concert proportions.  With costumed dwarfs, gangsta rappers,
and the "champ" dressed as Death, only then do we get a glimpse of the
spoof that should've been. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The word "hype" sums this one up pretty well, I'd say. The 
ad campaign for THE GREAT WHITE HYPE touts it as a downright 
hilarious satire on the world of boxing, but then you wouldn't expect 
the studioheads to come out and say their movie is just another 
mediocre comedy we'll all forget about in a few years. Boxing is 
probably the only sport so far that hasn't spawned some kind of 
comedic farce (although I can't recall any wacky shotput movies off 
the top of my head), but THE GREAT WHITE HYPE doesn't rank as 
one of the better sports comedies of our time even if it is better than 
MAJOR LEAGUE 2.
        It's obvious exactly which media-covered heavyweight 
and his flamboyant promoter are being made fun of here. Damon 
Wayans is James "Grim Reaper" Roper, the contending champ, with 
Samuel L. Jackson playing his weird-hairdoed promoter, Reverend 
Fred Sultan. It's obviously a Mike Tyson / Don King parody from 
the very beginning, when Roper is interviewed after a fight and lisps 
out the same incoherent nonsense we've seen Tyson do a hundrlife, though,
or Roper would 
have been named "Raper."
        The premise of this movie is that fights make the most 
money when a white challenger is brought in to fight the black guy, 
because even though white guys never have a chance of winning, 
the racial implications of each race backing their contenders ("Go 
out there and win one for the white race!") bring more pay-per-view 
millions than just two black guys beating each others' brains out. 
Hell, I can look out the window in my neighborhood and see the 
same thing most nights of the week.
        Sultan personally goes out to pick the white challenger -- 
Terry Conklin (Peter Berg), the only fighter to ever knock Roper 
out, albeit in an amateur competition. Conklin has since gone on 
to the grunge band club lifestyle, but is lured back into the ring 
by a $10 million promise from Sultan, which Conklin tells the 
media he will use to eliminate the homeless problem. Sultan also 
heads the media blitz hyping "Irish" Terry Conklin ("I'm not Irish," 
Conklin protests, to Sultan's reply that, "In the world of boxing, 
'Irish' means white.") and bribes the head of the boxing commission 
with "money, sex and drugs" (Cheech Marin, who you'd think 
would have enough drugs already) to rank Conklin as a 
professional contender.
        Sultan also has to duck a fighter who is actually interested 
in a serious fight for the heavyweight title (enough so that he pulls a 
gun on the Sultan at one point) and bribe an investigative journalist 
(Jeff Goldblum) who's trying to expose his corruption. Meanwhile, 
we see scenes of Conklin actually training for the fight while a 
lazy Roper gains twenty pounds eating junk food, secure in the 
knowledge that -- in the great scheme of things -- no "Irish" fighter 
has a chance against a black one. And there are no plot twists in the 
ending to dispel that law.
        The ending of THE GREAT WHITE HYPE is thoroughly 
disappointing, and I'm not saying that out of a deep-seated racial 
prejudice. The climax is just so abrupt and noneventful that there's 
no payoff whatsoever. It would be nice if the movie was actually 
building up to something or had some kind of clever, unexpected 
turns up its glove. There are a few laughs scattered throughout 
the film and the cast, (Jackson in particular) gives enjoyable 
comedic performances, but ultimately, the movie is weak, 
lightweight entertainment.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
htp://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Witty and satiric, The Great White Hope never lets up.  The
Reverend Fred Sultan (Sanuel L Jackson) is the ultimate con man who
is, among other things the manager and boxing promoter of the World's
Champion, "James, The Grim Reaper," (Damon Wayans). James is always
asking when he is going to see some of the millions that his boxing has
earned him but the Reverend has the ready smile, the hug, and "Brother,
I love you" as the ready answer to James . . . and to everyone else.
     The thread of the story is that James is worried that the
number of people attending the boxing matches is dropping and
realizes the black public  is getting tired of seeing "one black
brother beating up another black brother."   The solution, suggested
by his gorgeous assistant, Bambi (Salli Richardson), is to get a
white fighter dumb enough to take on the champ;  hence "The Great
White Hype."   Fortunately, she knows someone, Terry Conklin (Peter
Berg) from her past who did once beat James in an amateur boxing
match.
     Although everyone  in the cast has some input into making the
film a knockout, Peter Berg steals the movie with his very sincere
goals in life but dumb enough to think he can beat the champ..
When they find Terry he is no longer interested in boxing.  He plays
the guitar in a coffee house and all he is interested in is saving
the world's homeless.   If the money he wins in the match will go to
ending the homeless situation of the world, he will agree to the
fight.   That is one of the many satiric parts of the film, a boxer
interested in the homeless.    You will love the scowling, husky,
menacing guardians (including the one who does a 10-second dance
while on duty) who follow the Reverend.   Let us not forget Michael
Kane (Jeff Goldblum) who is trying for a Pulitzer prize by exposing
the Reverend's "private" life.
     In leading supporting roles are John Lovitz, John Rhys-Daniels,
Cheech Marin and Corbin Bernsen.
