Title
Review for Hola, żestás sola? (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
 I guess not all films that come out of Spain are top notch productions, or
deserve the acclaim that Spanish films have been receiving in Film
Festivals, where they seem to be doing so well.
 Hi, Are You Alone? is not a great film, but it is a slight fast paced romp
that allows us to flow through an hour and a half without thinking much.
For that it is a nice film. If it has ideas, notions and themes, they are
not grandeurized in the tragedy of life, or made much fuss over it, beyond
each of the girls' desires, and flow. In this sense the whole film takes its
attitude and style from the two girls' generation. They are impetuous,
undecided, dreamy, and willing to try different things, and learn from the
knocks along the way. And of course, these prices, often cost some to each
person.
 It is a rather simple story. One girl gets caught in bed with her
boyfriend, and dad gets mad. She leaves home. The other girl gets no
exposition per se, but apparently she has no parents. They both end up
living in the same place, when one day they get thrown out by the landlady
who has found someone who will pay the rent with money.
 And the two girls end up leaving for the south of Spain, in the hope of
making a better life for themselves, but not after Trini meets a Russian
fellow, with whom she ends up being in love. At the critical moment, when
she is leaving the guy also disappears, a sign that he may have been an
illegal immigrant anyway, and the girls go south. They end up visiting
Trini's mom, who is trying to open up a bar. The girls end up working for
her, until one day, they realize that the mother is not going to pay them.
They leave, and decide to return back north, where Trini is going to try and
find the Russian boyfriend.
 While the film has moments of enjoyment, the interplay between the girls is
what makes this film work, to what is a rather quiet, unassuming film that
just wants to go through a day without a hassle -- just like the girls --
and trying to show off its intellectual verve. IN this sense it is a lesser
film than many others we have seen, which tend to be "meaningful" and
"pointed". This film might even be considered a B movie, if the shooting
style, film stocks ( terribly faded and old looking ), and directing are any
indications at all.  the film has a hurried look, which works fine for the
girls, and a decided lackadaisical attitude towards the many things and
ideas when it has a chance to comment on them.
