Title
Review for Campanadas a medianoche (1965)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Pauline Kael said " Welles ... has directed a sequence, The Battle of
Shrewesbury, which is unlike anything he has ever done on screen before.  It
ranks with the best of Griffith, Ford, Eisenstein and Kurosawa -- that is,
with the best ever done. "
And, truthfully, were it not for the stuffy professors who promptly junked
this film as blasphemy, and were it not for the timing of the  film, it
might have been received today as quite an original, and exciting
masterpiece of writing as well.  All in all, this is the story of FALSTAFF,
the happy go lucky Shakespeare character who felt slighted when his best
friend, Henry, became king and stopped being one of the boys.  Taken from
the various plays in which this character appears, a complete story was
written by Orson Welles, and wrapped up neatly into a small film, in black
and white, to show the side of the story of the character that Shakespeare
didn't
have time to work on.  And he is the only character that appears in more
than one play.
And we follow the young Henry and his escapades with the drunken fool and
exciting, and never boring fat man, Falstaff.  Through the many bars, to the
many women, to the few battles they went on, the young Henry is a good
warrior, and also a wild young man.  But it all changes the day he becomes
king.  He forsakes his friends, and leaves them all behind, and in one
scene, he doesn't even recognize them.  And the older Falstaff, is crushed.
He is hurt. Henry was one of his few friends, and while the drunkard, and
crazy Falstaf, may have wished for better times and life, he  can never get
out of his rut.   Henry seems to be aware of that.
While a fascinating acting exercise for many, since the combination of
various plays into one script creates a new character per se, this film is
very memorable, specially the battle scenes, where Falstaf has to depend on
his wily, cunning, and even accidental, ways to get things accomplished.
While the dialogue, and film, never
make it quite clear, nevertheless it is inferred that the main  reason why
this man is not worthy of the royal class, is because his only royalty ( and
loyalty ) is to drinking.
IF EVER RELEASED ON VIDEO, THIS IS A MUST SEE. IF YOU ARE A WILLY MAJOR
FORGET THIS FILM.  It was the same professors which went on an intellectual
rampage to destroy this film, which caused
much harm, and sadness, to Orson Welles, who plays Falstaf.  And Orson
Welles's versions of Shakespeare were somewhat neurotic, but they were never
boring, or worthless.  This film is the same.
