Title
Review for Miracle Mile (1989)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Shane Burridge
     Right from the pre-credits opening you'll assume from Anthony
Edwards' retrospective narration that you are about to see a quirky,
affectionate romance.  But by the time MIRACLE MILE has ended you'll
have realized that this is a cunning maneuver by writer/director Steve
de Jarnatt to plant a subconscious sense of reassurance in the minds of
the audience, one that will prevent most people watching from believing
that the worst can happen, right up until the very end.
     Ten minutes into the story, Harry Washello (Edwards) is late for
his second date with new romance Mare Winningham.  While waiting on a
street corner in the early hours of the morning he answers a phone
ringing in a public booth.  To describe the events that happen
afterward would undermine the surprising developments that Jarnatt has
in store, but suffice to say that Harry is informed that inadvertently
launched nuclear warheads are winging their way towards his sleeping
city.  Throughout the rest of the film we watch in frustration as Harry
gets swept up in the circumstances he sets snowballing into motion.  As
in our worst nightmares, he never gains control; he can't seem to get
beyond the same limited geographical area; he (like the audience) is
deprived of essential knowledge - we are never sure whether the missile
scare is real, a hoax, or literally his nightmare.
     Jarnatt juggles humor and action with ease, but it is at the
moment when the film's nightmare logic spills over into the daylight,
where it shouldn't belong, that MIRACLE MILE becomes just plain
chilling.  We watch his portrayal of suppressed panic, which breaks at
different levels for different people, and wonder if we would fare any
better in a similar situation.  Jarnatt and cinematographer Theo Van de
Sande create images that will stick with you, including an
unforgettable final shot viewed from within a helicopter cockpit.
MIRACLE MILE was Jarnatt's pet project after CHERRY 2000, but was held
over for release and undeservedly overlooked.  A film that looks good
on a big screen, with a characteristically persistent score by
Tangerine Dream.  For the sharp-eyed: Jarnatt plants a clue pointing
toward the conclusion of the film by inserting a shot of study notes
for Thomas Pynchon's book GRAVITY'S RAINBOW.

Author
Thuan N. P. Nguyen
     I liked MIRACLE MILE even though the concept of the movie isn't
particularly original.  The main character, Harry Washello, has  just met the
woman of his dreams while wandering through a museum at the LaBrea Tar Pits.
He's a trumpet player, a self-professed Glen Miller wannabee, who looks sort of
sweet and honest like John Boy from the  Waltons.  Julie's a waitress, an
"old-fashioned girl" who lives with her grandmother; she also promises to
"screw his eyeballs blue" on their first date.  Fine.  So they have the hots
for each other.  "Big deal!"  you say.
     Their hot date doesn't go as planned.  Harry inadvertently answers a phone
call meant for someone else.  The caller is a young soldier stationed in a
missile silo in North Dakota.  He had meant to call his  father to say goodbye.
You see...The BOMB is coming.
     Harry is stunned.  He can't be sure if the phone call was real or if it
was a prank.  I couldn't tell either.  Throughout the movie, I kept changing
my mind as the situations became more frantic.  "Oh s**t! it's real."
"Sigh...it's not real.", etc.   Now that I have had some time to mull over it,
I'd say that the suspense is reminiscent of AFTER HOURS.
     The movie did raise some questions.  What if an ordinary person, someone
I'd trust, tells me that the BOMBS are flying *now* and that I have 50 minutes
'til I'm vaporized.  Would I be more likely to believe it if I heard it from a
clean cut man in a suit as opposed to a disheveled homeless person?  And if
the BOMB really is coming, what should a responsible adult do?  Will I regret
not doing the things I really want to do but never had the time for?
     MIRACLE MILE doesn't have the clinical horror of THE WAR GAME (the BBC
production) or the goofiness of THE ATOMIC CAFE, but I did feel that I got my
money's worth out of it and I would recommend it to my friends.  Oh...and don't
see it alone.  I think you'd want to have a friend along to talk about the
movie afterwards, over your favorite-dessert-which-you-have-been-avoiding.

Author
Hal Render
     I thought I'd post brief reviews of some good films I've seen recently on
video.  (The release dates I've given are approximate, by the way.)
HOUSEKEEPING (1989) ****
  A Bill Forsyth film, this is a touching, amusing story of two orphaned girls 
  who come under the supervision of their eccentric Aunt.  Beautiful
  cinematography and great performances by the leads, esp. Christine Lahti.
THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY (1979) ****
  Gripping, complex British gangster movie, with great work by Bob Hoskins 
  and Helen Mirren in the leads.  Warning: those who have trouble understanding
  heavy accents (particularly Cockney) may want to avoid this film.
MIRACLE MILE (1989) ****
  A sleeper from last year, this story mixes romance, suspense and the threat
  of nuclear war in a very different, very engrossing film.  (To tell more
  would spoil too much of the plot.)  Stars Anthony Edwards and Mare Winningham.
MR. NORTH (1989) ***
  One of the last films produced by John Huston, this is the film version
  of a Thornton Wilder story (if I remember right).  It tells the story of
  Mr. T. Theophilus North, an engaging young man with some unconventional 
  ideas and a peculiar physical ability to store static electricity.  Despite 
  the good performances and an interesting setting (ritzy Rhode Island during 
  the 20's or 30's), the story on this one never really drew me in.  I can only
  recommend it to fans of the period and the people involved.  Stars Anthony 
  Edwards, Robert Mitchum, Tammy Grimes, Virginia Madsen, Anjelica Huston, 
  Harry Dean Stanton and others.
HOW TO GET AHEAD IN ADVERTISING (1989) ****
  A very weird, very funny comedy about the tribulations of a British Ad
  exec who just can't figure out how to sell a new acne cream.  The stress
  gives him a problem that makes the average case of pimples seem desirable.
  Wonderful performances by the leads none of whom I knew except for Rachel
  Ward who has quite overcome her early typecasting.
THE LION IN WINTER (1967) *****
  A classic that tells the story of "family ups and downs" on Christmas 
  day 1183 in the household of King Henry II of Britain.  An enthralling 
  character study, this film has incredible performances by Peter O'Toole 
  and Katharine Hepburn, with solid support from Anthony Hopkins, Timothy 
  Dalton and others.  This film has probably the overall best dialogue of 
  any movie I have every seen, so good that I watched it twice in a row just 
  to try to remember some of it.  Hepburn deservedly won an Oscar for her 
  performance.  If you haven't seen this film, by all means try to do so.
PRICK UP YOUR EARS (1988) ****
  A solid British drama, this film describes the tragic relationship between 
  playwright Joe Orton and his lover, Kenneth Halliwell.  The film
  covers Orton's rise to success and the emotional struggles of Halliwell 
  to adjust from his early start as Orton's mentor to his later role as 
  Orton's "personal assistant."  Very well acted by Gary Oldman, Alfred
  Molina and Vanessa Redgrave.  (Note: the film may bother those who have 
  a problem with an open depiction of homosexual relationships.)
PASCALI'S ISLAND (1989) ****
  Set just before WWI, this film tells the story of Basil Pascali, a "local 
  character" on a Turkish-governed Greek island.  Basil makes a meager living 
  on the island as an interpreter and government intermediary for residents 
  and tourists.  Basil is also a "career informer" for the Turkish Imperial 
  government, and has been sending secret reports for the last 20 years.  The
  film details a sequence of events that may either expose Basil or allow him 
  to leave a life that has lost meaning for him.  Ben Kingsley (one of my 
  favorite actors) is excellent as Basil, Charles Dance does a fine job as the 
  archaeologist, and Helen Mirren is very good as Basil's best friend.  
