Title
Review for Wizard of Gore, The (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1970. Director/Producer - Herschell Gordon Lewis, Screenplay - 
Allen Kahn, Photography - Alex Ameri & Daniel Krogh, Music - Larry 
Wellington, Special Effects - Herschell Gordon Lewis, Allison Louise 
Downe, Robert Lewis & Vickie Miles. Production Company - Mayflower 
Pictures.
Ray Sager (Montag the Magnificent), Judy Cler (Sherry Carson), Wayne 
Ratay (Jack Ward)
Plot: The stage magician Montag the Magnificent gains attention with his 
stage act which involves the gory impalement and dismemberment of 
hypnotzied women -before each act of slaughter is revealed to the 
audience to all be an illusion. A reporter and his tv critic girlfriend 
investigate when they find that Montag's stage volunteers are each dying 
after the performance in exactly the same way as Montag pretends to 
dismember them on stage.
Beginning with `Blood Feast' in 1963, director Herschell Gordon Lewis 
created the splatter film. Lewis's films are really like porn films. But 
where porn films are staged around providing a set variety of 
procreational activities in great detail every few minutes, Lewis's 
films fixate around the body of a particular individual, usually a 
woman, who in great detail is dismembered or torn apart every few 
minutes. `The Wizard of Gore' features some really heavy-duty gore - in 
a variant on the old sawing a woman in half trick, a magician chainsaws 
a woman in half; swords are impaled down throats; holes punched through 
bodies with drill presses; and in the most perverse of all effects - a 
spike pounded into a woman's head and then her brains pulled out, the 
magician even reaching in with considerable glee to pop out one of her 
eyeballs. The lack of conviction to the effects - an appallingly 
unconvincing dummy head that the spike is pounded into head, the swords 
down the throat being seen to bend - do not in any way undermine the 
full-on shock value that Lewis's gore has.
Lewis's films are the sort that leave you constantly wondering what 
possible socially redeeming values they have. Indeed `The Golden Turkey 
Awards' nominated Lewis for the lifetime achievement as worst director 
of all time - only to be beaten out by Edward D. Wood Jr. `Wizard' is 
filled with all sorts of bad movie-making fascination. Lewis develops 
this bizarrely heavy-handed style every time he wants to achieve 
directorial effect - cuts to closeups of Ray Sager's eyebrows and hat 
filling the whole screen every time the audience are supposed to be 
being hypnotized or else bizarrely abrupt (and unintentionally funny) 
cuts in the music to signal the change between illusion and a return to 
reality. Ray Sager gives an amazingly bad performance with eyes wide 
open and enunciating everything in virtual upper case.
`Wizard' is usually regarded as the best of Lewis's films because it has 
a playful double-structure that flips back and forward between reality 
and illusion and at the end even starts to toy with the illusion of the 
film itself - something which has given the film a certain academic 
legitimacy. This play of illusion proves undeniably fascinating and 
never more so than the bizarre ending where the heroine and her 
boyfriend start making out and he turns back into the dead magician and 
then, in a moment of solipsistic ingenuity, she decides he is really an 
illusion and thinks him out of existence. Finally the magician turns 
directly to the camera to taunt the audience, telling them to make sure 
that this might not all be an illusion that what they have been watching 
is a film. Between its sheer shoddiness of production values, its 
gut-churning but somehow not offensive extremes, and weirdly fascinating 
and equally pretentious play of film, illusion and reality, `Wizard' 
proves an undeniably appealing.
Screening at the Christchurch 1998 Incredibly Strange Film Festival
Reviewed by Richard Scheib

