Title
Review for Killers, The (1946)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

KILLERS, THE (director: Robert Siodmak; screenwriter: Anthony
Veiller/short story by Ernest Hemingway/John Huston (uncredited);
cinematographer: Woody Bredell; editor: Arthur Hilton; cast: Burt
Lancaster (Ole "Swede" Anderson/Peter Lunn), Ava Gardner (Kitty
Collins), Edmond O'Brien (Jim Riordan), Albert Dekker (Big Jim Colfax),
Sam Levene (Lieutenant Sam Lubinsky), Vince Barnett (Charleston),
Virginia Christine (Lilly Lubinsky), Charles McGraw (Al), William Conrad
(Max), Charles D. Brown (Packy Robinson-Swede's Mgr.), Donald MacBride
(Kenyon), Jack Lambert (Dum Dum), John Miljan (Jake), Phil Brown (Nick
Adams); Runtime: 105; Universal; 1946)
A quintessential noir film, more entertaining and atmospheric than
essential viewing, featuring a hard-boiled story, average though it may
be, which goes beyond the main character getting killed in the first
reel to spend the rest of the film examining why he lost interest in
living anymore. All the cliché noir characters pop up here, including
the femme fatale, the innocent man who is corrupted, and the calculating
big boss and the cold-blooded hit men. There is also the recognizable
cinematography of this genre, which is darkly shot, using shadows to
frame its shots, long close-ups to show fear and to overall create a
mood for what has become known in film lore as the noir world.
"The Killers" use Ernest Hemingway's short story as a starting point for
its own story, as it picks up after the execution of an ex-boxer called
Swede (Lancaster-in his film debut). The wonderfully engaging scene sets
the stage for the dark story that unfolds, as the hit men, Al (McGraw)
and Max (Conrad) drive into a small New Jersey town and enter a diner
during the supper hour. They are not too subtle about what they are
after, as they intimidate the diner manager, the cook, and a customer
(Brown), asking about Swede (he's using an alias), even telling them
that they plan to shoot him.
When, by coincidence, it turns out that the diner patron works in the
same filling station as the Swede and knows the rooming house where he
lives, he rushes to warn him of the danger. But Swede tells him there is
nothing to do. He then asks, "Why do they want to kill you?" and Swede,
while lying in bed in a darkened room replies, "I did something wrong...
once." The actual killing is anti-climactic, as the killers enter his
room blasting away without saying a word.
Riordan (O'Brien) is an insurance investigator who finds this routine
case curious because he doesn't understand why Swede did nothing in his
defense and becomes obsessed with the case, very much in the cliché of
how a 1940s noir protagonist would react. And, even though his company
has to pay off only a small amount on the life insurance policy, he
decides to fully investigate it.
He figures out from Swede's bruised knuckles that he was an ex-fighter
and finds out that he came from Philly. But first he goes to Atlantic
City and meets the chambermaid Queenie in a hotel Swede stayed in. She
is the sole beneficiary of the insurance, and tells Riordan she only met
him once, when he stayed at the hotel and she stopped him from
committing suicide, which he said was because a girl he was staying with
ran out on him.
In Philly, Riordan meets with Lieutenant Sam Lubinsky (Levene) and we
see through flashbacks the biography of Swede, as Sam is not only the
cop who pinched him, so that Swede had to serve 3-years for a robbery,
but grew up with him and was always friendly with the fighter who fought
his last fight because he broke his right hand, he even married the girl
(Virginia) that Swede left. After Swede quit fighting, he got involved
with the wrong crowd and fell in love with the film's femme fatale,
Kitty Collins (Ava), even though he knew she was the girl of a gangster
called Big Jim Colfax (Dekker).
The film trails Swede's downfall and traces it to Kitty, who
double-crosses him after a  big-time heist Swede gets involved with, in
a gang put together by Colfax. It is through Riordan's insistence to get
to the bottom of the mystery, that we learn how the air went out of
Swede, and why he didn't care what happened to him anymore.
For Riordan, he gets to see justice done, but the tragedy that happened
to Swede is a personal matter and not society's fault -- of him
foolishly putting his trust in a beautiful woman who was rotten to the
core. The film is more or less a pessimistic reaction to the post-war
period and of the greed and lust that blinded those who typify the kind
of characters who dwell in the noir world, a place where corruption is
the norm. It should also be noted that Miklos Rozsa's musical score was
later used by Dragnet.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Koller
"The Killers" is a crime drama and mystery that is
interesting and watchable.  However, the movie is
filled with tough guy characters that have no depth
and do not always come across as credible.
Burt Lancaster stars as the Swede, a washed-up
boxer who has turned to crime.  He meets femme
fatale Kitty (Ava Gardner) who further ruins his life
by sending him to prison.  Once freed, he participates
in a heist and double crosses his partners, leading
to his murder at the hands of contract killers.
These contract killers, shown at the film's beginning,
are simply not believable.  They are waiting for
Lancaster to show at a diner.  They sure keep a high
profile however, badgering the staff and customers,
when in real life they would likely wait outside in
a car.
After the hit has taken place, the local police
are incredibly indifferent, not bothering with the case.
It is up to Lancaster's life insurance company to
investigate.  This is a common theme to other 1940s
crime dramas ("Double Indemnity" comes to mind)
but in this case it is especially difficult to accept,
as the killers also threatened and tied up people
at the diner.
The film has no less than two "dying criminal confesses"
scenes.  In the first scene, the incoherent, unconscious
man just happens to mumble the exact information that
the insurance agent (Edmond O'Brien) wants to know, just at 
the time he has arrived at bedside.  The second scene
has Gardner screaming at the dying man "Kitty is innocent!"
over and over.  Show some respect for the dead, Ava.
I guess in a crime drama, both bad guys and good guys
have to be tough guys.  But with no one showing any emotion
and always wearing their poker faces, the characters become
caricatures.  Lancaster is an exception, performing his 
lovesick palooka role quite well.
Despite its weaknesses, "The Killers" is mildly entertaining.
But it does not live up to its reputation as a film nwah,
oops noir, classic.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
