Title
Review for Dave (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The basic concept of the plot is an old and familiar one.  A commoner
looks just like a famous person and suddenly finds he must replace that
person.  Coming up with examples is almost a trivia game itself: THE PRINCE
AND THE PAUPER, THE PRISONER OF ZENDA, Robert Heinlein's DOUBLE STAR,
KAGEMUSHA, MOON OVER PARADOR.  If you want to press the point, there's also
RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE and SOMMERSBY.  The underrated science fiction film
QUEST FOR LOVE treats some of the problems of standing in as realistically
as many films more grounded in reality.  Many of the recent body-switch
films also treat the subject.  Of course, to make one of these stories
believable the writer has to come up with some contrivance as to why the
shape of the ear does not give the imposter away.  As Sherlock Holmes
correctly points out, the shape of an ear is as unique as a fingerprint.
Certainly somebody photographed as often as the President of the United
States is could not long be replaced by an imposter.  However, that is the
premise of DAVE.
     Dave Kovic (played by Kevin Kline) is an exact look-alike for President
Bill Mitchell (played by guess who?).  Dave runs a small temporary
employment office and occasionally picks up dollars impersonating the
President doing things like riding a pig at places like local car
dealerships.  Then one day the Secret Service shows up in Dave's living room
asking Dave to impersonate the President at a social function.  (Even this
seems very implausible in a world where one wrong comment can ruin a
politician's career.) The President is needed elsewhere.  The elsewhere is
an illicit tryst with one of his aides, and unfortunately the President
suffers a massive stroke.  At the urging of two aides (played by Frank
Langella and Kevin Dunn), Dave agrees to continue his role as the President.
     Dave quickly finds out that President Mitchell was nobody to admire.  A
small group of people are running the Presidency for power and greed.
Finding that the First Lady (played by Sigourney Weaver) detests the
President, Kovic decides to change policies.
     Perhaps the biggest surprise of DAVE is the performance of Frank
Langella.  Getting past the age when he can play dashing roles such as Zorro
and Dracula, he is turning to acting.  In a bleached crewcut he quietly
steals scenes from Kline and Weaver.  He has learned  the difference between
acting hammy and having an expressive face.  Like Frederic March before him,
he has made the transition from depending on his good looks to having an
expressive face that is a study in itself.  It seems even director Ivan
Reitman underrates the power of Langella's acting.  In one notable scene
Reitman has the camera focused on Kline in the foreground.  He then sets the
focus deeper to pick up a reaction from Langella in the background, then
again focuses on Kline to give him the viewer's attention.  But once the
viewer's eye is on Langella it stays on Langella through the scene, even
though he is now out of focus.  Reitman has underrated the interest and
magnetism of Langella's expression.  Kline plays his usual amiable self.
Weaver does what she can with a role that gives her very little to do until
late in the film.
     DAVE is a light, pleasant film in the style of Frank Capra that may be
a bit politically simplistic.  The view that there is corruption in high
places is undoubtedly true, but the view that a simple non-politician using
intuition could do better than an elected President is questionable.  There
is some hypocrisy in this populist pseudo-President who wants programs that
will increase Federal spending but who at the same time cheats on his own
taxes--a rather wry touch in Gary Ross's script.
     Still, it is fun to see over two dozen celebrities and commentators on
government affairs commenting on this new President.  The most enjoyable
cameo features Oliver Stone.  And one more nice touch: Kline's rendition of
the song "Tomorrow" from "Annie" is the first time I could ever make out all
the words.
     While not startingly original, DAVE is fun and well-made.  I give it a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kevin Kline, Sigourney Weaver, Frank Langella, Kevin Dunn, 
           Ving Rhames, Ben Kingsley
Director:  Ivan Reitman
Producers:  Lauren Shuler-Donner and Ivan Reitman
Screenplay:  Gary Ross
Music:  James Newton-Howard
Released by Warner Brothers
     Bill Mitchell (Kevin Kline) is the forty-forth President of the
United States.  On a night when he wants to engage in an
away-from-the-office fling with one of his female assistants, he
arranges for Dave (also played by Kevin Kline), his virtual double, to
impersonate him.  Unfortunately, during the course of his night of
passion, the President has a massive stroke that leaves him in a coma.
Two of his aides (Frank Langella and Kevin Dunn), unwilling to give up
the power they have amassed during Mitchell's term, persuade Dave to
stay on and continue his masquerade for an undetermined period of
time.  He agrees and his subsequent performance is good enough to fool
even the First Lady (Sigourney Weaver).  Problems begin, however, when
Dave starts to act like a leader--and a compassionate one at
that--instead of the puppet that his Chief of Staff wants him to be.
     As far as Hollywood is concerned, Ivan Reitman has the Midas
Touch.  Not only do his films deliver big laughs to the audience, but
they bring in lots of money to the production companies.  His string of
hits is impressive, including such titles as ANIMAL HOUSE (which he
produced but did not direct), GHOSTBUSTERS I and II (produced and
directed), TWINS (produced and directed), and KINDERGARTEN COP
(produced and directed).  He was also responsible for last years
profitable-but-moronic animal film BEETHOVEN.
     DAVE is a departure for Reitman.  The comedy of this film takes a
more adult path than anything he's done in the past.  Nevertheless,
DAVE is proof that predictable movies with only a marginally original
premise can still be tremendous fun.  Reitman, along with screenwriter
Gary Ross (BIG), have fashioned a highly-enjoyable, fresh, and
energetic motion picture that even the most hard-bitten cynic would be
hard-pressed to condemn.  DAVE isn't just a good movie; it's an
excellent one.
     For the most part, the comedy in DAVE works, due in part to the
performances of a cast of veterans.  Kevin Kline shows a marvelous
sense of comic timing and delivery, Sigourney Weaver does a good job
playing her role straight, Frank Langella is perfectly over-the-top as
the "frothing at the mouth" villain, and Ving Rhames delivers a deadpan
performance as a no-nonsense Secret Service Agent.
     There's time for a political message or two, but these are all
kept low-key and never allowed to interfere with the pacing of the
film.  DAVE is first and foremost a comedy, and drama is only allowed
to interfere on those rare occasions when it's absolutely needed.
     The list of cameos for this film range from Arnold Schwarzenegger
to Tip O'Neil, with about three dozen Washington insiders, celebrities,
and Senators in between.  What THE PLAYER did for Hollywood, DAVE does
for America's capital.  Larry King and Jay Leno have appearances, and
Oliver Stone gets to poke fun at his image by pontificating about a
conspiracy he senses to be brewing at the summit of the United States'
governmental pyramid.
     DAVE is a film that is so well-crafted that its obvious
shortcomings are easily overlooked.  Likeability overcomes
originality.  This isn't a movie where we want a twisty, complex plot
filled with unexpected revelations.  The familiar territory of DAVE's
story is perfect for the subject matter.  Just a shade away from
following a formula, the film is comfortable without ever being dull.
DAVE is pure, unfettered entertainment--something that's been
all-too-rare on movie screens thus far in 1993.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
cher@ksr.com (Mike Cherepov)

Author
Frank Maloney
     DAVE is a film directed by Ivan Reitman and written by Gary Ross.
The cast includes Kevin Kline, Sigourney Weaver, Ben Kingsley, Frank
Langella, Charles Grodin, and Ving Rhames.  Rated PG-13 for language
and sexual situations.
     Trivial first things first: Kevin Kline does a nude scene;
Sigourney Weaver does not.  And a cute one it is.  Secondly, some of
you are going to be having a lot of fun spotting the many "as himself
or herself" cameos by political and media celebrities.  There's a
pretty good list of them in the closing credits and when you go back
for a second or third viewing, you'll get another chance to add to your
Life Life.
     And the chances are you will be going back.  DAVE is a very
watchable movie with a heart of gold, a popular and needed message, a
gentle, affirming satire, and many engaging, even endearing
performances.
     There is Frank Langella as the corrupt and corrupting presidential
chief of staff.  Langella has developed the art of the villain to a
fine point.  Charles Grodin makes this his best performance in years as
Dave's slightly bug-eyed, slightly long-suffering pushover pal and
small businessman.  Ben Kingsley is perhaps a shade too noble, a touch
too wooden as the incorruptible vice-president.  Ving Rhames as the
head of the presidential security detail slowly unbends and opens up,
turning into a really lovable guy who turns in a one-line, slightly
oblique declaration of male friendship that in the context is rather
sweet; otherwise, his is a nicely paced comic performance that depends
on minimalist gestures and looks and is admirably, but subtly
masterful.
     Sigourney Weaver plays the First Lady, alienated from her husband
for good reasons but hanging in there to do some good for her favorite
cause.  Weaver proves that she can be strong and likable and still
have a very expensive haircut.
     And finally, of the actors, we come to Kevin Kline, whose
versatility and presence I've admired since A FISH CALLED WANDA (even
though he was in several earlier films, I failed to pick up on him
until then).  Kline brings so much energy and enthusiasm and charm to
his role of the ultimate impersonator.  A question the film asks in its
non-preaching way is who is greater impersonator, Dave or the President
he steps in for.  Kline is a perfectionist, a detail-oriented actor.
In this dual role he has to look like two different men who just happen
to have identical features.  The way their different personalities
inform and shape those features makes them recognizable to us and a
kind of challenge that might be a nightmare for another actor.
     The film benefits not only from having a first-rate cast but also
Ivan Reitman as director and Gary Ross as writer.  Reitman, who has
directed GHOSTBUSTERS and TWINS, is at his best in his particular style
of breezy gags, convincing production values, and a common-person's
moral center.  This is a worthy successor to the Capra tradition, a
kind of KEVIN KLINE GOES TO WASHINGTON.  Its vision and its ideals are
simple and, I fear, simplistic, but they add up to a heart-warming
fantasy about honesty and common-sense fixing the complex problems of
the day.  Maybe not, after all it's been a while since we tried honesty
and commonsense.  And along the way Ross has given us a lot of very
funny gags, a story that offers surprises and few holes, and lots and
lots of laughs.
