Title
Review for Hundred Percent (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Sunga
Synopsis/Opinion:
As I write this first draft, I'm sitting in a small auditorium at the
Art Institute Film Center in Chicago, scribbling my notes on a piece of
newspaper. An event called the Third Annual Chicago Asian American
Showcase is taking place. Right now actor Garrett Wang (from STAR TREK:
VOYAGER) is on stage, as is director Eric Koyanagi, some producers, and
the cinematographer. The men all seem to be cordial, laid back
professionals. They're here to field questions on HUNDRED PERCENT, the
new movie written and directed by Koyanagi which has just been shown. At
this time HUNDRED PERCENT has not yet been widely released, but it has
opened to enthusiastic responses at a Harvard test screening as well as
here in Chicago.
I saw the movie. HUNDRED PERCENT is one of those slice-of-life movies,
the kind that usually have names like MYSTIC PIZZA, the film about three
gal waitresses in a pizza parlor in Connecticut, and a two-season slice
of the girls' romance lives. HUNDRED PERCENT is a little like that,
except it's three Asian American guys in Venice Beach, and not
necessarily romance.
Actually HUNDRED PERCENT is three stories in one, an independent film
done up as a PULP FICTION-like collage of interwoven mini-episodes. In
the opening scene, a Star Trek debate in the middle of a dominoes game
involving the three Southern California guys quickly turns into a
flashback review of their recent experiences. Each man is a
twenty-something Asian American. Isaac (Dustin Nguyen) is an average Joe
who works behind the counter of a coffee bar. Isaac's story is a
romance: he meets and falls in love with a mysterious sexy woman dressed
in black (Tamlyn Tomita) who's on the run from a guy with a gun. Slim
(Darion Basco) is a dreadlock-wearing wannabe rasta man who is supposed
to take good care of a vicious gangster's favorite car, but is afraid of
what might happen when he must face the gangster to tell him the car is
missing. Troy (Garrett Wang) is an aspiring actor who finds that he
doesn't agree with the racist caricatures he is forced to play. He must
decide whether to kiss butt or give up his dream.
I felt a little peculiar after watching HUNDRED PERCENT, because I knew
the movie had made a statement, but I couldn't quite put my finger on
what statement had been made. The answer was both obvious and hidden at
the same time, because I was looking for a statement made by the plot,
but the statement was made by the movie itself. 
Let me explain. In Hollywood, Asian American actors get short shrift.
With few exceptions, there are really only three types of roles Asian
Americans ever get: the nerdy studious geek, the kung fu man, or the
jabbering guy with a funny, unintelligible accent. And any national
'racial' debate is always silent on Asian Americans: even Tiger Woods
and Andrew Cunanan are not portrayed as Asian Americans. Let's face it:
70% of the roles offered to Asian Americans in 1998 are hackneyed
stereotypes. So the odd thing about HUNDRED PERCENT is that it's chock
full of Asian American actors and actresses who go about playing their
roles as if it's entirely normal for them to go about playing their
roles. I find this to be a very profound, even revolutionary message, as
well as the reason why one of the mini-stories involves an Asian
American actor making tough choices, and why the ending involves a
fortune cookie message for the three Asian Americans.
Getting back to the film, the cinematography in HUNDRED PERCENT is
interesting in that it's filmed wider than most normal films, giving the
Venice Beach setting a quaint, yet larger than life feel. HUNDRED
PERCENT also sports an all star cast. You may recognize Nguyen from 21
JUMPSTREET, Tomita from THE JOY LUCK CLUB, and Troy's girlfriend
Cleveland (Lindsay Price) from THE BOLD AND THE BEAUTIFUL. Two of the
plots have unexpected endings, and the romance has a typical ending, but
Dustin Nguyen sparkles in his role as romantic lead.
