Title
Review for Live Nude Girls Unite! (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
First things first – Live Nude Girls Unite! isn't a sequel to Live Nude
Girls, the 1995 sex comedy with Kim Cattrall and Dana Delany (thank
God).  Unite! is actually a documentary about a struggling lesbian
stand-up comedian who becomes a peep show dancer to make ends meet.
While the film starts out as a goofy demonstration of women using their
`feminine powers' (read: stripping for men) to get ahead in life, the
film quickly focuses on the strippers from a small San Francisco parlor
who launch a six-moth battle to become the first unionized strip club in
the country.
Julia Query (her stage name) moved from New York City to San Francisco
at 27 to become a writer and a comedian, but quickly found that it just
wasn't paying the bills.  She needed a job that paid well but had
flexible hours, and found it at the Lusty Lady Theatre.  Sure, Julia
could have made more money if she performed in stage shows or gave lap
dances at other clubs, but she couldn't dance (luckily, there's a pole
for her to hold on to at the peep show).  And the Lusty Lady was run by
woman managers, so it seemed like a perfect fit for the daughter of a
Jewish doctor well known as an activist for safe prostitution in New
York.
Before long, however, Julia found out that the club wasn't all it was
cracked up to be.  The management discriminated against, among other
things, race, age and hair color.  There was no sick pay and no health
insurance, and missing a shift usually resulted in termination.  There
was a growing concern that the dancers were being filmed by patrons
through one-way mirrors in each private booth.  In general, the girls
were getting paid less and less to do more and more, and there was an
increased sense of danger to boot.
At the mere mention of the word `union,' the club's management hired
anti-union lawyers to break up the possibility of the dancers banding
together.  Unite! follows the trials and tribulations of the lengthy
battle to unionize the club's strippers.  There's also an interesting
subplot, where Julia tries to hide her stripping (and lesbianism) from
her distinguished mother.
Co-directed by Query and Vicky Funari, Unite! is a film that would make
Michael Moore proud.  It effectively blends serious subject matter with
a deft comedic edge.  There's something very funny about seeing a wall
of time cards with names like Velvette, Ginger, Sapphire and Isis, not
to mention hearing the strippers chant, `Two, four, six, eight – don't
go in to masturbate' while picketing the club.
1:10 – Not Rated but contains nudity and adult language

Author
Steve Rhodes
Some people spend time thinking about unions.  A lot of people spend 
time thinking about sex.  Very few of us combine these thoughts, but 
directors Vicky Funari (PAULINA) and Julia Query do in their fascinating 
peek into the labor struggles of a group of sex workers, a.k.a. 
strippers, at by-the-quarter peep shows.  LIVE NUDE GIRLS UNITE! tells 
the inside story of the well publicized organizing effort by the sex 
workers at the Lusty Lady in San Francisco, which, we are told, has 
mainly female owners and managers.  
Julia Query, a stripper as well as the co-director, is one of the 
documentary's central characters.  A writer and stand-up comic, she was 
a "professional dominatrix" prior to becoming a stripper.  As the story 
opens, a girl, representing the younger Julia, draws in a coloring book 
about Dr. Martin Luther King.  Julia fancies herself as a major activist 
for justice like her mother, a doctor who has dedicated her career to 
the betterment of the lives of prostitutes through proper health care.  
(Her mother hates the idea of her daughter being a sex worker, and the 
scene in which she first tells her mother about her job is quite 
dramatic.)
The documentary features lots of full frontal nudity, as would be 
expected.  This could be criticized in that it does raise the 
titillation factor, but, without it, it would be hard to imagine exactly 
what goes on behind the glass curtain.  Basically, the women work in a 
large tank, dancing and cavorting while men on the other side of the 
glass perform solo sex in little booths.  Yes, it is as sleazy as it 
sounds.  The women, however, are frequently mothers and college 
graduates who look upon their time dancing together as something between 
a girl's slumber party and a grueling day of hard physical labor.
What motivated the workers to be the first in their industry to organize 
were the working conditions.  At the top of their complaint list was the 
treatment of sickness.  Most companies allow sick workers to stay at 
home, but not the Lusty Lady, which is typical according to the film.  
If sick, a woman could have her salary cut and even be fired.  To avoid 
such penalties, a woman was required to find a replacement who had 
breasts at least as large as hers and skin at least as white.  A 
secondary issue for them was scheduling based on race, since management 
believed that the men preferred blonde Caucasians.  Their reasoning was 
that blonde Caucasians were by far and away the most popular choice for 
porn video sales.
Once the workers go on strike, they think up some of the funniest 
slogans and chants you can imagine to popularize their cause.  Most, 
however, are unprintable.  One that is printable appeared on a button: 
"Bad Girls Like Good Contracts."  They also had one of the more unusual 
job actions in the history of labor fights.  They tried keeping their 
legs closed while dancing in order to discourage the patrons.
The last third of the movie concerns the offers and counteroffers during 
the negotiations between union and management.  It is intriguing but 
covers more traditional material.  The only questionable choice the 
documentarians made was to include some simple cartoon figures to 
illustrate some of their points.  They are funny and cute, but the women 
themselves are more interesting.
When asked to summarize her job as a stripper, one of them says simply, 
"boring!"  This is something that could never be said of LIVE NUDE GIRLS 
UNITE!, a mesmerizing examination of a world that most of us have never 
seen and never will.  The film also provides your one opportunity to say 
to someone, the ticket seller in this case, "I'd like Live Nude Girls, 
please."
LIVE NUDE GIRLS UNITE! runs a fast 1:20.  It is not rated by the MPAA 
but would be rated NC-17 for graphic nudity and strong language.  It 
would be acceptable for college students.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
