Title
Review for Kadosh (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

KADOSH (director/writer: Amos Gitai; screenwriter: Eliette Abecassis;
cinematographer: Renato Berta; editors: Monica Coleman/Kobi Netanel;
cast: Yael Abecassis (Rivka), Yoram Hattab (Meir), Meital Barda (Malka),
Sami Hori (Yaakov), Lea Koenig (Elisheva), Uri Ran-Klausner (Yossef),
Yussef Abu Warda (Rav Shimon); Runtime: 116; 1999-Israel/Fr.)
Kadosh means sacred in Hebrew. Amos Gitai's fictional work, after
spending most of his career doing documentaries, is a grim story about a
failed Hasidic marriage, even though the marriage is a loving one. The
marriage will symbolize the clash of cultures in modern Israel between
the native Israeli's modern viewpoint toward religion and the political
savvy Hasidic's intolerable one, as both groups are vying for control of
the secular government. Gitai (Devarim/Yom Yom) is a Labor party
leftist, who believes that if the rigid Hasidic ever got control of the
government, it would sound the death knell of Israel.
The emphasis of the film is on how the ultra-Orthodox Jews of that sect
live by the letter of the Torah in everything they do and how they
subjugate the women to accept their vision of God's law from only the
male's view. That if they ever got control of the country, their
intolerant attitude would subjugate the country the same way the women
are.
The story takes place in Jerusalem's Jewish quarters called Mea Shearim,
where we are taken down sinewy back streets with placards pasted on the
walls, and into the crowded apartments and prayer rooms where the
protagonists live out their idea of the proper Jewish life, which is
much different than the way most Jews live in Israel. This is a
controversial film, in that the women are unhappy and the male attitudes
are to such an extreme patriarchal ones, that the film is bound to anger
most viewers, no matter their belief.
It is a slow-moving, meticulous film, that grabs hold of you by the
collar and never lets go. The force of what is seen, though filmed in an
objective manner, never taking a cheap shot at the Hasidim, is
nevertheless bound to leave questions about the nature of such a
practice of strict observance. The film is meant to be critical of such
a rigid people, as it implies how they kill the spirit of everything
they touch and with their extreme phobic attitudes, it makes it
impossible for them to unite the country when they can't at present live
in harmony with their own people, and it would be even more impossible
to imagine them living with their Arab neighbors in peace.
The film opens as Meir rises at dawn and goes through his prayer ritual,
where every prayer is made to the virtues of God. He even thanks God
that he didn't make him a woman. His wife Rivka accepts the fate she was
born into and looks at him from the next bed where she sleeps separately
according to Hasidic custom. She looks at him with glistening eyes, not
questioning the laws or rebelling against her secondary role and how her
religion keeps her from studying the Talmud and having all the modern
conveniences of life, and from seeing movies and TV. Meir is a Talmudic
scholar. His father (Abu Warda) is a rabbi at the yeshiva. He has been
married for ten years and his wife has not been able to give him a
child. Since the Hasidim look upon a woman's role in life being only to
conceive children, and cook and clean house for the man, while the man's
role is to spend his time in prayer, therefore there is an
insurmountable problem in this otherwise loving marriage. She receives
an anonymous letter that states "A woman without a child is no better
than dead." Meir's response, is that it is written like that in the
Talmud. Meir's father tells him that the marriage contract must be
broken: "A man who dies without progeny rips a page from the Torah." All
the blame is placed on Rivka, who is thought of as unpure as the reason
for her being barren. She will go through countless ritual baths to
cleanse herself, as her rigid mother (Koenig) dunks her in the holy
water and says a ritual prayer for the 12 times she is dunked as an
homage to the 12 tribes of Israel. Their religion doesn't permit them to
be examined extensively by a doctor. Rivka goes on the sly and finds out
that it is her husband who is sterile, but she cannot tell him that
because of their religion. So when Meir's father chooses a younger woman
for his son, she is exiled to live alone in a cold apartment in the same
Jewish quarters.
Rivka's spirited younger sister Malka does not want to get married but
wants to live a more liberated life. She has a long time romantic
relationship with a fellow Hasidic Yaakov. But, because of the way they
were both raised, she is still a virgin. When Yaakov joined the Israeli
Army to fight in Lebanon, something his sect is not allowed to do, he is
thereby banished from the sect even though he is still a believer. He
now works as a singer in a nightclub.
Malka's mother is worried that her daughter won't get married, so she
arranges with the rabbi for her to marry Yossef, someone whom she
doesn't love. Yossef is a very stern follower of the order, he is also a
political activist who drives around the city in a sound-truck with a
bull-horn urging Jews to stick together and fight their godless enemies.
The two sisters are close and languidly discuss their options, with
Rivka telling her sister to accept the marriage, it will make her happy;
but, while Malka is reluctantly forced into accepting it, she has other
plans to ruin this bogus marriage.
The harshest scene in the film is on Malka's wedding night. Yossef prays
to God for a child and then robotically gets Malka to spread her legs,
and without the least bit of affection, only a nervousness shown on his
part for the function he supplies, as he goes inside her and rams her
hard, thrusting away until the act is completed and then retiring
without a word or gesture of love.
The sisters have choices, like everyone else in life does. But the
choices are obliterated by one's beliefs, circumstances, and inward
nature, and how difficult it is to carry out those choices if it goes
completely against the way one is brought up. For the sisters, the
choices are life or death ones. Gitai by closing in on the daily
rituals, tight living quarters and close-knit community, has shown how
difficult these choices are for those who have never seen another world
and have been kept in the dark all their life. The film ends with the
forlorn Malka walking atop of Jerusalem and looking down upon it as an
outsider would, and everything seems strange to her, all the things she
once thought of as being set in stone are now harsh memories, as she has
made her choice, and the price of that choice is very heavy indeed.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Louis Proyect
"Kadosh," a hard-hitting feminist polemic, revolves around the tangled
sexual politics of three men and two women in an ultra-Orthodox Jewish
sect in Jerusalem.
Meir, a Talmudic scholar, and his wife Rivka have been married for ten
years but have not been able to produce children, no matter how many
prayers are recited or how many ritual baths Rivka takes to rid
herself of "uncleanness." In the opening scene, Meir rises from his
bed and goes through an elaborate series of prayers culminating in
thanks to the Almighty that he was not born a female. The prayers are
conducted while he wraps the leather thongs of the 'tfilin' around his
arm, which altogether gives the appearance of a junky preparing for a
fix. Instead of searching for a vein, Meir seems intent on mainlining
God.
Rivka's younger sister Malka is in love with Jacov, but can not marry
him. He has joined the Israeli army in defiance of the sect's ban on
serving in the military. He is still deeply religious but is regarded
as a renegade by the rest of the sect, who view any departure from the
rigid code of conduct as evidence of godlessness.
Symbolizing this rigidity in the most dramatic fashion is Yossef, who
attends the same Talmud school as Meir. When we first see the two men
together, they launch into an extended disputation over whether it is
more observant to put sugar into hot water when making tea on the
Sabbath or vice versa. It turns out that the water should be poured
over the tea and the sugar so as to preclude the possibility that the
act amounts to cooking. Yossef is the sect firebrand and drives around
in sound-truck during the week urging Jews to "close ranks" against
their godless enemies, which includes both turncoats like Jacov and
all Arabs.
Their rabbi has instructed Malka to break off with Jacov and marry
Yossef. In a truly riveting but repulsive scene, Malka and Yossef are
shown in bed on their wedding night. He first reads a prayer that is
supposed to heighten the chances of procreation and then coldly
instructs Malka to spread her legs. Without any foreplay, he mounts
her like a ram and thrusts violently until he has climaxed.
Meanwhile, the rabbi has also instructed Meir to end his marriage with
Rivka. The fact that she has not been able to conceive is regarded as
a sin by the close-knit community and it is time for him to live up to
his responsibility as a Jew. In their world, men are brought into the
world to study the Talmud and women are there to support them. This
means first of all procreating and secondly to cook and to keep the
house clean.
Regarded by Time Magazine critic Richard Corliss as the greatest film
ever made in Israel, "Kadosh" is director Amos Gitai's attempt to come
to terms with what many secular Jews in Israel regard as a threat to
their existence. The ultra-Orthodox Jews are a tightly-organized
political faction that pressures Israel from the right. From the
standpoint of Gitai, a left-wing Jew whose grandparents came to
Palestine in the early part of the century as Labor Zionists, their
orthodox cousins are an uncomfortable reminder of where they came
from. While tokens of a backward and insular past are considered
hindrances to civil society in the Israeli present, the more important
question that the film-maker and most secular Jews are not prepared to
confront revolves around their future. In truth it is very likely that
within 25 years the only "true", i.e. observant, Jews will be the
ultra-Orthodox.
The ultra-Orthodox sects, also known as the Hasidim, originated in
18th and 19th century Poland and Russia in a time of great economic
stress and persecution. Marxist historian Ilan Halevi explains their
origins in his "Question Juive":
"The internal crisis of the Shtetl, whose roots are to be found in the
crisis of Polish feudalism, was exacerbated and radically aggravated.
The domain of Polish sovereignty was shrinking rapidly. A kingdom that
had stretched from the Baltic to the Black Sea grew smaller and
smaller as around it tsarist Russia, the Hapsburg empire and the
German states grew larger and larger. The Polish question became the
European question and centuries-old Polish Jewry saw its territory
carved up among several states Austria, which took Galicia, lightened
the conditions of Jews there: but Russia, having seized the Ukraine
and Byelorussia, oppressed them there, said Lenin, 'more harshly than
the Negroes'. The Napoleonic conquest, short as it may have been,
precipitated the disintegration, inducing a general upheaval in the
empires of the centre and east. Following the French occupation, the
whole map of the region was transformed. The new frontier of Austria
and Russia, which shared the whole of what remained of Poland in 1815,
cut the Ashkenazi world in two, divided the dynasties of Hasidic
rabbis, and determined new sub-problematics. The sociological unity of
Ashkenazi Judaism was beginning to fracture."
Against this pattern of disintegration, the Hasidic rabbis created
cults based on three key elements that were supposed to function as
life-rafts:
--Strict observance of rituals, particularly those involved with
"cleanness"
--Reverence for the rabbi, who in most instances were seen as a
potential Messiah
--Fervent recitation of prayers, dancing and singing meant to induce
mystical states
For some secular Jews, and even some non-Jews, this last element has
served to bring them into the fold. For instance, Bob Dylan drew close
to the Lubavitcher Hasidic sect in the 1980s. He swapped these beliefs
for Christian fundamentalism not too soon afterwards.
The Lubavitcher sect occupies a place in NYC politics not unlike the
sect depicted in "Kadosh" with the blacks of Brooklyn standing in for
the unfortunate Arabs. The Lubavitchers have used political clout to
gain preferential treatment to gain access to subsidized housing in a
neighborhood where it is in short supply. Such tensions provided the
backdrop for the riots that broke out during the Dinkins
administration when the lead car of a Hasidic caravan struck and
killed a black child. A Hasidic scholar Yankel Rosenbaum, identical to
the film's characters, was stabbed during the violence and Dinkins was
blamed for his death. The Hasidic community then delivered their votes
to the "law-and-order" candidate Rudy Giuliani who has done everything
possible to intimidate the black community, just the way that the
current Labor government in Israel is using every means at its
disposal to intimidate Arabs.
The contradictions of late capitalism are acting on worldwide Jewry in
a manner that few Marxists--in my opinion--have fully understood.
Social and economic processes are in motion that tend to create three
distinct "peoples". One is the ultra-Orthodox sect depicted in the
film. The second is the Israeli "Sabras", the native-born, largely
secular, Jews who retain many of the values of any colonizing people
like the Afrikaners. The third are the largely assimilated and secular
Jews outside Israel who in a generation or two will retain nothing
distinctly Jewish except perhaps their family name. The unique racial
politics of worldwide Jewry will be forced to define itself in terms
of how these various groups relate to worldwide capitalism and the
oppressed Arab and Palestinian peoples. Political polarization will
generate at least in some cases a radical response that the film
"Kadosh" hints at. It is a positive sign that the film criticizes some
of the most backward elements of Israel society and at least points
the way toward a deepening critique of that society, including its
secular but racist elements. 
