Title
Review for Time Bandits (1981)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David Dalgleish
        TIME BANDITS is the first film in Terry Gilliam's "trilogy" about
childhood, adulthood, and old age.  It is a fantasy, and like the two later
films, it is also about fantasy--it explores the relationship between
reality and dreams, illusion, escapism.  While BRAZIL chillingly showed the
failure of imagination, and THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN its triumph,
TIME BANDITS is more ambiguous: both the fantastic and the mundane in some
way disappoint the story's hero.
        TIME BANDITS shares the pessimism of the other two films: reality
is not much fun, and that is why we need fantasies.  Kevin (Craig Warnock),
an adolescent boy, lives a stultifying life with his parents, who are
obsessed with technology and routine, and spend their evenings watching
awful TV shows.  His room, wallpapered with posters, littered with toys, is
his place of escape--literally so, when a troupe of time-travelling dwarves
stumble out of his closet one night and whisk him away on a series of
temporal adventures.
        They visit the siege of Castileone, Sherwood Forest, the Titanic,
Mycenae, and the Fortress of Ultimate Darkness, all with the aid of a map
they have stolen from the Supreme Being, showing the location of various
"timeholes."  The dwarves were in fact formerly in the employ of the
Supreme Being--they helped build the world, although because it was done in
only seven days, it's a "botched job"--and were given the map so they could
repair various oversights in the construction of reality.  Fed up with
their servitude, they chose instead to wander the ages and steal from the
rich (giving to the poor is not part of the plan, however, until they meet
Robin Hood, drolly played by John Cleese).
        Naturally, this plot offers plentiful opportunites for Gilliam's
fertile imagination to run wild, and there are some delightful sequences:
the band's arrival in Castileone is marvellously staged, as is their escape
from a cage hanging over a pit of ultimate darkness.  This is, in effect,
the first recognisable Terry Gilliam movie (the feeble JABBERWOCKY was
presumably directed by his evil twin), and while he is not yet in complete
command of the medium, the signs of his later accomplishments are evident.
The problems with TIME BANDITS--and there are many--are on the level of the
script.
        While the humour is probably fine for kids, the jokes in TIME
BANDITS are mostly poor by adult standards, even the ones thrown in
specifically for a mature audience.  Gilliam demonstrates a gift for both
satire and whimsy in his later films, but comedy is not his strong point;
even with Michael Palin as co-writer, the script never approaches the manic
comic brilliance of "Monty Python's Flying Circus."  And the episodic plot
suffers from its arbitrariness: the various sequences, while each effective
on its own, do not add up to much because there is no dramatic impetus.
With minimal tinkering, the plot could be re-written so that the episodes
occur in any order.
        The finale, however, rescues the movie.  It is no surprise that it
builds to a climactic sequence in the Fortress of Ultimate Darkness, a
showdown with the Evil Genius (Satan) created by the Supreme Being (God).
The outcome, however, is surprising: in its own way it is as disturbing as
the ending of BRAZIL.  This is not a happy, feel-good kids' movie.  There
is whimsy, there is silliness, but the underlying tone is grave, and the
movie's examination of free will and the relationship between good and evil
is quite sobering, particularly for adults.
        Gilliam does not cop to a cheap explanation of the events in TIME
BANDITS--it is not all just a dream--nor does he allow us any comfort from
those events.  What Kevin experiences is, for him, real, and because
reality is not much fun, the escapism offered by the dwarves and their map
proves to be much less fun than he expected.  In this movie, fantasy offers
lessons that are, if anything, harsher than the lessons of real life.
That, however, is an adult perspective; younger viewers will probably
remember the giant who wears a ship as a hat, Napoleon's appreciation for
Punch and Judy shows, and an ogre named Winston.  After all, one of the
points TIME BANDITS makes is that fantasies are more than adequate--until
you start to grow up.
        Review by David Dalgleish (subjective.freeservers.com) -- January
16th, 2000

Author
Kevin Patterson
Terry Gilliam's "Time Bandits" was promoted as a children's movie when it was
released, and it's easy to see from a marketing standpoint why this was done.
The main character (Craig Warnock) is a child, and the story revolves around
his fantastic adventures with a group of six mischievous "time bandits" -
former servants of the Supreme Being who have used their knowledge of space
and time to travel to various periods of history and steal valuable artifacts.
Along the way they encounter Robin Hood (John Cleese), Agamemnon (Sean
Connery), and other famous mythical-historical figures. Gilliam, who got off
the ground career-wise as the animator for Monty Python, puts his visual
sensibilities to good use, creating magnificent alternate worlds that are both
epic and cartoonish at once.
What elevates Gilliam's many cinematic flights of fancy above simple adventure
stories, however, is his insight into the mindset and implications of fantasy,
and "Time Bandits" is no exception. We don't just see the fun, care-free
aspect of these childhood fantasies, but the dark side as well. Some of the
young boy's heroes, for example, are not all they are cracked up to be. Robin
Hood's band of merry men seem to be a rather cynical and mean-spirited bunch,
as they amuse themselves by smacking the poor citizens around after they give
them their handouts. When we meet Agamemnon, he is in the middle of a brutal
fight to the death and seems genuinely regretful at having to cut down his
enemy. And towards the end, when the six bandits are trying to summon up a
portal to another dimension, one of them proclaims, "You just have to
believe!" This is straight out of any kids' adventure movie; yet the bandit's
intention is to transport himself and his companions to a realm ruled by greed
and evil.
"Time Bandits" succeeds at both romanticizing and pointing out the hazards of
childhood fantasies, then, but it ultimately drags on a little too long. The
motley crew's various adventures are completely disconnected from each other,
and not until the end, when they enter the realm of evil and it becomes
Warnock's responsibility to fight for the cause of good, are any of them
possessed of a real sense of urgency. It might also have helped if Gilliam had
been a little clearer about his internal logic, because "Time Bandits" is
thoroughly confusing at times, such as when the young boy's parents disappear
for no definite reason.
All in all, "Time Bandits" is an enjoyable and intelligent film, and a prelude
to later pieces such as "Brazil" and "The Fisher King" that would distinguish
Gilliam as one of the most talented fantasy directors working in modern cinema.
Visit my Film Reviews home page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/home.html

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Craig Warnock (Kevin), David Rappaport (Randall), Kenny Baker
(Fidgit), Malcolm Dixon (Strutter), Mike Edmonds (Og), Jack Purvis
(Wally), Tiny Ross (Vermin), John Cleese (Robin Hood), Sean Connery (King
Agamemnon), Ian Holm (Napoleon), Ralph Richardson (Supreme Being), David
Warner (Evil Genius)
DIRECTOR: Terry Gilliam 
CERTIFICATION: PG (USA) for mild violence
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1980
TIME BANDITS, from Director Terry Gilliam, is a very different fantasy
Action/Adventure movie about a group of time-traveling dwarves, led by
Randall (David Rappaport), who have stolen a map of the Universe.  This
map contains time hole, that, if exploited, enable the men to travel back
and forth through time.  The Supreme Being of the Universe (Ralph
Richardson) is the former employer of these treasure-seeking bandits, and
he wishes desperately to regain the map..  During the travels, he appears
as a ghostly face, demanding that they return the map that they have
stolen.  But, according to Randall, they are just "borrowing" it.
Kevin, a young boy who seems quite bored with his life, is unexpectedly
brought into the schemes of the little men when they appear in his room,
which has a portal for time traveling.  He joins up with the men and
becomes part of their gang, following them on their robberies.  Their
first victim is Napoleon (Ian Holm), whom they rob during a battle that he
is commanding.  From here, the group travels to the Middle Ages, meeting
up with Robin Hood himself.  Eventually, Kevin is separated from the group
and travels to an Egyptian time where he is taken in by King Agamemnon,
played by Sean Connery.  Kevin accidentally saved the King's life, and the
King wishes to have Kevin as his son.  But the group of bandits find Kevin
and transport onto the deck of the Titanic.  Meanwhile, the Evil Genius
(David Warner) is watching the group from Fortress of Ultimate Darkness,
attempting to find a way in order to bring the men, and the map, to him.
When Randall learns of the Fortress of Ultimate Darkness, which supposedly
contains "the most fabulous object in the world", the dollar signs
seemingly appear on his eyes, as he is convinced that they must travel
there.  Once inside the Fortress of Ultimate Darkness, it is unclear as to
if any of the men will make it out alive.
TIME BANDITS is a fantastically made film that caters to the imagination
of anyone.  With a terrific soundtrack, courtesy of George Harrison, whom
also was an Executive Producer, TIME BANDITS is sure to be a very
surrealistic, time-traveling adventure with unforgettable characters that
is sure to entertain anyone.  Terry Gilliam, however, does not utilize
that greatly his trademark ability in moviemaking during this film,
although this does not affect the film that greatly.  And finally, if you
liked LABYRINTH, you'll love TIME BANDITS.

