Title
Review for Mrs. Brown (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MRS. BROWN *** 1/4 (UK, 1997) Directed by John Madden. Written by Jeremy
Brock. Produced by Sarah Curtis. Photography, Richard Greatrex. Editing,
Robin Sales. Production design, Martin Childs. Music, Stephen Warbeck.
Cast: Judi Dench (Queen Victoria), Billy Connolly (John Brown), Geoffrey
Palmer (Sir Henry Ponsonby), Antony Sher (Disraeli), David Westhead
(Bertie, Prince of Wales), et al. A BBC production released by Miramax. 90
minutes. PG.
A made-for-TV American movie is, almost by definition, an inferior product,
although occasionally there are exceptions. In the UK however, films made
by and for the BBC, Channel Four and such, can be, and very often are
first-rate, and also get theatrical release.
Since among the co-producers of "Mrs.Brown"is "Masterpiece Theater," it
will no doubt turn up on PBS, but see it on a theater screen if possible.
Presented as a fascinating docu-drama, it deals with the special, warm
relationship of Queen Victoria (1819-1901) and commoner John Brown. It is
not a love story. The unquestioned love affair was between Victoria and
Albert. She became Queen  at 18, ruling over the Empire where the sun never
set for a record 64 years. In 1840, then not quite 21-years-old, she
married her cousin Albert. He died of what was then diagnosed as typhoid
fever in December 1861, leaving his 42-year old widow and their nine
children.
The Queen' was inconsolable. Her despair was of royal magnitude. The way it
is depicted, she went into total seclusion, feeding on her own misery,
never appearing in public. In her abodes, protocol made everything deadly
dull, stiff and formal and keeps the Queen away from human contacts.
In 1864, her worried, bothered entourage --particularly her Secretary Sir
Henry Ponsonby--had the bright notion of adding John Brown to the Royal
household. John Brown, a burly Highlander talented with horses, who had
been Prince Consort Albert's gillie (personal servant), hunting and riding
companion. Adding Brown to the Royal household was to have Victoria get
some fresh air and exercise.
Brown arrives with the Queen's favorite horse, starts out by committing
gaffes in etiquette: he addresses H.M. without being asked to do so, later
calls her "woman," reacts with cheeky directness. In delightful scenes, he
persuades her to ride (if 2 mph can be called riding). A bond born between
the Queen and the commoner blooms into a genuine rapport that makes the
Queen speak of him as her best friend. To the shock, disapproval and
discomfiture of the household's higher echelons (e.g. Ponsonby), Brown
becomes something like the Queen's factotum. In his gruff-ironic way he
immediately lords it over the servants He addresses the aristocracy without
subservience, the Queen with a gentle familiarity that to bystanders sounds
like criminal "lese-majeste." It is historically true that John Brown was
the only being in the Queen's household who ever spoke to her with
informality.
Dedicated to the Queen's physical health, Brown counsels swimming. This
gives the movie its chance to show the amazing (and for us, funny)
contraption from which bathers get in the water. Dedicated to her mental
health, he even takes her to a peasant cottage where the good cheer makes
Victoria laugh. Eventually his influence helps to make her attend social
functions.
The state of things may be serious but does not lack humor. At the Queen's
ludicrously retinue-laden picnic, stalking, hidden journalists observe
through binoculars. Sniffing them out, John roughhouses and menaces those
pre-paparazzi. He then delivers a dressing down to the staff "for
compromising H.M.'s security."
The Brown affair caused much gossip in its day, and later some unprovable
guesses or assertions by historians. It is shown however with tact and
delicacy, not as an affair but as what the French language, so rich with
terms of sentiments and feelings, calls "amitie amoureuse." This translates
as "loving friendship" but with a very special flavor.
(In support of the theory that there was no physical relationship, that the
Queen had a clean conscience,  is Victoria's project, after John's death,
to write his biography. She was dissuaded not for fear of revelations but
so that the Queen would not demean herself by writing about a servant).
Victoria is given the sobriquet of "Mrs.Brown." Cartoons appear in the
period's ancestors of our tabloids. These, however were far milder than
today's yellow press. The situation worsens by the Queen not appearing in
public, not making herself visible to the masses of her subjects, thus
losing popularity. Her family, Parliament, the country at large are upset.
There was even some talk (simplified in the film) about disestablishing the
monarchy.
Prime Minister Disraeli travels to Balmoral ("600 miles from civilization"
says he), to cajole the Queen and cannily enlist Brown's help against "the
threat posed by Republicanism." There is urgent need for Victoria's
physical presence among the people.  Finally the Queen asks Brown to
resign, which he flatly refuses in an amazing shouting match, in the
presence of others, to boot.
There is also a verbal duel between Albert ("Bertie") Prince of Wales --
the heir to the throne who is not especially liked by his mother -- and
Brown, whom he calls an "arriviste" (go-getter). Says the Prince "Do you
know who you address? " In a delicious invention that doubles as a dig at
today's sad state of grammar, John retorts :"WHOM you address! "
In 1872 the Prince of Wales is dangerously ill with typhoid -- the very
disease that presumably had killed his father ten years before -- but
recovers.  The Queen decrees the giving of thanks at St.Paul's Cathedral.
At long last she is seen by the masses, Riding  in an open carriage (her
stubborn choice against that of prudent statesmen), Victoria  regains her
popularity.
Brown remained the Queen's personal attendant in her travels. On at least
one occasion he saved her from an attempted assassination. He died in 1883.
Victoria continued to reign for another 18 glorious years.
The acting of all is irreproachable, from respected Judi Dench (who does
not look like Victoria) in her first major film-starring role, to stand-up
comic Bill Connolly, down to the awed house-maids. Antony Sher does his
Disraeli with relish and historical credibility. Geoffrey Palmer (Ponsonby)
may be familiar to us as Miss Dench's old flame in the TV series "As Time
Goes By" (on PBS). It took me some time to identify him, since TV's  Palmer
is a dour character whose jowls set something of a record -- but here these
are hidden by whiskers and beard.
Though "Mrs. Brown" was rapidly filmed and on a very modest budget, its
production values are excellent. The cinematography is particularly
skillful in interior scenes that retain realistically the look of
candle-lit spaces. Period visuals and feel are beautifully recreated.
Historians might cavil at some vaguenesses, misleading aspects and
inaccuracies. (I was enormously helped by Walter Arnstein, Jubilee
Professor at the University of Illinois, specialist in British history and
astute cinephile). Victoria and Albert spent four months of the year at
their country residences, Balmoral Castle in Scotland  (where Victoria was
happiest) and Osborne on the Isle of Wight. The movie is vague about which
is which, conveys the notion that the widowed Queen remained for years
hidden permanently away from London or Windsor, even after she recovered
from the depths of her depression.   One  is also given the impression that
Disraeli, whom Victoria favored,was the Prime Minister almost all that
time, when in fact "Dizzy" held that position for 10 months in 1868 and
through 1874-1880. The self-exiled Victoria may be perceived --wrongly-- as
a do-nothing Queen in affairs of state. Ponsonby was younger than is shown.
Anti-Catholic Victoria would never order a mass but would approve of a
Church of England service.
This said, the film's 90 minutes do a yeoman job of Queen Victoria and her
times (including a hunting scene where a poor stag is shot in a merciless
fusillade). It is one of the best historical movies made, dethrones the
once-wildly popular "Victoria the Great" and "Sixty Glorious Years," and
links clearly to the ceremonies of British royals and their essential
isolation --to this day.

Author
Seth Bookey
I have seen many buddy movies in my time--*Lethal Weapon,*
*Midnight Run,* *Thelma and Louise*. But the slowest of them all was
*Mrs. Brown*, which brings a curious look at a supposedly "more
reverential" time for the British monarchy, in light of today's royal high
jinks. 
Incredibly, Queen Victoria (portrayed by Judi Dench) took into close
confidence her Scottish servant, John Brown (Billy Connolly), while
isolating herself in the Scottish Highlands at Balmoral, mourning the
death of her beloved husband Prince Albert. Inconsolable, she shuns
official duties and carries on what government business she can 600 miles
removed for the governement.
This concerns her ministers; her eager son, the Prince of Wales, tries
desperately and in vain to take on some official duties; there are even
Parliamentarians who want to be dismantle the costly monarchy and
establish a Republic.  Things are *not* good. Prime Minister Benjamin
Disraeli (Alex Sher) is not amused. 
Only Brown can enlive n the Queen.  He even gets away with unusual
behavior like calling her "woman" in front of others. A bull in the
chinashop, he raises the ire of just about everyone at Balmoral, and in
London, just about everyone derisively calls the Queen "Mrs. Brown." 
So much for reverence. All of this is true (verified by *The Lives of the
Kings and Queens of England*, Antonia Fraser, Editor). Of course, nothing
remotely romantic occurs between them. What is unusual about the pair is
the almost obsessive devotion this "common man" has for his sovereign--for
her mental wellbeing and personal safely. Only he is truly concerned for
*her*. 
Apparently, Prince Albert, a "friend" of Brown's, had the rather
condescending "noble savage" view of working people. Where the film can
take liberties is the dramatization of how and why the uptight Queen is
able to completely unwind with the man who tends her horse. He is the
only person we see having real conversations with her, in which she drops
the royal "we" or third person nonsense. The entire royal family is
depicted, but they are all but indistinguishable from the maids and
ministers. Brown is, in effect, the only person the most powerful woman in
the world can confide.
Having a lifelong love of royal history and history in general, I found
this all very interesting. That Disraeli has to ingratiate himself with
Brown to prevail upon the Queen to come back to London and re-establish
herself as a real power fascinated me. It's not so hard to see how a
Rasputin could rise to power in Russia at his tsarina's side when you
consider her grandmother, who raised her, provided quite a role model. 
*Mrs. Brown* is slower than the 6 train, and is probably not for everyone.
The filming is unremarkable, but the br eathtaking Scottish countryside
compensates, and later scenes of Brown unspooling and declawed in the
decidedly more dangerous London, is understandable. He seems as out of
place in "civilization" as *Derzu Usala* does.
Basically, if you are a history buff, add a star. 
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
"Mrs. Brown" is one of the years best films; a charming, unconventional 
love story that is refreshing and utterly captivating. The film deals 
with the British monarchy, but rest assured, this is not one of those 
slow, staid period films. Rather, "Mrs. Brown" is a warm, graceful and 
often funny portrait of two very striking individuals.
Set in 1864, "Mrs. Brown" introduces us to a deeply depressed Queen 
Victoria. Three years after the death of her husband, the Queen (Judi 
Dench) is still mourning, forcing her family and staff to share her 
seclusion in Windsor. She adheres to her daily routine religiously, 
seeing no one but servants and relatives and avoiding all political 
matters. She wraps her depression around her like a comforter. Of course 
she's miserable, but it's a familiar misery, and that familiarity offers 
some solace. The staff, dreadfully tired of being "prisoners of the 
Queen's grief" and fearful of the political ramifications of her 
isolation, send for John Brown (Billy Connolly), the Highland equestrian 
caretaker of her Scottish retreat in Balmoral. Their hope is that Brown, 
a friend of her late husband's, can at least get her outside for periodic 
horse rides, a potential first step towards emergence from her self-
imposed isolation.
Brown arrives at Windsor and makes an immediate impression. The brash 
Scotsman has his own ideas of how things should be done and refuses to 
let propriety stop him from speaking his mind. During their first meeting,
 he looks at her with alarm, stating "You look terrible, woman!" The 
Queen and staff are horrified at his impudence, but in short order, 
Victoria warms to Brown's bold, protective manner. The two become fast 
friends, with an unspoken, but obvious love that prompts scandalous talk 
in the sexually repressed nation. Victoria is soon dubbed "Mrs. Brown" by 
political wags, while the nation speculates on the true nature of the 
Queen's shocking relationship with this commoner.
The story, a blend of facts and speculation, allows director John Madden 
to present a detailed portrait of the era, while shrewdly satirizing the 
politics and manners of the time. But far more important is the 
extraordinary character study of Queen Victoria and John Brown. Dench and 
Connolly are magnificent, a wonderfully mismatched couple with amazing 
chemistry. Connolly is a marvel; a swaggering bull of a man who takes 
guff from no one. He speaks when he wants, drinks when he wants and is 
utterly devoted to her majesty. His impudent remarks, and the stunned 
reaction of the staff and family, provide some of the film's funniest 
moments. Dench is equally impressive as Queen Victoria. She is 
convincingly regal, yet totally human; a haughty, incredibly proper 
monarch who wants to savor life, but has no idea how to go about it. 
The pairing of Connolly and Dench is sheer magic and deserves to be 
rewarded when the Oscar nominations roll around. Watching Victoria 
blossom through Brown's loving ministrations is exhilarating. One of the 
film's best scenes comes when Brown spirits Victoria away to visit a poor 
couple in the Highlands. The interactions between the four during their 
evening together leaves the viewer with an almost giddy feeling. The 
Queen's subsequent emergence from her shell is invigorating, a triumph of 
love and the human spirit over societal oppression. Director Madden also 
draws fine performances from the supporting cast, particularly Anthony 
Sher as Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli. Achingly beautiful Scottish 
locations are used to great effect in conjunction with an excellent 
musical score. In fact, the film's only problem is that it had to come to 
an end.
So what was the true nature of Victoria and John Brown's relationship. 
We'll never know for sure, but consider this. Following Brown's death, 
Victoria maintained his room in pristine condition and placed a flower on 
his pillow every day until her death 18 years later. At her request, she 
was buried with his photograph in her hand. Draw your own conclusions and 
don't miss this jewel of a movie.
One of the years best films; a charming, unconventional love story that 
is refreshing and utterly captivating. Set in 1864, a Highland equestrian 
(Billy Connolly) is summoned to serve a gravely depressed Queen Victoria 
(Judi Dench). Dench and Connolly are magnificent, a wonderfully 
mismatched couple with amazing chemistry. Rest assured, this is not one 
of those slow, staid period films. Rather, "Mrs. Brown" is a warm, 
graceful and often funny portrait of two very striking individuals.
The President's plane is hijacked by terrorists in this entertaining "Die 
Hard" clone. The combination of extremely well-detailed lead characters 
and a constantly escalating sense of tension is what makes "Air Force 
One" succeed. Director Wolfgang Petersen is very good at creating winning 
action/thrillers out of preposterous scripts. "Air Force One" has holes 
in logic large enough to fly a plane through, but Petersen spins the tale 
so well that ultimately, it doesn't matter. Ford makes a great President 
and Oldman is effective as a Russian zealot.
Swinton plays a young lawyer on the fast track to success who becomes 
plagued with anxiety and misgivings, made worse by the arrest of her 
sister (Madigan). The film's fantasy sequences leave much to be desired, 
but the powerfully acted story effectively addresses fundamental 
questions about family, sex, and a woman's place in contemporary society.
Kiddie flick from Nickelodeon tells of two amiable goofballs and their 
misadventures in the fast food world. War erupts between the staff of 
Good Burger and rivals at the evil Mondo Burger that opens across the 
street. Adults will be bored silly, but the little ones should enjoy the 
familiar antics of Mitchell and Thompson.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In 1861 Prince Albert, husband to Queen Victoria, died and the
Queen went into mourning where she stayed for the rest of her life.
For three years she did little but grieve.  Clothes each day were set
out for Albert, who fortunately never appeared to put them on.  She had
few responsibilities as Queen, but she ignored even them.  And the
public missed their view of royalty.  The Times labeled her "The Great
Absentee."  Finally she did appear for the opening of parliament but
apparently in such a depressed state that it was said that she should
not have bothered.
     Then a servant from Scotland, John Brown, came to Windsor to serve
her there in the position of gillie, a sort of attendant.  In spite
of--or perhaps because of--his candor he was able to pull her out of
her doldrums. He became a confidante and a friend, though at least
according to the account in the film MRS. BROWN he never had much power
over her other than the power of common sense.  Nevertheless Victoria's
unwillingness to return to the full level of her responsibilities
combine with her friendship with him gave the public the opinion that
he had a good deal more power than he actually had, suggesting that he
was her master and she was his mistress.  The crisis ended when the
wisdom of Disraeli prevailed and the Queen began showing up more
frequently in public and the people got their taste of royalty.
     This is the story of that relationship written by Jeremy Brock and
directed by John Madden for broadcast on the BBC and on PBS's
MASTERPIECE THEATER. Queen Victoria is played by Judi Dench who has a
long history of Shakespearean acting, but perhaps is most easily
recognized as James Bond's new M from GOLDENEYE.  Billy Connolly plays
the beefy John Brown with full mustache and beard (the original had
only the beard).  As the film opens Victoria is behaving not so much
like a queen as like a spoiled child who refuses to cooperate with
anyone because of the monumental loss of Prince Albert.  She is also
angered that Albert died with the title Queen's Consort rather than
King.  The early part of the story is very reminiscent of the film
PASSION FISH.  Brown insists that the Queen needs fresh air and
manipulates her into riding. In his company she regains some of her
will to return to life.  Brown is less than an idealist, however.  He
uses his friendship with the Queen for power in the Royal household.
He drinks heavily and while he is willing be candid with the Queen, in
any disagreement with others, he will back up the Queen's side like a
yes man.  This earns him enemies in high places.
     Victoria has returned to the stream of life but she is willing to
go only so far.  She will go to Balmoral in Scotland to take in the
Scottish scenery, but she does not want to return to England and her
social responsibilities.  Antony Sher plays young and sharp-witted
Benjamin Disraeli, not yet a friend of Victoria, nor is he deserving to
be.  He dubs Victoria Mrs. Brown.  But his wisdom prevails.
     Richard Greatrex's camera keeps the style of the film physically
subdued.  The production is painted in large part in blacks, browns and
deep reds.  Much of the film takes place in half-dark rooms and often
Greatrex will film a character in shadow.  The film's most interesting
sequence is just showing Victoria and her two daughters going swimming
and seeing what modesty was common in those days for royalty as her
enclosed cart backs up to the lake on a rope arrangement so that she
may step down the steps into the water. Then she steps out covered from
neck to foot.  MRS. BROWN offers very credible look at the powerful
people in England in the mid to late 1800s, but it lacks any real
dramatic punch.  There are no great secrets and much of the
relationship between Brown and Victoria remains unknown and presumably
lost with Brown's diary.  The film lacks dramatic punch and when it is
all over the viewer is left to wonder what was the point.  I rate it a
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
The attraction of love is a powerful thing.  In the tale of Queen Victoria and 
an extravagant veteran servant, awkwardly titled "Mrs Brown," we are reminded 
of a value lesson.  For when the word love is mentioned, we immediately think 
of marriages and intimate relationships.  But the love and attraction 
highlighted in Mrs Brown is not the kind found in sex or marriage; rather in 
the wonder and bondage of a true friendship.
During the lengthy reign of Queen Victoria (Judi Dench), her majesty went 
through a period of deep grief and depression after the death of her beloved 
husband Albert. Disappearing from public view and perception, the secretive and 
distressed Queen has lost confidence in her role as leader of the country.  
Entering her life is John Brown (Billy Connolly), a loyal yet outspoken servant 
that devotes his life to giving the Queen confidence and protection at any 
cost.  Over the following couple of years the two become immersed in friendship 
and drawn together with a powerful attraction.  The Queen is not an attractive 
woman, but her power and stand in society is, and although both of them realize 
and even consider the costs of having an affair, the intimate boundaries of 
their friendship prevents them from doing so.  Behind her back, the Queen is 
dubbed as "Mrs. Brown."
Whilst this relationship is taking place, England is not benefiting from the 
Queen's seemingly eternal absence from public view.  So as the monarchy beings 
to fall into crisis, Prime Minister Disraeli (Anthony Sher) realizes that Brown 
is the key to refreshing faith in the crown.
Mrs. Brown can surely be considered as an elegant and graceful film, but it 
quickly finds itself trying too hard to make us care for the relationship 
between the Queen and Brown, which ultimately falls flat on its face as soon as 
we are witness to the Queen's uninspiring and emotionless personality.  The 
film's dialogue doesn't give Judi Dench any chance to get into her distressing 
role, so naturally when the Queen enters the scene Mrs Brown takes a tumble 
into an almost non existent level of interest.
Billy Connolly, responsible for picking up the pieces of a fairly weak film, is 
an absolute revelation and refreshes the audience with a touch of well placed 
humor and a diligent presence on the screen.  For those of you who don't know, 
he is actually a stand up comedian - so if you thought that casting him as John 
Brown would be like casting Jerry Seinfeld as Hamlet, think again.
The finest part of Mrs Brown's awkwardly crafted collection of scenes is just 
near the end, yet ironically the final scenes of the film are among the worst. 
 They seem incredibly rushed and hastily put together; so as the lights in the 
cinema were becoming brighter I was left gazing at the credits asking myself - 
"Did I miss something?"
Another main problem with the film, and call me what you will, is that it's 
just not interesting enough.  I don't have anything against historical and 
periodic stories, but Mrs. Brown proved too bland and often much too dull to 
keep me eagerly watching.  There are two ways that the production crew could 
have addressed this problem - either alter history to suit the film's needs 
(which, thankfully, they did not do) or to change the focus of the story to a 
more interesting character or setting.  So in this case, I would have been 
delighted if Mrs. Brown had shown us much more of Billy Connolly's intriguing 
character rather than monotonous Queen who doesn't tantalize any climatic taste 
buds.  
But overall, Mrs Brown is an entertaining period film that could have been much 
more than what it amounted to be, and the main problem lies in the relationship 
between the Queen and Brown that never really works.  More often then not the 
film appears to be emotionless and cold; which should never be related to a 
film so caught up in love and loyalty.
For a film originally made for British TV, the idiot box would be an ideal 
place to showcase this slightly disappointing drama.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     As in THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, the people in HER MAJESTY, MRS. BROWN
live their lives in straightjackets.  Even the richest and most
powerful among them, Queen Victoria, has rules under which she must
operate that were preordained for her from the moment of her birth.
     So it is too and even more so with those on the queen's household
staff.  Each has a carefully labeled position with strictly understood
rules and regulations.  That most of them are unwritten makes them no
less binding.
     Into this carefully regimented life comes one Mr. Brown.  Based on
historical fact about a relationship -- no, not that kind despite
rumors at the time -- between the queen and one of her servants, the
film has all of the honesty and fine acting one comes to expect from a
British costume drama.  But MRS. BROWN is so much more.  These people
are not mere puppets in some lavish production, rather their emotions
are heartfelt and vivid.  The two leads, Judi Dench as Queen Victoria
and Billy Connolly as John Brown are both candidates for Oscar
nominations, as is the film's director, John Madden.
     The story is set in the long years of Victoria's mourning for her
beloved, dead Prince Albert.  Judi Dench gives a brilliantly
understated performance as the queen.  Her sunken eyes remain downcast,
and she is obsessively serious about everything in life.  During this
period, mealtimes with her large family include little conversation
since one does not speak to the queen unless spoken to, and the queen
is not in the mood to talk.  One lunch finds the only dialog being an
admonition of the queen's to one of the princesses.  "You're not eating
enough," the queen instructs her.  "One must not let vanity overrule
appetite."
     Into this rigid structure comes a man unwilling to live under its
rubrics. The queen has summoned Mr. Brown, "a most dedicated outdoor
servant of Prince Albert at Balmoral," to serve her.  Mr. Brown arrives
and shocks everyone by being so concerned for the queen as a person
that he gives her his unsolicited advice.  The other members of the
staff have unfailing loyalty to the monarchy and would probably let the
queen kill herself rather than commit some faux pas like speaking up at
a non-sanctioned moment.
     Mr. Brown's radical ideas extend to much more than the queen.  He
seizes the head butler's chair in the servant's dining room.  This
causes so much commotion that it looks like the weaker servants may
faint.  Billy Connolly gives a strong performance as the freest man in
the story, but one willing to risk anything to serve the woman who is
his queen.  Others are bound by the structure of their lives, but not
Mr. Brown.  He even tells off the Prince of Wales, played by David
Westhead in the weakest performance in the film.  The prince demands to
see his mother at a time when Mr. Brown has already told him she should
not be disturbed, so he barks at the prince, "Are you deaf as well as
stupid?"
     Taking Mr. Brown's advice, the queen changes her habits.  She
freezes the household, telling them, "Cold is good."  In the movie's
most surprising scene, she goes swimming in the lake.  Not exactly
skinny dipping, she is wheeled in a bathing carriage to the water's
edge.  When she emerges, she is covered from head to foot for her swim.
She even wears a hat.  Only her face, neck, and hands are left
uncovered.
     There are many such wonderful vignettes in the film.  In another,
Mr. Brown and the queen go alone to have dinner with a local working
class Highland family.  The woman of the household curtseys so often
that her whole body seems to be in spasms.
     As you might guess, their relationship as well as the queen's
unwillingness to resume her royal duties caused quite a scandal
throughout the land, but she refused to give him up.  "Sometimes I
think Brown is all I have left of Albert," she reasons.
     Although the two leads carry the picture, Antony Sher is terrific
as a wild eyed and devious Prime Minister Disraeli.  He has a constant
smile as a consummate politician who figures he can turn any momentary
setback to his advantage.
     It is easy to grow to love Richard Greatrex's filming of the lush
Scottish Highlands, but rather suddenly, the picture begins to wind
down.  How the story resolves itself is a bit unusual and not near as
tidily wrapped up as we have come to expect from our films.  More like
real life.
     HER MAJESTY, MRS. BROWN runs a fast 1:43.  It is rated PG for a
little violence, mild profanity, and brief male nudity.  The film would
be acceptable for all ages, but kids would have to be at least nine to
get anything out of the picture.  I strongly recommend the film to you
and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
     MRS. BROWN is a love story much in the same vein as CARRINGTON in 
that it deals with platonic affection that runs deeper and truer than 
that of the motion picture staple romantic variety.  These days, it 
seems that whenever we see a male/female friendship on screen, it's just 
a setup for the inevitable moment when the two realize that they're 
fated to be lovers.  Not so with MRS. BROWN, one of the most emotionally 
sensitive and intelligent love stories of the year.  It shows, amongst 
other things, that it's possible to love completely and with unflagging 
devotion without sex ever becoming an issue.  
     Queen Victoria was born on May 24, 1819 and died nearly eighty-two 
years later, in the first month of 1901.  Her reign as England's 
monarch, which began in 1837, lasted more than six decades and left such 
an indelible impression upon the country that, upon hearing of her 
death, author Henry James wrote, "We all feel a bit motherless today."  
MRS. BROWN, which is based on actual events and uses historical figures, 
transpires during one of the darkest periods of Victoria's reign -- a 
four year segment from 1864 to 1868 (with a brief epilogue in 1883).  
Still mourning the death of her beloved husband, Prince Albert, who died 
over two years earlier, the Queen (Judi Dench) is in virtual seclusion 
at Windsor.  She sees no one outside of her servants and her immediate 
family, rarely goes out, and has no taste for politics.  In the words of 
her loyal secretary, Henry Posonby (Geoffrey Palmer), they are all 
"prisoners of the queen's grief," which he describes variously as 
"ferocious introspection" and "unfettered morbidity."  So, in an attempt 
to revive Victoria, Posonby summons John Brown (Billy Connolly), the 
highlander who runs the queen's Scottish retreat of Balmoral, to 
Windsor.  It's Posonby's hope that Brown will "appeal to the queen's 
sentimental belief that all highlanders are good for the health."
     Brown arrives and proves to be a breath of fresh air.  Before he 
enters Windsor, the castle is a place of icy silence and solitude.  
Director John Madden so effectively conveys this atmosphere that we 
become keenly aware of such things as a ticking clock and a cleared 
throat.  Brown's attitude of speaking what he thinks, regardless of the 
consequences, horrifies the servants and family.  But, after initially 
being annoyed, Victoria warms to his methods, and it isn't long before 
the two develop a unshakable friendship.  They become so close, in fact, 
that wags begin calling the Queen "Mrs. Brown."  The Prince of Wales, 
wary of Brown's growing influence over his mother, seeks to have the 
highlander sent back to Scotland.  And the Prime Minister, Disraeli, 
wonders whether Brown is more likely to be a valuable ally or a 
dangerous enemy.
     Like 1995's THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE, MRS. BROWN mixes the 
political machinations of various MPs with the growing fissure between 
the monarch and the Prince of Wales.  However, while George may have 
been mad, Victoria is merely eccentric.  Nevertheless, her extended 
period of mourning, during which she has been out of the public's sight, 
has created a great deal of uncertainty among her subjects, and 
Parliament is beginning to discuss the possibility of disestablishing 
the monarchy -- a prospect that horrifies Disraeli and Prince Edward.
     Brown and Victoria's relationship develops and deepens slowly and 
naturally, and credit must be given to both of the lead actors, Judi 
Dench ("M" from GOLDENEYE and TOMORROW NEVER DIES) and Billy Connolly 
(Howard Hessman's replacement in the TV series HEAD OF THE CLASS), for 
their extraordinary performances.  Both actors immerse themselves in 
their roles, playing Brown and the Queen without a hint of artifice, and 
the chemistry between them is palpable.  Theirs is a wonderfully real 
relationship that is reminiscent of the one between Lytton Strachey and 
the title character of CARRINGTON.  (Ironically, Strachey is most famous 
for his 1921 biography of Queen Victoria.)
     Perhaps the best thing of all about MRS. BROWN is that it doesn't 
offer any hokey, Hollywood-type moments.  The picture remains true to 
itself throughout, affirming that film maker John Madden (ETHAN FROME) 
has a keen insight into the human psyche.  MRS. BROWN is a fascinating 
character study, a wonderful love story, and a brilliant period piece 
(MASTERPIECE THEATER and the BBC, both renowned for their costume 
dramas, are listed as co-producers).  In a summer that is sure to be 
glutted with formulaic action thrillers and flat romantic comedies, MRS. 
BROWN will delight and touch any viewer who seeks it out.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Ben Hoffman
Despite the unprepossessing but quite appropriate name of MRS. BROWN,
the film is the very best so far this year   "Superb, Intriguing, Gripping," all come to mind in this true story of England's Queen Victoria (Judy Dench) and her servant, John Brown (Billy Connolly) with whom she fell in love.  Seldom has History been more interestingly brought to the screen.
A mere eighteen when she was married to Albert, Queen Victoria went into deep depression when her husband died.   Not wishing to see anyone, unable to be consoled, she had a profound effect on the country she ruled.  While at first England extended great sympathy to their beloved Queen after the passage of a few years during which she partook of no ceremonies, the public began to feel somewhat short-changed.
1864.  The Queen decides she needs someone to care for her horses. The man hired is John Brown, a tall and handsome Scotsman.  As if part of a romantic novel, the Queen falls in love with him, much to the dismay of her children, the rest of her family and of her loyal subjects who are unhappy about this commoner, this servant.   Everyone begins to resent and babble about Brown who is always at her side. He has assigned himself as her protector, as a kind of security guard and not even her son, The Prince of Wales (David Westhead), can have an audience with her unless Brown gives his assent.  But the Queen? She has not been this alive in many years.
Meanwhile, a storm is brewing, aided by the gossip newspapers of that day in rumor-mongering who now refer to the Queen as "Mrs. Brown."  Even Prime Minister Disraeli (Anthony Sher) comes to call on Brown to  tell him the queen must come out of hiding and return to Windsor to partake in the events of the country or the monarchy may be in grave danger.
This then is a true romantic story of great love and loyalty taking place on the highest plateaus of nobility.  To relieve the tenseness of the main story, there are the three Maids-in-Waiting who march just behind the queen in case she wants something.  When she stops her brisk walk, they stop.  The director has choreographed that episode into a quaint ballet-like humorous sequence.
No review of MRS. BROWN could be complete without mentioning the very
MEMORABLE performance by Judy Dench, at times imperious, and other
times, just a vulnerable woman who loves a man regardless of the consequences and who forbids him to ever leave her.   Connolly, as the object of her love, is very believable; little wonder that a queen would fall in love with him . . . kilt and all.
Mention, too, must be made of the screenplay and literate dialogue by Jeremy Brock, as well as the music composed by Stephen Warbeck.  The fact is, everyone in the cast is first class in this most entertaining film.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In 1861, Queen Victoria's husband Prince Albert died of typhoid
fever, sending the monarch into years of secluded mourning.  MRS. BROWN
deals with an interesting footnote to those years, the relationship
between Victoria (Judi Dench) and a Scotish groom named John Brown (Billy
Connolly) who comes to service for the queen in 1864.  While Victoria has
grown accustomed to her servants and family humoring her moods, she finds
no such deference in Brown.  Indeed, his manner with her borders on
outright insolence, but such treatment seems to be exactly what the queen
needs to rouse her from her gloom.  As Brown becomes Victoria's closest
confidante, salacious gossip begins to accumulate around their friendship,
including references to Her Royal Highness as "Mrs. Brown."
     If MRS. BROWN had been a love story, it would be a pretty poor excuse
for one.  Jeremy Brock's script offers far too few scenes between the two
principles, providing very little sense of the basis for those rumors; 
their relationship is as much a rumor to viewers of the film as to the
scandal-mongers it portrays.  Victoria's devotion to Brown remains 
unexplored, the feelings of both parties purely a matter of conjecture.
     Despite promotional suggestions to the contrary, however, MRS. BROWN
isn't a love story at all.  Instead, it's a drama of political intrigue,
both on a national scale and within the queen's own household.  As
liberals in Parliament begin challenging conservative Prime Minister
Benjamin Disraeli (Antony Sher) with proposed reforms in the status of
the monarchy, the facts of the queen's relationship with Brown become
irrelevant.  The monarchy is no longer inviolate in the eyes of the
public, the idea of abolishing it no longer heretical.  MRS. BROWN is
quite effective as a portrait of rumor as political lever, as well as the
changing perception of monarchy.  In this context, MRS. BROWN works as a
companion piece to another recent film about the British crown in turmoil,
THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE -- think of this one as THE SADNESS OF QUEEN
VICTORIA.
     The household politics are less clearly drawn, due largely to the
uneven characterization of Brown.  Billy Connolly (previously best known
to Americans for replacing Howard Hessemann in the television series "Head
of the Class, I'm certain to his great dismay) portrays Brown with a
matter-of-fact arrogance which energizes the film.  Brown refuses to
suffer fools of any social station, a quality which is both his greatest
asset and his greatest fault.  His motivations, however, fluctuate too
frequently -- at times he seems self-serving, at other times insanely
devoted to Victoria.  John Brown remains as mysterious as his dalliance
with the queen.
     It is Antony Sher's performance as Disraeli which really makes MRS.
BROWN worth watching, capturing the work of a consummate politician in an
era when consummate politicians were few and far between.  Disraeli gets
exactly what he wants while convincing everyone around him that they are
getting exactly what they want, all done with a smile, an off-the-cuff
remark and a self-effacing manner.  If MRS. BROWN were half as compelling
behind the doors of Balmoral Castle as it is behind the doors of
Parliament, it could have been as fine a romantic tragedy as it is a piece
of political theater.

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
The film MRS BROWN, directed by John Madden, focuses on a little-known
chapter in the history of the British monarchy, and in retrospect it is
somewhat surprising that it has taken so long for this story to be
depicted onscreen: it has all the requsite elements -- an uplifting
story arc, grandiose, larger-than-life characters, a deep friendship
overcoming class boundaries, the majesty of royalty (to quote Richard
Harris from UNFORGIVEN), and the fact that it is based upon obscure
truth -- that would make it appear to be an eminently feasible film
project.
Given the source material, it would be really difficult for Mr. Madden to
make an uninteresting film out of this, and MRS BROWN does indeed work,
gaining momentum particularly during the film's second half, yet his
helming does not succeeed in ascending the film beyond the limitations of
the material; it is somehow guarded and vaguely distant.  Rather than
being a great *film*, the impression is left that MRS BROWN is a polite,
decent adaptation of a *great story* -- the distinction is subtle, yet
noticeable.
The film's title is an interesting one, for there is no Mrs. Brown in the
film in a literal sense, and yet it is "Mrs. Brown", and the connotations
of this title, which truly delves into the heart of the picture.  The
lady in question is actually Queen Victoria, generally considered to be
the greatest British monarch of the modern era, and the film is set in
1864, after the death of her beloved husband Price Albert from typhoid
fever.  Inconsolably grief-stricken, Her Majesty (Judi Dench) retreats
from public life into a state of cyclic mourning, much to the concern of
the British Court and government, particularly the Prince of Wales
(David Westhead) and Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli (Antony Sher).
The popularity of the Crown is waning, and it seems that nothing can be
done to resuscitate Victoria from her sorrowful stupor.  In an act of
desperation, Crown secretary Henry Posonby (Geoffrey Palmer) summons
Scottish highlander John Brown (Billy Connolly) from the Balmoral
estate, in the hopes that the spirited nature of her late husband's
riding partner might revive the Queen's spirits.  This he does, with a
demeanour which shocks the British Court -- rather than dealing with
Victoria in submissive subservience, Brown is cheerfully brash and
forthright with her, never mincing words -- and so begins a relationship
between the Queen and her servant which grows to be deep and fierce,
scandalizing Great Britain and resulting in the more bold and brazen to
mockingly refer to Her Majesty as "Mrs. Brown".
MRS BROWN shares a great deal in common with Nicholas Hytner's THE
MADNESS OF KING GEORGE in that both films address the shaky status of
the monarchy with the British government and the people during episodes
of extreme turmoil with the monarch.  With Victoria's extended withdrawal
from her public duties as Queen during her mourning, liberals are
clamouring for the disestablishment of the monarchy, which understandably
frightens the Prince of Wales and royalist Prime Minister Disraeli.  To
turn the tide against increasing public apathy for the position of the
Crown in society, it becomes imperative for them to goad the Queen from
her lament, but when Brown is all-too-successful in the task, leaving
Victoria happy to spend out her days with his companionship, away from
the public eye, the Prince and the Prime Minister are forced to attack
the problem from different tacts.  The political schemes behind the
scenes in MRS BROWN are fascinating, played out like an analytical
chess match, and in particular, Mr. Sher gives a very nicely done, oily
performance as the eloquent, clever Prime Minister.
While the political manoueverings in MRS BROWN provide the intrigue, the
heart of the film involve the bond which forms between Victoria and
Brown.  The development of the relationship is a bit forced -- there is
a rather noticable leap in the friendship between when the pair come to
an uneasy understanding to when the Queen is confiding her innermost
thoughts to her faithful servant and friend -- but the depiction of the
eventual depth and warmth of the relationship is well done.  Ms. Dench
is marvellous as the film's lead, with an imposing screen presence which
is truly evocative of royalty.  Her careful, stoic performance is subtle,
bringing forth the portrayal of a woman whose rigid, mannered upbringing
results in the repression of a flurry of emotions stirring just under the
surface.  Mr. Connolly's performance is a bit one-note, and not
particularly accomplished -- it really is more of an onscreen physical
presence than a portrayal per se -- but is sufficiently capable for the
less emotionally-strenuous scenes of his Brown character.
While MRS BROWN employs a number of clearly fictional embellishments to
heighten the emotional punch of its story (which work to varying
degrees), I have come to understand that it is remarkably truthful to
fact.  It does go without saying that Queen Victoria did return to her
royal duties, and MRS BROWN includes the obligatory sequence of her
triumphant return to her adoring public, but it is perhaps indicative of
the success of the film in creating a strong emotional connection
between its characters and the audience that these scenes are suitably
stirring.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Let's hurt somebody." - Aaron Eckhart, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN
