Title
Review for Basket, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Wholesome story with a deadly slow pace
And sometimes the name in the trademark works against me . . .
Here in the urban jungle of New York City we have no problem with the
desires of grownups on the other coast who wish to make a old-fashioned
"family" movie. One with no sex or swearing, gratuitous nudity or
violence. What they produced is called The Basket, and it is all that
they wanted. That it took four writers and a "script consultant" to get
it into shape is the film's undoing, for any family with more than a
passing acquaintance with a Sony Playstation or Nintendo console. It all
comes down to what kind of kids you've got: if they're old enough that
they can sit still and pay attention to a slow moving story (my ten year
old niece could), you're fine. If they can't (my seven year old nephew)
you're gonna have a very restive kidlet on your hands.
My gut reaction is that the creators were so determined to write
traditional family values into the film, the kind that you can sit
around with your kids and discuss afterwards, that they failed to relax
enough to let the story and their cast do that work for them. It's a
good story, too...
The setting is Waterville, Washington state in the waning days of World
War I. The war is not an abstraction to this rural town. Ben Emery
(Elwon Bakly) has come back from France missing a leg and his father
Nicholas (Jock MacDonald) and brother Nathan Emery (Brian Skala) carry a
nasty hate towards all things German; Pastor Simms (Tony Lincoln) has
adopted Helmut (Robert Karl Burke) and Birgitta (Amber Willenborg),
German children whose parents were killed by American troops. All the
kids, regardless of age, are in the same school classroom, just brimming
with all that war driven racism and hatred.
The new teacher in town is Martin Conlon (Peter Coyote), who has come
from Boston carrying a Victrola and a basketball and a nasty secret.
With the Victrola, he uses a German opera recording to teach -- which
alternately pisses off half the town 'cuz it's a German opera and
enthralls the other half, 'cuz the story is intriguing. With the ball,
he teaches the kids the relatively new sport of basketball, hoping to
inspire cooperation. Both work against Helmut, because he can translate
the opera for the class and because he is small, the five larger boys in
the school can keep him off the team. So Helmut decides to teach himself
how to play and his sister pawns an emotionally priceless locket to help
buy a ball.
The other story involves the need to raise $500 for a downpayment on a
harvester tractor that can be shared by the farmers of the town. Conlon
enters his team in a match with the "professional" Spokane Spartans
(undefeated in 70 straight games) hoping to win the cash prize,
coincidentally $500. All the while Bessie Emery (Karen Allen) is trying
to hold her family together as son Tom Emery (Eric Dane) has fallen for
Birgitta, with all that entails.
As you make your way through the film, it's as if you could see a
checklist of important points: hatred is bad; racism is bad; helping out
is good; tolerance is good and so on. We applaud all of that. The
problem is that as The Basket builds towards its big finale, its
dedication to making the little points keep the story from building the
dramatic elements to make the ending work as the thrilling, life
enhancing moment it was meant to be. That ending involves shady friends
of the teacher and the 1918 equivalent of the Immigration Service. The
emphasis that should have been placed on those two factors isn't there.
The dramatic impact of the third act of the movie is thus diluted. Too
bad.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Basket, he would have paid...
which is rental level and not a diss on the film at all. If your kids
can sit still, go to the theater. If not, rent and discuss with the
kidlets after. That way the restive ones can work through a piece at a
time.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Opera, basketball and prejudice: an unlikely combination for any film,
especially for one set in small town America towards the end of World
War I.
Rich Cowan's THE BASKET is a simple and poetic film whose magic comes
from many sources, particularly two beautifully understated performances
by Peter Coyote and Karen Allen.  The director makes the bold assumption
that the audience has both intelligence and patience.  In a film filled
with messages -- "To defend a mighty wall, each one must fight for
something small," the opera says -- most are delivered with quiet
delicacy, leaving the viewers to ascertain the fullness of their
meanings and their portent for the story at hand.
Two teenage, German war orphans, Helmut and his sister Brigitta, played
with touching resoluteness by Robert Karl Burke and Amber Willenborg,
are taken from their internment camp to live in Waterville, Washington
with Reverend Simms, M.D. (Tony Lincoln).  Waterville is so small that
Rev. Simms is in charge of both birthing and baptizing.  Although their
parents were killed by Americans, the orphans carry little resentment;
they're just thankful to be alive.  But it's not easy since the members
of the town carry varying amounts of prejudice against them.  "I thought
the war for us had finally ended, but it hadn't," Helmut explains in
voice-over.  "Only the battlefield had changed,"
The one most against the orphans is Mr. Emery (Jock MacDonald), whose
oldest son, Ben (Elwon Bakly), has just returned home from the war.
Having lost his good health and his left leg, Ben has been transformed
from his father's chief helper into "just another mouth to feed."
Unlike her headstrong husband, Mrs. Emery (Karen Allen) wants to pick up
the pieces of their lives and get on with it.
Another outsider in Waterville is Mr. Conlon (Peter Coyote), the new
teacher for the town's one-room school.  With a Bostonian accent as
thick as Helmut's German one, Mr. Conlon sticks out like a peach basket
nailed up to a wall.  He once played under the man who invented
basketball and that's how it was played back then.  Things having not
advanced much, that's exactly how the teacher introduces the game to his
pupils, who had barely heard of the sport.
Meanwhile, back in the schoolroom (he sleeps in its small anteroom), Mr.
Conlon teaches the class a continuing lesson with the aid of a German
opera ("The Basket").  This creates a buzz of excitement in the village
because he dribbles out the story like episodes of a soap opera.  The
whole town becomes enthralled with the latest happenings in the story,
as if they were the latest installments of "Dallas."  His choice of a
"German" opera, even with its popularity, causes great consternation to
some residents.
The goings-on at the school have ramifications throughout the town.  In
a delicately nuanced performance, Karen Allen's Mrs. Emery finds the
teacher fascinating because he represents life away from the farm.
"Boston -- I always wanted to visit Boston," she sighs when Mr. Conlon
tells her of his home.  "Or any place for that matter."
Helmut, a source of derision among his fellow students for being German,
is also the shortest of those near his age.  This means that he isn't
allowed in the basketball games that the older and much taller boys try
without much skill or luck.  Nevertheless, using laundry and a laundry
basket, or whatever he can find, Helmut practices in the hope that the
day will come when he can join in the game.
The seemingly disparate stories of opera and basketball come together
when the town needs the down payment for a harvester.  If they can
defeat the undefeatable Spokane Spartans, they can win enough to get the
down payment.
Filmed frequently with the warm glow of the setting sun, the rolling
pastures of Washington state look invitingly bucolic.  This little
filmed area of the United States clearly deserves to have more movies
set there.
Although the journey is the reward in this movie, its big game ending
manages more surprises than you'd ever expect, one being the half-time
refreshments of the other team: beer and big cigars.  And the rules back
then were quite a bit different than they are now.  Even the game's
slower pacing, which matches that of the movie, possesses an undeniable
charm.
A heartfelt motion picture, THE BASKET is a delightful film worth
savoring for those willing to take the time to enjoy its methodical
rhythms.  It's a film that gives family entertainment a good name and
one that will have you still enjoying it in your memory after you leave
the theater.
THE BASKET runs 1:45.  It is rated PG for some mild violence and brief
language and would be fine for all ages.  Children with short attention
spans, however, are unlikely to find it worthwhile.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
Clean, proper, and brimming with good intentions, _The_Basket_ is one of
those films that people say "aren't made anymore."  That comment is only
partially true.  Films like _The_Basket_ indeed aren't made anymore--for
the big screen, at least, for this type of maudlin, medicinal family film
is a dime a dozen on the tube, where it belongs.
The title _The_Basket_ has a number of meanings.  First, it is the title
of a (fictional) German opera that newly-arrived schoolteacher Martin
Conlon (Peter Coyote) presents to his students in a small Washington
town, circa 1918.  The opera's twisting, mystical story soon captures the
imaginations of everyone in town, its plot developments being discussed
and dissected much like those of a modern day soap.  Second, it is a
reference to the other new thing that Conlon brings to the youth: the
game of basketball.
The round ball especially captures the interest of young Helmut Brink
(Robert Karl Burke).  Helmut and his older sister Brigitte (Amber
Willenborg) are orphaned German refugees, and with WWI raging--and one of
the local boys having returned from the warfront severely injured--the
two face prejudice from all around.  The anti-German sentiment also
extends to Conlon for teaching a work originating from America's enemy.
That already is enough plot for a feature film, but like an overstuffed
afterschool special that wants to be all things, _The_Basket_ doesn't
know where to quit.  Writers Rich Cowan (who also directed), Don Caron,
Frank Swoboda, and Tessa Swoboda throw in a "forbidden romance" between
Brigitte and a brother of the injured soldier, an intrigue subplot
involving Conlon's down-low dealings with shady characters, and a "big
game" sequence where Helmut gets his shot at hoops glory.  The obvious
intent is to give each character on the large canvas a chance to shine,
but the individual elements are undercooked on their own terms, yielding
less-than-satisfying payoffs.
The performances also don't feel quite formed.  Coyote is likable but
hampered by a strange accent.  Less strange but more distracting are the
German accents of Burke and Willenborg, which are just as awkward as
their overall performances.  Karen Allen, as the mother of the soldier,
makes the most significant impression, but her role is only a few lines
away from being a mere walk-on.
There's no denying that _The_Basket_ will foster warm feelings in its
audience; it's a nice film that addresses worthy subjects and does so in
a manner accessible to the entire family.  But in a time where "nice" is
often equated with "boring," the undistinctive, earnestly good-for-you
_The_Basket_ does nothing to alter that perception.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "THE BASKET" (North by Northwest Entertainment)
 The impact of regional film-making is growing and this
independent "family film" is one of the best to emerge in recent
years.  Working with three friends, film-maker Rich Cowan has created
a character-driven, intriguing tale of opera and basketball, nostalgia
and history, love and war set amid the rolling wheat fields of
Washington State. His company, North by Northwest, raised the $3
million budget for the period drama, set in the rural town of
Waterville in the midst of World War I. The story begins as a
pastor/physician welcomes two German war orphans, 12 year-old Helmut
(Robert Karl Burke) and his 17 year-old sister, Brigitta (Amber
Willenborg), into his home. At the same time, a new school teacher
named Martin Conlon (Peter Coyote) arrives from Boston, bringing with
him phonograph records of an evocative German opera called "The
Basket" about a stranger who saves a town that is threatened by
barbarians at the gates. The plot of the opera obviously parallels the
suspicion, prejudice and intolerance of Waterville's citizens, much to
the dismay of a sympathetic farmer's wife (Karen Allen) who bears her
own wartime tragedy. "Why are you teaching the children a German opera
when we are at war with them?" she asks. Conlon also introduces a
then-new sport called "basketball" with its emphasis on teamwork,
saying: "To defend a mighty wall, each one must fight for something
small." Ultimately, Waterville challenges Spokane's experienced team
for money - which will allow the farmers to buy the new thresher that
they desperately need for harvest season. Despite its slow-pacing, on
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Basket" is a warm, heartfelt,
uplifting 7. It's a gem, one of those rare, thoughtful, beautiful
movies with a feeling of "A River Runs Through It."
