Title
Review for Without Limits (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Susan Granger
"Running is not about winning, it's about guts...To give
anything less than your best is to sacrifice the gift," said Steve
Prefontaine. In an era where heroes are hard to find, it's no wonder
that this popular track star's story has inspired so much
interest. Prefontaine had it all: talent, charm, grace, beauty,
self-confidence, and - above all - tremendous drive. He broke every
American record between 2,000 and 10,000 meters before he tragically
died at the age of 24 in 1975 in a car crash. Written by Robert Towne
and Kenny Moore (a champion runner and one of Pre's closest friends)
and directed by Towne, this biopic examines the boy behind the man,
the coach behind the athlete. A mill worker's son who grew up in a
German-speaking household in Coos Bay, Oregon, Steve Prefontaine
(Billy Crudup) learned early how to run. As a kid, he ran from kids
who taunted him. As a teenager, he ran for fun and glory. As an
athlete, he ran for himself. He was a rebel, a perpetual front-runner
who refused to win a race with a mediocre effort, saying: "When you
set the pace, you control the race." At the University of Oregon, he
met the two most pivotal people in his life: his legendary coach, Bill
Bowerman (Donald Sutherland), and his devoutly Catholic girl-friend,
Mary Marckx (Monica Potter), who both cooperated in the making of this
movie. The story doesn't idealize Prefontaine as a role model. On the
contrary, it details his blunt, cocky attitude, self-obsession, and
anti-authoritarian outbursts. Robert Towne has been this route before
with "Personal Best," his story about women runners training for the
Olympics. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Without Limits" is
an inspiring 7, examining the cool, fearless legacy of the
long-distance runner. It's a great American story.

Author
Greg Nowak
        Director: Robert Towne Cast: Billy Crudup as Steve Prefontaine,
Donald Sutherland as Bill Bowerman (aka Nike Shoes co-founder), Monica
Potter as Mary Marckx. Written by Robert Towne and Kenny. Out of 5
stars: ***1/2 (3-1/2)
        There was a huge crowd - at a premiere screening of "Without
Limits" (first screening with a major general audience admittance). This
was a movie premiere at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival. I
must say that I met the director there so this could be a more slanted
review.
        Have you ever been on a European Bullet train. I just got back
from Europe, riding around 5 times to various cities. You get on and
can't believe the speed. You start conversing; being distracted as the
outside rushes by you. Then you turn back to the excitement of speed.
        You look out the window searching for a reference of speed.
Automobiles on the Autobahn that you pass show you how fast you are
going. Steve Prefontaine was so much of a gift or had that gift. The
movie of his life is like that feeling on the train; what's he compared
to. The story inside him needs an artist and Robert Towne paints the
intensity of a runner, "Pre" "Without Limits". Pre is without limits,
except for the honest distractions of the humorously laid-back but
dabbling attitude of his coach, Bowerman and the great allure of Pre's
female attraction.
        Sutherland is at his best (you know his great acting like in
Ordinary People (1980) that won 4 Oscars). and Billy Crudup fine
performance reminds you of those college days of recklessness and long
hair.
        Why should you see this movie? It's a tragedy that takes you
back to the late 70's; why you love to do sports ("Just do It"); and why
you really do what in the rest of your life (testosterone). Also you
escape to green pastures, smelling the newly cut grass and college days
with a coach or teacher you don't like but like now.
(c) Greg Nowak 1998 (only Internet Movie Database, and their links,
publication allowed)

Author
Matt Williams
Without Limits is the second biopic of Olympic track athlete Steve
Prefontaine (following last year's Prefontaine). Both films hit all the
same bases, and have about the same effect:  a modest appreciation, but
little understanding of the man.
Steve Prefontaine (Billy Crudup) is introduced through the eyes of
college scouts.  "Pre" is the most sought after high school runner in
the country, and every prestigious college can't wait to recruit him.
However, Pre has his sights on the University of Oregon, where the
legendary Bill Bowerman (Donald Sutherland) coaches.
The film doesn't display a very high opinion of running coaches.
Bowerman's only advice to Prefontaine is to avoid "front running", a bad
habit which Pre refuses to break, and with which he wins.  Aside from
that, the grand strategy in this film seems to simply be: run faster.
The film follows Pre, both as a collegiate athlete, an olympian, and
later as an "amateur" athlete.  Through it all, he's the consummate
rebel. He never wants to simply run with the crowd...he always wants to
lead the pack.
More than the previous Prefontaine biopic, Prefontaine, Without Limits
gets us on a personal level with Steve Prefontaine.  It's too bad the
Pre Without Limits shows us isn't all that interesting. He's just
another romanticized version of the "doomed athlete".  We never find out
what makes him tick...or why he was important enough to merit two movies
about his life.
Billy Crudup plays Pre with all the spit and polish deserving a
wonder-boy athlete. There are no rough edges, yet no real defining
character distinctions, either. Donald Sutherland fares better as his
coach, though at times he seems like he's starring in a Nike commercial
(a company with which the real life Bowerman was involved).
The story itself is more or less straightforward, but there are odd
little gaps here and there.  They're kind of like holes in memory...it
doesn't seem like anything is missing, but things don't quite flow
right.  Whether this was the filmmakers' intent, or just the result of
some sloppy editing, the result is a vague outline of the events in
Pre's life, rather than a clear picture.
Without Limits is not completely satisfying.  But it does manage to
conjure up a sense of respect for an athlete who, after nearly 30 years,
has likely faded from most memories.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Greg King
WITHOUT LIMITS (M).  
(New Line Cinema/Village Roadshow)
Director: Robert Towne
Stars: Billy Crudup, Donald Sutherland, Monica Potter, Jeremy Sisto, 
Matthew Lillard, Gabe Olds, Judith 
Ivey, Dean Norris, Billy Burke, Adam Setliff, Nicholas Oleson, William 
Mapowther
Running time: 118 minutes.
For a long time, Tom Cruise has been interested in making a
biopic about Steve Prefontaine, the champion American distance runner
who was killed in a car crash at the age of 24.  In the early pre-
production stages, Cruise was even attached to the role.  However, his
involvement here is limited to that merely of producer.
Like James Dean, Prefontaine was something of a cult hero, a
popular idol, who died tragically young while still at the start of
his promising career.  At the time of his death, Prefontaine remained
unbeaten in America, and many of the records he set 25 years ago
remain unbroken.  The film touches on his clashes with the sport's
governing body, his strong desire to win, and his crushing defeat in
the Munich Olympics.  His college romance with writer Mary Marckx
(Monica Potter, from Patch Adams, etc) is the least interesting
element of the film.
The most fascinating part of Without Limits centres on the
complex and volatile relationship between the cocky, arrogant and
strong willed Prefontaine and his brilliant coach and mentor Bill
Bowerman (Donald Sutherland).  Although the two men had different
philosophies about how to run a distance race, they slowly established
a mutual respect for each other's abilities.  Without Limits opens
during the 10,000 metres final at the 1972 Munich Olympics, and
unfolds in flashback, seen mainly from Bowerman's perspective.
Writer/director Robert Towne, who last ventured into this
territory with Personal Best, brings some genuine suspense to the
running sequences.  It is the numerous race sequences that bring some
excitement and energy to this otherwise routine biopic.
Billy Crudup (from Inventing The Abbotts, etc) brings a
brashness, vitality and raw sex appeal to his performance as the
charismatic Prefontaine.  So often cast as the villain or the dry
authority figure, Sutherland rarely gets a chance to show what a
superb performer he is when given a decent role.  As Pre's coach he
gets a rare opportunity to deliver a subtle and insightful
performance, and he brings a spark to the film.
Without Limits is actually the second film to depict the life
of the famous runner, following the lacklustre Pre, which disappeared
straight to video.  This stylish and superbly crafted biopic is very
American in tone, and is ultimately more concerned with worshipping
Prefontaine's achievements rather than offering personal insights into
the man.  It is also ultimately a story of particular appeal only to
American audiences, with its international appeal limited mainly to
those with an interest in athletics and sports biographies.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The sports movie formula is etched somewhere in Hollywood stone.
The semi-sadistic but benevolent coach takes his untalented minions and
drives them hard right up to the big game.  Heavy music and showy
camerawork highlight every twist and turn, as if the future of the
nation rides with the team.  And when, in the movie's long finale, the
final game arrives, the team triumphs while something approaching the
Hallelujah chorus plays in the background.
Sports movies are considered innovative in the small degrees to which
they vary from this rigid prescription.
Director Robert Towne's WITHOUT LIMITS, a movie which basically throws
out the recipe, is the second and only movie about American
long-distance running star Steve "Pre" Prefontaine worth watching.
Containing an intense performance by Billy Crudup as Pre and an
Oscar-worthy one by Donald Sutherland as Bill Bowerman, Pre's coach at
the University of Oregon, WITHOUT LIMITS is one of the best sports
movies in quite a while and is worth seeing, whether you are a sports
fan or not.  (Director Steve James's trite PREFONTAINE, from early last
year, was not very good when evaluated on its own merits, and it suffers
dramatically when compared to WITHOUT LIMITS.)
As a wise old coach, Sutherland always has a twinkle in his eye.  Bill
Bowerman was the type who didn't talk a lot, but, when he did, it was
worth hearing.  In the movie he stays at loggerheads with his cocky star
over running strategy.  Rather than yelling at him on the track, Bill
argues with Pre off the field using back-of-the-envelope calculations
about the best strategy for winning.
"When you set the pace, you control the race," Pre argues.  This
technique of leaving them in the dust from the first is a crowd pleaser,
but Bill argues that it's a loser when you're up against the best.
Pre doesn't believe in talent, and he truly believes that he has a
secret weapon.  He can endure more pain than anyone else can.  In one
race, he competes even though he has 12 stitches in his foot.  By the
end of the race, he is running on a bloody stump.  Running for him isn't
about winning, but about doing your best even if that is precisely what
prevents you from winning.
Bill, who spends as much time in the movie measuring feet and cooking
shoe soles on his wife's waffle iron as he does coaching, has his own
secret weapon for his team.  His real gift in life is as an athletic
shoe inventor, and he makes shoes for his athletes.  Eventually, he
names his shoes "Nikes."  You may have heard of them.
Being a cult hero on the track, Pre attracted girls like flies to honey.
One of the film's important subplots concerns his main girlfriend, Mary
Marckx, a devout Catholic who doesn't believe in premarital sex.  Mary,
played with big-eyed beauty by Monica Potter, is just as committed to
her faith in God as Bill is committed to himself.  In one telling
exchange, she asks him pointblank if he believes in God.  "I believe in
myself," he retorts with such innocence that it shows he doesn't
comprehend how blasphemous his answer might appear to her.
To the extent that the movie has a big game, it is the 1972 Munich
Olympics.  Those tragic 1972 games forever altered the lives of many
young athletes, Pre among them.
Even at almost a full two hours in length, the movie feels as trim as
its star.  Conrad L. Hall's cinematography, which focuses on the facial
expressions during the races rather than the theatrics, helps us get
inside the heads of the runners.  Feeling more like participants than
spectators, the audience gets some real appreciation for Pre's devotion
to his goals.  If there ever was one who marched to a different drummer,
it was Pre.
WITHOUT LIMITS runs 1:57.  It is rated PG-13 for brief sexuality and a
little profanity and would be fine for kids around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of 'WITHOUT LIMITS" (Warner Bros.) 
  "Running is not about winning, it's about guts...To give anything
less than your best is to sacrifice the gift," said Steve
Prefontaine. In an era where heroes are hard to find, it's no wonder
that this popular track star's story has inspired so much
interest. Prefontaine had it all:talent, charm, grace, beauty,
self-confidence, and - above all - tremendous drive. He broke every
American record between 2,000 and 10,000 metersbefore he tragically
died at the age of 24 in 1975 in a car crash. Written by Robert
Towne and Kenny Moore (a champion runner and one of Pre's closest
friends) and directed by Towne, this biopic examines the boy behind
the man, the coach behind the athlete. A mill worker's son who grew up
in a German-speaking household in Coos Bay, Oregon, Steve
Prefontaine (Billy Crudup) learned early how to run. As a kid, he
ran from kids who taunted him. As a teenager, he ran for fun and
glory. As an athlete, he ran for himself. He was a rebel, a
perpetual front-runner who refused to win a race with a mediocre
effort, saying: "When you set the pace, you control the race." At
the University of Oregon, he met the two most pivotal people in his
life: his legendary coach, Bill Bowerman (Donald Sutherland), and
his devoutly Catholic girl-friend, Mary Marckx (Monica Potter), who
both cooperated in the making of this movie. The story doesn't
idealize Prefontaine as a role model. On the contrary, it details
his blunt, cocky attitude, self-obsession, and anti-authoritarian
outbursts. Robert Towne hasbeen this route before with "Personal
Best," his story about women runners training for the Olympics. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Without Limits" is an inspiring
7, examining the cool, fearless legacy of the long-distance
runner. It's a great American story.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./Cruise-Wagner Productions
 Director:  Robert Towne
 Writer:  Robert Towne, Kenny Moore
 Cast: Billy Crudup, Donald Sutherland, Monica Potter
   Steve Prefontaine may not have been able to catch a
football as well as Air Bud, the other great athlete
photographed this year, nor could he sink baskets like that
strapping canine.  But take the two out for eight laps around
the track and he'd probably give the retriever a run for the
gold.  Steve Prefontaine, considered the greatest American
track athlete of his time, was a charismatic chap who could be
counted on the ignite the crowds from Eugene to Munich, a
young man who proved that you don't have to be a football
hero to get along with all the pretty girls.  Robert Towne
directs this story in a fairly straightforward way: it is, at base,
a conventional biopic.  Nonetheless--perhaps even because of
its orthodoxy--it is as inspirational as Hugh Hudson's 1981
"Chariot of Fire" albeit without that director's probing insight. 
Towne tends to throw in one too many close-ups of feet as he
did in his 1982 study of a lesbian relatioship during the 1980
Olympics, "Personal Best."  While Towne does not spend too
much time rummaging about Prefontaine's compulsion to win,
he knows how to excite his audience using Conrad Hall's slo-
mo photography with discretion and a booming sound track
pulsating with Randy Miller's original music.
   Towne introduces the young Pre, as he became
affectionately known, a grade-schooler frequently chased by
the town bullies presumably because of his German
background and accent.  Cut to his final year of high school
where the athlete is juggling several offers of full track
scholarships.  He has decided to choose his home state's U.
of Oregon if only its famed coach would personally invite him
to attend.  The principal conflict set up by Towne and Kenny
Moore's script is between Pre (Billy Crudup) and coach Bill
Bowerman (Donald Sutherland), the man who eventually
designed the Nike running shoe.  Pre stubbornly insists on
leading the race from start to finish, holding that "it's
chickenshit to win any other way."  Bowerman warns that
when world-class competition arrived in the coming Olympics,
his protege would have to pace himself and save his energy
for the final laps.  Morever, said the coach, the lead runner
would cut the wind from the second-place competitor, making
the latter's job all too easy.  Why the drive to be first at all
times?  Towne implies that the pressure came from Pre's
frequently having to outrun bullies a decade earlier.  But in
the less sympathetic film by Steve James, "Prefontaine"
(starring Jared Leto), the athlete was seen as a boastful,
somewhat unsympathetic young man who once refused even
to allow a nine-year-old to beat him for fun.
   Pre and Coach Bill exchange philosophies time and again,
with the runner holding that his ability to win came from his
willingness to endure pain more than the next guy. 
Bowerman countered with what is probably the truer
interpretation: talent is the key.  "Your heart pumps more
blood and the bones in your feet are made for the tough
asphalt."   Philosophy, of course, is not what we came to this
film for, and Towne gives us plenty of action, mostly on the
field, a little in the boudoir.  In the University of Oregon's
celebrated field, in Finland, and in Munich, Pre is the crowd
favorite, with thousands of fans stomping their feet and
shouting "Pre" as though the runner were the highest-paid
basketball player in his country.  In fact he remained an
amateur throughout his life, forced to fly tourist class and
given a pittance to live on while traveling.  He dated many
women but his favorite was the religious and celibate Mary
Marckx (performed by the terminally adorable Monica Potter),
a young woman who played hard-to-get at first as she was
put off by his popularity with the fair sex.  Ms. Potter,
however, does little more than look great and mug from time
to time for the camera.
  "Without Limits" is a sturdy, hero-worshipping picture that
underplays the boasting which made Pre less sympathetic in
last year's version by Hollywood Pictures.  It features solid
acting by Billy Crudup who obviously trained hard for the role
and Donald Sutherland who wears his characteristic grin for
the major part of the picture.  The crowd scenes look
authentic and each time Crudup lets the asphalt fly, any
feeling person in the audience must feel his heart skip about
as much as would a runner who is at least jogging the 5,000
meters.  For the record, Steve Prefontaine was killed at the
age of 24 by a hit-and-run driver, having just turned down an
offer of $200,000 to go professional.  He was intent on
competing in the Montreal Olympics, an event off-limits to
those who make a living from the sport.

Author
David Wilcock
Released with little fanfare, Without Limits is a pleasant diversion. The
film documents the life of athlete Steve Prefontaine (played by Crudup),
whos name probably means little to British audiences. An idolised long
distance runner, this film charters his life from his training in the
University of Oregon with coach Bill Bowerman (Sutherland), through to the
1972 Munich Olympic games, and ends with the tragic car crash he was in at
the young age of 24. There's also thrills, suspense and romance in the form
of Mary Marckx (Monica Potter) along the way.
Appearing from accomplished writer Robert Towne, Without Limits is a well
made documentary. The performance, writing and acting are above average, and
all account to a good time. New actor on the block Billy Crudup is good as
Prefontaine, and the audience can relate easily to him. He gets an
unfortunate moustache later on in the film, but this doesn't stop him
delivering an good performance. Monica Potter has great charm as the love
interest, although she isn't given much to do. She looks nice, and acts
well. The ubiquitous Matthew Lillard makes an appearance as one of
Prefontaine's team mates, but the acting award goes to a magical performance
by the ever reliable Donald Sutherland. Every film he's done, whether Animal
House (1979) or Outbreak (1995) he delivers a good performance, but here
he's got a meaty part, and gives it his all. It really is a superb
performance, playing the 'father figure' in a good way.
The script, by Towne and Kenny Moore, is good enough, even though all the
source material is written out for them in history. The dialogue isn't too
bad, though, although occasionally it can get a bit sappy with the romantic
scene between Pre and Mary (a common problem in today's movies.) It doesn't
detract, however. The direction is also very good. Towne makes the actors in
the movie look like the real persons at the time, and uses stock footage of
the actual events, and mixes them well with the filmed footage. Largely
seamless. There's also some good use of montage throughout the film, and a
well selected period soundtrack with some good tunes.
It's a shame this film won't be seen by many people (it only made around $1
million in the U.S during it's cinema run) as this is good entertainment.
Never overdoing it, the audience doesn't feel manipulated throughout with
the movie, even with a typical Hollywood funeral scene. Charming
performances, good direction and decent writing make Without Limits one of
the most pleasant surprises of the year, and is worth watching.

Author
David Nusair
Starring Billy Crudup, Donald Sutherland, Monica Potter
"Without Limits" is the second film in less than a year to tell the story
of Steve Prefontaine, one of the greatest runners in American History. 
The first was called "Prefontaine", and I did not like it much.  It
started off well enough, but then ran out of steam too quickly.  "Without
Limits", unfortunately, follows the same pattern.
"Without Limits" stars relative unknown Billy Crudup as the charismatic
Prefontaine, and Sutherland as his coach and mentor, Bill Bowerman.  The
performances are top-notch, with Crudup giving a star-making performance
as the doomed athelete.  Monica Potter is the only weak link in the cast. 
It seems she was hired simply because she is pretty, because she elicited
no interest from myself.  I was bored everytime she was on screen, and
found her performance comprable to a Cigar Store Indian, except the Cigar
Store Indian is much more interesting to look at.
As with "Prefontaine", the movie starts out quite well.  During the first
half-hour, I was relieved to find that the director, the legendary Robert
Towne, had chosen to film Pre's story in a linear fashion, unlike the
earlier film, which was shot in a pseudo-documentary style which was
exceptionally distracting.  However, as the movie progressed, I found
myself experiencing a sense of deja vu.  Like "Prefontaine", I was
becoming more and more impatient with the film as it went on.  Once Pre
goes to the Olympics, is there really much more to say?  I don't think so.
All that stuff about his fight with the Amateur Athletes Association was
nothing but filler.  A movie about a world-famous runner should concern
itself with only what made the man such a legend.  I don't care whether or
not he was a lothario off the track, I only want to know about what
happened *on* the track.
Since I have disliked this film and "Prefontaine", I can come to only one
conclusion:  While Pre may have been the greatest runner of his time, his
life just isn't filmable.  He didn't do enough to fill a two-hour running
time.  
"Without Limits" is worthwhile only for the performances of it's two
leads, and nothing else.
-- 
David Nusair                                      dnusair@chat.carleton.ca
Come visit my "Reel Film Reviews" site! "http://chat.carleton.ca/~dnusair" 
