Title
Review for Gorilla Bathes at Noon (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Max Hoffmann
Seen: Sun 5/10/93, Palo Alto Square, SF Film Festival
Rating: 6 (scale of 1->10)
Germany 1993, 83 min.
In English, Russian and German with English subtitles
Director/Screenplay: Dusan Makavejev
Prod:  Alfred Hurmer, Boana Marijan, Joachim von Vietinghoff
Camera: Aleksander Petkovic, Miodrag Milosevic
Editor: Vuksan Lukovac
CAST: Svelozar Cvetkovic, Anita Mancic, Alexandra Rohmig, Petar Bozovic
IN A NUTSHELL: a great, original premise for a film that misses the
mark; a major in the Red Army decide to stay behind in Berlin and "make
it," after reunification.  In spite of the clever interspersing with a
campy post-war Russian "victory over Berlin" film, this movie sags as
the hero begins to wear on you, and the sight gags lose their
freshness.  Would lose most mainstream audiences, but the art-house
crowd may find enough gems in this dust heap to make it worth viewing.
     Major Victor Borisovich's soviet officer's unit has "deserted"
him, leaving him behind in a city still trying to rebuild itself.  The
naive hero (played by Yugoslav stage actor, Svetozar Cvetkovic) takes
the wrong tack, bicycling around the city in full uniform with the Red
Flag on his bicycle (because he's used to women "falling" for his
uniform).  Though initially an engaging hero, the material gradually
wears thin, and the Major starts to resemble an obnoxious Danny Kaye.
     His journey through Berlin is hardly boring.  He falls in with an
aspiring artist, and eventually beds her, only to receive retribution
from her Turkish lover (whose charcoal etched good looks makes the
wispy Russian's conquest a little unbelievable).  The film hits its low
point as the Major ends up with an Oliver Twist-like group of outcasts,
living in an abandoned building.  The motley crew resembles a colorful
group of hastely assembled stereotypes chosen to be foils to the
Major's off-beat ways.  The script even throws in a baby for the "heart
warming" effect.  In this tepid soup, it's more like indigestion.
     The unifying symbol in this film is the eventual decapitation and
tear down of a huge statue of Lenin.  The director revealed in the
post-viewing Q/A that a few kegs of beer for the wrecking crew bought
him the privilege of shooting the action, with he and the actor high on
the scaffolding, while the press was cordoned off hundred of feet
away.  This may have been the film's only triumph.
     Highlights of the film are the frequently interspersed clips from
THE FALL OF BERLIN (1949).  It's a high camp, Russian propaganda piece
with outrageously operatic deaths, and closeups smudgily superimposed
over what appears to be a color postcard of the burning Reichstag.
Unfortunately, this film begins to look more interesting than the
modern work that frame's it.  This has oft been a problem, for instance
in film biographies of old movie stars where the vintage Hollywood
clips are more interesting than the contemporary spin on the subject's
lives.
     The film has crisp photography, but it's not brilliant enough to
avoid the wait for this turkey to come out on video.  It might be
appropriately labeled a WINGS OF DESIRE with wings of lead.  Unlike
its German predecessor, this one never gets off the ground.
