Title
Review for Predator (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Fritzinger
     Arnold Schwarzenegger leads a team of elite mercenaries through a Central
American jungle to rescue a captured "Cabinet Minister" from communist-backed
rebels.  Along the way he deals with a treacherous CIA agent, about a hundred
insurgents, and an alien sportsman doing a little trophy hunting.
     The "plot" of PREDATOR is only a set-up for the long hunt scene that takes
up 3/4 of the movie.  Any reason to drop 5 or 6 heavily armed men miles from
civilization would have worked just as well, so little time is spent here,
only long enough to let us know who the good guys and the bad guys are, and
then one obligatory battle scene so Arnie can use his patented groan-inducing
corny combat banter.  Characters that started out as one-dimensional Rambos are
barely developed to the point of being two-dimensional Rambos, and most of the
dialogue is so stiff and unnatural that the characters seem to be announcing
important information for the sake of the audience, rather then talking to one
another.  Lines like "You were my friend; now you are a treacherous CIA agent.
What happened?", and "He was my friend.  Now I want revenge."  are typical.
     But that doesn't really matter, because PREDATOR is not trying to present
a soldier's experience.  These guys are not ALIENS' grunts in space, nor are
they the regular guys in a horrible situation from PLATOON.  PREDATOR is about
the local bare-knuckles champ going up against an out-of-towner who's won his
last 725 fights.  And on that level PREDATOR works well!
     The alien's actions are believable, and consistent with the idea it is a
sportsman.  It treats the human characters like game animals, stalking them
down, taking them one by one, and taking care of each kill before going out
again.  The alien is a competent, though sometimes over-confident, hunter after
dangerous big game, and it behaves accordingly.
     The thing that impresses me most is that throughout PREDATOR, the humans
have a chance.  Too often in movies like this, the monster is unstoppable.  It
is indestructible and omniscient until the last five minutes of the last reel,
when the hero finds some laughably easy way to destroy it.  In PREDATOR the
alien is very very good, but fallible.  The movie carefully portrays the alien
as a real threat, without making it seeming invincible.
     The effects used to create the alien are another strong point.  While
watching the movie, you know that the alien's camouflage suit and blaster would
work just as well as shown on the screen.  There is plenty here for the people
who complain about Tie-fighters banking and spacecrafts making noise to pick
apart, but it LOOKS real, and that is the important part!
     There are still some holes in PREDATOR.  The last scene of the alien mars
the rest of the performance, and I feel some of the characters are killed off a
little to easily so they could get on with the final fight of Arnie vs.  The
Thing.  But it works more often than it fails.
     It's hard to rate PREDATOR since if you don't like this sort of movie,
this isn't the one that is going to change your mind, so as a movie I only give
it +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Die-hard fans of action movies, in the TERMINATOR
style, can take a +3.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Arnold Schwarzenegger meets an alien
     with a cloaking device while on a commando mission in Central
     America.  Action films are pretty common, but the concept of
     the cloaking device coupled with decent special effects are a
     boon.
     When I was growing up and into comics, one kind of comic I was NOT
interested in was war comics.  I never read one, though I was occasionally
curious about the ones that mixed war stories with a science fictional
element.  Typically, some group of commandos would find an island they were
taking was infested with dinosaurs.  If I were to read a war comic, that
would be the one I'd want to read.  Well, the science fiction war story has
made it to the screen with PREDATOR.
     To Major Dutch Schaefer (played by Arnold Schwarzenegger), it's just
another job.  Schaefer makes his living by leading a crack commando unit in
the jungle.  It isn't the safest way to make a living, but it usually has a
predictable level of danger and few really unexpected hazards.  Schaefer
usually knows pretty much what to expect and what to be prepared for.  This
time, however, Schaefer has flubbed it badly.  Schaefer and his men are not
prepared for the hazards they are facing and they are paying the price in
lives.  It isn't really their fault, of course.  It's just that sometimes
you face *something you haven't seen before*.  This time they are being picked
off by an alien creature and because the alien can fade into the jungle like
a chameleon, they are not even seeing the something this time.
     Twentieth Century Fox, who cleaned up with two science fiction horror
films last summer (ALIENS and THE FLY), have as their summer science fiction
film this year a sort of RAMBO meets ALIENS.  You probably already know who
Schwarzenegger is.  The title role is played by the 7'2" tall Kevin Peter
Hall, the Peter Mayhew of the 80s.  Hall is quoted as saying of his alien's
fighting style: "An alien warrior wouldn't come from outer space doing old
Bruce Lee routines.  I wanted something a little different from the standard
karate.  Medieval combat seemed appropriate."  Right!  Well, I'm not really
sure you can tell the difference.
     What does set this film apart from pure throwaway action films is an
interesting approach in the chameleon or, more accurately, "cloaking"
effect.  In the first scenes when you see it, you really are not sure what
you have seen or how the effect was created.  When you can get a better look
at the effect, it is relatively clear how it was achieved, but it is still a
good idea.  The plot implications of a nearly invisible creature stalking
the commandos are well-handled.  Without the cloaking concept this would be
a fairly low-grade action film.  As it stands, PREDATOR is an enjoyable
action film, reasonably well-thought-out.  I saw only one real inconsistency
(I don't think it will give away much to say that sometimes the alien can
see human eyes and sometimes it can't).  Because the invisibility theme is
well-handled, I give PREDATOR a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
