Title
Review for Governess, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE GOVERNESS (UK) ***  Written and directed by Sandra Goldbacher.
Photography, Ashley Rowe. Editing, Isabel Lorente. Production design, Sarah
Greenwood. Music, Edward Shearmur. Produced by Sarah Curtis. Cast : Minnie
Driver (Rosina), Tom Wilkinson (Charles Cavendish), Florence Hoath
(Clementina), Jonathan Rhys Meyers (Henry Cavendish),  Harriet Walter (Mrs.
Cavendish), Arlene Cockburn (Lily Milk), Bruce Myers (Rosina's father),  et
al. A Sony Picture Classics release.114 minutes. R (sex)
Produced or sponsored in the UK by the British Broadcasting Corporation,
British Screen, the Arts Council of Britain, Pandora Cinema, and Parallax
Pictures, The Governess is directed by first-timer (in features) Sandra
Goldbacher, and the film's credits are for more women than men. No doubt
about it, the gender gap is closing steadily. In countries like France it
is a fait accompli; in the USA, it is felt more among Independents than in
mainstream Hollywood. Good news.
Set in the early 1840s, the start of the Victorian era (1837-1901), the
film revolves around Rosina Da Silva (Minnie Driver), one of the children
of a wealthy Jewish family in London. What is immediately striking is that
those Jews are members of the Sephardic Community in London, a large,
lively group that, to my knowledge, has hardly been featured in British
cinema, except indirectly and in the person of Benjamin Disraeli who was
of Sepharad Italian-Jewish  descent and became twice Prime Minister under
Queen Victoria.
The Sephardim (from the Hebrew word Sefarad, meaning Spain) were originally
Spanish or Portuguese Jews who were expelled from their countries in the
late 1400s, moved to North Africa and other areas of the then Ottoman
Empire (including the Balkans and Greece) on or near the Mediterranean,
also to countries such as Italy, France, Holland, England. They mostly
retained their Judeo-Spanish language (Ladino),and mostly, too, contributed
hugely to the culture and life of their new homes. They formed the
second-in-size diaspora, after the Ashkenazi , mostly Yiddish-speaking
Jews, who lived in Central and Eastern Europe. (In the U.S.A the Ashkenazim
have always been far more numerous than the Sephardim).
American movies show a wealth of Ashkenazi-descended characters, but hardly
any Sephardim.  For that matter, except, no doubt, in Israeli cinema, very
few films anywhere have dealt principally with Sephardic Jews. Offhand,
only two come to mind:  Every Time we Say Goodbye (Israel, 1986), a
charming WWII romance starring Tom Hanks; and Novia que te vea  (Mexico,
1993) in Ladino literally "would that I could see you becoming a bride,"
directed by a Mexican woman, Guita Schyfter who is no doubt Ashkenazi.
In The Governess, there's a fascinating, long opening of a synagogue, its
mass prayers and its socializing aftermath, reproduced, I would think, with
minute and colorful precision, and introducing Rosina who has a will of her
own and would like to be an actress. But soon after, her father dies and
the family is left debt-ridden. Rosina, a girl with gumption, refuses the
easy solution of marrying a rich and much older fishmonger (who smells of
his product). At a time when women's options for employment were
microscopic, just one venue is open to Rosina: to become a governess. So
she scours newspaper announcements, finds a "wanted" ad, applies under the
Gentile name of Mary
Blackchurch (sic!), forges a false background for herself, and gets hired.
Her employers live on an island off Scotland. The exteriors were filmed on
the Isle of Arran, which filmgoers could perhaps confuse with the Aran (one
r), which is in Ireland,  of Man of Aran, the superb 1934 documentary by
Robert Flaherty. Still, both films happen to have this in common: survival,
physical in Flaherty and social-psychological in the case of Rosina-Mary.
She enters a big house where the first sight is a wall festooned with
trophies of stag-heads, a sight that chills as much as the lack of heating.
Neither is made a point of, but we do feel both in the background. The lady
of the house, Mrs. Cavendish, is bored to extinction, misses the bright
lights and social life of London. Why she accepts this provincial exile is
not spelled out. We might assume that it is because Mr. Charles Cavendish
needs this isolation for his work. A cultivated man with insatiable
curiosity, he is one of those lay, amateur scientists and inventors who
devote their all to research and experiments and often come up with
discoveries. His current passion is for photography.
Rosina slowly adapts, or pretends to, in the somehow Gothic-Gentile milieu,
in spite of ham being served, occasional Christian prayers, and especially
her charge, the bratty child Clementina. Rosina, who has guts, slowly tames
the little shrew. Eventually some affection is born between them. She also
impresses her employers with her culture, knowledge, foreign languages,
even her singing of Schubert. We could have done without the latter. Above
all, she proves to be also scientifically inclined, which leads to her
assisting Mr. Cavendish.
The man's main problem is that while he can make photographs with his
camera obscura, he cannot fix them, that is, find a way to keep the images
from fading. There is no known process for this yet.
(But, to get technical, it seems to me that before 1840 , Talbot in England
and Daguerre in France had
achieved this with the use of "hypo," sodium hyposulphite. I won't quibble
however).
Accidentally, as Rosina is secretly performing a Jewish prayer --note the
symbolism--she stumbles on the answer to the problem. Until now, it was a
given that Charles and Rosina would, for obvious reasons, fall in love. Her
"invention" strengthens the bond, yet at the same time poses ego-problems
for Charles, some stemming from scientific macho-pride (he later has a
scientist visitor but he gives no credit to Rosina), some from a murky
feeling that Rosina is overwhelming his life (later too he tells her "you
consume me, I cannot be consumed").
In-between, the affair proceeds inevitably and predictably, except for
details which add color, especially as Rosina  abandons her fake
eyeglasses, becomes more sexily dressed, gets better-looking, daringly
poses for photographs au naturel (including a Salome dance of the seven
veils), even photographs Charles asleep and naked in the fullest monty -- a
big step beyond The Full Monty movie where Tom Wilkinson (Charles here)
played the foreman of the male strippers. Risque stuff indeed in a story
that marginally smacks of Bronte-Austen novels.
Predictably, when  Henry, the Cavendish's son, is sent down from Oxford,
the boy, at an age when the sap rises quickly, becomes passionate about
Rosina. Predictably, Rosina quits her job, returns to London during a
cholera epidemic. With an abrupt leap in time, we next find Rosina
established as a commercial photographer and a recorder of Jewish life.
Charles appears to have his portrait taken. "I'm in your hands" he tells
her in a symbolic double-entendre. Then, at the end of the posing "Are we
done?" She replies with another double-entendre "Yes, quite done."  She
becomes sought after. "They tell me I captured the beauty of my father's
people." The end.
The Governess has some weak points, among them the nearly total
predictability of the events. But then, lacking this, the film could not be
what it is. On the other hand, there is too much purple prose in the
lovers' dialogue. Also, several scenes are both slow and protracted, as if
the movie's makers wanted to squeeze out every drop of every setup. This
can be a become a bit dull especially since this is a work with few
characters, all supporting except for the Charles-Mary couple. I say Mary
rather than Rosina since we're positive that if he knew that she is a
Jewess --a word frequently used here--he would never have had an affair
with her.
More ambiguous (in her first starring role) is Minnie Driver's presence.
She is no beauty, she does not exude sexuality, she is not captivating. Yet
this serves the movie's feminist side subtly and well, since it tells us
that you don't have to have radiant appeal to be attractive. This also goes
with several scenes of love-making or sex which are quite realistically
awkward or naive.
Overall The Governess score many a good point. I find both the start and
the finish of the movie excellent, the former in its non-cliche nature and
length, the latter in its brusqueness. One also ought to appreciate the
metaphor, the notion that photography means possession which some want but
others do not. Think of New World Indians and others who don't want their
soul stolen by pictures. And fixing the image stands cleverly for the
fixing of relationships, feelings and attitudes.
Without insistence, the movie sketches out a latent anti-Semitism that's
familiar to the director: "at my primary school the only two other Jewish
girls and I felt completely alien, and that was only 20 years ago." There
is no attempt to spell out actions, reactions, states of mind, or to engage
into anachronistic psychology. The cinematography and use of light are
beautiful, with burnished colors, chiaroscuro, candle-light, diffraction of
images seen through pieces of glass or in reflections, etc. The whole is
without forced artiness, including the several occasions when Rosina has
dreams or perhaps sees apparitions of her late, beloved father.
The movie won as Best Film at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival,
today the paramount festival in what used to be the Soviet bloc.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
     Sandra Goldbacher's "The Governess" is, like Minnie Driver
herself, a creation of uncommon beauty.  Every frame of the
film shimmers with color and exquisite visuals, thanks to
Ashley Rowe's incredible cinematography and keen eye for
detail.  The lovely score from Edward Shearmur finds the proper
tone for every scene, never once intruding into the dialogue or
serving as a phony emotional cue (ie, "This is a sad moment, so
we'll beat you over the head with weepy violins now.")  Even
if it contained nothing but these items, the movie would still
be worth a peek.
     Fortunately for us, it also contains one of the year's
best performances.  Rosina da Silva (Ms. Driver) is the
educated, spirited daughter of a wealthy Jewish merchant,
living with her family in one of London's Sephardic communities
during the early nineteenth century.  Although content with
life, Rosina sometimes feels constrained by the demands imposed
on her by Victorian etiquette ("Try not to look so tall, dear,"
frets her mother).  Although she has no training, she dreams of
one day leaving home to become an actress, exposing her soul on
the stage for all the world to see.
     Her dream soon becomes reality, though not in the way
she'd hoped.  After her father passes away unexpectedly, the
family finds itself in desperate need of money.  Rosina, the
eldest daughter, decides to look for a domestic service job to
help the family struggle by, and she eventually receives an
offer to act as governess to young Christina Cavendish
(Florence Hoath) at the Cavendish family home in Scotland.  The
only catch: the devoutly Christian Cavendishs don't know that
Rosina is Jewish; if they did, she'd never be allowed to work
for them.  Needing the job, Rosina buries her heritage and
invents a Gentile persona named Mary Blackchurch.  If
questioned about her heritage, she plans to tell her employers
that her olive skin is the result of the (fictional) Italian
blood she received from her mother's side of the family.  Thus
begins Rosina's acting career... though it's far from what she
originally had in mind.
     After arriving at the Cavendish home, Mary quickly becomes
enamored with her employer, Charles (Tom Wilkinson, last seen
as the grumpy foreman in "The Full Monty").  Highly
intelligent, and charming in his own fumbling way, Charles is
working in an exciting new field known as "photography," though
he has not yet figured out how to keep an image from fading
mere moments after the picture is developed.  Rosina/Mary,
possessing an extensive knowledge of chemistry, begins to
assist him in his work.  Soon a strong bond forms between them,
the ramifications of which will change both of them forever.
     As usual, Minnie Driver devours her role, acting with such
skill and charisma that I forgot about everything in the world
except the story I was watching.  I wasn't looking at a movie
screen; I was gazing through a window into the nineteenth
century, watching a beautiful, intelligent young woman trying
to sort out her own tormented emotions.  Ms. Driver was
nominated for "Best Supporting Actress" for her work in
last year's "Good Will Hunting," though the award ultimately
went to Kim Basinger ("LA Confidential").  I predict another
Oscar nomination, and quite possibly a win, for her performance
in "The Governess."
     The material could have been approached in a number of
ways: as a Great Statement about prejudice, a commentary on
nineteenth-century social classes, a depiction of the maternal
relationship Rosina/Mary develops with young Christina, a
journey of female self-discovery, a steamy historical romance,
etc.  Director Sandra Goldbacher, however, has chosen to
include ALL these things in her film.  It's both the movie's
strength and biggest hindrance.
     Quite simply, there's a little too much story contained in
"The Governess"; at its conclusion, we're left with as many
questions as answers.  In particular, the final scene is
maddeningly vague, and we're left to ponder its meaning as the
end credits roll.  It's not a fatal flaw; the film still
resonates with enough simple truth that it can't be derailed so
easily, but the less interesting subplots (such as the ones
involving Charles' son Henry) do cause the pace to drag from
time to time.
     One other (admittedly petty) thing concerned me: why does
Rosina/Mary need to go to Scotland for a job?  Is no one in
London hiring?  Or England, for that matter?  There may well be
a good reason for this; my knowledge of Victorian Europe is
basically non-existant, but the question nagged at me while
watching the film.  If the script hadn't made it so clear that
Rosina was uncomfortable about taking a job so far away from
her family, I would've simply chalked it up to her spirit of
adventure.
     With that said, "The Governess" remains a film of rare
beauty.  Its wonderful acting, cinematography and music place
it a notch above the usual historical costume drama.  Only an
overly long running time and a slightly unfocused script
detract from its visual elegance.  This is a fine debut; if
Sandra Goldbacher can learn to prune her future work a bit more
liberally while keeping her direction and photography at this
level, she could very well emerge as one of Europe's most
interesting directors.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film: http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Sony Pictures Classics/Parallax Pictures
 Director: Sandra Goldbacher
 Writer: Sandra Goldbacher
 Cast: Minnie Driver, Florence Hoath, Jonathan Rhys-Myers,
Harriet Walter, Tom Wilkinson
   "The Governess" is writer-director Sandra Goldbacher's
British answer to Agnes Merlet's Italian-centered "Artemisia." 
While "Artemisia" deals with the first woman who made a
living by painting in Italy, "The Governess" is a (fictionalized)
interpretation of Britain's first female career photographer. 
Wielding vivid but realistic color when Ashley Rowe's camera
focuses on an almost subterranean society in London, the
lens takes on a cold, harsh conviction when it travels to the
remote and uncharitable Scottish island of Arran, a piece of
godforsaken territory that must seem alien even to its lifelong
residents.
   "The Governess," which takes place in the 1840's, is the
story of Rosina Da Silva (Minnie Driver), a woman of great
English patience who grows up in the Sephardic Jewish
community of London, where she enjoys a happy and
prosperous life amid a people generally shunned by the
Anglican majority.   She jokes readily with her conventional
sister.  In one scene, the two young women ponder the
possible taste of semolina, a dessert enjoyed by Gentiles,
which they agree looks somewhat like semen.  "I'd like to see
semen but not as a drink," Rosina announces to her sib, who
is shocked even that Rosina had once kissed her boyfriend
Benjamin though they are "not married."  When Rosina's
loving father is murdered, we understand that the estate is in
debt.  To support her mother and sister, Rosina must find
employment, but in an anti-Semitic Britain, what will she do? 
As she is educated, she takes the job of governess, a
prestigious profession which, along with prostitution, was one
of the few careers open to women.  But to acquire and
maintain the position, she must pose as a Gentile (not difficult
for one who aspires to the stage), and even then, she must
re-locate to a manor on the bleak Scottish island of Skye.
   As she puts it, writer-director Goldbacher, herself a product
of an Italian Jewish father and a mother from the Isle of Skye,
is interested primarily in taking "a character out of one really
strongly defined, close-knit, vivid culture into another world,
and look at what it would be like for her to fall in love with
someone from this other culture, while also denying her own
identity."  From the looks of things, Rosina--now known by the
name Mary Blackchurch--has quite a conflict on her hands. 
On the one hand she finds it difficult to accept the exotic
culture of non-Jews whose remoteness keeps her feeling an
outlander.  On the other hand, she enjoys her first sexual
relationship, one which both destroys her stereotype of
Gentiles as a distant people and reconfirms her expectations
of them.  Striking a feminist attitude, one which projects both
strength of character and vulnerability to hurt, Minnie Driver
gives an Oscar-caliber performance as a woman who takes a
deep interest in the traditionally masculine profession of
chemistry as she becomes involved in the experimentation of
her employer, Mr. Cavendish (Tom Wilkinson), one of
England's first photographers.  With no background in the
field, the clever Rosina impresses Cavendish by providing the
clue he needs to fix the camera's images on paper while at
the same time freeing the repressed gentleman from his
sexual limitations.  Much of the humor comes from Ms.
Driver's thoughts, which provide some narration to the tale, as
when she assesses the patronizing Mrs. Cavendish (Harriet
Walter) as a woman who "seems as though she has a lemon
up her posterior."  Florence Hoath turns in a cute
performance as Clementina, the thirteen-year-old spoiled brat
who is tamed by her governess while Tom Wilkinson shows
his flexibility this year by playing both an enraged homophobe
in "Wilde" and a tormented, obsessed scientist in "The
Governess."
   Urban audiences will be pleased by Goldbacher's view of
country estates, in which wealthy patrons allegedly enjoy their
lives in quiet and splendor.  Mrs. Cavendish is, after all, bored
out of her mind; their son Henry (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) is
disturbed enough to be thrown out of college; and Mr.
Cavendish is oppressed by the surroundings.  Even when
returning to her cholera-embattled digs in London, Rosina--
who has lost her mother to a disease that is ravishing the city-
-realizes that there's no place like home.  Minnie Driver finally
has the role of her career; one that utilizes her considerable
acting talent and the dark Mediterranean features which have
allowed performers like Joe Mantegna (in "Homicide") and
John Turturro (in "The Truce") to achieve splendid turns as
Jews.  The sound track of Sephardic songs is mesmerizing,
as is the rest of the picture. Rated R.  Running time: 114
minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Writer and director Sandra Goldbacher's THE GOVERNESS is a movie 
all dressed up with no place to go.  It knows it wants to be an 
atmospheric costume drama that feels as fresh as the latest "Masterpiece 
Theater" series.  What it lacks is a compelling story to tell.  And when 
it finally gets to some "madness, sinful madness," the incidents feel 
forced and unnatural.
     The talented Minnie Driver plays Rosina, a young Jewish woman whose 
father dies in the beginning of the picture.  In order to stop being a 
burden on her mother, who is left saddled with her husband's 
considerable debts, Rosina decides to leave the big city she loves to 
venture off to the remote Isle of Skye in Scotland to be a governess.  
     Rosina, for reasons never adequately explained, hides her religion.  
Posing as a devote Christian, she nevertheless shudders to see all of 
the crucifixes in her new household.  The idea of a man with nails 
through his hands and feet hanging over her head is not something she 
easily tolerates.
     Most of the characters in this somniferous tale are not well drawn.  
Tom Wilkinson from THE FULL MONTY plays Rosina's new employer, 
Cavendish.  An early photography experimenter, he finds that Rosina 
provides the key help he needs to solve his scientific problem.  
     Rosina becomes more than just Cavendish's secret scientific 
colleague.  They become lovers in a bit of never very credible 
chemistry.  (She describes his wife as having a "lemon up her 
posterior," supposedly to justify her own subsequent behavior.)  She 
ends up taking nude pictures of Cavendish, which she uses for shock 
value when it suits her purpose.
     Edward Shearmur's music for the film is wonderfully dark and 
mysterious - a quality the lifeless picture rarely obtains.  The average 
"Masterpiece Theater" episode is much livelier and certainly preferable 
to THE GOVERNESS.
     THE GOVERNESS runs 1:54.  It is rated R for sex and nudity and 
would be fine for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
Minnie Driver's new film: it's one of the "Governess in Remote Estate"
genre, something I understand better than the "American/Briton in
Italian Villa," but, really, that doesn't say much.  The latter is
entirely mysterious to me; the former is less so, only because of the
good old high school reading list, which included more Bronte sisters
than you can reasonably expect to see in later life.
This new film takes place in the 1820s or 1830s, and throws a few
twists into the usual story.  The first one, not truly remarked on for
most of the movie, is that Minnie Driver's character is Jewish.  To
kick off the film, we see an interesting depiction of Jewish life in
early 19th C. London: a marginalized culture, almost wholly insular,
with its own rituals and institutions.  Gentiles are the great unknown,
and the only interaction between the two groups early in the film is an
exchange of insults between Driver and a pair of street hookers.
Driver's father dies early on, leaving the family in debt.  Instead of
marrying a rich old fish monger, as her mom wants, Driver takes on a
Gentile name, Mary Blackchurch, and becomes a governess.  Her first job
is at the aforementioned remote estate, on a remote Scottish island,
the Isle of Skye.  Travel before the invention of railroads just sucks,
but there are very nice shots of the North Sea, almost flat as a mirror
at times.  In any case, the archetypal trappings of the remote estate
are there: a bratty charge, a distant wife, a dynamic if emotionally
closed master of the house.  Things develop as expected.
The second twist comes about in this part of the film.  The estate's
owner is an inventor, trying to come up with the right chemical
solution to "fix" photographs, so the images captured by camera won't
fade immediately after they're taken.  So, woven into the usual
governess story is a meditation on the capturing of indelible images
and memories.  This is a romanticized, compressed history of the
invention of camera film, but it provides the filmmakers with a nice
opportunity to show large, airy chambers filled with fluttering
photographic prints, art photos that you won't find in Daguerreotype
archives.  Presumably, there was some meditation on eyes, observation
and their relation to memory as well, but that was far too subtle for
me, so we'll skip it.
The relationship between the lord of the manor and the governess is
done fairly well, with the expected bright, sunlit moments amid sturm
und drang as the affair's barometer bobs up and down.  The lord's son
makes an appearance later in the film; he's read too much Byron,
apparently, something the flouncy shirt and haircut gives away.
Hijinks and revenge ensue, and the governess leaves for the calmer
environs of London by the end.
The epilogue is a curious one: she becomes a photographer in her own
right, specializing in capturing the heritage of her people.  This
ending feels a little tacked on, as her people aren't really remarked
on for most of the film, not in any meaningful way.  Yes, there's a
dramatic moment or two somewhere in there, and the Jewish-Gentile thing
highlights her isolation in Scotland, but it's not organic to the film:
she could have been a worshiper of Bob the Subgenius for all it
mattered.
As a side note, I saw the preview for this film a couple of days
later.  Golly: what a Harlequin Romance!  It's not that bad in real
life.  "The Governess" is supposed to be the director's first film, and
it's a fine first effort.  Some of the photography is gorgeous, though
the movie was a little longer than it could have been.  I didn't find
the story that intriguing, but that may be me.  Quite watchable.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Sandra Goldbacher's "The Governess" is, like Minnie Driver
herself, a creation of uncommon beauty.  Every frame of the film shimmers
with color and exquisite visuals, thanks to Ashley Rowe's incredible
cinematography and keen eye for detail.  The lovely score from Edward
Shearmur finds the proper tone for every scene, never once intruding into
the dialogue or serving as a phony emotional cue (ie, "This is a sad
moment, so we'll beat you over the head with weepy violins now.")  Even
if it contained nothing but these items, the movie would still be worth
a peek.
        Fortunately for us, it also contains one of the year's best
performances.  Rosina da Silva (Ms. Driver) is the educated, spirited
daughter of a wealthy Jewish merchant, living with her family in one of
London's Sephardic communities during the early nineteenth century.
Although content with life, Rosina sometimes feels constrained by the
demands imposed on her by Victorian etiquette ("Try not to look so tall,
dear," frets her mother).  Although she has no training, she dreams of
one day leaving home to become an actress, exposing her soul on the stage
for all the world to see.
        Her dream soon becomes reality, though not in the way she'd hoped.
After her father passes away unexpectedly, the family finds itself in
desperate need of money.  Rosina, the eldest daughter, decides to look
for a domestic service job to help the family struggle by, and she
eventually receives an offer to act as governess to young Christina
Cavendish (Florence Hoath) at the Cavendish family home in Scotland.  The
only catch: the devoutly Christian Cavendishs don't know that Rosina is
Jewish; if they did, she'd never be allowed to work for them.  Needing
the job, Rosina buries her heritage and invents a Gentile persona named
Mary Blackchurch.  If questioned about her heritage, she plans to tell
her employers that her olive skin is the result of the (fictional)
Italian blood she received from her mother's side of the family.  Thus
begins Rosina's acting career... though it's far from what she originally
had in mind.
        After arriving at the Cavendish home, Mary quickly becomes
enamored with her employer, Charles (Tom Wilkinson, last seen as the
grumpy foreman in "The Full Monty").  Highly intelligent, and charming in
his own fumbling way, Charles is working in an exciting new field known
as "photography," though he has not yet figured out how to keep an image
from fading mere moments after the picture is developed.  Rosina/Mary,
possessing an extensive knowledge of chemistry, begins to assist him in
his work.  Soon a strong bond forms between them, the ramifications of
which will change both of them forever.
        As usual, Minnie Driver devours her role, acting with such
skill and charisma that I forgot about everything in the world except the
story I was watching.  I wasn't looking at a movie screen; I was gazing
through a window into the nineteenth century, watching a beautiful,
intelligent young woman trying to sort out her own tormented emotions.
Ms. Driver was nominated for "Best Supporting Actress" for her work in
last year's "Good Will Hunting," though the award ultimately went to Kim
Basinger ("LA Confidential").  I predict another Oscar nomination, and
quite possibly a win, for her performance in "The Governess."
        The material could have been approached in a number of ways: as
a Great Statement about prejudice, a commentary on nineteenth-century
social classes, a depiction of the maternal relationship Rosina/Mary
develops with young Christina, a journey of female self-discovery, a
steamy historical romance, etc.  Director Sandra Goldbacher, however, has
chosen to include ALL these things in her film.  It's both the movie's
strength and biggest hindrance.
        Quite simply, there's a little too much story contained in "The
Governess"; at its conclusion, we're left with as many questions as
answers.  In particular, the final scene is maddeningly vague, and we're
left to ponder its meaning as the end credits roll.  It's not a fatal
flaw; the film still resonates with enough simple truth that it can't be
derailed so easily, but the less interesting subplots (such as the ones
involving Charles' son Henry) do cause the pace to drag from time to
time.
        One other (admittedly petty) thing concerned me: why does
Rosina/Mary need to go to Scotland for a job?  Is no one in London
hiring?  Or England, for that matter?  There may well be a good reason
for this; my knowledge of Victorian Europe is basically non-existant, but
the question nagged at me while watching the film.  If the script hadn't
made it so clear that Rosina was uncomfortable about taking a job so far
away from her family, I would've simply chalked it up to her spirit of
adventure.
        With that said, "The Governess" remains a film of rare beauty.
Its wonderful acting, cinematography and music place it a notch above
the usual historical costume drama.  Only an overly long running time
and a slightly unfocused script detract from its visual elegance.  This
is a fine debut; if Sandra Goldbacher can learn to prune her future work
a bit more liberally while keeping her direction and photography at this
level, she could very well emerge as one of Europe's most interesting
female directors.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Joy Wyse
Minnie Driver turns in another superb performance as the title character
in The Governess.  She portrays a Jewess in Victorian London who dreams of
love but, following the murder of her beloved father, she finds herself
"promised" as a wife.   Rather than marry this unwanted husband, she
places an ad in the newspaper looking for   employment.  In order to
accept a job as governess she pretends to be a gentile named Mary
Blackchurch.
At her new residence in Scotland she learns that the father of her charge
is a man of dreams who is working on a form of early photography.  It is
this quest that forms the major storyline.  Tom Wilkinson, who will be
remembered as the older member of the Full Monty troupe, portrays the
father.
In an opening scene, when a London prostitute bears her breast, you know
that there will be nudity in the film.  But, this is a true case of
artistic nudity, including full frontal nudity.  
The most memorable thing about the film, and there are many, is the
fantastic art direction.  That, combined with exquisite cinematography,
creates artistic portraits that become etched in your mind.  The wardrobe
is strikingly different, but totally fitting with the period.
There is something about this film that reminded me of "The Heiress" with
Olivia deHaviland. And, I think that you will find that there will be a
disagreement with your friends as to whether it is a happy or a sad
ending.  It's all in how you look at it.
This is an Art film in more ways than one, but it is also an excellent
study in life, religion, and love.  I hope that people recognize it for
what it is.  I will probably see it again.  I give it an B  because it did
move slowly in a couple of places.

Author
Matt Williams
The Governess is a romantic drama that's like an overripe peach.  It has
a strong core, but a soft, mushy outside.
Minnie Driver stars as Rosina da Silva, a devout Jewish girl in 19th
century London. After her beloved father passes away, she is forced to
take a job to support her family.  However, there aren't many lucrative
job opportunities for Sephardic Jews, so Rosina poses as a gentile named
Mary Blackchurch in order to take a job as governess on the remote Isle
of Skye.
There, she is hired by the Cavendish family to look after the devilish
Clementina (Florence Hoath).  The head of the Cavendish family, Charles
(Tom Wilkinson), is a reclusive inventor who is fascinated by the new
science of photography.
Despite the amorous advances of Charles' son Henry (Jonathan Rhys
Meyers), Rosina finds herself attracted to Charles, himself.  Will
Charles return her affections, or will he remain devoted to his wife
(Harriet Walter)?
The heart of this unconventional love story is pinned together by Driver
and Wilkinson.  The whole thing depends on convincing performances by
the two leads, and they successfully carry it off.  Driver displays a
degree of eroticism heretofore undiscovered in her works.  And Wilkinson
is able to make us understand why a young woman would be attracted to
this older man, with a performance bristling with perception and
intelligence.
It's too bad the rest of the film isn't as strong as their relationship.
The Governess' multiple subplots are awkwardly set up. You can spot the
"miraculous" photography breakthrough from several miles away, and one
never gets a sense of what the Henry-Rosina relationship is ever trying
to accomplish.
Worth seeing on the basis of its central romance, The Governess is never
able to get much beyond that core relationship.  It's aimless at points,
but has a good heart...and after all, that's what's most important in a
romantic drama.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "THE GOVERNESS" (Sony Pictures Classics)
 In her fictionalized tale of Britain's first female
photographer, writer/director Sandra Goldbacher fashions a romantic
drama set in Victorian England.  Minnie Driver plays the daughter of
a once-wealthy Jewishmerchant who leaves her sheltered Sephardic
community in London when herfather is murdered and the family
suffers a financial crisis. Suffering the stigma of anti-Semitism,
she poses as a Protestant in order to get a position as a governess
on the bleak, remote Scottish island of Skye. Thefamily that hires
her is bizarre: an obsessed scientist-father (Tom Wilkinson), an
invalid mother (Harriet Walter), a rebellious teenage son, anda
spoiled daughter, best described as "a rodent in petticoats."
Curiousabout his work, she offers to help with the photographic
process on which the father is working, becoming his laboratory
assistant and, eventually, not only his muse but his
partner. Together, they explore the estheticdimensions of the
then-emerging art of photography as she discovers a fixative to
prevent his camera images from fading. Eventually, of course, the
volatility of their intimate, illicit relationship explodes in a
betrayal. That and the attendant dialogue are inevitable and
predictable. After an auspicious debut in "Circle of Friends" and an
Oscar-nominated supporting role in "Good Will Hunting," Minnie
Driver delivers a standout, Oscar-caliber performance as the
seductive, spirited heroine, caught betweentwo cultures, a position
emphasized by Sandra Goldbacher's sensitive vision and Ashley Rowe's
stylish cinematography. On the Granger Movie Gaugeof 1 to 10, "The
Governess" is an exquisite, erotic 7, a sexy, sensuous feast for the
eye.

Author
James Sanford
        On a purely dramatic level, writer-director Sarah Goldbacher's "The
Governess" isn't much more than a slightly more cerebral take on "Jane
Eyre," burdened by a near-lethal dose of  melodrama in its final half-hour.
But for sheer visual elegance, "The Governess" has few equals, and the
magnificence of its imagery more than compensates for its somewhat
overheated story.
 The movie is also bolstered tremendously by the finely tuned work
of Minnie Driver and Tom Wilkinson, two actors who've demonstrated uncommon
versatility throughout the last year, Driver in films ranging from the
ridiculous ("Hard Rain") to the near-sublime ("Good Will Hunting"), and
Wilkinson in roles running the gamut from the uptight foreman in "The Full
Monty" to the mad Marquess in "Wilde" to the villain in "Rush Hour." Both
actors are near the top of their form in "The Governess."
 Driver lands the key role of Rosina, the kind of challenging,
multi-faceted character most young actresses can only dream of playing, and
she obviously revels in it. Born into a rich Jewish household, Rosina is
sharp-witted, well-educated and bright enough to realize a woman's mind is
far less valuable in the eyes of mid-19th-century English society than her
domestic skills and drawing-room manners. Becoming a wife is viewed as the
only viable option for a girl of her class; employment opportunities are
limited to servitude or prostitution.
 After her father is murdered, Rosina dodges a marriage of
convenience to a fish merchant and takes it upon herself to provide for the
family. Since anti-Semitism runs high all around her, she masquerades as a
Christian named Mary Blackchurch to secure a job as a governess in a remote
home on Scotland's pastoral Isle of Skye, which the city-bred lass describes
in a letter home as "green, green and more green."
 The position is unrewarding at first -- "Mary" quickly realizes Clementina
(Florence Hoath), the little girl she's supposed to watch over is "a rodent
in lace petticoats" who enjoys leaving dead rats on people's pillows and
staging demented little puppet shows -- but Charles Cavendish (Wilkinson),
her employer, recognizes the governess' intelligence and allows her to
assist him in his research lab. Charles is looking for a solution to
stablize the photographs he's been taking; "Mary" finds the answer when she
accidentally splashes one of the pictures with saltwater (which, in a minor
triumph for her people, was made with kosher salt).
 What eventually develops, of course, is exactly what one would
expect in an isolated location between a lonely man with a chilly, nagging
wife (Harriet Walter) and a young woman hungry for knowledge and acceptance.
Meanwhile, "Mary" tries to hold on to her Jewish heritage by worshipping in
secret and whispering prayers in Hebrew even as she crosses herself in the
Cavendishs' church.
 Since "The Governess" deals with the early days of photography,
Goldbacher incorporates into her story all sorts of gorgeous visual effects
to accentuate the material, including sepia-tinting that makes certain
scenes look like antique postcards, complex double- and triple-exposures to
layer images on top of each other and a wonderful bit in which "Mary"
remains fixed in the center of the frame while hyperactive Clementina is
seen as a blur zooming around her. Goldbacher also weaves some powerful,
almost ethereal images into the encounters between Charles and "Mary"; the
shot of a white veil rising and falling on the virginal governess' face as
Charles caresses her is loaded with both symbolic meaning and erotic
potency. It's moments like this one that linger in the mind long after the
less convincing elements of "The Governess" have faded away.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Images are the dominant motif in The Governess, an interesting period
piece by first-time director Sandra Goldbacher, who also wrote the script.
 Many of the shots in Goldbacher's story view the protagonists reflected in
mirrors, through a camera lens, or some other object.
 That is because The Governess is a study of people wanting to change their
image and of how they want people to see them.
 Rosina Da Silva (Minnie Driver) is a Sephardic Jewish woman living within
the warmth and love of her family in London in the 1840s. Then her world is
turned upside down when her father is murdered.
 In debt, Rosina, to provide for her family, decides to create a new
identity, Mary Blackchurch, and accept a job as a governess to a family
living on a remote Scottish island.
 There she goes to work for the Cavendish family, who are the usual
assortment of Victorian dysfunctionals. Rosina/Mary's pupil, Clementina
(Florence Hoath), is precocious, spoiled and craves attention. Mrs.
Cavendish (Harriet Walter) is bored and snobbish, treating her new employee
with the utmost condescension. Mr. Cavendish (Tom Wilkinson) spends most of
the day cooped up in his laboratory completely absorbed in his pioneering
studies of photography.
 Before you can say Charlotte Bronte, Mary has won over Clementina and
formed an uneasy friendship with Mr. Cavendish, who notices her interests
and aptitude in the natural sciences.
 As quickly as you can say Jane Eyre, Mary is helping Mr. Cavendish - she
now calls him Charles - in his work, and soon after they are helping each
other undress.
 Of course, this being the Victorian era, Charles is one of those repressed
types who pours all his emotion into his work. Though he is in infatuated
with Mary, he also mistreats her for diverting his passions from his
studies to her.
 Added to the mix is the Cavendishes' black sheep son, Henry (Jonathan Rhys
Meyers), sent home from university in disgrace. He, too, becomes smitten
with Mary to the point of obsession. His curiosity about her leads him to
discover her secret.
 As often happens in such melodramas, the lovers part and Rosina returns to
London where she begins a new life as a photographer, recording the people
in her Jewish community.
 The Governess is a bleak movie. Goldbacher keeps her colors muted to fit
the tone of the story.
 She derives a fiery performance from Driver, who is all-consumed by her
new-found passion for Charles.
 Wilkinson is rigid and tightly would as the introspective inventor who
finds his newly-awakened desires an unbearable intrusion upon his
experiments.
 Together Driver and Wilkinson form an odd alliance of heart and mind, or
the sensual and the logical.
 Where Goldbacher's story fails is in the buildup to the relationship
between the two. It happens too quickly, and we are not sure - beside their
common interest in science - what could drive such two opposites to begin
such a fruitless venture.
 The Governess, however, is a compelling period melodrama that touches a
bit on the anti-Semitism faced by London's Jewish populace and the
sacrifices and compromises some chose in order to grab what few
opportunities the world afforded.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
You can e-mail him at bloom@journal-courier.com or at cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Dennis Schwartz
THE GOVERNESS  (director: Sandra Goldbacher; cast: Minnie Driver, Tom
Wilkinson, Florence Hoath, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers, Harriet Walter, 1998
GB)
A heavy going and at times annoying, but, nevertheless, embroiling
drama. Minnie plays a Jewess in 1800s London, whose father is murdered
and leaves the family impoverished. She refuses to marry a rich man
chosen by her mother, instead she seeks employment and takes a job on
the Isle of Skye, Scotland, in order to support her family. She hides
her Jewish identity because a Christian is requested by the household.
Religion acts as an inhibiting and possessive experience throughout the
film, as the first time director weaves a tale of alienation and sexual
liberation in a Puritan type of setting.
The film opens powerfully as the Jewish ritual in the temple is shot in
chiarasco. It is easy to realize how difficult it is to break from one's
religious traditions if you are raised and indoctrinated with it. Minnie
has left her world of cities and Jewishness for a hostile gentile world
she cannot fathom. The starkness and loneliness of this rural area
leaves her agonized and deracinated. She subsequently finds romance with
the master of the house, the intellectually gifted Wilkinson (searching
for a method to make the photographic image permanent), who is a bit of
a prude and a bigot, though not as much as his bored wife (Walter) is,
who idly chatters about escaping her lonely world for one of culture. In
this perplexing type of atmosphere, Minnie is struggling to find who she
is, constantly put off by the foreign Protestant countryside and the
restictive family she is isolated with.
The flaws in the film are that the direction is at times unfocused, as
too many scenes are awkwardly shot and difficult to watch and
comprehend. There just seems to be too much internally going on for any
follow-up scenes to uncover all the loose ends that remain untied. The
Protestant family is way too complicated to gloss over its 19th century
life style. The film is too long and boring at times; and, the love
affair was not credible considering the lack of passion (these lovers
were just not a believable match);  and, the film hammers out too many
far reaching religious themes that it cannot properly address.
But the acting and cinemaphotography are superb. Everyone performs with
stagelike perfection. Minnie was alluring in her role as a governess. It
makes sense that her romance does not work, that her lies are uncovered,
and that she returns to her Jewish roots, vulnerable and ready to find
herself again. I, especially, was intrigued by her botanical walk scenes
with the repugnant young girl she tutors (Florence), as she forms a
genuinely warm relationship with her despite the child's obvious faults.
Her sexually explicit scenes with Wilkinson added to the religious
tremors of the film and the sense of her alienation, but since I did not
find their passion convincing, it was difficult for me to believe that
their relationship would have taken place.
THE GOVERNESS  is an absorbing, marvelously acted film, but not
necessarily an entertaining one.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One wants to feel when watching a film that at least somewhere in
the film there are some new ideas somewhere in the film and something
that the viewer has not seen before.  Of late, however, we have been
getting films that really are little more than recombinations of other
films.  No part of the film felt like it belonged to that film alone.
Rarely does one see such a film on the art house circuit.  That is one
advantage to art house films.  But occasionally even there a film comes
through that feel more assembled from parts than written.  Watching THE
GOVERNESS I was reminded of pieces of JANE EYRE, of THE INNOCENTS, of
Jane Austin films, even of THE COLOR PURPLE.  It reminded me of all
these films, but I cannot imagine that any other film will ever remind
me primarily of THE GOVERNESS.
     Minnie Driver plays Rosina, a precocious young Jewish woman from
London some time around the 1820s.  When her father is killed Rosina
does not know what is to become of her.  Her mother wants to marry her
to an old fish merchant for whom she thinks she will never feel love.
Didn't I see this with a butcher in FIDDLER ON THE ROOF?  Rosina has a
better idea.  She will take the ultra-Christian name Mary Blackchurch
and will apply for a job as a governess.  She does and accepts a
position for the Cavendish Family on the Isle of Skye.  Rosina has the
most romantic of impression what the isle will be like but it turns out
to be foggy and dismal and the house big and mysterious in the best
traditions of the Brontes.  Mrs. Cavendish (Harriet Walter) seems to be
dramatically wasting away of ennui.  Young Clementina Cavendish, a
small monster, does not like her new governess and immediately tries to
get the upper hand.  And there is no appearance from the mysterious Mr.
Cavendish (who would be played by Tom Wilkenson if he were around).  It
seems that Cavendish is performing strange scientific experiments that
some rumor to verge on the supernatural.  However as time passes nearly
all things improve in various predictable ways as Rosina's spunk, wit,
education, and intelligence proves to be just what the Cavendish house
needs, and the house is just what Rosina needs.  Sandra Goldbacher
wrote and directed the film as her first major effort and perhaps that
is part of the problem with the plotting.
     Minnie Driver is a good actress in a role that by turns expects
her to be plain as a bug and then later to be glamorous.  She manages
to cover the range and does for the story all she could be expected to
do.  Tom Wilkenson as Cavendish must go in the reverse direction and
manages quite well.  Wilkenson may be remembered as the imperious
bosses from THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS and especially from THE FULL
MONTY.  Ashley Rowe's photography is certainly moody if unsubtle.
There is a heavy use of filters so that most scenes do not appear in
natural light.  Scenes are frequently awash in blue or brown.  And Rowe
manages to make the fog outside even appear to enter the house.
     It is easy to imagine Goldbacher turning out good films in the
future, but her first effort points to a need for a little more
imagination in her storytelling.  I give her first effort a 5 on the 0
to 10 scale and a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     The contrivance and cliche seems to continue throughout the film
in ways that could not be described above.  Rosina's photography
suggestions all make perfect sense from the present when we know that a
darkroom is a pretty good idea and that photography can artistic.  But
they seem unlikely coming from a woman or even a man of the 1820s.
Even for a woman from a culture that stresses education the extent of
her general knowledge seems anachronistic.  In the final analysis THE
GOVERNESS is a sort of bodice-ripper variant on COLD COMFORT FARM, then
twists when Rosina learns the hard feminist lesson not to trust men.
Every inch of the way in the plot we are on well-trodden ground.  I
will point out the one laughable irony is that so soon after
photography is invented comes the advent of the dirty picture.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Here's the faint praise with which I ultimately damn THE GOVERNESS:
while I was consistently interested in the film, I'm not sure I could tell
you what the point of it all was.  Certainly I could outline the plot,
which centers around a young Sephardic Jewish woman named Rosina Da Silva
(Minnie Driver) in 1840s London.  When her father dies suddenly, leaving a
mountain of debt, Rosina is obliged either to marry or find employment of
her own.  The high-spirited girl opts for the latter course, posing as a
Gentile named Mary Blackchurch in order to work as a governess for a
Christian family called Cavendish on Scotland's Isle of Skye.  There she
finds herself drawn to patriarch Charles (Tom Wilkinson), a reclusive
scientist, even as his son Henry (Jonathan Rhys-Meyers) becomes fascinated
with Rosina/Mary.
     From there, however, things start to get a little murky.  We know
that Rosina is a stranger in a strange land; will the central conflict be
a clash of cultures?  We know her young charge Clementina (Florence Hoath)
is a trouble-maker; will the story follow their growing mutual affection?
We know that Rosina has dreams of performing on the stage; will we find
her getting lost in the real-life performance she is forced to undertake?
We know that Mrs. Cavendish (Harriet Walter) feels suffocated by her
isolated country life; will she and Rosina act as counterpoints in a study
of acceptable female roles, or bond over their shared pining for the city?
     The answer to these questions and more is a resounding "sort of."
The bulk of the narrative is devoted to the developing relationship
between Charles and Rosina, a relationship hinged on a provocative irony:
though Rosina loves Charles for his ability to appreciate her mind (when
he invites her to assist in his research), he only knows her as the
fiction she has created.  Yet all the rich background provided by
writer/director Sandra Goldbacher teases without adding up to enough.  In
the long run, it's virtually irrelevant that Rosina is Jewish; all she
really needs is some sort of dark secret to hide from the Cavendish
family.  The Rosina-as-actress angle disappears after the first act,
shortly followed by the conflict between Rosina and Clementina (dismissed
in one threatening tug of the pigtails).
     Most disappointing of all is the lack of interest Goldbacher shows in
developing her secondary characters.  Mrs. Cavendish, a potentially
touching portrait of repressed longing, instead becomes comic relief
described as though "she had a lemon stuck up her bottom."  Even more
mysterious is young Henry, whose obsession with Rosina may be an act of
rebellion, or perhaps a fleeting adolescent crush, or perhaps some mixture
of the two.  In any case, it certainly doesn't mean enough for a lingering
scene of Henry writhing naked in the surf to provide anything more than
the film's _second_ gratuitous penis shot.  Driver's strong, sensual
performance as Rosina and Wilkinson's turn as the conflicted Charles do
fill in plenty of gaps, but it's tough to get caught up in a romantic
square composed of one real woman, half an identifiable man, a pale and
petulant enigma, and a stick figure wrapped in a shawl.
     All the time that might have been spent sorting out their motivations
is spent instead on a metaphor so massively obvious you might trip over it
on your way out into the lobby.  Charles' major scientific investigation
involves photography, particularly how to hold the transient images which
fade over several hours.  Leaving aside Rosina's Forrest Gump-like
discovery of the darkroom and the concept of saline solution developing,
the entire photography angle feels like one long attempt to distinguish
between our two principal characters -- she wants to capture human faces
(i.e. she's vibrant and alive), he is interested only in inanimate
objects (i.e., he's cold and reserved).  What we don't see is what this
has to do with any of the other cultural or sociological tidbits 
Goldbacher drops along the way.  Driver's Rosina is a compelling enough
presence that you'll want to put the pieces together, but you'll find far
more ambition than resolution.  THE GOVERNESS fairly drowns in context
desperately seeking some content.
