Title
Review for Nankyoku monogatari (1983)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
     I've always been skeptical about the exploitation of animals in
Japanese films since THE ADVENTURES OF MILO AND OTIS, but this effort,
at least, carries a disclaimer stating that none of the dogs used in
the making of this film were mistreated.  Which is a relief,
considering what we see them go through.  Story, which is largely
speculative, recounts the survival of a dog team abandoned at a
Japanese research base in Antarctica towards the end of 1957.  Ken
Takakura and Tsunehiko Watase play two scientists exploring the pole.
When an expedition gets lost they turn to two of their most reliable
dogs to help save their lives.  It's an opening which impresses upon us
the hostility of the continent, so we are not surprised when the
research team abandons the base before the onset of the savage polar
winter.  It is while Takurara and Watase are on board the icebreaker
waiting for them outside the Antarctic shelf that they--as do
we--discover, to their horror, that it is impossible for them to
retrieve the dog team from the base.  Under protest, the two scientists
are taken home, and most of the ensuing film juxtaposes their lives in
Japan (they are disillusioned and feel shame) with  the lives of the
dogs as they struggle for survival.
     Film has many sad moments--we see the resourceful dogs die one by
one--but these are undermined a little by the uneasy mix of fact and
conjecture.  There are other lapses in judgment, such as a contrived
scene involving an attacking whale, but most intrusive is the use of a
narrator who anthropomorphizes the dogs and gives their scenes the kind
of stagey atmosphere reminiscent of early Disney animal stories--it may
be said however that this cutesifying of animals is not uncommon in
Japanese entertainment.  In any case, all of this is outweighed by the
spectacular scenery (let's face it, Antarctica looks good in any film),
especially some stunning shots of the team pulling their sled across
the ice, and the dogs running wild in their frozen wonderland. If you
have a dog, you'll probably want to run outside and play ball with it
afterwards.  Directed by Koreyoshi Kurahara, with a simple but
effective score by Vangelis.
