Title
Review for Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andrew Hicks
        For a span of two weeks or so when I was in ninth grade, 
"Kids in the Hall" was my favorite show. I watched edited rerun 
after edited rerun of the sketch comedy show on Comedy Central 
until I started to see the same episodes over and over again. 
Eventually, I got sick of it all and moved on, returning a few years 
later to see reruns of the next few season's worth of episodes. By 
that point, "Kids in the Hall" had gone down the tubes like crap 
through a goose and I wondered what I ever saw in that show in 
the first place, but I still felt obligated to watch and review the 
feature-length movie it spawned, just as I will when the "Beavis 
and Butt-head" movie comes out this Christmas.
        For those of you who have never seen the show on HBO, 
Comedy Central or your local CBS affiliate at two in the morning, 
"Kids in the Hall" is a thirty minute sketch comedy show written 
by and starring David Foley ("Newsradio"), Bruce McCulloch, 
Mark McKinney (now on "SNL"), Kevin McDonald and Scott 
Thompson. Basically a western hemisphere version of "Monty 
Python's Flying Circus," the sketches range from funny and bizarre 
to vulgar and indecipherable, with most female parts played by the 
Kids in drag. The show, even during its best, early years, was a 
mixed bag of entertainment.
        The movie BRAIN CANDY is also a mixed bag of 
entertainment and spans the usual "Kids in the Hall" spectrum 
of being alternatingly funny, bizarre, vulgar and indecipherable. 
Like the Python movies HOLY GRAIL and LIFE OF BRIAN, the 
movie has one thin storyline serving as a setup for the troupe 
to play a range of male and female characters in different episodic 
situations. Here, McDonald plays the scientist who invents a 
wonder drug curing depression by having its patients recall over 
and over the most pleasant memory of their lives. The evil heads 
of the company (McKinney and Foley) rush the drug onto the 
market before sufficient testing can be done on the product and 
soon everyone is taking the drug.
        Some of the early recipients of the drug are an old lady 
(Thompson) whose happiest memory involves the Christmas her 
son and his kids came over for a few minutes, a married man 
(Thompson again) who is in denial about his homosexuality, 
and a depressed heavy metal star (McCulloch). Some of BRAIN 
CANDY's best moments come when these characters take the drug 
for the first time. Thompson's gay character walks down the street, 
singing a production number to inform the world of his sexual 
orientation, and McCulloch begins singing folk music about 
flowers and puppy dogs.
        BRAIN CANDY has some great comedic moments but is 
played a lot more straight (Thompson excepted) than you might 
think. Many of its scenes toward the last half-hour don't attempt 
laughs at all but instead achieve a surreal artsy look. The opening 
credits themselves prepare us for a movie that pays a lot more 
attention to art design than is customary in the world of sketch 
comedy. BRAIN CANDY bears little resemblance to the "Kids in 
the Hall" TV show but is equally or more entertaining.

Author
John Robertson
Starring: The Kids in the Hall (David Foley, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, 
Mark McKinney, Scott Thompson)  
Perfect Person Rating*: The Perfect Person for this film is a devotee of The 
Kids in the Hall, or someone in the mood for their comedy served up with doses 
of satire, sarcasm, and occasionally poor taste.  The Perfect Person would 
probably give this film a rating around 7 out of 10.
Ever since the Kids in the Hall went off national TV here in Canada,
devotees of the group have been waiting for the Kids in the Hall movie to
come out.  Since they stopped making new shows for the CBC in Canada, the
Kids have actually gotten bigger, through reruns on cable in the US.  All
this has led to terrific anticipation from fans north and south of the
border.  With the release of Brain Candy, that anticipation has been
lessened, but not without some surprises.
The Kids in the Hall's television show was sketch comedy, where the five
members played various roles, some recurring, some in drag.  In recent
years, where Saturday Night Live has been terrible, The Kids stood out
like a bright light.  Always on the edge, sometimes over it, it was
always trying new things, and though it sometimes missed a mark tastewise,
it was never unfunny because it was just plain lame.
The same can be said of The Kids' new movie, Brain Candy.  Although I
don't know if I could say in all honesty that it was always funny, I can
say that it was never unfunny because it was lame.  If anything, the movie
was too subdued and satirical and even too artistic for what I had
expected from the Kids.
Plot summary: The company who make and market Stummies (tm) is on the
rocks, and they need a new product to put them back on top.  Combing their
R&D division, they discover that a bright young scientist has developed a
drug that completely cures depression.  They pressure him into giving it
the thumbs up, and then market it as Gleemonex, the drug that makes you
feel like it's 72 degrees in your head all the time.
Of course the drug has side effects, like putting its users into blissful
comas some of the time, but that's not important to a multinational
corporation only interested in greed is it?
As mentioned before, one of the things that caught me off guard about this
movie was the fact that at times it was so serious.  The Kids obviously
made this film to have a serious message, and they deliver it through
satire.  One of the things that I liked about the Kids in the Hall
television show was that they were so over the top, and they have gone
over the top in this movie as well, but not in a comedic sense.  To push
home their message, they went a little too far over the top in satirizing
drugs like Prozac, and didn't spend enough time being farcical.
As usual, the actors play a multitude of roles, and all of them are well
done.  There aren't as many characters from the original series as the
audience seemed to want, but the ones that were there were a welcome
sight.
Bottom line:  If you're in the mood for a clever satire of the drug
industry, or you're a self-professed die-hard Kids in the Hall fan, don't
miss it.  If you're just looking for a good comedy, find a Kids in the
Hall rerun on TV, you'll probably be far more pleased.
Copyright 1996 by John Robertson. Retransmit freely if unedited. My opinions 
are solely my own, and in no way reflect those of my employer. 
* Perfect Person Rating: The Perfect Person Rating is an attempt to give the 
reader a new way of understanding my rating. Rather than give a film a score, 
either overall, or on several attributes, the Perfect Person Rating tries to 
identify the type of person would enjoy this movie the most. Since a reviewer 
is by nature someone with a great deal of experience in what they are 
reviewing, their experience may not be the same as someone who is less 
informed, less jaded, or more attuned to the subject. Hopefully the Perfect 
Person Rating will go further toward eliminating reviewer bias than a simple 
rating scale. Comments are appreciated. 

Author
Christopher Null
     Well, what have we here?  Let me say first-off that I'm a *huge* Kids
in the Hall fan.  This review is necessarily going to be tainted by the
fact that I've probably seen 300 hours of Kids in the Hall on TV...and by
my impression going into the film that, hey, another 1 1/2 hours wouldn't
kill me.
     If you aren't familiar with the comedy troupe, the Kids are five guys
(Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, Mark McKinney, Scott Thompson, and Dave
Foley) who have appeared in 110 episodes of some of the funniest sketch
comedy television has offered up in recent years.  After ending the series
in July 1994, talk of a movie immediately began.  Two years later, the end
result is here.
     What the Kids have brought us with BRAIN CANDY is a 90 minute skit
about a drug company and its hapless employees who invent the penultimate
"happy pill," GleeMonex.  The only problem, they later discover, is that
those that take the pill commonly become comatose due to the ecstasy
caused by it...which isn't such a happy result after all.
     Plotline aside, the real question on everyone's mind is, "Is it any
good?"  Well...yes and no.  The Kids have brought back some 40 of our
favorite characters from the show (and some new ones), and their
performances as Canada's most ridiculous citizens are perfectly done.  The
problem, and it's quite a big one, is that the GleeMonex storyline gets
old--fast, although it has a certain charm and does serve to tie the whole
movie together.  In the end, the plot is little more than an arbitrary way
of getting to the funny bits of the script, which rarely have anything to
do with the BRAIN CANDY in question.
     Good characters in a crummy story don't make for particularly good
time, but there are plenty of laughs to be had by all scattered throughout
the film.  You're probably better off just watching three episodes of the
TV show at home, but for die-hard fans, the movie will probably carry at
least some appeal.  Just don't take any pills from strangers.
     (Special note:  *Yes!*  Paul Bellini (the guy in the towel) does
appear in one scene.)
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Scott Marcus
Cast:  David Foley, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, Mark McKinney,
Scott Thompson
Director: Kelly Makin
Writers: : Norm Hiscock, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, Mark McKinney,
Scott Thompson
Running Time: approximately 90 minutes
Grade: C-
     The Kids in the Hall are an acquired taste. It took at least a
season of watching their show on HBO before I became a believer.  Maybe
after watching a half dozen Kids in the Hall movies, they would grow
into the big screen. My recommendation is that, unless you are a big
fan of The Kids, skip the film.
     As it is, their first--and most likely only--attempt at a full
length film lacks the qualities that made their comedy work on TV.  A
big-budget and glossy production can not make up for a lack of
spontaneity that permeates their TV show. The Kids go through the
motions, but you get the feeling that they arent really having fun
doing so. And this makes it more difficult for the audience to enjoy
their antics.
     BRAIN CANDY is a bunch of skits tied together by the story of a
pharmaceutical company that develops a new drug to cure depression. In
typical sketch-comedy tradition, each actor plays several roles. Doctor
Cooper (Kevin McDonald) and his team create the drug. Then, under
pressure from Don Roritor (Mark McKinney), founder and president of
Roritor Pharmaceuticals, Dr. Cooper releases the drug into the
marketplace. The ensuing distribution of the new happy pill throughout
the populace drives the rest of the film.
     At about 90 minutes, BRAIN CANDY still seems long. The best thing
about sketch comedy--and The Kids are no exception--is the ability to
quickly deliver the laughs, then go on to another quick skit. But with
the additional set-up necessary in telling a longer, coherent story,
the laughs just dont come fast enough.
     Strangely, the show is even more tame than it was when on cable
TV. The movie makes several attempts at risqueness--mostly by pointing
up the gayness of one of Scott Thompsons characters--but they seem
almost forced; As if they have to live up to a PG rating. One of the
best bits, though, does make use of Thompsons naked buttocks; we see
him charging into battle--going to have sex with some guys taking a
shower.
     In the classic of this genre, Monty Python pulled off this
delicate balancing act between plot advancement and punchline delivery
for most of THE HOLY GRAIL. The Kids, unfortunately, are not up to the
task.  There are some amusing moments, to be sure, but not enough to
make the experience an enjoyable one.
