Title
Review for Visiteurs, Les (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
In 1993 the biggest grossing film of all times was Steven
Spielberg's JURASSIC PARK. Although it made a lot of money
outside US markets, the audience in many countries seemed to
feel guilty about enjoying just another product of American
cultural imperialism. So, in the mid 1990s many non-US film
industries presented their own products, proudly noting that
they had beaten JURASSIC PARK at their own box-offices. In
case of France, that product was LES VISITEURS, 1993 comedic
fantasy directed by Jean-Marie Poire and written by
Christian Clavier.
The plot begins in 12th Century France where Count Godefroy
de Montmirail (played by Jean Reno) saves the life of King.
For that, he is awarded by permission to marry his beloved
Frenegonde (Valerie Lemercier). Unfortunately, the witch
poisons his wine with hallucinogens, so Godefroy kills
Frenegonde's father. With Frenegonde deciding to go to the
convent, desperate Godefroy and his trusted servant
Jacquasse (Christian Clavier) seek the help of wizard who
would bring them back in time and prevent the tragedy. The
senile wizard botches the spell and sends them to 20th
Century instead. There they must confront not only the
strange world, full of wonders and dangers - they are faced
with their own descendants, that look exactly like them. One
of them is Jacquasse's descendant Jacquart (also played by
Christian Clavier), who managed to turn the caste tables and
now owns ancient Godefroy's castle.
LES VISITEURS happened to be rude awakening for all of those
who grew up on Anglo-American pop culture only, and expected
any French movie to be noble artistic endeavour compared
with Hollywood products. That shouldn't surprise anyone,
since it was hard to expect that non-commercial oriented
product could beat Spielberg. Poire and Clavier, of course,
knew better and decided to make their film just like any
average Hollywood hack - "high concept" comedy, few
computer-generated special effects, and lots of gags with
the most hilarious ones, as usual, wasted in trailers. The
humour, that should rely on the conflict between medieval
and modern world often sinks to toilet levels. The plot is
too complicated, considering that screenwriters don't pay
much attention to it. Christian Clavier also doesn't help
much with his own obnoxious Jim Carey-style over-acting. On
the other hand, Jean Reno, until that role associated
strictly with Besson, proves that he is capable comedian.
This film is still funny, and those viewers who are somewhat
more familiar with French and European history would
appreciate it even more. But, the end result is still one
big disappointment - excellent idea wasted in third-rate
effort.

Author
Pedro Sena
It's a shame that these types of comedies do not make it in America. These
are worth a lot of fun, and they display a sense of humor that few people
can enjoy or appreciate. It really is a story in the style of The Goons, the
American Firesign Theatre, or even a Monty Python story - not just a
vignette. but unlike those stories, this one has no deus-ex-machina working
for it, in the country that just about perfected it with Moliere. Says a lot
more about many other fluffy comedies...
An 11th century knight and his loyal page consult a wizard regarding some
trivial matter or other. But the old wizard messes up and forgets one
ingredient, and that gets the knight and page in another century, the 20th
to be exact.
The great premise brings about some great moments, like the characters
considering cars dragons for the longest time, and many other idiocies that
we have forgotten to appreciate because we live with them, least of all
perfumes and baths.
In the 20th century, everything is messed up. The descendent of the knight
is now the servant, and the page's descendant is now the owner of the castle
and its lands. This creates several caste problems between the characters
and it gets exploited to the max. But the whole film, does not stop there.
The page, who is very clever, gets a whiff of the whole thing better than
his boss, and when it is time for him to return home he makes sure that he
is not the one who goes, but his relative, and he gets the bimbo that has
befriended in the meantime, and turns the hotel into a fun place to visit
and be.
The story is almost not needed, but it helps. There are some excellent
moments in this film that define "eccentric' to the max, and makes for a
very enjoyable film.... with subtitles.
However, the best part is really missed in the translation. The film uses
old French versus the new French, and that in itself creates a great many
words that come and go and get lost in the translation. it is probably the
best part of the film, other than the great visual gags.
With very enjoyable performances, and well understated humor to make sure
that this is not lost in a laugh track, this very good film never got the
appreciation that it should have. by all means, it is a valuable, and
enjoyable film. you won't soon forget it.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jean Reno, Christian Clavier, Valerie Lemercier, 
      Marie-Anne Chazel, Christian Bujeau
Director: Jean-Marie Poire
Producer: Alain Terzian
Screenplay: Jean-Marie Poire and Christian Clavier
Cinematography: Jean-Yves Le Mener
Music: Eric Levi
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
In French with subtitles
     Maybe I just don't understand the French sense of humor.  After 
all, they think Jerry Lewis is a comic genius.  Whatever the reason, I 
rarely find "lowbrow" French comedies more than passably watchable (and, 
in the case of LITTLE INDIAN, BIG CITY, not watchable at all).  THE 
VISITORS, which was released three years ago, drew huge crowds across 
its native land, outgrossing the imported JURASSIC PARK.  The French 
loved it -- a sentiment that I definitely do not share.
     It's curious that, for all the French outcries against American 
imports, this particular home-grown hit has "Hollywood" written all over 
it.  Strip away the subtitles, and the result is the kind of mediocre 
comedy that major American production companies turn out with alarming 
regularity.  THE VISITORS is a "least common denominator" motion picture 
-- largely mindless, sporadically funny, and creatively handicapped.
     When THE VISITORS scored big in France, Miramax Films immediately 
snapped up the U.S. rights.  That's when the problems started, because 
Miramax couldn't figure out how best to market it.  At one point, they 
were poised to release a dubbed version, but it was pulled back at the 
last minute (considering the audience response to the dubbed LITTLE 
INDIAN, BIG CITY, it was probably a wise move).  Now, finally, Miramax 
has decided on a simple strategy -- add subtitles, but don't change 
anything.  So, after three years, THE VISITORS will reach American 
theaters.  It's not worth the wait.
     The opening is promising.  THE VISITORS starts with a send-up of 
grandiose French costume dramas, introducing us to a series of armored 
knights and damsels in distress.  One of the former is Sir Godefroy, the 
Count of Montmirail (Jean Reno), a renowned warrior.  When he saves the 
king's life, he is given permission to marry the woman of his choice, 
Lady Frenegonde (Valerie Lemercier).  Unfortunately, after drinking wine 
laced with a witch's hallucinogenic, Godefroy mistakes Frenegonde's 
father for a bear, and kills him.  Frenegonde then enters a convent,  
unwilling to marry the man who killed her father.
     For help, Godefroy goes to the local wizard, who proposes a way of 
changing history.  By drinking a potion, Godefroy can go back in time 
and alter what happened.  Unfortunately, the wizard gets the ingredients 
wrong, and the knight, along with his faithful retainer, Jacquasse 
(Christian Clavier), ends up nearly 1000 years in the future, in 1992.  
There, these two "fish out of water" embark on a series of misadventures 
that puts CROCODILE DUNDEE to shame.
     Some viewers will undoubtedly notice superficial similarities to 
MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY GRAIL and TIME BANDITS.  However, while those 
films steered a bizarre premise in wonderfully unexpected, comic 
directions, THE VISITORS uses comparable ideas in the service of a banal 
plot with cheap jokes.  There were times when I thought I was watching a 
cross between ERIK THE VIKING and DUMB AND DUMBER.
     There are some hilarious moments, such as when Jacquasse first 
encounters a car, or when Godefroy and Jacquasse attempt to discern how 
the various conveniences of a modern bathroom function.  And there are a 
few attempts at the more intellectual approach of lampooning 
Shakespearean language with lines like "It stinketh", "Let's splitteth", 
and "Holy scrotums!" (Incidentally, these lines work a little better if 
you understand the original French.)  Unfortunately, the good parts of 
THE VISITORS are isolated, and it's debatable whether the rest is worth 
wading through to get to them.
     For those who are convinced that all films emerging from France are 
snobbish, elitist, and artistically upscale, THE VISITORS will quickly 
change that impression.  Subtitles excepted, American audiences won't 
find much here that they couldn't unearth in 50% of the titles currently 
playing in mainstream multiplexes.  Ultimately, it's this conformance to 
mediocrity that brings down THE VISITORS.
