Title
Review for Mary Reilly (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael Redman
The Jekyll and Hyde story told from his maid's point of view is, in a word,
"Dark". You wouldn't expect something bright and cheery based on Robert Louis
Stevenson's novel, but the film is surprisingly dreary and dismal.
Jekyll/Hyde (John Malkovich) is terminally depressed and desperate. Mary
Reilly (Julia Roberts) is a victim of monstrous child abuse and the anti-woman
sentiment of the times. Director Stephen Fears' version of the London slums
makes us marvel that anyone survived them. The lighting level is exceedingly
low throughout the movie: it almost appears to be filmed in black and white.
The direction and cinematography are brilliant and liquid. Scenes flow into
the next scene like honey oozing off a strawberry. (Except there's no red, of
course.) The look is so moody and melodramatic that you'll be shocked when you
leave the theater. I saw it at a matinee and took quite a while to adjust to
the sunny skies afterward.
Often the Jekyll and Hyde archetypes are viewed as splitting a whole person
into components of good and evil or perhaps cerebral and emotional parts. Here
the doctor is intellectual and perhaps good, but certainly powerless. His
alter ego is forceful and totally without conscience. Two parts that make up a
whole. Neither are capable of functioning without the other and once
separated, disaster is inevitable.
The differences between the two characters would be more effective if it were
accomplished by demeanor and attitude.  When we finally see the
transformation, the special effects thrust the story into the realm of science
fiction, not the psychological horror that the tale demands.
Roberts and Malkovich are skillful in their roles. Both are suitably
melancholy, fitting in with the rest of the film. The only flash of life and
color comes from Glenn Close (and her lips) as the madam of a whorehouse where
Hyde lives, and surprisingly, Jekyll apparently frequents. Life and color
maybe, but this is not Close's best role. She seems little more than a
cardboard cutout character.
A beautiful film in its own dreary way. You'll appreciate the filmmaking
craft, but don't expect to leave in an upbeat mood.
[This appeared in the 2/25 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana. Michael
Redman can be contacted a redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The swooping shots across darkened rooftops suggest a very Tim 
Burton movie, but, alas, no caped crusader descends to save *this* 
film. Instead, it's a skeletal housemaid (Julia Roberts) who must bear 
witness to this unfortunate retelling of "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde." 
For a few, fleeting, maddening moments, director Stephen Frears 
(DANGEROUS LIAISONS) gets everything just right-- the tone, the 
colors, the characters; all the ingredients to make a most-powerful 
potion out of Valerie Martin's best-selling novel.  Yet it fizzles 
too quickly; the volatile mixture losing potency from the very first 
scene.
     Casting is a large part of the problem.  The story all but collap-
ses around Ms. Roberts-- she doesn't have the range for this kind of 
drama.  Her accent also comes and goes, though it's nowhere near as 
glaring as the total lack of chemistry between her and co-star John 
Malkovich.  (He looks the same in both of his roles-- an incredible 
fact that's missed by everyone in the story!)  The very British 
supporting cast-- including Michael Gambon and George Cole-- gives 
credibility to the smaller parts.  Glenn Close also appears as a 
Madam that the Good Doctor calls upon.  Her performance is as close 
to intentional camp as the movie ever gets and-- as a bonus-- offers 
a likely peek at her upcoming Cruella De Ville in the live-action 101 
DALMANTIONS.
     The biggest botch in MARY REILLY is suspense:  there is none.  No 
terror, no tension; nothing.  Without any weight, wit, or wonder to 
propel the story, the viewer is left with little more to do than pay 
attention to the period detail, a few buckets of blood, and Stuart 
Craig's fabulously dreary production design.  All of which gets old 
after about an hour, at which point I recommend leaving.  (The pacing 
in the second-half is especially abominable.  If you *do* stick it 
through, your sole reward is a half-hokey special effect depicting 
the infamous transformation.)  
     Mr. Frears reportedly recut his film several times, missing 
several release dates in the process.  (Obviously, no one advised him 
to throw up his hands and just turn the whole damned thing over to Mel 
Brooks.  Blucher!)  MARY REILLY is the second Robert Louis Stevenson 
story of the month, after MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND.  Perhaps Mr. Frears 
should consult with Brian Henson on future projects.  I daresay that 
even Ms. Piggy is a better choice for a certain roles than Julia 
Roberts.  And she does have a great chop! 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Robert Louis Stevenson's "Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde"
was inspired by schizophrenics that Stevenson had studied and also by
Edinburgh's notorious Deacon William Brodie--pious churchman and
respected councilman by day and house burglar by night.  (Jean Brodie
claims him as a relative toward the end of the film THE PRIME OF MISS
JEAN BRODIE.)  Stevenson wanted to write first a horror story and
second a parable about the latent beast in all of us.  Valerie Martin's
novel MARY REILLY retold the story from the point of view of Jekyll's
maid, a character whom Stevenson neglected to mention.  The newer novel
transformed the story into a parable about the latent beast in all men
and the cruelty of men toward women, peppering the story with bits of
male misogyny from sources having nothing to do with Edward Hyde.
Though subtlety was not a great concern of the book, what there was
excised by Christopher Hampton's screenplay, directed by Stephen
Frears.  The resulting film is relentlessly downbeat and dark.  It is
as dark literally as it is in tone, seemingly set in a London that
offers two kinds of weather: night and fog.
     Mary Reilly (played by Julia Roberts) is a new housemaid at
Dr. Henry Jekyll's household.  Jekyll (John Malkovich) takes a
particular interest in her for the interesting scars on her arms and
neck and later for the unusual fact that she could read.  The household
is run by the authoritarian and domineering butler Poole who likes Mary
even less for the interest that his master shows her.  Mary is a gentle
sort inordinately bothered by simple everyday household chores like
skinning and slicing a live and wriggling eel.  The camera shows us
this spectacle in loving detail just as it shows us the carcasses of
skinned meat hanging in the market street.  But in spite of these minor
annoyances Mary likes the Jekyll household and receives from Jekyll
unexpected kindness, considering that he is a man.  It is in fact the
only male kindness in the film.  So things are really going the best
that Mary has ever had them go for her, which is not saying very much.
Then one day Jekyll announces that his assistant Edward Hyde
(Malkovich) is to be given access to the house.
     Hyde, when we finally see him, is a genuine let-down.  This has
got to be the least differentiated Jekyll/Hyde pairing in cinema
history.  Jekyll has a short, light mustache and beard; Hyde has
shoulder- length dark hair.  No obvious attempt was made to make them
sound at all different.  In a dim light one could easily confuse one
for the other, which is unfortunate because dim light is something this
film has in great abundance.  Perhaps one other difference is
discernible: Jekyll is the one that seems half asleep, perhaps
exhausted from the labors of his research.  Hyde seems at least mostly
awake.  The weakness of the performance is particularly puzzling in
that Malkovich under Frears direction previously gave us such a
compelling Valmont in DANGEROUS LIAISONS (also written by Hampton).
     Julia Roberts does not look Victorian somehow and at least at
first looks highly out of place in a maid's uniform.  It takes a while
to see her in this role and not think of previous roles she has played
rather than as the Victorian chambermaid.  Two fine actors under-used
here are Glenn Close, almost unrecognizable as mistress of a bordello.
(I believe the bordello is totally the invention of Valerie Martin's
novel, incidentally.)  Only slightly better used is Michael Gambon as
Mary's nightmarish father.  Gambon is a fine actor, best known perhaps
for the British TV mini-series "The Singing Detective."
     A peculiarity of this film is that to understand what is going on,
one should already know the Stevenson story, yet if one knows the
story, the new film is almost totally redundant.  The film builds to
its surprise revelation fully realizing that the vast majority of
viewers entered the theater already knowing what is to be revealed.  By
telling the story from the housemaid's point of view, the most dramatic
scene of the story has to happen off-stage.  This robs the film of most
of the story's dramatic impact.  The pay-off scene is postponed until
much later in the story.  When we do see it, the good news is that it
is done in a totally original manner, like no way it has been done
before in any screen adaptation.  The bad news is that nobody in their
right mind would have wanted to do it this way.  The way it is done
adds very greatly to the implausibility of the story.  It may well be
the worst touch in the film.
     George Fenton wrote a score as downbeat as the sunless visuals
with occasional touches on the strings very reminiscent of Bernard
Herrmann.  Curiously, this film played in the same theater opposite
MUPPET TREASURE ISLAND.  Stevenson is not having a very good year.  I
may not be either.  I give this a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Although MARY REILLY is being billed as a remake of the Dr. Jekyll
and Mr. Hyde story, I believe it is actually a remake of MY FAIR LADY.
Off screen we have the director (Stephen Frears) playing the Professor
Higgins role and the producers (Norma Heyman, Nancy Graham Tanen, and
Ned Tanen) playing Colonel Pickering.  I can easily imagine Professor
Higgins bolding proclaiming that he could take a famous story full of
action and imagination, populate it with megastars, turn it into a
colossal bore and yet so stun the audience with his audacity that no
one would leave.  Everyone would know the story and the stars so they
would wait until the last moment to realize that he had transformed a
prince of a movie into a guttersnipe and that nothing of interest was
ever going to happen in the film.  As the audience leaves dazed and
bewildered, Colonel Pickering must have been singing, "You've done it,
you've done it, I can't believe you've done it."
     The MARY REILLY on the screen is a remake of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde told from the view of a maid named Mary Reilly (Julia Roberts).
The brilliant actor John Malkovich is Dr. Jekyll as well as his alter
ego Mr. Hyde.  The only other important part in the movie is Glenn
Close badly miscast as the madam of the local bordello where Mr. Hyde
gets into trouble.  The movie starts off promisingly enough with
realistic gas and candle lit photography (Philippe Rousselot).  This,
however, rapidly degenerates into a movie so dark and with such low
contrast that your eyes, when you can keep them awake, will literally
hurt from squinting so much trying to make out the action, or usually
lack thereof, on the screen.  The movie is filmed in Edinburgh, but it
is so dark, you'd never know it.
     At the thirty minute point, almost nothing had happened save an
ineffective flashback to an abusive period in Mary's childhood.  Most
of the time, during this and all parts of the movie, is devoted to
atmospheric scenes of one cast member or another slowly walking through
rooms where little happens.  It is hard to believe that this movie
shares the same lineage with the numerous other Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
pictures.
     The screenwriter (Christopher Hampton) is at a loss at how to
engage the audience.  In a failed attempt to solve this problem he
comes up with lots of gratuitous violence and major amounts of human
and animal blood.  In a typical scene, there is a disemboweled rat
laying on a bed in a room with blood splattered everywhere.  In
another, we have a medical operation complete with hacksaw.  Actually,
my distaste for the movie comes not from disliking these scenes, but
from being put to sleep by the boredom of the show.
     In the more minor complain department, when Dr. Jekyll becomes Mr.
Hyde, I did not buy his short curly hair getting longer and straight
and his goatee disappearing, and I certainly did not buy the
transformation scene lifted straight out of ALIEN.  For some reason Dr.
Jekyll looks a lot like Ethan Hawke in BEFORE SUNRISE.  In Christopher
Hampton's MARY REILLY, Dr. Jekyll is a meek and melancholic man, and
Mr. Hyde is a handsome and self-assured playboy.  Sure.  The sparse
sets (Stuart Craig) provided nothing of visual interest to engage the
viewer.
     The acting by the three great stars is an embarrassment.  Glenn
Close has no idea of what to do with her role and plays it like a
stone.  Julia Roberts seems to think that so long as she is made up to
appear unattractive, and she grimaces a lot, she has achieved great
art.  Last, and certainly least, is John Malkovich's disappointing
performance.  I would list him close to the top of the best actors
working today.  In good shows and bad, I have been nothing less than in
awe of his work until now.  Somehow, Professor Higgins, I mean Stephen
Frears manages to get an uninteresting performance out of Malkovich.
This is a miracle I did not think possible.
     MARY REILLY runs way too long at 1:58 thanks to an editor (Lesley
Walker) asleep at the editing table.  Many scenes of no interest in the
less are left in the final cut.  Although there is no sex, nudity, or
bad language, there is so much gore that the movie is correctly rated
R.  Although it might bore them to death, I do not think the movie
would be bad for teenagers.  On the other hand, I had trouble staying
awake, and I wish I would have walked out so I do not recommend this
extremely s-l-o-w film to anyone.  Rent any of the previous versions
instead.  I give the movie 1/2 of a * only because I've seen worse.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
