Title
Review for Rage: Carrie 2, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       This sequel is so forgettable you probably won't even want to
bother renting it on video. "Carrie," the powerful 1976 film based on
the best-selling Stephen King novel and directed by Brian DePalma,
spawned a number of teenage-slasher pictures but this travesty,
written by Rafael Moreu ("Hackers") and directed by Katt Shea ("Poison
Ivy"), tarnishes the memory of the original.  Bright-eyed newcomer
Emily Bergl plays Rachel, a nasty high-school outcast bursting with
adolescent rebellion and rage. Her mother is confined to a sanitarium;
she lives in a trailer with emotionally abusive foster parents; and
her best friend just committed suicide by jumping from the school's
roof after the girl was humiliated as a sex object by a group of
football players who made a competitive game of seducing girls for
points. A whiny guidance counselor, Amy Irving (the only token
original "Carrie" alumna), recognizes the potential destructiveness of
Rachel's telekinetic powers - meaning she can move objects with her
mind - but fails to get out of the way when Rachel's emotions explode,
ignited by her relationship with a football jock, Jason
London. "Sometimes I wish I could be one of the shiny, happy people,"
muses Rachel before she begins her post-homecoming game party massacre
- causing one of many unintentional laughs. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Rage: Carrie 2" is a viciously predictable 2 with a
fiery, bloody, gruesome conclusion.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In a typical cinematic high school, the football jocks have sex with the
girls and then dump them, but not before the boys' scores are dutifully
recorded in their little black books.  As the sexual acts take place,
the other guys hang out nearby, guzzling beer and grunting like pigs.
In THE RAGE: CARRIE 2, Robert Mandel's terminally bland sequel to
CARRIE, there isn't a single original moment.  Only Amy Irving returns
from CARRIE, and the talent of the rest of the sequel's cast is
impossible to determine given the stupefying mediocrity of Rafael
Moreu's script.  As Rachel, the horror story's lead, Emily Bergl gives
one of the least scary performances in recent memory, but it isn't
exactly her fault.  The director asks for little from his actors, which
is precisely what he gets.
Sporadically in this lame and lifeless movie, Rachel will cause school
lockers and windows to fly open, but generally she just mopes around
looking like a victim.  Her fellow students delight in tormenting her.
Of course, she will get her revenge in the obligatory ending bloodbath
in which she will decapitate and castrate the boys and crush the girls
with burning timbers.
As the movie marks time until its big finale, it throws in some
repugnant scenes, hoping to turn audience's stomachs.  Rachel's
girlfriend commits a horrible and realistic suicide after the boy who
made "love" to her the night before spurns her.  (He gets major points
in his black book for this, but his buddies say he would have gotten
more if he had had sex with her after her death.)  Even a helpless puppy
is run over, and we see his poor, little body flipping over and over
under a truck.
The teenagers in the movie are completely blasé about it all.  "Doesn't
it offend you that some girl offed herself yesterday," asks one of the
few kids with a conscience.  "Why?" responds his nonplussed girlfriend.
"She wasn't anybody."
Remarkably devoid of any energy, especially for a horror flick, the
movie makes one yearn for a fast forward button on the theater's
armrest.  With material this bad, the film's only hope is to go for
parody, but it isn't smart enough to realize it.  Even the mandatory
epilogue is as pointless and predictable as the rest of the movie.
THE RAGE: CARRIE 2 runs 1:45.  It is rated R for graphic violence, teen
alcohol abuse, sex, nudity and profanity and would be acceptable only
for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
  Carrie is one of my favorite films. It's a masterfully crafted gothic fairy
tale and one of the best teen angst movies ever made. Carrie is a realistic
outcast. She's not a cool outcast like Winona Ryder sometimes plays, or like
Samantha Mathis in Pump Up the Volume. Carrie wouldn't have fit in at my high
school. She looks genuinely plain - no glasses, either - she is socially
awkward in a believable way, and her religious zealot mother is so vividly nuts
that you can believe poor Carrie would be put in the humiliating situation of
having her first period in the gym shower without knowing what's happening to
her.
  Brian DePalma's virtuoso technique squeezes dread - not suspense, but dread -
out of your stomach like it's orange juice. All the pieces fall into place -
the prom queen, the bucket of blood, the rope, the telekinetic explosion
yearning for release. You know exactly what's going to happen and DePalma knows
that you know, and he makes you waaaaaaaaaiiiiiiiiiit for it in beautifully
agonizing slow motion.
  And because it's such a great movie, and because it's almost as old as I am,
and because the titular protagonist ends up pretty damn dead in the end, it's
just not cool to make a sequel to it. My expectations were low.
  For me, there is a precedent for uneccessary sequels that turn out
surprisingly good, because I really enjoyed last year's badly titled Halloween:
H20 - Twenty Years Later. It's a better movie than The Rage: Carrie 2, with a
fantastic third act and with the advantage of capping off a series of bad
sequels (rather than being the first). Because of H20, I tried to keep an open
mind about this sequel, although I also figured lightning couldn't strike twice
when it comes to unwanted sequels to '70s horror classics.
  Well, it didn't, but it could have been worse. Standing on its own, The Rage
isn't all that bad. It doesn't all work, but it has its strengths, and it
doesn't feel very similar to other teen oriented horror films of the late '90s.
  The best thing about the movie is Emily Bergl, who plays Rachel, the also
telekinetic half sister of Carrie White. Her performance (aside from the
climactic telekinetic rampage) is believable and charismatic. She's good
looking in a non-movie star type of way, and the writers wisely don't cast her
as an ugly duckling or a freak. When I first saw the poster for the movie, I
worried that they were replacing Carrie with a hipster outcast. Fortunately,
they don't push the outcast angle (or the hipster, for that matter). Rachel
isn't one of the popular kids, and that's all. She's not Carrie White awkward -
she even dates. And to my surprise, it works. She's a different type of
character, she's not a sub-Carrie, and that's fortunate.
  The two villainous football players are also well cast. One of them looks too
old to be in high school, but his bulky frame and hairy upper lip are dead on.
The other one is played by Zachary Ty Bryan from Home Improvement. I think he's
supposed to be some type of teen hearthrob, but he's a hideously ugly chunk of
smirk and freckles, and I think he may have really been on the football team at
my high school. It's nice to see a high school movie that acknowledges that
ugly - but not fat (the Varsity Blues clause) - football players can still be
the popular kids just because they play sports with the popular kids.
  The plot works surprisingly well for something that mirrors the original
Stephen King derived plot. There is another cruel prank at a social gathering
that leads to telekinetic mayhem, but the prank and the way it unfolds is
different enough from the original that it doesn't seem very formulaic. 
  In most ways, Carrie 2 captures high school life more accurately than other
teen films of the '90s. Rachel's room actually looks like a real bedroom. She
has Marilyn Manson posters on her wall but it's not pushed on us as a mark of
rebellion. She's not much of a type, she's into a lot of different things. She
listens to Billie Holiday and has a close relationship with her dog. (I didn't
buy that she and her best friend would have matching tattoos that they would
touch and say "Best buds," but hey, you can't win 'em all.)
  The dialogue isn't flowery, self-referential or steeped in pop culture.
(There is a somewhat awkward conversation about the band Garbage, but it is
more an attempt at illustrating the social connection high school kids feel
through music than it is a Tarantino or Williamsonism.) Occasionally I was
impressed by bits of dialogue that struck me as realistic teenspeak (Rachel
playfully telling her friend "You suck," the football player's use of the word
"dude"). The only thing that marks this is as a post-Scream horror flick is an
amusing bit where a villain asks "What's your favorite scary movie?" over the
phone - in a Donald Duck voice.
  Unfortunately, these strengths aren't enough to hold up the whole movie. The
biggest connections to the first film are the ones that don't work. Amy Irving
returns as Sue Snell, whose plight was so moving in the first film. She really
means to help Carrie but she fails, and ends up getting almost as raw of a deal
as Carrie. Now Sue is a guidance counselor who discovers Rachel's secret and
tries to get her help before history repeats itself. The premise is sound, but
the execution is weak. Sue seems tagged on to make the sequel official. Most of
her scenes are separate from Rachel, visiting Rachel's mother in the
inappropriately named Arkham Asylum, driving around trying to find Rachel only
to be given a sudden, meaningless (if rather spectacular) death. Perhaps if
DePalma were directing, Sue's scenes would have been tense, suspenseful, a race
against the clock. But the timing is all off. She never seems like she exists
in the same timeline as the other characters. And she's just not as interesting
as she used to be anyway. Worst of all, she keeps having flashbacks of footage
from the first film, which remind you how much more stylish it was and how
badly you wish the theater had accidentally been shipped a pristine new print
of the original, not the sequel.
  There are a few more subtle homages to the original that aren't bad, in
particular a shot in the opening scene where red paint drips on a Virgin Mary
icon (a surrogate prom queen).
  Most of the stylistic flourishes are annoying instead of captivating. The
colors are not as vivid as DePalma's, but then they keep switching to black and
white. Not striking black and white, just bad TV trying to be arty black and
white. A character who carries a camcorder is used, a few times, as an excuse
for cheesy video POV shots. But then they try to get really fancy schmancy with
two football players talking while highlight films are projected on to them,
which is odd since we already have the camcorder character so we know this team
would just use a VCR.
  Things really fall apart at the climax. The action is stilted and sprinkled
with Hellraiser 3 style deaths. Bergl, sadly, falls into a pale imitation of
Spacek's wide eyed trance in the original. Most uncomfortably, a sample of
Piper Laurie's "They're all gonna laugh at you!" squawk is incorporated into a
Super Mario Brothers-esque techno song. (The scoring throughout the film is
cheesy, especially when compared to Pino Donaggio's lush orchestral work.)
  Not surprisingly, there's an epilogue tag vaguely inspired by the legendary
Carrie's-hand scene. Also not surprisingly, it's not very effective.
Fortunately, it doesn't seem to set up much of a Carrie 3. For that, they'd
need to go really off the wall. I suggest Carries, the story of the military's
experiments in genetically engineered telekinetic warriors, all played by Sissy
Spacek.
  I'm glad Carrie 2 isn't as bad as I'd expected, and that I got some enjoyment
out of it. But I still wish it hadn't been made. The aspects that work are
pretty admirable, but it's just not worth it. I just don't like the idea of
Carrie becoming Carrie 1.
"I write rhymes so fresh I try to bite my own verses." --Tash

Author
Jerry Saravia
Now imagine a teenage story of a goth high-school student unable to connect to
any of her peers - she remains a social outcast. Now imagine that a football
jock is piqued by her beauty, or the beauty he sees in her soul, and asks her
out on a date. Now further imagine how all the jock's friends are going to
react, sensing that a gothic weirdo has no place in their circles. Now sit
down, close your eyes, relax, and consider this plot for a moment. Sure,
cliches abound like fireflies, and yes, it almost sounds like a Molly Ringwald
movie or one of those old girl-from-the-wrong-side-of-the-tracks movies that go
back as far as the 30's, if not further. Ask yourself one question: does this
sound like the plot for a horror movie like "Carrie"? Hmmm...don't think so.
"The Rage: Carrie 2" is a preposterous medley of the teen romance and horror
film genres. What makes it doubly preposterous is that it tries to be a
psychological horror film about an outcast and manages to squander its premise
with a relatively "normal" teenager who would never be confused for a Sissy
Spacek clone.
The goth girl of "Carrie 2" is Rachel (Emily Bergl), a lonely teen student with
a best friend (Mena Sevauri) whose only connection to her seems to be matching
heart tatoos. Rachel's home life is perfunctory at best, living with abusive,
uncaring stepparents. You see Rachel's mother went to a mental institution, for
reasons never made entirely clear, and so Rachel got foster care and adopted an
attitude. Several years later, she attends a high school where the football
season is all that matters, the jocks hate her, the girls are all treated like
sluts, and a suicide is seen so matter-of-factly by the student body that one
of them even takes a picture with the remark, "cool!" Not a fitting environment
for Rachel, who only wishes she could be like them, but resents them all the
same, or so we believe. It turns out one jock (Jeremy London) feels connected
to her in some way, and asks her out much to the chagrin of his fellow buddies.
Rachel now has a boyfriend, but is still saddened by her best friend's suicide.
The guidance counselor, Sue Snell (Amy Irving, returning from the original
"Carrie") tries to help Rachel, fearing that her telekinetic powers (such as
moving Sue's paper weights in the office) may lead to a repeat of Carrie's
actions from the past. And on and on, as we are treated to a lot of male
bonding scenes between football jocks, a dog is nearly run over, Rachel's house
is nearly vandalized, and so on. There is the obligatory set-up of the evil
teens siding with Rachel, making friends with her, until we are treated to a
humiliating, carnage-packed climax with nerves popping out of Rachel's
skin...well, you get the idea.
To be fair, there are some very good scenes in the film revolving around
Rachel's relationship with the "good" jock, who does love her (the cafe scene
and their love scene in the car are effective). I also liked the early, all too
brief scenes with Mena Sevauri as Rachel's sad friend. 
Emily Bergl has charisma to spare, and has some startling, witchlike eyes - it
is hard to take your eyes off her. But why would anyone think she is ugly? She
is not that Gothic anyway, more toned down than say Fairuza Balk's character in
"Urban Legend." Bergl is beautiful and so the basic premise - social outcast
gets revenge on tormenting teens - does not resonate as it did in the original
"Carrie." Carrie White was utterly defenseless and often humiliated - she was
made to feel worthless and her telekinetic prowess was her only salvation. In
this film, Rachel seems to handle herself rather well, and is only humiliated
once prior to the bloody climax. The buildup is not there for us to sympathize
with her need to kill all the jocks and cheerleaders.
"The Rage: Carrie 2" is not really comprised of much rage or fury to speak of.
It is not boring and it is often watchable, but the melding of such genres does
not make for a cohesive whole. It all goes downhill with the unnecessarily gory
and unpleasant climax that will leave you reeling as to why so many teens had
to die (especially the good to merely decent). Bring back Sissy Spacek! 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
In 1976, director Brian DePalma created a legendary thriller based on a
best-selling novel by the horror-meister himself, Stephen King. Sissy Spacek
played the lead and garnered an Oscar nomination for her role. Even John
Travolta showed up for the fun. Twenty-two years later, in the midst of
teen-flick mania, some wise folks over in Hollywood decided to update the
film for the kids of today. Bad idea.
PLOT:
Girl#1 meets boy#1. Boy#1 sleeps with girl#1. Girl#1 tells her best friend,
girl#2, she really digs the guy. Guy#1 tells his friends that he doesn't
give a crap about girl#1. Girl#1 finds out. Girl#1 does something real nasty
to herself. One of the guy's friends now starts liking girl#2. Is he using
her as well? Does he really like her? Not sure, but either way, girl#2
possesses telekinetic powers by which she can move things with her mind when
she is upset, and hurt people real bad. Enjoy the movie.
CRITIQUE:
Lame, predictable, slow and not scary...and those are its good points! I
wish I could say that this film had something going for it, but it doesn't
even have any cheap T&A shots, pop-culture humor, or one decent, hip teen TV
star to gaze at (Okay, I know the kid from "Home Improvement" is in it, but
he ain't really all that hip.) If you've seen the trailers for this movie,
you've pretty much seen the only exciting parts of this entire film. It
starts off slow, it continues to go slow, and then eventually downshifts
into the most anti-climactic and foreseeable ending this side of the PSYCHO
remake! The best part about this movie is when they splice in shots of the
original CARRIE, and that's not saying much. Amy Irving, we forgive, because
this is the best that you could muster at this point of your career. The
rest of the cast is lame and forgettable, non-withstanding Jason London
(Twin brother of the kid who starred in Kevin Smith's MALLRATS, Jeremy), and
Emily Bergl in her feature film debut.
If you're looking for a bad horror movie, this is it!!! I saw this film at a
sneak preview, where most of the audience got in for free, and even then,
people we're walking out! By the end of this cinematic gig, most people were
rolling in the aisles with laughter, but not because of the humor in the
film, but for the cruel joke that we had all just been a party to. Even the
soundtrack sucked. All in all, I would recommend this film only to those who
love to see bad horror movies, or cheezy remakes that blow chunks.
Otherwise, skip this dull follow-up and rent the original TEXAS CHAINSAW
MASSACRE, if you really want to get the schmekkies scared out of ya!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Amy Irving actually made her feature film debut in the original CARRIE. She
was the only survivor of the infamous prom night inferno (It's scary to
think that she actually got original director DePalma's okay on this project
as she notes in the press clippings, "I talked to Brian DePalma about it, to
get his blessing, and he thought it was a great idea and I should go for
it."
Emily Bergl, who plays the lead in this incarnation, is also making her
feature film debut. She was originally born in England, but mainly grew up
around the Chicago area. In 1993, she was a national champion in Poetry
Reading (National Forensic League).
Elijah Craig also makes his big-screen debut in this movie. His mom is
actress Sally Field.
Dylan Bruno, who plays the character of Mark in this film, graduated from
MIT with an engineering degree in 1993. His latest role was in Steven
Spielberg's SAVING PRIVATE RYAN.
Jason London is real-life twins with actor Jeremy London of TV's "Party of
Five". He is married, and has a daughter named Cooper.
Zachery Ty Bryan has played the role of Bradley Michael Taylor on TV's "Home
Improvement" since 1991.
Director Katt Shea plays the role of the Deputy DA in this film.
Actor John Doe, who plays Rachel foster dad in this pic, got his name during
his years in the punk rock band "X".
Producer Paul Monash also produced the original CARRIE back in 1976. He
hadn't produced anything since.

Author
Greg King
THE RAGE: CARRIE 2 (M).   
(MGM/UA/UIP)
Director: Katt Shea
Stars: Emily Bergl, Jason London, Dylan Bruno, Amy Irving, Zachery Ty
Bryan, J Smith-Cameron, John Doe, Gordon Clapp, Rachel Blanchard,
Charlotte Ayanna, Justin Urich, Mena Suvari, Elijah Craig, Eddie Kaye
Thomas, Clint Jordan, Steven Ford, Kate Skinner, Katt Shea
Running time: 104 minutes.
The scene: the offices of MGM/UA studios in Hollywood, sometime last
year.  We are privy to a rare conversation between two production
executives.
"We've got a pretty thin slate this year until the next Bond film
comes out.  What can we do to beef it up a little?"
"Sequels and remakes always do reasonable business."
"Yes, but we've already done The Mod Squad, and we've still got the
remake of The Thomas Crown Affair on the way."
"Why not do another, but let's call it a sequel, just to be different."  
"I know the perfect film, too!  Remember that fantastic horror film
from 1976.  That one about the tormented adolescent with telekinetic
powers who destroyed her school on prom night.  That one that made the
reputations of both Brian De Palma and Stephen King?  What was it
called... Carrie?  It's old enough now that most of today's audiences
probably won't have seen it, or won't remember it."
"We set it 20 years later, and we bring back Amy Irving's character.
She was the only one to survive that spectacular conflagration.  We
make her a guidance counsellor at her old high school.  She can
recognise the telekinetic powers in another outcast, and try and
prevent another disaster."
"And, as an added twist, we'll make the new kid the illegitimate
daughter of Carrie's father, a sort of half- sister.  Things will
escalate until she erupts and unleashes her full fury."
"We'll get some unknown actress to play our heroine."  
"And let's have the football jocks be her tormentors.  They're playing
a kinky and cruel game whereby they score points for seducing various
girls at school."
"And we'll have our spunky male hero also an innocent victim of a
prank organised by a vindictive student."
"Yeah!  Our film will really explore the bitchy politics, the cliques
and social undercurrents that are an integral part of contemporary
high school life."
"But, hasn't that angle already been explored ad nauseam already this
year?  What with Jawbreaker, 10 Things I Hate About You, She's All
That, Cruel Intentions, and even Never Been Kissed?"
"Yeah, but they were all comedies.  This will be a horror story for 
adolescents."
"And we've got to have a scary coda.  Like that final scene in Carrie
when the bloodied hand reaches out of the grave and grabs Amy Irving's
arm, and it turns out to be a dream.  I really jumped at that bit."
"Even if that sort of thing has now become a cliché and not terribly 
scary?"
"Yes, we've got to have that.  Audiences expect that sort of thing 
nowadays."
"Will we have some big names in the cast?  I mean the original had
people like Sissy Spacek, John Travolta and William Katt before they
really became famous."
"Well, we could have a tv star in it.  What about that kid from Home 
Improvement?"
"You mean Jonathan Taylor Thomas?  He'd be a big name and would draw
in the female demographic."
"No, I was thinking of that other one, the guy who plays Brad.
Zachery Ty Bryan."
"He'll be great, especially when cast against type as a villainous sort. 
 And we'll have lots of fresh young faces play the rest of the
students."
"Will we show the script to Stephen King first for approval?"
"No, he'd just hate it and what we've done to his story.  And he'd
probably want to direct.  We all know what happened with Maximum
Overdrive!"
"Probably a woman, who will bring an added dimension to the horror
genre.  Someone who has made a few teen flicks and has indy
credibility.  And most importantly, someone with a unique visual style
- lots of moving cameras, flashy and atmospheric switches between
colour and black and white.  Someone whose pretentious style will
distract from the lack of originality and credibility and the ham
fisted performances of the cast."
Cut to the present day.  Distressed film reviewer wakes up in a
darkened cinema with the credits rolling across the screen, hoping
that it was all just a bad dream.  No!  Unfortunately, it was a very
bad film!

Author
DeWyNGaLe
THE RAGE: CARRIE 2 by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: A-
Around twenty-two years ago, a movie starring Sissy Spacek, Piper Laurie, and
Amy Irving was released about a girl with telekinesis that was driven to the
edge, called Carrie.  It was nominated for a couple of Academy Awards, a Golden
Globe, and Sissy Spacek won the National Society of Film Critic's Award for
Best Actress.  Twenty two years later, a sequel to the classic has been made. 
I found myself asking the question before the movie, "Isn't it too late for a
sequel?"  After seeing such a great movie, I don't think it was.
Emily Bergl shines as Rachel, the sister of Carrie.  Rachel has telekinesis,
just like her sister did.  She does not want to admit to it, she just covers it
up by saying objects fell because she bumped them off the table or another
excuse.  When Rachel was a little girl, her mom was admitted to an institution
for the insane.  She had to witness her mom get taken away, and some very
strange events things, such as windows opening and shutting violently occurred
when she was mad.  She was forced to go to a foster home after her mom left,
because she did not have a dad at the time.  Growing up, Rachel has had to deal
with all the weird things that go in with her telekinesis.
Rachel has many problems at school.  She isn't popular, or with the in-crowd,
and she doesn't have many friends.  Many people make fun of her, and don't
bother to talk to her or be near her.  Her best friend is Lisa, played by Mena
Suvari.  They seem to be the two outcasts of the school.  Rachel is made fun of
a lot by the popular people. 
After Lisa commits suicide, Rachel becomes very angered.  Lockers and doors
shut instantly when Rachel sees the sight of her dead best friend.  No one
knows why this happened, but it was due to Rachel's telekinesis.  Having to
cope with the loss, Rachel sees Sue Snell, played by Amy Irving, the guidance
counselor, who reprises her role as Sue from the first Carrie film.  Sue
confirms that Rachel has telekinesis, and she also confirms that she is Carrie
White's sister.
Rachel's breaking point in the film is at a party at Mark's, played by Dylan
Bruno, who is one of the popular people.  Mark is involved in a setup to pull
Rachel away from Jesse, another popular boy, played by Jason London, that all
the popular kids are in.  They all act like they like Rachel, and Rachel
finally feels like she fits in.  At the party though, she discovers the truth
and beings very enraged, and as a result, some very suspenseful and eerie
scenes follow.  Rachel uses her telekinesis to get back at the kids who are
making fun of her the best that she can.
The Rage is somewhat predictable, but it is still fun to watch.  There are a
few suspenseful scenes, and also a few very frightening and disturbing images. 
The sound adds to the creepiness of the film, with loud effects at the right
time to make you jump out of your seat.  The house at which Mark's party took
place in was a little extreme, but it was still a fun place to have a rage.
In comparison to other recent horror films, The Rage is better by far.  When
viewing trailers for The Rage, I was expecting another teenager movie that
would have a lot of blood and gore and barely any plot, but I was wrong.  It
completely surprised me.  The Rage and In Dreams both had a similar feel to
them, but I think that In Dreams was a little more clever, but certainly not as
fun.  I am glad to see this form of horror taking place more, rather than the
slasher plot line for movies.
The Rage: Carrie 2 is Emily Bergl's first film, and it certainly is a great one
for her.  She is very believable.  She handles the scenes where telekinesis is
kicking in very realistically and well.  The character of Rachel is developed
very deeply, and it is almost like we have known this character for a long
time.  We are given background on her, which is usually something film's don't
give anymore.  Amy Irving was also great as Sue Snell.  It was very neat to see
someone from the original Carrie return for the sequel.  The acting from the
popular crowd, which included Rachel Blanchard, Zachery Ty Bryan, Charlotte
Lopez, and others, all did very nicely, and were all very mean characters. 
Although they weren't developed, they added to the film.
The Bottom Line: Although the larger are "all going to laugh at this", this
smaller critic didn't.

Author
Matt Williams
Most horror films are hesitant to trumpet their lack of originality.
That's not the case with The Rage: Carrie 2, which displays its copycat
plot proudly.  It has to...there's not much else which connects this
film with the original Carrie.  It's certainly nowhere near the dubious
quality of Brian DePalma's mid-70s teen horror film. Heck, even Stephen
King's name is no longer associated with this project (which should tell
you quite a lot).
The Rage can call itself a sequel to Carrie by the thinnest thread. Sue
Snell (Amy Irving), one of the tormenting teens of the original, is the
only returning character.  She has grown up into a school guidance
counselor, determined to prevent the type of telekenetic violence she
instigated twenty years earlier.
Emily Bergl stars as Rachel Lang, the teen you don't want to mess with
in this sequel.  Unlike the original Carrie, Rachel isn't a complete
outcast.  She's bonded with another white trash goth girl named Lisa
(Mena Suvari), who also has low self-esteem.  However, both girls are
about to run afoul of the "popular" crowd.
It seems that the local jocks have a game they've been playing: to
deflower and dump as many pathetic girls as possible.  Lisa's reaction
as a victim of this cruel game is predictable, but it really only serves
as a plot device to further isolate Rachel.
When sensitive jock Jesse (Jason London) befriends Rachel, are his
feelings true?  Or is he merely luring her into a cunning trap which
will unleash her psychic fury to kill?!?  (Seeing as this is a "Carrie"
movie, which do you think?)
In a strained attempt to link itself to the earlier film, The Rage
contains several "flashbacks" to the original Carrie (most of which are
quite a stretch).  It even goes so far as to replay the original's
"They're all going to laugh at you" line over and over again on the
soundtrack.  The effect seems more pathetic than frightening.  It's as
if the new film realizes it has failed to create anything even mildly
creepy, and must dredge up the memories of the past in an attempt to
shock.
The film is almost robotic in its mimicry of the original Carrie. At
least the first film had originality on its side.  With The Rage: Carrie
2, every step of the plot is irritatingly obvious, even to those who
never saw the first film.  You would at least think that, with such a
detailed blueprint, the film would move along at a decent pace. Wrong
again.  The film is painfully sluggish in creeping towards its
inevitable conclusion.
But, of course, the characters are completely oblivious of the utter
predictability of their situation.  No one even pays the  slightest heed
when windshields shatter without cause, and the  school lockers have the
darndest habit of exploding open at random times.  These things would
raise flags even in a town which hasn't had an entire senior class
slaughtered by telekinetic  violence.  The filmmakers behind The Rage:
Carrie 2 must be as oblivious as these students!
Certainly as an audience member, you wish you had their amazing powers
of ignorance, both during and after the movie.  As a horror film, The
Rage: Carrie 2 is more likely to elicit groans than shrieks.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Katt Shea.
Cast: Emily Bergl, Jason London, Amy Irving, Zachery Ty Bryan, Dylan 
Bruno, J. Smith-Cameron, Rachel Blanchard, Mena Suvari, Elijah Craig.
1999 - 104 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, gore, brief nudity, and sexual 
situations).
Reviewed March 14, 1999.
In 1976, director Brian De Palma released "Carrie," based on the novel 
by Stephen King, which went on to be nominated for two Academy Awards 
(Sissy Spacek for Best Actress and Piper Laurie for Supporting Actress, 
respectively) and is now considered a horror classic, with almost 
everyone familiar with the shocking and surprisingly touching climax set 
at the senior prom. Twenty-three years later, a sequel seems pretty much 
like a desperate attempt for MGM to make some money, and after seeing 
"The Rage: Carrie 2," that is apparently exactly what the studio's goal 
was, since this low-rent, convoluted follow-up gives the great original 
a bad name.
In a brief prologue, a young girl who has the ability to move objects 
with her mind sees her schizophrenic mother taken away in an ambulance. 
Switch forward to the present-day, that young girl is now 16-year-old 
Rachel (Emily Bergl), a teenage girl who is living with an insensitive 
foster family. Rachel is a tough, strong-willed young woman who stands 
apart from the popular crowd at school, but is not actually made fun of 
or tormented the way that Carrie was in the original, and so we don't 
get to sympathize with the Rachel character in the same way. When 
Rachel's best friends, Lisa (Mena Suvari), excitedly tells her that she 
lost her virginity the night before, Rachel is devastated to discover 
later on that day that Lisa has committed suicide from jumping off the 
school's roof. Developing her late friend's pictures at the photomat she 
works at, Rachel discovers that Lisa had a picture taken with the guy 
whom she had sex with, Eric (Zachery Ty Bryan), one of the school jocks 
who is in a group where those initiated have sex with people and then 
rate them on a points scale in a little notebook. The one guy in the 
group who actually is growing tired of this cruel and juvenile game, 
Jesse (Jason London), starts to have eyes for Rachel, even though she 
initially finds it hard to believe that such a popular guy would be 
interested in her. Meanwhile, the school's guidance counselor, Sue Snell 
(Amy Irving, reprising her character from the original), the sole 
survivor of the town massacre two decades before, begins to recognize 
similarities in Rachel to Carrie, including her obvious power of 
telekinesis, so Sue sets out to find if Rachel is of any relation to 
Carrie. All of this finally leads up to the inevitable horrific climax, 
just like its predecessor, when the mean kids at school plot to play a 
prank on Rachel at a party, which subsequently pushes her over the edge.
The more you think about it, the more "The Rage: Carrie 2" really does 
come off as a shameful ploy to rip off the infinitely superior original, 
as it steals all of the major elements of that film and then attempts to 
put a spin on them, even though all they really are doing is tarneshing 
the memory of the first movie. For the first 85 minutes, the film moves 
at a very, very slow pace that is only a set-up for the climactic 
showdown. Although "Carrie" did the same thing, I was able to sympathize 
a great deal with Carrie, in her fight to be happy amidst constant 
torment from her fellow students (all much more memorably written and 
played by Nancy Allen, John Travolta, P.J. Soles, etc.), as well as her 
religious fanatic mother (Laurie). When the fateful moment finally did 
occur, we watched with horror and sadness as Carrie was humiliated and 
took revenge on everyone there, and the sequence was all the more 
touching, as well as frightening, because we cared about some of the 
innocent people (and, of course, Carrie) in which terrible things were 
happening to.
In "The Rage: Carrie 2," Emily Bergl, making her feature film debut, 
gives just about as strong of a performance as could possibly be 
expected, taking the thankless and underwritten role (even though she's 
the main character) of Rachel and making it her own. Perhaps this fact 
is where the first major problem of the film arises, however, since at 
least a little weakness and vulnerability needed to be shown so that we 
could care more about her. In retrospect, I can't even recall anything 
that terrible that anyone did to her in the movie (aside from at the 
party), and she was certainly not the ultimate class outcast. Because of 
this, when the ending arrived and Rachel takes out revenge on everyone, 
this plot development comes off as more of a gimmick rather than a 
natural occurrence. When Spacek did the same thing in 1976, we could see 
the pain in her eyes and were able to understand why she was doing what 
she doing. It is not Bergl's fault that she does not accomplish this 
same thing, but rather Rafael Moreu's clumsy and uneven screenplay. If 
this aspect of the conclusion doesn't necessarily work, it could have 
come off as exciting nonetheless, but director Katt Shea (1992's "Poison 
Ivy") even botches the technical aspect, and certainly lacks the style 
and overall height of raw terror that director De Palma was able to 
reach. To top it all off, when Rachel finally takes her vengeance, the 
tatoo on her arm wraps all over her body like a vine which, I seriously 
doubt, is a characteristic of a telekinetic person and makes no sense 
whatsoever. If anything, a few of the death set-pieces were admittedly 
original and shocking in its sudden surge of gore, but they also did not 
service the plot in any way.
One of the most irritating things in "The Rage: Carrie 2" is the 
pointless way that the film mixes color and black-and-white. One 
particular scene mid-way through that might have been effective only 
came off as cheesy due to the mindless decision to film certain sections 
in b&w, and because of this, the movie often felt like a direct-to-video 
movie.
Unlike "Carrie," "The Rage: Carrie 2" does an inadequate and 
disappointing job of writing its large cast of characters (many of which 
come off as simply an afterthought) and the story also does not hold 
such close scrutiny. The movie is never the least bit scary or even 
suspenseful, only occasionally bloody. Sure, there were a few 
unintentionally funny elements thrown in for good measure, such as when 
Rachel and Sue visit the school from the original that was burnt down 23 
years before, and the firey remains still have not been cleaned up, but 
this ineptness was only a brief distraction from the lame proceedings. 
In the latest issue of Fangoria magazine, Amy Irving admits that the 
reason she agreed to make this sequel was because they offered her a 
sizable paycheck. At least she's honest.

Author
Michael Redman
"There's nothing new under the sun" is a phrase often used when the speaker
actually means "Let's find something to copy."
Of course there are very few completely original ideas. Even earth-shattering
concepts are built upon the vast body of human experience. There is, after
all, no need to re-invent the wheel time after time.
Recently it seems that Hollywood doesn't feel the need to even re-write the script.
My understanding of the word "sequel" is a continuation of the story. The film
industry has defined the word to mean reshooting the original with minor changes.
Have an overwhelming desire to see an inferior version of Brian DePalma's
adaptation of the Steven King novel? This is your dream come true.
Rachel (Emily Bergl), a high school outcast, is beginning to notice weird
things happening around her. Doors slam shut by themselves. Glass globes blow up.
Her mother has severe mental problems and her father is absent. A popular boy
unexpectedly asks her out. The in-crowd conspires to embarrass her at a public event.
Once the audience catches on that this is the same story as "Carrie", there's
little to do but wait for the inevitable ending. The effects are a bit better
this time around, but the film doesn't work nearly as well.
There are a couple of minor plot differences. Rachel lives with foster parents
because her mother is institutionalized. The boys at her school are portrayed
as even more evil than in the original. They keep score of their scoring with
points given for each conquest. And, uh, there must be other story changes but
none stand out.
One nice touch is the casting of Amy Irving again as Sue Snell. Over 20 years
ago she was the one girl who tried to help Carrie. Now a high school
counselor, she befriends Rachel, but her character's potential is squandered.
There's too much about Sue that doesn't make sense. After the slaughter when
Carrie kills most of her classmates, Sue is driven mad and spends time in the
institution that Rachel's mother is in. Still living in the same small town,
the woman with a well-known history of mental problems is hired as a high
school counselor?
Sue tells Rachel that her telekinesis is a genetic disease. This may be the
one original idea in the film, but the reasoning behind describing psychic
powers as a "disease" is never explained.
Sue's eventual fate is an admission by director Katt Shea and writer Rafael
Moreu that they had an interesting character but couldn't figure out what to
do with her. Blink and you'll miss it.
Some of the events are filmed in black and white, but the rationale for this
is unknown. It doesn't add anything and the choice of scenes appears somewhat random.
"The Rage" retains some of the trappings of "Carrie" without the meaning. In
the first film the color red was a motif connected to Carrie's onset of powers
at the same time she began menstruating. Here there's an abundance of red, but
for no apparent purpose.
The casting of high school jocks and cheerleaders as villains is beginning to
wear thin. One might be lead to suspect that most filmmakers were unpopular in
school and the history of teenage films is an extended cinematic revenge of
the nerds.
The biggest mistake the film makes is including clips of the original. Seeing
Sissy Spacek on the screen only points to the quality of that film - and the
flaws in this one.
(Michael Redman has written this column since "Carrie" was released and
thought about just re-writing his review of it for "The Rage". Email copies of
old letters to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 3/18/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Rage:_Carrie_2_ (R) 1/2* (out of ****)
Why a sequel to _Carrie_, and why now?  I cannot think of one valid reason
except sheer desperation over at beleaguered MGM/UA, for the retarded
rehash _The_Rage:_Carrie_2_ fails to offer even one compelling reason for
its pathetic existence.
What is compelling, however, is newcomer Emily Bergl, who takes center
stage as Rachel Lang, another alienated teen at Bates High School who, like
one Carrie White some twenty years before her, is blessed (cursed?) with
the ability to move objects with her mind, or telekinesis.  But this
"Carrie" has been given a '90s makeover: this tough-talking Goth chick is
no one's victim, unlike her predecessor.  (She even gets to lose her
virginity.)  Sounds like a thankless task, but Bergl, while no Sissy
Spacek, holds the audience's attention and interest well, infusing Rachel
with the right amount of warmth and vulnerability beneath her rough facade.
But for all the contemporary touches and new plot wrinkles writer Rafael
Moreu and director Katt Shea dress _The_Rage_ in, there's no hiding the
fact that this is just about the same movie that came out in 1976.
Telekinetic girl is picked on by peers.  Peers humiliate her in big social
event (here, a party instead of the prom).  Girl takes violent revenge.
Even the characters are direct analogues to the original.  In addition to
the obvious Rachel = Carrie, Jason London (as Rachel's boyfriend Jessie) is
William Katt's sensitive Tommy; Nancy Allen's uberbitch Chris has been
split into Rachel Blanchard's Monica and Charlotte Ayanna's Tracy;
similarly, John Travolta's blowhard Billy is replaced by Dylan Bruno's Mark
and Zachery Ty Bryan's Eric; and Rachel's religious, institutionalized
mother (J. Smith-Cameron) is an extremely watered-down version of Carrie's
frightening, religious fanatic mother (oh so indelibly played by Piper
Laurie).  Amy Irving, whose Sue Snell was the sole survivor of Carrie's
prom night rampage, not only gets to reprise her character (and her
character's role in the story) here, she also gets to assume the guidance
counselor (read: caring adult) part originally held by Betty Buckley.
With Shea and Moreu so closely following the original, needless to say
there are no surprises in _The_Rage_.  But even without keeping the
original in mind, there's nothing shocking about the film or its climactic
explosion of violence--which can be directly attributed to the attitude
alteration of the protagonist.  Sure, making Rachel far from a meek girl is
a very '90s feminist thing to do, but it also robs her eventual bad
behavior of any resonance.  A lot of the power of _Carrie_'s famous prom
scene is that, while some payback is clearly in order, the fury of her
vengeance comes as a shock, given how weak she had been throughout the
film.  With Rachel, such an intense outburst is a foregone conclusion--and,
accordingly, Shea ups the gore factor in the big climax.  While she comes
up with one especially clever domino-effect scene invoving eyeglasses and a
spear gun, there's nothing particularly frightening or suspenseful as any
given scene in Brian DePalma's original film.
It was undoubtedly the ties to the original _Carrie_ that got _The_Rage_
made, but, ironically, it is that connection that makes the film even worse
that it already is.  Not only does _The_Rage_ simply pale in comparison,
the links Moreu serves up are ridiculously clunky, especially one ill-kept
plot "twist" about the origin of Rachel's powers.  Shea even actually goes
so far as to include excerpts of the first film as random flashbacks for
Sue.  Worst of all, though, these ties seem completely arbitrary, serving
no real purpose other than to fill time and fulfill the meager promise of
the subtitle.  Change a line here and there (and Irving's character name),
and _The_Rage:_Carrie_2_ would be just _The_Rage_--and better for it.
However, no script revisions are necessary for the film to simply be
_The_Rage_; audiences will feel plenty of that once the closing crawl begins.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        My friends, I have seen bad films.  I have laughed in the
face of "Batman and Robin," cackled maniacally at "The Avengers,"
giggled all the way through "Highlander II"... and received a
perverse sort of pleasure from them all, I might add.  When it
comes to the enjoyment of bad movies, you will be hard-pressed to
find my equal.  An Ed Wood retrospective?  Count me in!  A Roger
Corman marathon?  I'm there, my friend, I'm there!
        That introduction was necessary in order for you to
understand the magnitude of what I'm about to say: As God is
my witness, I have never seen anything like "The Rage: Carrie 2,"
a film which has no reason to exist on this planet other than to
emotionally scar anyone who sees it.  I'm not sure, but I think
it made me sterile.
        Who in the hell thought "Carrie," Brian de Palma's 1976
macabre masterpiece about a teenage girl cursed with telekinetic
powers, needed a sequel in the first place?  The tale, based on
Stephen King's novel of the same name, was engrossing and
touching, as the outcast Carrie (Sissy Spacek) fell for a handsome
senior (William Katt), not realizing that his friends were using their
relationship as the set-up for a cruel joke.  Carrie was warm and
undeniably human; we could understand her pain, which made the
film's final 20 minutes all the more tragic.  (Even people who have
never seen the movie know all about the famous prom scene, which
ranks right up there with "Psycho's" shower montage in terms of
pop-culture familiarity.)
        "The Rage: Carrie 2," which is really more of a remake
than a sequel, doesn't bother to give the same depth to its
so-called "heroine," a goth-girl named Rachel (Emily Bergl).
We're supposed to sympathize with her, I think.  I guess.
Maybe.  Couldn't tell you why.  Like Carrie, Rachel is a social
outcast who possesses a limited telekinetic ability, which grows
stronger when she gets angry.  Unlike Carrie, Rachel never earns
our sympathy: most of her problems seem avoidable, and if she
appears to be an outcast at school, I blame it on the fact that
she's a bitch to everyone she encounters.
        In her defense, the script doesn't give Bergl much to
build her performance on.  We learn very little about Rachel
over the course of the story.  What are her hobbies?  Her
aspirations and goals?  How does she feel about her mother,
who is locked up in a mental institution?  The movie couldn't
care less, and nothing I saw made me curious to know more.
Nor does Bergl possess the ability to rise above the material--
her main method of dealing with a crisis is to deliver her
dialogue to the floor.  (See for yourself!  Anytime she gets a
major speech, Rachel drops her eyes, as though she were talking
to the ground.  I was actually disappointed the floor didn't
receive a co-acting credit for its fine work here.  It certainly
gives the best performance in the movie.)
        It's not just Bergl's fault.  Every character in this
film is here for one specific purpose, and no more: Rachel's best
friend is here to die, thus allowing Rachel's emotional stress
(and her telekinetic power) to skyrocket.  The "in-crowd"
characters are here to instigate this movie's equivalent of
the prom scene massacre.  Jesse (Jason London) is here to fill
the Katt role from the first movie: he's the handsome, popular
jock who goes out with the shunned girl, earning the scorn of
his friends in the process.  He's supposed to be likeable, but
he's not: witness his notebook, in which he keeps track of all
the girls he's had sex with and awards them points based on
their physical attractiveness.  But the most laughable character
is Sue Snell (Amy Irving, reprising her role from the original
film), who is here to gasp dramatically at key moments.  She's
the school's guidance counselor, and makes her living by consoling
distressed students with helpful observations like: "Losing people
close to you can hurt sometimes."  Not exactly Sigmund Freud,
is she?
        Events are so obviously set up that only a dummy -- or
Rachel -- wouldn't be able to see through them.  She's tormented
by the popular kids.  Her life is traumatic.  When she starts dating
Jesse, the in-crowd at school pretends to accept her.  Rachel
finds out that they're just putting her on during a crowded party,
thus giving her a reason to go ballistic and wipe out most of the
people in attendance.  And because the story opens with a scene
of Rachel and Jesse discussing the end of "Romeo and Juliet," we
know that either Rachel or Jesse, or perhaps both, will be pushing
up the daisies by the end of it all.  Blame the directors (yes, it
apparantly took two directors to make a film this bad) for adhering
to cliche and violence, rather than story and characterization.
        The movie eschews restraint during its climactic apocalypse.
We're treated to graphic decapitations, and numerous shots of people
being speared like pieces of fruit in a mixed drink.  A young man's
testicles are separated from his body before our very eyes.  Thank
you, movie.
        But even this doesn't begin to convey the pure wretchedness
of this piece of excrement.  Just how bad is "The Rage: Carrie 2?"
Well, here's a list of things I learned while watching it:
        1) If a teenage girl hears a knock on the front door when
she's clothed in nothing but a towel, she should immediately fling
the front door wide open without bothering to establish the identity
of the visitor.  If no one is there, she should poke around the dark
shadows which surround her on every side, while still wearing the 
towel.
        2) Breaking out of an asylum is a piece of cake.  One
merely has to say "Hey, look over there!" to the guard.  (At
least "In Dreams" made it look like it took some ingenuity to
escape from this type of place.)
        4) Shaking the camera equals cheap telekinetic effects!
It's hours of fun for the whole family!
        5) If the guy you're dating likes your kind of music, he's
obviously your soulmate.  Rachel eyes Jesse warily for the first
half of the movie, until he mentions that he likes the band Garbage.
Immediately she perks up: "You like Garbage?"  Obviously he does:
he's in this movie, isn't he?  And in case you miss their passion,
a computer-generated spark is inserted when their fingertips brush
together.
        The only moments of life contained in this film are the
flashbacks from the original "Carrie," which really have no
business being here at all, but do at least make this piece of tripe
watchable.  (Hint for the filmmakers: don't insert footage from a
good movie into the middle of your really bad one.  It just makes
your offering look even worse by comparison.)  Actually, I take it
back: there *is* a reason to include these flashback scenes: to entice
teenagers into buying a copy of the original "Carrie," which is now
23 years old and has probably not been seen by the sequel's target
audience.
        Why would anyone take a classic film like "Carrie" and
butcher its memory so badly?  I tell you, Stephen King must be
rolling over in his... great big pile of money?  Under no circum-
stance should you see "The Rage: Carrie 2."  Your very salvation
depends on it.
  ("The Rage: Carrie 2" hits theaters Friday, March 12th.)

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com
