Title
Review for Tell Your Children (1936)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jason Wallis
Up until a couple hours ago, I was completely convinced that Ed Wood's
"Glen or Glenda?" was the stupidest, most inane movie ever made. Well,
earlier today I decided to take a trip down to my local friendly Hollywood
Video to pick up some flicks. Looking in the cult classics section, a film
called "Reefer Madness" caught my eye. I thought it was like a Cheech and
Chong flick or something. So I read the box and discovered that it was a
short made in the 30s that was meant to warn families about the dangers of
marijuana addiction. So I figured, "What the hell? It might be good for a
laugh or two." 
Well, a little over an hour later, I was trying to catch my breathe because
I was laughing so hard. "Reefer Madness" (originally titled "Tell Your
Children") is the single worst film ever made, but it is also one of the
most entertaining (unintentually, of course). 
The "film", shall we call it, opens with a warning - "The film you are
about to see may disturb you." Well, it does, but not in the way that they
meant. What's disturbing about it is that someone actually thought it was
good enough to get produced. 
The plot deals with a group of kids that hang out at the apartment of a
chick named Mae and get high together on pot. Mae's boyfriend/husband (not
sure which) is their supplier. I'm not going to bore you with anymore of
the story line. You just gotta watch it. 
Very rarely does a film come along that I think warrents the dreaded zero
stars rating (other recipients include "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" and
"New York Stories", by the way), but this movie truly deserves it. The fact
that it's funny as hell doesn't alter this because the only reason it funny
is because it's just so bad. 
So I guess I actually recommend "Reefer Madness" for the simple fact that
it made me bust a gut watching it. Louis J. Gasnier has made a film that
joins the ranks of "Plan 9 from Outer Space" and "Santa Claus Conquers the
Martians" as great flicks to watch when you're in the mood for some really
bad camp classics. 
Check out Jason Wallis' Filmaholics Anonymous web page at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Andrew Hicks
        REEFER MADNESS is one of the most famous bad movies 
of all time. It's an ancient propaganda piece about the dangers of 
marijuana, "the new drug menace that is destroying the youth of 
America in alarmingly increasing numbers." An on-screen prologue 
tells us, "Something must be done to wipe out this ghastly menace," 
but obviously this movie isn't the thing to do it. If anything, it has 
prompted sixty years worth of teenagers to try pot for the first time 
and countless others to laugh hysterically at some of the worst 
acting and preposterous dialogue in cinema history.
        The movie centers around a clean-cut WASP couple, Bill 
and Mary, who spend their days playing tennis and drinking tea 
on the back porch, where Bill says to Mary, "I went home and told 
mother that the problem with her pot roast gravy was that she hadn't 
added three heaping teaspoons of olive oil." From the looks of these 
two, they're already either tripping acid or on heroin, but their 
friend, Jimmy, soon introduces Bill to someone who can get him 
something even better.
        It's Jack, the local dealer, who invites kids up to his 
girlfriend's apartment and gives them free pot. Bill comes up with 
his friend and begins to light up his plain old tobacco-and-nicotine 
cigarette when a beautiful girl gives him one of her cigarettes. Soon 
Bill's giggling like a schoolgirl and dancing a frantic jitterbug. If 
REEFER MADNESS only serves one education purpose, it's as 
evidence that white people can't dance when they're stoned 
either.
        Of course, after one joint, Bill's hooked. And, as his grades 
and tennis game go down the tubes, the principal can't help but 
notice. He comes right out and asks Bill, "Isn't it true that you 
have, perhaps unwillingly, acquired a certain harmful habit through 
association with certain undesirable people?" But Bill ducks the 
question and heads back to the solace of Jack's apartment, where 
any kid can go to be himself.
        After one particularly potent reefer, Bill beds down 
with another girl. A concerned Mary tracks him down but gets the 
cigarette switch trick pulled on her. Soon she's giggling like a school 
girl while the weirdest of the potheads, Ralph, tries to jump her 
bones. When she resists and begins screaming, Bill comes running 
out, still under the influence of the evil weed. He begins 
hallucinating and blacking out at the same time Jack accidentally 
shoots Mary. The bullethole in her back is about the thickness 
of a pencil.
        "Is she alright?" the other girl asks. "She's dead," Jack 
replies, pinning the blame on Bill, who ends up being convicted 
of murder. Only Ralph and the other girl know the truth, and they're 
locked up in Jack's apartment for the duration of the trial, with only 
a piano and couple hundred joints to keep them going. That's when 
the movie's funniest scene comes along, in which the girl, joint in 
mouth, begins playing the piano and a paranoid Ralph keeps yelling, 
"Faster! Faster!" until finally the girl is playing a frenzied solo, 
establishing the marijuana-music connection which would peak 
in the 60's.
        The climax comes when Ralph kills Jack and the guilty 
piano girl blurts out the truth to the police. "I'm guilty, I'm guilty!" 
she cries as she signs her confession. Scarcely one minute later, 
as she is being led back to her cell by a prison matron, she runs 
down the hall and throws herself out the window, by which point 
most viewers of REEFER MADNESS have done the same. The only 
way to get anything out of this movie is stoned, with the video box 
serving as one giant rolling paper. But watch out because "the dread 
marijuana may be reaching forth next for your son or daughter... or 
yours... or YOURS!"
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
