Title
Review for Murderers' Row (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Afterburner
Rating (out of 10):  N/A.  See review for further details.
        MURDERER'S ROW (1966) is the second of the four Matt Helm movies.
For those who haven't seen any of them, the Matt Helm movies answer the
question "What if Hugh Hefner (founder and publisher of Playboy Magazine)
had been a secret agent on the side?"  Dean Martin plays Matt Helm, an
affable, boozing photographer of scantily-clad women who works for
"Slaymate" magazine.  But that's just a cover!  The truth is that Helm is
*really* an affable, boozing, super-competent secret agent who works for
the Intelligence Counter Espionage (ICE) organization.
        Before we go further, I should point out that the Matt Helm movies
are all pretty bad.  But they're wonderfully bad, and they're great,
cheezy, campy fun.  I tend to speak glowingly of the Matt Helm movies
because I enjoy them for their over-the-top campiness, but more
serious-minded viewers will probably be turned off.
        MURDERER'S ROW opens with a scene of Washington, DC.  Suddenly, two
beams of light appear out of nowhere, and within minutes, DC is a charred
wasteland.  But wait!  It was all just a prop; a demonstration by the evil
"Big O" organization of their nefarious plans.  The *real* DC will be toast
as soon as "Big O" can torture a few essential equations out of kidnapped
scientist Norman Solaris.  But just to be on the safe side, several top
secret agents need to be rubbed out, and this task is given to Ironhead
(Tom Reese), a fellow with a big steel plate on his noggin.
        Well, as fate would have it, Our Hero is among the secret agents
slated to be greased, and it looks as though "Big O" is successful at
killing him by boiling him alive in his own swimming-pool-sized bathtub.
But of course, it's all just a ruse.  Helm is still alive.  He faked his
death so that he could investigate "Big O" unmolested.  And thereafter
follows the usual spy stuff, with Helm meeting bad guys, rescuing damsels
in distress, and so forth.
        Of the four Matt Helm movies, this one has the most "Austin Powers"
feel about it.  Several scenes involve Dean Martin (never a big fan of rock
and roll, or the people who sang it) in a discotheque, getting jostled
around by teenagers doing the Frug, and getting called "Dad" by the young
hipsters.  Other scenes involve protracted shots of Ann-Margaret (playing
the daughter of the kidnapped scientist) dancing wildly in a very '60s
fashion.  (I kept hearing the line "This is my happening, and it really
freaks me out!" over and over in my head during these scenes.)
        Of the cast, the best acting job is done by (believe it or not)
Karl Malden, doing the Blofeld role as Julian Wall, head of "Big O."
Malden chews up the scenery left and right, and clearly has a blast doing
it.  Of the rest of the acting, the less said, the better.  :)
        * A talking bottle of booze that activates when Helm tries to drink
it (his bosses knew he'd go there first).
        * A gun with a 5-second, time delay trigger.  Pull the trigger and
it won't go off for five seconds.
        * A nifty hovercraft battle.
        * Some of the worst fight scenes ever committed to celluloid.  The
fight between Helm and Ironhead on the hovercraft is particularly
laughable.
        * The line "I demand an explanation for this nocturnal
assignation."
        If you're looking for a quality, thoughtful film, avoid MURDERER'S
ROW like the plague.  But if you're a fan of camp, MURDERER'S ROW is right
up your alley.  (And if you've seen other Matt Helm movies, I'd rank
MURDERER'S ROW as 3rd best of the four movies.)
