Title
Review for Sôseiji (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chen Chiou Beng
In the Meiji era of Japan, a doctor named Yukio is a doctor who has worked
as a medic officer during the war, gaining fame in the process. He comes
from a prestige family and is happily married. The life he leads seems
perfect, but is shattered when his family members died under mysterious
circumstances. Soon it is revealed that it is but Yukios twin brother, who
was abandoned at birth due to a birthmark, is behind all the murders and he
is now coming back to reclaim whats his, especially  Yukios wife, who was
once his lover
The film is a refreshing depart from Shinya Tsukamotos previous works,
whose works previously included the very mechanical Tetsuo and its sequel,
and also the very violent Tokyo Fist. All previous films he made were filled
with jarring images and an almost incomprehensible plot, but Gemini is
different. Gemini is made with the purpose of straight story telling.
Despite this, Gemini still flashes the old Tsukamoto, with the opening
showing a decomposed cat eaten but vultures and a scene with a nail is
driven into a guys neck, sprouting blood.
Gemini also deals with duality. This can be seen right at the start of the
film, where a contrast between the rich and the poor. He is born with a
silver spoon in his mouth, and he despises the slum people. At one scene
Yukio has to save between a poor woman is pleading for her child and the
injury of the mayor, he chose the rich, and forced the old woman out. In the
starkest contrast, however, is when his twin brother, who was abandoned when
birth and forced to live within the slums, exchanged identity with Yukio by
imprisoning him in a deep well and forcing him to eat on scraps of food. In
this scene, we really see the reversed life on each other as a psychological
game is played out, forcing him to reconsider the sides of the rich and the
poor. As the end scene shows, after he kills and knows the truth of his twin
brother, he walks into the slums, presumably to cure the poor people he once
loathed. At a minor turn of duality also sees Yukios wife, whose lover was
Yukios twin brother, has chosen to forsake a life of poorness and lives
with Yukio, whom she has initially mistaken for the other guy. As I said to
end this review, I would say Gemini is a compelling, albeit a little
conservative directing from Tsukamoto, film, and I would highly recommend
it.
(In Japanese With English subtitles)
Note:
Gemini was shown on 9th April 2000 at the 13th Singapore International Film
Festival and will be scheduled released for commercial release in Singapore
on a later date.
