Title
Review for WADD: The Life and Times of John C. Holmes (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
WADD: The Life and Times of John C. Holmes (1998) 110m.
Commendably objective documentary takes a frank look at the turbulent life 
of 70s-80s porn star John Holmes.  The film-makers obviously figured that 
this subject matter alone was going to earn their movie an R rating so they 
allow their interview subjects free rein on opinions and reminiscences - 
this doco has the highest frequency  for 'penis' synonyms in the first ten 
minutes than any other film you will have seen.  It's only to be expected: 
Holmes' claim to fame was 13 inches of talent (32.5 cm if you prefer 
metric), a fact that director Cass Paley recognizes as this movie's selling 
point.  The audience gets what it pays for (although the famous member 
itself is only glimpsed) with much made of the fact that Holmes was born for 
porn, but this is merely a starting point - there's a lot more than sex 
going on in this story.
Holmes' odyssey leads him from a hard upbringing in Ohio, a stint in the 
signal corps, and marriage in California.  After an introduction to the LA 
pornography market and the invention of private dick 'Johnny Wadd' (the 
script was written on the back of an envelope!), his career path is assured, 
and the rest should be simple.  Holmes has a fatal flaw, however: he is a 
pathological liar, whose endless evasions and fabrications become so 
habitual that he begins to experience some sort of slippage.  After being 
busted on pimping charges (along with others stuck with "conspiracy to 
commit oral copulation"), Holmes turns informant for the LAPD vice squad - 
effectively he is living out his own porn-detective alter ego.  He graduates 
from smoking joints to freebasing cocaine, blurring lines of reality even 
further.  By the time he's stealing cars while on the run from the FBI, the 
cops, AND the mob, Holmes' separation from everything and everyone in his 
life has become complete.  WADD is terribly confusing: no other documentary 
has been so replete with contradiction.  The most common adjectives used by 
interviewees to describe Holmes are 'gentle' and 'sweet' - yet this is the 
same man who caused the horrific murders of four people and wantonly 
continued having sex with women without informing them that he was HIV 
positive. Nearly everyone gushes about what a great guy he was, but who's 
kidding who?  By the end of the film you won't trust what anyone has to say 
except for his second wife who has at least suffered enough physically to 
make her testimony believable.  Just to bring everything full circle, 
Holmes' third wife (and porn star) Misty Dawn sued the film-makers a year 
after WADD's release for slander and "reckless disregard for the truth".
Much more than just a documentary on a titillating subject, WADD is equal 
doses of humor, poignancy, horror and fascination.  Many lines are quotable, 
but not subject for repetition in most review columns and as the star player 
is Holmes himself, several innocent sentences take on amusing innuendoes - 
my favorite is when his first wife talks of his carpentry skills, claiming 
he 'could make anything with wood'.   Among those interviewed: Ron Jeremy, 
Gloria Leonard, Kitten Natividad and Misty Dawn a.k.a. Laurie Holmes, who 
now maintains the official John Holmes website.  Film also includes 
non-explicit clips from various Holmes movies, including the Johnny Wadd 
series.  Musical score of documentary is suitably cheesy and could be 
recycled in spots as background for any real porno movie.


Author
Mac VerStandig
WADD: The Life and Times of John C. Holmes is an extremely
entertaining documentary that handles its 110 minutes without the
slightest hint of boredom. The film, by Cass Paley, has been making
its way around film festivals for several months now, and most
recently played the Florida Film Festival. The production is well
conceived probably due to an interesting motivation behind it. Similar
to the 1997 film, Boogie Nights, the story being related is an
intriguing one that constantly begs the question "What will happen
next?"
John C. Holmes was a small town boy that went on to become the first
major male pornographic star in the United States of America. As his
career advanced he became a constant substance abuser, a pathological
liar, and a household name all at the same time. Seeing his first
marriage end in divorce, Holmes married again and carried on numerous
affairs. He also became increasingly involved with crime. By his death
in the late 1980's, Holmes was living more of a soap opera than an
ordinary life. In WADD, the people closest to John, notably absent his
family, recall their experiences with the sex star. Director Cass
Paley regrets the absence of Holmes' family, but explains "I didn't
find any of John's family that would talk to us. His mother didn't
want to discuss it, his brother hung up on us." This has an adverse
impact on the film, but the presence of Holmes' wives and closer
friends almost entirely make up for his biological family's absence.
After seeing Boogie Nights, a film largely based on John C. Holmes,
Cass Paley decided to make this film. "[Boogie Nights] was interesting
film, I enjoyed it; but knew that a lot of what was there was
fantasized." Mr.  Paley explained. Going on, he said that he met the
pornography star once and "85having heard a lot of stories about John,
I wanted to know if these = were really true." So when Bill Amerson,
John's manager finally agreed, the film was set to be made. "And all
of the sudden one day I got a phone call and it was Bill and his voice
at the other of the phone goes 'it's time' and that's all that he
said." Mr. Paley enthusiastically recollects.
Several of the scenes in WADD are easily recognizable from Boogie
Nights. One such scene pits Holmes and his director Bob Chinn being
interviewed together.  After Holmes explains at length that he enjoys
working with Chinn because he is allowed to block his own sex scenes,
the director flat out denies the entire practice. This brings a
certain comedic light to the film that is a pleasant surprise, yet
makes a point about Holmes' less than honest nature as well.
WADD does include several clips from Holmes' movies. However, this is
a far cry from pornography and would be considered family material if
compared to Hollywood films like 8MM. "You can show it until you are
blue in the face, but I don't think the audience needs to see it."
Says Mr. Paley explaining the absence of hardcore nudity in his film.
One of the more interesting filmmaking techniques was showing a
contrast in people's opinion of Holmes by putting contradictory
remarks after each other.  Take for instance when several people
attest to how easy it was to work with him, the film immediately cuts
to another person's complaints about working with the star. This is
entertaining and interesting initially, but the concept loses its
charm after a while and becomes somewhat of a repetitive downside.
At the South by South West Film Festival, WADD won top honors for a
documentary feature. Reportedly the film has been received quite well
elsewhere. This trend should continue, as WADD is a well assembled and
intriguing examination of not just the man who practically founded
cinematic adult entertainment, but the industry he started as well.
