Title
Review for Passion of Ayn Rand, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE PASSION OF AYN RAND" (Showtime TV)
"Ayn Rand wouldn't like this movie," said director Christopher
Menaul at its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival. But, if you're
an Ayn Rand fan, I suspect you will. Novelist, philosopher, and
self-described fanatic for individualism, freedom, and creativity, Ayn
Rand wrote visionary books like "The Fountainhead" and "Atlas
Shrugged." The story begins in Hollywood as Ayn Rand (Helen Mirren)
and her actor-turned-painter husband (Peter Fonda) welcome an
intelligent UCLA philosophy student, Nathaniel Branden (Eric Stoltz)
and his girl-friend Barbara (Julie Delpy) into their home. It is a
meeting that changes the lives of these two couples forever. Nathaniel
is enthralled by Ayn's philosophy of Objectivism, while she is
besotted by his youth and sexual vigor. He is the personification of
the hero she often extols in her writings. But she still remains
committed to her husband, who fulfills her on an emotional level that
Nathaniel cannot comprehend. Ayn soon convinces everyone involved that
it's imperative that she enjoy intimacy with Nathaniel. The passive,
pitiful spouses, Frank and Barbara, allow the 15-year affair to
flourish until Nathaniel falls in love with his own protege (Sybil
Temchen). That betrayal ultimately destroys Nathaniel's relationship
with Ayn Rand. The saga is told from the viewpoint of Barbara Branden
on whose 1986 best-selling Rand biography this is based. "Ayn Rand was
a genius, a great mind, and she was a bully and terribly human,"
Barbara Branden concludes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Passion of Ayn Rand" is a captivating 7, primarily because of Helen
Mirren's compelling performance in the title role. This edgy,
high-quality drama debuts on Sunday, May 30, at 8 P.M. on Showtime TV
with additional playdates on June 7 and June 22.
