Title
Review for Man in the Moon, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
A simple story well told.  When stripped down, it all appears so basic that 
you begin to wonder why veteran directors Robert Mulligan and Mark Rydell 
took it upon themselves to make it (Rydell produced).  I would guess that 
Mulligan knew well enough to trust his film to the right actors, if he could 
find them - and he did.  THE MAN IN THE MOON will probably be best known now 
for the debut of Reese Witherspoon, who impresses in her role as Dani, a 
14-year old girl living with her family in rural Louisiana during the 50s.  
A long-absent family friend moves in nearby, allowing 17-year old Court 
(Jason London, also making his debut ) to enter Dani's life.  But it isn't 
just Dani: her older sister Maureen (Emily Warfield ) has noticed him too.
It works in the film's favor to have the story of a young girl's first crush 
presented in a basic manner.  The story opens, progresses and closes, and 
even though significant events have unfolded it's hard to tell if the girls' 
lives will be changed that dramatically.  This is what I like most about THE 
MAN IN THE MOON - it's like a chapter from a book, self-contained in its own 
simplicity.  There are no complications, subplots, or clutter to distract 
us.  It begins and ends with the girls on a front porch in the light of the 
full moon, suggesting that the story has completed its 'cycle' (everything 
takes place within a month).  It also allows its characters leisure to 
breathe, walk, and talk so naturally that we don't focus on the acting.  
Witherspoon at first appears to be a teenybopper, then perhaps a 'wild 
child', but is perfectly at ease dressed either tomboyishly or in skirts.  
Sam Waterston, as the father of the girls, initially appears to be a 
traditionally strict father of the 50s, but reveals more elements to his 
character as the film progresses.  Look at the nuances that slip through so 
effortlessly - for example, the priceless, dismissive look on Witherspoon's 
face when she first meets London outside her home.  These are 
blink-and-you'll-miss-them moments, too ephemeral to be written into 
screenplays or catalogued in critiques.  True, there are a few unsteady 
turns - the opening dialogue that explains the film's title (which really 
has very little to do with what follows), and some scenes that verge on 
melodrama - but they do not detract from the overall charm of the piece.
There's also another level that the film works on, and one which I believe 
is true of many features of the last decade that have showcased the talents 
of young, up-and-coming performers.  As is the case with so many of her 
contemporaries, Witherspoon has graduated from the simple pleasures of her 
debut and moved on to harder, darker, and decidedly more adult material.  
It's a common occurrence: young stars don't want to be trapped in 
PG-features when they can stretch themselves as 'serious' actors.  So while 
the nostalgia of THE MAN IN THE MOON isn't troweled on too thickly, the 
sight of a smart, ponytailed, wide-eyed Witherspoon automatically ensures 
that it will make itself an irretrievable memento.  Given the film's subject 
matter of first love, lost love, and coming-of-age, this all conspires to 
make perfect sense.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is 1957 in rural Louisiana.  Fourteen-year-old Dani Trant (played by
Reese Witherspoon) is just at the awkward age when she is approaching
womanhood and thinks she has neither looks nor intelligence.  She envies her
older sister Maureen (played by Emily Warfield), who is attractive and gets
good grades.  Then her father's old girlfriend, now a widow, moves in next
door, bringing her own family including a seventeen-year-old son, Court
Foster (played by Jason London).  Court and Dani become good friends.  Their
friendship begins platonically, but Dani gets a crush on Court and is
anxious to push things just a bit further.  All by itself this relationship
causes problems between Dani and her father Matthew (played by Sam
Waterston).  However, more family strains start to show when Court discovers
Maureen, a Trant daughter his own age.
     Robert Mulligan directs this story with all the sensitivity he can
muster.  And sensitivity is certainly what the plot needs, since it is
perilously close to being a trashy Southern passions sort of melodrama.  In
different hands this story could have been  another GOD'S LITTLE ACRE.
However, this is avoided, thanks to good acting on the parts of Reese
Witherspoon and especially Sam Waterston.  As Matthew, Waterston seems
uneasy with the responsibility of fatherhood.  By turns he is authoritarian
or compassionate, but neither with real conviction.
     The most unfortunate aspect of the film is a melodramatic turn toward
the end of the film.  the two sisters are headed for conflict in one way
when the all too obvious hand of the scriptwriter distorts things.  It
leaves the conflict but warps it into a different one, and one that may be
more quickly resolved.  The last twenty minutes of the film are the least
satisfying.
     Photography is by the excellent Freddie Francis, whose credits as
cinematographer include THE INNOCENTS, THE FRENCH LIEUTENANT'S WOMAN, and
GLORY.  Overall the good moments of the film do not quite overcome its
weaknesses.  I give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
