Title
Review for Blink (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
     What would it be like to lose your sight at the age of eight then,
twenty years later through the miracle of modern medical science,
regain it?  Wondrous, yes; but perhaps frightening as well.  That which
was familiar and comfortable in darkness suddenly becomes strange and
threatening in light.
     As a little girl, Emma Brody (Madeleine Stowe) was blinded by an
abusive mother.  For twenty years, she has lived in the dark, until an
eye surgeon (Peter Friedman) offers her a cornea transplant to restore
her vision.  With mingled excitement and fear, she allows the
operation, first on one eye, then on the other.  Initially, her vision
is imperfect--images swim in and out of focus, and she occasionally
hallucinates, apparently seeing things up to a day after they occur.
Soon after returning to her apartment building, Emma becomes witness to
a murder--sort of.  She sees the face of a suspect, but not until the
day after the killing.  Detective John Hallstrom (Aidan Quinn) doesn't
know what to make of Emma's "visions", but she's his only witness in
what appears to be a serial killing.
     For BLINK to work, the viewer has to be willing to accept a rather
dubious plot device: that Emma's eye/brain coordination is so screwed
up that it occasionally takes as much as a full day before she
recognizes a face.  Those that find this a tremendously silly
proposition will have difficulty wading through the movie's
improbabilities.  Fortunately, director Michael Apted is skillful
enough that his use of such an unlikely premise is masked with adequate
flair.
     With the exception of some insipid dialogue (snippets of which
infect the entire production), BLINK starts out well.  It's fascinating
to watch as a blind woman regains her sight.  Apted tries to present
the world from her perspective and, while this is interesting in the
beginning, he does it a little too often.
     The "thriller" portion of the story takes a while to get going,
with the first twenty minutes devoted to setup.  When the killer is
eventually introduced, it occurs in a chilling scene, helped in part by
Brad Fiedel's cacophonous music and some intriguing camerawork.  Much
of the plot follows a fairly standard formula--cop and victim meet,
they argue, then they fall in love--but every time BLINK looks like
its going to fall into a typical cliche of the genre, it somehow
manages to avoid the trap.  That's not to say that there aren't times
when things become obvious or predictable, but at least the ending
shows a little originality, and the motive is unique.
     Madeleine Stowe's Emma is a rarity--a strong-willed victim who
isn't afraid to fight back without the support of a man.  At times,
Hallstrom seems almost superfluous.  In fact, one could almost make a
case for a role-reversal, with Emma as BLINK's central focus and the
detective as her male love interest.
     Ms. Stowe manages to portray Emma as forthright and independent,
and she adequately conveys the mixed emotions that result from her
newfound sense of sight.  Nevertheless, there's an occasional lack of
passion in the performance, and there are a few scenes where she isn't
convincing.  Throughout her career, Ms. Stowe has excelled at playing
supporting characters.  Placed in the lead role for the first time,
occasional faults are magnified.
     Aidan Quinn is something of a nonentity.  His character isn't
particularly likable, as is made apparent in the opening scene, but
Quinn vacillates between playing Hallstrom as an arrogant jerk and a
sensitive hero.  The screenplay is undoubtedly part of the
problem--writer Dana Stevens constantly has trouble with character
consistency--but Quinn never gets a good handle on his role.
     Michael Apted, best known for his documentaries (The 7 UP series
and INCIDENT AT OGLALA), develops a fine atmosphere, creating a Chicago
that is often ominous and strange.  Unfortunately, Apted isn't as
strong in directing his actors as he is setting a mood.
     BLINK is an adequate thriller.  It offers a reasonable one-hundred
six minutes worth of entertainment, with a few chills but not many
surprises.  Although this isn't a breakthrough performance for
Madeleine Stowe, she manages to pull off the role of Emma in a
mostly-convincing fashion.  Nevertheless, except for the often-haunting
and claustrophobic atmosphere, there's little special here.
Considering the general low quality of entries into the genre, however,
you could easily do worse.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BLINK is a very good show with only two things "wrong" with it.
First, it is being billed as a thriller.  A thriller is something that
scares you and, other than a brief pet in danger scene, there is
nothing in this show to scare anyone.  This is nothing to be ashamed of
because it is a excellent mystery with a well laid out plot and
characters you really care about.  I thought another flaw was the
script.  I was angry at the writer while seeing the movie in that a key
part of the mystery was too obvious.  Well, it turns out not to have
been obvious after all, and I guessed incorrectly.
     Almost everything is right about this show.  The plot is
fascinating.  It is about a woman (Madeleine Stowe) blind for 20 years
who undergoes an eye transplant and begins slowly to regain her sight.
She sees a serial killer while her eyes are just starting to show her
images of a sort.  The plot has much more complexity than this but I
found this pretty fascinating.  Many mysteries have ridiculous endings
that spoil the show.  This writer clearly had the ending in mind all
along and did a good job of it.
     The woman is not your stereotype of a blind woman like say Meg
Tilly would play one.  She is not a humble, frighten woman.  She is
vulnerable but quite strong and very feisty.  She meets and falls for
an equally strong headed detective played by Aidan Quinn.  They have a
stormy but highly realistic romance.  The F/M ratio (F-words per
minute) is quite high in this show, but like GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS, where
it reached an all time high, it works.  Most shows with high ratios are
garbage.   The script (Dana Stevens), especially the interplay between
the romantic leads, is strong and intelligent.
     BLINK was directed by Michael Apted.  He directed two of my all
time favorite movies, 28 UP and 35 UP.  These are documentaries about a
group of English people that he has filmed every 7 years since the age
of 7.  The movies are among the most fascinating and innovative I have
ever seen.  Sad to say, this director also did Thunderheart which I
loathed.
     BLINK runs a well paced 1:46.  It is rated R for the F-word ratio,
nudity, violence, and sex.  It would be okay for mature teenagers I
think.  I recommend the movie to you and award it ***.  This movie was
a pleasant surprise and I was tempted to rate it a little higher.  See
it; you will enjoy it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
According to the video distributor in my country, BLINK,
1994 movie by Michael Apted, was awarded as the best
thriller for that year. That wasn't enough for this film to
be picked from the multitude of different thrillers that
used to flood the video store shelves few years ago. But I
remembered Michael Apted as a director of very interesting,
although not too successful 1983 thriller GORKY PARK. I also
noticed Madeleine Stowe, an actress I like very much, in a
lead role. That was enough for me to pick this film and I
didn't regret it later.
Unlike many formulaic, by-the-numbers, thrillers, and
despite its "high concept" premise, BLINK, scripted by Dana
Stevens, has a rather complicated plot. Emma Brody (played
by Stowe) was blinded by her abusive mother in childhood.
Years have passed, and Emma, being adapted to darkness,
became a folk musician in Chicago. But the new improvements
in medical technology allowed her to see again through
donated eyes. Emma has some problems adapting to the new,
strange and now visible world, and additional problem comes
from a rare phenomena called "delayed vision" - her brain
tends to receive old visual signals from her eyes. That same
problem would get her in trouble when her next door
neighbour gets murdered and she begins thinking that she saw
the suspect. John Hallstrom (played by Aidan Quinn),
detective on the case, is, of course, sceptical towards her
claims, but, on the other hand, very attracted to her.
What differentiates this thriller from many others is the
fact that it isn't so clearly defined in the terms of genre.
BLINK mixes thriller with the elements of psychological
drama, love story and comedy. Those other genre elements,
although not so overwhelming, and together with urban
Chicago setting, bring a breath of every day life realism
into the story that would otherwise look like lifeless "high
concept" product. But BLINK still has thriller credentials,
and it is still a very suspenseful and exciting film. Most of
the suspense comes from the fact that in many scenes the
audience, same as movie's heroine, doesn't know whether to
believe or not to believe the sight. Also, the movie has
rather original villain with even more original agenda, and
the ending is somewhat unusual for this kind of film. What
makes this film ultimately work are the actors. Madeleine
Stowe, one of the most remarkable actresses in modern
Hollywood gave a very good performance in her role of a
blind woman frightened by the new and sudden perception of
world. Aidan Quinn, who used to work with Stowe in Badham's
STAKEOUT, has a really good chemistry with her, and his
performance of cynical yet dedicated policeman is fine too.
Music by the folk band "Drovers" delivers a soundtrack which
is refreshingly new for this kind of films. All in all, the
video distributors didn't lie - BLINK is a very good
thriller that deserves more than a glimpse from those who
want originality in that genre.
Review written on September 19th 1999

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     BLINK is the latest in a long line of Flawed Hollywood Thrillers.
The plot is formula--a psycho stalks an attractive woman who's
protected by a cop who's sleeping with the target--but good humor, a
good cast, and a couple neat twists provide the real thrills in this
"thriller."
     Once again, distress duties fall upon Madeline Stowe, who was last
seen resisting "Unlawful Entry." This time, Stowe plays
sightless-since-seven Emma Brody, a folk-band violinist who's awaiting
a corneal transplant.
     When the eyes are finally upon her, Emma has problems with her
newfound vision--one of which is what her doctor calls a "perceptual
delay."  That is, there's a delay between her eyes and her brain.  What
she sees can, sometimes, take over a day to appear in her head.
     Of course, poor Emma also suffers from flashbacks and blurry
vision.  So, when she catches a glimpse of a passing serial killer,
neither she nor the police completely believe her eyes....
     Despite the odd ocular angle, BLINK is a formula film at heart and
has the cliches to prove it.  There's the cautious-of-commitment cop
(Quinn), the cop's hard-nosed boss (Young), and the cop's rival, the
maybe-too-friendly doctor (Friedman).
     Throw in some psychological mumbo-jumbo and you have the perfect
recipe for disaster.
     This stew would probably sour in the hands of lesser talent.  But
with a Respectable Director (Michael Apted) behind the boards, BLINK
rarely sinks as low as the subject matter suggests.  Sure, there are a
couple of Awful Moments--including a hideous POV shift to that of the
killer's--but the bulk of BLINK is easy on the eyes (and brain).
     Most of the interesting stuff happens in the first half, when the
script promises more than it could ever hope to deliver.
     You get great flourishes like Quinn's character quoting Longfellow
to get gals.  Or Emma's flashbacks of her mother, who blinded her in a
fit of rage.  Or the crowning moment of questionable ethics, when
Quinn's boss tells him to, simply, "sleep with her and get it over
with."
     BLINK is also an unusually funny film.  A jovial bunch of
detectives provides gallows humor by the yard.  And a couple hilarious
herrings, of the red variety, are netted at key points late in the
film.
     There are other reasons not to blink at BLINK. The cast is
attractive, the locales (in Chicago) are great, and Stowe makes a
refreshingly strong heroine.  But when the plot passes the point of
oversaturation, somewhere in the last half-hour, BLINK drags like the
best of them.
     The director side-steps this problem, however, by simply slapping
on the suspense.  As any Bad Movie Fan knows, shameless manipulation
works wonders in the absence of a polished script.
     To the victor belongs the spoils and BLINK does reward the patient
viewer with a slightly surprise ending.  And, in a moment of unbridled
audacity that's worth the price of matinee admission alone, Apted even
allows a visit from Norman Bates' mother.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Madeleine Stowe, Aidan Quinn, Peter Friedman, James
Remar, Laurie Metcalf.
Screenplay:  Dana Stevens.
Director:  Michael Apted.
     Good thrillers are hard to find, and I am inordinately fond of
good thrillers.  In combination, these two factors lead me to do things
like give an "8" rating to MALICE (which I still defend, incidently).
The catharsis that a suspenseful tale provides seems to me to be the
essence of what movies are for many viewers: a visual rollercoaster.
However, far more common than good thrillers are slapdash would-be
scarefests stitched together from other better films like some
celluloid Frankenstein's monster.  Witness BLINK: one part REAR
WINDOW, two parts JENNIFER 8, and one part from just about every
suspense film cliche you could come up with if given a week to think
about it.
     BLINK tells the story of Emma Brody (Madeleine Stowe), a fiddle
player in a Celtic band who has been blind for twenty years.  One day
she receives a call from her doctor (Peter Friedman) that a cornea
transplant donor is at last available.  After the operation, Emma
experiences an odd side effect, a perceptual delay which causes things
seen initially only as blurs to jump into focus in the mind hours or
even days later.  This perceptual delay occurs when she spots a serial
killer leaving the scene of the crime in the apartment above her.  She
takes her information to Det. John Hallstrom (Aidan Quinn), but her
reliability as a witness is justifiably in question.  However, as
Hallstrom follows his only lead, he also gets involved with her.  Soon
it becomes clear that the killer knows there has been a witness, and
Emma finds herself next on his list.
     There are some things that BLINK tries to do differently that show
some early promise.  As played by Madeleine Stowe, Emma spends her
first few days with sight coming to terms with appearances, as it
matters to her for the first time whether she is considered pretty.
It's a nice bit of psychology for which I had high hopes.  Emma's
distorted vision is captured by some nifty computer effects and Dante
Spinotti's eerie photography, allowing us into her head quite
effectively.  It's too bad that potential is wasted on such a
positively bland story.  For a thriller, BLINK is almost completely
lacking in tension, its one good scare coming with Emma's first
recognition of the killer's face.  There's no opportunity to guess the
killer's identity, either, as clues yeield a "so what" result.  BLINK
just trudges along, focusing on a relationship between Hallstrom and
Emma which makes no sense.
     What is most distressing about that relationship is that it cops
out on its character development where it would have been most
interesting.  Stowe shows the blind Emma as confident and independent,
but without the omnipresent bitterness which characterizes so many
blind screen characters; then, in a bit of irony which might have made
O. Henry smile, she becomes dependent on others only when she can
finally see.  That internal conflict should have been the driving force
behind her relationship with Hallstrom:  while she needs the
reassurance he gives her that she's desirable, she hates that she needs
that reassurance.  But screenwriter Dana Stevens seems incapable of
that level of subtlety, and there seems to be no rhyme or reason to
their eventual (and inevitable) coupling, and subsequent conflict.  It
doesn't help that Hallstrom is basically a blank, and that Quinn does
nothing to make him particularly worth her time.
     If only that were the only fault in the script.  We start with the
now-ubiquitous serial killer, which if movies were to be believed are
virtually on every street corner, and head from there into
CinemaThrillerLand.  Here, dogs warn of impending danger, but are
heeded to late.  Here, cops always fall for the women they are assigned
to protect, and vice-versa.  Here, blind people always manage to have
their final confrontations with the killer in the dark.  Here, cops
exchange dialogue like:
     BLINK could have been a contender.  The elements were there.  It
was just too slow to make any of them count, and too timid to go to the
soul of the characters.
