Title
Review for Stand and Deliver (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Manavendra K. Thakur
Cast: Edward James Olmos, Lou Diamond Phillips, Rosana de Soto, Vanessa
Marquez, Virginia Paris, Carmen Argenziano, Mark Eliot, Will Gotay, Patrick
Baca, Ingrid Oliu, Tyde Kierney, Bodie Olmos, Karla Montana, Daniel
Villarreal, Michael Goldfinger, Michael Yama, Lydia Nicole, Graham Galloway,
James Victor, Andy Garcia, Rif Hutton.
Credits: Director: Ramon Menendez.  Producer: Tom Musca.  Written by Ramon
Menendez & Tom Musca.  Executive Producer: Lindsay Law.  Music by Craig Safan.
Editor: Nancy Richardson.  Director of Photography: Tom Richmond.  Associate
Producer: Iya Labunka.  Art Director: Milo.  Costume Designer: Kathryn
Morrison.  Supervising Sound Editor: Hamilton Sterling.  Project Consultant:
Kate Long.
     The state of the American educational system has received much attention
lately, most of it negative.  STAND AND DELIVER, in contrast, is a film that
tries to paint a positive picture of hope and inspiration.  The film brings to
the screen the story of Jaime Escalante, a high school teacher in East Los
Angeles who managed to motivate and teach the intricacies of calculus to
students who hardly knew remedial arithmetic.  When he first arrived at
Garfield High, he found gym instructors teaching basic math and the halls
overrun by gangs and drug runners.  The situation was so bad that the
predominantly Latino school was in danger of losing its accreditation.  But
Escalante stayed and began to make a difference.
     The film version has toned down the influence of the gangs, eliminated the
use of armed guards during the Advanced Placement re-exam, and created
composite characters from real students.  But the film is otherwise quite
faithful to the actual events.  Edward James Olmos (Lt. Castillo in MIAMI
VICE), who plays Escalante, spent 18 hours a day for a month with the real
Escalante to observe his teaching methods and personal habits.  [See
accompanying article for an interview with Olmos.]  Olmos' hard work pays off
as he gives a rousing performance that carries the film past its weak first
half.  Fortunately, the film recovers its own feet before the end.
     Americans love a success story, and the first half goes overboard trying
to oblige.  It introduces the characters and begins to show the unorthodox
teaching methods of Escalante (like bringing a machete to class).  This half of
the film fails, though, to impart to the audience the magic that Escalante
worked in his class because of choppy editing and faulty construction.  In
depicting the positive influence Escalante began to exert, the film glosses
over how Escalante managed to calm the students down enough to listen to him in
the first place.  The way the film presents it, it seems that one day Escalante
walked into chaos and by the next day had kids all lined up ready to learn.  It
may have happened that way in real life, but the film gives only glimpses into
how Escalante achieved his remarkable successes.
     For example, one gifted young girl named Ana (Vanessa Marquez) tells
Escalante that she has to leave school in the middle of the year because her
father wants her to help in their family-owned restaurant.  Escalante visits
the father (James Victor) in his restaurant to try and convince him to let Ana
stay in the class.  Far from succeeding, however, Escalante ends up arguing
loudly with the father.  The father soon decides to throw Escalante -- and any
hope for Ana's continued education -- out of the restaurant.  But lo and
behold, the next day, there she is back in school ready to learn, with no sign
of what caused her father's remarkable change of heart.
     Another botched change-of-heart takes place with hotheaded gang member
named Angel (Lou Diamond Phillips), who has letters written on the outer side
of his fingers that read ``F-U-C-K Y-O-U'' when he brings his fists together.
Dennis Hopper's recent film COLORS was not very good, but it did at least point
out that one of the strongest reasons why youths join gangs is to feel a sense
of belonging and identity.  That film also vividly showed how the gang ethic
demands retribution against members of other gangs and those who leave or
betray the gang.  These issues should be at the top of the list of any
filmmaker who wants to show the success of a teacher in a gang-ridden high
school.
     But these issues are barely mentioned by STAND AND DELIVER.  The scene
where Angel walks away from his fellow gang members is simply that; the film
makes no attempt to examine why Angel would now accept the value of an
education when it is clear that he rejected it in the past when he joined the
gang.  Nor does the film delve into how Angel handles his ex-gang friends once
he left the gang.  The film introduces these concerns, juggles them like a hot
potato, and then drops them without providing any illumination.  It seems as
though the filmmakers did not want to discuss these matters at all but had to
to address them at least slightly to maintain a modicum of credibility.
     These examples are typical of how all the first half of the film does is
present the end results of Escalante's efforts.  By not conveying any sense of
how large the barriers the kids overcome really are, the film fails to humanize
the students and comes dangerously close to robbing their triumph of its
meaning and value to others who may be facing the same situation.  As it
stands, Escalante and his students seem to be working virtual miracles, and
that leaves little room for the audience to identify or cheer for the
characters, since they will win out anyway.  For a film that wants to be
inspirational, this can be quite fatal.
     Fortunately for the film, the first half does succeed in setting the stage
for the second half, which is where the real value of this film lies.  The
second part concerns the students' efforts to prepare for and take the Advanced
Placement calculus exam, which no student had previously tried in the history
of Garfield High.  The Educational Testing Service (ETS), which administers the
tests, discovers that a number of the students made the same mistake on the
test and therefore opened an investigation into possible cheating.  Realizing
that their scores will be voided is the biggest setback the kids suffer since
they came under Escalante's spell, and in addition to upsetting the high school
seniors' plans to attend college, the accusations thoroughly demoralize
Escalante and his students.
     At this point, the film finally begins to examine some of the deeper
issues that so badly need to be brought to light.  In one tremendously
evocative scene, Escalante confronts the ETS investigators (Andy Garcia and Rif
Hutton) who have been trying to convince the kids to "confess" how they
cheated.  Working himself up, Escalante points out that the kids made the same
mistake because they all had the same teacher, and he angrily adds that the
kids' scores would never have been questioned had the school been located in an
upper-class suburb and had the kids' names been non-Hispanic.  In another scene
later on, Escalante finds himself re-examining the wisdom of his decisions to
push the students to learn calculus as hard as he did.  These are the types of
scenes that display the soul-searching and human weaknesses that firmly ground
the film's story in reality and carry the students' eventual triumph to truly
inspiring heights.
     Throughout the film, the camerawork does little to distinguish itself from
the style of made-for-television films, but the final shot of the film is
well-composed and deserves some mention.  Just prior to the shot, Escalante is
in the office of the Principal Molina (Carmen Argenziano) discussing whether
the kids really cheated, when a phone call brings news of the kids' excellent
scores on the re-test.  As the dumbfounded principal reads out the grades in a
voice over, Escalante exits the office and walks down the hallway.  The camera
shows the length of the hallway from the office to the doorway at the far end.
As Escalante nears the doorway, he silently permits himself a hand-raised
cheer.  Then, silhouetted by the light from the doorway and his back still
turned to the audience, he keeps on walking down the hallway and out the door,
which shuts behind him.  After a few more shots, the credits begin to roll.
    The reason the shot works so well is the stoic way in which Olmos conveys
Escalante's acceptance of the final payoff of all his efforts.  Instead of
patting himself on the back, Olmos lets the audience cheer for Escalante.
Olmos also recognizes that the film's ending is the beginning of Escalante's
efforts, and Olmos plays the scene accordingly.  The way Olmos walks down the
hall through the doorway, one feels that Escalante is going back to his
classroom to teach some more students.  The camerawork also does not overly
hype the triumph.  The filmmakers could easily have shifted the point of view
to a front view of Olmos and then ended the film on a freeze-frame of Olmos'
upraised hand.  They wisely chose not to do so.  The result of how they did
compose the shot is that the ending is easily the best moment in the film.
     One of Escalante's innovations was to display posters of Einstein and
Galileo in his classroom next to popular sports figures like Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar.  Escalante knew that if he could get his students to respect the
great thinkers as much as they admired rock stars and movie actors, his battle
was half won.  The filmmakers show the posters only in the background, but they
too know that the real importance of Escalante's story lies in changing
viewers' attitudes enough to cheer for a schoolteacher who cares and beats the
odds.  The filmmakers manage to bring the story to the screen -- although
clumsily -- and that in of itself is remarkable and refreshing in the final
analysis.
The filmmakers of STAND AND DELIVER are mainly recent graduates from film
schools making their feature film debut.  Director Ramon Menendez emigrated to
the United States from Cuba in the early 1960s when he was still a child.  He
enrolled in the UCLA film school in 1976, where he met Tom Musca (producer and
co-writer) and Tom Richmond (cinematographer).  Editor Nancy Richardson also
attended the UCLA film school.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  What kind of a film would appeal both
     to the Hispanic community and to mathematicians?  The true
     story of a math teacher who fights to make mathematicians out
     of barrio kids.  This plot has been done dozens of times as a
     fictional sports story. but rarely this well and rarely with
     a subject that has the immediate appeal that calculus does.
     Rating: +2.
     American Playhouse produces quality feature-length films primarily to
be shown on PBS.  Rare is the year that they have not made a film that
deserves to be at least nominated for Best Picture, though to the best of my
knowledge they have never received any such nomination.  Some of their
better work is released to theaters, though whether it is produced with that
market in mind, I do not know.  However, their films TESTAMENT and EL NORTE
did get shown in theaters well before going to television.  Their current
release is STAND AND DELIVER.
     You have probably seen before the plot of the losing team and the coach
who uses unorthodox techniques and understanding to build the team into
champions.  Things are different here.  First, this is a true story and
second, we are not talking about football or basketball, we are talking
about calculus.  This is the story of how a math teacher in a barrio school
fought to take students who had a hard time learning fractions and turn them
into some of the country's top scorers in the advanced college placement
tests.  Edward James Olmos plays Jaime Escalante, who is willing to play
clean or hit below the belt to taunt his students to make something of
themselves.  His classes are peppered with under-the-breath (and over-)
cutting remarks about math and life in the barrio.  ("Tough guys don't need
math.  Tough guys fry chicken for a living.")
     I guess that STAND AND DELIVER shows one of my childhood fantasies
actually coming true--I always thought that if even the school toughs found
out what math was really like, it would become the cool thing in the school
to be really into math, much like it really was for football.  This film
actually shows that in one very unlikely school, math did become the "in
thing."  But I guess what I find most amazing is that the film was made at
all.  I mean, it's one thing to sell a kid from the barrio on the idea that
math is nifty.  There is intelligence there you can appeal to.  But to sell
calculus to a film producer is something else again.  This fine film could
have been sold only to something like American Playhouse.  Rate it a +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Telling a newsgroup populated by computer scientists and mathematicians
that STAND AND DELIVER (side note: I cannot say this without thinking of John
Cleese as Dennis Moore) is entertaining is rather like advising basketball fans
to see HOOSIERS: you've got a pretty good shot that the readers will agree with
you.  However, in this case the film has other things going for it than the
subject, i.e., a teacher who inspires a group of East-L.A. Chicano kids to
study math and take the A.P. advanced calculus tests.  It has some complex,
entertaining characters, good acting and a story which is exciting to watch.
Seeing kids becoming enthused over learning, and watching their confidence
bloom over their intellectual abilities, is great viewing material, and it's
handled well here.  Edward James Olmos does a wonderful job as the math teacher
who pushes his students and himself hard (perhaps too hard at times), and shows
his pupils, their parents and the school that limits, defined by class,
background and race are non-existent.  That the film is based on a true story
seems almost irrelevant -- anyone watching the film would know that it either
did happen or could happen.  It's just nice to be reminded of that fact.
