Title
Review for Chamber, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Chris O'Donnell, Gene Hackman, Faye Dunaway, Lela Rochon, 
      Raymond Barry, Bo Jackson, Robert Prosky
Director: James Foley
Producers: John David, Brian Grazer, and Ron Howard
Screenplay: William Goldman and Chris Reese based on the novel by 
      John Grisham
Cinematography: Ian Baker
Music: Carter Burwell
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures 
     1996 has seen the birth of a new motion picture sub-genre:  the 
Death Row story.  So far, the lineup goes three deep.  Leading off, back 
in January, was Tim Robbins' searing DEAD MAN WALKING, one of the most 
powerful motion pictures of the year.  Following came Sharon Stone in 
LAST DANCE, an overwrought telling of a similar tale.  Now, batting 
third, is the weakest of the trio, THE CHAMBER, based on the novel by 
the only author to rival Jane Austen for recent cinematic exposure, John 
Grisham.  
     Grisham's novels all have a depressing sameness to them, and this 
one is no different.  We have the young, good looking hero crusading for 
right.  Whether he wins or not isn't important, only that he gives it 
his best shot and, in doing so, redeems himself.  Along the way, there's 
probably a pretty (and pretty insignificant) female sidekick willing to 
help him out.  This isn't just the plot of THE CHAMBER, it's the plot of 
THE FIRM and A TIME TO KILL.  And, if you do a little gender-swapping, 
it's also the plot of THE PELICAN BRIEF.  Frankly, when you get down to 
it, THE CLIENT isn't all that different, either.
     Tom Cruise.  Matthew McConaughey.  Now Chris O'Donnell.  These are 
the "Grisham men" -- the good-looking, young actors who play basically 
the same hero.  In THE CHAMBER, his name is Adam Hall, and, as usual 
when it comes to Grisham, he's a lawyer -- but one with principles, of 
course.  His role is to defend Sam Cayhall (Gene Hackman), who's been on 
Death Row for 16 years after being found guilty of setting a bomb that 
killed two children.  His death warrant has just been handed down -- he 
has 28 days to live.  Adam, having traveled from Chicago to Jackson, 
Mississippi to defend Sam, has that long to file the appeals and do some 
detective work.  Otherwise, this aging racist and former Ku Klux Klan 
member will die in the gas chamber.  So why does a young hotshot like 
Adam take such a hopeless case?  Because Sam Cayhall is his grandfather.
     As I indicated earlier, THE CHAMBER isn't so much about getting Sam 
off as it is about Adam exorcising his personal ghosts.  The problem is, 
in order to get him to this point, Grisham toys with a pair of heavy 
issues:  racism and the death penalty.  And "toys" is the right word.  
This isn't a deep or intelligent examination of either -- it's a blatant 
attempt to push viewers' buttons, relying on speeches and melodrama to 
replace an honest, more powerful form of emoting.  When someone in THE 
CHAMBER has something important to say, they pontificate.  Too often, 
dialogue in this film is people talking at one another, rather than to 
one another.
     There's an inherent danger in the way THE CHAMBER addresses its 
serious subject matter -- one that was apparent, but less blatant, in 
the most recent Grisham adaptation, A TIME TO KILL.  It's all part of 
the Grisham formula:  present facile, "tabloid" examinations of 
controversial issues.  The danger arrives if members of the audience 
start mistaking Grisham's simplistic views as thoughtful presentations 
rather than devices to move the plot along and get us to sympathize with 
the protagonist.
     Plot-wise, THE CHAMBER is full of seeming irrelevancies.  The movie 
should have been streamlined better; there's no need to try to include 
virtually every character from the book.  Some of them, like Lela 
Rochon's Nora Stark, could have been cut out with little loss.  There 
are too many tangents that distract our attention from the central 
relationship between Adam and his soon-to-die grandfather.  The only 
"external" character with any real importance is Adam's aunt, Lee (Faye 
Dunaway), who blames herself for one of her father's crimes.  
     Grisham likes defining characters as "good" or "evil", which is why 
playing the racism card is such a cop-out:  by definition, racists are 
bad -- and most of them presented here are downright monstrous.  The 
exception is Cayhall, who we learn may not be guilty at all.  Grisham 
allows Sam to be painted with shades of gray, and, not surprisingly, he 
becomes the most interesting character in the film.  Of course, that 
could also have something to do with the passionate portrayal given by 
Gene Hackman, who comes across as the cream of the crop even in a John 
Grisham movie.  Chris O'Donnell, on the other hand, is flat, and his 
character is dull.  We're supposed to be identifying with this guy, but 
he fails to grab our attention, let alone our imagination.
     When it comes to the actual Death Row scenes, THE CHAMBER is 
especially weak.  Even LAST DANCE was more impressive.  There's no 
emotional power here, and, most importantly, no catharsis.  The end of 
DEAD MAN WALKING put everyone in the audience through an emotional and 
ethical ringer, and there weren't many dry eyes in the house.  THE 
CHAMBER, on the other hand, is mechanical and artificial, and tells you 
what to think.  If anyone was crying at my showing, they hid it well.  
Ultimately, of course, that's the problem with Grisham -- he presents 
shallow, modern-day pulp fiction, so, when he pretends to deal with 
serious issues, it's all a thinly-disguised masquerade.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Starts off as a legal thriller, but mutates into something much
closer to the heart -- and features Gene Hackman in a typically excellent
performance.
Some movies lead you wrong, and that's a good thing. THE CHAMBER, adapted
from the John Grishamn novel, starts off as a typical
legal-thriller-with-a-twist, but then slowly turns into a different sort of
story, about one man trying to find the truth about the past and another man
trying to find the truth about himself.
The two men are Adam Hall, a young Chicago laywer, and his grandfather, Sam
Cayhall. Cayhall is a product of the worst breeds of Southern racism, in
whose fold he built and detonated several bombs. "I never meant to kill
anyone," he repeats angrily, but bombs are generally not designed to do much
else, and three trials and countless appeals later, he is now on death row.
Hall, his grandson, has decided to take on the eleventh-hour defense.
Hall and Cayhill do not like each other. Cayhill has no use for lawyers --
most of the reasons, it seems at first, are blatantly racist, and don't bear
repeating here (even though they are delivered with consummate skill by
Hackman). Hall doesn't like the bitter old man, but he smells a great deal
is being held away from a lot of people's noses here, and digs. He finds a
lot.
As the movie unwound, I felt it could have gone one of two ways: either it
could have developed the plot to the point where the human story became more
irrelevant and therefore could be resolved with a mechanical flourish (the
way the dreadful A TIME TO KILL ended up), or it could pay closer attention
to the people in the story. It takes the second road, and is all the better
for it. And be warned: as a result, we don't get a nice, tidy conclusion --
a lot of threads are left dangling, probably deliberately, since the real
conclusion of the movie is in the way Hackman's character handles his
oncoming fate. Eventually we see that his racism is not so much a philosophy
as a way of warding off terrible grief and hurt, and self-hatred (as is the
case with most virulently racist people, they compensate violently for not
having what they feel should be simply given to them gratis).
Hall (played by Chris O'Donnell with maturity and grace) also has a
transformation of his own, but a smaller one: sometimes it's not possible to
use the law as a way to repair what has gone wrong, just to comment on it.
He resents his grandfather for using the same tired excuses, but at the same
time batters patiently at the man's defenses, knowing that it's only a
matter of time before the imminence of the clock will get him to say
something true to his heart. He does.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Chris O'Donnell, Gene Hackman, Faye Dunaway, Lela Rochon, Raymond
Barry, Bo Jackson, Robert Prosky Director: James Foley Screenplay:
William Goldman and Chris Reese based on the novel by John Grisham
I do not hold strong views on capital punishment either way. After
watching "The Chamber" I ended up disliking the offender so much so,
that I remained unsympathetic when the gas went up and his mouth began
to foam at the sides. "Dead Man Walking" is by far the best movie on the
subject. It left audiences hurting on the inside when the electrical
volts surged a minute past midnight. Then again "Dead Man" is also the
better adaptation and story.
Sam Cayhall (Gene Hackman) is the central character in this John Grisham
movie. This Klan member, terrorist and murderer now awaits execution on
death row. The situation becomes intense when the lawyer assigned to
defend Cayhall, is also his grandson Adam Hall (Chris O'Donnell).
However, little effort is made to help the audience understand a man
about to face death. The glib reason given to explain Cayhall's past
actions is that he is a product of years of hating, and three
generations of Klan influence. Will the audience empathise with him?
This man was a monster most of his life and remains a monster throughout
most of the movie. There is a sudden change of heart towards the end
when death perhaps makes him reflect on the error of his ways, but it
seems too little too late.
Director James Foley focuses mostly on the plot of this movie when he
should have perhaps focused more on the characters. "Dead Man Walking"
worked well because time was spent discovering the plight of the man who
walked the tight rope between life and death. In this movie both
grandfather and grandson waste precious minutes bickering with each
other instead of resolving the ghosts which haunt their past. So much so
that the missing years of their lives remain a mystery, as the door of
opportunity closes behind them.
Sam Cayhall is another detestable character in the long line of
detestable characters played by Gene Hackman and he's good at it. This
is not the long awaited defining movie for young Chris O'Donnell; better
luck next time. This is not the come back film for Faye Dunaway who
looks well beyond her years, which suits her character well. All in all,
by far the most disappointing of Grisham's movies.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Racism, anti-Semitism, the Klan, capital punishment, vast
conspiracy, bankable stars and a famous author.  What more could the
viewing public want?  Believability would be nice.  Absent that,
perhaps a mystery that goes somewhere.  What they get instead is
balderdash.
     In a film that has only one even mildly interesting performance
and where the other characters are created out of cardboard, it helps
if you approach THE CHAMBER with as low an expectation as possible to
avoid disappointment.  Having read "The Chamber" and all of the other
John Grisham books, I entered the theater not expecting a lot, but it
was considerable worse than I feared.
     In the hands of director James Foley and screenwriters William
Goldman and Chris Reese, they manage to take the least of enjoyable
author Grisham's novels and excise its only strength which is the
mystery.  Although they do leave an outline of the mystery, what is
left is like a maze where someone has erased most of the dividing
lines.  The film plays like it was a four hour movie where all of the
key sections have been purged to get it down to size.  Only the dull
parts and the sensation portions have been left intact.  The characters
don't relate to each other.  Rather than chemistry between them, what
we get is a string of serial monologues masquerading as a script.
     There are many fine pictures that discuss the subjects in THE
CHAMBER in a responsible and enlightening manner.  Foley's vision here
is limited to the exploitive.  He takes controversial subjects and
taunts the audience with racial and religious epithets solely for
gratuitous shock value.
     In easily the worse performance of his career, Chris O'Donnell is
badly miscast as lawyer Adam Hall.  Adam is the grandson of famous
racist and KKK bomber Sam Cayhall (Gene Hackman), and Adam comes back
to town to save his granddaddy from execution.  Ever reliable Hackman
does the only real acting in the show, but even he is not as good as he
usually is.  Directors and writers do make a difference.
     As the story opens, Cayhall is going to die in 28 days unless Adam
can get him off with an appeal or a pardon.  Since Cayhall admits to
killing two innocent boys, Adam has his work cut out for him.
     The South in THE CHAMBER is even more stereotyped than most
Grisham novels.  White society is dichotomized into rich people who
live in white mansion with big columns and the rest who are rednecks
living in shacks.  They are almost all racist except for the hero
lawyer.  The KKK, of course, is omnipresent.  Caricature is effective
to a point, but THE CHAMBER is way over the line.  Cliche follows
cliche in an unending drive for manipulating the audience.
     When Adam arrives at the ante-bellum mansion of Cayhall's daughter
Lee Bowen (Faye Dunaway), she tells him, "Pretty good for poor white
trash.  How well I'll be accepted after everybody finds out I'm
Hitler's daughter is another thing."  She later tells him that, "We
come from a long line of hate."
     "Save me.  Your don't look like you can save a turkey from
Thanksgiving," remarks Cayhall when he meets his new lawyer Adam.  In
the most ridiculous aspect of the story, Cayhall spews out a constant
steam of racial and anti-Semitic epithets, but the black guards are
quite fond of him.  Sure.
     Soon Adam finds out Gov. McCallister (David Marshall Grant) was
somehow a partner in Cayhall's criminal activities.  Moreover, the
governor hints that if Cayhall will shut up, he will pardon him.
Imagine that, a government leader hinting of pardons if his partner in
crime will just keep quiet.  Couldn't happen in America.
     The governor's attractive female aide Nora Stark (Lela Rochon)
tells Adam, "You're in Mississippi now - land of the secrets.  There
are bodies buried everywhere."  The governor also suggest she sleep
with Adam so she can find out what he knows.
     Cayhall keeps wanting Adam to stay away from the conspiracy
admonishing him, "If you spend half as much time trying to be a lawyer
instead of trying to be Dick Tracy, I might not be dead in five days."
I will not discuss the ending other than to say it is as manipulative
as the rest of the film.
     Ian Baker's cinematography is dull and lifeless.  For a major
motion picture, it is strikingly ugly.  The music by Carter Burwell
sounds like it was lifted from an old B movie.
     I left the theater with many questions.  How could they make such
a incredible mistake as to cast Chris O'Donnell as the lawyer?  Why was
the script such an insult to the viewer's intelligence?  And the
biggest question of all, why did I stay, hoping in vain that the film
would somehow get better?
     THE CHAMBER runs forever at 1:51 thanks to the sloppy editing of
Mark Warner.  It is rated R for some violence and some bad language,
and the film would probably be acceptable for teenagers.  I hated the
show, and I recommend people of all ages avoid it.  Only out of respect
for Gene Hackman do I award it a single *.  My immediate reaction when
I left the theater was not even to rate it that high.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Chamber (1996) ** out of ***** - Cast: Chris O'Donnell, Gene Hackman,
Faye Dunaway, Raymond Berry, Lela Rochon, Bo Jackson. Written by: William
Goldman and Chris Reese. Directed by: James Foley. Running Time: 110
minutes.
There are two characters that for the life of me I cannot figure out
Hollywood's fascination with: the President of the United States and
convicted murderers. "The Chamber" makes the FOURTH film in less than two
years about someone trying to save a GUILTY person from the death penalty.
Chris O'Donnell stars as Adam Hall, a fresh young lawyer who travels to
Mississippi to appeal the case of Sam Cahall (Gene Hackman), a convicted
murderer whose racist beliefs cause him to blow up a building containing a
Jewish lawyer and his two young children. We find out early that Hall is
actually Sam's grandson, which is why he has requested the case. He doesn't
seem to care for his grandfather, and it certainly seems like he hates
racism, but I guess he hates the death penalty even more. He must save his
mean old granddad from that mean old gas chamber.
Now knowing that this was the fourth movie in the last few months to do the
exact same story, stupid me, I figured that this was a mystery and was
trying to figure out who really planted that bomb so that mean old racist
Hackman can get out of jail. As I said, stupid me. Hackman is guilty. And
none of the characters make any sense. Hackman (who does give a good
performance, even with an illogical character) is mean, racist,
cold-hearted, yet forgiving, sympathetic, and kind. How is that possible?
And I already explained O'Donnell's paradox, I see no reason why he is
trying to save this man's life.
Another main problem is that Hackman's (and other's) racist speeches go
completely unanswered. While he's spouting his racist views we might see a
shot of someone rolling their eyes or whatever, but no one speaks up to put
Hackman in his place. It's as if the filmmakers think that all of society
has matured so much that everyone will also just roll their eyes and
realize, "Hey, racism is stupid". This can be dangerous. A great many people
who feel the way characters do in this film are still out there, and these
unanswered comments can make strong impressions on those weak-minded people.
I didn't get to see "The Chamber" in the theaters, it was gone too quickly.
That surprised me. John Grisham movies have always been blockbusters. After
seeing it however, I understand why. Attention Hollywood: the movie-going
public has no desire to see movies about people trying to save the lives of
convicted murderers! It just doesn't interest them. Go figure. [R]
--Chuck Dowling  
--Chuck's Movie Reviews -- http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  James Foley.
Screenplay:  William Goldman, Chris Reese.
Producers:  John Davis, Brian Grazer, Ron Howard.
Starring:  Chris O'Donnell, Gene Hackman, Faye Dunaway, Lela Rochon,
Robert Prosky.
     In the adaptation of John Grisham's THE CHAMBER, Gene Hackman plays
Sam Cayhall, a dyed-in-the-wool, Confederate-flag-waving Klansman on death
row after being convicted of a 1967 racially-motivated bombing which left
two children dead.  His grandson Adam Hall (Chris O'Donnell), a Chicago
attorney, has arrived in Mississippi in an attempt to pull off a
last-minute appeal even though prospects appear dim.  As the film nears
its climax, Sam makes the long walk to the death watch cell past other
prisoners, and one by one we see and hear them wishing Sam well.  This
includes several black prisoners, one of whom offers Sam a peace sign.
     I may be no expert in the brotherhood of death row, but I'm going to
go out on a limb and suggest that there may be no love lost between black
inmates and an inmate who uses a certain "n" word with unapologetic
frequency.  Yet THE CHAMBER depends on such warm fuzziness when it comes
to matters of race, because its thinking is equally fuzzy.  Sam Cayhall
may be Klan, the script suggests, but he's good people; after all, he
tells his black guard (erstwhile pro baseball and football star Bo
Jackson) that he doesn't mean it personally when he refers to "your
people," and writes a letter to the mother of the boys who died in the
explosion.  More to the point, as Adam contends in his appeal, Sam had no
choice but to be a racist because of how he was raised.  It is one of THE
CHAMBER's many bits of convenient ignorance that Adam makes his plea with
absolute earnestness, despite the fact that his own father suffered and
struggled not to turn out like Sam.
     Of course, it may be that Chris O'Donnell knew no other way to make
that speech, because earnestness is the only emotional pitch in which he
seems capable of performing.  THE CHAMBER may toss around ideas about
racism, the politics of criminal justice and corruption in high places --
all pet peeves of Grisham's, if his oeuvre is any indication -- but
ultimately it really comes down to the face-offs between Hackman and
O'Donnell, and man oh man but O'Donnell is wrestling out of his weight
class.  There may be no more inconsequential actor in American films than
Chris O'Donnell, a pretty boy who makes you want to re-evaluate Keanu
Reeves as a multi-shaded thespian.  Watching O'Donnell try to drag an
inner life out of Adam Hall is like watching a puppy try to play Macbeth.
     Then there is Gene Hackman, an actor with the ability to make you sit
through nonsense like this just for the chance to watch him do his thing.
In many of his early scenes he is simply marvelous, tearing into Adam with
the practiced disdain of a man who has spent his life figuring out why
everyone else is responsible for his own misery.  His best moment comes in
a scene where he describes to Adam the death of another inmate in the gas
chamber, the horror of his likely fate sinking in with every word.  It is
a really little more than a piece of anti-death penalty propaganda, but
Hackman sells it with such conservation of emotion that it doesn't feel as
obvious as it should.  He makes that speech a statement about the feelings
of his character, which is the mark of a superior actor:  the words he
speaks are his.
     It is a shame then that Sam is obliged to turn into just the
grandfatherly sort he mocked Adam for believing him to be.  Films about
condemned killers have been all the rage lately, but THE CHAMBER is
both the most weightless and the most subtly offensive of them all,
because it is so disingenuous in its portrayal of Sam.  As the film
progresses, it seems that we are supposed to feel sorry for Sam, a man
raised on racism who has been set up to take the fall for a crime in which
he may not have been the key participant.  At the same time, we are aware
that he murdered the father of one of his son's friends, a black man, in
cold blood.  The fact that we are expected to root for Sam to get his
appeal because he may not have committed the _particular_ murder for which
he was convicted is enough to make you shiver when you think of Sam's line
that the Klan "should have stuck to the niggers."  THE CHAMBER is a film
which poses at social consciousness, then casts a black actress (Lela
Rochon) in the female lead only to strip the character of her romantic
relationship with Adam.  Gene Hackman is interested only in making Sam
Cayhall human; THE CHAMBER wants to make him lovable, to use racism as an
incendiary plot device then shrug it off as Sam makes his last long walk,
ready to do everything but shout "Power to the people!"
