Title
Review for Scrooge (1951)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"A Christmas Carol" has to be Charles Dickens' most famous work.
There are countless versions and parodies, but all of them,
this version is probably the best.
It tells the story of Ebenezer Scrooge (Alastair Sim), an elderly
businessman who has grown cold-hearted and miserly over the years,
discarding family and disregarding his employees, especially
humble clerk Bob Crachit (Mervyn Johns).  On Christmas Eve, Scrooge is
visited by a series of ghosts, who seek to change his ways before
he has to walk the earth after death, dragging heavy chains like
his unlucky partner Jacob Marley (Michael Horndern).  The ghosts 
represent Christmas Past, Present, and Future.  Will Scrooge recognize
the error of his ways?  Will he repent and embrace mankind?
There seems to be a correlation between the ghosts of Christmas
and Scrooge's character.  The Spirit of Christmas Past is kindly,
as was Scrooge in his youth.  Christmas Present is more stern,
just as Scrooge has become cruel.  And Christmas Future is
as forboding and bleak as is Scrooge's future.
Why is this version of the classic better than its competitors?
The script is well adapted, and the direction is tight, but
the film's strength comes from the cast.  Bob Crachit, Tiny Tim,
and Scrooge's pleasant nephew all glow with the warmth of
Christmas spirit.  Alastair Sim plays Scrooge so that you feel
sorry for him, rather than despise him, especially after the
spirit of Christmas Past has shown us that Scrooge has taken
some hard knocks.
"Scrooge" is a British production, but the accents are not strong
and I had no trouble following the dialogue.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Alastair Sim, Mervyn Johns, Michael Hordern, Kathleen Harrison, 
      Michael Dolan, Francis De Wolff, Glyn Dearman, Hermione Baddeley
Director: Brian Desmond-Hurst
Producer: Brian Desmond-Hurst
Screenplay: Noel Langley based on the novel by Charles Dickens
Cinematography: C. Pennington-Richards
Music: Richard Addinsell
U.S. Distributor: Liberty Films
     When it comes to favorite Christmas tales on the screen, there are 
probably two.  There's no confusion about the first, because there is 
only one IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE.  In fact, Frank Capra's classic is so 
expertly wrought that no one has even attempted a big screen remake.  
The second is a little more problematic, because there have been many 
worthy takes on Charles Dickens' A CHRISTMAS CAROL.  In 1984, George C. 
Scott humbugged to memorable effect in a made-for-TV adaptation.  Albert 
Finney sang and danced his way through the title role of 1970's SCROOGE.  
Even Mr. Magoo, the Muppets, Blackadder, and Mickey Mouse have taken 
their shots (with varying degrees of success).  But the best-loved and 
most-remembered version of A CHRISTMAS CAROL has to be the 1951 edition 
of SCROOGE, with the inimitable Alastair Sim as London's cruelest miser.
     Sim, a veteran of British stage and screen, started his motion 
picture career in the mid-'30s and ended it in the early-'70s.  In 
between, he appeared in over fifty films, but the role that has given 
him true immortality is that of Scrooge.  Sim is not just one of many 
actors to play the part -- for everyone who has seen the crisply-made 
black-and-white production, he is the definitive Scrooge.  Everyone 
else, from George C. Scott to Bill Murray, is an impostor.  
     What did Sim do to put his indelible mark on Scrooge?  Of those who 
took up the skinflint's mantle, only he has been equal to the task of 
playing Scrooge in his many, varied incarnations:  uncaring miser, 
heartless employer, frightened old man, mournful supplicant, and 
repentant merrymaker.  At the film's opening, Sim radiates cold; at the 
end, his giddy exuberance is contagious.  In between, we experience many 
emotions directed towards his character:  sadness, anger, and, most 
strongly, pity.  Sim makes us feel for Scrooge in a way that no other 
actor has been capable of.  
     Take away the lead actor, and this version of SCROOGE would still 
have been a credible reworking, with capable performances, a strong 
atmosphere, and superior costume and set design.  The movie was made on 
an English soundstage in the early 1950s, but the look is of London a 
century earlier.  Today, with modern special effects, this would not be 
as great an achievement as it was more than forty years ago.  The black-
and-white cinematography, brilliantly achieved by C. Pennington-
Richards, is as crucial to the film's success as any other individual 
element.  Rather than making SCROOGE seem quaint and outdated, the 
black-and-white approach lends it a sense of eerieness and mystery that 
no color version has managed to recapture.  
     The plot is faithful to Dickens' original tale.  Ebeneezer Scrooge 
is easily one of the nastiest men in London.  To him, money is 
everything.  He does not believe in charity and only reluctantly agrees 
to give his clerk, Bob Cratchit (Mervyn Johns), Christmas Day off.  On 
the night before Christmas, Scrooge receives four ghostly visitors, all 
of whom share a mission:  to teach him the error of his ways and show 
him the path to redemption.  The first is Scrooge's former partner, the 
late Jacob Marley (Michael Hordern), who bears a warning about what 
happens to a man who dies after living only for money.  Next is the 
Ghost of Christmas Past (Michael Dolan), who takes Scrooge on a journey 
into the years gone by, reminding him of times when wealth meant little.  
The third spirit is the boisterous Ghost of Christmas Present (Francis 
De Wolff), whose task is to show his charge how others are spending 
Christmas Eve.  Finally, the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come (C. 
Konarski) lets Scrooge wander through the shadows of the bleak future 
that awaits him if he does not mend his ways.
     Sim is supported by an able cast, many of whom are familiar faces.  
Mervyn Johns, who plays Bob Cratchit as sturdy-yet-sympathetic, appeared 
in over four dozen films over his career, including the cult classic THE 
DAY OF THE TRIFFIDS.  Kathleen Harrison, whose Mrs. Dilber was SCROOGE's 
comic highlight, had a similarly impressive resume.  Michael Hordern, 
whose Marley was a tortured soul, became a mainstay of British and 
American TV.  Likewise, Francis De Wolff enjoyed a long and successful 
relationship with the silver screen.  Only Michael Dolan was hardly ever 
heard from again.  
     Like all uplifting Christmas stories, SCROOGE ends with a flurry of 
good will and high spirits.  But the chief pleasure of watching this 
version of A CHRISTMAS CAROL is not the ending.  At a reasonably short 
85 minutes, this is nevertheless a complete experience, and the strength 
and depth of its drama makes it the most memorable of any adaptation of 
the tale.  We may hum along with Albert Finney, hiss at Bill Murray, and 
smile at Scrooge McDuck, but none of them compares favorably to Sim.  
When it comes to A CHRISTMAS CAROL, perhaps there isn't much of a 
question about the best version after all
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
