Title
Review for Barry Lyndon (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
Director Stanley Kubrick followed the success of "2001: A Space
Odyssey" and "A Clockwork Orange" with a film that was perhaps
even more daring.  "Barry Lyndon" was a three hour costume
drama set in the 18th century, without sufficient action
to interest male viewers, and without sufficient love interest
to satisfy women viewers.  The film starred expressionless
Ryan O'Neal, who had been derided since "Love Story" despite
a quality performance in "Paper Moon."  Meticulously filmed
entirely utilizing natural light, "Barry Lyndon" was beautiful
to look at, but was a flop at the box office.  Even some critics
weren't kind, calling the film tedious and lifeless; perhaps
more a series of still life paintings than a conventional film.
But "Barry Lyndon" is outstanding.  It is not as great as
"Dr. Strangelove", but it could be Kubrick's second best film.
Besides the gorgeous visual appeal of the cinematography and
costumes, the story is highly compelling, even with the narration
curiously revealing plot spoilers.  While the viewer never
likes the characters, one can identify with them, and what
happens to them seems as natural and inevitable as if preordained
by the stars.  Redmond Barry's ultimate failure, propelled by
hunger for respect and the title of Lord that he doesn't merit,
seems a fitting punishment for treating people as mere stepping
stones to glory.
Redmond Barry (O'Neal) is first seen as an idealistic,
courageous young Irishman.  Tricked into leaving home by
relations anxious to be rid of the meddlesome youth,
he enlists in first the English, then the Prussian
Army.  His courage survives better than his morality,
and he eventually manipulates his way into a favorable
marriage with lovely, sad-eyed Lady Lyndon (Marisa Berenson).
He shamelessly dissipates the Lyndon family fortune in
attempt to buy the title of Lord, making an enemy of
his dislikable stepson (Leon Vitali).
While "Barry Lyndon" was nominated for 7 Academy Awards,
including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted
Screenplay (credited to Kubrick, based on William Makepeace
Thackeray's novel), the film only won for its most obvious
strengths.  John Alcott won Best Cinematography, Leonard
Rosenman for the low-key score, and the sets and costumes
(of course) won Oscars.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Stanley Kubrick
Writer: Stanley Kubrick (based on the novel by William Makepeace
Thackeray)
Starring: Ryan O'Neal, Marisa Berenson, Patrick Magee, Leon Vitali,
Hardy Krüger, Mary Kean, Frank Middlemass, Leonard Rossiter, Gay
Hamilton, Diana Körner, Murray Melvin, Arhtur Sullivan, Philip Stone,
David Morley, Michael Hordern
Many people consider Stanley Kubrick's "Barry Lyndon" to be overrated,
as it was his most successful at the Oscars (garnering seven
nominations), yet seems to be his least involved.  Sometimes dubbed as
just "Kubrick's Costume Drama," it has been ridiculed for being too
long, and too bland, the latter in comparison with Kubrick's other
films.  However, beneath the period piece, Merchant Ivory, Ryan
O'Neal-miscast surface of the film lies a poetic little allegory, as
complex and involving as his other work.
"Barry Lyndon" takes place around the time of King George III, and
centers around a slick opportunitist: Redmond Barry (Ryan O'Neal) - a
poor Irish boy.  The film seems to chronicle his rise and fall from
grace and power (with a couple trips along the way), showing him trying
to become a gentleman throughout the film.  We already know what will
happen to him by the end of the film, the narration (by Michael Hordern)
more than subtlely hints at it.  But that's precisely what this film is
about.
Through the 185 minutes of the film, Redmond has quite a huge reportoire
of things occur to him.  He starts out in his hometown, forced to leave
because he won in a duel (there's a lot of them in this film), and soon
ends up in the army during the "Seven Year's War."  He also ends up
gambling with a fellow Irishman, simply named "The Chevalier" ("A
Clockwork Orange"'s Patrick Magee, who played the insane writer), and
even marries into a wealthy family: the Lyndons (hence the name).  But
by the end, Redmond has lost everything, and dies penniless.
"Barry Lyndon" will easily be loved by fans of period pieces turned into
film, as it is a tour de force of authentic 18th centruy decor.  All of
the costumes were made the exact way as the ones from the time period,
and the cinematography is absolutely gorgeous.  The people in this film
look, act, and appear just like they would if they lived at the time of
the characters...even Ryan O'Neal.  The story is wonderful, filled with
irony, sadness, and tragedy (and some nice un-forced comical bits here
and there).  It feels like an epic.
And this film is also noted for creating a special camera for shooting
in rooms lit only by candle.  While this is now obselete, this was the
prototype for this kind of camera (and apparently it was a big pain in
the ass: if a character moved back or forth, they'd go out of focus) and
is, of course, in the history books.  Also noted is the fact that one of
the greatest duel scenes in film history takes place at the end of this
film (there's a bunch of them).
But this is not just a period piece for the sake of being a period
piece.  Kubrick has never been so simple to make a film which is ONLY a
period piece, or ONLY a horror film, or ONLY a sci-fi film.  Like all of
his films, "Barry Lyndon" has a lot of depth, and a hidden meaning which
is never easily spelled out.  Kubrick is always fascinating because his
films are never really easy to comprehend the first time around.  Even
"Dr. Strangelove" has a deeper subtext to the text (that it's a film
about sex in the mechanical age).
"Barry Lyndon" seems to be about man trying to become the ruler of his
own world, but ultimately failing.  The characters are always striving
for greatness, but can never escape fate.  Redmond, in particular, is an
opportunitist, and feels that taking his chances will ultimately set him
farther in the human race.  He has no real dignity, honor, or even
scruples (he shamefully marries a woman chiefly because she's rich), but
at the end, when he has suffered so much that he tries to be a good man,
he fails miserably (not really his fault though).
The characters in "Barry Lyndon" are all bound by fate, crushed by the
frames of the film.  If you look closely at the film, you see that they
are usually confined to the film's frames (probably better with a
widescreen treatment, though), suffocating them.  No matter how any of
the characters try, not just including Redmond, they can never escape
and become...dare I say it...the master of their own domain (hee hee). 
Even the narration basically tells what's going to happen (which pissed
off Pauline Kael, but as pointed it out blatantly by Sam Peckinpah, THAT
WAS THE POINT, PAULINE!!!!!!!).
The acting is generally good, although nothing spectacular - the film's
only real drawback.  Ryan O'Neal, who seems like a joke for the lead in
a costume drama, actually does a pretty good job.  Although having one
look for most of the film, it works, and he's surprisingly moving
towards the end of the film (also, his irish accent is far better than
that of Brad Pitt and Richard Gere).  Other standout performances come
from Madchen Amick-looking Marisa Berenson as the Lady Lyndon, who's
excellent at looking hurt and melancholy without looking like Matt Le
Blanc; Patrick Magee as the heavily-painted Chevalier; Hardy Krüger as
General Podzdoff; Philip Stone, as the kind of always nervous Graham;
and Leon Vitali, as Lord Bullingdon, son of Lady Lyndon, and enemy of
Redmond, who's really amazing in his role.
As always, the direction and writing is the best thing about the film. 
Kubrick squeezes so much into the three-hour film that you'd think that
it'd be either too much or too little, too fast or too slow.  But
Kubrick finds a nice leisurely pace, and allows the story to unwind
nicely.  "Barry Lyndon" is an odd choice for Kubrick, especially as his
follow-up to the X-rated, disturbing-as-hell "A Clockwork Orange."  But
Kubrick pulls it off, amazingly, and presents to us his most underrated
about being overrated film.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
