Title
Review for Stealing Beauty (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     With apologies to John Landis, a better title might have been AN
AMERICAN VIRGIN IN TUSCANY.  This exquisitely shot soft-core romp
through the Italian countryside stars Liv Tyler (EMPIRE) as a 19-
year-old American whose stay at a sculptor's hillside home-- for the
purposes of having her portrait made and losing her virginity, and not
necessarily in that order-- causes all the men around her to act like
dogs in heat.  They sniff, growl at, and circle their bitches for two
very long hours.  Ms. Tyler, the current queen of the ingenues, projects
an innocence that would be rather sweet to behold if the director,
Bernardo Bertolucci (LITTLE BUDDA, LAST TANGO IN PARIS), didn't have so
much sex on his mind.
     When a dying playwright (Jeremy Irons) meets Lucy, he immediately
begins babbling about the importance of the dirty deed.  At this point,
a certain absurdity creeps into the movie that never leaves, and which
prevents the semi-serious story from breathing without heaving.  The
whole thing is over-sexed.  My favorite:  the strange symbolism of Liv
vomiting into a man's crotch!  And what about all those
below-the-hemline camera angles?!  (To be fair, the story isn't entirely
perverted:  Lucy is also trying to solve the mystery of who bopped her
mom, many years ago on that same hillside.) Bathed in the relaxed amber
tones of cinematographer Darius Khondji (SEVEN, THE CITY OF LOST
CHILDREN), STEALING BEAUTY certainly has the best scenery of any summer
movie.  Too bad that those below- the-belt stirrings have more to do
with a lack of blood flow to the buttocks than anything else.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Liv Tyler, Jeremy Irons, Sinead Cusack, Donal McCann, Rachel
Weisz, D. W. Moffett, Carlo Cecchi, Stefania Sandrelli, Roberto Zibetti.
Screenplay:  Susan Minot.
Director:  Bernardo Bertolucci.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Bernardo Bertolucci's STEALING BEAUTY opens with a point-of-view
video sequence focusing on the journey of 19-year-old American Lucy Harmon
(Liv Tyler) via plane and train to Tuscany.  As she steps off the train in
Tuscany, Lucy hears a man call to her, and sees a hand bearing a unique
bracelet drop the videotape he had just taken out a window of the train.
A bit of mystery is established:  who is the man in the bracelet, and why
was he following Lucy?  It is a clue to what is wrong with STEALING BEAUTY
that, though the man appears again, his behavior on the train is never
explained, or even addressed.  This is a film of false starts, dead ends
and pointless distractions which pays too little attention to what should
be its central premise.
     Tyler's Lucy is traveling abroad for a couple of very distinct
reasons, we learn.  Returning to the estate of sculptor Ian Grayson (Donal
McCann) and his wife Diana (Sinead Cusack), family friends with whom she
had vacationed five years earlier, virginal Lucy hopes to find the Italian
boy (Roberto Zibetti) who gave her her first kiss, perhaps to share
another first.  She also hopes to find the meaning behind the final entry
in her late mother's diary, which hints at a special connection to the
Graysons' place.  Lucy befriends several other guests at the Graysons',
including terminally ill author Alex Parrish (Jeremy Irons) and Diana's
free-spirited daughter Miranda (Rachel Weisz).
     They are not the only guests at the Grayson residence, which appears
to be a kind of expatriate artist's Hotel Algonquin.  Other regulars
include Noemi (Stefania Sandrelli), an advice-to-the-lovelorn columnist;
Richard (D. W. Moffett), an American entertainment lawyer and Miranda's
lover du jour; and M. Guillaume (Jean Marais), a slightly dotty old poet.
Most of them are given some kind of romantic sub-plot -- just enough, in
fact, to be genuinely annoying.  Bertolucci repeatedly cuts away in the
middle of a scene to an irrelevant tangent, or introduces characters for a
few superfluous moments.  In one scene, an army lieutenant (Leonardo
Treviglio) has his car break down near the Graysons, and ends up joining
them for dinner; in another, Lucy's dance with an older gentleman (Carlo
Cecchi) is interrupted by a drunken, jealous woman who promptly urinates
on the floor.
     All this activity might suggest that Bertolucci simply wants to revel
in the Bohemian lifestyle of the artistic types who populate the Grayson
estate, except that he plays Lucy's quest for her mother's past and the
illness of Irons' Alex so seriously.  It is as though he is afraid that
with all the drinking, dancing and baring of breasts going on, we in the
audience will forget that there are also Serious Issues to be addressed.
The problem is that it is always clear which of Lucy's two missions is of
greater interest to him, to the other characters in the film, and probably
to us.  There's nothing wrong with a simple, erotic coming-of-age story,
but Bertolucci appears to be embarrassed at the thought of making a film
which is about something as base as the loss of virginity.  Consequently,
he piles on the characters and the distracting editing to provide the
illusion of substance, when in fact he is ready to end his story as soon
as Lucy is de-flowered.
     It's truly a shame that Bertolucci was unwilling to focus on that one
story, because it provides a few touching moments.  Liv Tyler, who has
improved exponentially as an actor since her debut in SILENT FALL, is a
radiant presence at the center of the story.  She makes the best of the
sketchy relationship with her poet mother through her own abortive
attempts at verse, and shares some appealing scenes with Irons (in one of
his least mannered recent performances), including one where she reveals
her sexual inexperience.  That revelation finds its way to the other
guests, leading to an effective and poignant sequence in which Lucy, in an
attempt to convince everyone that she finally has a lover, picks up a
drunken young man at a party and makes a point of being seen kissing him
and taking him to her room, where she then watches him pass out in her
bed.  There are moments like that when Lucy is every bit as beguiling as
everyone in STEALING BEAUTY seems convinced that she is, but Bertolucci
still carries on as though he is above it all.  By trying to turn STEALING
BEAUTY into something deep, he muddles it.  He also makes that voyeuristic
opening video sequence all the more telling.  Instead of watching his
character's life unfold, he tries to catch it out of the corner of his
eye, without letting anyone else know that he's looking.

Author
Julian Lim
Mmm, isn't Jeremy Irons lovely?  How he moves, how he talks, how his
saliva falls on to the hard rocky ground.  His svelte, skeletal frame,
his eyes that look at you with impossibly nosy curiosity, the way he
sucks with asthmatic ecstasy on a cigarette.  He speaks French, he
speaks Italian, and he's dying. Could anything be sexier?
Well, there's Liv Tyler of course. She glides through the film beguiling
everyone, whether she's in a swimsuit or a horrible frilly dress,
whether she's dancing, smiling blankly at social occasions or solemnly
writing her diary. And actually, she's pretty good, too.  Tyler is a
natural at playing the American beauty Lucy Harmon, poised between
adolescent gawkiness and adult self-awareness, who comes into an Italian
village to stay with family friends.
Lucy is aware of her beauty, flirting with it, toying with her role as
the pretty young thing amidst the old, the jaded and the sleazy.  Yet
she is still in the process of getting used to the attentions of men,
and more importantly, finding out what she wants and who she is.  A
double quest unfolds in the course of the film: one, to lose her
virginity, and two, to find out more about her mother's past, perhaps
even to discover her true father.
Aiding and abetting her in the first quest is Jeremy Irons, oozing his
uniquely foxlike charm out of every dying pore. As an invalid and old
person, he plays the part eunuch mentor to Lucy, but his busy probings
into her love life are a strange mix of leering, paternal and camp.  His
interests in her remain ambiguous to the end, when he falls sick and has
to be hospitalised soon after Lucy takes a man home.
STEALING BEAUTY could have been an interesting exploration of virginity,
innocence and experience. And with its dual search for absent fathers
and lovers, it nearly manages an incisive look at how a young woman's
identity is dependent on male figures, and on male constructions of the
female image (hinted at in the opening scene of a strange man
videotaping Liv Tyler sleeping in the train).
Unfortunately, Bertolucci's film touches on these themes but never goes
into them with much depth or energy.  The search for Lucy's first love
never rises much above the level of your typical teen movie. Indeed a
film like CLUELESS had a more ironic and revealing take on teen love,
poking fun at its conventions even while revelling in them.  By
contrast, STEALING BEAUTY seems to take all too seriously characters
like the sleazy American hunk, the cute-but-insincere Italian, the drunk
Englishman, and the truly-sincere-sensitive-shy guy.  Does Bertolucci
somehow expect us to see this string of cardboard figures as steps in
Liv Tyler's voyage of sexual awakening?
Perhaps the problem with the film is that it shares rather too much of
the teenager's perspective, with the adolescent's self-absorption and
exaggerated seriousness.   Hence the 'adult' characters surrounding Lucy
never quite take on a life of their own, seemingly spending all of their
time thinking and talking about her.  Rather than offering contrasting,
ironic perspectives on her character, they only seem to indulge her
sense of self-importance. And the scenes of Lucy writing in her diary,
supposedly our window into her inner life, look like MTV (or, worse,
KTV) ballad-sequences, with white handwriting gracefully squiggling
across the screen and Tyler's faux-naif girlish voice talking to us (be
warned: these contain scenes of graphic teen poetry).
But to carp too much on the shallowness of STEALING BEAUTY is really to
miss the pleasures of watching this movie. As in his previous films,
Bertolucci excels at providing manifold feasts for the eyes.  Here,
joined by hipper-than-hip cinematographer Darius Khondji (SEVEN, CITY OF
LOST CHILDREN), he gives us lush Tuscan landscapes, beautiful life-size
wood sculptures, kisses in a sunset-drenched meadow, Liv Tyler emerging
from a pool seemingly chiselled from marble (the pool, that is), Jeremy
Irons removing his cap to show a thin veil of grey hair.  There are
times when the images take on a stunning, iconic flair all their own, as
in the scenes of some beguilingly bizarre dancing at a party.  It is
actually not that hard to lose yourself in the simple charms of this
film, to get into the easygoing, gently interested pace of the plot, and
to even feel for Liv Tyler as she goes looking for love in all the most
photogenic places -- just don't take too seriously the pretensions of
the film to being anything complex or profound. 
The Flying Inkpot Rating System: 
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
**** Amazing, potent stuff. 
***** Perfection. See it twice.>
____________________________________________________________ 
This movie review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT, the 
Singaporean zine that dares to say "Bok." For a spanking 
good time, visit THE FLYING INKPOT at 

Author
Pedro Sena
This may not be as strong a film by Bernardo Bertolucci as many other in his
long and illustrious career. But it does have a few touches of beauty in it
that make this film stand out, although, compared to many of his other
films, the themes here seem trivial, and not as important, even if the young
girl doesn't think so.
It's not much of a story, other than a relative on vacation in Italy, ends
up spending time with a group of people whose attitudes vary and their life
style is very different from the American style. The young girl befriends a
older man whose life is on the decline, with whom she can at least have a
few conversations, although what he might want out of her is not what  he is
going to get. All in all a rather lecherous group of people in a  society
that is rather free in sexual mores, but at the same time a bit on the
scavenger side of things to get that freedom.
It's almost like that freedom is there as long as the individuals can get
what they want, when they want and for their own reasons.
Unlike many other films by Bernardo, the main beauty here is really the
countryside, with its very clear oranges and greens all over them. The rest
appears somber, and not as lively as nature, certainly not as pretty. The
young girl does eventually come of age, but not really the way she expected,
although she seemed to have fun and made a new friend. In the older group,
it seems that sex is the excuse to make friends. The same thing happened
here with the younger ones, although we may be more forgiving since they are
young.
Not a great film, by any means, but it does have its own little beauty. If
you have the patience to stay through it, at times a very talky film, this
is not bad. It's just not as good, as some of the stronger stuff that
Bernardo has done in the past. Compared to those films this would seem to be
an earlier film, rather than a later film.
I suppose that we all have to search a little and learn something...

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The setup for Bernardo Bertolucci's (LAST TANGO IN PARIS, 1900,
THE LAST EMPEROR, and LITTLE BUDDHA) latest film is a classic.
Probably everyone has had the puppy love stage when you kissed a girl
or a boy and then lost touch with them only to wonder later what has
happened to them and what would have come of the romance if it had been
allowed to blossom.
     In STEALING BEAUTY, a title with many meanings, 19 year old Lucy
Harmon (Liv Tyler) travels back to the Tuscany countryside of Italy to
spend the summer with old friends and to get her portrait painted.  In
reality the driving motivation is rekindle her friendship with the boy
with whom she shared her first kiss four years earlier.  After she left
four years ago, he wrote for a while, but the letters stopped and she
does not know what that means.  At any rate, she is a virgin, which
bemuses her Italian friends.
     I will tell you a bit more of the story shortly, but let me stop
right here and say the only reason to see this film is for its visual
impact.  The story itself is so insubstantial that if you think about
it for a moment, it will disappear.  Moreover, the director's pacing
can be summarized as nothing much happens, but it happens slowly.
Don't get me wrong, you can make lightweight films worth seeing.
Perhaps the best recent example was SIRENS, but in STEALING BEAUTY
there is nothing compelling to involve the audience.  The audience
becomes little more than voyeurs in STEALING BEAUTY, and the actors
seem strangely disconnected from the characters they are playing.
     Back to what is right about the film.  Tuscany has never looked so
lovely.  In fact, Bertolucci went out of the way to make it even more
magnificent.  As the press kit points out, he requested the set
designer (Gianni Silvestri) to take the gravel road where they were
shooting and dye it "a dark Siena ochre." Moreover, Bertolucci wanted
the sets "to create a contrast to the lightness of the story by using
heavy colors, deep reds, blues, burnt oranges."
     The cinematography by Darius Khondji is as handsome as the sets.
Bertolucci told him to look at the paintings by Matisse, Derain and
Marquet and listen the music of Mozart in order to form the proper
texture for the film.  Most scenes, even the meals, are filmed outdoors
for maximum effect.  If you are not blown away by the images, get an
immediate appointment at your optometrist.  The opening scene is shot
in dizzying swirls so that you are immediately engulfed in the radiance
of the film.  When Lucy writes in her diary, words appear across the
screen in script as if written by an angel, and they then float across
the screen like an apparition.
     Returning to the story itself, we have a tale set in Italy of a
bunch of friends, lots and lots of friends.  Lucy stays at the villa
owned by the Grayson's.  Diana Grayson (Sinead Cusack) is the
matriarch, and her husband is the painter Ian (Donal McCann).  Visiting
them are Carlo Lisca (Carlo Cecchi), M. Guillaume (Jean Marais),
Richard Reed (D. W. Moffett), Noemi (Stefania Sandrelli), Miranda Fox
(Rachel Weisz), and Christopher (Joseph Fiennes).  Finally, there is
the dying invalid, Alex Parrish (Jeremy Irons), who is staying with the
family.
     The show seems to be about sexuality, if indeed it is about
anything at all, but to me it is no more than a tone poem to
triviality.  All of the males in the cast appear subtly to be trying to
seduce Lucy.  Both sexes shown as free spirits who all run around
together with no clothes on, and who smoke dope together as casually as
others would share a jug of water on a hot day.  I lost track of how
many times Lucy came upon others making love loudly and in easy view of
anyone walking by.
     The acting and the music (Richard Hartley) is as trivial as the
script (Susan Minot based on the story by Bernardo Bertolucci).  The
music is full of dreamy little jazz numbers that have an overall
numbing effect.  Finally, the film does have a small mystery in it, but
it is easily solvable and plays only a small part in the plot.
     STEALING BEAUTY runs too long at 1:56.  The picture is mainly in
English although a bit of it is in Italian and French with English
subtitles.  The picture is rated R for full frontal male and female
nudity, sex, drug usage, and some bad language. There is no violence.
I would only let teenagers go if they are mature and if they understand
the dangers of drug usage, no matter how cool this film makes it seem.
I enjoyed the gorgeous look of the picture, but I left feeling cheated
since there is no substance.  I give the film a mild thumbs down and
rate it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Liv Tyler, Jeremy Irons, Donal McCann, Sinead Cusack, 
      Ignazio Oliva, Jean Marais, D.W. Moffett, Stefania Sandrelli, 
      Rachel Weisz
Director: Bernardo Bertolucci
Producer: Jeremy Thomas
Screenplay: Susan Minot
Cinematography: Darius Khondji
Music: Richard Hartley
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight Pictures
     What do you call a character study with shallow, sketchily-drawn 
characters, but a gorgeous setting?  A scenery study, perhaps.  Or an 
atmosphere study.  Either would be appropriate for STEALING BEAUTY, a 
stylish, sensual motion picture that's hollow where it should have a 
heart.  This film is aesthetically pleasing but not emotionally 
satisfying.  It's occasionally erotic but rarely dynamic.  While these 
aren't unforgivable traits, I somehow expected more from a Bernardo 
Bertolucci (LAST TANGO IN PARIS) film.
     The main thrust of the movie are the attempts of the lead 
character, Lucy Harmon (Liv Tyler), to lose her virginity.  At age 19, 
she's never slept with a man -- a revelation that causes a great stir 
among the residents of the Tuscany villa where she is spending the 
summer.  Everyone is sympathetic with her situation, and they begin to 
consider who might best be able to accommodate her.
     There is no shortage of candidates.  STEALING BEAUTY presents them 
one-by-one, then dismisses them in the same manner.  There's the 
American boyfriend of the jewelry-maker daughter of Lucy's hostess.  
There's the son, Christopher, or one of his friends, including Nicolo, 
with whom Lucy shared her first kiss four long years ago on her last 
visit to Italy.  Then there's Nicolo's shy, sensitive friend, who turns 
away from the sight of an exposed female breast.
     As the story, such as it is, develops, a mystery subplot is 
introduced:  who is Lucy's real father?  There are three apparent 
possibilities:  Alex Barnes (Jeremy Irons), a dying writer; Ian Grayson 
(Donal McCann), the sculptor husband of Lucy's hostess; and Carlo Lisca 
(Carlo Cecchi), a mysterious ex-military man.  We know the truth long 
before Lucy does, but STEALING BEAUTY is never surprise-oriented.  It 
doesn't take a genius to weed through the choices to determine who will 
get the opportunity to deflower Lucy.
     Despite all the screen time accorded to Tyler, her character shows 
little development.  Events seem to swirl around her, only briefly 
touching her shallow emotional center.  Fundamentally, she's no 
different at the end than at the beginning (except that her hymen is no 
longer intact).  Several of the supporting characters show greater 
depth.  Most notable of these is Jeremy Irons' terminally ill author, 
who becomes Lucy's confidante and vicariously lives out his last days 
through her.
     There's very little comic relief in this too-serious film, which 
makes for a rather grim movie-going experience.  STEALING BEAUTY is 
long, but doesn't really go anywhere.  It is most remarkable for its 
excellent sense of time and place.  The Italian countryside becomes as 
vital a supporting character as Alex, and when Lucy dives into a lake, 
you can almost feel the cool, clear water.  STEALING BEAUTY functions as 
a two-hour, surrogate holiday -- diverting and visually captivating, but 
far from a cinematic landmark.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Christopher Null
     STEALING BEAUTY is a *bad* movie.  Bernardo Bertolucci, the Academy
Award-winning director of 1987's THE LAST EMPEROR, is dead.  He has been
replaced with a hormonal and juvenile kid, masquerading as a filmmaker,
desperately trying to appeal to a cerebral audience yet maintaining enough
accessibility for the moviegoing public.
     STEALING BEAUTY fails miserably on both counts.
     The story is simple, after you put it together (Susan Minot's script
hides the real plot for a good hour).  Liv Tyler plays Lucy, a 19-year old
virginal American who travels to Italy to lounge around with old family
friends, talk about her dead poetess mother, and find her sexual awakening.
Or, HOW TO MAKE AN ITALIAN QUILT.  Lucy moves in with about a dozen bizarre
characters -- I have no idea who they are or why they are together except
that some of them new her mother -- some are English, some American, some
Italian -- they're just living in a big villa in Italy -- and Lucy
basically makes herself at home.  A lot of people have a lot of sex, and
Lucy watches or listens to a lot of this, when she isn't posing half-naked
for a statue being carved in her image.  As Jerry Seinfeld would say, "Who
*are* these people!?"
     On screen, this set of situations is as ridiculous as it looks on
paper.  The movie makes little or no sense, being at its heart a far-too
simplistic tale of a girl losing her virginity that is told in a far-too
roundabout way so as to make even this fact almost lost upon the viewer.
     The story is so simple, yet at the same time, Tyler's character is
wholly unbelievable as a real person.  Quite frankly, she is contradicted
in her actions with every progressive scene.  Whether this is Tyler's fault
or the script is anyone's guess.
     As for the titular BEAUTY, there ain't a whole lot of it around,
unless you consider scenes of Lucy drooling, Lucy looking at a bidet, Lucy
talking with her mouth full, Lucy singing off-key, and Lucy vomiting as
"beautiful."  *Stealing* beauty?  You can have it!  And you can keep Liv
Tyler as an actress altogether as far as I'm concerned.  (Am I the only one
who had the misfortune of seeing SILENT FALL?)
     In fact, the only real beauty in the film is Bertolucci's
ultra-stylish/ ultra-cutesy photography, which ultimately does little to
enhance the story.  (Note to the producers:  *please* cut out the
superimposition of Lucy's poetry on the screen while she looks wistfully
into the camera.)  And lest you think I'm too negative, the only decent
character in the film is the terminally ill Alex (Jeremy Irons).  I have no
idea *why* he was in the movie, but his scenes were the only watchable
ones, and he's the only likable character.
     Bertolucci tries to win us over by showing a lot of naked people, but
I certainly wasn't sucked in.  In fact, I was just shocked at the amount of
lechery and sluttiness that goes on that is essentially *endorsed* by the
film.
     My favorite line in the picture:  "What am I doing here with these
kids?"  I couldn't have said it better myself.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
