Title
Review for Kavkazskij plennik (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ben Hoffman
War movies (actually anti-war) come in all sizes and shapes. Who can
forget APOCALYPSE NOW with its gigantic helicopters coming in as if
from outer space, firing at the Vietnamese on the ground, with Wagner's
Die Valkyrie enhancing the awful drama . . . or the magnificent DAS
BOOT with its story of the crew of a German submarine?  PRISONER OF
THE MOUNTAINS takes an entirely different, much more subdued but every
bit as powerful approach to tell of the craziness and inhumanity of
war. . . as well as the decent people who are caught up in the
insanity.
The time is today in the former USSR. It is set in a small town very
much like Chechnya where the inhabitants (Muslims) have been battling
their neighbors and the Russians on and off for hundreds of years;
where the villagers still live as they did thousands of years ago.  The
story, while based on Tolstoy's PRISONER OF THE CAUCASUS, (written as a
short story for children), has been brought up to date with new themes
introduced.
A Russian patrol is ambushed by some Muslim inhabitants of the village
with the object of capturing a Russian soldier whom they can use as a
hostage, a bargaining chip for a young villager being held prisoner by
the Russians.  The prisoner ia the son of the village's patriarch, an
impressive, tall man, Abdoul-Mourat (Jemal Sikharulidze).  Instead,
they inadvertently capture 2 Russians, Sacha (Oleg Menshikov) who has
become cynical from many years of soldiering and Vania (Sergei Bodrov,
Jr. who happens to be the director's son), a recent recruit.  Both
being prisoners, they have to learn to live together and to cooperate
with one another if they hope to escape.  In an escape attempt,
however, Sacha is killed.
Vania's life now hinges on the patriarch's son being exchanged for
him.  Vania's mother tells the Russian captain that she is going to
speak to Abdoul but before that can be accomplished the young Muslim
prisoner in an attempted escape is fatally shot.
A terrible confrontation now seems inevitable.  What choice does Abdoul
have but to revenge his son by killing Vania? The captain, for his
part, tells Vania's mother that if any harm comes to her son, the
Russians will exact a terrible price on the village.
On the Muslim side, the father, shotgun in hand, marches  Vanua in
front of him, prepared to kill him. .  What happens next is entirely
unexpected, shocking, frustrating. . . and will break your heart.
For several minutes after the film ended and the credits rolled I was
still in my seat unable to move.  A great movie!
Others in the cast include Susanna Mekhralieva as a young girl of the
village,  Alexei Zharkov as the Captain, and Valentina Fedotova as the
mother.
My own choice for the Best Foreign film of 1996.

Author
Pedro Sena
Like another film from last year, BURNT BY THE SUN, this one has to travel
through an area where sentiments are not comfortable to get its point
across. But unlike BURNT BY THE SUN which has irresistible charm in the form
of a young girl, this film has to live and die by how well it can convey a
sense of humanity in what otherwise is really a bad conflict, in an area
where the outsiders can rarely win in the first place.
But the price, the locals have to pay, is real sad, and terribly destructive
for all the parties concerned.
A group of Russian soldiers are ambushed in the Chenchen region, and two men
survive. The apparent reason for the attack seems to be a certain
Abdul-Mourant, who has decided to take the war in his own hands, since the
Russians are keeping his son in jail. He hopes to trade the two prisoners
for his son.  And the Russian contingent, does not seem interested in
parlaying a peace, and neither does it seem interested in seeing that the
older man gets to see his son.  By now, the Russian men in charge have
become complacent and couldn't careless about the war. They have the guns
and the power, and they probably figure that they can clean house at any
moment they feel like.
The two prisoners seem to do well, despite having a bad start. One is
aggressive, and the other a young one who failed to fire a shot in the
ambush. They befriend a young girl, Dina - Abdul's daughter, who takes care
of them and brings them food and water. And it is in the end Dina who really
has helped create the only level headed decision, going into the last minute
of the film. The hope is that her plight and goal will last and survive, for
Dina is much better centered than all of them.
In the middle of the film, one of the prisoners, the aggressive captain,
decides that he wants to escape, and he does so, and they survive, with the
exception that they do not know where they are going. He makes the mistake
of killing a shepherd, and this brings about a change in the film's
direction and a serious problem for Abdul. The town wants the prisoners
killed, or gotten rid of, as they are a walking problem.  But others have
better ideas. The rebels want to use the two Russians to find the field
mines and disarm them, which they do.
And in between, one comes to find that some locals are not happy either. One
has a son in the Russian army, stationed in town. And this elder is ashamed
that his own son is turning against the town's own people. And the old man's
indiscretion gets Abdul's son killed, and places the film in a terrible
dilemma.
The villagers have gotten even with the prisoner that killed the shepherd.
They killed him in the same spot. But the young soldier, has been a man of
peace, for the most part and has not displayed anything violent... he has
befriended Dina nicely, and he probably wishes that they would have had a
chance though she is young, but as Dina says, "around here they marry off
very young". Abdul, takes his last prisoner to the top of a mountain where
he will kill him... and in the film's turnabout ending, Abdul misses the
shot on purpose and goes home. His own personal war is over. He has lost his
son, but this young man is not the cause or the reason for the conflict. And
a new reason has been uplifted. But sadly, the film hints that the Russian
military leaders have other reasons in mind, as we see four bombing
helicopters fly over their very own, and not pick him up.
The innocent get screwed, in a puzzle and game, that in the end is
meaningless, and can only bring about hate and destruction..... story has it
that Boris Yeltsin saw this movie and immediately signed a pact to end the
war and help the region..
Based on a Tolstoy novel, this adaptation came around at the right time, and
brought about a point.
The film is very good, and has some very beautiful moments, specially in the
way that it displays the cultures through its own music. The Russian styles
are almost, by comparison, stupid and are seen through the prisoners minds
when they hear their Russian songs. But right after it, we often hear the
Moslem tinged musical style that the region has, and its power is much more
evident than the words in the Russian songs.
Full of beautiful cinematography, and moments, this is a very good film, and
really deserving of an Oscar nomination. But it fits into the category of
the films like Burnt by the Sun, as an anti war film, that really destroys
innocent lives needlessly. Still, it is strong, and well done.
Nice performances, and magnificent moments. Dina is excellent. As are Abdul
and Hassan's characters. The two soldiers come off as childish next to them.
But it is clear that this is just the way it is.

Author
Jun Yan
Spoiler Alert: The following review is full of spoilers.  Be aware and
stop while you can if you don't want to lose the suspense!!!
        It doesn't happen that often, but it happened today -- I walked
out of the cinema with shamelessly wet eyes and don't know how to explain
it.
         The film is the Russian production "Prisoner of the Mountains."
It's a story about 2 Russian soldiers captured in the civil war in Chechen
by some village people.  It is inspired by a Leo Tolstoy's short story
written 100 years ago.  Stunned by how perfectly it fits today's
situation, my friend who watch the film with me said afterward: "I thought
we were much civilized by now."  Well, we are.  Instead of horses, we have
tanks; intead of swords, we have machine guns and helicopters and bombs.
It is amazing how little we have evolved and such a theme about war and
human spirits in the war is so unexpectedly timeless. 
        In the beginning of the film, a group of Russian soldiers are
ambushed in the mountains by Muslin villagers.  Bruised but alive,
the only 2 survivors were taken hostage by a village elder Mehamed Murat,
who planns to trade them for his only son who is imprisoned by the
Russians in town.  Veteran actor Oleg Menshikov plays the older, more
cynical soldier Sasha;  while the director's son Sergei Bodrov Jr. plays a
naive young man newly drafted and inexperienced in the war.  Chained
together, the two men first do not get along, but soon develop a
friendship and bond in the desperate situation.  
        As time goes on, the 2 prisoners also grow fond of the village
people, among which are Murat's daughter, a cute teenage girl with some
very real headaches in life, and their mute guard Hassan, who has an
emotional story in his past.  Yet, as Sasha says to his young friend,
"It's war, Vanya, you have to (kill them)."  And he did, in an attempt to
escape.  It is chilling to see how the people who are basically good are
capable of killing in cold blood, from both sides.  
        Like an invisible hand, the powerful bureaucratic machine that
initiated the meaningless war has made a simple hostage trade into a
mission impossible.  Vanya's desperate mother comes down to the village
and fights with teeth and nails to save her son while Mehamed Murat trying
to save his own, who is a teacher, not a soldier, but just another
casualty of the war.  The showdown goes on and the situation gets more and
more impossible to resolve, until the writers of the film utterly
eliminate all the possible ways for Vanya to survive the fate of being
executed.  The ending is an incredible payoff that first took me aback,
but became more and more logical as I chew on it.  
        The acting and cinematography of this film are quite interesting.
They look very crude in the beginning and all the villagers look like
local people temporarily turned actors.  It is too real to be real for a
movie.  The cinematography is undoubtedly beautiful in the portrayal of
the magnificent mountains and harsh land where these villagers have lived
for hundreds of years.  But there is never an over-the-top shot that
shouts out "I'm Oscar material."  The filmmakers present the story, the
scenery and the Muslin villagers' lives and cuture with such realism,
patience and subtlety that they fooled me for at least half an hour.  The
only "visible" acting is Oleg Menshikov's Sasha as the flashy and witty
joker.  Everyone else is low-keyed and real as if walking out of a
documentary, yet incredibly interesting and intriguing.  The characters
are so real and presented to effortlessly that I never stop and think
about their authenticity until way after the movie.  No one in this film
is flat, yet no one is glamerous or conventional in any way.  Even the
weary commander is interesting with only several scenes.  And the actor
who plays Mehamed Murat (whose name is too long for me to remember) goes
through the entire film solemnly and almost expressionlessly.  It was not
until I stepped out of the cinema did I realize his great delivery of the
role.  Quite amazing.  Everything is done way too realistically that you
let the effort of the filmmakers and actors slip by unnoticed.  I have
never seen anything quite like this. 
        Above all, it's a story about issues beyond one war or the concept
of war.  It's a complicated study of human hearts and spirits, both the
great dignity and compassion AND the horror and stupidity we are capable
of.  It is a lesson, all too real, all too contemporary and all too
universal.  I think it can be done so perfectly only by Russian artists.
Anyone else who attempts to tell the same story would probably fall into
melodrama and unsincerity.  The theme and idea are presented so
effortlessly and so effectively that we cannot but sigh with appreciation.
        The theme is heavy, but delivered in a quiet and smooth way.  The
middle part of the film is actually quite humorous (a trait I thought
Russians didn't have).  The ending is captivating, surprising but logical.
It is sort of happy, but also sad, and above that, it's uplifting.  It
makes me feel better about us and mankind as a whole.  It presents hope
after all for the world that maybe, perhaps, we can still make it out of
this swamp of killing, war, hatred and ignorance and idiocy.  
        It is a great film, an unforgetable experience.  I give it an A+.
Go see it.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sergei Bodrov Jr., Oleg Menshikov, Jemal Sikharulidze, 
      Susanna Mekhralieva, Alexander Bureyev, Valentina Fedotova
Director: Sergei Bodrov
Producers: Sergei Bodrov, Boris Giller
Screenplay: Arif Aliev, Sergei Bodrov, Boris Giller based on the short 
      story "Prisoner in the Caucasus" by Leo Tolstoy
Cinematography: Pavel Lebeshev
Music: Leonid Desyatnikov
U.S. Distributor: Orion Classics
In Russian with subtitles
     Lyrical and evocative, PRISONER OF THE MOUNTAINS represents a 
balanced and telling examination of the absurdity of war.  Director 
Sergei Bodrov uses an intimate tapestry depicting two Russian captives 
and their small band of captors to illustrate the similarities of human 
beings on either side of the battle lines.  There's nothing 
fundamentally new about this observation, of course, but the manner in 
which PRISONER OF THE MOUNTAINS presents it is unique.
     The film's first priority is to familiarize us with the characters.  
What transpires in the second half only has impact if we understand the 
motivations and aspirations of each of the main players.  So, after a 
brief opening sequence showing the physical examinations of would-be 
recruits to the Russian army, the scene shifts to the Caucasus 
mountains, where Chechnyan rebels ambush a group of Russian soldiers.  
Two -- Vanya (the director's son, Sergei Bodrov Jr.) and Sacha (Oleg 
Menshikov, BURNT BY THE SUN) -- are taken prisoners.  The patriarch of 
the village, Abdul-Mourant (Jemal Sikharulidze), wants to trade the 
Russians for his son, who is a captive of the army.  But mistrust on 
both sides scuttles a deal.  Unwilling to give up his son so easily, 
Abdul-Mourant demands that Vanya and Sacha write to their families so 
that their mothers can attempt to broker a settlement.  Meanwhile, the 
captor's young daughter, Dina (the delightful Susanna Mekhralieva), 
takes an almost-proprietary interest in the prisoners.
     Nearly every interpersonal dynamic in this film is fascinating.  
The best-explored is that of Vanya and Sacha, who, although they're 
fellow countrymen, have vastly different outlooks on the world.  Vanya 
is young and green.  He has never fired a shot at anyone, and is now 
desperately afraid that he will be killed before he ever gets a chance 
to experience life.  Sacha, on the other hand, is a veteran.  A career 
soldier who joined the army because he was "stupid, loved guns, and 
needed money", he's short-tempered and jaded.  But, as the period of 
captivity wears on, his hard shell deteriorates, and he becomes fiercely 
protective of his naive compatriot.
     Abdul-Mourant is painted as a fair, but emotionless, man.  Of his 
three children, one is dead, another is a captive, and only his youngest 
remains with him.  He refuses steadfastly to interact with his prisoners 
on any emotional level, leaving their care in the hands of his mute son-
in-law, Hassan (Alexander Bureyev).  Abdul-Mourant has no love of 
Russians, and, if not for the promise of getting his son back, he would 
have no compunction about shooting both of them.
     Dina, Abdul-Mourant's 12-year old daughter, befriends the captives, 
but never loses sight of their relative positions.  She's a solemn, 
serious girl who takes pity on them, and gradually begins to see them as 
human beings.  But she has been hardened by the centuries old struggle 
and is in many ways less naive than Vanya, with whom she develops an 
oddly tender relationship.
     There's an old saying that goes something like:  "We have met the 
enemy and they are us."  Words to that effect could easily describe the 
growth process undergone by the characters in PRISONER OF THE MOUNTAINS 
as they come to understand how little there is that separates them.  
Often, it's the little things that emphasize the connection.  Vanya 
repairs Abdul-Mourant's watch.  When she comes to bargain for her son's 
life, Vanya's mother tells the patriarch that she, like his son, is a 
teacher.  Dina offers the Russians bread and water.  Vanya, in turn, 
makes a toy for her.  The participants on both sides of the struggle 
have to consider what the word "enemy" means and whether the phrase 
"It's war" is a good enough justification for a killing.
     The movie, which was actually filmed in the Caucasus mountains, 
introduces a world that is likely to be unfamiliar to most Western 
viewers.  PRISONER OF THE MOUNTAINS' camerawork effectively captures the 
setting, evoking a strong sense of place through views of mist-shrouded 
mountains, rough, rocky terrain, and green pastures.  This is a timeless 
land that dwarfs human concerns, and it explains much about the 
hardiness of the inhabitants.
     PRISONER OF THE MOUNTAINS makes us think about the absurdity of 
war.  It brings the toll of battle down to a personal level, but without 
the bitterness and rancor evident in American productions like PLATOON 
and APOCALYPSE NOW.  There's quite a bit of low-key humor to be found 
here, which may account for the tone being lighter than the subject 
matter might suggest.  However, the final, darkly ironic sequence of the 
film drives home Bodrov's point with brutal clarity.  The machines of 
war don't take into account the human pain that they inflict.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
