Title
Review for Just One Time (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     Just One Time has that Sex in the City feeling -- if only they
never left the East Village.
     A New York indie romantic comedy in the classic vein, Just One Time
is writer/producer/director/star Lane Janger's fifth time around as a
filmmaker but is his first major in front of the camera.  To my
surprise, he's not bad -- which probably means the source material is
ripped from his personal headlines (but who am I to say?).
     The story's got a sitcom feel: NYC firefighter Anthony (Janger) is
about to get married to fiancée Amy (Joelle Carter).  But Anthony's
life-long dream is to be in bed with two women getting it on.  He pushes
and pushes Amy and finally she gives in, on the condition that he do the
same for her with another guy.  He agrees; wacky relationship issues
ensue.
     Most memorable in the film are The Other Guy and The Other Girl,
Guillermo Díaz and Jennifer Esposito (Summer of Sam) respectively.  Both
are nutty and memorable supporting stars, not to mention better actors
altogether.  In fact, the only real dead fish in the cast is Carter, who
imbues Amy with, well, nothing much.  Emotionally dead, it is
inconceivable that feisty Anthony would really want anything to do with
her.  In fact, Just One Time would have been a much better film if
Anthony had ended up running off with Díaz's Victor instead.
     But alas, happy and expected endings are the rule of the day, and
sure enough, that's what we get.  The era of "straight man dabbles in
gay culture" is no longer taboo, and movies like Trick, Better than
Chocolate, and countless others that have taken us down this road in
recent months just don't cut it any more.  It's not a bad way to spend
90 minutes, but not fantastic cinema either.
Director: Lane Janger
Producer: Lane Janger, Jasmine Kosovic, Exile Ramirez
Writer: Lane Janger, Jennifer Vandever
Starring: Lane Janger, Joelle Carter, Guillermo Díaz, Jennifer Esposito,
Vincent Laresca, Domenick Lombardozzi, David Lee Russek
http://www.cowboybi.com/jot/home.htm
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
