Title
Review for Oliver & Company (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As Disney loves to do, it is rereleasing to the big screen, an
animated movie it has yet to release on video, OLIVER & COMPANY (1988).
Why they decided to hold this one back for another theatrical run
before it makes its inevitable transition to tape is beyond me.  This
is one of the weakest Disney movies in years.
     The plot is that a thieving, street smart animal gang is led by a
human named Fagan (Dom DeLuise).  Fagan is given three days by a cigar
smoking evil character called Mr. Sykes (Robert Loggia).  Mr. Sykes's
rhetoric is full of killing people and cement body suits.  The animal
gang operates much like a street gang and when one of its members wants
to leave, he is pressured to stay.  Why these juvenile delinquents and
their even worse masters are considered appropriate material for the
3-8 set that is most likely to see this movie is a conundrum.
     The animals in the gang are led by a mutt named Dodger (Billy
Joel).  In the gang is an intellectual bulldog called Francis (Roscoe
Lee Browne) who likes to watch Shakespeare on a stolen TV, a highly
ethnic mouse called Tito (Cheech Marin), and several others.  One day
an orphaned and adorable kitty called Oliver (Joey Lawrence) follows
Dodger home and is adopted into his den of thieves.  Dodger eventually
will allow that, "hey, you're okay for a cat," but at first considers
him a pest.
     Mr. Sykes gives the gang 3 days to steal a large sum of money or
he will murder Fagan.  In a frightening scene, he closes the electric
car window on Fagan's neck which realistically begins to strangle him
to death.  His Dobermans, Roscoe  (Taurean Blacque) and DeSoto (Carl
Weintraub), snare at all of them and look like they will rip their
throats up at any moment.  This is a little kids' show?
     While the gang is attempting to steal the radio from rich little
Jenny's (Natalie Gregory) limo, Oliver is found and taken home by
Jenny.  Her overly pampered poodle with a massive ego, Georgette (Bette
Midler), is not amused and wants Oliver out of her house.  Georgette's
motto is, "Perfect isn't easy, but it's me."
     There are two good characters in the show, Jenny and Oliver, but
most are mediocre.  The ones of Fagan and Mr. Sykes are inappropriate
for young kid's movies.  The film would have been stronger if both of
these characters had been written out and the gang had led totally by
Dodger.  Moreover, Fagan is so poorly written as to be an
embarrassment.
     The script has few ideas and is bad need of a rewrite.  The
paucity of ideas is addressed by introducing unnecessarily frightening
images.  Do we really have to have a scene of a small girl tied to a
chair by a sinister older man while Dobermans snarl at her and look
like they will maim her shortly?
     The drawings are colorful and pretty, especially in the night
sequences.  Overall, however, they saved money way too often by making
scenes where almost nothing moves, and they excessively pan the cameras
to create the feel of action.  The music (J. A. C. Redford) itself is
full of a heavy beat that will keep the kids moving with it, but the
songs are imminently forgettable.
     OLIVER & COMPANY runs a quick 1:12.  It is rated G, but I would be
very careful with kids under 5 lest they be significantly scared.  My
son Jeffrey (almost 7) liked the movie as he almost always does, but
his Dad was not impressed.  I do not recommend it, but I generously
award it * 1/2 because I don't want to be too tough on any film with a
cute kitty.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        A year before Disney began their streak of high-quality 
animated films like THE LITTLE MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE 
BEAST and THE LION KING, out came OLIVER AND COMPANY, 
which lives in infamy as one of the most mediocre cartoon movies 
ever. As with the vast majority of Disney cartoons, this is based 
on a classic of literature, Charles Dickens' OLIVER TWIST. Also in 
the Disney tradition, this features talking animals in all the major 
parts.
        OLIVER AND COMPANY takes place in present day 
New York, Oliver being a cute orange kitten with the voice of Joey 
Lawrence. Abandoned and homeless, he meets up with the dog 
Dodger (voice of Billy Joel -- yes, you read me correctly) to steal 
some hot dogs. That's right, hot hot dogs. Dodger doublecrosses 
Oliver, saying something like "only the good die young," and runs 
off with the hot dogs. Cue the cute chase scene and a song from 
Dodger.
        The two end up in the headquarters of Dodger's two-bit 
thievery gang, which consists of a bunch of dogs, including a fiesty 
Chihuahua voiced by Cheech Marin. They live with one of the token 
humans in the film, Fagin, a low-life who has three days to pay off 
the evil Mr. Sykes. That means Oliver and the dogs have to work 
extra hard to rob the New York citizens blind, in that cute, musical 
Disney way, of course.
        One of their scams involves having the English bulldog in 
the gang pretend to get hit by a car while Chihuahua Cheech makes 
off with the car radio. This time, it's a limo with a cute little rich
girl 
in it, and Oliver gets left behind in the limo. The cute little girl falls
in love with the cute little kitty and takes it home to the mansion, 
where the egomaniacal French poodle is displaced from her position 
as favorite pet. So she conspires to get rid of Oliver at the same time 
the other dogs conspire to break in and rescue Oliver.
        The cartoon goes on after that, not too much longer after 
that, mind you. It's only 72 minutes long, but that's one of the more 
attractive selling points. The movie is short on plot and a little too 
long on the songs. "Under the Sea" and "Hakuna Matata" they ain't, 
even if the Piano Man is at the helm of most of them. There's no real 
reason to seek this one out unless you've already grown sick of every 
other Disney animated classic. It's no accident that OLIVER AND 
COMPANY took eight years to be released on video.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!
