Title
Review for Substitute, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Orion)
Directed by     Robert Mandel
Written by      Roy Frumkes, Rocco Simonelli, and Alan Ormsby
Cast            Tom Berenger, Diane Venora, Ernie Hudson, Glenn Plummer,
                Marc Anthony, William Forsythe, Luis Guzman
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    120 min.
Reviewed at     Carmike Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (21APR96)
     Anyone who has ever taught public school should get a (mild) charge
out of this one.  Tom Berenger stars as an out-of-work "operative" who
take his girlfriend's place at an inner-city high-school, after an
assault (on her) by a gang member.  He traces the attack back to a
student, quickly arranges some fake credentials, and shows up the next
day as "Mr. Smith." Just like that.  Predictable, poorly lit, and
possessing a tone that too easily shifts on a dime (from revenge fantasy
to message movie to all points in-between), THE SUBSTITUTE is best
enjoyed at face value.
     The ensemble acting is surprisingly sincere, with Berenger lean and
mean in the title role.  (He reminds me of how the Marvel Comics'
character The Punisher would behave on-screen, had he not been played by
the unfortunate Dolph Lundgren in that unfortunate 1990 movie.) The film
also has a strong sense humor, right down to the straight-faced
Schwarzenegger accent attempted by Berenger.  Of course, to enjoy this
nonsense, you have accept a harsh moral stance that allows, among other
things, all drug dealers to be shot on sight.  Exploitative?  Yes.
Gratuitous?  Yes.  Just remember to check your testosterone level before
entering.
     THE SUBSTITUTE kicks effective butt for about an hour and a half,
at which point the story finally-- inevitably?-- begins to repeat
itself.  The last twenty minutes are the worst:  Yet Another Showdown,
except this one so poorly lit that we can't tell who is shooting whom.
Leave a half-hour early and you won't miss a thing.  Really.  Now, if
only someone had thought to make DANGEROUS MINDS with Linda Hamilton
instead of Michelle Pfieffer.  She'd be back.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE SUBSTITUTE 1/2 *. Directed by Robert Mandel.  Written by
Roy Frumkes and Rocco Simonelli. Photography, Bruce Surtees. Editing,
Alex Mackie. Cast: Tom Berenger (Shale), Diane Venora (Jane Hetzko),
Ernie Hudson (Rolle), William Forsythe, Glenn Plummer, Marc Anthony,
Cliff de Young, Sharon Corley, Ricghard Brooks, Raymond Cruz, Rodney
Grant, Luis Guznman, Wet al. A Live Entertainment release. 114 minutes.
Rated R (extreme violence, bad language)
Accept no "Substitute." This blackboard jungle movie has almost nothing
to recommend it.
Shale (Tom Berenger) is a mercenary soldier who's just decided to hang
up his Uzi and is visiting in Miami his girlfriend Jane (Diane
Venora).  She teaches in a high school that's like an armed camp  plus a
hotbed of big-time drug dealing. Jane, gutsy and outspoken, incurs the
wrath of the Numero Uno gang-leader who has another male animal break
her leg.
Shale wants to investigate the bad guys, who are legion. As he has
done jobs for the CIA, he knows all about fabricating credentials, or so
we are to believe. Posing as an Ivy Leaguer, he appears at the school
and takes over Jane's class as a substitute.
In the tired old formula, he discerns the humanity in some of the kids,
becomes (natch) liked by them. His methods combine strong-arm
no-nonsense and the pathetic way of speaking to the students in "their"
language, as when he explains the Vietnam War as "the gangs in the North
wanted to take over the gangs in the South." In my book this comes under
the rubric of the Power of Primitive Thinking.
What Shale's investigations uncover is corruption in high places and
low, an industrial-strength drug-ring that extends well beyond the
school, murder and other such niceties. 
This leads to the film's real "raison d'etre," and "piece de
resistance," a long, bloody confrontation between the bad guys and the
good. The latter are Shale's motley team of disbanded mercenaries, now
re-recruited in Wild Bunch or Dirty Dozen fashion. The battle is
absurdly unbelievable in its strategies, heroics and high-tech
equipment. 
The film is an Equal Opportunity production. The huge majority of the
students are minorities: black, Cuban, Hispanic, Latino, American Indian
-- and since so many of them are gangsters, the portrait of such
minorities is neither P.C. nor kind. Of course there are a few people
who act with honesty and courage, but this feels like tokenism.
This is a cheap exploitation movie that's far cry from the fine "The
Blackboard Jungle" of 1955, the movie whose title became the expression
for delinquent and defiant high schoolers. That film was seen by some
American authorities here, and especially abroad, as showing a most
undesirable slice of US life. I shudder to think what "The Substitute"
's message will be for foreign countries.
While without saving graces, the film has some performers who are better
than their material. Venora sends good vibes in her unglamorous but
appealing small part.  Hudson has presence as the school principal with
a not so secret secret. Teacher Plummer contributes some good
African-American activism.
As for Berenger, in the early days of his career, he was often referred
to as the next Paul Newman. This did not come to pass. He is far from
untalented, but he's been in insignificant movies, with just a few
exceptions: "The Big Chill," "Platoon" (he was Oscar-nominated for Best
Supporting Actor), "Born on the Fourth of July," and the little-seen
"The Field" and "At Play in the Fields of the Lord."
In "Sniper"(1993), Berenger played a military hitman, a terminator of
drug-traffickers in a South American jungle.  It was not a good film,
but if Berenger has to be cast in more action movies, good scripts and
direction could at least make him a hero a la Stallone, minus pectorals,
plus brains.

Author
The Flying Inkpot
Director: Robert Mandel
Written by: Roy Frumkes Alan Ormsby Rocco Simonelli
Cast: Tom Berenger, Diane Venora, Ernie Hudson
Rating: ** out of *****
Run Time: Approx. 114 Minutes
The premise of this movie is, well, pretty far-fetched. Tom
Berenger plays Shale, a mercenary who is temporarily out of work
(those fools at the CIA have denied his existence just because he and his
buddies botched a job in Cuba). Fortunately, his girl friend (Diane Venora),
a teacher at Christopher Columbus High School in Miami, gets her knee cap
broken by a disgruntled student, creating a job opening for Shale as a
substitute teacher. Not telling his girl friend, who might object on
pedagogical grounds, he creates a number of fake higher degrees for himself
(from Yale, Harvard, Princeton, et al) and begins his tenure as a high
school teacher.
The students (junkies, drug dealers, gang members, sleazy sluts, ice-pick
wielders...you get the picture) don't really take to him right away, so he
hits one in the face with a can and breaks a few fingers. This gets their
attention to a certain extent, so he tells them the story of the Vietnam
War: "See, some homeboys from the North tried to muscle in on the turf of
the homeboys from the South." Oh yeah, now they can dig it; the problem is
just that nobody ever explained it properly before.
But wait! There are drugs being dealt in the school itself! And behind the
whole scheme, in cahoots with the head gang, the KOD (no, not "cod", but
"Knights of Destruction"...really!), is none other than...the upright,
ex-cop principal, played by the forgotten ghostbuster, Ernie Hudson! So
Shale does what any good teacher would do. He gets his buddies together,
they gather together a bunch of bazookas and other major weapons,
explosives, and cool stuff like that, and they have a big showdown against
the drug dealers and KOD at the high school.
OK, so the premise is not just far-fetched, it's downright dumb. If this
were a Hong Kong action comedy, we might just accept it, but it takes itself
far too seriously to be truly fun. Oh, it has its moments; how one can truly
hate a movie in which huge (really HUGE) amounts of cocaine are delivered in
school busses? And to be fair, it is almost never really boring, as the
action is interrupted by only short sequences of actual story.
But over all, this is pretty much a made-for-TV movie with more (and bigger)
explosions and more foul language. In fact, it reminded me of "Miami Vice"
without the production values, babes in skimpy bikinis, and pastels. If you
can sneak into the theater without paying, go for it. Otherwise, wait for
video.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tom Berenger, Diane Venora, Ernie Hudson, Glenn Plummer, 
      Marc Anthony, William Forsythe, Luis Guzman
Director: Robert Mandel
Producers: Morrie Eisenmann and Jim Steele
Screenplay: Roy Frumkes, Rocco Simonelli, and Alan Ormsby
Cinematography: Bruce Surtees
Music: Gary Chang
U.S. Distributor: Orion Pictures
     At Miami's Columbus High, classes aren't the only things students 
cut.  Since it's difficult to get guns through the metal detectors, 
knives seem to be the weapon of choice.  Not that a minor inconvenience 
like a metal detector will stop any really determined delinquent.  
Plenty of firearms are shot off -- all in "self defense", of course.  In 
fact, by the time this brainless action flick has ricocheted to a 
conclusion, someone has procured a rocket launcher for use in the halls.
     Tom Berenger plays soldier of fortune Shale, an ex-covert operative 
for the U.S. government.  After the failure of his last mission, a raid 
into Cuba, Shale and his compatriots have been retired.  Now unemployed, 
Shale ventures into the teaching profession when his girlfriend, Jane 
(Diane Venora), is beaten up by a sumo wrestler-type hired by one of her 
disgruntled students.  Shale has decided to use his multiple talents to 
clean up Columbus High.  When his buddies from the service learn that 
drugs, and therefore money, are involved, they're eager to help out.  
Soon, this group of mercenaries has infiltrated the high school, and, 
with the introduction of drug kingpins, members of a gang called the 
"Kings of Destruction", and a corrupt principal, the stage is set for a 
violent confrontation.
     This is really a Steven Seagal movie with Tom Berenger doing his 
best Seagal impression (although, even at his worst, Berenger has about 
300% more range than the wooden-faced action star).  Director Robert 
Mandel (F/X) brings a sense of wry, warped humor to THE SUBSTITUTE -- he 
rarely takes anything too seriously -- but it's not enough to save the 
film.  Admittedly, parts are fun in a mindless, visceral sort of way, 
but the whole is a lot worse than the sum of its parts.
     Setting a vigilante thriller in a high school, even the High School 
from Hell, might seem like a bad idea.  After all, since the point of 
such a movie is for Berenger to kick butt and kill people, his options 
would appear to be limited by the presence of so many juveniles.  Never 
fear, though.  The clever screen writers have found a way to incorporate 
lots of nasty adults into the mix.  There's also a group of really evil 
kids who look like they're in their mid-twenties, and are allowed first 
crack at Shale before he throws them out the library window.
     This is no MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS or DEAD POETS' SOCIETY, and no one is 
going to mistake Berenger for Richard Dreyfuss or Robin Williams.  In 
fact, with all the firepower employed in and around the school, THE 
SUBSTITUTE might easily have been called GOODBYE MR. CLIPS.  At one 
point, there's actually an attempt to espouse some kind of message about 
kids breaking the cycle of violence.  "Gang funerals -- is that what you 
want for yourselves?  For your kids?" demands Shale in one 
heartbreakingly poignant scene. (Brings a tear to the eye, doesn't it?)  
Not much is done with this theme beyond the redemption of a few minor 
characters, which is probably a good thing, since audiences don't come 
to this sort of movie for drama.
     THE SUBSTITUTE has its moments, all of which fall in the realm of 
high camp.  One scene not to be missed:  Shale, attempting to get his 
class' attention, roars, "I'm the warrior chief!  I'm the merciless god 
who rules over everything that stirs in my universe!"  It's a hilarious 
moment, and I'm reasonably certain the director intended for it to be 
so.  Nevertheless, aside from a lot of only moderately-satisfying 
violence, THE SUBSTITUTE comes across as rather lame.  It's not boring, 
but that dubious qualification isn't enough to earn the movie a passing 
grade.
