Title
Review for Snow White (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Clara Duong
The Grimm Brothers' Snow White, The (1997) - Review by Clara Duong
Produced by: Interscope Communications / PolyGram Filmed Entertainment 
Effects by: Fantasy II Film Effects (special visual effects) 
Directed by Michael Cohn
Written by Jacob Ludwig Carl Grimm and Wilhelm Carl Grimm
Screenplay by Thomas E. Szollosi and Deborah Serra
Cinematography by Mike Southon
Music by John Ottman
Production Design by Gemma Jackson
Costume Design by Marit Allen
Summary:
Also Known As "Snow White in the Black Forest" and "Snow White: A Tale
of Terror" with the catch phrase "The Fairytale is Over".  You all know
the story - beautiful Queen wishes for a daughter with skin
as white as snow, hair as black as ebony, lips as red as blood.  The
Queen dies, the husband remarries a beautiful and incredibly vain woman
and both Snow White and Evil Queen loathe each other on sight.  Snow
White flees into the forest to escape from death and the Evil Queen is
dogged in her attempts to annihilate her beauteous step-dauther.
Review:
I've always been a sucker for fairytales and their retellings.  If
you've read Robin McKinley's 'Beauty', 'Rose Daughter' or 'Outlaws of
Sherwood' you realise that a good story can be told again and again in
many different ways.  While I'm one of those people who isn't ashamed to
admit loving the Disney versions of fairytales, in light of the fact
that Disney always changes the ending, I've always considered them to be
their own sub-category.  It's always intriguing to get back to the
original 'darker' roots of a fairystory.
"Snow White in the Black Forest" manages to capture the 'traditional'
telling of the story while reflecting the decidedly evil and bleak
undertones of the original story as told by the Grimm Brothers.  The
film begins with Lilliana who is riding with her husband Fredrick (Sam
Neill).  Lilliana is pregnant and appears to be in labour, evidenced by
Sam Neill feebley attempting to comfort her.  When the carriage is
overturned due to chance misfortune or Dark Fate, the dying Queen can
think only of her child and pleads with her husband (in a manner
reminiscent of the folk song 'Queen Jane') to save the unborn child.
Sam Neill is playing the character he seems to have been lumped with
lately - limp, ineffectual and vaguely pathetic. He was the same
character in that hideous movie 'Event Horizon' until the point when he
became psychotic, scarred and eyeball-less.  He doesn't contribute much
to the film as a whole except to make it credible that he would become
enslaved by the charms of the evil Claudia.  
Sigourney Weaver is outstanding as Claudia.  Beautiful, enigmatic and
haunted, Sigourney brings a depth to the role of the Evil Queen which
has been lacking in other versions of the story.  Weaver portrays the
Queen as
sympathetically as is possible considering the constraints of the role.
In the beginning, she appears to make genuine efforts to make Lilli
(Snow White) like her and she appears to be tortured by the memory of
her mother who was reviled by the society in which she lived.  Another
bonus is being able to hear Weaver singing beautiful operatic arias in a
pure voice - I had no idea that she could could sing.
All that being said, Claudia is Evil and after giving birth to a
stillborn son, her sanity takes a turn for the worse and she is
convinced by her Mirror that Lilli is the source of all her
misfortunes.  It is never clear whether the mirror is an independent
source of evil, whether it is a reflection of Claudia's inner evil or
whether it is a sinister spectre of Claudia's dead mother.  Driven by
the Mirror, she seeks Lilli's death, sending her mute brother Gustav out
to murder the unsuspecting Lilli.
Monica Keena as Lilli is exquisite, innocent and a trifle bland.
Nonetheless, Snow White isn't supposed to be a towering spokeswoman for
women's emancipation.  Symbolically she is the personification of
innocence and beauty and Keena does this well with wide-eyed
bewilderment and helplessness.  Lilli stumbles into the forest and
instead of meeting 7 cherubic dwarves, she encounters a group of
unwashed, surly criminals (one of them is a dwarf though).  Her arrival
brings nothing but misfortune onto the gang of criminals who have
already endured a great deal as a result of the harsh laws in force at
that time.  
An interesting twist is the 'hero' character.  'Prince Charming' in this
piece is Peter Gutenberg, a young doctor played with stiff, pomposity by
David Conrad.  Peter seems to be sexually attracted to Claudia and we
never really get a sense of any genuine connection between his character
and Lilli's.  Lilli on the other hand is drawn to one of the criminals
in the forest by the name of Will and the two of them share a number of
very eloquent and rather romantic staring sessions.  
The characterisation of the criminals in the forest was one of the
things that I didn't like.  I thought that they were the most
interesting aspect of the film and yet the time spent on their stories
was extremely brief and tantalising to say the least.  I realise that
it's the story of "Snow White" and not a Canterbury Tales in which each
character is given a large amount of time to recount a story, but it
would have been interesting to find out more about each of the
characters.  Will's character with his scarred face and back had a story
that was only hinted at briefly.
This is a very beautiful-looking film.  It captures the essence of
darkness perfectly, but I think it would have been better if it had been
longer.  The ending was a trifle abrupt, stories remained untold and the
little glimpses we receive into various characters was slightly
frustrating.  With the exception of Sigourney Weaver's singing, the
score and soundtrack is unmemorable.  Despite the shortcomings, I do
believe that this film is worth watching and very aborbing while it
lasts.

Author
Jun Yan
To tell you the truth, I grew up with fairy tales -- but which girl
didn't?  Unlike the cenored and sugar-coated Disney version, the Grimm
Brothers' collection of folklores and fairy tales are quite bloody and
dark according to today's standard.  What made me interested in watching
this film as an adult is the curiosity to see the ruthless and brutal
nature of the story itself and today's interpretation.  
As we all know, Snow White's mother wished for a baby with skin as white
as the snow and lips as red as the blood.  The film opens as the Bavarian
nobleman Hoffman (Sam Neill) riding home in a carriage with his wife
Lilliana, who is pregnant.  A terrible accident happens, and he has to cut
her open to save the baby -- the first bloody element.  Snow White --
Lilliana Hoffman grows into the beautiful little girl her dead mother had
wished for.  Unfortunately, her father soon remarries and takes home a
beautiful wife that occupies all his affection and attention.  Lady
Claudia (Sigorney Weaver), to the contrary of the usual opinions, does not
start as a witch.  She tries to be friendly and get along with the young
Lillie, without much success.  She does not abuse her stepdaughter.
Although tension remains between the two women as Lillie grows up, things
remain civilized, until nine years later, when Lady Claudia finally
becomes pregnant with a boy, a possible heir.  
Claudia's sanity quickly degenerates as his baby boy dies at birth.  It is
at this time that her Magic Mirror starts talking to her.  This seems to
be a clear cut case of postpartum manic depression with psychosis.  She is
suddenly convinced that Lillie is responsible for her boy's death.  This
deviates from the original story's theme about female rivalry and fear for
loss of youth and good looks.  The interesting thing is the lack of
supernatural elements up till this point, in which the talking mirror may
as well be Claudia's hallucination rather than some evil force.  I was
quite fascinated by the attempts of the filmmakers to explain the fairy
tale in a realistic way.  
Things change when Lady Claudia begins to practice black magic and
witchcraft.  She sends her mute brother Gustav to kill Lillie in the
forest and bring back her heart.  Of course she escapes, and runs into
seven... nope, not dwarfs, but seven miners with shady past, among which
only one is a dwarf.  None of them is cute, sweet, funny or friendly.
Unable to find her way home, she gradually gets along with them while
Claudia continues trying to do some remote killing with little success.
Although young, naive and innocent, Lillie is another example of "die
hard" character.  
At this point, the film becomes strangely dark and bizzare, as Claudia
turns madder and madder.  I was bored by the predictability and weirdness;
I started to doubt about the point of remaking a well know fair tale.
What's interesting, however, is the attraction that develops between
Lillie and one of the miners Will (Gil Bellows).  I could not figure out
what they are going to do with it.  
As we all know, Claudia finaly sets out to poison Snow White with an
apple, and succeeds.  The prince in this film is not a prince, but a
physician and family friend Dr. Peter Guttenberg (David Conrad).  He finds
her, but she is dead.  In the mean time, a few twisted things happened at
home in the Hofffman household.  I was really growing impatient by then as
the whole thing seems to be a disappointment afterall.  However, the plot
makes a few neat turns and delivers some interesting twist.  The last
20 minutes or so has shadows from "The Terminator", "The Abyss"
("Breeeeeath!"), "Portrait of Dorin Gray", "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and
some generic horror flicks.  Although definitely not original, it
nevertheless surprised me mildly given the situation.Plus, as a 90's fairy
tale, the heroine is bound to kick some butts rather than waits to be
rescued.  With some graphic moments, this is definitely not for kids. 
What's good about the film is the occasional unpredictability mixed with
cliched elements from the original story, and its attempt to instill
reality into the interpretation.  The production design and costumes are
quite lousy and ... eh... inexpensive -- but I guess it's a made-for-tv
movie afterall.  Nothing impressive.  
The actings are at best mediocre, except for Weaver, who carries subtlety
and complexity in the first half and throughout her transformation, but
unfortunately goes over the top as her character turns hopelessly evil and
insane.  
For the standard of tv movies, it deserves a B+, but as a movie, I give it
a generous C, because I'm a sucker for new interpretation  of old tales,
any time.  I did enjoy it.  

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
The classic fairy tale, fed ("Fargo" style) through a tree shredder.
The media-astute amongst you will recognise "The Grimm Brothers' Snow 
White" as the latest in the string of "X's Y".  For example:
It is also a member of that dubious class known as Films With Many 
Names (also known as Films That Are Not Very Good), scuttling around 
like an international master criminal under various nom-de-plumes:
which evokes images of sequel films like "What Snow White Did Next" 
and "Snow White From Navarone".  This schizophrenic identity is 
indicative of a picture that would like to reinvent an old myth, but 
instead just slaps on a fresh coat of paint and sticks a huge 
extension out the back.  It's not exactly a bad film, but one that is 
not as brave as it needed to be.
We commence the film with a tragic carriage accident somewhere in the 
faux Middle Ages.  Lord Friedrich Hoffman (Sam Neill, no - really) is 
distraught at losing his beautiful wife and vows he will not show any 
facial expressions until he can remarry and advance the plot.  But at 
least he still has his daughter, the utterly resistible Lilli (Taryn 
Davis).  You see, she is named after her unfortunate mother.  Holy 
Freudian overtones, Batman!
Sure 'nuff, after some years Lilli is replaced by another actor (the 
even more resistible Monica Keena) and the Lord Friedrich announces he 
will get married to the mysterious Claudia (Sigourney Weaver).  With 
la Sigourney flouncing around the castle, complete with malevolent 
mute manservant and a wardrobe that occasionally blinds the cleaning 
staff, things start to get interesting at last.  La Sigourney wants to 
have a child with Friedrich (which is one method of determining 
whether he's alive or not, I guess) and Lilli pouts a lot.  Finally, 
one of Lilli's tantrums causes her step-mother to miscarry.  La 
Sigourney cranks the acting dial up to "11" and storms dishevelled 
around the castle, wielding her manservant liberally and talking to 
the mirror in her wardrobe.  (The mirror's reflection incidentally, 
does a nice fuzzy lens effect that William Shatner would be proud of.)  
She tries to resurrect her dead baby, casts a sleeping spell on the 
castle (inadvertently resolving the issue of whether Sam Neill is 
conscious or not) and casts Lilli out into the deep woods, distracting 
her would-be beau, the wholly unremarkable Dr Peter Gutenberg (David 
Conrad, in a career-stalling appearance).
It is about here that the film's inventions start getting problematic.  
In the earlier scenes, Claudia is sympathetically drawn as a 
stepmother that is trying hard with a new and uncooperative daughter.  
Then the daughter's actions cause her to derail, drool wildly and 
start dabbling in the dark arts.  As in "Bram Stoker's Dracula", we 
are left with the perplexing issue of whether our villain is a damned 
vile creature, or just someone with a few issues to resolve.  
("Tonight on Oprah - Satan, Master of All Evil or Just 
Misunderstood?")  Either way, it seems clear the actions of the bratty 
Lilli has pushed her onto this path, which allows no happy nor 
satisfying conclusion.
(Also problematic is the mirror charming Claudia with talk of how 
beautiful she is, and then presenting the shocking news that there is 
one more beautiful than her - Lilli.  I mean: Hello?  We're talking 
about Sigourney Weaver here?  The mirror doesn't have to like to her!  
And you're comparing her unfavourably to the whiny, pasty Lilli?)
In the forest, Lilli encounters not the Seven Dwarfs but the Six 
Impoverished and Politically Disenfranchised Homeboys.  One of them is 
actually short, but if you were a Freudian you might think that their 
lack of power and - hence - metaphorical economic and civil 
emasculation, make them "dwarfs" in a political sense.  (No, that 
didn't fly for me either.)  The Six (And Shortly To Be Five then Four) 
Homeboys fight over whether they should kill, ransom or protect Lilli.  
And it doesn't matter how many times you watch the film, they always 
make the wrong decision.
Needless to say, Lilli with the help of her homies eventually caps her 
evil but well-intentioned stepmother, La Sigourney chewing scenery all 
the way.  Lilli's boyfriend shows back up again and - alas - Sam Neill is 
revived and rescued, which means that "Event Horizon" will get made.  
Darn.
Once again, not a bad film (but who can tell after "Starship 
Troopers"?)  and more one that speaks of a horrible design by 
committee, where no one vision is allowed to dominate and the film ends 
up going several directions at once.  Sigourney is as always good even 
in bad roles, Neill continues to snooze his career away, and we have 
an elegant proof that you don't have to be European to make bad 
arthouse films.  [*/misfire], casual inelegance on the Sid and Nancy 
scale.
------
Paul-Michael Agapow (agapow@computer.org)
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."

Author
Tim Voon
Cast : Sigourney Weaver, Sam Neill, Gil Bellows, Monica Keena Written by
Jacob Ludwig Carl Grimm and Wilhelm Carl Grimm Screenplay by Thomas E.
Szollosi Deborah Serra
Hi Ho Hi Ho a merry way we go! Not any more. Get rid of the dwarfs and
Snow White is left standing at the alter like a bride without
bridesmaids. Make Snow White's love interest, one of the dwarfs instead
of Prince Charming, and you may be wrongly accused of indulging in sick
fantasies or reading too much ‘Hustler'. When in truth the Brothers'
Grimm are too blame for not including these adorable little men in their
very grim original, but instead using dirty, odd ball ruffians to help a
girl out in need. Thanks, to Uncle Walt all this grim darkness is
removed and instead we have a very happy, very gay version of
enlightened, mirthful, sleepy, sneezy, grumpy, snotty etc etc midgets on
the constant move protecting the girl child in desperate need of a tan.
Okay, so it's the original story, but it doesn't mean that it's the
better version. To tell you the truth, I think this version sucks. But
first I will tell you what I did like about it. I liked the fact that
once upon a time, the Wicked Queen (Sigourney Weaver) was once a loving
wife and mother, until she miscarries Lord Hoffman's (Sam Neil) son.
Then a mixture of post natal psychosis and depression sets in resulting
in her extreme hatred of the surviving first child (Snow White – Monica
Keena) which is not hers. This helps us understand why she is sooooo
jealous, plus the fact she's getting older, in desperate need of Hormone
Replacement Therapy and a face-lift. Also, Snow White is a brat, and
deserves to get scratched and humiliated – she just isn't a very nice
little girl. So what didn't I like? I hated the fact that there were no
dwarves, and the bunch of brigand miners who help Snow White have names
that all begin with moron.
Sigourney Weaver shines in the role of the evil step-mother. Maybe it's
because she has all that mothering experience from close encounters with
‘Alien' Queens that give her a bitchy edge. Her pale white complexion
and fine facial features glow in the reflection of the mirror and there
is no doubt ‘Who is the fairest of all'. Sam Neil is wasted in a
bombastic, silly role of a weak male figure far too easily manipulated.
Monca Keena, a relative new comer gives a very ordinary performance of
the fairy tale princess. She looks too anaemic and is too hot headed to
adequately portray a likeable Snow White.
This is definitely not the fairy tale you want to tell you're children
about.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html
