Title
Review for Insider, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
31

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
The first question to ask of a two and a half-plus hour movie is could it
have been shorter and still achieved the same effect? With a Heat, yes; with
The Insider, no. The next question then is was that effect worth two and a
half-plus hours, which is a little trickier to answer, as you have to first
establish what the movie was trying to do. The Insider pretends to make that
part easy for us, though: just as the TV magazine newshow 60 Minutes
exposes, say, the tobacco industry, so does director Michael Mann's The
Insider pull the curtain back on 60 minutes. Which is to say if your
infortainment fetish didn't get satiated during prime time, check out the
local theatre. It's all on the big screen now, dramatized. With big name
actors: Al Pacino as a convincing Lowell Bergman, 60 Minutes
segment-producer; Christopher Plummer as an austere, unredoubtable Mike
Wallace; Russell Crowe as "insider" Jeffrey Wigand, constantly breathing in
big just to blow the whistle on the tobacco industry.
Too, though, The Insider's something of a fairy tale--the ultimate insider
pairing up with the ultimate investigative journalist to fight tobacco, the
ultimate big industry heavy. Rain Maker-Civil Action type stuff, just
without the Grisham underdog element. 60 Minutes is 60 Minutes, after all.
Their calls get returned. As for Bergman and Wigand, too, they're
practically the same character: one clings to journalistic ethics in the
face of everything, and the other is a steadfast scientific method man. And
both want to right all the wrongs so obviously going on, no matter the havoc
it wreaks on their personal lives. The first part of being a hero, after
all, is cutting all your ties or having them cut for you. Watch all the
Deathwishes for more like this.
Of course there are various obstacles in Wigand and Bergman's way, though,
which gives us the dramatic structure of The Insider: first Wigand goes to
bat for Bergman, then Bergman goes to bat for Wigand. The problem with all
this, though, is that the in-house resistance Bergman has to eventually
hurdle (CBS translated as 'Corporate BS,' as personified in Gina Gershon) is
much more believable than the resistance Wigand has to deal with. Not that
we don't all already 'know' that big tobacco wouldn't hesitate to threaten
the life of a whistle blower. That can be assumed. It's the threats
themselves which don't ring true, or, feel suspiciously as if they've been
edited for TV, so to speak. Which is to say the names have been left
intentionally vague in order to avoid any potential legal ramifications.
Which is to say that The Insider feels as if it's falling prey to the same
pressures that--in the movie--are trying to keep Wigand off-camera.
Yes, though, one objection to that would be that the parties intimidating
Wigand and family were never formally revealed, indicted, whatever, meaning
The Insider, like 60 Minutes, is being true to the facts. Which is fine,
except that The Insider claims to be a 'dramatization.' And dramatizations
are pretty much licensed to do whatever's necessary to make the facts
narratively compelling. And there are times in The Insider when things
simply aren't that compelling, when bladder issues become more important
than what's going on on-screen. But so be it. Russell Crowe is excellent; Al
Pacino is doing a lighter version of his Glengarry Glen Ross role. And
nevermind that the big 'secret' the trailer uses to draw us into the theater
is anticlimactic enough that Mann had to spill it early rather than string
us along (which is some good foresight on his part). Is The Insider worth
the two and half-plus hours it takes to get through it without a pause
button, though? Yes, but only for that one "How about Mr. Wallace?" line,
which we've already heard.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Bob Bloom
 The Insider (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Russell Crowe, Al Pacino
and Christopher Plummer. Written by Michael Mann and Eric Roth. Directed by
Mann.
 I have a problem with movies based on fact that offer disclaimers saying
parts of the story are fictitious dramatizations of actual events.
 Which parts? What should I believe and what should I consider as a
screenwriter's fertile imagination?
 These questions gnaw at me as I reflect on "The Insider," a suspenseful
drama about a tobacco executive who blew the whistle on the industry,
revealing its dirty big secret - that its executives always have been aware
that the nicotine in their cigarettes is addictive.
 But "The Insider" is so much more. It's a story of courage, idealism, ego
and corporate cowardice.
 It is understandable why CBS officials are criticizing the movie. The
network, specifically "60 Minutes" creator Don Hewitt, are portrayed as
waffling individuals, caving in to the corporate lawyers who call the
behind-the-scene shots.
 As a whole, lawyers come off very poorly here, whether representing CBS or
the tobacco interests. "The Insider" could spark a renaissance in lawyer
jokes.
 Another institution receiving an unflattering portrayal is 60 Minutes
newsman Mike Wallace (Christopher Plummer), who is conceived as
egotistical, pompous and self-serving.
 The hero of "The Insider" is Dr. Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe), the
former Brown & Williamson vice president who went public.
 Wigand, like all true heroes, is a conflicted and flawed individual. He
weighs doing what he knows is right against an uncertain future. Wigand
risks the financial security of his family by violating the confidentiality
agreement he signed upon his termination.
 It is Wigand who first approaches - anonymously - Lowell Bergman (Al
Pacino), a producer for 60 Minutes, by sending him a packet of data
concerning the tobacco industry.
 It is mesmerizing to watch the cat-and-mouse game played by Wigand and
Bergman. Wigand wants to unburden himself, yet he remains reticent around
Bergman, continually questioning his motives. He pushes Bergman away while
simultaneously enticing him with hints about what he knows.
 At the same time, Wigand begins to receive threats. The phone rings at odd
hours, but no one is on the other end. He finds a bullet in his mail box
and believes he is under surveillance. Is this real or paranoia? "The
Insider" proffers the perspective that, yes, the tobacco interests are
keeping an eye on this former top official and are using coercion to force
him to maintain his silence.
 But you never know for sure. The FBI believes Wigand himself placed the
bullet in his mail box. So, who to believe?
 "The Insider" changes focus once Wigand goes public and films his "60
Minutes" interview with Wallace.
 Director Michael Mann, who co-wrote the screenplay with Eric Roth (adapted
screenplay Oscar-winner for "Forrest Gump"), begins to concentrate on the
infighting at CBS over the airing of the Wigand piece.
 And while all this behind-the-scenes activity is interesting, it lacks the
human drama of Wigand's dilemma.
 Wigand, reduced to teaching chemistry at a high school in Kentucky,
becomes the focus of a smear campaign contrived by the tobacco interests.
His past is combed, and he is accused of being a wife beater, an alcoholic
and a crook.
 But instead of concentrating on Wigand's situation, we watch the raging
debate between the CBS news people and its corporate lawyers over airing
the Wigand interview. It ends with Bergman being overruled and an alternate
version of the segment aired minus Wigand's testimony.
 The last section of "The Insider" focuses on Bergman's attempts to
exonerate Wigand and get his "60 Minutes" segment aired.
 "The Insider" is compelling and very interesting. Despite the big issues,
Mann has created a very intimate film. Much of it is shot in close-up -
with generous dollops of extreme close-ups so we are forced to become
intimate with the characters.
 Crowe is superb as Wigand. Wisely, he does not make his crusader a knight
in shining armor. Crowe re-creates an individual coping with extraordinary
circumstances. He doesn't hide Wigand's drinking, his vanity, his emotional
confusion. Crowe's eyes show a man trapped under a spotlight he wishes to
avoid.
 Crowe's Wigand is a decent man doing what is right while at the same time
regretting his actions.
 Pacino's Bergman is the idealist, a former radical journalist hired by "60
Minutes" to uncover the big lies and air the hard-hitting stories. Bergman
continually says he is a man of his word who has never betrayed a source.
 But Bergman also is a seducer. He knows what to say to Wigand and how to
say it. He plays Jiminy Cricket to Wigand, telling him it's his duty to
humanity to go public.
 Pacino recently, in films such as "The Devil's Advocate," has a tendency
to be very broad. In "The Insider" he is a bit restrained but does have
some moments of theatricality in which he is more Pacino than Bergman.
 If Crowe has inhabited Wigand, then Pacino has merely scouted out Bergman.
Plummer is smooth as Mike Wallace. The real Wallace, of course, has taken
umbrage with this portrayal of himself as a man concerned more with his
legacy than with revealing the truth. Plummer's Wallace seems to go with
the flow. He appears as adept at office politics as he does at interviewing
a terrorist or a whistleblower.
 In the end, of course, the original "60 Minutes" interview with Wigand is
aired. History - still being written - tells us what havoc this has created
within the tobacco industry.
 But is "The Insider" history? It's high docu-drama wrapped around a
skeleton of facts. It's fascinating and holds your attention for its entire
two hours and 38 minutes. But as you watch, you have to cipher history from
Hollywood. Does it make a difference? Will it affect the movie's impact? In
the short term, no. But 20, 30 or 40 years from now, who can tell?
 Today, when people think of the Apollo 13 mission, do they picture Jim
Lovell or Tom Hanks?
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Joy Wyse
Starring:        Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, etc.
There are numerous familiar faces in this movie.  The list is goes on and
on so part of the enjoyment of the film is noticing who is in which role. 
The Insider has such an important storyline that a large group of
well-known actors wanted to be part of it.
At first you might think that this is the story of how the tobacco
industry has successfully kept the smoking public thinking that cigarettes
are non-addictive.  That's not it.  It also is the story of how big
business can, and does control the media.  But even that is not the true
plot line.  It's really the story of two men, Lowell Bergman (Pacino) and
Jeffrey Wigand (Crowe) and the integrity that each man has.  
Bergman is a producer on `60 Minutes' who is always on the lookout for a
big story.  When he convinces someone, anyone, to allow him to cover a
story, he promises to protect the person, and he means it.
Wigand is a former executive research officer at Brown & Williamson who
knows that they actually add substances to insure addiction.  When they
fire him he must agree to a confidentiality contract prohibiting him from
telling what he knows.  In return, B & W bestows upon him a good severance
program including much needed insurance that will insure his daughter's
asthma treatments.
When a movie is based on fact, as this one is, the producers cannot take
liberties with actual events.  People cannot be portrayed as acting in a
way other than what they truly did.  So, when they show Wigand's wife,
Liane, (portrayed by Diane Venora) crumbling under the outside pressures,
you get a good look at how difficult their lives became.
As we were leaving the screening almost everyone said that same thing: It
is a good movie, but longer than it should be.  I can't think of any scene
that should be omitted, but they could have edited out a lot of the
lingering moments.
Every actor in the film is terrific.  There is already talk that Plummer
will probably be nominated for best supporting actor.  We'll see. 
Personally, I loved Russell Crowe and I'm glad to see him coming into his
own.  I liked him so much in `Mystery Alaska'.  This is a very different
role for him.
I give the film an A.  I don't know how it got an `R' rating.   The only
objectionable thing I remember was a single use of F---!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Touchstone Pictures
 Director: Michael Mann
 Writer: Eric Roth, Michael Mann, Marie Brenner (article)
 Cast: Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, Diane
Venora, Philip Baker Hall, Lindsay Crouse, Debi Mazar,
Stephen Tobolowsky, Colm Feore, Bruce McGill, Gina
Gershon, Michael Gambon, Rip Torn
  You don't have to see Eugene O'Neill's "The Iceman
Cometh" to perceive that no one is more fanatical than a
fellow who has just vanquished a bad habit.  Find a person
who has just given up smoking or alcohol or adultery or a life
of crime and you have located a guy who will relentlessly
climb the world's soapboxes to insist that you too can
become as pristine as a newborn pup. Marie Brenner's
investigative article in a "Vanity Fair" magazine article entitled
"The Man Who Knew Too Much" portrays such a man,
Jeffrey Wigand, an ex-smoker who was a top executive with
the tobacco firm of B&W until he had an epiphany.  Tobacco
is not a nice product, he realized some years after the rest of
us knew this, and what's more the executives that make their
living from selling this foul substance have noses longer than
Pinocchio's.  At a congressional hearing one day, all seven
CEO's of the big tobacco corporations stated under oath that-
-get this--nicotine is not addictive.  When B&W's vice
president in charge of scientific research heard that,
something snapped.  Never mind that he was making
$300,000 a year, had quite a nice home, a trophy wife and
two lovely kids.  As a man of science and a man of integrity
he had had enough.
   "The Insider" is the story of this man and of another who
became the most important person in his life.  Done in a
docu-drama style but with a number of highly melodramatic
scenes that give the movie the ambiance of a thriller, Michael
Mann's inspiring tale focuses on scientist and whistle blower
Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe) and on an excitable producer
of the famed TV news show, 60 Minutes, Lowell Bergman (Al
Pacino).  Director Mann ("Heat"), together with Eric Roth,
adapted the narrative from an article that appeared in "Vanity
Fair" magazine, "The Man Who Knew Too Much," by Marie
Brenner.  The outrageous lies given to the public by the
tobacco industry as delineated in her text are not surprising
since, after all, big corporations are not run by the likes of
Mother Theresa.  The core of the film, however, is not on
Wigand and his decision to go public against these
prevaricators, but on the sorry actions of CBS.  Motivated by
greed just play gutlessness, the corporate side of the network
AND Mike Wallace himself resolved not to air an interview
which would have exposed the tobacco executives for the
liars they are.
   Director Mann is obviously concerned with a careful
development of the principal characters in his story, so that
while the movie is swiftly paced with some dramatic slo-mo
photography and effective use of hand-held cameras, "The
Insider" clocks in as one of the five longest movies of the
year.  The two hours and thirty-eight minutes are used well. 
Mann divides the story into two chapters: the first focuses on
Jeffrey Wigand, the hero whistleblower, and his struggle with
his conscience; the second part concentrates on the goings-
on within CBS as first the corporate executives and then Mike
Wallace (Christopher Plummer) himself, turn against producer
Bergman and opt to trash the already taped interview with
Wigand.
   In March 1993 Wigand was fired from his $300,000-a-year
job as vice president in charge of research for the B&W
tobacco company.  He had expressed reservations about the
company's policy of using cigarettes as mere delivery devices
for nicotine and for the industry's use of chemicals to
enhance the addictive power of the nicotine.  When Bergman,
a producer on the staff of the TV program 60 Minutes, asks
Wigand simply to explain some scientific jargon in an industry
report, Bergman senses that the chemist knows something
about his company that could be explosive material for the
popular news show.  Since Wigand is contractually bound to
reveal nothing lest he lose his severance package and the
health insurance he needs so badly (his little girl has
asthma), he at first refuses to talk.  But convinced that
Bergman would not abandon him but would allow him to air
his ethical concerns to a worldwide audience, he reluctantly
agrees to be interviewed by Mike Wallace and to testify in a
Mississippi court despite a restraining order slapped on him
by the state of Kentucky.
   If you try to wade through Marie Brenner's report in "Vanity
Fair," you might well throw up your hands when faced with
the complexity of the drama she unfolds.  Hers is a piece of
investigative journalism that goes overboard in detail,
throwing in an enormous cast of characters without sufficient
concern for intelligibility and structure.  But Mann and Roth,
who wrote the screenplay, have shown that film can indeed
be not only an acceptable substitute for the printed page in
getting across facts but a breath of clarifying air that siphons
off the excess verbiage of print text without destroying its
truths.  Who in the audience--smoker and nonsmoker alike--
can walk away from this film without a deeply felt sympathy
for its hero, Jeffrey Wigand?  This soft-spoken scientist who
gave up his wife, his daughters, his comfortable salary, his
spacious home in the service of truth only to be abandoned
as well by the TV people who seduced him, has merited his
place in the pantheon of American idols.  The 35-year-old
Russell Crowe, a charismatic New Zealander, is himself
somewhat of a hero, having gained fifty pounds for the role
and now turns in a more nuanced, more sensitive
performance than he rendered in "L.A. Confidential," "The
Sum of Us," and "The Crossing."  Never raising his voice and
yet communicating his agony by his dropped head, his three-
day growth of beard, his pained expression, Crowe steals
from the show from the more flamboyant Al Pacino who, in
his characteristic way, rants and raves throughout the film to
communicate his own passions.  Who could not feel disgust
for Wigand's wife (played by Diane Venora), a woman who,
like Mike Wallace himself, abandons the man at the very
point that he needs her most?  Liane Wigand, living in luxury
thanks to her husband's income, loses our sympathy by
immediately condemning the man for being fired and is
concerned foremost with the future of their mortgage and
their car payments.  
   How extraordinary that Mann is able to tackle the
intricacies of the plot--the testimony before Mississippi court,
the in-fighting among CBS bigwigs, the domestic dilemma
facing Wigand, the congressional testimony of the so-called 7
dwarfs who blatantly thumb their noses at the American
public with their lies about the poison they dispense.
   We're left hanging in the end, though.  If CBS were fearful
of a huge lawsuit by tobacco that would threaten a favorable
buy-out by the Westinghouse corporation, why do we hear
nothing about such an action after the interview was actually
scheduled?  After all, if the lawsuit did not take place, nothing
was at stake in the first place.  I would be curious to know as
well why Wigand took a job teaching the unusual combination
of chemistry and Japanese in a high school rather than in
college or a graduate institution.  A man with a Ph.D. and a
westerner with fluent Japanese would surely be interested in
a place of higher learning where, in fact, he would not have
to go through the bureaucracy of state licensing required for
teaching in the lower grades.  I'd be curious as well to know
the proportion of heavy smokers who attend the film.  Can
they sympathize with the right people while at the same time
continuing to puff away?  (By the way, this is one of the few
movies I've seen in which no one smokes.)  If so, are they
even angrier than the abstainers with the tobacco people for
getting them hooked, probably when they were under the age
of valid consent?

Author
Jamey Hughton
`The Insider', a riveting dramatization of the events that occurred in
the tobacco wars of 1995, is a movie of rare superiority. While some
movies merely present the facts, `The Insider' involves the viewer with
them, to such a point that it feels as if we're watching a real-life
simulation rather than a movie. It's about as absorbing as a film of
this genre can be.
Capturing your attention from minute one, director Michael Mann proceeds
to masterfully
craft the story of a former tobacco company employee named Jeffrey
Wigand (Russell
Crowe), who reveals to the CBS program `60 Minutes' how cigarettes are
being illegally enhanced by chemicals to make them more addictive.  `60
Minutes' producer Lowell
Bergman (Al Pacino) first approaches Wigand for his knowledge in another
matter, but
after the continued threatening of his family and health plan, Wigand
makes the crucial
decision to expose the secrets that his boss originally withheld while
testifying before
congress. It's an engrossing story that captivates your interest, both
in the aspects of journalism and it's compelling human details.
Crowe is superb as Wigand, who is shown as a thoughtful family man
committed to his job. All of the key scenes involving Wigand's shocking
revelation - namely, a courtroom
sequence and the `60 Minutes' interview itself - are pure dynamite.
Crowe digs deep
within the character to give the audience an accurate personification of
his complicated situation. He and Pacino compliment each other in such a
miraculous fashion, as if to
suggest the two actors have worked together on several projects previous
to this one. Both
Crowe and Pacino deserve to be recognized by the Academy come nomination
time.
The interview with the tobacco industry insider never ran, because of
the possible lawsuit
that could have resulted. CBS pulled the plug in fear of a tobacco
company takeover, and Wigand was infuriated because he had risked his
life and social stature and felt manipulated
by Bergman and the `60 Minutes' crew. Afterward, the story ran in the
New York Times and Wall Street Journal, and Bergman resigned from CBS
due to the future complications that would arise with new stories.
If `The Insider' has one deficiency, it's the matter of it's elongated
running length, which clocks in around the vicinity of 2 hours and 40
minutes. The dramatic thrust of the story almost becomes too
overwhelming and convoluted. After the two hour mark, the amount of
interest declined on my part. Undeniably though, for a movie to attain
that amount of fascination and involvement for such a time span is quite
remarkable. Backed by stellar performances, Mann (who previously teamed
with Pacino for the action film `Heat') directs at the top of his form.
In the supporting category, virtually everyone contributes. Diane Venora
is excellent as Wigand's estranged wife. As `60 Minutes' news
correspondent Mike Wallace, Christopher Plummer reinvents the word
`intensity' with exceptional ferocity, and Philip Baker Hall delivers as
executive producer Don Hewitt. There are several moments that jump right
off the screen, namely an electrifying courtroom sequence in which a
heated attorney (Bruce McGill, terrific in a tiny role) defends Wigand
by verbally attacking an opposing representative. If you exert a fair
amount of patience and understanding, you'll be glued to your seat
during `The Insider'.
At first, the premise of `The Insider' didn't strike as one that could
be this enthralling. Nonetheless, I was hardly bored with the film, even
during it's periodic lulls of detailed investigation. It's just so
invigorating to have a true story told with such bracing skill as `The
Insider', and it's also quite refreshing, because few thrillers of
modern day cinema are this self-involved.
It's a full-fledged dramatic powerhouse that deserves to be mentioned at
the upcoming Academy Awards ceremony. I'm sure the real Lowell Bergman
and Jeffrey Wigand would approve.
Send Your Comments to:  ">HREF="mailto:movieviews@hotmail.com">

Author
Eugene Novikov
"That's not the point, whether you tell the truth or not!"
Starring Russell Crowe, Al Pacino, Christopher Plummer. Rated R.
I don't have too much respect or patience for movies that scream at me.
Subtlety is not always a virtue and many times just putting whatever
you have to say right out on the table is the prudent thing to do. But
an audience shouldn't be forcefed and the themes of the movie shouldn't
be rammed down our throats. Do that and you insult your viewers.
Michael Mann's much lauded "60 Minutes" biopic The Insider succumbs to
the urge to hit the audience as hard as it can with its message. The
film comes on so strong, instead of comprehending what it's trying to
say we reel from it.
Mann is working with one of the year's most impressive casts making
this even more of a disappointment. Our favorite thespian from New
Zealand, Russell Crowe, stars as Jeff Weigand, a chemist who has just
been fired from one of the biggest tobacco companies after working
there for more than a decade. He is forced to sign a confidentiality
agreement requiring him not to share with anyone any information he may
have acquired during his stint at the company. Should he break the
confidentiality agreement, his generous severance package (including
health insurance for his little ones) will be terminated and the
company will commence litigation against him.
In the meantime he is being hounded by Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino),
producer of the popular tv newsmagazine "60 Minutes." Lowell believes,
correctly, that Weigand is an insider with knowledge crucial to public
safety. More specifically, Weigand knows that the tobacco companies are
indeed aware of the addictive and harmful nature of nicotine, a fact
the CEOs passionately denied at a prior hearing.
This is pretty important stuff. Lowell is determined to air Weigand's
testimony, but the tobacco company will stop at nothing to silence him.
They resort to (alleged) death threats against him and his family, a
lawsuit against him and, more importantly, a lawsuit against "60
Minutes" should they decide to air the segment. Basis? Assisting
Weigand in breaking the confidentiality agreement. The lawyer for CBS,
the network in charge of "60 Minutes" advises Lowell and star of the
show Mike Wallace (Christopher Plummer) that should such a lawsuit be
brought to trial and be successful, the tobacco company may wind up
owning CBS, a possibility which gives the network pause.
Running an exorbitant 157 minutes The Insider manages to entertain for
its first two hours, but runs out of steam towards the end. It's
bloated and self-important, with the apparent conviction that
everything that was shot is too essential to cut. The result is a messy
denoument that muddles and undermines the rest of the movie, which is
for the most part engaging and focused. Since when is it a rule that
Longer is Better? After all, though films of epic length do, for some
reason, tend to dominate the Academy Awards, the two-hour Shakespeare
in Love did, rightfully, beat out the three-hour Saving Private Ryan.
Today's directors need to learn to keep their rambling at a minimum.
What is the movie trying to say? Journalistic integrity is very, very
important. The problem? Well, a) it's not exactly a new and original
idea and b) the film insists on overwhelming us with it. It even goes
so far as having the characters scream this primitive and simplistic
message right into the camera. At the two hour point, I was rapidly
losing my patience and wsa tempted to scream "I got it already!" at the
screen. But The Insider showed no signs of letting up. There will not
be a more redundant movie this year.
Russell Crowe and Al Pacino sure are dynamite. They both give
explosive, occasionally powerful performances, just like I would expect
from two first-rate actors such as this pair. The standout, I think, is
Christopher Plummer who perfectly projects his character's vanity but
also his goodness. If anyone deserves an Oscar nomination for this
inconsistent affair, it would have to be this guy. I can't wait until
his next film (which happens to be Posessed, where he plays a priest).
A little subtlety never hurt anyone. It shouldn't be so subtle that
it's vague but screaming doesn't exactly serve the movie's purpose
either. A film has to hold our attention throughout and deliver its
message in the meantime. Viewer intimidation is not the way to go.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I read the NEW YORKER magazine and I enjoy some of their really
in-depth articles about some incident.  They will take some incident
like the investigation of a mysterious plane crash and tell you what
happened in detail.  It becomes a real education in what agencies get
involved and how theories are suggested, and what kind of pressure the
investigators are under, and just about any other aspect you can think
of.  Frequently I get the feeling that the article sounded exciting,
but I am being told in more detail than I really wanted to know.  Often
I get to the middle of a story and say, OK, it sounded good but I now
have invested more time than I am willing to spend on this subject.
Film is a different medium.  It is a visual medium.  That slows down
the telling of stories much more than people realize.  I frequently am
surprised to find out how short a film script is and how much of the
pages are empty space.  The magazine article and the film script are
two very different media.  THE INSIDER is a film adaptation of the
Vanity Fair article "The Man Who Knew Too Much" by Marie Brenner.  It
is too much an adaptation of a magazine article slowed to the pace of a
film.  It really verges on being tedious at least at times.
     For years the seven big companies knew that they dealt in an
addictive drug that caused a host of unhealthy side-effects.  But they
pretended for the public that it was unproven and they did not really
believe it.  The business was incredibly profitable and the proceeds
translated into the political power to squelch and discredit any
political movements against big tobacco.  The tide turned when a former
vice-president of one of the companies was convinced by the CBS 60
Minutes News team to tell the public how much the tobacco companies
really knew about the health effects of smoking.  The resulting
pressure to stop the story created a small civil war at CBS.  Who were
the major people involved, what were their motives, how was the story
almost killed, how did it get aired anyway?  That is the story covered
in surprising detail by THE INSIDER.  This all could have been
enthralling, but it is not the sort of thing that a stylist like
Michael Mann would be likely to do well.  And in the end, he failed.
To make a long story short, the film needed a director who knew how to
make a long story short.
     The film opens with the CBS 60 Minutes team in Iran with the
assignment to interview a terrorist.  We get a taste for their personal
style and how they get the upper hand.  They go from being one newsman
blindfolded at the hands of the terrorists to the actual interview with
Mike Wallace (played by Christopher Plummer). There the news team under
producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) are ordering around the terrorists
and getting away with it.  This seems to have nothing to do with the
main line of the story, but later when the tobacco industry is so much
harder to manipulate than committed terrorists, we have a wry irony on
who really has clout in the world.  Terrorists can grab the headlines,
but the tobacco companies have the real position of power.
     Incongruously intercut with the Iran interview sequence we see
Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe) dejectedly returning from work to his
home.  We discover that he has been fired and his career brought to a
complete halt unexpectedly.  He had been a very profitably rewarded
vice-president in charge or research and development at Brown and
Williams Tobacco; now he was unemployed and needed money to support his
family.  Rather than support him his wife Liane (Diane Venora) demands
of him what are they supposed to do for income.  Meanwhile the 60
Minutes team trying to do a story on fires started by cigarettes have
obtained some data they do not understand.  They offer Wigand $12,000
just to interpret the data.  Wigand's severance agreement swears him to
secrecy about anything he knows about tobacco dealings, but he is
reluctantly he stretches the severance terms.  He is willing to read
some documents from another tobacco company and interpret them for
Bergman.  In spite of the secrecy, Wigand's former employers seem
immediately to know Wigand is talking to 60 Minutes and he is warned
off by former boss Thomas Sandefur played Michael Gambon in an all too
brief but deliciously sinister role.  And so the game begins.  Wigand
is irate at his negative treatment for what he still considered
continued to be loyalty to his agreement and his former employer.
Meanwhile someone is playing very rough with Wigand and his family.
     The film examines Wigand and the pressures placed on his family as
they are caught between two powerful giants.  Wigand has always wanted
to make tobacco safer and has natural sympathies with getting the story
out.  He and his family are assaulted psychologically and financially
by the giant tobacco industry that had never lost a legal fight.  Al
Pacino is given top billing but the Wigand family is the core of THE
INSIDER.
     The story is told slowly and in just a bit too much meticulous
detail.  The film is 157 minutes and is an extremely demanding film for
the audience.  The musical score by Pieter Bourke, Lisa Gerrard, and
Graeme Revell is one of the worst in recent memory.  It puts ominous
chords under some scenes and using voice in ways that become a
distraction that gets in the way of the storytelling.  Also disturbing
is the casting of Christopher Plummer as Mike Wallace.  Plummer and
Wallace are such different types and Wallace is too well-known for even
so good an actor as Plummer to play him convincingly.
     This film might have been a really engaging experience under
another director's control.  Michael Mann was the wrong person to helm
this film and THE INSIDER lacks intensity because of his style.  I rate
it a 4 on the 0 to 10 scale and a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
A Mercedes speeds through a densely populated Middle Eastern city.
There is an American in the backseat, blindfolded.  His name is Lowell
Bergman, a 60 Minutes producer that is being led to a secret location to
line up an interview with an Islamic fundamentalist Sheik.  Bergman
isn't the least bit intimidated by the process and even plays hardball
with the Sheik's handlers, who eventually give up their fight to see the
questions prior to the interview.  Think your job is tough?  Unless your
name is Regis, you've got no reason to complain about your day job.
After Bergman (Al Pacino, The Devil's Advocate) secures the interview,
the gold-domed white buildings give way to the white lab coats of
Louisville's Brown & Williamson, where Vice President of Research and
Development Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe, Mystery, Alaska) has just
been fired.  The good news is that he will receive a beefy severance
package and continued health benefits, which will both keep his family
in the lifestyles to which they've grown accustomed and ensure medical
care for his eldest daughter who suffers from acute asthma.  The bad
news is that Wigand was forced to sign a confidentiality agreement that
prevents him from disclosing any information regarding his employer, who
happens to be one of the country's largest tobacco manufacturers.  And
he knows secrets that could severely cripple any company that makes
cigarettes.
More of a scientist than your typical corporate VP, Wigand, who was
previously employed by Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer and Union Carbide, has
been struggling internally for years.  He's been taking the big payoff
for something that he knows is wrong.  Bergman is given Wigand's name as
someone who can translate scientific data for a fire safety piece that
60 Minutes is producing.  But after speaking with each other, Bergman
feels that Wigand has a story to tell and Wigand realizes that Bergman
represents a chance to clear his conscience and inform the public that
tobacco companies are chemically enhancing nicotine to be even more
addictive.
Despite this opportunity, the doughy Wigand is still reluctant.  Just
meeting Bergman has thrown his life into chaos.  His former employer is
asking for an addendum to confidentiality agreement, he thinks he's
being stalked, and the local FBI agents seem to be in someone's pocket.
The Insider tells the true story of Wigand's decision to become a
whistleblower and the dramatic effects that the decision has on his
life.  It also shows the internal struggle behind the scenes at 60
Minutes, as CBS fears that airing Wigand's interview could result in a
huge lawsuit.
Based on Marie Brenner's Vanity Fair article called `The Man Who Knew
Too Much,' the film was adapted by Eric Roth (The Horse Whisperer) and
director Mann.  Crowe's performance is simply amazing, as is Christopher
Plummer's (Twelve Monkeys), who plays 60 Minutes vet Mike Wallace.
Pacino is typically wonderful and Philip Baker Hall (The Truman Show)
effectively portrays 60 Minutes chief Don Hewitt.  Mann's direction is
successfully accented by several scenes that are shot out of frame with
no dialogue, relying on the film's moving score to power itself.
Despite being a brilliant film, Mann's self-indulgent style proves that
he has no respect for the asses of moviegoers.  This is the guy that
turned Heat, a run-of-the-mill crime drama into a three-hour epic.  The
Insider could have easily been 30 to 40 minutes shorter and, as a
result, a much better film.  His choppy editing was, at times,
frustrating.  A film of this magnitude really needed a lot of long,
sweeping shots  especially in a scene like Bergman's blindfolded
interview in the film's opening.  And the driving-range-stalking scene
was way too much.  Perhaps a nice, quick montage of Wigand noticing the
same guy following him at the bank, the grocery store, the post office
and the liquor store would have been better.  But `quick' isn't a word
in Mann's vocabulary.  I think he may be Kevin Costner's cousin.
2:37  R for adult language and the threat of violence

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE INSIDER (1999) ***1/2 Directed by Michael Mann; written by Eric 
Roth and Mann, based on an article by Marie Brenner, "The Man Who 
Knew Too Much"( in Vanity Fair, May 1996.) Photography, Dante 
Spinotti. Editing, William Goldenberg, Paul Rubell & David 
Rosenbloom. Production designer, Brian  Morris. Music, Lisa Gerrard 
& Pieter Bourke; Produced by Mann & Pieter Jan Brugge. Cast:  Cast: 
Al Pacino (Lowell Bergman), Russell Crowe (Jeffrey Wigand), 
Christopher Plummer (Mike Wallace), Michael Gambon (Thomas 
Sandefur), Diane Venora (Liane Wigand), Bruce McGill (Ron Motley), 
Philip Baker Hall (Don Hewitt), Lindsay Crouse (Sharon Tiller), Gina 
Gershon (Helen Caperelli).et al.  A Touchstone Pictures release.156 
minutes. R (language)
In 312 A.D. as the Roman Emperor Constantine's army was about to do 
battle with Maxentius, a Christian cross appeared in the sky, with 
the words "In hoc signum vinces" ("with this sign, you will win"). 
Constantine did win, had this inscription placed on his imperial 
standards and decreed that Christianity was the Empire's official 
religion.
"The Insider" is Michael Mann's best film to date, as well as one of 
the best of the year. Its subject is a factual, specific case, but 
even more importantly, the background and the obvious subtext are 
about capitalist greed, the kind whose emblem should be "with this 
sign, you will win" around the image of money, whether a dollar, a 
mark, a euro or whatever.
The film probably holds the all-time record for legal maneuvers, 
clearances, consultations and precautions, before and during its 
making. This, because it is a docudrama whose "docu" aspect could 
invite anything, from blocking its release to lawsuits.
The story is familiar to most of the American public. Biochemist 
Jeffrey Wigand, Ph.D, was an R & D vice-president at Brown & 
Williamson, the third largest tobacco company. He earned $300,000 a 
year plus perks. Suddenly he is fired, arbitrarily. By signing a 
confidentiality agreement he keeps such perks as health insurance. 
But when asked to sign another, far more stringent document, he 
refuses.
Worried, bitter, even scared of reprisals, Wigand contacted Lowell 
Bergman, .a "60 Minutes" producer at CBS,  An expose of B & W --and, 
by implication, the other cigarette-makers whom Wigand calls "the 
seven dwarfs"--  was to be telecast by Mike Wallace, with Wigand 
present. But several factors intervened, mainly the fear that a 
lawsuit against CBS by the nicotinizers could run into billions and 
result in the smoke-Godzilla obliterating the CBS Mothra.
Centering on the actions and reaction of Bergman and Wigand, the 
movie does a very good job of depicting the implications, 
complications, side-effects and ramifications of the case, and of 
taking the viewer through the dedalus of (mostly) genuine facts and 
events. This task is greatly helped by brilliant performances, a 
high budget put to (mostly) good use, a strong sense of dialogue and 
production values.
Michael Mann is widely known for his TV work, notably the "Miami 
Vice" series. Since 1981, he also directed the theatrical movies 
"Thief," "The Keep," "Manhunter," "The Last of the Mohicans," and 
"Heat." It is an honorable record, generally influenced by TV's 
techniques and larger-than-life tendencies.
Deliberately, the movie adopts a super-visual approach. Mann, with
cinematographer Dante Spinotti ("L.A. Confidential," "True Colors," 
"The Last of the Mohicans) and editor William Goldenberg ("Heat") go 
all out in this direction.
"The Insider" opens with a long prologue in which an American in 
some unnamed Middle Eastern country, is taken, blindfolded, on a 
mysterious ride (full of local color) to meet a mysterious Arab 
sheik, the leader of a terrorist group. The man from the West turns 
out to be Mike Wallace ( Christopher Plummer) there for a scoop, a 
hard-to-get interview. Why this hors d'oeuvre? To build up the 
powerful, take-no-prisoners persona of Wallace. To remind us of his 
tough style. To spell out his high standards.
The movie-Wallace will reappear many times in the course of the 
picture. Plummer is very good, yet it may be difficult to suspend 
one's disbelief since the real Wallace's face, so familiar and 
distinctive keeps coming to mind. So does Al Pacino's. That's the 
price of fame.
There are no such problems with the other performers. You watch with 
conviction the complex --and in the last analysis, mysterious-- 
Wigand, incarnated by the excellent, Australian-raised Russell Crowe 
("Proof," "L.A. Confidential")-- artfully made older and heavier. 
Yet even if Pacino remains Pacino, his intensity does help in making 
us accept him as Lowell Bergman. Tricky stuff.
Did I say tricky? The Middle East prologue (shot in Israel) is a 
harbinger of razzle-dazzle cinematography. Incessantly, every small 
or big filmmaking trick comes into play. Angles, slow motion, 
focusing, zooming, crawls, video footage, the steadicam, 
reflections, extreme close-ups, nightmares and daymares, color 
symbolism, you name it. Nothing was left out.
This both works and does not. Sometimes you think you're watching an 
avant-garde, experimental or "art" movie. Sometimes it might  give 
one sea-sickness. Sometimes it is like an honest-to-goodness 
documentary. Sometimes it looks like a solid "traditional" drama. 
What is certain is that Mann & Co. went for overkill, ignoring the 
"less is more" principle, adopting a "more is more" stance. The 
result is that your eyes get fatigued, that they may need 
stabilizers, that things can get muddled.
Even so I will not rain on Mann's parade. In spite of all those 
distractions, it does keep you in a state of concentration which 
demands of you not to miss anything. It is a peculiar situation 
which will doubtlessly require a second or third viewing before you 
come to a valid conclusion. More viewings at nearly two hours and 
forty minutes? Yes, since the film has its own, special fascination. 
Even confirmed addicts who normally yearn for a smoking break will 
stay put and not think of the weed.
Tobacco reigns here, satanically.  It is a clear-cut fact that the 
tobacco giants are proven liars. They cook the cigarettes' nicotine 
with chemicals which make the smokes even more addictive -- more so, 
it seems,  than many hard drugs. The corporations are worse than 
gangsters or mafiosi. They commit mass murders, from greed, for 
profit. It is capitalistic materialism at its worst and deadliest. 
They, and other mega-corporations run the country. And, while the 
techniques of the movie are exaggerated, its message does not seem 
to be.
We are a long way from Frank Capra's America I Love You or The 
Little People Win Over The Big Nasties. Or put it this way. This is 
all about the dark side of Capra, a side that he would play down. 
The fact that Wigand aided the lawsuits instigated by the Sovereign 
State of  Mississippi and joined by all the other States of the 
Union to force the tobacco industry onto a 246 billion (that's a 
"b") settlement, still is light years away from a Capraesque happy 
ending.
There are puzzling moments as well as privileged ones. Samples: 
Bruce McGill as a Mississippi lawyer shouting down and shutting up a 
B & W lawyer, in the best Southern style of forceful, colorful 
rhetoric. Gina Gerson's handsome, chic and cool CBS legal eagle 
bringing in bad news. A transitional section after the Pascagoula 
sequence in which strings and a male voice do a beautiful, 
mood-enhancing, dirge-like song. Cleverly too,  the script avoids 
simplistic black-and-white contrasts as it follows the twists of "60 
Minutes" painting itself into a corner.
Pointed digs are numerous. Samples: when referring to the armies of 
lawyers hired by the tobacco industry, Ken Starr's firm is among 
them. Or aging Mike Wallace speaking of his future: "I don't plan to 
spend the rest of my days wandering in the wilderness of PBS!"
The cast is of near-epic size, yet most appearances are short and to 
the point. Machinations and counter-plots, on both sides, are 
effective. The thriller aspect of the movie is powerful. The story 
is not especially easy to follow. In certain areas one will cavil at 
confusions which Alfred Hitchcock would scold. Yet credit the film 
for not spoon-feeding its audience.

Author
Marty Mapes
Not that I put much stock in the Academy Awards, but 3 people deserve
nominations for their work on THE INSIDER: Al Pacino and Russell Crowe
for their focused performances, and Michael Mann for his clockwork
direction.
THE INSIDER is an intense, involved drama about Jeffrey Wigand's
whistleblowing on Big Tobacco and Lowell Bergman's work producing a 60
MINUTES segment about him. Two and one-half hours fly by as the detailed
drama unfolds.
The movie opens on Bergman (Pacino) risking his life to set up a 60
MINUTES interview with the leader of the Hezbollah. Yet even while he's
producing one segment, he's looking ahead to the next one - a segment on
the fire hazards of smoking in bed.
Wigand (Crowe) is introduced to us as he leaves his job at Brown &
Williamson, one of the Big Seven tobacco companies. Mann's close-up,
hand-held camera (his cinematographer was Dante Spinotti) implies an
ominous, Big-Brother watchfulness as Wigand leaves the building, and
throughout the movie.
The two cross paths when Bergman calls Wigand, hoping to hire him as a
consultant on his fire-hazard story. Wigand strongly refuses Bergman -
so strongly that it piques his curiosity. Bergman smells a bigger story
under Wigand's nervousness.
Meanwhile, the Big Brother cinematography that implied Wigand's
paranoia, turns out to have been well-founded. Brown & Williamson calls
him back in to renegotiate the terms of his confidentiality agreement.
They seem to know that he has spoken to someone, and they want to
tighten the knots in his gag order.
Luckily for Bergman and 60 MINUTES, the more pressure Brown & Williamson
put on Wigand, the more eager he is to come forward with his story.
Part of the reason Mann is so successful is that every character has his
own motives. No character exists merely as a plot device. So although
Bergman and Wigand often collaborate, each has a different reason for
doing so, each with a different goal. Such human motivators as trust,
integrity and honesty all figure in to the characters and their actions.
Another reason is that the intensity of the story never falters.
Although the movie is over two hours loX-Mozilla-Status: 0009at should
have been trimmed. Every scene is important to the film, and no scene
goes on too long.
Finally, there are some technical reasons that Mann's movie succeeds.
The first is where Mann and Spinotti put the camera. For example, they
broke one of the fundamental rules of filmmaking, but for a good reason.
One should never "cross the eyeline" - that is to say, if Pacino and
Crowe are talking and Pacino is on the right side of the screen, he
should ALWAYS be on the right side, at least during that conversation.
But in two places, the eyeline is crossed repeatedly. The effect is
disorienting, which is both why you shouldn't do it, and why they DID do
it in THE INSIDER.
The second is in the editing. Mann and editor William Goldenberg would
sometimes edit for mood. For example, when Wigand crosses back into
Kentucky after possibly violating part of his confidentiality agreement,
he puts himself at risk of arrest. A burning car sits by the side of the
road. Plotwise, the car is a coincidence, but its inclusion shows
externally what Wigand's emotions must be doing internally. 
And finally, the amount of polish the filmmakers used shows great craft
and respect for the audience. Carefully designed sound schemes and
well-framed widescreen shots are the outer signs of a movie that is very
good through and through.
To top it all off, Pacino and Crowe give outstanding performances in
serious, well-rounded, and substantial roles.
THE INSIDER is a success at every level. It's a gripping drama, not to
be missed.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Greg King
THE INSIDER (M).  
(Touchstone/Buena Vista International)
Director: Michael Mann
Stars: Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, Diane Venora,
Rhillip Baker Hall, Lindsay Crouse, Debi Mazar, Hallie Kate Eisenberg,
Stephen Tobolowsky, Colm Feore, Bruce McGill, Micahel Gambon, Gins
Gershon, Rip Torn, Lynne Thigpen, Michael Paul Chan, Linda Hart,
Robert Harper, Nestor Serrano, Pete Hamill, Wings Hauser, Clifford
Curtis, Breckin Meyer
Running time: 150 minutes. 
Director Michael Mann's first film since the brilliant Heat is
a wonderfully gripping and intelligent true life drama about the
scientist who blew the whistle on the tobacco companies for tv's 60
Minutes.
When he is unfairly dismissed from tobacco company Brown and
Williamson, scientist Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe) eventually told a
60 Minutes news team that the tobacco companies had been lying for
years about the dangers of smoking.  But then the tobacco industry
began a massive smear campaign, dragging Wigand's life through the mud
in an effort to discredit him and his testimony.  When even CBS
eventually bowed to enormous legal pressure and failed to air the
damaging interview, veteran investigative reporter and 60 Minutes
producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) fought back to protect Wigand and
the right of the public to know the truth.  It was a protracted and
heated dispute that shook up the landmark television news show and
tested old loyalties.
This is probably the best drama featuring journalists as
heroic characters and newsmakers, pursuing a momentous story, since
All The President's Men.  The Insider is suspenseful, riveting stuff,
but it also has a strong emotional punch.  With this searing look at
corporate America out of control, Mann is dealing with some weighty
and important themes - big business ethics, greed, corruption, heavy
moral dilemmas, journalistic integrity, freedom of the press.
Mann directs with a commendable sense of restraint.  Mann uses
a pseudo-documentary style, to give the film a sense of urgency, which
is highly effective at times.  But the hand held camera work becomes a
bit tiresome and there are a few scenes that could have been tightened
up in the editing room.  There are also a number of characters who
come and go without making much of an impact.
However, The Insider is driven by two powerhouse, Oscar-worthy
central performances.  Pacino is intense and believable as the dogged
and disenchanted Bergman, and delivers one of his best performances
for quite some time.  Heavily made up, Crowe delivers a stand out
performance as Wigand, who acts out of conscience and then helplessly
watches as his life and reputation are systematically destroyed.  He
brings a wonderfully nervous edge, quiet honesty and dignity to his
performance.
Women often get short shrift in Mann's overtly masculine
films, but Diane Venora (from Heat, etc) is impressive as Wigand's
long suffering wife.  And Christopher Plummer (who often has a
reputation for publicly slagging off at his films) is terrific as
veteran journalist Mike Wallace, bringing a pompous air but also an
intelligence to his role.
Unfortunately, The Insider wasn't a huge success in the US,
which may affect its chances at the Oscars.  However, this is a rare
example of Hollywood producing a gripping and intelligent drama that
is also relevant, and it should be put at the head of the list of must
see films of this year.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Al Pacino reteams with director Michael Mann after their 1995 kickass film
HEAT, to tell the real-life story of the behind the scenes goings-on of one
particular episode of the CBS news magazine show "60 Minutes". Ironically,
this film seems to go on as long as three episodes of that show.
PLOT:
Cigarette company Vice-President gets fired after he disagrees with company
policy on how to produce their cigarettes. When his firm begins tossing
veiled threats towards him, the man gets angry and thinks seriously about
exposing his industry's lies about nicotine addiction to a worldwide
audience on TV's "60 Minutes". This movie documents the entire events of
this true-life historical case.
CRITIQUE:
Interesting story...great actors...well-developed characters...unique
style...do not an overall great film make. This film suffers from something
that a lot of major films from big name directors have been suffering with
over the past year or so: it runs too long and is not engrossing enough to
warrant our attention for that lengthy amount of time. It's too bad because
the story told here is definitely one that has all the elements of an
engaging drama set in place, but when spread across a canvas so vast, it
seems to lose any emotional power or deeper resonance. Another thing which
I've only recently noticed in Michael Mann's last two films is his lack of
female character involvement. It's strange because he seems to have plenty
of women in his films, but along with questionable casting calls, they do
little but stand around and appear on screen.
The main actors in this film are all in their top form, with Christopher
Plummer finally getting a decent role from which he could orchestrate his
talent. Pacino is perfect as the idealistic producer who realizes early on
that all he's truly got in his corner is "his word" and he doesn't intent on
losing it. Give the man an Oscar just for keeping his acting decibel level
on an even keel! (Hoo-hah!) And then there's Russell Crowe pulling off
another powerful performance as the pudgy whistle-blower, whose real-life
counterpart apparently commended Crowe of his portrayal (Click here to see
picture of real-life counterparts). Having said all that, the story told in
the film was really just another behind the scenes movie about an industry
and a specific "story gone bad", but nothing more dramatically effective
than that. I'm not sure if people are equating this film's greatness with
the grandeur of its actual ramifications (which eventually led to a court
ruling of approximately $250BILLION against the tobacco companies), but I
thought the drama in the film was simple and interesting, but nothing more.
I would suggest you see it if you love any of the main actors, or if the
story line is of particular interest to you, otherwise, you could wait for
video and fully appreciate the reason why fast-forward buttons were created.
C'mon Michael...how 'bout cutting out some of those lingering slo-mos for
God's sakes!!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Al Pacino has dated all kinds of actresses. Besides his current
girlfriend, Mrs. Griswold herself, Beverly D'Angelo, he has reportedly
maintained relationships with Kathleen Quinlan, Diane Keaton, Debra Winger,
Penelope Ann Miller and Tuesday Weld. His dad was an insurance agent named
Salvatore Pacino and his mom, Rose Pacino, died when Al was just 22. He's
also been known to have turned down some big roles including KRAMER VS
KRAMER, BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, APOCALYPSE NOW, PRETTY WOMAN, CRIMSON
TIDE (The Gene Hackman part) and STAR WARS?? (Apparently, he was offered the
role of Han Solo, which eventually went to an unknown actor named Harrison
Ford).
Actor Russell Crowe was born in New Zealand but grew up in Australia. Not
surprisingly, he has been smoking since he was 10 and acting since he was
six.
Actor Christopher Plummer's full name is Arthur Christopher Orme Plummer. He
was born in Toronto, Canada and is probably best remembered as the loveable
anal-retentive father of those nutty Von Trapp kids from 1965's THE SOUND OF
MUSIC, Captain Von Trapp.
For anyone who still doesn't know, director Michael Mann began his career as
a writer on the popular "Starsky and Hutch" TV series. His greatest TV
success came when he created and produced the even more popular "Miami Vice"
series. His feature film directorial debut was the 1981 James Caan film
THIEF.
The man who plays the Sheikh Fadlallah is in this movie is Cliff Curtis, the
same actor who played the excellent role of drug dealer Cy Coates in Martin
Scorsese's BRINGING OUT THE DEAD (6.5/10).
The real tobacco whistle-blower Jeffrey Wigand says this movie took some
liberties with his story, but is essentially accurate. In one scene, the
former Brown & Williamson executive is portrayed as hitting golf balls at a
driving range while a burly man watches him. "Did that happen? No." Wigand
said. But Wigand said the movie accurately portrays the kinds of threats he
and his family faced after publicly addressing health and smoking issues in
1995. "Its fidelity to the actual facts is acceptable," Wigand said. Wigand
is in Nebraska giving speeches on his experiences. He said he is donating
his speaking fees to his nonprofit organization, Smoke-Free Kids, based in
Charleston, S.C.
This film is based on the Vanity Fair article written by Marie Brenner
entitled "The Man Who Knew Too Much".

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
"What was broken up here doesn't get put back together again."
This is Al Pacino speaking as "60 Minutes" segment producer Lowell Bergman 
in Michael Mann's new "The Insider."  What he's talking about is the serious 
consequences that go down when politics and greed assault integrity.  What 
we see is a well-paced portrait of investigative journalists, and of the 
effects of decisions:  some of them easy and some of them wrenching.
The content here doesn't fit the mold of the American suspense movie.  There 
are no serial killers or occult goings-on.  There are not even any car 
chases.  But in a similar way that "All the President's Men" functioned as 
an expose of Washington politics surrounding the 1972 election, "The 
Insider" functions as an eye-opener to mid-1990's capitalistic depravity.  
Mann has chosen much different fare here than he covered in his superior 
period drama "The Last of the Mohicans";  his success, though, is every bit 
as certain.
Lowell Bergman is a top-of-the-line producer.  The film's opening sequences 
take place in a country very much like Iran, where Bergman and a crew member 
are blindfolded and driven to meet with a Hezbollah leader.  Will the sheik 
trust the reputation of "60 Minutes" and, specifically, of its 78 year-old 
icon, Mike Wallace?  Yes.  We watch as the interview is staged a couple of 
days later, and Wallace gets in the face of a ranting disciple of the 
sheik's.  Wallace's first question is "Are you a terrorist?  No beating 
around the bush with Wallace, of course, and Bergman is one of the main 
preservers of this dogged honesty.
Enter Dr. Jeffrey Wigand, a scientist formerly employed by health companies 
like Johnson and Johnson, but who until recently made a lot of money by 
selling his services to a major tobacco company.  It seems Wigand has been 
terminated rather suddenly.  That he doesn't tell his wife immediately about 
losing his job displays his emotional unevenness, a behavioral pattern that 
surfaces several times.   Wigand's wife seems most concerned with losing the 
money for the house payments and the for health benefits that assist with 
their elder daughter's asthma.
So how does Wigand meet up with Bergman?  As a corporate executive and 
respected scientist, Wigand is called upon to interpret some dirt about the 
Phillip Morris Company that someone dropped in Bergman's lap.  Although this 
piece work does not surface again, we are introduced to some real dirt, a 
crisis of Wigand's conscience that affects all of American public health.  
Simply said, Wigand cannot make up his mind to reveal or keep confidential 
the fact that cigarettes are a delivery device for nicotine.  Worse, tobacco 
companies are enhancing the power of the nicotine by adding chemicals that 
enable the addictive substance to pass more easily from the lungs to the 
brain.  Wigand's big problem is that part of his severance package is 
signing an addendum to his confidentiality agreement.  Because of this, he 
cannot communicate any information about his research, as this research is 
owned by the company.
Circumstances happen that push Wigand to fess up.  It seems he is being 
followed and even harrassed at his home - at the modest rancher he and his 
wife and young daughters occupied after moving out of their mansion.  
Bergman gets Wigand a role in a lawsuit being brought by the state of 
Mississippi again the tobacco industry;  the reasoning is that a deposition 
under oath will make the information public record and let Wigand sidestep 
his confidentiality pact.  The complications surrounding this dilemma are 
what Mann concerns himself with exploring.
>From the start we sense an edgy tone, the camera catching odd venues, the 
shot slowing down while the score goes to discordant jazz.  Mann has a knack 
akin to a good fiction writer's for keeping a narrative engaging, almost 
jumpy.  Again, considering the premise for the film does not carry with it 
the possibility for much physical action, Mann does an amazing job with 
editing and pacing.  The result is a story with several dimensions.  There's 
the story of Wigand's degeneration, tracing his separation from his family 
and his struggle to start a new career as a teacher of high school chemistry 
and Japanese.  Will he defy a Kentucky court order and offer his damning 
deposition?  What's equally riveting is the conflict among the makers of "60 
Minutes," the legal arm of CBS, and various other media - such as the "New 
York Times" - about whether Wigand's words and face should be aired.
As Jeffrey Wigand, Russell Crowe is masterful.  He carries about him a hint 
of quiet impotence, a rage against all the players of the game, Big Tobacco, 
the FBI, "60 Minutes" and Lowell Bergman himself.  Apparently Crow gained 
some weight for the role, and the result is a meaty middle-aged man who 
wants desperately to be a good father and husband, a man of science who let 
himself be drawn just a little too deeply into the financial and moral 
morass stirred up by the marketing culture of cigarette peddlers.  For 
Crowe, look for a nomination for best actor in a supporting role.
As Mike Wallace, Christopher Plummer is perfect.  His is an American accent 
and an American aggressiveness.  Smart and compassionate, he is nevertheless 
ruthless when it comes to getting a story.  In every scene he's in, Plummer 
shows his experience and wisdom about the subtlest of actions.
Viewers should make no mistake:  this is Al Pacino's movie.  It opens and 
closes with him in our sights, and enables him to display his intense 
talents in almost every scene.  The best part of his performance has him 
depicting moral ambivalence.  He takes it personally when he's accused of 
betraying sources, and does all he can to expose the tactics taken by the 
tobacco company to smear Dr. Wigand.  Surprisingly, he's not even about to 
kowtow to the great and powerful Wallace.  In role after role, Pacino takes 
his task seriously; here he helps to bring out the dramatic aspects in this 
important, factual narrative.
One weakness lies in the story's failure to put faces behind the people 
harassing Wigand.  We see a muscular man in a business suit, hitting golf 
balls and pausing to watch the scientist.  And there are the boot prints in 
the tomato patch that was worked by Wigand and his girls.  Okay, we know 
it's important to include the threats Wigand experienced, but the most 
compelling ones come from identifiable perpetrators.  Further, what is this 
habit of Wigand's of talking with Bergman over a pay phone in the crowded 
halls of the high school in which he is trying to establish himself as a 
teacher?
"The Insider" will probably bring in a decent box office, but not an 
outstanding one.  The reason?  It's a thinking-person's movie, a 
behind-the-scenes look at a call for social reform, a story too true to be 
sensational.  It's also a darn good effort by a veteran of both television 
and film.  Its acting is solid, its plot engaging.  I'd recommend it for 
anyone 14 and up; the only reason for the R rating is too many appearances 
of a single, vulgar adjective.


Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Michael Mann.
Cast: Russell Crowe, Al Pacino, Christopher Plummer, Diane Venora, Phillip 
Baker Hall, Debi Mazar, Hallie Eisenberg, Lindsay Crouse, Gina Gershon, 
Michael Gambon, Bruce McGill, Stephen Tobolowsky, Rip Torn, Lynne Thigpen.
1999 - 158 minutes
Rated R (for profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, November 7, 1999.
Controversial even before its release, "The Insider" has recently been under 
fire for its mostly accurate, but allegedly dramatized telling of events that 
took place in 1996 between the news show "60 Minutes," its television station 
CBS, and the tobacco industry. "60 MInutes" reporter Mike Wallace is one of 
many that has let his displeasure known, due to what he says are embellished 
details in the film, as well as the unfavorable depiction of himself. Based 
on the widely argued Vanity Fair article by Mary Brenner, "The Man Who Knew 
Too Much," filmmaker Michael Mann (1995's "Heat") has crafted a highly 
charged drama that, despite featuring next to no action, occasionally shifts 
over to being a sort of heart-stopping paranoid thriller. 
The events that surround the goings-on in 1996 begin somewhere around the 
time middle-aged Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe) is fired from his job as an 
executive for a tobacco company. Jobless and with a housewife (Diane Venora), 
two young children, one that has acute asthma, and a nice home, to support, 
Jeffrey Wigand is sought out by "60 Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman (Al 
Pacino), who is working on a story about the question of whether tobacco is 
addictive, which the companies say aren't. At first trying to avoid Lowell, 
Jeffrey finally decides to hold an interview with "60 Minutes" for a paycheck 
that he really needs, despite his contractual obligation that says he won't 
ever say anything that might put Brown & Williamson in hot water. The 
revelation that Jeffrey holds, however, could very well ruin him and destroy 
CBS if they run the interview he holds, in which he reveals that the company 
knew all along cigarettes were addictive and had begun to add various other 
chemicals so as to give them more of a kick. 
For all of its very serious, disputatious subject matter, the strength of 
"The Insider" lies not with the premise, but in the excellent treatment it is 
given. In essence, a docudrama, and perhaps carrying a story more suitable 
for television, director Mann has transformed it into a 2 3/4-hour motion 
picture opus that is filled with the sort of rich details and highly felt 
characters that only a great director could come up with. 
The first half is told mostly from the point-of-view of Jeffrey Wigand, a 
recovering alcoholic, but caring husband and father, whose life ultimately 
takes a disheartening turn when his family starts to receive ominous death 
threats and are suddenly overrun by the media, signaling their separation 
and, later, divorce. Jeffrey is played by the 35-year-old Australian actor 
Russell Crowe (1996's "L.A. Confidential"), and what an amazing performance 
he gives. Abandoning his usual good looks and gaining over 20 lbs. for the 
role, Crowe is not only wholly believable as a man nearly twenty years his 
senior, but he virtually disappears into his character, equipped with a 
pitch-perfect American accent. Better yet, he portrays Jeffrey Wigand as a 
flawed, but sympathetic man whom you know cares for his family, but also is 
dedicated to telling the truth, despite his possible downfall. 
The focus then shifts midway through to Lowell Bergman, and when this occurs, 
the picture admittedly loses some of its punch. The conflict that Lowell 
faces is certainly an intriguing one, as he is devastated to discover that he 
was the antagonist that caused Jeffrey's collapse, and begins to grow 
doubtful of the validity of "60 Minutes," but Lowell simply isn't as fully 
written as Jeffrey. With a wife (Lindsay Crouse) and two teenage sons of his 
own, Lowell puts himself in Jeffrey's place and realizes he did a careless 
thing without thinking about the consequences. As Lowell Begman, Al Pacino is 
his usual captivating self, and is well-cast, but it really isn't much of a 
stretch for him, in comparison to a handful of his other roles.
The supporting cast is filled to the brimming point with first-rate talent, 
from Christopher Plummer's bravura turn as Mike Wallace, to Diane Venora's 
poignant portrayal of Jeffrey's trophy wife who wishes for something more, to 
young Hallie Eisenberg as Jeffrey's daughter, who has abandoned her famed 
Pepsi commercial spots to show that she is a natural young actress.
The largest compliment that can be given to "The Insider" is in showing the 
questionably dark corners that people can back themselves into. Director Mann 
has a gift with depicting the threat and danger of average, everyday 
surroundings, and is aided by one of the most impressive examples of 
cinematography so far this year, only equaled by "American Beauty." Director 
of photography Dante Spinotti benefits from intermittently using visually 
stunning colors amid the washed out hues of modern suburbia and New York 
City, as well as in using handheld cameras that put the audience in the 
moment, and tight close-ups. Two astounding sequences come to mind that 
should be noted, the first set at a desolate golf driving range late at 
night, and the latter involving a noise one of Jeffrey's daughters hears 
outside. Suspenseful and even a little eerie, those are two adjectives that, 
in lesser hands, you'd never hear being mentioned in a review about a film of 
this genre. Furthermore, the pulsing music score, by Lisa Gerrard and Pieter 
Bourke, is dynamite.
By the last half hour, "The Insider" had begun to wear out its welcome, 
introducing further subplots and unneeded scenes, and neglecting a few of the 
characters I would liked to have seen given more closure, particularly 
Venora. But still, Mann, a master filmmaker who admittedly doesn't know when 
to hit the edit button, has made a film that is both powerful and 
thought-provoking. Whether much of it is accurate or not to the real-life 
story remains to be seen, but as a film, even one that has taken several 
liberties in search for the truth, it is an electric drama.

Author
Jonathan F Richards
     The opening of Michael Mann's gripping expose' "The Insider" has "60
Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) driven blindfolded through
Tehran to a meeting with a Hezbollah chief.  When the interview is abruptly
terminated, Bergman finds himself alone in the room, and he sweeps back the
curtains to discover a view of the city from an office window high above
it.  A similar perspective will be repeated from the corporate offices of
tobacco giant Brown & Williamson, and broadcast giant CBS.  The implication
is evident:  it's all about money, folks, and the view from high floors is
pretty much the same everywhere.
     The movie recounts a low moment in the image of CBS News.  In 1995,
"60 Minutes" yanked a Mike Wallace interview with tobacco industry
whistleblower Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe), who had confirmed that
tobacco CEOs perjured themselves before Congress in denying that nicotine
was addictive, and that their companies knowingly spike the nicotine in
cigarettes to boost the fix.  The CBS brass pressured the news magazine
show, fearful that Brown & Williamson would sue for billions claiming
"tertious interference" (inducing Wigand to break his confidentiality
agreement).  The truth is irrelevant, says a network lawyer (Gina Gershon).
 "The truer the information, the greater the danger."  And "60 Minutes"
caved.
      Christopher Plummer captures Mike Wallace so unerringly with
gestures, facial expressions and temperament that although the two men are
hardly lookalikes, there are moments when Plummer morphs completely into
the veteran newsman.  Al Pacino stays in control and still sears the screen
as producer Bergman, who established a bond with Wigand and drew him out
for the story.  And Russell Crowe, the Australian actor best known here for
"L.A. Confidential", is superb as Wigand, the muffled powder keg whose slow
fuse of temper and conscience is unerringly lit by the bullying tactics of
his former employers.  
     There's a fascinating correlation between the disparate characters of
Bergman and Wigand.  Wigand left a background in health companies for a
high-salaried job with tobacco; Bergman departed the leftist magazine
"Ramparts" for a career with ultra-establishment CBS.  In Mann's treatment,
both finish the movie with their lives in disarray but their values
restored.  Big Tobacco is the villain, but the unsettling moral cavity at
the center is the buck-driven relativity of truth in the corporate news
business.
    "The Insider" doesn't pretend to be a documentary.  It's a movie in the
great tradition of tear-the-lid-off-the-whole-stinking-mess cinema, with
artful cinematography and a lush enhancing score.  It's drawn from life,
but events are shuffled, compressed, invented.   Still much of it,
according to insiders, is just the way it happened, and on screen the story
carries the whiff of truth; if some of it has been knowingly spiked to
increase its impact, that's only the delivery system, and it's effective as
hell. 

Author
Walter Frith
Based on the Vanity Fair article 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' by Marie
Brenner, director Michael Mann's 'The Insider' is not so much a film which
is anti-tobacco as it is pro-truth.  Mann's ability to diversify himself as
a film maker continues to impress me.  From his little known 'Thief' in
1981, to his Oscar winning period piece effort 'The Last of the Mohicans' in
1992 to his soulful examination of crime with 1995's 'Heat', Mann always
finds a laid back style mixed with a textured style of great visuals and an
under lying theme of violence, or at least a reference to it (always
tastefully portrayed) is found in his work.  Mann teams up with the Oscar
winning writer of 'Forrest Gump', Eric Roth to bring a broadened approach to
a very serious issue which may be the most serious legal entanglement ever
to engulf the United States.  I'm talking, of course, about the law suits
that many states have filed against the tobacco industry, citing them for
selling a knowingly dangerous and addictive product which has cost many
health care programs billions of dollars.  What 'The Insider' does is it
makes you think about the ethics involved in pursuing the truth, no matter
what the cost.
Based on a true story, 'The Insider' is about a former tobacco company
executive and a producer from t.v.'s '60 Minutes' who collaborate to tell
millions the truth about the way cigarettes are allegedly tampered with to
increase a person's desire for them.  Dr. Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe) is
the conscience-stricken former tobacco executive who wants to blow the
whistle on his former employer and teams up with Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino),
a top producer for '60 Minutes' who works closely with legendary anchor Mike
Wallace (Christopher Plummer).
As the story unfolds, we see that Wigand signed a document of
confidentiality, stating that he would never reveal to outside sources the
details of his job.  He eventually balks at this and feels that he has a
greater responsibility to the public.  His life then begins to fall apart.
As he makes progress in bringing what he knows to the public, he finds a
bullet in his mailbox, an e-mail is sent to his house threatening to kill
him and every member of his family and his wife leaves him.  At least he is
able to find work as a high school teacher after being fired from his old
job with big tobacco.
What really makes 'The Insider' work is the way it tries to tackle the
subject of media ethics.  As it is based on a true story, there is a
detailed breakdown of the struggles, arguments and wrangling over what
content is suitable to air and what footage may land CBS' '60 Minutes' in
some serious hot water.  Bergman produces the segment with Wallace as the
host, interviewing Wigand and making allegations against big tobacco as the
film becomes more and more absorbing.
The film also does something very clever.  It never tries to match its two
leading stars against each other in an effort or given opportunity to
upstage one another.  The first half of the film is primarily about Wigand's
dilemma and the second half tells the story of Bergman and Wallace and how
they are at odds during the whole story.
Russell Crowe, who was born in New Zealand, gave a brilliant and hard boiled
performance as the tough cop in 'L.A. Confidential' and mastered an American
accent extremely well.  He makes good on that again with his portrayal of
Wigand using a New York accent which he nails down to perfection.  Pacino,
my all time favourite actor, gives a straight forward performance as the
veteran producer who oozes decency.  He cares about his sources and goes
to bat for them each and every time.
At a running time of over two and a half hours, Michael Mann uses every
minute to properly tell his story of one of this generations greatest
injustices.  There is a time during the film where a lot is said about
Jeffrey Wigand's flaws that perhaps question, if not, damage, his
credibility as a witness to his former employer's dealings.  Balance is the
key with this film that strives not only to inform but enlighten an audience
in a conventional yet powerful manner.  An extraordinary combination
and Oscar nominations for some may be involved.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Michael Mann. Screenplay by Eric Roth and Mann, from the 
article "The Man Who Knew Too Much" by Marie Brenner. Starring Al Pacino, 
Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer. Running time: 188 minutes. Rated AA 
for offensive language. Reviewed on March 5th, 2000.
There are days when I'm flabbergasted by the power of big business. They 
have the power, the money, and the influence to seemingly do whatever 
they want. Governments kowtow to them, common man is overwhelmed by them. 
When a corporation can throw hundreds of thousands of dollars into a 
legal campaign, or use media connections to denigrate their opponents, 
how can Joe Average compete?
"The Insider" is the story of just such a battle, based on real events 
from the mid-Nineties. Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe), newly fired from 
his job as a research and development executive with tobacco giant Brown 
& Williamson, is asked by "60 Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman (Al 
Pacino) to assist him on a story related to the cigarette industry. 
Bergman soon realizes that Wigand's knowledge of evidence damaging to Big 
Tobacco extends well beyond the scope of his current story. He attempts 
to persuade Wigand to come forward with what he knows for a "60 Minutes" 
segment with Mike Wallace (Christopher Plummer).
This in of itself would make for a remarkable film. Wigand's inner 
conflict -- should he talk or shouldn't he? -- is poignant and involving. 
Not only does Wigand have to deal with the legal ramifications of going 
on "60 Minutes" (he has signed a confidentiality agreement with Brown & 
Williamson) but he soon finds his old bosses applying more dubious means 
of persuasion -- he is followed and sent threatening messages.
Or is he? In real life, none of Wigand's accusations about Brown & 
Williamson's tactics were substantiated. "The Insider" leans toward 
Wigand's side of the story, but leaves the question open. Is the man at 
the golf course spying on Wigand, or just watching him because Wigand is 
himself behaving oddly? Was a bullet left in his mailbox as a warning, or 
did Wigand put it there himself? Even Wigand's then-wife Leane (Diane 
Venora) has since accused him of the latter.
Making Wigand's conflict even more engrossing is the fact that he is 
married with children. Were he single, going on "60 Minutes" would be a 
noble and selfless act. But his entire family appears to be at risk (from 
economic hardship caused by the termination of Wigand's severance pay, if 
not from the tobacco giants themselves). Can he put the interests of the 
nation above his marriage? In many ways, Wigand is a tragic character -- 
no matter what he decides, people will be hurt, himself included. The 
ways in which he copes with this fact comprise some of "The Insider"'s 
quietest but most touching moments.
The engaging first act segues neatly into the second, where Pacino's 
character takes center stage. With the Wigand "60 Minutes" segment in the 
can, everything looks set until CBS's legal department intervenes. Lawyer 
Helen Caperelli (Gina Gershon) believes that because Bergman encouraged 
Wigand to break his confidentiality agreement, CBS could be liable for 
billions of dollars. To Bergman's horror, both Wallace and CBS News  
chief Don Hewitt (Philip Baker Hall) agree to edit the segment to remove
Wigand's interview, despite the supposed autonomy of the news division 
within the CBS hierarchy. To make matters worse, Big Tobacco begins a 
smear campaign against Wigand which, if successful, will destroy his 
credibility, making his interview worthless even if CBS does eventually 
acquiesce.
Although not as compelling as Wigand's personal journey, Bergman's 
efforts to fight both CBS management and the anti-Wigand publicity are 
exciting and provide a dynamic counterpoint to the film's emotional and 
ethical struggles. It is in these scenes that "The Insider" plays most 
loosely with the facts, building up Bergman as the hero of the debacle. 
This is to the detriment of people like Wallace and Hewitt, who come 
across more like corporate lackeys. Many of the feats the movie 
attributes to Bergman are exaggerations or wholesale fabrications -- 
feeding "The Wall Street Journal" information to disprove Big Tobacco's 
smear campaign, for example. (In reality, Bergman had nothing to do with 
the "Journal's" Pulitzer Prize-winning article.)
But I find it difficult to criticize "The Insider" on this basis. This is 
a drama, after all, not a documentary, and without a central hero in 
Bergman, the film would probably be weaker. It is also important to point 
out that both Hall and Plummer maintain their characters' core integrity 
throughout. Plummer has an especially powerful scene after a newspaper 
editorial accuses "60 Minutes" of dishonoring "the legacy of Edward R 
Murrow".
Both Crowe (in an Oscar-nominated performance) and Pacino are terrific 
throughout "The Insider". They find just the right note of realism in 
their characters, not playing them as overtly heroic but sustaining our 
interest nonetheless. Without this, scenes like the one where Wigand, on 
the slippery slope toward a nervous breakdown, hallucinates about his 
daughters would come across as farcical, not enthralling. Both Bergman 
and, in particular, Wigand are ordinary people thrust into extraordinary 
circumstances, and "The Insider" does well not to forget that.
Also excellent is Michael Mann's direction, which keeps up the pace while 
recalling that, at its heart, this is a very human story. There is a 
scene toward the beginning where Wigand and Bergman converse in the 
cramped interior of Wigand's car. It is raining, and they are parked near 
a lake, the car sinking slowly into the mud. It is little more than a 
static dialogue scene, but the setting conveys a sense of claustrophobia 
and isolation which makes it clear that there is already no way out for 
Wigand. He has to make his choice and bear the consequences, and he 
can escape neither.
In the end, "The Insider" shows that it is possible to beat big business, 
if one is willing to endure the inherent risks, and has a little help 
from friends in high places of their own. But we do not live in a black 
and white world, and no matter how noble the cause, such a struggle will 
have undesirable consequences for everyone it touches. The real question 
is whether the people involved will be transformed by these consequences, 
or destroyed.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheInsider.html

Author
Bill Chambers
THE INSIDER ***˝ (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, Diane Venora
screenplay by Eric Roth and Michael Mann, based on the article "The
Man Who Knew Too Much" by Marie Brenner
directed by Michael Mann
"60 Minutes" segment producer Lowell Bergman (Pacino) has contacted
Dr. Jeffrey Wigand (Crowe) hoping he'll be able to interpret an
innocuous book of scientific data on the fire hazzards of smoking.
Wigand, a chemist who was recently sent packing by cigarette
manufacturer Brown & Williamson, incorrectly presumes from Bergman's
call that a newshound is after him to break a confidentiality
agreement he signed as part of a severance package. Wigand promptly
faxes a message back that reads "Can't talk. Won't talk. Don't want
to." 
Director Michael Mann's nervous camera seems to stop dead when Bergman
realizes that his would-be interpretor has let some sort of cat out of
the bag. Pacino doesn't overemphasize the moment-a satisfied grin
flits across his face and then he's back in business mode. (After all,
Bergman at this point is a detective without a mystery.) They first
worked together on Heat, Pacino and Mann, and they make a great team.
Mann leaves Pacino's visage only out of necessity, and in return,
Pacino always gives us something to look at. 
The brilliant Crowe extends Mann the same courtesy. Jeffrey Wigand is
introduced to us as a husband and loving father of few words. (B&W
officially dismissed him for poor communication skills.) But a
disgruntled nerd lurks beneath the surface, a man prone to hard
drinking and violent outbursts. Crowe doesn't call attention to any
shift in personality-when Jeffrey's rage first reveals itself to us,
during a meeting with his former superiors, it's as if we, not Crowe,
were the ones initially repressing Wigand's dark side. And though he
changed his hair and diet to play the gray, pudgy doctor, Crowe (hulky
Bud White of L.A. Confidential) is an unavoidably imposing physical
presence, which adds another layer of tension to his scenes with
Pacino-volatile Wigand could mop the floor with Bergman. 
Wigand and Bergman team up when B&W's unwarranted pressure tactics
drive the former to blow the whistle. (They've seen him talking to
journalists; they assume the worst.) Countless threats of litigation
and murder later, Wigand sits down for veteran TV personality Mike
Wallace and discloses the cold hard truth: that he had been hired to
make "nicotine delivery devices" more addictive. Their interview is a
powerful sequence, one of many. 
Before the piece on corruption in the tobacco industry has aired, CBS
attorneys advise the "60 Minutes" crew to edit out Wigand's
contribution. As a third party exposing Jeffrey's secrets-breaking the
confidentiality agreement on his behalf-they face a lawsuit so great
that Big Tobacoo' (the seven biggies of the industry) could wind up
owning the network. For the first time in the show's history, or at
least in Lowell's fourteen year history with the show, senior producer
Don Hewitt (Phillip Baker Hall) backs down from a fight, and Wallace
joins him-he's too old and tired to stay perched on the soapbox. This
plot point is the real Mike Wallace's point of contention with The
Insider, a docudrama: he fears the film portrays him as spineless. It
does, but it might also be true.
Bergman, on the other hand, comes off as that rare media species who
glows with integrity. He's as concerned about his new friend Jeffrey's
personal sacrifice going unrewarded as he is the story's impact being
softened. (An altered version will simply warn the public that
cigarettes are bad for you-not exactly the sort of groundbreaking item
that brought "60 Minutes" to fame.) If Lowell is too saintly, in the
end, at least Pacino makes quiet confidence and old-fashioned values
as compelling as those traits that win Oscars: brooding, anger,
remorse, the fidgets-Jeffrey's qualities. Though both actors are
award-worthy, I suspect that Crowe's performance will be the one to
capture the Academy's imagination if any of The Insider's do. 
Mann has become a less rigid filmmaker over the years. As co-creator
of "Miami Vice", he practically pioneered the pastels and art deco
aesthetic of the mid-eighties; back then, his shooting style was often
as sterile as his set design. The tide turned with The Last of the
Mohicans-we were no longer voyeurs, we were participants thrown into
battle and swept up in period romance. 1995's Heat, in which his
characters slam "dead-tech post-modern bullshit" architecture,
confirmed that Mann had evolved (no pun intended) into a more
elaborate visualist. (His love of synth music has remained intact over
the years, God bless him: ex-Dead Can Dance frontwoman Lisa Gerrard
and synthesist Pieter Bourke provide The Insider with a dreamy,
emotionally satisfying score.) 
The Insider's cinematography, by Dante Spinotti, is beautifully gritty
and experimental-one memorable shot follows Crowe so closely that his
head threatens to knock the lens. Several unfocused reaction takes
feel as if they were captured on the fly. Perhaps and Mann and his
team were inspired by the work of Wong Kar-Wei (whose freeform
Chungking Express The Insider often resembles in visual terms) or
Dogma 95 (the ideal co-developed by Breaking the Waves' director Lars
Von Trier that prohibits the use of unnatural lighting, Steadicams,
and the like). Whatever the case, the film bears the most
issue-oriented screenplay Mann's worked from yet; had he Hollywood-ed
up the presentation, it might have enhanced the story's preachiness
for the worse. 
At last, the importance of Dr. Wigand's ballsy confession has been
acknowledged; The Insider is great moviemaking.

Author
Gary Jones
Based on events on the early 1990s, The Insider tells how CBS television
producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) persuaded tobacco industry whistle-
blower Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe) to break the confidentiality
agreement he had with his ex-employer and spill the beans on the
management's knowledge that their product was indeed addictive, despite
their sworn public declarations to the contrary. Getting the interview
with Wigand taped was only half the battle, and the film shows the
further struggles Bergman had persuading CBS to air it.
Michael Mann's film finds high drama in telephone calls and faxes, and
his distinctive slick visual style, which was a large part of the appeal
of his TV series Miami Vice, is evident here, although the flashiness
has evolved to take into account the (literally) broader canvas and more
leisurely pace of film. For example, as in his films Manhunter and Heat,
characters are shown in long contemplative silence, framed off-centre in
widescreen fields of garish colour. At times the style threatens to get
in the way of the content, but Mann mostly manages to keep himself in
check.
Al Pacino has in recent years tended to chew the scenery in histrionic
fits, but here he turns in a more carefully controlled performance,
perhaps his best since The Scent of a Woman. But it can't beat Russell
Crowe's terrific performance as the tormented executive. A complex
character, Wigand comes across as a decent principled man without being
particularly likeable. Crowe put on weight for the part, and it is
astonishing that this is the same actor I'd seen in a trailer for
Gladiator a few days earlier. 
The Insider has proved controversial largely because the names of the
individuals and corporations have not been changed in this
dramatisation, and a few feathers were understandably ruffled. In
particular, Mike Wallace, the 60 Minutes front-man played by Christopher
Plummer, objected to the way he is portrayed failing to back up
Bergman's attempts to convince the CBS suits to broadcast Wigand's
interview. The tobacco company involved was also miffed, and insisted
that the film include a disclaimer pointing out that the source of the
death threats against the Wigands was never established. 
How accurate the film is in its details is open to question, but it
seems that the film successfully communicates the broad truth of the
case. Does it really matter? I think it does. All The President's Men,
with which The Insider is bound to be compared, was a similarly talky
but compelling tale of investigative journalists persuading reluctant
witnesses to reveal their inside knowledge of the dirty dealings of
powerful interests, in this case political rather than corporate. Such
films can have a dramatic influence on public perceptions of such
events. Although I've read Woodstein's book, my memories of what
Watergate was all about come mainly from watching Robert Redford and
Dustin Hoffman. Probably the same is true for many US citizens, for whom
these events are not just the stuff of casual interest but form an
important part of recent history. I think filmmakers have a
responsibility with material of this sort, and The Insider and All The
President's Men are both honourable films which discharge this
responsibility. At the other extreme, Oliver Stone's JFK is an example
of the damage that can be done by a talented but misguided filmmaker
meddling with sensitive historical material.
Tackling a tricky subject head-on, The Insider is a stylish and
compelling drama with two excellent lead performances, confirming
Michael Mann as one of mainstream Hollywood's most interesting
filmmakers.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Jeremiah McVay
       This is a hulking mass of a movie. There's just a lot of story,
and, unfortunately, it's not all necessary.
The Insider is fragmented into two main sections, one focusing
on Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe)-- tobacco industry
whistle blower, and the other on Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino)-- 60 Minutes
producer. Crowe does a decent job of apparently
impersonating the real life Wigand (as said by Wigand himself), but
imnpersonation is not always the best route. Of course, I
knew from the beginning that Wigand would eventually decide to speak out
against the industry, but since this was a given, his
struggle to do so should have been more enthralling. There were threats
to his character and his family, but I can't say they ever
convinced me that Wigand ever actually thought about not blowing the
whistle-- it seemed like he was set from the beginning,
no matter how much he tried to act otherwise. This apathy probably came
from the character seeming rather flat. I never felt
like I really knew him-- especially the way I felt I began to know
Pacino's character, Bergman.
Bergman may seem like a bit of a cliché-- the man of
journalistic integrity, but a cliché played by Pacino usually find added
depth. Pacino did a good job of portraying his character, which made it
easier to relate to Bergman, so perhaps the entire
movie should have been slanted more to his position, rather than
spending so much, or any, time in Wigand's position at all. It
surely would have have helped to focus the story as a whole.
The film probably would have been better if it simply kept up
it's theme of upholding journalistic integrity, and simply used
the tobacco issue as a springboard for that, rather than delving so much
into the tobacco industry itself. As it stands, the film
does lean more to this, but it's simply not enough. It becomes bogged
down in trying to create unnecessary and distracting
tension around Wigand when, instead, it would be all the better to focus
on him almost completely from Bergman's position or
point of view [speaking of unnecessary, I'm not sure I'll ever really
figure out what that whole bit about the Uni-bomber was
meant to accomplish].
I loved Mann's last feature, Heat- it was far from perfect, but
it was an interesting and involving film, in my opinion. Of
course, I think it was easy to like it because it was really quite
simplistic-- it was the involvement that made the simplicity seem
to be more than it was. It seems as if, with this film, Mann wanted to
show that he can make a serious film about important
issues. While I think that this film does prove he can do such a thing,
I wouldn't yet say he's been entirely successful. I'll hazard
a guess that he probably worked a little too closely with the editor,
and that's why there's so much material in the final product.
It's easy to lose objectivity in such a situation. Of course, I have no
idea if that's what actually happened...
Perhaps the real fault lies in the writing. The story is just
too unfocused, as I've said. Now that I think about it, what I saw
seems as if they shot a draft of the screenplay that should have been
revised two or three more times. What this means is that
there is a good film on the screen, but not alone. It's there with
extra, unnecessary material.
--
TyroneZero's Movies, etc.
http://members.tripod.com/~TyroneZero/film.html

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
The Insider (1999) 
Rated R; running time 152 minutes
Genre: Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0140352 
Official site: http://www.theinsider-themovie.com/  
Written by: Eric Roth (based on the article by Marie Brenner) 
Directed by: Michael Mann
Starring:  Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, Diane Venora, 
Philip Baker Hall, Gina Gershon, Wings Hauser, Debi Mazar (Debbie De 
Luca), Lindsay Crouse (Sharon Tiller), Stephen Tobolowsky (Eric 
Kluster), Colm Feore (Richard Scruggs), Bruce McGill (Ron Motley), 
Michael Gambon (Thomas Sandefur), Rip Torn (John Scanlon), Lynne Thigpen 
(Mrs. Williams), Hallie Kate Eisenberg (Barbara Wigand), Robert Harper 
(Mark Stern), Nestor Serrano (FBI Agent Robertson), Pete Hamill (N.Y. 
Times Reporter), Cliff Curtis (Sheik Fadlallah), Renee Olstead (Deborah 
Wigand), Mississippi Attorney General Michael Moore (Himself), Robbie G. 
Tomlin (Sammy Bergman), Clyde Lee (WRTV 6 Newscaster), Eyal Podell 
(Lowell's Son), Madeleine Reller (Lesley Stahl), Chris Ufland (Doug 
Oliver)
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsinsider.html
Remember way back in December when I reviewed "Any Given Sunday" and 
wondered if, as an actor, Al Pacino had grown as tired as his football 
coach character was?  Well, based on his performance in The Insider, 
Pacino is as full of piss and vinegar as he was back in his Dog Day 
Afternoon prime.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
In a movie populated with far too many characters to give proper 
attributes to in this small space, the central characters of Jeffrey 
Wigand (Russell Crowe), Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) and Mike Wallace 
(Christopher Plummer) stand out most.  Jeffrey Wigand, a scientist and 
V.P. at tobacco giant Brown & Williamson, is pursued by CBS' "60 
Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman after Wigand is fired from B&W and 
Bergman is given anonymous tips by an insider that tobacco companies 
knowingly and willfully put harmful chemicals in their cigarettes to get 
smokers hooked on them.  Even though Wigand has been fired, he hesitates 
to talk to Bergman and reporter Mike Wallace about the company, due to a 
confidentiality clause he signed with B&W, and in fact Wigand finds 
himself under increasing harassment and smear campaign tactics from 
unnamed sources (who he naturally assumes are connected to B&W) to keep 
his mouth shut.  
After Bergman convinces him that Bergman and a group of lawyers he hires 
can protect Wigand, Wigand agrees to be interviewed by Wallace; but that 
confidentiality clause comes back to haunt both men when Bergman, 
Wallace, and Executive Producer Don Hewitt (Phillip Baker Hall) are put 
under pressure by CBS' legal department, led by Helen Caperelli (Gina 
Gershon), to drop Wigand's interview from the "60 Minutes" story.  
Remarkably, the CBS executives do just that, leaving Wigand to suffer 
the smear campaign alone, after his wife Liane (Diane Venora) and 
children leave him.  Bergman, however, has other plans...
The Upshot:
Let me be perfectly frank: I didn't go to see "The Insider" because I'd 
heard it was Da Bomb.  I didn't go because I had 2.5 hours of free time 
on a lonely Saturday night (trust me, I didn't), nor because I had a 
hankerin' to see a Good Guy vs Bad Guy fable.  I'll be straight-up with 
you; I went to see this flick for the same reason that tens of 
Jonny-come-lately critics and moviegoers went to see it after its 
re-release: because it was nominated for an Academy Award.  I'll not put 
forth any illusions that I cared for the tone of this film, for its High 
Moral Stance about the trials and travails of the Little Whistleblower 
versus the Big Bad Tobacco Company in the one corner, and the Evil Media 
Empire in the other.  I mean, to me, this movie rested squarely on the 
same continuum of last year's simple-minded, ridiculously hyped (and 
sheeple-ly watched) Titanic flick: Little Man Blow Whistle.  Big Bad 
Tobacco Company Squash Little Whistleblower. Evil Media Empire Leave 
Little Whistleblower Twisting In Wind. Little Whistleblower Fight Back. 
Good Triumphs Over Evil.  End Of Movie.  And to an extent, that's how 
it's laid out for the viewer.
That extent, of course, doesn't do much justice to the powerhouse 
performances by Pacino, Crowe, and the underappreciated Plummer, an 
actor whose characters always have the same sly grin that a Rottweiler 
might just before he tears you a new one.  Crowe garnered an Oscar 
nomination for his against-type performance, a nod which he richly 
deserved; an Aussie whose next big flick, Gladiator, has him filling 
Kirk Douglas' sandals, Crowe sinks his teeth into this meaty role and 
digs in--even when it gets Weird.  And the aforementioned Pacino puts in 
a solid performance that makes me wonder why he, too, wasn't seriously 
considered for a nomination.  Lack of character flaws aside (though it 
was a central issue for me that both Bergman and Wigand were presented 
as Put-Upon Heros with little culpability), they both did an outstanding 
job in keeping the noticeably-longish movie going smoothly, for the most 
part.  
Michael Mann's direction, on the other hand, tended to get in the way 
for me; while I'm sure there are critics out there, hailing Mann's 
so-close-up-the-nose, you-wanna-grab-a-tissue closeups as the pinnacle 
of cinematic art, I found them as tedious as Weigand's hallucinations 
were laughable.   Mann didn't totally screw the pooch--his artistic use 
of light and shadows, and beautiful shots of the Mississippi coastline, 
really worked for me, as did his general direction of the actors 
themselves.  But those closeups gave me a daggone headache.
As for the movie itself, in the end, it all boils down to this: the 
movie, as good as it may have been, failed to impart a sense of Urgency! 
in me, because of the times we live in in American society.  Crooked 
politicians, slimy lawyers, opportunistic Media outlets, 
morally-bankrupt businesses: they're all part and parcel of The System 
in which we all are trapped; for all its chest-thumping, this movie 
isn't telling us something we don't already know. 
As I said earlier, there are far too many characters--and actors--to 
properly attribute from this lengthy film (thus, the addition of 
character names next to the credited actors above but not mentioned in 
the body of this review).  Try as I might, I can't even remember half of 
the characters that the Internet Movie Database lists in starring roles 
(and the Flash-laden official movie site doesn't help much).  But for 
all of the pomp and circumstance surrounding the main players, there's 
one scene late in the movie, involving two character actors playing 
lawyers (one of whom is Wings Hauser, and the other whose name escapes 
me right now, though he's one of those actors whose face you never 
forget) that was the highlight of this flick for me, so much so that I 
find myself often repeating the name-I-forget's memorable line.  Keeping 
this great scene as spoiler-free as I can, I'll summarize it thusly: at 
Weigand's relatively informal hearing in Mississippi, Hauser's 
character, a lawyer for the tobacco interests, continually harangues 
Weigand, telling him he can't break his confidentiality agreement; he 
does this to the objection of name-I-forget, who reminds Hauser's 
character that they aren't in a jury trial and he should just chill.  
Hauser's character, of course, fails to chill, and as their argument 
comes to a head, name-I-forget breaks off with "The Saaavern State 'a 
Mih-sippi is tellin' you to shut! the! hell! up!".  Or something like 
that.
Maybe you had to be there, but it had me rollin'.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I actually hesitate to bring this up within the context of the BF, 
because the comparison isn't valid strictly along these lines--but since 
I've read it bandied about in many email messages forwarded hither and 
yon, I'm hoping that the inclusion of the comparison within this space, 
will bring an end to the playing of this particular race card:
It's no secret that "The Insider" as well as another current movie based 
on a true story, "The Hurricane" starring Denzel Washington, are 
"burdened" by untruths, if not outright lies, included as "dramatic 
license".  Where "Insider" acknowledged these "fibs" in disclaimers 
displayed in the end credits, "Hurricane" did not, and "Hurricane" 
seemingly suffered the consequences for it, in both bad publicity and, 
likely, in not being given an Oscar nomination.  Some would say that an 
unspoken consideration was the two movie's racial makeup--"Hurricane" 
being, in their eyes, a Black movie.  To that, I say, get over it--and 
remember that Denzel picked up a Best Actor nod for that role.  Fibs and 
all.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
"Tobacco companies put Bad Stuff in cigarettes so that smokers will 
continue to ignore the limp warnings on the ciggy packages, and puff 
until their lungs are coated black with tar?  Noooo, really?  And The 
Media has no backbone, hiding behind The Peoples Right To Know whenever 
it suits them?  Git outta heah, ya gotta be kiddin me!  What's next, 
you'll tell me that "Titanic" was a dumb piece of fluff about a big boat 
that Hit Iceberg, Go Boom?"  Duh, so what's new?
"The Insider" (rating: greenlight):
Good performances that are as much wasted on a "No sh*t, Sherlock" tale.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Almost compelling. But you know what they say about almost...
Slow and deliberate pacing is all well and good for the first hour of an
end of the year flick, but when the fireworks at the core of the story
finally hit, it would be very nice if they sustained themselves for a
bit. It would be even nicer if they weren't backed up by a soundtrack
vocal that sounds like the wail of a peasant woman being tortured. But
they don't and they are and good is not good enough in Oscar season.
Michael Mann's The Insider dramatizes the story of a botched 60 Minutes
report on the addictive properties of cigarettes. Botch may be the wrong
word; It wasn't factually inaccurate story -- at the center of the storm
is a fired research V.P. for the Brown & Williamson tobacco company
named Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe). His knowledge of the effects of
chemical additives mixed with cigarette tobacco would eventually supply
the evidence that forced the `Seven Dwarves' (the big tobacco companies)
into a $246 Billion dollar settlement. When 60 minutes was ready to air
their story, the threat of a multi-Billion dollar lawsuit by B&Y coupled
with, and this is how The Insider presents it, the pending sale of CBS
to Westinghouse and all the stock option profits that would be lost
because of such a suit caused management to stomp on News. 60 Minutes
aired an `alternate' story. One which didn't include the on-camera
testimony of Wigand.
Even before the corporate power play, Wigand found himself followed,
threatened, unable to find work in his professional capacity as a
researcher (he became a schoolteacher). His marriage dissolved, and a
high powered public relations firm engineered a nation smear of his
reputation. The man he trusted his story to, who assured him (as he had
so many others) of the integrity of CBS News was Lowell Bergman (Al
Pacino). Mike Wallace (Christopher Plummer) was the correspondent the
story was produced for. Don Hewitt (Philip Baker Hall) is the CBS News
executive who guides, actually he created, 60 Minutes. All but Bergman,
to some extent, folded to pressure from Management (Gina Gershon as the
corporate lawyer who stands to lose millions if the story isn't spiked)
and aired an `alternate' version of the story, masking Wigand's face and
voice in a manner that is downright cheesy.
It isn't hard to disassociate the actors from the real life characters
they play, all but Wallace (and Wigand, if you've followed the story
very closely) are fairly anonymous to the general public. Christopher
Plummer has Wallace's vocal inflection and physical manner down pat --
and all I know about Mike Wallace is what I've seen on teevee for the
last thirty or so years -- and the real life Wallace doesn't come off as
badly as he thought he would. By which I mean . . .
In the real life news biz sometimes telling most of the story can
deliver most of the message. I speak from a couple of years experience
at NBC News (the biggest names I worked with were Jane Pauley and Roger
Mudd). In this case going with the alternate story is acceptable to
Wallace who is facing his last years and worrying about the rep that
will live on. When he reads a New York Times editorial saying 60 Minutes
had `betrayed the legacy of Edward R. Murrow,' Plummer's Wallace is
justifiably cut to the quick and reacts. You get a good sense of the
politics of the newsroom in what follows.
Al Pacino knows how to bring fire and passion to a role. Pacino's
character has a couple of other stories in development and you get a
good notion of what working the newsbeat is like. But when his Bergman
sees his story about to get spiked, he find the alternative
`acceptable.' His efforts to get the real story out should've brought
them ol' fireworks to the screen. The fuse is lit many times but the
sparks rarely fly.
Michael Mann's pacing kills the effort dead. There's nothing that gets
in the way of the central story but, when a lot of that story involves
great soul searching on everybody's part, that means we spend a lot of
time watching people think. That also means that the time devoted to
Wigand and his family, Diane Lane as his wife Liane, doesn't provide
enough info to stab our emotional hearts when she grabs the kids and
runs away from the coming media onslaught. I can't point a finger at
Crowe, he's done too much good work before. I have had problems with
Michael Mann's writing/directing; yes, I know I'm not supposed to
compare films but I'm comparing styles here, and I haven't much liked
Mann's.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Insider, he would have paid...
Wait for pay per view. At this time of year, the longer they get, the
better they should be. With nominations on the line, the contenders get
a more severe looking over. Our nod would go to Plummer's Wallace,
though Pacino is a no-brainer.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on March 10, 2000; 
certificate 15; 158 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Michael Mann; produced by Pieter Jan Brugge, Michael Mann.
Written by Michael Mann, Eric Roth; based on the "Vanity Fair" article "The 
Man Who Knew Too Much" by Marie Brenner.
Photographed by Dante Spinotti; edited by William Goldenberg, David 
Rosenbloom, Paul Rubell.
The tobacco industry is one of the most greedy and deceptive there is. All 
its major companies have covered up official research which proves their 
products are disease-causing fire hazards, marketed them to underage kids, 
manipulated levels of nicotine to promote addiction and lied about these 
actions in open court. Everyone is disgusted at its behaviour -- onlookers, 
customers and even employees.
A case in point is Jeffrey Wigand, a former smoker who once headed the 
research department of Brown & Williamson, the third biggest cigarette 
manufacturer in the USA. B&W fired him for shooting off his mouth about 
company policy after his employers kept ignoring his evidence on how to 
produce a safer smoke. And then it went to great pains to destroy his life, 
when it became apparent that he intended to blow the whistle on its official 
secrets.
Michael Mann's "The Insider" stars Russell Crowe as Wigand, tells his story 
from the moment he was fired, and for the most part remains faithful to the 
facts. At the start of the film he is a man who does not want to rock the 
boat, despite his important knowledge about his bosses' dirty tricks. He 
usually speaks his mind, but breaking his confidentiality agreement with B&W 
would cut off his severance payments and medical insurance.
He denies an interview request from Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino), an 
investigative reporter for the television news magazine "60 Minutes". Until, 
that is, B&W send him uncalled-for violent reminders to keep quiet, which 
include a bullet in his mailbox, e-mail death threats and up-front stalkers. 
Then Wigand, furiously angry, agrees to record the interview, in which he 
reveals damning facts about the perjury and illegal cover-ups his firm was 
involved in.
CBS, the channel that runs "60 Minutes", decides not to broadcast the 
footage, because their executives have been threatened with a B&W lawsuit for 
"tortious interference". Bergman's fight against this decision is passionate, 
and takes up the second half of the film, but Wigand is offended that it was 
made in the first place. His involvement with Bergman has broken up his 
marriage, and provoked B&W to cancel his financial benefits and orchestrate a 
smear campaign against him. He starts to drink, shout, hate; in short, his 
life goes to hell. 
But "The Insider" is not, as some reviews have stated, a character study of 
ambiguous American heroes. Nor does it make much of an impression as a tale 
of the struggles involved in investigative journalism. It involves both these 
things, yes, as well as elements of courtroom drama, but most critics are 
simply trying to find sophisticated ways of saying the movie isn't an attack 
on the tobacco industry, when that's exactly what it is. Every scene is 
haunted by the evil intimidation of Brown & Williamson: When Wigand's life is 
crumbling, when close relationships disintegrate, when Bergman's superiors 
are afraid to air his story, when court proceedings keep getting obstructed 
-- it's always obvious who's throwing the spanner in the works.
The news that big corporations use their influence destructively hardly 
surprises us (it's widely rumoured that the oil industry, for example, is 
just as bad as Big Tobacco). But we're still angered by it, and that's why 
"The Insider" works, unlike the Marie Brenner magazine article it's based on, 
which was interesting, but developed into a puzzle of facts and figures that 
was impossible to follow.
Mann, the director and co-writer, gets past this problem by organising the 
material in the manner of a slick Hollywood thriller. That's his forte -- he 
made "Thief", "Last of the Mohicans" and "Heat", all of which are acclaimed 
epic action pictures. Bergman's story, when told with their intensity and 
immediacy, becomes something we can easily get involved in. It's a pity that 
Mann is less interested by Wigand's (more attention-grabbing) plight. The 
developments in that character's life seem to be skimmed over in comparison 
to Bergman's; there's less of a structure to his tale.
Luckily, Russell Crowe gets across the point well enough with his startlingly 
brave acting. The physical side of his role involved putting on a dangerous 
amount of weight, wearing a grey wig and ageing make-up, and replacing his 
young Australian voice with the accent of a middle-aged man from Kentucky. 
Psychologically, he challenges us to admire Wigand's courage despite his bad 
temper, indecisiveness and shifty body language. Crowe always seems to be 
shaking a little, with eyes glaring and angry, and paranoid fingers fumbling 
-- but of course there's every justification for these nervous ticks.
This is great characterisation, and the way Crowe paints Wigand's breakdown 
incenses us at those who would seek to destroy his reputation. On that note, 
though, lies one of the significant problems I had with "The Insider", which 
is its unnecessarily dark portrayal of Mike Wallace, the presenter of "60 
Minutes". I understand the need for screenwriters to take dramatic license 
when adapting true stories, or to condense events to make them cinematic. But 
Wallace, who in reality fought alongside Bergman, is shown bowing to CBS 
corporate pressure for no other reason than to make Al Pacino look more 
heroic. This is a film that wants to discuss the importance of truth. Lies 
and hypocrisy are not the best way to kick off the debate.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Indra Moeljadi
Smoking is bad for your health. Everybody knows it. But people still enjoy
it. And the tobacco companies are making big money. Worse, they even lie
about the fact that nicotine is addictive. So what if it's addictive? People
are still going to smoke it.
Too bad these tobacco companies keep on lying, and with their big bucks,
they can do whatever they want, create whatever lies they want. Jeffrey
Wigand (Russel Crowe) used to be a top executive at Brown & Williamson, the
third largest tobacco firm in the US. That was until he got fired by his
boss because of "poor communication skills". But from his time at B&W, he
knew a whole lot of information that could bring the tobacco business down.
So Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino), producer of CBS' 60 minutes, is looking for
Wigand and he tries to make Wigand confess in front of national television
about all these tobacco firms lies. But in doing that isn't easy.
Wigand has to deal with his ex-office. They have the money, he doesn't. And
with money, you can do almost everything. On top of that, he has to deal
with his wife, who can't support him, and keeps on whining about the money.
What a rollercoaster ride for Wigand, and Bergman can't keep up.
It's a fantastic investigative movie, based on a true story and true facts.
Although the movie exaggarated some facts, but at least they admitted it at
the end of the movie. No wonder that this movie is nominated for Best Film
at the Oscar. You can really feel the struggle that Wigand and Bergman have
to make during the whole process of being a whistle blower.
Russel Crowe's performance is outstanding, and he did just fine playing
alongside Al Pacino. Whenever Al Pacino is in a role that requires screaming
and confronting somebody, than he is the man.
Michael Mann is getting better. He made the bad guy the good one in Heat,
and he made everybody dressing up like Don Johnson during the Miami Vice
days. Here he put suspense from telephone conversations, not with fights and
gun shots all over the place.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In a picture that deserves to be remembered at Oscar time, THE INSIDER
tells a mesmerizing, true story that's in equal measure drama, thriller
and mystery.  Directed by Michael Mann (THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS) and
starring Russell Crowe (L.A. CONFIDENTIAL) and Al Pacino, all three of
whom should be nominated by the Academy, the film has your eyes glued to
the screen as it examines some universal truths about integrity and
risk.
With never a dull moment, the story still manages to take the time to
consider the entirety of people's lives and families and delve into the
minutia of a journalistic investigation.  The movie will and should be
compared favorably to the classic journalistic investigation story, ALL
THE PRESIDENT'S MEN.
Brilliantly scripted by Eric Roth, based on a magazine article by Marie
Brenner titled "The Man Who Knew Too Much," and containing a sterling
supporting cast, the movie has only one possible flaw -- it's longer
than normal at over two and a half hours.  Its length, however, turns
out to be both necessary and beneficial.  Any scene that looks like
cinematic fat will prove later to be a key to setting up other parts of
the story.  In most movies the characters have either a work life or a
home life, but not both.  This film takes the time to show both, and
their interactions prove essential to understanding the motivation of
the protagonists.
The story concerns one Dr. Jeffrey Wigand (Crowe), the former head of
research at Brown and Williamson Tobacco.  A proud man of high
integrity, Dr. Wigand has been fired by the company, who is scared that
he will break his confidentiality agreement and reveal certain hidden
truths about the company.
Michael Gambon does a deliciously sinister turn as Thomas Sandefur, the
CEO of Brown and Williamson and Dr. Wigand's direct boss.  Sandefur, who
testified with 6 other Big Tobacco executives before Congress that
tobacco is not addictive, takes an ostrich approach to facts that aren't
to his liking.  "You declare as a badge of honor that you don't even
know what makes water boil," Dr. Wigand ridicules him.
The whole situation is extremely complex as real life situations tend to
be.  Dr. Wigand does not want to do anything to jeopardize his severance
package and the medical insurance that the company has promised.  He has
2 beautiful young girls (Hallie Kate Eisenberg and Renee Olstead), whom
he adores, but one has asthma, which requires expensive medical care.
His trophy wife (Linda Hart) becomes chilly toward him as soon as his
income dries up and his troubles begin.
Meanwhile "60 Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman (Pacino) wants to get the
doctor on the show and have him interviewed by veteran journalist Mike
Wallace (Christopher Plummer).  Pacino is perfectly cast as the
hard-charging reporter who'll do anything so long as it doesn't
jeopardize his source.  Bergman is as tough and honest as they come.
Nearing retirement, Wallace comes across as possessing good intentions
but fatal flaws as he worries too often about "other considerations."
Chief among these considerations is that the tobacco companies, who
possess the most sophisticated and powerful attorneys on the face of the
earth, will bring down his entire company, CBS.  "History only remembers
what you did last," he laments.
As a slimy lawyer with possible conflicts of interests, Gina Gershon
plays CBS's lawyer, Helen Caperelli, who advises "60 Minutes" not to run
the Wigand segment lest the company end up losing a multi-billion dollar
law suit and being owned by Brown and Williamson.
While all of this fascinating corporate intrigue is going on, Dr.
Wigand's life is falling apart.  He's getting anonymous death threats,
he's being followed, and his life is crumbling all around him.  Crowe
with his physical mannerisms makes palpable the tenseness of the
situation.  Constantly adjusting his glasses, fiddling with his tie and
twitching his head, Dr. Wigand is a lonely man who is breaking under the
strain.
The suitably ominous but never overpowering music by Pieter Bourke and
Lisa Gerrard add immensely to the production.  Dante Spinotti's moody,
shadowy cinematography lends an ominous feeling of impending doom.
"I'm running out of heroes, man," Bergman tells Dr. Wigand.  "Guys like
you are in short supply."  The movie makes it obvious why.  Dr. Wigand
realizes, correctly, that to agree to be interviewed he has to be
willing to risk everything, literally everything, in his life.  If you
have a loving family and expensive possessions, would you be willing to
chance losing them all forever, just because your integrity demanded it?
For most of us it's not a tough call.  In reality, most of us would
pass.  It is for just that reason that this film, with its superlative
acting, becomes so engrossing.
THE INSIDER runs 2:37.  It is rated R for language and mature themes and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE INSIDER" (Touchstone)
Michael Mann's compelling story, adapted by Mann and Eric Roth
from Marie Brenner's 1996 Vanity Fair article, "The Man Who Knew Too
Much," examines the behind-the-scenes drama and maneuverings that led
to the media's exposure of tobacco industry fraud. Whistle-blower
Jeffrey Wigand, former head of research and development at Brown &
Williamson, was a corporate officer, the ultimate insider on the
skullduggery involved in the business of selling tobacco. His firing
comes to the attention of Mike Wallace's producer, Lowell Bergman, who
convinces the reluctant scientist to spill the beans on 60 Minutes,
only to have the interview killed by CBS's corporate lawyer who cites
a confidentiality agreement the executive signed with the tobacco
company. Three months later, after the Wall Street Journal printed
Wigand's allegations, 60 Minutes aired the segment. So much for
fiasco. It's the Oscar-caliber performances that command attention,
primarily the emotional relationship between Russell Crowe, as the
conflicted Wigand, and Al Pacino, as the tenacious Bergman. A
journalist hasn't shown this much righteous indignation since All the
President's Men. Christopher Plummer deserves a Best Supporting Actor
nod as Wallace, who with Philip Baker Hall, as producer Don Hewitt,
come across as cowards, bowing to management on ethics, leaving their
source, Wigand, hanging in the wind. The medieval and Middle Eastern
music by Lisa Gerrard and Pieter Bourke enhances Dante Spinotti's
dark, eerie imagery. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The
Insider is a tense, trenchantly topical 10.  Subsequent to the
shocking events dramatized in the film, the tobacco industry settled
the lawsuits filed against it by Mississippi and 49 other states for
$246 billion.

Author
Christopher Null
     Listen up!  A movie adapted from a magazine article about the
making of a four-year old segment of a television program:  Does this
pitch have you hooked yet?  No?  Well, despite a potentially dry-as-dust
premise, THE INSIDER manages to rise above its inherent limitations and
provides a compelling look inside the politics of `60 Minutes' and the
tobacco industry.
     They say you should never see two things being made:  Sausage and
legislation.  Add journalism to that list.  I've been in this racket
long enough to know that objectivity is painfully lacking in the places
you expect to find it the most.  Backroom deals make strange bedfellows
of interest-conflicted parties (e.g. Time-Warner owns Entertainment
Weekly magazine, which reviews Warner Bros. films, etc.)  So when `60
Minutes' producer Lowell Bergman (Pacino) decided to do a story about
the hazards of cigarettes in 1996, he found himself embroiled in
controversy.
     Central to that controversy was Jeffrey Wigand (Crowe), a VP with
Brown & Williamson, the #3 tobacco company in the U.S.  Just-fired and
full of rage, Wigand `blew the whistle' on B&W, and after much
haranguing, he told a tale of the hazards of smoking  and the fact that
the tobacco companies knew about those hazards  to Mike Wallace
(Plummer) and `60 Minutes.'
     But before the segment could air, B&W threatened legal action
against all the parties, Wigand became the subject of a vicious smear
campaign, his wife left him, he basically went nuts, and Bergman started
to feel responsible for ruining Wigand's life  all with nothing to show
for it, because CBS top brass refused to air the interview.
     Add in the impending sale of CBS to Westinghouse, and you're
staring into a morass of journalistic dishonesty and a legal migraine.
     That any of this makes interesting filmmaking is a genuine
surprise, and with a running time close to 3 hours, it's even more
amazing that my attention was held throughout.  Mann, last seen
directing HEAT, is certainly unnecessarily long-winded throughout the
movie, but some stellar performances keep THE INSIDER going strong.  It
goes without saying that Pacino burns in his role, but it's Crowe who
deserves the real praise as the falling-apart Wigand.  Think Oscar
nomination; he deserves it.
     Christopher Plummer does an amazing impression of Mike Wallace, and
also of note is Bruce McGill, as a Mississippi D.A., who has about five
minutes of amazing screen time.
     The funny thing about THE INSIDER is that Wigand's story is not the
most interesting part of the film.  It is at first, but Mann (wisely)
eventually directs the story back to CBS, with focus on the wrangling
within its corporate hierarchy about whether to run the interview.
Why?  Because the `danger of smoking' is really old news.  Philip
Morris's recent admission that smoking causes cancer is a further sign
that this whole debate might be beating a dead horse.
Director: Michael Mann
Producer: Peter Jan Brugge, Michael Mann
Writer: Eric Roth
Starring: Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, Philip Baker
Hall, Diane Venora, Gina Gershon, Rip Torn, Lindsay Crouse, Debi Mazar,
Bruce McGill
http://www.theinsider-themovie.com/
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE INSIDER
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, Philip Baker
Hall, Diane Venora.
Screenplay:  Eric Roth and Michael Mann, based on the article "The Man Who
Knew Too Much" by Marie Brenner.
Producers:  Michael Mann and Pieter Jan Brugge.
Director:  Michael Mann.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  155 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As a storyteller, Michael Mann was born at least 200 years too late.
In another place and time, he would have crafted operas -- grand-scale
tales of human conflict blown up several times larger than life,
accompanied by choruses and crescendos. Neither the subject matter nor the
genre alters Mann's sense of the theatrical. The gothic horror of THE
KEEP, the cop/crook conflict of HEAT, the historical drama of THE LAST OF
THE MOHICANS -- all were treated as Very Important Films, sometimes
through sprawling running times, sometimes through lingering slow-motion
images. Mann's brand of operatic cinema has never quite been my cup of
tea, and I was even more skeptical when I knew he had gotten his hands on
material like THE INSIDER. This was, after all, a story about undeniably
important issues: the insidious influence of corporate consolidation;
journalistic ethics; the weighty responsibility of challenging the Powers
That Be. Could Mann resist creating a film that would collapse under the
weight of its self-imposed significance?
     He could, and he did, though THE INSIDER is a much better personal
story than it is a sweeping indictment of journalism-as-big-business.
Russell Crowe stars as Dr. Jeffrey Wigand, who has just been fired from
his job as director of research for the Brown & Williamson tobacco company
when the film opens. Looking for a little extra cash -- and perhaps a
small measure of payback -- Wigand agrees to act as a consultant when "60
Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) comes to him with documents
obtained from Phillip Morris. Wigand has no intention of revealing any of
his own secrets until anonymous threats and harassment inspire him to blow
the whistle on tobacco industry manipulation of nicotine. Bergman is ready
to go public with Wigand's story, until the threat of litigation from
Brown & Williamson throws the future of the story into question. As Wigand
attempts to pick up the pieces of his life, Bergman attempts to pick up
the pieces of "60 Minutes'" compromised integrity.
     The details of CBS' ignominious corporate cave-in are already fairly
well-known: Allegedly afraid of how the spectre of litigation would affect
a proposed sale of the network to Westinghouse, network executives ordered
Wigand's on-air interview shelved. The story of how Wigand's life was
forever changed is considerably less well-known. Mann and co-screenwriter
Eric Roth paint Wigand as nobody's idea of a hero, a contentious
occasionally-heavy drinker whose manner does little to challenge Brown &
Williamson's description of him as possessing "poor communication
skills." Russell Crowe transforms himself physically into the pale, doughy
scientist, never shying away from Wigand's darker side. Ironically, that
pig-headed side of Wigand is shown to be the reason he persists even when
Brown & williamson starts playing the hardest hardball. It's also the side
that makes THE INSIDER most compelling -- and most unnerving -- as B&W
begins digging up every possible speck of dirt from Wigand's past to
discredit him. It's a notion only a half-step removed from the tragic
state of our political process -- the discouraging idea no sane man would
open his entire history, warts and all, to public scrutiny.
     As long as THE INSIDER sticks close to Wigand's story and the
ever-mounting repercussions for his actions, it's pretty strong stuff. In
the second half of the film, however, CBS corporate politics begin to take
over the narrative. Bergman confronts Mike Wallace (Christopher Plummer)
and executive producer Don Hewitt (Philip Baker Hall) over their
willingness to accept the dictates of the corporate big-wigs; he works in
the background to expose the cover-up of Wigand's interview. Paper chase
storytelling is tough to pull off, and Mann does a more than serviceable
job of finding drama in ethical debate. It's just that once again he's in
Opera Man mode, giving Pacino a stage for railing with righteous
indignation (a scenario that never does Pacino any favors). The subject is
interesting, but it is not about the deathknell of the free press. Mann
has trouble recognizing when a film isn't about earth-shaking
consequences.
     He also has trouble recognizing when enough is enough. At more than
two and a half hours, THE INSIDER starts to drag, and feels particularly
out-of-control when Mann drags in the Unabomber story near the conclusion. 
Granted, he finds time in those two and a half hours for some dynamic
individual scenes, including Bruce McGill's magnificent tirade as a
Mississippi prosecutor staring down a smirking Brown & Williamson
attorney. Mann does know how to make a moment of truth crackle; he knows
how to create compelling human stories. He doesn't always know when enough
is enough -- when that next shot of someone walking in super slow-mo will
feel overly pretentious, or when that wailing chorus will begin to grate
on the nerves. Eventually, even after plenty of solid filmmaking, you're
just ready for that fat lady to hurry up and sing already.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Insider (1999)
Al Pacino, Russell Crowe, Christopher Plummer, Diane Venora, Philip Baker Hall, Lindsay Crouse, Debi Mazar, Stephen Tobolowsky, Colm Feore, Bruce McGill, Gina Gershon, Michael Gambon, Rip Torn. Screenplay by Eric Roth and Michael Mann, based on the Vanity Fair article "The Man Who Knew Too Much" by Marie Brenner. Directed by Michael Mann. 158 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Jeffrey Wigand is a hero. The former corporate officer of a major
tobacco company risked everything to blow the whistle on his employers
and "60 Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman eagerly taped his
statement. But greed and fear at the highest levels of the network led
CBS to pull the finished segment. Stunned at the breach of
journalistic integrity, Bergman frantically tried to save the
interview while his number one source was left twisting in the wind.
This powerful slice of recent history deserves the big screen
treatment. To a degree, "The Insider" does its subject proud. But at a
whopping two hours and 38 minutes, the deliberately paced film from
director Michael Mann ("Last of the Mohicans," "Heat") is about 40
minutes too long. As if that wasn't challenging enough, a shift in
focus from Wigand to Bergman during the last hour further undermines
the impact of the piece. In real life, Wigand found himself swallowed
by network politics and a smear campaign by the tobacco
company. Sadly, his character ends up a ghost in the film as well.
Still, patient viewers will find substantial rewards here. After
breaking onto the American scene with "L.A. Confidential," Russell
Crowe gives another stellar performance as Jeffrey Wigand, a scientist
who learned that cigarettes were merely "a delivery device for
nicotine" and that the tobacco companies routinely manipulated the
drug to further promote addiction. Crowe deftly creates a rich,
three-dimensional portrait of this deeply conflicted man. For
authenticity, the actor also gained 50 pounds for the role and proudly
displays the results in a brief "Check out my flab - - am I dedicated
or what?!" shirtless scene, one of the more amusing contemporary movie
clichés.
Thankfully, serial overactor Al Pacino reigns in his scenery chomping
for most of the film, although he finally tears loose towards the end
of the story. As Mike Wallace, Christopher Plummer does a reasonable,
if oily, impersonation of the veteran newsman.
"The Insider" is similar in theme and structure to "Prince of the
City," although the latter is a far superior film. While even longer
than "The Insider," "Prince" had a much more intricate story to
tell. In addition, the filmmakers recognized the importance of keeping
their tortured informant in the center of the proceedings. When "The
Insider" veers from Wigand to Bergman, the film becomes just another
tale of a crusading journalist, and, though the mechanics are
fascinating, it remains a trip through overly familiar
territory. While the tobacco company failed in their attempt to bury
Jeffrey Wigand, "The Insider" finally dismisses him, leaving the man a
footnote at the end of his own valiant story.

Author
Ross Anthony
Based on the May 1996 Vanity Fair article "The Man Who Knew Too Much" by
Marie Brenner, "The Insider" follows the trials and tribulations of a former
big tobacco executive who coughs up sobering truths concerning cigarette
addiction. Mann's script remains boldly true to the article, right down to
naming names (CBS, Wallace, B&W, etc.); Mississippi Attorney General Michael
Moore even plays himself, "I saw it as a chance to have some fun and be a
part of history again." (Quote from production notes.)
Russell Crowe, almost completely unrecognizable from his long-haired,
hockey-playing, mountain man look in "Mystery, Alaska," works out the
nervous cricks in his neck as the middle-aged, whistle-blowing, former VP of
B&M (Kools, Viceroy). Managing the difficult role of an intelligent,
imperfectly sincere, tough, slowly crumbling pillar, Crowe displays
appropriately tamed flare and rugged modesty.
Pacino plays Lowell Bergman, producer of "60 minutes" and Wallace's right
hand guy. It's Lowell that erects the soap box/guillotine for Dr. Wigand's
big bean spillage. Willing to loose it all (family, reputation, even
freedom), Dr. Wigand refuses to be squelched by Tobacco's less than subtle
intimidation tactics (including but not limited to death threats). In fact,
the movie plays a bit like a horror flick at times ... Is the house safe for
the family? Will one of the kids be snatched away? Will an un-snuffed cigar
butt start the place on fire? Wigand weighs the risks: personal welfare vs.
right vs. stubborn horse pride, "I can't seem to find the criteria to
decide."
Eventually, Lowell's proximity and passion to this truth-teller leaves him
feeling the stinging singes of hot coals as well. Pacino's performance, as
in other films, is flawless. He's strong, passionate and completely driven.
Interestingly enough, I don't recall a single lit cigarette or pipe in the
entire picture, not even from a passer-by; perhaps making the film's only
flaw (if you wish to call it that) a wisping tendency toward the preachy.
Nonetheless, "The Insider" delivers good entertaining drama. After it's two
hour and thirty-seven minute duration, you'll still be left wanting more.
The Insider. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Russell Crowe, Al Pacino, Christopher Plummer and Diane Venora.
Directed by Michael Mann.
Screenplay by Eric Roth and Michael Mann.
Produced by Michael Mann & Pieter Jan Brugge at Touchstone.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
James Sanford
 In an episode of "ER" for example, it's easy to show the
consequences of giving a patient the wrong medication. Likewise, in a
comedy like "Runaway Bride" or "Moonstruck," a director can let us see
the chaos that erupts as the heroine chooses true love over
responsibility.
 It's considerably trickier to convey to an audience the
consequences of what happens when crucial information is withheld from
the public due to legal maneuvering or corporate cover-ups. That's
precisely the problem director Michael Mann struggles with in "The
Insider," an intensely detail-oriented drama about the manipulation of
the news that will strike a resonant chord with many people in
journalism or TV production.
 Based on a Vanity Fair profile of Jeffrey Wigand, a former
research and development director for cigarette manufacturer Brown &
Williamson who exposed the hypocracy within the tobacco industry, this
is a film almost certain to receive plenty of coverage in the media.
 The attention would not be undeserved. It's a well-written,
masterfully acted piece of work with many thought-provoking points to
make about what happens when we let outside interests determine what is
and is not news.
 From the average moviegoer, however, the response is likely to be a
loud "ho hum."
 In tackling a challenging subject, Mann has presented his story
in a jarringly uncinematic fashion. In fact, often while watching the
movie, you may find yourself thinking this material might have been
easier to present in a play since so much of it revolves around tense
dialogues and silent soul-searching. The immediacy of live performance
might have helped immeasurably in putting across "The Insider"'s agenda
to the masses.
 Instead, Mann tries to create that intimacy through
near-continuous use of extreme close-ups. We're constantly being thrust
into the heavily lined eyes of Wigand (whose inner torments are
marvelously brought to the surface by Russell Crowe) and "60 Minutes"
producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino), who's determined to hack through
the jungle of gag orders and confidentiality agreements that stands
between Wigand and "60 Minutes" reporter Mike Wallace (Christopher
Plummer). The in-your-face technique is initially gripping --
particularly in an early scene involving an asthma attack -- but before
long we start to feel queasily voyeuristic and that discomfort distracts
from the drama.
 At the same time, for the patient viewer, "The Insider" is
packed with fascinating bits and pieces about how the news world
operates and the various pressures that come to bear on the people who
determine what gets on the air.
 The screenplay convincingly tracks Wigand's journey from
semi-hostile witness to whistle-blower and goes to great pains to show
how much time and energy Bergman put into winning Wigand's trust. Mann
also goes behind the scenes at "60 Minutes" to find out about the
off-camera politics and the shifting alliances of the reporters and
staff. Wallace is portrayed as a mercurial type who knows his best days
are behind him and is consumed by the idea of his legacy. He doesn't
want to retire in disgrace -- "I don't plan on spending the rest of my
days wandering in the wilderness of National Public Radio," he notes --
so he's cautious about throwing his weight behind Bergman when the going
gets rocky.
 "The Insider" also offers a remarkably restrained and effective
performance by Pacino, who Mann obviously kept on a short leash. There's
very little of the showboating that's marked (many would say "marred")
most of his post-"Scent of a Woman" films.
 In the final analysis, though, it's hard to say if Mann has
truly succeeded in getting his message to the masses. There's plenty of
quality here to be sure, and no one's likely to find fault with any of
the acting.
 But the ethical issues Mann raises remind me of the reaction of
a seemingly sophisticated woman I overheard at a screening of "Broadcast
News" 12 years ago. In that movie, TV news producer Holly Hunter is
attracted to anchorman William Hurt, but steers clear of him after
learning he faked the tears he seemed to cry during an interview with a
rape victim. Hunter's character was so devoted to the idea of truth in
journalism she couldn't comprehend that a reporter fail to see what was
wrong in staging the news or spicing up a story with crocodile tears.
 The viewer, on the other hand, complained she didn't understand
why Hunter and Hurt didn't end up together in the end. "So he made a
mistake -- big deal," she scoffed, and her friends, all of them
well-dressed and well-spoken, agreed with her. Those women probably
won't get the point of "The Insider" either, and, sadly, they're a large
part of the audience Mann is trying to reach. James Sanford
