Title
Review for Jurk, De (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Peter Schouten
The Netherlands 1996
Written and Directed by Alex van Warmerdam
With: Alex van Warmerdam, Henri Garcin, Olga Zuiderhoek, Rijk de Gooyer,
      Rudolph Lucieer, Ariane Schluter, Jack Wouterse, Leny Breederveld,
      Carol van Herwijnen
Music: Vincent van Warmerdam
Produced: Marc van Warmerdam, Vincent van Warmerdam
          GRANIET/ORKATER/VARA
Let's face it. The starring part in this motion picture is given to a
dress, and not a pretty one. A bright blue cotton summer dress, with red
and yellow leaves printed on it. The movie follows the production of the
dress, and after that the people who wear one of the dresses. All those
people are in for a disaster, because the dress is a jinx.
"De Jurk" is the third outing for actor-director-writer-producer-and guy
who-thought-off-the-movie's-single-sheet-poster Alex van Warmerdam. The
first two movies were Abel, about a young man still living at home, and
De Noorderlingen (The Northerners) about minding other people's business
in the suburbs. Social Comedy is his trade, and this movie is no exception.
Since the dress moves around a lot, and only one woman (Olga Zuiderhoek, who
also played a major part in Abel, just like Henri Garcin) is able to hold on
to the dress for more than a few days, before being horny, harassed, killed
or several of those destinies, the movie feels like a cameo party, but when
the movie is distributed abroad, viewers probably won't recognize many.
One of the bigger parts is reserved for Alex van Warmerdam himself. He plays
a train conductor who develops a crush on women who wear the dress. Throughout
the movie he claims sanity, but he isn't believable for a moment. The woman
he spends the larger amount of time pursuing is Ariane Schluter, who in the
movie "06" (also with Jack Wouterse) talks a lot about sex but remains
relatively dressed, but in this movie she sleeps in the nude and apparently
wouldn't need forementioned dress that much, for she walks around naked most
of the time.
At the movie's funny finale scenes, the question remains "What was this movie
really about?". If a lesson is to be learned from it, it should be "Do not, I
repeat Do Not buy this dress" but if you saw the design, you would allready
understand that as a matter of taste. Alex van Warmerdam said the movie was
about a dress, because dresses are worn by women. Next month "The Birdcage"
is showing here, so we'll see about that! :-)

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Winner of the International Film Critics Award at the Venice Film
Festival, the Dutch film "The Dress" ("De Jurk") is an uneasy mix of
good-humored frivolity and disturbing sexual violence.  It often feels like
two separate and distinct movies stitched together.
        The lighter part of Alex van Warmerdam's film (the multi-talented
director also produced, wrote, and stars in "The Dress") is the unique
concept of having the film chronicle the title article, from its
inspiration and design, to its passage from one hapless owner to the next.
This construct is a clever one and van Warmerdam has a deft eye for social
detail, and an even defter ear for dialogue.
        The darker, unsettling aspects of the film are the incidents which
befall those unlucky enough to possess the eponymous garment.
        In this regard the film is only semi-successful, managing to entice
the audience with a breezy, humorous tone throughout while simultaneously
subjecting them to several unnerving sequences.  Sequences which, for the
most part, feature women at the hands of men with pathological designs on
their bodies.
        The dress in question is a simple summer frock sporting a bold,
eye-catching pattern of gold and rust-colored leaves--actually they look
like fat, tiger-striped leeches--backed by a sea of azure blue.
        A sixty-one year old woman first purchases the passion-inciting
apparel in a ritzy boutique, even though her husband claims it to be a
young girl's dress.  Within minutes of putting it on and suggesting they
engage in some wild sex, their luck begins to change.
        Next, a man with a ZZ Top beard gives the dress to his cleaning
woman, Johanna (the barely-dressed Ariane Schluter) after it drops out of
the sky, tugged from a clothesline by a gust of wind.  His futile attempts
to locate its original owner best exemplify van Warmerdam's wicked sense of
humor.  Johanna hopes to use the dress to seduce her painter boyfriend, but
he seems more interested in paint.  Unfortunately, the dress does catch the
eye of the ticket collector (played by the producer/director/writer) on
Johanna's train home, who follows her back to her place, slipping into bed
with her while she sleeps.
        This scene might be played for laughs--van Warmerdam certainly has
a gift for the absurd--but it's pretty creepy to think of someone
introducing themselves and claiming to love you, as van Warmerdam's
character does to Johanna, in such a private and vulnerable setting.
        That sequence, however, is not nearly as freakily disturbing as a
scene early in the film in which a motorcycle courier delivers a ream of
fabric to the dress designer and witnesses a half-naked woman running
around outside, crying hysterically because she doesn't want to engage in
kinky sex with the designer and his "friend" Tony.
        "Wear and beware" warns the movie's tag line.  Watch and beware as
well; "The Dress" is a funny, skillfully-made film that is often times
jarring.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DRESS, THE (Jurk, De) (director: Alex van Warmerdam; screenwriter: Alex
van Warmerdam; cinematographer: Marc Felperlaan; cast: Henri Garcin (Van
Tilt), Ariane Schluter (Johanna), Alex van Warmerdam (Train Conductor),
Rijk de Gooyer (Martin), Elisabeth Hoijtink (Stella), Olga Zuiderhoek
(Marie), Eric van der Donk (Painter), Netherlands-1996)
This social comedy is a slick sick one, told in short sketches, where
absurdity and perversity go hand-in-hand with the dress, which is the
subject of the film. We see it from its inception, as its cotton
material is picked in the fields of Spain, to its unlucky-in-love
designer who created its pattern of imaginary red and yellow leaves on a
blue background, to its death by cremation, as its last owner, a
homeless lady is put to rest in it. To emphasize the bad karma of the
dress, it is shown how troubled men created it and merchandised it. The
fashion designer of this plain summer dress is a pervert with a pig
fetish, and to add insult to injury, it is worn by losers who are taken
in by its optimistic design and colors.
On the dresses journey, it brought bad luck to whomever owned it,
passing to different ownership many times; the film could have gone on
ad infinitum, if the director wasn't kind enough to end the film with a
good old mercy killing of it. The dress becomes the object of the film,
and as the director and writer and actor, Alex van Warmerdam, said: we
used a dress in the film because women wear dresses. But by making it
just an object, giving it no other symbolic significance, the film has
to rely on its biting satiric humor to carry it through. And since, I
couldn't find myself consistently laughing at its Monthy Python-like
skits, nor find its outrageous humor and politically incorrect stands to
be paricularly tasteful, I therefore found myself under-whelmed with
this third film by the independent cult film director, even as I
empathize with his determination to make his own type of film, no matter
how it is perceived by others. This bawdy comedy, should guarantee it
some audience abroad, though those seeing it in the Netherlands, have an
added plus going for them, as they should be more able to recognize the
cameos that some of the notable Dutch film stars make in it.
Coincidently, the first couple who buy it in a dress-shop, get robbed
and she gets extremely sick as soon as they bring the dress home. When
the husband hangs it out to dry on the clothesline, it blows away and
falls eventually into the the hands of a pretty cleaning lady (Ariane),
who feels very sexy wearing it. The ticket-collector (Alex van
Warmerdam) on the train is so attracted by it, that he follows her home,
where she lives with an older artist (Eric ), a real cold and gloomy
sort, but whom she tries to appeal to with her new dress. It only
inspires him to redraw the drab blue dress he was working on in his
canvas, with this brighter pattern. When the artist steps out with his
artist friends, the train conductor comes back to rape her. This was the
most risque and politically incorrect scene in the film, but it also
turned out to be a rather tame but funny scene, after all. But the humor
came at the expense of the pathetic lady being chased by the rapist, who
when in trouble would shout out, "I'm normal."
She gives the dress away to some rip-off charity seekers, who sell it to
a boutique. The dress is then made to look more chic and youth
orientated, so an attractive teen-ager buys it and in a long litany of
coincidences, the train conductor is there to try and rape her. This
rape scene was crasser than the other one, for a few moments it had the
same hard edge of violence to it that a film like "Funny Games" had. But
comedy is the vehicle here, so when the teen escapes from her sleeping
would-be rapist, she promptly has the dress stolen by a homeless lady in
the park.
The final act of indignity for the dress is when the gloomy artist's
rendition of it, is hung in a gallery as a great work; the train
conductor then appears to rip it apart, as a tour guide helplessly
watches. This violent act fits in with all the other themes the film
superficially covers: of sexual harassment, rape, dysfunctional
relationships, insanity, homelessness, fake charities, and the poor
relations between a boss of the dress factory (Garcin) where this dress
was manufactured and one of his employees, who attacks him.
Since I was not all that amused by what I saw and did not find the film
particularly perceptive, and only found parts of the film to be
diverting and original, it is hard for me to recommend it as anything
but an attempt to be outrageously funny without enough substance in it
to be funny for a long enough period of time to be a fully entertaining
movie. And it is only from an entertainment perspective, I think, that
this film should be judged.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Netherlands, 1996
Running Length: 1:43
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Nudity, sex, mature themes, 
      profanity, violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/3/97 & 5/6/97
Cast: Henri Garcin, Ariane Schluter, Alex van Warmerdam, Ricky Koole, 
      Rijk de Gooyer, Elisabeth Hoijtink, Olga Zuiderhoek, 
      Eric van der Donk
Director: Alex van Warmerdam
Producers: Marc van Warmerdam, Ton Schippers, Alex van Warmerdam
Screenplay: Alex van Warmerdam
Cinematography: Marc Felperlaan
Music: Vincent van Warmerdam
In Dutch with subtitles
     I can think of few things more appropriate to call THE DRESS than 
absurd.  It's a bizarre comedy with a brand of humor that, despite 
making fun of normally-serious issues like rape and sexual harassment, 
can inspire bouts of uncontrolled, politically-incorrect laughter. 
     Most films follow characters.  Alex van Warmerdam's THE DRESS, like 
TALES OF MANHATTAN and TWENTY BUCKS, accompanies an object as it changes 
hands.  In this case, it's a dress.  From the design of the pattern and 
the garment's manufacture to its passage from owner-to-owner, THE DRESS 
offers us glimpses into the lives of a gallery of characters, all of 
whom are, in one way or another, losers.  There's a mentally unbalanced 
man who stalks anyone wearing the dress, a woman who wants to excite her 
passionless painter lover, a meek young girl looking for a way to assert 
herself, and a businessman who finds himself on the outs after attacking 
his boss.  The dress has an impact upon each of them.
     The dress seems to generate male sexual arousal, and, as a result, 
much of the film's outrageous comedy is sexually-oriented.  Several 
attempted rapes are played for laughs, and, although these scenes may 
not be in good taste, they are funny, and the director recognizes how to 
stage them to limit the potential to offend.  THE DRESS relies on 
coincidence and the recognition of familiar faces from earlier in the 
film to provide its funniest moments.  Several of the characters 
resemble refugees from such diverse, offbeat sources as a David Lynch 
movie, a Coen brothers' outing, or a MONTY PYTHON sketch.  Unusual, to 
be sure, but also quite effective.
     The film isn't completely without substance, either.  Van Warmerdam 
uses this canvas to paint a picture of a suffering, dejected humanity 
whose participants willingly seize upon any chance for love or affection 
that they can find, even if it's of a twisted variety.  THE DRESS is 
well worth a look, not only because it's so much different from anything 
else currently available, but because it's an enjoyable motion picture.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
