Title
Review for Goldfinger (1964)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dragan Antulov
When we are dealing with movie series made out of twenty or
so titles, finding the best of them might look like a
difficult task. But, in the case of James Bond films, it
isn't so. Almost everyone agrees that the best Bond films
used to be made in 1960s, in a Golden Age that spawned Sean
Connery and set the standards that would never be satisfied
again in later decades. Choice is even simpler when we
discount first two films - DR. NO and FROM RUSSIA AND LOVE -
which were some sort of experiments for the series creators.
The third film in the series, GOLDFINGER, directed in 1964
by Guy Hamilton, is often considered to be the first "true"
Bond, the one that firmly established formula that we all
know and love. GOLDFINGER also has a very special meaning
for the author of this review. It was the first Bond film I
have ever watched, and, although some time had to pass
before I started truly appreciating its quality, it sets my
standards for all the future Bond viewing experiences.
The plot of the film begins when British secret agent James
Bond (played by Sean Connery) crosses path with Auric
Goldfinger (played by Gert Froebe), wealthy international
gold trader, whose character is unscrupulous enough to cheat
even in trivial games of poker and golf. British and
American authorities suspect that he could break rules even
in even more serious matters like international trade, and
Bond is being sent to investigate possible Goldfinger's
involvement in grand-scale gold smuggling operation.
Goldfinger is too shrewd to allow himself being fooled by
Bond's cover as fellow smuggler, but Bond won't stop the
investigation. The trail leads him to Switzerland, where he
would hear Goldfinger discussing some sinister plan called
"Grand Slam". Unfortunately, he can't report his findings to
his superiors, since Goldfinger's henchmen capture him.
Goldfinger decides to leave Bond alive for a while, and his
personal pilot Pussy Galore (played by Honor Blackman) would
fly him over the Atlantic to Goldfinger's stables in
Kentucky. Bond there sees what the "Grand Slam" actually is
- spectacular raid on the US government golden reserves in
Fort Knox. Equipped with this knowledge, Bond must find a
way to escape and foil Goldfinger's plan.
GOLDFINGER is often referred as the best example of what
Bond movie is and what every Bond movie should be. Made in
1964, as a third movie of a well-established series, it was
the fortunate transition between realism and seriousness of
first two films, and spectacle and glamour of later Bond
films. The plot is, relatively speaking, realistic (at least
for the Bond series standards), and the script by Richard
Maibaum and Paul Dehn actually improved Ian Fleming's
original novel in this area. The character of Bond is hardly
invincible and in the film he often makes mistakes, gets
beaten or captured, and his survival generally depends more
on the mere luck and good will of other people than on his
own brain or charm. Sean Connery again shows his great
talent making his jovial attitude even in direst of
circumstances quite believable.
This time character of James Bond has quite a match in the
character of chief Bond Villain. Auric Goldfinger is
brilliantly played by German actor Gert Froebe and, unlike
the usual cardboard villains of the Bond series, this one
looks genuine. From the first scene, he is clearly
identified as Bad Guy and audience is spared from the
unnecessary and time-consuming attempts to shed doubts about
his moral alignment. Goldfinger is also portrayed as truly
intelligent villain, someone who relies more on his brain
than on his immense wealth or underground armies of
henchmen, and, in the end, has enough brains to think about
back-up plans. Such Bond Villain truly deserves to have
quality assistants at his disposal, and Korean bodyguard
Oddjob, played by Harold Sakata. Equipped with funny yet
deadly hat, and almost invincible, Oddjob gives Bond run for
his money and turns out to be the best Bond Villain ever (or
at least shares that spot with 1970s Jaws).
Bond Villain is not the only category that makes this Bond
movie superior to the rest. Pussy Galore, played by Honor
Blackman, is more than interesting Bond Girl. She is quite
believable character - tough, no-nonsense and able to take
care of herself. But most of all, she is mature, at least
compared to usual Bond Girl stock (in case of Honor Blackman
term "girl" might not be quite appropriate, since she was 38
years old in time of production). However, despite her
relatively old age, she manages to stay not just impressive,
but very sexy and sometimes even more desirable than two
other younger yet more shallow Bond beauties in the form of
Shirley Eaton and Tanya Mallet. Even her defection to the
side of the Good Guys couldn't be explained as simple
capitulation to Bond's masculine charm - Bond appealed to
her common sense as well as her feminine desires.
In terms of spectacle, GOLDFINGER represents the obvious
improvement over first two sequels. The series introduces
one of not so important and obligatory, yet attractive
elements of Bond formula - spectacular battle between Good
Guys and Bad Guys. But most attractive thing about
GOLDFINGER is its style. Guy Hamilton paces film
brilliantly, never allowing a single minute of the film to
seem boring. Musical soundtrack by John Barry is one of the
best ever made in history of cinema, and the title song,
sung by Shirley Bassey, became some sort of Bond's
alternative anthem. GOLDFINGER is also great in visual
sense, with Ted Moore providing excellent photography and
Ken Adam creating truly impressive production settings. But
the most memorable thing about GOLDFINGER is, of course,
dead girl being covered with gold paint - one of the most
memorable images not only in history of cinema, but also in
history of art. There are few examples when artists are able
to create images that are haunting, terrifying and erotic in
the same time.
Another thing that makes GOLDFINGER truly attractive is the
fact that such films couldn't be made in this time and age.
Feminists would cringe at the sight of women being treated
like nothing more than easily disposable sexual objects, and
PC police would be infuriated with the fact that the
majority of villains happens to be of Asian origin. Newer
generations would probably grin after Bond's Beatles remark,
which shows how deeply Bond series was ingrained in its
time. Such remark shows how deeply Bond series was ingrained
in its time, and, consequently, all attempts to adapt it to
more "modern" sensibilities turn it into pathetic parody of
itself. Despite being set in past times, GOLDFINGER found
its way to the modern audiences and it is quite
understandable how even the generations born decades later
don't hesitate to name it the best Bond film ever made.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Here it is, the best James Bond movie out there, with 
DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER coming in a close second. It just makes 
me wonder why all the Sean Connery movies in the series couldn't be 
like this. The first two weren't (DR. NO and FROM RUSSIA WITH 
LOVE) and the two after this certainly weren't (THUNDERBALL and 
YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE). The formula that's utilized in all the 
other 007 films--death traps, chases, explosions, intriguing villains 
with plans for world conquest, girls, girls, girls--click together 
especially well here, making it the standout episode of the series.
        Goldfinger is certainly an intriguing villain. He's a roly-poly 
fat guy on the surface who has millions in gold bullion yet gets off on 
conning people for relatively small amounts. In the beginning of the 
movie, he has his secretary watch a card game through binoculars and 
tell him over a radio transmitter what cards the other man is holding. 
Bond thwarts that racket and later takes Goldfinger for five thousand 
pounds by utilizing some trickery of his own to win a game of golf. 
Goldfinger gets him back by capturing Bond halfway through the 
movie and taking him back to his hideout, where he tells him all about 
his plan to loot the gold reserve at Fort Knox. That's always the single 
biggest mistake of Bond villains--the inability to keep their damn 
mouths shut.
        Bond remains in captivity for the second half of the movie, 
mingling with other memorable villains on the Goldfinger compound 
as he repeatedly tries to escape. There's Oddjob, a beefy Korean who 
never talks, choosing instead to express himself through decapitating 
people by using his tophat as a frisbee. And, of course, there's Pussy 
Galore (That phrase, incidentally, also represents James Bond's main 
goal in life.), a sexy airplane pilot who is probably the only woman 
who has the balls (Wait a minute, you can't say someone named Pussy 
has balls. Let's change that to "guts.") to resist Bond's advances. He 
soon changes her mind, though, by forcing himself on her and making 
her his third conquest of the movie. Could the 60's have been a more 
groovy decade?
        GOLDFINGER takes the already-worn Bond formula to new 
levels. The death trap where a laser is advancing toward Bond's crotch 
(the Vasectomy of DEATH!) is one of the most tense scenes in the 
series, as is the movie's climax, involving Bond, an atomic bomb and a 
pair of handcuffs (which just happened to be left over from Bond's date 
the night before). While other 007 movies utilizing these elements 
have come off looking campy and ridiculous, this one works almost all 
the time. Well, there is a scene in the movie where planes drop nerve 
gas on an entire army and they all fall over simultaneously, but you 
have to give the director credit for trying.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Gert Frobe, Honor Blackman, Harold Sakata, 
      Shirley Eaton, Tania Mallett, Cec Linder, Bernard Lee, 
      Lois Maxwell, Desmond Llewelyn
Director: Guy Hamilton
Producers: Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and Paul Dehn based on the novel by 
      Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Ted Moore
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     With 1964's GOLDFINGER, the third James Bond story to reach the 
screen, the "Bond formula" had reached maturity.  Screenwriter Richard 
Maibaum, a participant in the scripting of the previous two movies, DR. 
NO and FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, had identified those elements of the 
series that audiences liked.  So, for this film, his storyline (adapted 
loosely from Ian Fleming's 1959 novel) enhanced the action sequences, 
added more beautiful women, gave 007 an Aston Martin loaded with neat 
gadgets, and offered actor Sean Connery more opportunities to deliver 
one-liners and act suave.
     One of the last Bond films to clock in at under two hours, 
GOLDFINGER is tightly-paced and economical in its usage of extraneous 
material.  The character development of FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE is 
replaced by a greater attention to action.  There are several memorable 
fight sequences (including a climactic struggle between 007 and 
Goldfinger's nasty henchman, Oddjob) and a lengthy car chase that has 
Bond's Aston Martin trailing smoke screens and oil slicks, firing built-
in guns, and ejecting the passenger seat.  The level of excitement in 
GOLDFINGER is up a notch from its predecessors.
     When the British Secret Service decides that they want supposedly-
legitimate bullion dealer Auric Goldfinger under observation, agent 007 
is chosen for the job.  After Bond finds a naked, dead woman on his bed, 
covered head-to-toe with gold paint, the investigation takes on a new 
urgency.  It seems that Goldfinger is planning something big -- 
"Operation Grand Slam" -- and anyone who interferes is targeted for 
elimination, including, of course, Bond.  But, when Goldfinger captures 
the British agent in Switzerland, he decides to keep him as a hostage 
rather than kill him.  So Bond accompanies the criminal and his 
entourage to Kentucky, where Goldfinger plans to engineer the greatest 
crime in history:  knock over Fort Knox.
     Sean Connery, back for the third time in the role that made him 
famous, plays the lead character with the same easy elegance and wit he 
displayed in FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE.  007 can be a man of action or a man 
of style, and Connery is equally at home as either.  In GOLDFINGER, Bond 
gets one of his better opponents.  The title character (played by Gert 
Frobe) isn't the most sinister or vicious villain to stand against 007, 
but he is intelligent, ingenious, and obsessed with gold.  Frobe's 
performance is top-notch for this kind of role.  He treads the line 
between subtlety and overacting, showing different aspects of 
Goldfinger's shifting personality -- cruelty, greed, playfulness, and a 
single-minded determination.
     In Bond films, the henchman typically provides a more colorful 
adversary than his leader, and Goldfinger's mute Korean manservant, 
Oddjob (Harold Sakata), started this trend.  Second only to Jaws (THE 
SPY WHO LOVED ME, MOONRAKER) in near-invincibility, Oddjob is the kind 
of murder-loving ruffian that Bond can't beat in a fair fight.  With his 
death-dealing, frisbee-like bowler and his immense strength, Oddjob 
proves a worthy foe for the superspy.
     In addition to being one of the most unforgettable of the "Bond 
Girls", Honor Blackman's Pussy Galore is one of the toughest and most 
self-sufficient women to cross 007's path.  In her own words, she's 
immune to his charm, and, while this doesn't prevent her from sharing an 
intimate moment or two with him, she never yields her independence.  
Pussy has better things to do than follow Bond around like a faithful 
lap dog.
     GOLDFINGER is studded with moments that have since become deeply 
embedded in the Bond mythos.  John Barry's opening song (sung by Shirley 
Bassey) is among the series' best.  Snippets of dialogue have attained 
an almost-legendary status, such as the exchange when Goldfinger is 
about to emasculate 007 with a laser.  "Do you expect me to talk?" asks 
Bond.  The response is succinct:  "No, Mr. Bond, I expect you to die!"
     In the midst of Bond's "golden era" of the '60s, it's hard to 
single out one film as the best, but history has shown GOLDFINGER to be 
among the series' most enduring entries.  Although more gimmicky than 
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, this film is equally as entertaining.  And, of 
course, it takes the Bond films in a slightly different direction, 
blazing a trail that they have been following ever since, all the way 
from GOLDFINGER to GOLDENEYE.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Steve Rhodes
     1964's GOLDFINGER, the movie that set the gold standard for spy
movies, stars Sean Connery at the peak of his form as the debonair and
self-assured James Bond.  GOLDFINGER has rightfully been called the
best Bond movie that was ever made.
     This film brings it all together perfectly.  It has an intriguing
and ingenious plot, fascinating gadgets, beautiful women, handsome men,
lush scenery, great music, well paced action, and a certain
indescribable magic.  If spy-action films ever had a classic, then this
is it.
     This time Bond is on the track of an international gold smuggler
extraordinaire named Auric Goldfinger (Gert Frobe) -- this was back
when gold was worth something.  And Bond will find out that Goldfinger
has a much more elaborate scheme than his usual simple arbitrage of
moving gold illegally from place to place to take advantage of the
artificial price differences.  This time he's after the mother lode --
Fort Knox.
     With 41,000 troops guarding Fort Knox and with the gold both heavy
and voluminous, Goldfinger needs a truly ingenious scheme to get it out
and that's exactly what he has.
     Bond, who got his first gadget pack in the form of a briefcase
full of goodies in FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, hits the jackpot this time.
Q (Desmond Llewelyn) has a very specially configured Aston Martin for
007.  Where other cars might have controls for the electric windows,
this one has knobs that fire machine guns, generate oil slicks, raise
bulletproof shields, and, like the chariot in BEN HUR, stick out a
device to cut the tires of the opposing chariot, er, car.  But best of
all is the hidden ejector button.  If his passenger is too talkative or
otherwise disagreeable, all Bond needs do is push a little button and
his companion shoots straight up and out of the car permanently.
     The story has many famous villains.  As the non-talking Oddjob,
Harold Sakata plays a man with a body stronger than steel and a hat
that appears to made of it.  Goldfinger, think Midas, is so obsessed
with gold that he even kills one of his victims by painting every inch
of her skin with gold paint.  And, of course, who could ever forget any
character who goes modestly by the name of Pussy Galore.  What is
surprising is that Pussy is played by Honor Blackman, the first female
lead on "The Avengers," not as an airhead but as one of the smarter
characters in the movie.
     This time the gorgeous and exotic locales include the lush
Kentucky Bluegrass country and the snow capped majesty of the Swiss
Alps.  Although the Alps are the more striking of the two, Kentucky
looks especially lovely.  We see the easy going life of mint juleps on
the front porch as their drinkers are serenaded by the cricket
minstrels.
     Bond's overriding rule has to do less with his assignments than
his libido.  Whenever a pretty woman appears, he always arranges for an
extension in his schedule so he will have time for a roll in the hay --
which he does literally in a scene with Pussy Galore.  Bond sex is a
special movie style.  It consists of a quick but intense kiss followed
by a cutaway to later.  The sex is hinted at with cute puns and sexual
innuendo, but never discussed explicitly.  This produces enough
titillation for the adults in the audience but stays harmless enough
for the younger ones as well.  Few movies these days (except Bond
pictures) even attempt this style.
     "Do you expect me to talk?" Bond asks of Goldfinger, who has
pointed a gigantic industrial laser at the strapped-down and
spread-eagled Bond.  The laser is working its way towards Bond's
private parts.  "No," Goldfinger laughs.  "I expect you to die!"
     GOLDFINGER runs 1:52.  It is rated PG for violence and sexual
innuendo and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, liked the movie a lot, especially the
car and the gadgets.  He has seen the first three Bond movies now.  He
likes this one much better than FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE but likes DR. NO
better than either of them.  He hates the parts at the end of the films
where Bond and the pretty woman don't want to be rescued.
