Title
Review for Mad Dog and Glory (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Robert DeNiro, Uma Thurman, Bill Murray, David Caruso,
           Mike Starr, Kathy Baker
Director:  John McNaughton
Producers:  Martin Scorsese and Barbara DeFina
Screenplay:  Richard Price
Music:  Elmer Bernstein
Released by Universal Pictures
     Wayne, or "Mad Dog", as he's called (Robert DeNiro), is a cop who
has never fired his gun.  When he saves mob boss Frank (Bill Murray)
from death at the hands of a common thief by using talk to diffuse the
situation, Frank feels compelled to reward Wayne for saving his life.
So he gives Wayne a gift in the person of Glory (Uma Thurman).  She is,
in essence, his property and at the end of a week he expects her back.
At first, Glory is an unwanted presence in Wayne's life but, as the days
go by, he realizes that she's what he wants more than anything else.
     MAD DOG AND GLORY is a film that takes a lot of chances, from its
choice of director to the roles played by two of its three leads.  While
the casting against type works strictly on the basis of the strengths
of the actors, Martin Scorsese's hand-picking of John McNaughton
(HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER) may not have been the best
decision.  McNaughton was brought on board the project to give it a
"different feel".  That is certainly achieved, but not necessarily for
the betterment of the movie.  MAD DOG AND GLORY has an extremely uneven
tone.  The dark moments are not dangerous enough and the more uplifting
scenes lack a much-needed lightheartedness.
     At times, the writing is also suspect.  Too often, the film stays
at arm's length from the audience, keeping emotional involvement to a
minimum.  While attempts are made to create three-dimensional
characters, the people in this picture never seem more than
half-developed.  The love affair doesn't take up enough screen time to
be vivid, and the relationship between Wayne and Frank never gels.
     It's difficult to write a romance that isn't sappy and in that, MAD
DOG AND GLORY is a success.  The putrid, silly dialogue of such films
as UNTAMED HEART is thankfully absent.  These people at least say and
do intelligent and reasonable things.  Although I felt something was
missing from this film, I was never insulted by it.
     Not since his abysmal performance in RAZOR'S EDGE has Bill Murray
tried to play it straight.  His job in MAD DOG AND GLORY is deserving
of mixed reviews.  He is competent--and sometimes quite good--but his
character never comes across as forcefully as it should have.  This may
have been as much the fault of the script as anything else, but it would
have been interesting to see how Al Pacino (who was originally offered
this role but begged off to do SCENT OF A WOMAN and GLENGARRY GLEN
ROSS) would have interpreted Frank.  So, while Murray has improved
since RAZOR'S EDGE, he still has a distance to go.
     Robert DeNiro is effective in an unusually restrained role.  In MAD
DOG AND GLORY, the actor's energy has been internalized, and this helps
Wayne seem more real than anyone else.  Uma Thurman is capable of
better work than the scope of her character allows.  She does what she
can with the role, and turns in a good performance, but it's a shame to
consider what might have been had the script given her more to work
with.
     The "gem in the rough" is Mike Starr's Harold.  Perhaps the only
character that clicks all the time, Harold is exceptionally funny--a
sensitive big guy who says the most unusual things--but is never
portrayed in such an over-blown manner as to be no more than comic
relief.  It would not be too far off the mark to say that character
actor Starr (whose previous credits include GOODFELLAS and THE
BODYGUARD) steals most of the scenes that he's in.
     Overall, MAD DOG AND GLORY is a mixed bag.  What's on the screen
is entertaining, but I often felt that I was only seeing half the
movie--the more interesting portion, perhaps, but still only half.  MAD
DOG AND GLORY was heavily edited, so part of the fault could lie there,
but the final result is not wholly satisfying.  It works, but not as
well as it could--or should.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Eric Walker
     In these days of Hollywood "cop" movies, where the good guys are
macho dudes and the bad guys are slimy and totally evil, a movie like
MAD DOG AND GLORY shines because it cares about something far more than
brainless melodrama.
     This a comedy, but you won't be rolling in the aisles with
laughter.  It's leisurely and even slow-paced, and you won't be on the
edge of your seat (until the climax).  There's some very brief nudity
and one extended sex scene, but it's not very erotic and there's almost
no T-and-A.  It has lots of gangsters, but there are no chase scenes,
no big shoot-outs, and the only time we see people blown away is during
the first five minutes.  So if you go to this one expecting the likes
of MARKED FOR DEATH or LETHAL WEAPON, you're going to be sorely
disappointed.
     MAD DOG AND GLORY isn't interested in pandering to our love of sex
and violence.  The director, John McNaughton, is interested more in
character development than in chase scenes and shoot outs.  This is
what makes the movie such a delight:  We CARE about the characters.
     The film does everything possible to distance itself from the
standard Hollywood cop movie, even in its choice of leads.  Robert De
Niro and Bill Murray headline the film, and one would expect De Niro to
play the cool, suave gangster (in a replay of his role in THE
UNTOUCHABLES), but it's Murray who's the heavy here.  De Niro is a cop
named Wayne (his friends call him "Mad Dog"), and he carries a gun, but
he hasn't used it in fifteen years.  He's a photographer: he
photographs the corpses of crime victims for police records.  Unlike
your typical Hollywood cop, he's shy, nervous, and unsure of himself,
so that when he stumbles across a holdup in a grocery store, one night,
he's willing to let the robber have anything he wants.  He's far from
perfect, and he feels guilty about it: later on he even fantasizes
about blowing away the robber, the way he "should have" done (and the
way we see cops shoot down bad guys in one movie after another).
     Bill Murray, meanwhile, doesn't look like such a bad guy at
first.  He's a gangster, Frank, and he does nasty things, but he wants
to make people laugh; he even does stand-up comedy at one of his own
clubs.  (He's not a very good comedian, however; all of his best lines
are stolen from someone else.)  De Niro saves his life during that hold
up--but he's the "bad guy" and ol' Mad Dog is the "good guy." So what
does he do?  He picks him up, and they go out drinking.  Cops and
gangsters aren't supposed to fraternize like this, of course, but real
life isn't the black-and-white world of Hollywood cop movies.  Stuff
like this happens all the time, and there's a fine line that both sides
occasionally tread.
     Which is why Frank decides to reward Wayne: he sends a girl over
to "be his friend" for a week.  It seems that she owes Frank "a
favor"--everyone seems to owe things to Frank--and she's paying off
her debt in this fashion.
     But as the trailer for the movie shows, things get a little more
complicated than anyone expects.  Wayne falls in love with Glory, and
Frank doesn't like this.  So he gives Frank an ultimatum: give Glory
back--or else.
     It sounds like your typical Hollywood cop plot, doesn't it?  But
I'm not giving away anything here, because the plot is the least
important part of the entire film.  What makes it such a joy to watch
is De Niro's typically amazing performance, backed up by a wonderful
role from Uma Thurman, who plays Glory.  Bill Murray is also good; this
may be the best role I've ever seen him play.
     I love watching De Niro in his "quiet" moments.  He can entrance
an audience just by talking softly, so much so that the sound of his
breathing is as mesmerizing as his voice.  He becomes his characters,
and he makes them so three-dimensional and lifelike that by the time
the climax rolled around I was watching his actions (including an
important financial transaction) and thinking "Really?  I didn't think
Wayne wouldn't do that."  I was rooting for him during the final fight
scene, and he underplays his character superbly.
     Uma Thurman is equally impressive as the equally insecure and shy
Glory.  Here are two characters who are tailor-made for each other, but
they have to overcome their initial shyness and self-doubt before they
can trust each other.  They're a long way from the brainless "macho"
cop and the whorish "moll" who jumps into the sack with the hero just
because he blinks in her direction.
     There's a sex scene that deserves especial mention: it's funny at
first, as Wayne and Glory finally get to know each other better; but it
becomes sad and tender as they embrace each other.  They're not merely
banging away and getting the audience hot and bothered; they're really
holding onto each other for security, for comfort.  They CARE about
each other, and that's why we care about them.
     The laughs in this film don't come from out-and-out gags, except
for one hilarious fight scene between a cop and a thug.  Instead, it's
the characters, both good and bad, who hold our attention and keep us
interested.  This movie is a character piece, and its strengths lie in
the way it works better when we THINK about the characters.
     John McNaughton is making a career for himself as a Hollywood
outsider.  A couple of years ago, he was asked to make a horror film
that could be marketed to the splatter-film crowd--but what he
delivered was HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER.  The studio didn't
know what to do with it (especially since it was threatened with the X
rating), so they dumped it to the "art-house" market and released it on
video.  Now he's taken the "macho cop vs. gangster" cliche and turned
it on its side, giving us a film with no breathless action, little
blood-and-guts, and no car chases or smashing plate glass windows.  So
Universal released the film in the "quiet" period between Christmas and
Memorial Day, hoping to cash in on De Niro's reputation (and Bill
Murray's sudden popularity from the success of GROUNDHOG DAY).  The
film is fading fast from theaters, too--it's not going to be
remembered by anyone except the movie critics by the time the Christmas
movie season rolls around.
     But box-office isn't everything.  MAD DOG AND GLORY is a
delightfully original film, and if you enjoy original performances and
character development over chase-and-crash scenes, you'll be won over
by this film.  Check it out.
     When John McNaughton's next film hits the theaters, I'll certainly
be there to see it.

Author
David Pimmel
Directed by John McNaughton
Starring Robert De Niro, Bill Murray, Uma Thurman
Rated R for language, violence, brief nudity, simulated sex
     Robert De Niro plays reclusive police evidence technician/
photographer Wayne, who is called "Mad Dog" because he is anything
but.  One night he walks into a robbery and saves mobster/ loan shark
Frank Milo (Bill Murray)'s life.  After a night of friendship Frank
gives Wayne a present, Glory (Uma Thurman), a bartender who is
basically in hock to Frank.  Trouble and romance bloom.
     The strength of this film is in its characters.  All three of the
leads bring forth personalities with depth and consistency.  The plot
line is a little awkward and several scenes seem unnecessary, but the
leads carry the film admirable.  I was particularly impressed with Bill
Murray.  He seems to finally be developing into an actor rather than a
comedian who acts.  His performance here and in GROUNDHOG DAY are a far
cry from his smug laugh at the world performances in MEATBALLS and the
GHOSTBUSTERS film.  He is finally playing characters with depth and
interest.  Robert De Niro has been handling the tough roles his entire
career.  This is not his best performance, but as always, he portrays
another solid and believable character.  However, after seeing TAXI
DRIVER recently, it was a bit hard to adjust to De Niro's character at
the beginning.  Finally Uma Thurman as Glory gives a fairly strong
performance.  Unfortunately, her role provided the least substance so,
occasionally she seemed lost.
     This film was originally scheduled for release about six months
ago.  This is usually a sign that something is wrong.  Here we don't
see it as much.  The one scene that seemed out of place was the second
love scene of the movie.  The first was actually a very powerful scene
for plot and character development.  The second seemed gratuitous and
more like a five-minute filler and a chance to show a little skin.
Also the end of the film seems a bit strained.
     In summary, MAD DOG AND GLORY works because of the strong
performances of its leads, despite a less than wonderful script and
plot line.  Particularly strong, as always, is De Niro, but Murray
surprisingly strong as well.

Author
Scott Fisher
     Let's get one thing straight up front.  MAD DOG AND GLORY is NOT a
drama.  When I rented it on video tape, the store had put it in the
Drama section (as has the Internet Movie Database).  I'm not sure it's
a comedy though.  Deconstructionist satire might be a way to describe
it.  Its charm comes from breaking expectations--showing life in an
unflattering, unexpected, and humorous way.
     Superficially, the plot seems as though it belongs to a
traditional romantic comedy--THE BUTCHER'S WIFE, or WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING, for example.  Wayne (DeNiro), a middle-aged cop, intervenes
in a convenience store robbery, saving mob boss (Murray) being held at
gun point.  The next day, Wayne receives an invitation to a party at a
local comedy club.  Frank, the mob boss that Wayne saved, turns out to
own the club.  He does stand-up comedy there for all his mob friends.
In gratitude for saving his life, Frank sends Glory (Thurman) to live
with Wayne for a week to "make him happy."  At first Wayne tries to
ignore Glory, but they eventually fall in love--Wayne no longer wants
to give Glory back after the week is over.  The conflict between
Wayne's love for Glory and the fear of defying Frank form the basic
conflict.
     After the summary, you might wonder why MAD DOG AND GLORY is any
different than any romantic comedy.
     First, consider that Bill Murray plays a mob boss while DeNiro
takes the part of a cop.  DeNiro usually plays the famous gangster.
Second, DeNiro is not heroic (in any traditional sense).  He's scared
witless in the robbery in which he saves Frank's life.  A
non-aggressive cop?  When was the last time you saw that in a movie?
     The list of shattered expectations goes on and on: the sex scene,
instead of being glamorous, is downright awkward and humorous.  The mob
boss, has a sensitive and insecure side (he talks about his
psychologist constantly), instead of being the powerful and threatening
person portrayed in most movies.  Though the script keeps foreshadowing
the death of DeNiro's partner, he never dies.  Almost every time you
expect something to happen, something different occurs instead.
     After reading a few reviews of the movie at the Internet Movie
Database, I was amazed that people took it so seriously.  Many
apparently took it at face value--as a drama.  The humor was deadpan
and sometimes subtle--the kind of thing you'd expect if David Byrne and
Woody Allen made a movie together.  Still, I'd think that most people
would pick up on it.  Then again, I know some people who took _Spinal
Tap_ at face value, as a "rockumentary."  Maybe some awareness of movie
conventions and stereotypes is necessary to enjoy this movie.
     I loved this movie, and though it had its share of problems, it's
one of the best movies I've seen in the last year.  Though rough around
the edges, this thinking person's comedy brings something lively to the
screen.  If you want to watch something tired and homogenized, look
elsewhere.  MAD DOG AND GLORY's sense of comedic adventure make this
movie a very entertaining experience.
