Title
Review for Gang Related (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: James Belushi, Tupac Shakur, Wendy Crewson, Lela Rochon, 
      Dennis Quaid, James Earl Jones, David Paymer, Gary Cole
Director: Jim Kauf
Producers: Brad Krevoy, Steven Stabler, John Bertolli
Screenplay: Jim Kauf 
Cinematography: Brian H. Reynolds
Music: Mickey Hart
U.S. Distributor: Orion Pictures
     GANG RELATED will forever be known as Tupac Shakur's last film.  In 
fact, that's how it's being marketed.  As final features go, this isn't 
a bad one (for the ultimate in ignominious send-offs, see Donald 
Pleasance's curtain call in HALLOWEEN 6), and Shakur is in top form.  
The movie is a generally well-written yarn about police corruption that 
gets out of hand.  For 90% of its 110 minute running length, GANG 
RELATED is taut, well-paced, and clever.  It's too bad that the 
conclusion, despite retaining a sense of unpredictability, is a let-
down.  Characters act irrationally to facilitate a few more ironic 
twists of plot.
     On the whole, however, GANG RELATED is an enjoyable, if extremely 
profane, example of movie-making.  The script, from writer/director Jim 
Kauf (who previously penned the screenplay for both STAKEOUT movies, and 
last directed with 1989's DISORGANIZED CRIME) mixes action, tension, and 
low-key comedy.  Our heroes (who are actually anti-heroes) are Davinci 
(James Belushi) and Rodriguez (Tupac Shakur), a pair of bent cops who 
have just been caught in the Murphy's Law corner of the Twilight Zone.  
What at first seems like a relatively straightforward caper turns into a 
nightmare as circumstances conspire to plunge them into a tangled web of 
bad breaks and worse luck.
     Their plan is seemingly simple:  sell cocaine taken from the police 
evidence room to a drug dealer, kill him using a gun also lifted from 
the evidence room, then replace the gun and coke before anyone is the 
wiser.  The results:  an apparent gang related slaying of human refuse, 
plus Davinci and Rodriguez get to pocket the profits of their illicit 
drug sale.  With the help of Davinci's stripper girlfriend, Cynthia 
(WAITING TO EXHALE's Lela Rochon), the pair has successfully pulled this 
con nine times.  Ten isn't their lucky number.  On this occasion, their 
victim is an undercover DEA agent, and they're put in the uncomfortable 
position of having to investigate a murder they committed.  And that's 
before things start to go really wrong
     While GANG RELATED's script isn't a masterpiece, the situation it 
postulates is suitably delicious.  The film probably contains enough 
action to qualify as a thriller, but it's really more of a black comedy.  
Kauf has fun toying with his characters and their situations, constantly 
one-upping himself in the "whatever can go wrong, will go wrong" 
department.  I won't give away any specifics beyond the initial setup, 
because that would spoil the primary entertainment value of the movie.  
Sadly, however, Kauf is at a loss when it comes to wrapping things up, 
and the anticlimactic, routine finale lacks the panache evident 
throughout most of the running time.  The final scene is in keeping with 
the rest of the film, but the events leading up to it are dubious at 
best.  But, because only a few minutes are so out of synch, minimal 
damage was done to my appreciation of the movie as a whole.
     It's no surprise that Tupac Shakur is good in his role as a bad cop 
with a conscience.  In films like POETIC JUSTICE and, more recently, 
GRIDLOCK'D, Shakur has shown himself to be a talented actor, and it goes 
without saying that his untimely death has robbed the motion picture 
community of a promising star.  The actor who really surprised me here 
was James Belushi, who is very good as Davinci, the cynical mastermind 
behind the kill-the-drug-dealer-and-get-the-money scheme.  I've never 
been terribly impressed by Belushi's range, but his performance here is 
relentlessly on-target.  The supporting players are also good, with 
solid work turned in by Lela Rochon, James Earl Jones (as a high-priced 
lawyer), Wendy Crewson (as the prosecutor who is unpleasantly surprised 
by disappearing witnesses and evidence), and Dennis Quaid (as a homeless 
man who plays a pivotal role in the proceedings).  
     Kauf, whose STAKEOUT was a lighter blend of the same kind of 
elements at work here, knows just how to play the material to keep it 
enjoyable.  That's not an easy task, considering that the main 
characters are pretty reprehensible and the basic plotline is about 
covering up the accidental murder of a cop.  Nevertheless, in part 
because of a series of good performances and in part because Kauf 
approaches things with confidence, the results are positive.  GANG 
RELATED may not be PULP FICTION, but it's not a bad foray into 
tangential territory.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Homer Yen
On the big screen, police in the big city are a corrupt breed.  They
unfairly wield their powers to exact their own self-righteous brand of
punishment, assuming the role of judge, jury and executioner.  These
themes were recently played out in the well-received Copland and the
entertainingly artsy LA Confidential.  Here, in this undermarketed film,
the writers revisit this theme, but the movie is not some lush,
cinematographic presentation, coated with heavy ambiance.  Rather, it
strips away the artistic fluff to give us a gritty look at two bad cops
desperately trying to dig themselves out of a situation gone bad.
Jim Belushi plays Detective DiVinci, a morally deprived, self-centered,
and prototypical 'bad cop.'  He has bad taste in clothes, a penchant to
use the "F" word whenever possible, a bad attitude, and a corrupt soul.
His partner in crime and punishment is Rodriguez (the late Tupac
Shakur), who is more reserved and slowly develops a bad taste for the
killings.  Their scam is simple, yet deadly.  These two sell drugs to
dealers.  But once the exchange is made, the cops kill the buyer, take
back the drugs to sell to someone else, and pockets the money.  The
murders are meant to seem gang-related.  They see nothing wrong in
taking the spoils of their quarry.  In their eyes, slaying drug dealers
reduces crime while making them rich.
Unfortunately, the victim of their latest killing is an undercover DEA
agent, which immediately brings a large investigation into the faces of
DiVinci and Rodriguez.  They work quickly to deflect their guilt.  They
manipulate the evidence, look for scapegoats, falsify claims, and then
uses the flag of authority to cover their tracks.  But with each
cleverly calculated move, a surprise sets them back.  Things become
steadily more interesting as the two cops in charge of finding
themselves must find a way out.
This film does well to offer pure drama, although the dialogue is quite
raw.  It didn't cheat us with car chases, explosions, or ridiculous body
counts.  The writer-director, Jim Kouf, has a good story to tell and
makes it affecting.   Shakur exudes an appealingly fragile charisma as
the conscious-stricken cop.  As he continues to question the path that
they are on., he begins to stray away from their partnership.  Belushi
is also quite good as his ever-growing sleazy counterpart.  As the
situation gets more and more out of control, we see the chaos that
springs from vigilantism and we feel the tensions that surround a
partnership under extreme duress.  Nonetheless, DiVinci continues on
with his amoral pep talks, which further alienates his partner.  We are
not only treated to an engrossing psychological war displayed between
these two, but are also rewarded with a clever sequence of events where
the two cops try to maneuver out of their guilt.  I was satisfied with
the way the story stayed focused on the frailties of human nature.
You'll find that this film offers no heroes nor villains.  In some
well-told stories, they're actually one in the same.

Author
James Sanford
GANG RELATED
Directed by Jim Kouf
 "Gang Related" is destined to go down in history as the final film of
rapper-actor Tupac Shakur, and it's not a disgraceful send-off. In fact,
Shakur's nicely modulated performance looks all the better alongside the
rampant overplaying of co-stars James Belushi, Lela Rochon and Wendy
Crewson, all of whom seem to think in order to register on screen you have
to scream a lot of profanities and mug wildly.
 A better director might have kept them under control, but "Gang Related"
comes from Jim Kouf, better known for his screenplay for "Stakeout" than for
his direction of such sorry efforts as "Disorganized Crime." Typically,
Kouf's script for "Gang" is sturdier than his scene-setting. Shakur and
Belushi play amoral, money-hungry cops who've devised a scheme to get rich
quick by bumping off drug-dealers and stealing their money. It seems like a
good idea, since the murders can be easily disguised as gang related revenge
killings that no one else in the department will bother putting in overtime
to investigate.
 But as fate would have it, they manage to rub out a DEA agent who's working
undercover as a cocaine supplier, leading to all manner of disaster.
Desperate to cover their bloody tracks, Belushi and Shakur try to frame a
homeless vagrant (Dennis Quaid, who's unrecognizable and terrific) for the
killing by planting evidence and conning Belushi's girlfriend (Rochon) into
pretending to have witnessed the shooting. Nothing goes as planned, however,
and the duo find themselves piling lie upon lie until the whole jerry-rigged
situation threatens to tumble down on their heads.
 There are several clever twists in the story, though Kouf never quite
manages to make much of it seem credible. Perhaps he shouldn't have bothered
trying: There's a strong undercurrent of black comedy in the screenplay that
should have been brought to the forefront. Instead, Kouf---like his
heroes---keeps pushing the limits, wrapping the tale up with a "four months
later" epilogue that aims for irony and fails badly.
 Fans of Shakur will probably be pleased to have one more opportunity to
watch him working. Fans of movies will be relieved to hear the overintense
Belushi has temporarily deserted the silver screen for the TV screen. At
least it will be easier to turn him off now.
James Sanford
