Title
Review for Tous les matins du monde (1991)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jet Wimp
     When I think of the predicament of French cinema, I envision a
delicate Columbine doll labeled ART being torn apart by a mastiff
labeled THOUGHT AND REASON.  The tendency towards philosophical
abstraction has been the curse of French film since Renoir, culminating
in the soporific headiness of such master anaesthetists as Bresson and
Rohmer.  My own list of the 12 greatest films contains a single French
entry, Clement's FORBIDDEN GAMES (1951).  That film spoke movingly of
the horrifying effect of war on children; no philosophical meditations
crippled its direct and harrowing message.
     But in French film, such achievements are rare, and seem almost to
have to apologize for their presence.  There was a time when I thought
French film might be rescued from its philosophical diaspora.  I
welcomed Godard's BREATHLESS (1960), and even WEEKEND (1968), but that
director began to descend into bombast and politically trendy rant.
Once in a while a filmmaker such as Cocteau in LES ENFANTS TERRIBLE
(1950) would approach a robust subject, then scurry away in cant and
confusion, leaving an unwatchable film.  The promise of LA FEMME NIKITA
and DELICATESSEN remains to be fulfilled.   
     It is remarkable that French cineasts admire from afar a completely
different approach to filmmaking, the American film noir genre, with its
frenetic sense of doom and its headlong momentum.  I think randomly of
four fairly recent American films, THE GRIFTERS, KILL ME AGAIN,
SHATTERED, ONE FALSE MOVE.  None of these films is free from flaws, but
each grabs the viewer by the scruff of the neck neck at the beginning
and at the end propels him/her out of the theater wondering how 1 1/2
hours could have passed so quickly.  The momentum films in this genre
are capable of building is truly marvelous.  The  noir spirit of these
films is the antithesis of what the French filmmakers themselves usually
achieve.  French filmmakers are like the acnaed high school computer
whiz who fantasizes about the cheerleader he can never have.
     The recent film, TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE (All The Mornings of the
World) is, alas, in the reflective tradition.  The film  details the
relationship between the baroque composers Marin Marais (1656-1728) and
M.  de Sainte Colombe, played by Gerard Depardieu and Jean-Pierre
Marielle, respectively.  Marais is best known, perhaps,  for his
unearthly "Les Sonnerie de Sainte Genevieve du Mont-de-Paris" which is
often played on the classical music stations.  I am uncertain about the
historicity of Marielle's character.  He is certainly obscure, not even
being listed in my Slonimsky.   However, some recordings of his music
have begun to emerge.  In the film Marais is depicted as his protege,
but in reality Marais studied the viola da gamba with Hotterman, and
composition with Lully.  Their relationship is the usual protege
relationship enshrined in filmdom: melodramatic, filled with sullen
abrasiveness, temperament, posturing, and in this case with a seduced,
pining and ultimately suicidal daughter.  
     The film is langorous and atmospheric, and the interplay of the
haunting baroque music with the pastoral scenery is effective.  The
actors handle their duties adroitly, particularly  Marielle, and that
reliable fireplug of an actor, Depardieu.  French actors are, I think,
the best film actors.  Everything comes from the face, and everything is
nuance.  French actors and directors both have obviously studied the
great American film actors of the past.  It is interesting that Stephen
Frears, the director of LIASONS DANGEREUSE, cast that film with
American, rather than French, actors because "American actors are better
with their faces."  I don't think so.  More than once, during the films
JEAN DE LA FLORETTE and MANON OF THE SPRING I burst into spontaneous
applause at the intense subtlety of the performances, particularly those
of Daniel Auteuil and Yves Montand.    When I saw LA FEMME NIKITA, there
was a unified intake of breath from the audience during Jeanne Moreau's
bravura turn as the aging crone.  I could name many other equally
thrilling examples.  Marielle in the present film is so uncanny that one
could easily watch him read a telephone book, or Descartes' "Discourse
on Method," which is an asset, because in this movie that's about what
the viewer gets.
     Yes, unfortunately that age-old succubus of French film, THE IDEA,
is at work.  Seeing the device called  "faction"---  historical figures
in an imagined narrative---in the hands of a French director is ominous,
like a toddler playing with a handgun.  It means the characters can be
anything, in particular, puppets, from whose mouths can me made to issue
maxims, alternatively opaque and sophomoric.  The motivations and
consistency of character in the movie are really non-existent;  Marais'
dialog could be given to Sainte Colombe or vice versa with no
discernible effect.  The characters are pegs on which to hang a series
of ruminations about art and life.  The character of the young Marais,
played by Depardieu's real life son, makes no sense whatsoever.  He
weeps when upbraided by Sainte Colombe and denounces him as a cruel man,
yet, with no hesitation, walks out on his pregnant lover.  "Our bodies
are no longer right for each other."
     There is no historical evidence that Marais liked to dally
destructively.  In fact, he married at the age of 20 and had 19 devoted
children.  More faction, I suppose.
     The film culminates in a ultra-slow-motion Socratic dialog between
St. Colombe and his errant pupil Marais on the nature of art and life.
     "What is music for?"  St. Colombe asks, pensively.  The scene is
filmed in near darkness, the actor's faces fill the screen, an
encyclopedia of facial expressions is exhibited before each word of
dialog emerges.   
     To this question, Marais offers a languid series of abstruse
replies, each of which is countered by a severe "NO!" from St. Colombe.
Finally, the secret is revealed.
     "Music is for before we are born, before we breathe, before we see
the light."
     Watching this philosophical paint dry became excruciating,
unendurable.  I estimated my distance from the exit doors.  I found
myself conjuring up new muffin recipes.  I found myself thinking of
imaginative ways to re-wire my house and reappraising the promises of
that morning's junk mail.  I renewed my promise never to shout "FRENCH
CINEMA!" in a crowded fire station.

Author
Frank Maloney
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE is a French film directed by Alain
Corneau, from a script by Corneau and Pascal Quignard.  It stars
Jean-Pierre Marielle, Gerard Depardieu, Guillaume Depardieu, Anne
Brochet, and Carole Richert.  Unrated, includes male and female nudity.
In French with English subtitles.
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE is as serious, slow-paced, and sadly
beautiful as the viola da gamba music that pervades the film.  The story
of the film concentrates on the conflict between the austere, cenobitic
master of the viola da gamba (the ancestor of the modern cello),
Monsieur de Sainte-Colombe -- whose name is otherwise unknown -- and a
hack seeking fame and fortune in the court of Louis XIV, Marin Marais.
Their personal conflict symbolizes the war between art and commercial
success, a subject as relevant today as in the late 17th Century.
     TOUS LES MATINS has been compared to no great purpose to AMADEUS, a
movie with an entirely different background, tone, style, and focus; the
Mozart of AMADEUS sees no conflict between living like courtier and
being a great artist and the subject of that film is an examination of
the question "What is genius?"  The genius in TOUS LES MATINS lives a
life dedicated to fifteen-hour practice days and rural simplicity; he
refuses to go to Versailles to play for le Roi du Soleil, the Sun King,
just as he refuses to publish his compositions.
     A more useful comparison might be made between TOUS LES MATINS and
BARRY LYNDON, Stanley Kubrick's much maligned masterpiece (okay, so Ryan
O'Neil wasn't the greatest casting choice, but everything else about it
was a stunning experience): both films have a deliberate pace that is
guaranteed to put off most Americans accustomed to the rhythms of TV and
Hollywood movies.  And both films are virtually a series of tableaux
vivants, still lifes recreated on film, with a painterly style of design
and composition and lighting that delights and fascinates from beginning
to end.
     The script, written by the director Alain Corneau and Pascal
Quignard, is based on Quignard's novel.  The film runs 114 minutes, and
you will probably feel either caught up in something you would rather
never end or you will feel every one of those minutes in your keister.
The plot is minimal:  relationships develop and change among the small
cast.  There are few characters outside the principals, there are only a
few moments of humor or sex.  There are long, long head shots, a
voice-over narrative by Depardieu pere, much chiaroscuro, detailed
period accuracy, and wonderful music.  There is also some talk about
what the purpose of music is that helps to clarify to rather mysterious,
unknowable Sainte-Colombe.  And finally, there are some individual
moments that have to be considered small epiphanies for the viewer, as
when Marais leads a full baroque court orchestra in a thumping version
of his most beautiful composition -- an utterly astounding scene
probably by itself worth the price of a ticket for some of us.  Or the
very end of the film, which made me gasp out loud and cry, so moving, so
beautifully earned, so right was it.
     The cast is perfect.  The center is Jean-Pierre Marielle
(Sainte-Colombe), a veteran actor who has appeared in films such as COUP
DE TORCHON and URANUS.  He walks that fine line between sainthood and
madness; he lives to play and retreats from the world into his music and
his visions.  He is not likable, I doubt that any saint would be, but he
is irresistible and powerful.  Anne Brochet, who played Roxanne in the
Depardieu CYRANO DE BERGERAC (1990), is every bit as strong as
Madeleine, Sainte-Colombe's older daughter.  She is the link between her
father and Marais in life and in death.  Carole Richert plays the
younger daughter, the daughter who is not a slave to her father's
obsessions.
     The two Depardieus, father and son, play Marin Marais as the
middle-aged "successful" courtier and as the raw youngster who first
presents himself to become Sainte-Colombe's student.  Gerard Depardieu
puts on a fearless performance, especially the opening sequence, a long
close-up of the ruined face of a failed, foppish man who finally knows
he's a hack, and at the end as he finds and redeems himself.  Guillaume
Depardieu, the 21-year-old son, has a lighter acting style and a strong
resemblance to his famous father as well as to Julian Sands.
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE has proved to be an enormous success in
France, where it sold 2 million tickets in a year, sparked a revival of
interest in French baroque music, and won seven Cesars (the French
Oscars) -- best picture, director, music, and supporting actress
(Brochet), amongst them.  The soundtrack featuring the viola da gamba of
Jordi Savali and the music of Marais, Sainte-Colombe, Couperin, and
Lully has been a success in its own right wherever the film has played.
     In the U.S., the film's success will be limited to the art-house
circuit and not even everyone there will like it for its pace and
plotlessness.  For those willing or able, or both, to give TOUS LES
MATINS DU MONDE a chance, the rewards can be enormous.  If you are one
of those, I recommend this film to you most highly.

Author
Pedro Sena
There is so little known about the life of composer SAINTE COLOMBE, that it
took a novel to get some attention.  And a director who loves music, because
if you didn't, this film might not have been worth it.
This is not the CLIFF NOTES of music appreciation.  This is the real
thing....... and it is done so carefully, and meticulously, that one is
probably going to go out and buy a lot of this music.............
Sainte Colombe, became a historical composer, and creative musician because
he disdained the music business more than for his own music, although it is
intensely private, and extremely beautiful.
He was more famous for having created a scandal when he refused the favors
of the courts of Louis XIV in France.  He was less interested in the
popular, or court attentions, than he was in being lost in his own grief,
for a wife he truly loved, and if it is an indication, the first person that
showed to him that his music not only made sense, but was good.  However,
Sainte Colombe's prowess with the instrument
he devised ( the precursor to today's cello -- he added a 7th string to the
viola to add more lower notes ) was clear, and the desire of many who hoped
to get him as a teacher.  Most were refused, and it
is possible than none actually got any teaching.  But Marin Marais has in
his memoirs some moments to tell, and the film's writer devised a novel
about the tragic life of a man, who was truly lost
in his own creation.
Opening with an extreme close up of the sad Marais, in grief, for he too has
been bit by his inability to deal with the guilt he has for having left
Sainte Colombe's daughter, who went on to hang herself,
the elder Marais tells his story to an audience of young musicians that are
trying to rehearse, but have no touch, no feel for any music.   And the film
ends with the elder Sainte Colombe entering
and saying the final line of the film.  " I am proud to have taught a
student like you " ... A submission, that he has finally seen what he has
felt and preached to himself all his life.  The music has
won out.  And the feelings have been elevated to a new high.
With a superb cast, both Depardieus ( father and son ), J-P Marielle as
Sainte Colombe, and Anne Brochet and Carole Richert as the daughters of the
composer, just smooth their way through the whole
film, which appears long, but isn't..... but pleas that you listen and live
the feelings of the music... which is not something Hollywood likes to
do..... they would have cut half hour out of this  film........
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Reviewer and Moderator of the CENTIPEDE's THE FILM.

Author
James Berardinelli
Running Length:  1:54
Rated:  No MPAA Rating (Nudity, sexual situations, mature themes)
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE presents a fictionalized account of the 
lives of the 17th Century French musician-composer Sainte Colombe and
his brilliant, flamboyant student, Marin Marais.  The story begins with
the death of Sainte Colombe's beloved wife and progresses onward as he
tries to be the best father he can to his two daughters.  After the 
passage of about twelve years, the seventeen year old Marin Marais 
arrives, seeking to become Sainte Colombe's pupil.  Both of Sainte 
Colombe's daughters are attracted to Marais, but it is the eldest
daughter,  Madeleine, with whom he has an affair--an affair that is
destined to shape all that comes after.
     Were TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE a British production, it might 
appear on MASTERPIECE THEATER as a two-part drama.  The film moves at a
leisurely pace, refusing to let modern conventions drive it faster than
it's prepared to go.  Those who are unwilling to simply sit back and
enjoy the story as it gradually unfolds would find their time better
spent somewhere else.  TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE demands--and
rewards--patience from its audience.
     This is a movie of few words.  Take away the framing narrative of
Marin  Marais as he looks back on his life, and there's little dialogue
in the film.  As a result, TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE demands distinctive
performances from its participants when they don't speak.  Eyes, lips,
hands, and body language are vitally important to the success of the
film.  Fortunately, the assembled cast, with the possible exception of
the younger Depardieu, are up to the challenge.
     As for Guillaume, he's not the actor that his father is.  At best,
his performance is wooden, and it stands out uncomfortably in compari-
son to the stunning portrayal given by Anne Brochet (Madeleine).  
Guillaume lacks range, and, as result, the film takes a dramatic turn 
for the better when father takes over for son in the role of an aging
Marin  Marais.
     Where dialogue is lacking however, a resonant musical score takes
over.  Arranged by Jordi Savall, the soundtrack is evocative and moody,
and, as might be expected, includes several compositions by Sainte
Colombe and Marin Marais.
     What might at first seem like a deceptively simple story is
actually a tale of ego, passion, and the clash between the desire for
fame and the pursuit of true art.  Young and ambitious, Marin Marais
wants to play at court for the king.  Sainte Colombe, who has already
rejected that honor, claims that the call of the musician supersedes
all.  The two clash over this issue, as well as over the affair between
Madeleine and Marais.
     TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE is an emotional story whose potency grows
with every passing moment.  The unhurried pace of the film allows for
greater character development than can be found in many domestic movies,
and this enforces the impact of the conclusion.
     Costume and set design are both impressive, well deserving of the
honors already heaped upon them.  We don't for one moment doubt that
this story is taking place in the latter part of the 1600s.  If there
are anachronisms,  I couldn't find them.
     Despite its meandering pace, TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE is a well 
worth a look for anyone who doesn't demand a large dose of action in a 
film to keep them riveted.  This is the kind of pure drama, energized by
character interplay, that Hollywood almost never produces.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE (ALL THE MORNINGS OF THE WORLD) 
(France, 1991) *** 3/4 . Directed by Alain Corneau. Screenplay 
by Pascal Guignard and Corneau, from Guignard's novel. Music 
arranger and performer,  Jordi Savall. Cinematography, Yves 
Angelo. Sets, Bernard Vezat. Costumes, Corrine Jorry. Editing, 
Marie-Joseph Yoyotte.  Cast: Jean-Pierre Marielle, Gerard 
Depardieu, Anne Brochet, Guillaume Depardieu, et al. An 
October Films release. In French with subtitles. 113 min. 
Rated PG. At the Savoy Theaters. 
C'est magnifique ! The musical sounds are magnificent. 
Lighting and photography are magnificent. Editing and just 
about everything else is magnificent.  
Gerard Depardieu must be Lon Chaney's successor as The Man of 
a Thousand Faces. Grotesquely puffy, rouged, bewigged,  he 
opens the film as the musician-courtier, composer and viol 
virtuoso Marin Marais (1656-1728)] 
In a fit of dark despair and humbling himself, the aging 
Marais tells his students that he is nothing compared to his 
teacher. His voice-over starts the flashbacks about Monsieur 
de Sainte-Colombe, a musical genius about whom little is 
known, not even his first name. 
Sainte-Colombe did exist. He was a composer-performer who did 
marvels for the viol (the viola de gamba that became the 
cello), added a seventh string, found new fingerings, and had 
Marais as his most direct disciple.
The story begins with the death of Sainte-Colombe's young wife 
in the 1660s. The disconsolate musician  (Jean-Pierre 
Marielle) becomes a recluse in his large country house, builds 
a cabin --a wooden shack to practice in -- in his garden. He 
practices endlessly and also teaches his two daughters the 
rudiments of literacy and the techniques and secrets of great 
viol playing. 
Solo or together they make stunning music. Years later, father 
and grown-up children give a rare salon   trio performance. 
The court's foppish first violist acknowledges 
Sainte-Colombe's superiority, soon after offers him to play 
for His Majesty Louis XIV, the Sun King in whose reign France 
was the cultural and artistic center of the world. 
The vile-tempered Sainte-Colombe was a purist's purist and a 
Jansenist to boot -- these were breakaway Catholics who, among 
other matters, disapproved of the Jesuits' worldliness and 
ostentation. He kicks out the envoy. Playing the Palace is not 
for him.  
He resumes his rustic, eremitic life, with a vengeance. Having 
attained musical perfection he will not share it. 
17-year old Marin Marais (Guillaume Depardieu, Gerard's only 
son) asks the Master to teach him. In vain, until the two 
girls come to the rescue.  But in this un-Hollywoodian tale 
the teacher keeps reminding the young man that he may have 
virtuosity but lacks soul. "You're not a musician," he says, a 
term that the uncompromising Sainte-Colombe seems to equate 
with an ineffable state of grace.
French movie narrations can often be superb.  Here, Gerard 
Depardieu relates the past with perfect voice and tone, in 
literary yet beautifully simple, un-pedantic terms. His 
technical discourses on musical techniques are fascinating.  
"Tous les Matins ... " is a glorious musical story. It is also 
a moving story of marital love. Sainte-Colombe's adoration of 
his wife is recompensed by a series of her apparitions. " It 
seemed to him that his rage was leaving him." He mellows 
perceptibly. We even discover that the Maestro did have one 
friend, painter Baugin, also a purist and a real-life person 
about whom little is known.
The film drips with Frenchness, from small details to the face 
of senior daughter Madeleine. Curiously, Anne Brochet played 
Roxanne in "Cyrano de Bergerac" where, without realizing it, 
she was in love with Cyrano, played by Gerard Depardieu. Here 
she loves Depardieu Junior. 
There is an affair that turns sad when young Marais yields to 
the temptations of fame and fortune. Much later, he realizes 
that his ties to the Sainte-Colombe family were more powerful 
than he had thought. 
The music, string and vocal , is a feast for the ears, with 
compositions by Sainte-Colombe, Marais, Lully, Couperin, and 
arrangements and performances by contemporary, Barcelona-born 
master of the bass viol, Jordi Savall.  The faking of 
viol-playing by the actors is entirely convincing. 
The look of the film is a  feast for the eyes. The interiors 
remind you (but not pointedly) of paintings by Georges de La 
Tour, Dutch masters and others.  The secret is exquisite 
lighting, one of the most beautiful and precise I can 
remember. It reproduces perfectly the period's commonly used 
single or weak light sources, as opposed to artificial 
movie-lighting and the lightening of shadows or duskiness.  
The acting by Gerard Depardieu and Anne Brochet is impeccable.  
Jean-Pierre Marielle ho generally has comic or cynical roles, 
is cast again type and gives an unforgettably taciturn 
performance. Depardieu Jr. makes a good debut.   
French director Bertrand Tavernier had made" Round Midnight," 
in 1986. With the help of Dexter Gordon and Herbie Hancock, 
this was the best and most loving film ever about jazz 
musicians. Now Alain Corneau's ninth film in 18 years does the 
same for baroque music. Nominated for 11 Cesars (the French 
Oscars), it won 7, including Best Film, Director, Supporting 
Actress and Music. There were other awards too, such as the 
prestigious Louis Delluc Prize for Best French Film. 
TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE (ALL THE MORNINGS OF THE WORLD) 
(France, 1991) *** 3/4 . Directed by Alain Corneau. Screenplay 
by Pascal Guignard and Corneau, from Guignard's novel. Music 
arranger and performer,  Jordi Savall. Cinematography, Yves 
Angelo. Sets, Bernard Vezat. Costumes, Corrine Jorry. Editing, 
Marie-Joseph Yoyotte.  Cast: Jean-Pierre Marielle, Gerard 
Depardieu, Anne Brochet, Guillaume Depardieu, et al. An 
October Films release. In French with subtitles. 113 min. 
Rated PG. At the Savoy Theaters. 
C'est magnifique ! The musical sounds are magnificent. 
Lighting and photography are magnificent. Editing and just 
about everything else is magnificent.  
Gerard Depardieu must be Lon Chaney's successor as The Man of 
a Thousand Faces. Grotesquely puffy, rouged, bewigged,  he 
opens the film as the musician-courtier, composer and viol 
virtuoso Marin Marais (1656-1728)] 
In a fit of dark despair and humbling himself, the aging 
Marais tells his students that he is nothing compared to his 
teacher. His voice-over starts the flashbacks about Monsieur 
de Sainte-Colombe, a musical genius about whom little is 
known, not even his first name. 
Sainte-Colombe did exist. He was a composer-performer who did 
marvels for the viol (the viola de gamba that became the 
cello), added a seventh string, found new fingerings, and had 
Marais as his most direct disciple.
The story begins with the death of Sainte-Colombe's young wife 
in the 1660s. The disconsolate musician  (Jean-Pierre 
Marielle) becomes a recluse in his large country house, builds 
a cabin --a wooden shack to practice in -- in his garden. He 
practices endlessly and also teaches his two daughters the 
rudiments of literacy and the techniques and secrets of great 
viol playing. 
Solo or together they make stunning music. Years later, father 
and grown-up children give a rare salon   trio performance. 
The court's foppish first violist acknowledges 
Sainte-Colombe's superiority, soon after offers him to play 
for His Majesty Louis XIV, the Sun King in whose reign France 
was the cultural and artistic center of the world. 
The vile-tempered Sainte-Colombe was a purist's purist and a 
Jansenist to boot -- these were breakaway Catholics who, among 
other matters, disapproved of the Jesuits' worldliness and 
ostentation. He kicks out the envoy. Playing the Palace is not 
for him.  
He resumes his rustic, eremitic life, with a vengeance. Having 
attained musical perfection he will not share it. 
17-year old Marin Marais (Guillaume Depardieu, Gerard's only 
son) asks the Master to teach him. In vain, until the two 
girls come to the rescue.  But in this un-Hollywoodian tale 
the teacher keeps reminding the young man that he may have 
virtuosity but lacks soul. "You're not a musician," he says, a 
term that the uncompromising Sainte-Colombe seems to equate 
with an ineffable state of grace.
French movie narrations can often be superb.  Here, Gerard 
Depardieu relates the past with perfect voice and tone, in 
literary yet beautifully simple, un-pedantic terms. His 
technical discourses on musical techniques are fascinating.  
"Tous les Matins ... " is a glorious musical story. It is also 
a moving story of marital love. Sainte-Colombe's adoration of 
his wife is recompensed by a series of her apparitions. " It 
seemed to him that his rage was leaving him." He mellows 
perceptibly. We even discover that the Maestro did have one 
friend, painter Baugin, also a purist and a real-life person 
about whom little is known.
The film drips with Frenchness, from small details to the face 
of senior daughter Madeleine. Curiously, Anne Brochet played 
Roxanne in "Cyrano de Bergerac" where, without realizing it, 
she was in love with Cyrano, played by Gerard Depardieu. Here 
she loves Depardieu Junior. 
There is an affair that turns sad when young Marais yields to 
the temptations of fame and fortune. Much later, he realizes 
that his ties to the Sainte-Colombe family were more powerful 
than he had thought. 
The music, string and vocal , is a feast for the ears, with 
compositions by Sainte-Colombe, Marais, Lully, Couperin, and 
arrangements and performances by contemporary, Barcelona-born 
master of the bass viol, Jordi Savall.  The faking of 
viol-playing by the actors is entirely convincing. 
The look of the film is a  feast for the eyes. The interiors 
remind you (but not pointedly) of paintings by Georges de La 
Tour, Dutch masters and others.  The secret is exquisite 
lighting, one of the most beautiful and precise I can 
remember. It reproduces perfectly the period's commonly used 
single or weak light sources, as opposed to artificial 
movie-lighting and the lightening of shadows or duskiness.  
The acting by Gerard Depardieu and Anne Brochet is impeccable.  
Jean-Pierre Marielle ho generally has comic or cynical roles, 
is cast again type and gives an unforgettably taciturn 
performance. Depardieu Jr. makes a good debut.   
French director Bertrand Tavernier had made" Round Midnight," 
in 1986. With the help of Dexter Gordon and Herbie Hancock, 
this was the best and most loving film ever about jazz 
musicians. Now Alain Corneau's ninth film in 18 years does the 
same for baroque music. Nominated for 11 Cesars (the French 
Oscars), it won 7, including Best Film, Director, Supporting 
Actress and Music. There were other awards too, such as the 
prestigious Louis Delluc Prize for Best French Film. 

Author

     I would like to take the time to encourage anyone interested in
beautiful music to see the movie TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE.  I
understand the movie is showing in New York and Boston.  It will
hopefully be distributed widely.  To answer possible future questions
about the movie, here is some information I have.
     The movie is the result of joint work by a writer (Pascal
Quignard), a director (Alain Corneau), and a musician (Jordi Savall).
Corneau wanted to do a movie on music and the 17th Century; he met
Quignard, who had already written about the viol, and suggested that
they do the story of Marin Marais (1656-1728), one of the best viol
players and composers of the time, and his teacher Sainte Colombe.
Quignard had discovered the music of Sainte Colombe through a recording
made by Jordi Savall in 1976.  Quignard wrote the book, Corneau took the
book and worked with Quignard and Savall to make the movie.  Savall
plays the music, and the soundtrack has been released (in addition to
Savall's previous recordings of Marais, Sainte Colombe and other French
composers, all on the Astree label).
     The title comes from a sentence in the novel: "Tous les matins du
monde sont sans retour," meaning literally "all the mornings of the
world are without return."
     Gabe Wiener asked what the historical truth is behind the movie.
Well, we have only four pieces of information on Sainte Colombe: a
religious community in Lyon hired a "Augustin Dautrecourt, known as
Sainte Colombe" to teach the viol to young nuns, in 1657 and 1659.
Sainte Colombe was mentioned in the Mercure Galant in 1679 as being in
attendance at the creation of an opera by Lully.  A manuscript
containing 67 pieces of viol attributed to Sainte Colombe was found in
the papers of Alfred Cortot in 1966.  Also, Marais published a "tombeau
de M de Ste Colombe" in 1701.  Finally, the fourth and most substantive
piece of information comes from the book by Evrard Titon du Tillet
called "Le Parnasse Francais" (published in 1732).  The book contains a
large number of anecdotes on various French musicians of the 17th and
early 18th Century.  The text on Marin Marais begins as follows (rough
translation by the poster):
    "It can be said that Marais brought the viol to its highest
    point of perfection, and that he was the first to reveal its
    range and its beauty by the many excellent pieces he wrote for
    this instrument, and by the remarkable way in which he played
    them.
    It is true that before Marais, Sainte Colombe had brought some
    fame to the viol; he gave concerts in his house, in which two of
    his daughters played, one the treble viol, the other the bass,
    and they formed with their father a three viol consort, which
    was a pleasure to listen to, even if it was made of rather
    ordinary symphonies and few chords.
    Sainte Colombe was actually Marais' teacher; but when he
    realized after six months that his pupil could surpass him, he
    told him that he had nothing more to show him.  Marais loved the
    viol passionately, and wanted to learn more from his master to
    perfect his skill on this instrument; and since he had some
    entry into his house, Marais took the time in summer when Sainte
    Colombe was in his garden, locked up in a little wooden cabin he
    had built between the branches of a mulberry tree, so as to play
    the viol without distraction and more beautifully.  Marais
    slipped under the cabin; he could hear his master, and profit
    from special passages and bow movements that the masters of the
    art like to keep to themselves.  But this did not last long, as
    Sainte Colombe noticed and took care not to be heard by his
    student.  Sainte Colombe nevertheless always gave him credit for
    the amazing progress he made on the viol; and once, as he was
    attending an occasion where Marais was  playing the viol, he was
    asked by some gentlemen what he thought of his  playing, and he
    answered that there were pupils who could surpass their 
    masters, but young Marais would never find anyone to surpass
    him."
     The text by Titon du Tillet is how we know about Sainte Colombe.
He never published his music, so until 1966 no one knew what he had
written.  As for his real name from the registers of that community in
Lyon, that was discovered in 1978 only.  It could also be counted as
information the mention made by Le Blanc in his 1740 "Defense de la
Viole de Gambe," of Sainte Colombe's extraordinary talent on the viol:
he could imitate any nuance of the human voice, from the sigh of a young
woman to the cry of an old man.
     Quignard could not miss the reference to the daughters, and the
phrase "since he had some entry into his house."  The story line of the
movie is imagined on the basis of these two "facts."  Whether Titon du
Tillet's story is itself true or just a story, we will never know.  As
for the wife, I don't think we have any evidence on that.  One of Sainte
Colombe's pieces is a "tombeau des regrets," but it is not known for
whom or why it was composed.  To me, no liberties were taken with the
truth because the truth is so slim: Quignard's inventions are, however,
coherent both internally and with the larger historical context.
     The book is very short (a 45-minute read), written in a terse and
suggestive language, often reminiscent of 17th Century French.  The
movie took a similar approach, and emphasized the same themes.  Among
the themes is the almost human quality of the viol, and how it can
render almost any human expression.  The book recalls the known fact
that Marais sung as a boy in a choir, and was kicked out when his voice
changed: his love of the viol is then explained as a "transfer" to a
new voice.  Interestingly, Jordi Savall himself took up the cello after
he stopped singing in a boys choir.
     Another theme is linked to the historical background: around the
middle of the 17th Century, a peculiar kind of Catholic movement
emerged, called Jansenism (sort of crypto-Calvinists, really, brooding
about predestination and all that).  These people, austere,
metaphysical, detached from the world, rejected the unheard of
extravagance and pomp of the court of Louis XIV, who in the end had
most of them exiled or imprisoned.  The book and the movie link Sainte
Colombe to the Jansenists explicitly, and his black dress, his cold
appearance, his hate for the world's pomp is set in contrast to young
Marais' search of pleasure, fame and success.  In the end, Marais is
redeemed, in spite of his worldly success, by his love of the viol.  The
language of the book and the movie's dialog are also best understood in
the context of the 17th Century, which was the defining moment for
French literature, when the canons of classicism (restraint, elegance,
respect for rules) were set by the newly created Academie Francaise,
writers such as Boileau, dramatists such as Corneille.  This may be
hard to appreciate for non-French speakers, but they may nonetheless
try to listen to the clipped, luminous diction and the sparse, laconic
dialog (in striking contrast to the richness and splendor of the music).
     A noteworthy point: old Marais is played by Gerard Depardieu, young
Marais by his son Guillaume.  Guillaume apparently plays the cello, so
he is the only one with decent placement of fingers on the frets....  I
wouldn't know myself, but some have been irritated by the fingers
moving without any relation to the music.  That is one of the film's
flaws.
