Title
Review for Drug Mule (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Will FitzHugh
This film starts out as the thematic sequel to the 1995 film festival
hit 'Flesh Suitcase'.  In that film, two men swallow balloons full of
heroin in order to smuggle it from Malaysia to the States.  The
majority of the movie takes place in a hotel as the men wait for the
balloons to re-emerge.  One of the men is a first-timer and the plot
unfolds as the more experienced one relates stories and advice from
past runs.  The hotel is populated with go-go girls, an
apocalypse-obsessed religious freak and the eccentric manager and his
dog, all of whom get swept up in the plot.  Eventually, a balloon comes
up missing and the drug's owners show up, looking for someone to
blame.  The movie succeeds on most fronts with a blend of black humor,
sharp dialog, competant acting and nearly ridiculous plot details.  The
violent conclusion is a bit disjointed, but the film is a welcome,
personalized look at the pawns in the worldwide drug trade.
The follow-up, 'Drug Mule', pushs the suspension of disbelief even
further.  The two drug runners, this time a man and a woman, use a
donkey as their 'flesh suitcase', loading the beast's digestive tract
up with well-wrapped heroin.  Once over the border Mexican border into
Arizona, the two hole up at a ranch to wait for the results of their
scheme.  As in 'Flesh Suitcase', the details of the plot are exposed in
a series of flashbacks as the veteran woman and the neophyte man pass
the time.  This doesn't last long, however.
The plot starts to twist unrecognizably as the donkey turns out to be
more than it appears.  William S. Burroughs' 'The Place of Dead Roads'
seems to be an inspiration as the ranch soon becomes populated with the
ghosts of indians and gunfighters and competing spys from unnamed and
possibly extraterrestrial sources.  The donkey (or whatever), now able
to talk, shrink to half its original size and mentally control anybody
past puberty, has assimilated the heroin and sets up a pre-teen drug
empire at the ranch to feed his massive habit.
The beast uses the two runners as bait to get their bosses under his
control and soon pushes his influence worldwide.  There are some darkly
comic scenes of children negotiating with American and Middle Eastern
drug kingpins.  The plot trys to stay on course as the two original
characters try to escape the beast and get back to reality, but they
(and us) are in way too deep.  The movie goes nearly out of control in
a wigged-out space opera across the solar system as the beast and his
army of prepubescent psychotics fight it out against the real
intergalactic government power (the Leptoids), an organization that
claims that the CIA and KGB are its 'tiniest, most insignificant field
offices'.  Good, twisted design (David Lynch would have been proud,
even scared) makes up for a small budget (think 'Doctor Who' if
designed by Francis Bacon and H. R. Giger as a boy).
'Drug Mule' lasts for almost three hours and I had a splitting headache
after I saw it.  Don't let that deter you, though.  Do what you have to
do prepare yourself; it probably won't help, but take a few painkillers
before you sit down.  The plot and characters, the main building blocks
for most movies, become secondary to the overriding vision and horror
of the scenario.  This film is the most powerful piece of modern cinema
since, well, since there has been modern cinema.  To properly view this
movie, it should be viewed through a telescope while being projected on
the dark side of the moon with the soundtrack being spliced directly
into your otic nerves.  No shit.
