Title
Review for Last September, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Trimark Pictures
 Director: Deborah Warner
 Writer: John Banville
 Cast: Maggie Smith, Michael Gambon, Jane Birkin, Fiona
Shaw, Lambert Wilson, David Tennant, Richard Roxburgh,
Keeley Hawes, Gary Lydon, Jonathan Slinger
   The troubles in Northern Ireland--the conflict between the
British troops who are stationed in two Irish counties and the
IRA forces which long to drive them out--are an obvious
source of high drama for film makers.  Consider Terry
George's 1996 emotion-charged "Some Mother's Son," a
true-life story of a hunger strike staged by a jailed IRA
member in the early 1980s, starring Helen Mirren as a
prisoner's mother who is forced to become involved.  Think
also of the more passionate "In the Name of the Father," Jim
Sheridan's 1993 release about a young and innocent ne'er-
do-well in Belfast accused by British police of a terrorist
bombing.
   If we judge movies about the 20th Century conflict between
British and Irish according to the directors' passion, "The Last
September" wouldn't have a chance.  But veteran theater
chief Deborah Warner has other things going for her in her
debut at the helm of a film.  The first is that she has adopted
Elizabeth Bowen's novel to the screen, a work of fiction
dealing with an episode that has received surprisingly little
attention given the interest in the centuries' old conflict.  The
second is that she has utilized Slawomir Idziak's camera in a
creative way to stylize quite a number of shots to show the
historical continuity of the family she portrays.  To her credit,
Warner has effectively translated an essentially literary work
into a cinematic vision--but one which is not without
drawbacks.
   "The Last September" is a 1920's Chekhovian tale of an
aristocratic Anglo-Irish family headed by Sir Richard Naylor
(Michael Gambon) and his wife Lady Myra (Maggie Smith). =
They own a lavish estate known as Danielstown in County
Cork in an area surrounded by relatively poor merchants and
are protected by elements of the British army led by Captain
Gerald Colthurst (David Tennant).  Though the Naylors
consider themselves Irish for having lived in that country for
most of their lives, to outward appearances they are
absolutely British.  Among their guests are a 19-year-old
orphaned niece, Lois Farquar (Keeley Hawes) and the
mischievous 30-year-old Marda Norton (Fiona Shaw) who has
had various affairs and is debating whether to marry an
English stockbroker whom she does not love.  =
   While the story ostensibly centers on Sir Richard and Lady
Myra, Warner's principal concern is the youthful Lois, a high-
spirited woman who is eager to see what love is all about and
is attracted to a roguish Irish terrorist, Peter Connolly (Gary
Lydon)--who is hiding out in an unused barn of the estate. =
Warner allows us to observe the idiosyncratic owners of the
estate who are given to alternately cryptic and witty
statements about love and politics.  In one quietly humorous
exchange, Sir Richard gives instructions to the clueless
captain--who is in love with a not-too-interested Lois--the
captain hanging on every utterance but not understanding a
word.  In a similar exchange between the captain and Lady
Myra, the woman of the estate advises the soldier in no
uncertain terms that Lois would never marry a man so
obviously beneath her station.  (Maggie Smith is, as she was
in "Tea With Mussolini," a lady who is above it all, one who
has seen everything and would insist on her afternoon tea
even if she were in the midst of a battlefield.) The real
surprise of the picture is Keeley Hawes, who had complained
that she is always cast as an older woman but now gets her
chance to portray an adolescent who acts as a 19-year-old
woman would act in just about any country in the West.
   The political situation is never too far from the polite, if
acerbic, discussions.  We become privy to the execution of a
black-and-tan (British soldier) by a terrorist and the
subsequent liquidation of yet another British soldier by a
fighter determined to drive the English out of their country. =
We cannot help feeling sad for the Naylors and their entire
household, who are aware--like the characters in Chekhov's
"The Cherry Orchard"--that a lacy era is ending and a way of
life is to be forsaken.  The pace is awfully slow but to keep
an audience involved, the camera plays tricks that often
seem employed for the sake of copying the Merchant-Ivory
genre.  As Lois looks through her telescope, the audience
gets a closeup of her eye and catches what she observes as
she slowly focuses and spins her instrument about the
landscape.  In another scene we witness the going-on in a
room of the estate through the keyhole.  "The Last
September" is so ethereal that Warner appears at times to
challenge her viewers to sit without fidgeting with the promise
of coming away with a better understanding of a fading
epoch.
Rated R.  Running Time: 103 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE LAST SEPTEMBER is one of those inert period pieces that give art
house films a bad name.
Wasting a talented cast that includes veteran actors Maggie Smith and
Michael Gambon, director Deborah Warner has her actors strolling through
the sets to the rhythm of the film's dreamy, melancholic music.  As a
short film without words, the movie might have worked, but as a
full-length, talking motion picture, it is terminally boring.
Although this is Warner's first feature film, she has an extensive
background in opera direction, which shows.  She places the actors
statically within the frame as she might arrange an opera set with the
singers, who normally move slowly, if at all.  Meandering across the
stage, however, can become soporific in a film.
The opening credits explain that the movie is about the "Anglo-Irish
tribe" when they were about to vanish from Ireland with the coming of
Irish independence in 1920.  This background data is extremely helpful
since the movie's message is buried by an avalanche of aristocratic
small talk.  ("You're being beastly."  "I say there, old girl.")  Little
happens in the movie, other than the brief interruptions of the violence
that takes place away from the house.  People are killing each other,
not that you'd know it by listening to the conversations of the
Anglo-Irish wealthy, like the estate's owners, Sir Richard Naylor
(Gambon) and Lady Myra (Smith), and their house guests.
At the center of the "story" -- calling it a drama or a romance would be
a misnomer -- is Sir Richard's niece, Lois Farquar (Keeley Hawes from
THE AVENGERS).  British Army Capt. Gerald Colthurst (David Tennant) is
in love with Lois, but her heart pines for a local Irish rebel, Peter
Connolly (Gary Lydon).
An interchange about as witty as the film ever gets occurs on the estate
grounds between two of the guests.  "One always has the idea of love,"
Marda (Fiona Shaw) says to Hugo (Lambert Wilson).  "I haven't," Hugo
retorts.  "Yes, but you're married," she explains.
Like a houseguest who doesn't take the hint that it's long past time to
leave, the movie drags on after it's natural ending point.  As you leave
the theater, you may find that the most remarkable thing was that you
were able to stay awake.  That is, if you were.
THE LAST SEPTEMBER runs 1:43.  It is rated R for some violence, nudity
and sexuality and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: For the arthouse. Better for rental.
Welcome to County Cork, 1920. That would be after the time of "The
Troubles" detailed in Michael Collins; in the period when the English
Army and the Irish Republicans were still battling for control of the
Irish countryside. The big losers in this war are the Ascendancy,
English gentry and former Lords of the Land who, after hundreds of years
of occupancy, consider themselves Irish. The other tribe of Eire, of
course, consider these folk to be English and want them to go back where
they came from. Since where they came from is Ireland, you can see the
cultural problems looming.
But balancing cultural differences against army action and a blooming
relationship that puts both of the aforementioned things in conflict is
a mighty difficult thing to do. That's why novels are huge. That's why
screen adaptations, most of the time, come up short. Such is the case of
The Last September and, even as we ignore the Source Material as a
baseline comparison, we can tell stuff got lost.
As The Last September begins, we see a young couple of obvious monetary
plenitude. Lois Farquar (Keeley Hawes) dances down the rural avenue of
the estate run by Sir Richard (Michael Gambon) and Lady Myra Naylor
(Maggie Smith), flirtatious pheromones pouring from every pore. Laurence
Carstairs (Jonathan Slinger) follows. Behind the pair is a burly
handyman (Tom Hickey), carrying the portable Victrola which is pumping
out an Al Jolson tune. Back at the estate, eyebrows are raised at this
flirtation, which Lois pooh poohs because she is her uncle's niece and
Carstairs is her (Lois') aunt's nephew.
Nope, makes no sense to Cranky, either. Either something didn't make it
from the pages of the novel by Elizabeth Bowen or these Ascendant
Irish-English don't know diddle about genealogy. Anyway, Lois is more
interested in the Army Captain Gerald Colthurst (David Tennant) as a
suitor, though Lady Myra will see that this person with no money
dispatched post haste. While Sir Richard knows darn well that this year
will be the last, Lady Myra is content to believe that the English will
continue to rule this small part of the Empire. Danielstown, aka The Big
House, is chock full of guests, including Hugo and Francie Montmorency
(Lambert Wilson and Jane Birkin), who have sold their estate and are
looking for a suitably luxurious place to squat, and Marda Norton (Fiona
Shaw) who still harbors a major attraction for Hugo. Marda is suitably
engaged to a man in London, but still hopes she can insert herself
between Hugo and his wife.
The last guest is an unwanted one. Hiding in an old mill house on the
estate is Peter Connolly (Gary Lydon), an IRA fugitive wanted for the
murder of an English Army officer. While the Army keeps an eye on
Connolly's parent's house, he is being tended to surreptitiously by Lois
-- who still finds herself attracted to the boy she grew up with, all
the while knowing that aiding the fugitive could get her put to death.
The story arc of that particular trio is easy to follow. Problem is, and
this is just a dumb kid from Brooklyn talking, that the story arcs of
the supporting characters aren't clear and, even with dialog explaining
why each is staying at Danielstown, there's no great sense that any of
their particular stories matter. If Lois is truly meaning to see if any
kind of spark still exists between her and Hugo, it isn't apparent.
Hugo's wife, Francie is as meek and nonexistent as the proverbial fly on
the wall. As for the elderly Lord and Lady Naylor, even with the minute
amount of screen time they receive, they firmly establish the background
of the tale, and Smith's performance is (as usual) head and tails above
all else as she brings the full weight of English class consciousness
crashing down on the head of the poor Captain.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Last September, he would have
paid...
Rent, even if you're into this kind of flick.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Ross Anthony
Beautifully filmed, "Last September" has the feeling of an impressionistic
painting. The setting is that of the last days of the ruling "tribe" of
Ireland back in 1916 as the Irish begin to revolt. But the primary story is
at play in young Lois, a member of the elite, pursued by an innocent British
soldier, but allured to the roughened Irish renegade she had known as a
child.
Despite the text preface, this ruling "Tribe" scenario may still be a bit
confusing to those not privy to UK history. It certainly was for me. For
that reason, here is further explanation from the film's production
material: They are "the Ascendancy ... moneyed, graceful and essentially
feudal. The Anglo-Irish aristocracy (the wealthier heirs of English
immigrants in Ireland, who sound and appear English, although they consider
themselves Irish)."
Maggie Smith and Michael Gambon are superb in their proper snootitude. Fiano
Shaw gives a flawless performance as Lois' influential confidant. In fact,
most of the acting, direction, and cinematography are remarkable. It's the
culmination of the story that falls flat against this disciplined canvas.
Director, Deborah Warner's portrayal of the sheltered, ignorantly bliss
elite is as delicate and beautiful as the shell of an Easter egg -- inviting
friends over for a tennis party while the countryside trembles on the verge
of war.
Lois, herself, is carefree, emotion-driven, spur of the moment; and for that
we all fall in love with her. With giddily attractive dialogue
like..."You're so sudden all of a sudden." and "How do you know I'm not in
love with some married man or something." These lines are delivered in a
completely sweet and romantic scene with her innocent soldier-caller. This
stunning moment is followed by a charming chat with the experienced yet,
sensitively-humored, older woman.
Unfortunately, by the end of the film our patience with both Lois and this
oft-used story line may not be so sympathetic.
The Last September. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Keeley Hawes, Michael Gambon, Tom Hickey, David Tennant, Richard
Roxburgh, Gary Lydon, Maggie Smith, Fiona Shaw, Lambert Wilson.
Directed by Deborah Warner.
Screenplay by John Banville based upon the novel by Elizabeth Bowen.
Director of Photography Slawomir Idziak.
Produced by Yvonne Thunder at Trimark/Matrix/Scala.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
