Title
Review for Fresh Air (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
First time writer/director Neil Mansfield contends that art
can be found in the everyday lives of ordinary people.  He tries to
prove his theory with this video diary following a week in the lives
of three friends who share a house in the inner Sydney suburb of
Marrickville.
Kit (Nadine Garner) shares the house with her boyfriend Jack
(Marin Mimica), a failed film maker, and her best friend E (new comer
Bridie Carter), a uni student who daily compiles her own personal
magazine which she distributes to her small circle of friends.  The
house is situated under the airport flight path.  It is this element
that provides a thematic focus that runs throughout the otherwise
fragmented and loosely structured film.  This is an area that
Mansfield knows well, and the film is enthused with a passion for the
back streets and the residents of this slice of suburbia.  Mansfield
is inspired by the early films of Godard and the French new wave, and
he tries to duplicate some of that energy here.  However, not a lot
that is particularly interesting occurs, and this is ultimately a dull
and meandering film.  Some people may find its easy going style
charming and endearing, others will merely find it dull.
Mansfield has coined a new term to describe his low budget
semi-autobiographical film - "zinema" - which suits its multi-media
format.  The film combines the cut and paste methodology of magazines
with the flexibility of various different film stocks, and still
photography, drawings and other objects that interest the characters.
Despite the obvious passion displayed by Mansfield and his crew, the
film itself is rather artlessly constructed.  A couple of scenes use a
disconcerting method of jump cut editing.  Every line of dialogue in
one scene is obviously cut together from several takes, and this scene
is symptomatic of the film's overall lack of rhythm and style.
Far from a breath of fresh air for contemporary Australian
cinema, this film comes across as little more than a below average,
low budget, experimental effort from a film student.  Fresh Air lacks
the charm and winning humour of Love And Other Catastrophes, another
local low budget film which used a similar improvised approach, and
seems rather stale by comparison.
