Title
Review for Faster Pussycat! Kill! Kill! (1965)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Christopher Null
     In 1966, Russ Meyer's classic, FASTER, PUSSYCAT!  KILL!  KILL!,
first hit the big screen.  1995 marks the re-release of what is
considered the director's best and most accessible work: still as fun,
twisted, and hilarious as ever.
     The picture opens with an ominous voice-over, reminiscent of an
old Ed Wood picture, warning us of the dangers of a certain creature
that often "travels in packs."  Of course this creature is none other
than ... the go-go dancer, which, when released after a hard night's
work, has the tendency to wander through the desert looking for
trouble.
     FASTER, PUSSYCAT! is the story of three such creatures (Tura
Satana, Haji, and Lori Williams) who, after a particularly competitive
auto race, wind up in a plot involving murder, kidnapping, and the lust
for an old man's "stash" of money.  It's a thin plot, of course, but
the ultra-hammy acting by the three ladies is what really carries the
story from one hilarious scene to the next.
     The Ed Wood comparisons don't stop at the narration.  In many
respects, FASTER, PUSSYCAT! is so bad it's good.  Satana, Haji, and
Williams couldn't act their ways--working together--out of a paper
bag.  But surprisingly, this works.  With the heavy use of '60's
hipster-slang and a cool jazz/thriller theme music soundtrack, the
three leads are portrayed as anti-heroines of a bygone age.  So what if
they haven't memorized their lines?
     And don't be fooled, Meyer knew what he was doing.  The script is
full of self-mocking references, with Satana referring to a "scene" or
"the screenplay."  And as a true master of low-budget filmmaking, Meyer
could turn this schlock into profits.  While appearing as
half-industrial film, half-farce, the sum result is an entertaining
fringe picture that's really quite suitable for the mainstream.
     As new prints of FASTER, PUSSYCAT! travel around the country,
you'll probably hear that Meyer was "a soft-core pornographer" with
films like BEYOND THE VALLEY OF THE DOLLS.  But when you see this movie
(and you really should), you may not even notice:  despite the
sensationalistic topic and scantily-clad characters, PUSSYCAT has no
nudity, due to the heavy censorship activity of the era.  Of course,
Meyer's reputation is quite the opposite.  Meyer fools us all again.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Russ Meyer's most popular movie hasn't dated badly, and it serves as
the best introduction to the mammary-mad director.
I wasn't too sure what to think when John Waters raved in his memoirs that
FASTER, PUSSYCAT! was "the best film ever made". Chalk that up to Waters'
love of high-trash cinema, I guess. Exactly how much credit, and for what, to
give to Meyer is a seriously debatable question. One thing I don't doubt was
that he made a campy, magnetic, high-energy movie that hasn't dated all that
badly -- much better than many of the other movies he made at the time. (And
because all the eroticism is implied, that makes it only smuttier and
therefore more fascinating.)
FASTER, PUSSYCAT! gives us three go-go dancers who head out into the desert
to race their cars. (I couldn't help thinking that Meyer would have had
endless fun with a scene where one of them explains her ambitions to
eventually enter law school, making love to a support pillar during the whole
conversation.) After meeting up with a whitebread-innocent couple, Varla
(Tura Satana) gets fed up with being one-upped, and kills the guy with a few
well-placed karate blows. They kidnap the girl and keep her sedated while
trying to figure out what to do next -- although it sort of hits them over
the head: at a gas station, they learn than a weird old cripple and his sons
live in the area, harboring a massive fortune. No prizes for guessing what
happens next.
The movie's loaded with things that have since become pop-cinema staples:
bizarre camera angles and editing, improbable character pairings, bizarre
fights. One of the most memorable scenes has Satana vs. one of the old man's
sons. She's trying to run him into a wall with her speedster, and he's
holding her car at bay with his bare hands, the wheels digging a huge ditch.
Satana's idea of karate has nothing on Jackie Chan, but it's not hard to see
how a woman using violence against a man in the late Sixties, on-screen, could
be construed as *really* shocking. She isn't flashy; she's trying to do
damage. She means business.
As the model (or at least the center of inspiration) for the rest of the
women in the film, Tura Satana eats up the screen without even trying. She
reminds me of the extremely fetishistic, almost representational ways women
are depicted in X-rated Japanese manga: gigantic chest, mask-like face,
drill-instructor's voice. She reportedly received a deluge of fan mail after
the movie came out, mostly from men who either wanted to marry her or be
flogged by her. Most of the reason you can't look away from the screen is
her, and it's not because she's attractive, or even sexy. She's terrifying,
especially when Meyer shoves the camera down on the desert floor, somewhere
between her toes, and has her stare down at us.
What we wind up with, incredibly, is probably the wellspring of almost every
butch-femme empowerment image. I'm not sure Madonna or Pat Califa would exist
as we know them, without something like FASTER, PUSSYCAT! as part of the
ambient background noise in American culture. Then again, maybe I'm crediting
him with too much. But then I watched Ralph Fiennes get the cheese kicked out
of him by a green-haired punk girl in STRANGE DAYS, and thought: Maybe too
much credit isn't nearly enough!
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: initial release 1966; special re-release 1994-95 
Running Length: 1:23 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA rating (Double entendres, violence, 
                     deep cleavage) 
     Russ Meyer's resume reads like a list of B-movie exploitation 
classics.  Remember BEYOND THE VALLEY OF THE DOLLS?  How about MONDO 
TOPLESS, BENEATH THE VALLEY OF THE ULTRAVIXENS, THE IMMORAL MR. TEAS, 
and WILD GALS OF THE NAKED WEST?  Then there's the director's current 
project-in-development, THE BRA OF GOD (co written by movie critic and 
DOLLS scripter Roger Ebert).  Of all of Meyer's films, however, perhaps 
the most memorable is 1966's FASTER, PUSSYCAT!  KILL!  KILL!, the flick 
described by film maker John Waters as "beyond a doubt, the best movie 
ever made."  Considering the source, that just about says it all. 
     In the 1960s and 70s, Meyer was to the silver screen what Hugh 
Hefner was to the printed page.  In fact, the paths of the two often 
crossed.  Meyer did several photo sessions for PLAYBOY (behind, not in 
front of, the camera) and a number of Playmates appeared in his movies.  
The director's ... ahem ... fondness for certain oversized female 
attributes is well-documented.  He cast all of his actresses based not 
on talent or ability, but on breast size.  A small-busted woman in a 
Russ Meyer film is as rare as one dressed conservatively. 
     Although it features no nudity, PUSSYCAT is classic Meyer.  The 
three leads are all topheavy, the action-packed plot is paper-thin, 
there are loads of double-entendres amidst the cheesy dialogue, and the 
style is pure low-budget.  This is fun stuff, to be sure, but definitely 
of the "guilty pleasure" sort.  PUSSYCAT promises an entertaining 
eighty-plus minutes without offering one redeeming tidbit of social 
commentary.  This is camp at its best. 
     The three women who strut their way through the film are Varla, the 
leader (played by part-Apache, part-Japanese Tura Satana); Rosie, her 
lesbian lover (Haji); and Billie, the bouncy blond (Playmate Lori 
Williams).  The wardrobe of the trio consists largely of leather boots, 
tight halters, and hot pants.  They love fast cars and when they 
encounter a clean-cut, all-American guy who's interested in racing 
against one of them, Varla takes up the gauntlet.  First, she defeats 
him on the track, then, out of the car, physically beats him to death.  
This leaves his helpless, apple pie-sweet girlfriend (Playmate Susan 
Bernard) in the clutches of the ruthless pussycats, whose next target is 
an old man (Stuart Lancaster) living with his two sons on an out-of-the-
way ranch.  Somewhere, he has a fortune stashed away, and Varla wants 
that money.  She doesn't care what--or who--she has to sacrifice to get
it. 
     The sexes will probably enjoy PUSSYCAT for different reasons.  
While the attraction for men should be reasonably obvious, the draw for 
women (the heaviest renters of this "epic" on videocassette) isn't hard 
to understand, either.  This is a prime example of female empowerment.  
The pussycats consistently dominate the male characters, showing them up 
as wimps, dolts, or both.  Those who accused THELMA AND LOUISE of "man-
bashing" will probably pale at what goes on here--if they can stop 
staring at the canyon between Tura Satana's breasts. 
     All this is probably terribly politically incorrect, but who cares?  
FASTER, PUSSYCAT!  KILL!  KILL! is entertainment of the lowest and most 
pleasant caliber, and it slips into art theaters and retro venues in the 
midst of a 60s and 70s resurgence.  Times have changed, however.  On its 
original release, this movie was considered adult fare.  Thirty years 
later, had this been submitted to the MPAA, it would have garnered a PG-
13--suitable viewing for teenagers.  I guess plunging necklines and 
tight shorts aren't what they used to be....  Not that such a realization 
will hamper anyone's enjoyment of this, or any other, Meyer endeavor. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
