Title
Review for Feds (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Those who have read some of my previous reviews know that I
have some problems accepting words like "comedy" and "Ivan
Reitman" in the same sentence. In the decade and half after
GHOSTBUSTERS, his last truly funny film, Reitman was
constantly failing to make any film able to produce laughter
among audience. This failure was most the evident case of
Hollywood creative bankruptcy associated with "high concept"
films, and it wasn't limited only on Reitman's work as
director. Reitman record as producer was equally
unimpressive, and FEDS, 1988 comedy directed by Dan Goldberg
is just another example.
The heroine of this film is Elizabeth De Witt (played by
Rebecca de Mornay), former Marine that decides to become an
FBI Agent. Before being enrolled in FBI Academy she is told
that only a fraction of the class would actually finish the
course, graduate and become an agent. Her own prospects seem
discouraging, since she lacks school credentials and skills
necessary to wrestle with high academic demands. Janis
Zuckerman (played by Mary Gross), her nerdish roommate, has
quite another problem - she could eat toughest academic
courses for breakfast, but her physical skills and fitness
seem way bellow high FBI standards. After a while both women
decide to compensate each other's flaws with tutoring.
Probably some time during production Goldberg and his
screenplay co- writer Len Bloom realised that their gags
simply aren't funny and that this rather weak copy of POLICE
ACADEMY couldn't work. So, they added some usual story
ingredients - action in the form of bank robbery subplot,
and some romance for our heroine, although failed one in the
form of hunkish would-be agent Brent Shepard, played by Ken
Marshall. Even with that, this film remain unattractive and
its short length shows the lack of creative juices among its
makers. Luckily, charm and tragically underused comedic
talent of Rebecca de Mornay save this film from turning into
total disaster. Unlike Mary Gross, who has the same facial
expression for the most of the film, she gives some realism
and humanity for her character.
Another thing that gives some purpose to this film is its
educational value. Those who are able to swallow Bloom's and
Goldberg's weak attempts on humour could get some
interesting insight into the inner workings of world's most
famous law enforcement organisation (after LAPD, of course).
The training course is presented seriously and realistically
with future Senator Fred Dalton Thompson playing quite
believable chief instructor and giving lessons usually not
applied by most of the on-screen lawmen. FBI, just as any
other police organisation in the world, relies on its brains
more than its guns, and this film reflects that - good
psychological skills, intelligence and mastery of
complicated legal procedures are actually more valuable than
simple gunplay. This message of FEDS is more important than
cliched and unsuccessful attempts to preach feminism.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
