Title
Review for Love! Valour! Compassion! (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Love! Valour! Compassion! (1997)
Jason Alexander, Randy Becker, Stephen Bogardus, John Glover, John 
Benjamin Hickey, Justin Kirk, Stephen Spinella. Directed by Joe Mantello.
Rated R, ** and one half stars (out of *****)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com/film
I saw Terrence McNally's LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! on Broadway a couple 
of summers ago. I'd already purchased tickets for Dan Butler's 
outstanding one man show "THE ONLY THING WORSE YOU COULD HAVE TOLD ME" 
and only had time to see one other play while in New York. Here's how I 
selected L!V!C! I read the theater listings on the Internet, looking for 
gay plays with male nudity. There were two major ones and the postings I 
read indicated that both featured about the same amount of flesh. L!V!C! 
had won the Tony for best play and I thought "Great! Art AND dicks!" 
There, now you know how shallow I am. 
The simple truth is that lots of guys are just like me and theatrical 
productions exploit that to the hilt. Many mediocre plays, both gay and 
straight, have enjoyed long profitable runs by tossing in lots of nudity. 
When I left the theater after three long hours of LOVE! VALOUR! 
COMPASSION!, I reflected on the experience. I'd had a fine time looking 
at the naked guys, particularly Randy Becker as a Puerto Rican dancer, 
and an awful time suffering through the actual play. That a production as 
mawkish and gimmicky as this won a Tony flattened me. If this was the 
best drama, Broadway must have had a terrible year.
Now LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! is a movie, with the Broadway cast intact, 
save for Nathan Lane being replaced by SEINFELD's Jason Alexander. L!V!C! 
the movie is definitely better than L!V!C! the play. For one thing, it's 
an hour shorter, and the editing helps. And, being a movie, you get a 
much better view of the naked guys.
Set at a secluded Victorian house on the edge of a beautiful lake, L!V!C! 
tells of eight gay men who gather over three holiday weekends one summer. 
The house belongs to Gregory (Stephen Bogardus,) a middle-aged 
choreographer and his younger, blind lover Bobby (Justin Kirk.) Their 
guests include John (John Glover,) a bitter English composer, and his 
current boy toy Ramon (the aforementioned Becker;) John's twin brother 
James, who is HIV+ and as sweet as his brother is surly (the twins' last 
name is Jeckyll...too clever, eh?;) Buzz (Alexander,) a flamboyant show 
tune aficionado; and Arthur (John Benjamin Hickey) and Perry (Stephen 
Spinella,) a couple celebrating fourteen years together. 
The men hang out and mostly spout the kind of theatrical chatter that you 
would never hear in real life. The continuing relationship of the group 
is puzzling. John is intensely hateful at every conceivable opportunity, 
yet he gets invited back. Ramon has a brief affair with Bobby that nearly 
destroys Bobby and Gregory's relationship, yet he gets invited back. Two 
of the guys are caught hiding in a closet eavesdropping on a painful 
encounter between John and Ramon, yet they get invited back. These men 
are either far more forgiving than anyone I've ever met or simply 
gluttons for punishment.
L!V!C! has its pleasures. The dialogue, windy though it may be, is often 
funny and occassionally very touching. Jason Alexander gives a strong 
performance. Initially he appears to be doing an impression of Nathan 
Lane, but after a few minutes he seems to find his footing and makes the 
character his own. Despite being saddled with the twin roles, John Glover 
almost succeeds in making the viewer forget the gimmick. His James is a 
particularly nice creation; bedecked in flowing clothes and a straw sun 
bonnet, James is a painfully kind and loving person. A flowering romance 
between him and Buzz is one of the highlights of the story. 
L!V!C! deserves credit for presenting a non-stereotypical, intimate 
portrait of a group of gay men to a mainstream audience. It's a shame 
though, that for the most part, these guys are boring. Not much happens 
in L!V!C!, and aside from Alexander and Glover's characters, the men are 
pretty bland. That's fine if you're trying to show heterosexuals that 
gays are really just plain folks. If you're trying to construct a drama, 
though, it really helps to have characters that are actually interesting. 
For better or worse, L!V!C! struggles mightily to be a gay version of THE 
BIG CHILL, but lacks the color and sense of motion necessary to pull it 
off. It sure has a lot of naked guys, though! What a shame to see so many 
penises wasted on a mediocre story.

Author
Matthew Ignoffo
The film is well intended, but like many films of plays, it doesn't have
the impact. It is well done and has a good cast in a nice setting. The
first problem is that the character who is supposed to hold the whole
plot together (the owner of the house in the country) is such a vacant,
bland person (and is played that way by the actor) that the story is
just a lose set of scenes. Jason Alexander does a good job with the part
played by Nathan Lane on stage. Bobby, the blind lover, has a wonderful
sweetness that is really appealing. Hot latino Ramone is very impressive
as the "other man." John Glover really steals the film as two brothers
named Jeckyll -- undoubtedly an allusion to Jekyll & Hyde since the two
brothers are opposites. One is nasty and bitter. The other is very
likable and is dying of AIDS. We see most of the cast fully nude
although Mr. Alexander graciously shows us his tush but nothing else.
The mood, especially the mood music, comes off as a bit syrupy. But the
strongest appeal of the film is that it is about human relationships.
Ultimately it is not about gay men, but people.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 5/16/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:54
MPAA Classification: R (Graphic nudity, profanity, sex, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: John Glover, Stephen Bogardus, Jason Alexander, Randy Becker, 
      John Benjamin Hickey, Stephen Spinella, Justin Kirk
Director: Joe Mantello
Producers: Doug Chapin, Barry Krost
Screenplay: Terrence McNally
Cinematography: Alik Sakharov
Music: Harold Wheeler
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     Gay movies have come a long way since the release of the seminal 
THE BOYS IN THE BAND more than twenty-five years ago.  With the advent 
of the millennium, film makers have taken a more even-handed approach to 
homosexuality.  Mainstream films such as PHILADELPHIA and JEFFREY have 
attracted big-name actors to play sympathetically-written gay men.  Now, 
with the release of first time film director Joe Mantello's LOVE! 
VALOUR! COMPASSION!, the American movie industry has taken another step 
forward.
     LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! began life in 1994 as an off-Broadway 
stage production.  It drew rave reviews and eventually captured the Tony 
Award for best play.  Now, only three years later, the celluloid 
adaptation has reached screens, and will become the first widely-
available American motion picture to address issues of male intimacy 
openly and honestly, without resorting to hooks like PHILADELPHIA's 
courtroom battle.  During the last two weeks of May and into June, Fine 
Line Features intends to distribute the film in dozens of cities across 
the United States, beginning in New York, San Francisco, and Los 
Angeles, and spreading outwards from there.
     While LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! will obviously appeal to gay 
audiences (considering that all eight characters are homosexual), the 
film has plenty to offer straight viewers as well.  Much of the humor 
and drama presented here is universal -- love is, after all, love, 
regardless of whether it's between a man and a woman, a woman and a 
woman, or a man and a man.  LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! doesn't use 
homosexual shock tactics to enliven the proceedings.  Instead, it 
carefully and realistically examines a series of relationships, both 
sexual and platonic, between men.  
     The eight characters in LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! are not intended 
to represent a cross-section of gay America, and, as a result, there's 
little evidence of stereotyping.  It's rare for homosexuals in 
mainstream motion pictures to be presented as individuals rather than 
icons; LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! defies tradition by proffering its 
characters as real people with believable problems.  
     Over the course of three holiday weekends during one summer, a 
group of eight friends gathers together at a secluded Victorian house 
for swimming, picnicking, volleyball, and talking.  The house is owned 
by an aging dance choreographer, Gregory (Stephen Bogardus), who lives 
with his younger, blind companion, Bobby (Justin Kirk).  Their guests 
include John Jeckyll (John Glover), a surly British composer, and his 
current lover, Ramon (Randy Becker); John's twin, James (also Glover), 
who is as nice as his brother is nasty; Buzz Hauser (Jason Alexander), a 
flamboyant showtune aficionado whose HIV+ status casts a grim shadow 
over his life; and Arthur (John Benjamin Hickey) and Perry (Stephen 
Spinella), a couple who have been together for fourteen years.  As the 
season progresses from Memorial Day to Independence Day to Labor Day, 
relationships begin and end, revelations occur, and betrayals are 
committed.  
     As is often true of stage productions adapted for film, LOVE! 
VALOUR! COMPASSION! turns out to be a talky affair, and, even though the 
dialogue is rich, there are times when the characters seem to be 
speaking just to hear the poetry of their words.  The film also takes a 
while to get going.  This is not an unusual trait for an ensemble piece 
-- until you get to know the characters a little, it's difficult to 
become involved in the story.  After about the first half-hour, however, 
LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! hits its stride, and, from that point on, it 
becomes consistently more engrossing.
     Six of the seven New York actors who were featured in the stage 
version of LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! have re-created their characters 
for the film, including Tony Award-winner John Glover.  The lone no-show 
is Nathan Lane, who played Buzz and has been replaced by Jason 
Alexander.  Alexander's portrayal is curious, since there are many 
instances when he appears to be mimicking Lane rather than just playing 
the character.  It's not an ineffective approach, but it occasionally 
becomes distracting.  
     For the most part, since the actors know their characters so well, 
we are treated to a relaxed set of performances.  There are hiccups, 
such as when Justin Kirk goes over-the-top reacting to a family tragedy, 
but such occasional flaws can attributed to the inherent differences 
between performing for a camera and on stage.  The chemistry developed 
within the group is evident even to the most casual observer.
     As play-to-movie transitions go, LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! is about 
average.  Mantello, who helmed the stage version but has never before 
directed a film, doesn't do anything especially interesting or radical.  
He opens things up a little bit, and occasionally uses the closeup 
effectively, but this is by no means a stunning motion picture debut.  
Nevertheless, the material he's working with is so strong that even a 
mundane approach like this fashions a funny, poignant motion picture 
that's worth seeing regardless of your sexual orientation.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Fine Line)
Starring:  Jason Alexander, Randy Becker, Stephen Bogardus, John Glover,
John Benjamin Hickey, Justin Kirk, Stephen Spinella.
Screenplay:  Terrence McNally, based on his stage play.
Producers:  Doug Chapin and Barry Krost.
Director:  Joe Mantello.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In one sense, the premise for LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! is sheer
brilliance.  Terrence McNally's screenplay (based on his Tony
Award-winning 1994 play) deals with eight friends -- all gay men -- who
gather for three long weekends one summer at a country house owned by
Gregory (Stephen Bogardus).  Arthur (John Benjamin Hickey) and Perry
(Stephen Spinella) are a couple celebrating 14 years together; John (John
Glover) is a misanthropic composer who has brought along his latest flame,
a dancer named Ramon (Randy Becker); Buzz (Jason Alexander) is a
flamboyant lover of show tunes.  The real inspiration comes not with the
characters, however, but with the setting.  By placing these characters in
a world of their own, without a single heterosexual character around to
define them by their "otherness," McNally allows us to focus on the
problems of these people as human beings.  In this place, they're just
ordinary folks.
     The thing about ordinary folks is that they're not always
particularly interesting.  As sensitively written and well-acted as it may
be, LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! is terribly short on conflict.  Whenever
McNally does try to insert some conflict, it feels forced and
inconsequential.  Gregory's partner Bobby (Justin Kirk) cheats on him, but
we never really understand why; there is a quarrel at the dinner table
which is resolved quickly and neatly with a round of apologies.  Some of
LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! is spiced up by the presence of most bare male
flesh ever seen in a movie not starring Harvey Keitel.  The rest of the
time, the characters sit around talking and supporting each other, waxing
philosophical about love, romance, social politics and mortality until the
film starts to feel very much like a gay BIG CHILL.  Whether that
comparison intrigues you or makes you cringe may go a long way toward
predicting your response to this film.
     The most affecting moments in LOVE! VALOUR! COMPASSION! involve the
developing relationship between Buzz and John's twin brother James (also
played by John Glover), the two characters with AIDS.  Both actors give
solid, multi-faceted performances, bringing humor and delight to the
connection between two people who have assumed that it's too late for them
to experience love.  All of the emotion in the film feels genuine,
developed with care by a group of actors who, with the exception of
Alexander, originated the roles on Broadway.  It is a warm and appealing
piece of film-making by first-time feature director Joe Mantello (also an
alum of the stage production), but that warmth is not enough to make it
exceptional.  It's not really a narrative so much as it is an idyll, a
chance to watch normal people living normal lives in a pastoral setting.
Normalcy, however, is a better social goal than a dramatic device.
