Title
Review for West Beyrouth (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Ziad Doueiri is best known in the U.S. for being the cameraman for
Quentin Tarantino's films. But there is a story behind every person
(even in Hollywood). Doueiri has used his filmmaking experience to
bring his true childhood experiences to the screen in the poignant
"West Beirut". The film takes place in Beirut, Lebanon in 1975, where
a civil war is breaking out. For Tarek (Rami Doueiri) and Omar
(Mohamad Chamas), the cancellation of school brings a newfound
freedom.  They roam the streets of the war-torn city, making Super 8
films and generally causing mischief. The kids don't realize the
seriousness of the war, which has separated their city into two
sections; East (Christian) and West (Muslim) Beirut. Doueiri also
focuses on the tensions surrounding Tarek's parents. His father
(Joseph Bou Nassar) has faith in Beirut and will not leave, while his
mother (Carmen Lebbos) is overcome with tension and stays only because
she seems to have no choice.  For most of its 105 minute running time,
"West Beirut" is a vivid, involving slice of life showing us a city in
turmoil. However, in the final third of the film, the lack of a clear
plot undermines the realism, and the characters find themselves in
far-fetched situations. I would rather have had Doueiri let the story
tell itself. In the press notes, Doueiri remarks that he made the film
from memory of certain images, and not from memory of a story. But the
images are definitely there, and "West Beirut" is at times very
moving. The story behind the film is just as interesting as the film
itself. For the child actors, Doueiri chose his brother, Rami, to play
his alter-ego, and chose Mohamad Chamas, a penniless orphan, to play
his childhood friend. Chamas now lives in a shack in a Beirut refugee
camp. His only close relative, a brother, is in jail. The images in
"West Beirut" are therefore very real.  Ziad Doueri's debut film is
flawed, but it is a coming-of-age picture made with care and
relevance. In the early 1980's, Doueiri fled Lebanon and went to USC
Film School. Others will never be that lucky, and this film is for
them.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When I was a kid and saw films made in Europe
during the late 1940s, I noted that the teens on the Continent
seemed more mature than the youngsters in the States.  I
asked my dad whether this was because the 14-year-olds on
the screen were actors and not real people, or whether their
early ripening was in fact true.  He explained that here in the
U.S. we hadn't had a war on our soil since 1865, whereas the
Europeans were afflicted with every kind of armed struggle in
this century.  Bombings and machine-gunnings that go on
day after day for five years--as in the case of the Second
World War--can make kids grow up early.  Presumably in
countries like France and Germany today, the 14-year-olds
are able to play out their childhoods as nature intended--
kidding around, acting their own age rather than like small
versions of adults.
   But many areas of the world have not been that fortunate
even decades after World War II.  Lebanon--like Northern
Ireland--had been torn apart by sectarian violence, in their
case pitting Muslims against Christians.  Simply put, though
Lebanon--one of the few countries with more of their people
living abroad than in their home state--had a Muslim majority,
the Christians ran the government.  When the situation
became irreconcilable, civil war broke out, so that during the
years that Ziad Doueiri situated his coming-of-age movie
(1975), the city of Beirut was divided between an Eastern
part controlled by Christians and a Muslim sector in the West. 
Between the two areas was a no-man's-land, Zeytuni, which
in this remarkable film becomes the focus of the most laughs. 
The city's best brothel was located there, the one area in
which Christians and Muslims were both welcome.  "The bed
knows no religion," proclaimed the Madam.  In fact males who
patronized the whorehouse essentially used it as a sanctuary
from the fighting.  If a patron would hold aloft a bra or a panty
while walking to the house, the snipers would treat the
garment like a white flag and not fire on the turned-on fellas.
   Coming-of-age dramas often juxtapose the most tragic
scenes against great humor.  After all, in life, even during
some pretty devastating circumstances, people still need to
laugh and find ways to do so.  Much of the comedy in "West
Beirut" comes from the vulgar dialogue that Lebanese
citizens freely indulged in as though they were living in New
York, exchanging insults with one another that are not directly
related to the war. The comedy starts early on as Lebanon's
own Mrs. Tingle, a teacher in the city's French high school,
first leads the youngsters in a patriotic French song only to
be subverted as one kid sneaks into the building to grab an
electric megaphone and from the balcony pilots the boys and
girls into a Lebanese strain.  In the principal role of sixteen-
year-old Tarek, Rami Doueiri, the younger brother of the
director, is made by the teacher to write his name on the
board, but he can scarcely spell "Monsieur."  Although the
instructor tries to instill the lads with a love for France which
"gave you Lebanese your culture and your political
boundaries," Tarek dislikes going to school, particularly one
which has a Francophile agenda.
   Director Doueiri squeezes more knowledge of the Lebanon
of the seventies into his 105 minute film than you could learn
on your own in five times that length of time, creating
humorous, bombastic, and wrenching dialogue virtually each
line of which tells us something more about the culture of that
small beleaguered nation.  We quickly learn that Tarek's
father, Riad, is notably pro-French though a Muslim, but that
despite the bombings and shooting going on around him
which drive his educated wife Hala (Carmen Lebbos) to utter
distraction and to a desire to leave the country for good, her
husband will not hear of this.  "In America, they call us sand
niggers...we're all terrorists to them," he explains, and what's
more he is an ardent nationalist who brags about the
contributions made by the Arabs while Europeans were still
crawling in caves.
   While Ziad Doueiri has fun with side characters--with
sandwich and flour supplier Hassan (Mahmoud Mabsout) who
treats his favorite kid to food on the house, with the Madam
of the country's famous brothel, Oum Walid (Leila Karam),
who is perplexed by her new 16-year-old customer, by an
obese neighbor who cavils about everything from the rooster
that wakes her up each morning to her couch potato husband
who watches soccer all day--he hones in on his young
brother who is in the starring role of a teen.  For most of the
story Tarek acts like any American his age. He has posters of
American movies ("Airplane") on his wall.  He cuts up in
school.  He frolics with his friend Omar (Mohamad Chamas)
and is repeatedly chastised by Omar for risking his life just to
get some super-8 film developed in the antagonistic East
Beirut.  His girl friend is the orphaned May (Rola Al Amin)
who for some dumb reason insists on wearing a crucifix
although she lives in Muslim West Beirut.  By the conclusion
of the movie, young Doueiri has grown up but not in the good
sense of the term.  He is in tears, wondering what he will do
if the bombs kill his parents and he is orphaned in much the
way his girl has been.  
   One of the fascinating aspects of this intriguing, fast-
moving film is the background of one of the performers. 
Mohamad Chamas (Omar) was a street kid, the equivalent of
an inner-city American teen, whose mother was killed in the
1970s Civil War and whose heroin-addicted father abandoned
him years earlier.  Amazingly this fella, who turns out a
professional performance as Doueiri's best friend, had no
acting background when he was hired and, despite the quality
of his work he not only has not been scouted but is today
living in a refugee camp on the outskirts of Beirut.  Let's hope
enough people with clout get to this wonderful movie, a film
that both poignantly and humorously tells us what it's like to
grow up in a war zone, so that performers like Chamas can
get the acting contracts they deserve.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Hanging prominently in the bedroom of Tarek (Rami Doueiri), a Lebanese
teenager, is a poster of the movie ESCAPE FROM HELL.  Writer/director
Ziad Doueiri's autobiographical WEST BEIRUT, set in 1975 in Beirut at
the start of the Lebanese civil war, uses the poster as an extremely apt
metaphor for the longings of the country's citizens.  The moving but
never morose film tells an always touching and sometimes funny coming of
age story.
Tarek is a high-spirited, good kid from a close-knit family.  He likes
his practical jokes, which sometimes get him into trouble.  His antics,
however, never get the film in any trouble, as the filmmaker stays clear
of anything approaching slapstick.  Tarek and his best friend Omar
(Mohamad Chamas), a Muff and Jeff pair, use an old Super 8 movie camera
to record various events, ranging from the cleavage of one of Omar's
future relatives to war footage.
Tarek's father (Joseph Bou Nassar) is an optimist who thinks this war
will not amount to much and will quickly blow over like the many other
wars that he's been through.  Tarek's mother (Carmen Lebbos), a lawyer,
isn't so sure and wants them to evacuate.  The movie takes the time to
show the teenage son playing innocent games with his parents.  Imagine
that.  A cinematic family that's not only not dysfunctional, but even
enjoys and looks forward to each other's presence.
Soon after the film starts, the war begins.  At first, his parents
insist on continuing as usual.  Their morning ritual includes driving
their son across town to his high school.  Along the way they come
across a roadblock patrolled by armed guards.  The guards refuse them
passage.  "But, I'm from Beirut," the angry father explains to the
militia, assuming that they must think he is some outsider.  "Beirut?"
mocks the guard.  "Today there is no Beirut -- only East and West."
At first there are those who resist the division of their city along
religious lines -- the Muslims controlling West Beirut and the
Christians controlling East Beirut.  "If anyone asks your religion, tell
them you're Lebanese, and if they don't like it, send them to me,"
Tarek's friendly baker (Mahmoud Mabsout) tells him soon after the
hostilities begin.  But it will not be long until almost everyone seems
to be taking sides and peacemakers like the baker are all but forgotten.
The family's normalcy is completely shattered when a bomb strikes their
apartment building.  No longer can they make believe that the war will
not affect their lives.  "I know it's tense," the father tells the
family.  "Tense!" his angry, frustrated and frightened wife barks back,
"People are dying and you call that tense!"
To add a small Romeo-and-Juliet spin on the story, a beautiful,
cross-wearing Christian teenager named May (Rola Al Amin) moves into
Tarek's apartment complex, and he is immediately smitten.  Omar, who
sees her as a danger, ridicules her by calling her Virgin Mary in hopes
that she will stop hanging out with them.
Omar tells Tarek that his parents have decided that their family will
become religious.  Omar's parents decry rock music as the work of the
devil.  "Is Paul Anka the work of Satan?" asks his nonplussed friend
Tarek, who brags that he doesn't know a word of the Koran.
The only unsuccessful part of the film concerns a noisy, obese neighbor
of Tarek's.  An obnoxious woman, she does have one saving grace.  She
elicits the movie's funniest line.  Throwing the woman out of her
apartment, the mother screams, "May you clot in hell!"
A delightful little subplot finds Tarek accidentally in a brothel run by
a Jabba the Hutt clone named Oum Walid (Leďla Karam).  What he does and
doesn't do there shows the difference between an indie film and a
Hollywood one.  The director takes a setup ripe for clichés and turns it
instead into another touching episode in a delightful little film.
WEST BEIRUT is filled with realistic people whom you'd like to know.
Tarek and his family and friends are so genuine and likable that you'll
wish you could invite them all over for dinner.  And because of this,
their difficulties in coping with their dire situation become personal
and palpable.
WEST BEIRUT runs 1:45.  The film is in Arabic and French, both
accompanied by easy to follow English subtitles.  The movie is not rated
but would probably be PG-13 for some profanity and some war footage.  It
would be fine for kids around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 WEST BEIRUT (WEST BEYROUTH) (director/writer: Ziad Doueiri;
 cinematographer: Ricardo Jacques Gale; editor: Dominique Marcombe;
 cast: Rami Doueiri (Tarek), Mohamad Chamas (Omar), Rola Al Amin (May),
 Carmen Lebbos (Hala), Joseph Bou Nassar (Riad), Liliane Nemry
 (Neighbor), Leila Karam (Oum Walid), Mahmoud Mabsout (Baker), Fadi
 Abou Khalil (Papa Snake); Runtime: 105; A Cowboy Booking; 1998)
Yes. A war zone can be fun for restless teens with hot blood and a
passion for mischief. In Ziad Doueiri's semi-autobigraphical film about
his growing up as a teenager in the 1970s in the middle of the civil war
that rocked Beirut, that is the strongest message I received from his
irreverent look at what he did during the war years. It was filmed by
someone who knows the mood of that critical time, the real dangers that
were there, the music that was played, and the tensions that gripped the
city. In this shoestring budgeted indie, Doueiri does a nice job of
detailing how his Muslim community of West Beirut reacted to all the
violence; and, how he and his friends and his bourgeois parents endured.
His intellectual father Riad (Joseph Bou Nassar) being the eternal
optimist and his lawyer mother Hala (Carmen Lebbos) constantly feeling
panicked by the events. The film shows how through all the turmoil his
parents showed much affection to their only child, as he was doted upon
by both of them. This is a hearfelt film about his coming-of-age during
that strife. The 36-year-old filmmaker studied at UCLA and was the
cameraman for Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fiction and Reservoir Dogs.
The 15-year-old protagonist, Tarek (Rami Doueiri, nonprofessional actor
and the director's brother), is the school joker. In the opening scene
he stops the singing of the "Marseillaise" at his French-speaking
high-school by climbing above the students gathered in the school yard
and using a megaphone to sing the Lebanese national anthem. When he is
removed from class because of his insolence, he witnesses the massacre
of a busload of 31 Muslims by masked terrorists--it's April 13, 1975,
the start of the war between Muslims and Christians that leaves Beirut
divided into Christian East Beirut and Muslim West Beirut. It is a
chaotic war that is to last for 14 years, leaving the city in ruin. But
when Tarek witnessed the attack, he wasn't sure who the attackers were
and why they were there.
Tarek's father thinks this war will be like the others he has lived
through, and the Americans will force a negotiation and it will be
settled very quickly. His wife is confused about what is happening and
wishes to flee the city. But, as Riad says, this is our home, there is
no other place I would feel comfortable fitting in. Tarek and his best
friend, the short but peppy Omar (Mohamad Chamas, a Beirut street kid
and thief), don't see things the way the adults do. They are happy that
their school, in Christian East Beirut, is closed to them and they can
horse around in the street and spend their time with the hobby they both
have a passion for, Super-8 filmmaking.
Tarek becomes infatuated with May (Rola Al Amin), the pretty Catholic
refugee girl from his school who wears a cross and lives in Muslim West
Beirut. They become a trio though Omar is, at first, displeased with her
and calls her "the Virgin Mary." The film is not plot oriented, it
relies on a bunch of episodic incidents to take place before Tarek gets
it through his clownish skull and smirking face that this city has
changed and won't be the same again. His adventures are driven by his
sexual curiosity, but he will soon realize it's not that easy to be so
carefree anymore. One character angrily tells him when he is aimlessly
running through the streets, "What planet are you from?" When they go to
develop film in a neighborhood where they have to cross the border to
the East, there is a sense of imminent danger that the trio didn't
realize until then really existed. They go to a brothel where safe
passage means you have use women's underwear as a white flag to avoid
being shot at by snipers. Here, they meet the legendary madam Oum Walid
(Leila Karam). She tells them for certain that Beirut has changed, and
it finally sinks in that Beirut is no longer the cosmopolitan
Mediterranean city it once was.
We get a feel for what the director lived through as the friendly Tarek
is shown relating to his neighbors. He has a wonderful relationship with
the neighborhood baker (Mahmoud Mabsout); a comical relationship with
his complaining neighbor (Liliane Nemry), who is great with cursing out
those she doesn't like with shouts of: "May Allah spread pain all over
you;" and, she tells Tarek's mother: "Your son is a blood clot in my
vein." There's the neighborhood bully called Papa Snake (Khalil), who is
disliked by Tarek for intimidating the baker to give him flour for
protection.
The director also presents us with a flavor of the slang language used
by the locals, with expressions such as: "You're shish-kabobing me on a
small flame;" or "You drive like Steve McQueen;" and, about a buxom
woman Omar says, "What a piece of lamb!"
The film was good at given us a realistic look at how one family looked
at those troubled times, rather than for having anything political to
say. We are not getting a history lesson here, but a grown man's look
back at a period of eight years of his youthful life. The film did this
in a rather ordinary way, so that there is nothing deeper to dig out of
Ziad Doueiri's story. Rami Doueiri was a lively teenager. Mohamad Chamas
was equally feisty as his main man. It seemed to be a story that the
director had to tell, and he shared what he saw with an audience that
more than likely only followed the long civil war in the news stories
and had no idea how it looked first-hand. This was a film that had no
pretenses about it; it just told the story it knew.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
