Title
Review for Dakhtaran-e Khorshid (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
DAUGHTERS OF THE SUN (Dokhtaran-e-Khorshid)
Written and Directed by Maryam Shahriar
     The sun never shines on the "daughters of the sun."  In Maryam 
Shahriar's ironically-titled debut masterpiece, the girls spend most of 
their time in a dark adobe room, slaving at looms under the saturnine 
supervision of their brutal boss, creating the hand-woven Persian 
carpets that may someday wind up commanding enormous sums of money in 
Western showrooms.  Even outdoors, the sun never penetrates the heavy 
atmosphere of rural Iran.  Homayun Payvar's extraordinary camerawork (he 
shot Kiarostami's A Taste of Cherry) bathes everything in an exquisite 
melancholy of mist and shadow.  Daughters of the Sun is one of the most 
beautifully photographed films you will ever see. 
     Not all the daughters of the sun look like daughters.  At the 
film's opening, Amangol (Altinay Ghelich Taghani) has her hair cut off, 
the camera focusing on the ground as the long dark tresses drop and 
scatter in the wind.   She dresses as a boy and leaves home to work as 
an apprentice to the carpet master.  The disguise is required because 
only men can be master weavers; the girls are relegated to subordinate 
work. 
     Her male disguise is intermittently effective; some see through it, 
others do not. Perhaps the boss sees through it, but it suits his 
purposes not to - Amangol is a brilliant weaver.  The dark-eyed musician 
who urges Amangol to run away with him appears to have guessed her 
secret, but the young weaver Belghies (Sogrha Karimi) who falls in love 
with her and begs Amangol to ask for her hand has not (though you have 
the feeling that if she were to reveal her hidden gender, Belghies would 
say, like Joe E. Brown in Some Like It Hot, "Well, nobody's perfect.")  
There are times when it seems that even Amangol herself loses track of 
who and what she really is.
     Shahriar's storytelling is contained and minute, like the detail in 
the delicate carpets woven in the dusty adobe sweatshop.  The setting is 
a small area of remote countryside; Amangol's journey from home is less 
than a day's walk, yet returning home, even when she learns that her 
mother is sick, is out of the question.  An outsider, an official with 
the Iranian Social Security department, spends much of the movie 
searching for the tiny village, though from various clues we know he 
must be within a few miles of it all the while.  Most of the time there 
is nothing to suggest even a particular century, other than the 
official's jeep and the anomaly of streetlights along the country road.
     One of the girls in the shop gets married, to her cousin.  "Do you 
love him?" Belghies asks.  "I don't know," the girl replies.  They've 
been engaged since birth.  When the bridal couple arrives at their 
house, the young groom hesitantly lifts the bride's veil, and a hint of 
a shy smile crosses his face; and you have the feeling this may be the 
last moment of tenderness she will know in her life. 
     The subject matter is melancholy, but Shahriar closes in a spirit 
of fiery affirmation.  Despite its themes of enslavement, exploitation, 
and perfidy,  Daughters of the Sun is not depressing.  A movie this 
beautiful and this engrossing can only leave the viewer exhilarated.
