Title
Review for Shichinin no samurai (1954)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian Koller
Better known by its English translation title,
Directed by Akira Kurosawa, "The Seven Samurai"
is one of the most famous and highly praised of all
Japanese films.  I have seen it on many critic's
all-time top ten lists.
"The Seven Samurai" takes place in feudal Japan.
A small farmer's village will soon be raided by
bandits after the harvest.  The village elder
decides to hire Samurai (proud, experienced mercenaries)
for its defense.  Kambei (Takashi Shimura) is
the first to join, and as the leader recruits
others, notably young Katsushiro (Isao Kimura)
and aboriginal, emotive Kikuchiyo (Toshiro Mifune).
The villagers are trained as soldiers, and the
village is quickly fortified.  The bandits attack
on schedule.  Will the Samurai and the village
be successfully defended?
It is a terrific story, one that Hollywood adopted
(appropriately turning it into a Western) as
"The Magnificent Seven".  But while "The Seven Samurai"
is an excellent film, it is not outstanding.  The
story has a few problems.  There are some spoilers
in the following paragraphs.
The bandits repeatedly attack the well-defended
village.  These assaults all fail, with the bandits
taking heavy losses every time.  Yet they continue
their efforts until all the bandits have been
killed.  This does not make sense to me, as surely
one small recently-raided village would not rate
such desperate, suicidal attention.  The argument
"but then there would be no story" isn't convincing,
as the film is already two hours old when the
first assault is repelled.
I am, I also don't understand Kambei's decision to
let all the bandits into the village for the final assault.
This results in many deaths of both Samurai and villagers.
Picking off the bandits one or two at a time had been
the best strategy all along.
There is also an unneccessary romance between
Katsushiro and farmer's daughter Shino.  He behaves as
shlyly as if he has never seen a girl before, while she
is as desperate to lose her virginity to him as her father
is to preserve it.  More interesting is the other romantic
subplot, which has Rickichi (Yoshio Tsuchiya) anguishing
over his lost wife.
But aside from these relatively minor problems with
the story, "The Seven Samurai" is an excellent film.
The battle scenes are well choreographed, and the cast and
characters are excellent (especially Mifune, who provides
the film's soul and comic relief).
Beware of edited versions.  Since the original release is
203 minutes long, as much as an hour has been removed from
some prints.  These cuts tend to make the film more of a
war or action picture, and less of a character study.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
     STARRING: Takashi Shimura, Toshiro Mifune, Yoshio Inaba,
Seiji Miyaguchi, Isao Kimura
     DIRECTOR: Akira Kurosawa
     WRITERS: Shinobu Hashimoto and Akira Kurosawa
     RELEASED: 1954
"Farmers are stingy, foxy, blubbering, mean, stupid and
murderous! God damn! That's what they are! But then, who made
them such beasts? You did! You samurai did it! You burn their
villages!  Destroy their farms! Steal their food! Force them to
labor! Take their women! And kill them if they resist! So what
should farmers do?" --Kikuchiyo, Seven Samurai
Akira Kurosawa's Seven Samurai is perhaps the closest any
director has come to a true cinematic study of social class.
Much of the film's genius revolves around moments of humanity
hidden where we least expect them--in the merry laughter of
peasants, sharing a joke only minutes before the start of the
battle which could destroy them; in the tears shed by a brash
warrior when confronted with reminders of the past; in a young
man's scream of remorse as he is forced to kill for the first
time. More than anything, Seven Samurai is an epic behavioral
study, and it's this attention to detail which elevates the
work from a standard Japanese 'jidai-geki' (samurai picture) to
a masterpiece.
Sure, there's also a great story contained herein, but that
alone can't account for the film's enduring appeal and renown.
Seven Samurai is unequivocally regarded not only as Kurosawa's
greatest film, but as the best cinematic work ever to come out
of Japan--no small praise, especially considering the caliber
of the director's other achievements. There's more going on
here than skillful story construction: the events resonate with
a degree of sincerity rarely found in modern cinema. It's easy
to love these people, because they seem real--they're neither
action heroes nor cardboard stereotypes.
The story: A small village finds itself annually raided by an
army of bandits, who steal the meager crops harvested by the
peasants. Tired of relinquishing their food supply but woefully
inept in combat skills, the villagers decide to hire a band of
samurai to protect them. It won't be easy, however: the
villagers have nothing to offer their would-be saviors except a
few handfuls of stale rice. The advice of the town elder? "Find
hungry samurai."
Eventually six warriors are recruited. The regal Kambei
(Takashi Shimura) accepts their offer because he believes it's
the morally correct thing to do. Katsushiro (Ko Kimura) is a
young, inexperienced 'ronin' (masterless samurai) who comes
along for a taste of adventure. Schichiroji (Daisuke Kato), an
old friend of Kambei, also offers his assistance, as does
master swordsman Kyuzo (Seiji Miyaguchi), and two additional
samurai, Gorobei (Yoshiro Inaba) and Heihachi (Minoru Chiaki).
Trailing after the band of warriors is the brash Kikuchiyo
(legendary Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune), the son of a farmer,
who wishes to be admitted into the warriors' ranks.
The rest of this review can be found free of charge at:
http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm

Author
Dragan Antulov
Work of art can have its quality measured by other works of
art it inspired through time. The world of seventh art has
plenty of such examples, and the best known are those which
had inspired numerous remakes through decades. Among those
remade movies the best are those that contain images,
stories and characters deeply ingrained in the collective
unconsciousness of their viewers, regardless of their
cultural background. Probably the best known of such films
is SEVEN SAMURAI, 1954 film by famous Japanese director
Akira Kurosawa. This is equally famous for being the best
example of "jidai-geki" (samurai picture) genre - Japanese
equivalent of western - and for being inspiration for
numerous other authors which had used its basic concept for
movies set in different time periods, different locations
and belonging to different genres.
The plot of this movie, loosely based on ancient Japanese
legend, is set in late 16th Century Japan. The country is in
the middle of civil war, the government authority has
collapsed and the countryside is left the roaming hordes of
bandits. One of such gangs made a habit out of plundering a
mountain village after each harvest and leaving barely
enough food for peasants to survive. This time the village
had been hit by especially hard times, and after one of the
peasants accidentally overhears bandits discussing plans for
their next visit, village council is ready to listen to
young Rikichi (played by Yoshio Tsuchiya) who wants to fight
bandits. But the villagers also know that they lack combat
skills necessary to match dozens of well- armed thugs.
Village elder Gisaku (played by Kokoden Kodo) advises them
to go to town and hire services of ronins, masterless
samurais, whose martial expertise would defend the village.
When the group of peasants come to town, they see plenty of
ronins, many of them penniless, but almost none would
humiliate himself by offering his services to common
peasants for three meals of rice per day. Their search is
fruitless until they meet Kambei Shimada (played by Takashi
Shimura), old, experienced but kind-hearted samurai who
agrees to help them. He and his apprentice/disciple
Katsushiro (played by Isao Kimura) gather four other ronins
and six of them head for the mountains, followed by vagabond
and samurai wannabe Kikujiro (played by Toshiro Mifune). The
small army arrives in the village, greeted by scepticism,
fear and distrust from the peasants, but they nevertheless
begin preparations for defence.
When Kurosawa died, many obituaries called him the God of
Cinema, and it was hardly an exaggeration. Anyone who
watches THE SEVEN SAMURAI would understand why. Fans of
Peckinpah, Lucas, Spielberg, Millius, Cameron and almost any
respected modern-day action director would see many familiar
scenes and motives in this film, made almost a half century
ago. The influence Kurosawa had on future filmmakers is
immeasurable, yet his films still look fresh, original and
very modern. THE SEVEN SAMURAI, despite its black-and-white
photography and despite its huge length (203 minutes in
original cut), can be put in the same category with action
classics like DIE HARD and ALIENS. This also explains why
Kurosawa's work sticks out as the only B&W classic among
entries in many personal Top 10 or Top 100 movie lists.
This movie is so successful because of its flawless
direction and very balanced combination of powerful human
drama and exciting action. Unlike most of the action
directors today, Kurosawa knew that the audience wouldn't be
satisfied just with the elaborate action scenes; audience
needs characters to identify with it. Script by Kurosawa,
Shinobu Hashimoto and Hideo Oguni is based on the very
simple plot, but this plot is used as base for the whole
series of interesting subplots and character studies. Never
allowing the film to become stale and boring, Kurosawa
slowly but methodically unfolds the plot and develops his
characters, less through dialogue and more through the
simple but revealing gestures. For that Kurosawa had to rely
on very talented actors and he was very lucky to have more
than adequate crew for the job. The top of the list is
Takashi Shimura, descendant of real life samurai, who gives
quiet yet powerful performance as the leader of small army;
every community in the world would probably appreciate
having someone like him in times of need. Seiji Myaguchi is
also remarkable in the role of ascetic yet deadly samurai
Kyuzo, same as Isao Kimura as young Katsushiro, forced to
learn some ugly lessons in life. Yoshio Tsuchiya is great as
Rikichi, hotheaded peasant who is deeply traumatised by
personal tragedy. The best known of them all is, of course,
Toshiro Mifune, Kurosawa's favourite actor, who gives more
than memorable portrayal of Kikujiro, lowlife who begins the
film as comic relief and gradually evolves into real hero.
Kurosawa, having such great characters and such great actors
on his disposal, established rather interesting
interactions, but that didn't interest him only on
individual level. Like very few action movies before and
after, THE SEVEN SAMURAI actually deals with broader social
issues. In the context of 16th Century Japan this issue was
class conflict between peasants and feudal class, embodied
in samurai. Kurosawa always keeps viewers aware of such
conflict - peasants and samurai can live and work together,
but this relationship is temporary and based only on short-
term interest. Both classes are inimical towards each other
- samurai look on the peasants like inferior beings, while
peasants mistrust samurai. Character of Kikujiro explicitly
explains this class conflict through memorable and powerful
monologue. This social dimension of THE SEVEN SAMURAI,
although it could be replanted from feudal Japan through
different times and places, wasn't very convincingly used in
this film's remakes (which is especially the case with
American 1960 version).
Despite having a story with universal appeal, Kurosawa has
put a lot of effort for historical accuracy in THE SEVEN
SAMURAI. Clothes, houses and folklore of 16th Century rural
Japan are painstakingly recreated, as well as the weapons
and armour of the samurai. But the best thing about this
historical reconstruction is Kurosawa's great care about
combat scene. Fighting in THE SEVEN SAMURAI doesn't just
look exciting, it is very realistic and, unlike most of the
war and action movies, it actually makes sense. Individuals
play very limited role, just like in any other war; unlike
Rambo movies with superhuman heroes that eliminate hundreds
of well-armed opponents, superior numbers, tactics, training
and firepower does matter. Samurai might be superior in
one-on-hand and hand-to-hand combat (such fights are very
short and decided in matter of seconds), but even they are
powerless against bandits' firearms. Victory comes out of
collective action, with few making painful sacrifices for
the benefits of the many. Same as in any military textbook
from Sun Zi to this day, good planning in THE SEVEN SAMURAI
plays more important role in acquiring victory than actual
fighting itself. It is marvel to watch scenes in which
Kambei, like any other good general, surveys and sketches
the future battlefield and makes mental notes about best
ways to defeat the enemy. This dimension of THE SEVEN
SAMURAI is also missed from all latter remakes.
Kurosawa was very pedantic about scenes depicting the war,
but THE SEVEN SAMURAI could hardly be seen as militaristic
propaganda. Realism in battle scenes also means that the
death in war happens without any rules; characters often die
in agony or covered with mud or similar prosaic
circumstances. War equally brings out the best and worst
from people, the latter being symbolised in brutal acts of
violence and succumbing to animalistic desires, even among
the most innocent and idealistic characters like Katsushiro.
Wars, even when they are justified and when they end with
victory, are hardly something that should be celebrated.
Kurosawa underlines this message with bittersweet finale
scene.
With the sole exception Fumio Hayasaka's musical score that
sounds a little bit old- fashioned for today's standards,
THE SEVEN SAMURAI withstood the test of time. But this is
just one of many reasons why this film earned its rightful
place as the timeless gem of world cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Daniel Saunders
     A week or two ago I had a chance to see my all-time favourite movie,
The Seven Samurai, for the fourth time, in a revival movie theatre.
Directed and written by Akira Kurosawa, it is the simple story of a tiny
farming village on the edge of starvation, threatened by a band of forty
brigands who intend to attack and steal everything once the grain has been
harvested. One of the farmers overhears their plans, and so the village
has time to prepare to fight back. On the advice of Granddad, the local
patriarch, they resolve to hire samurai, but they are so poor they can
only afford samurai willing to work for three meagre meals of rice a day
(while the farmers subsist on millet), so they end up with a rather motley
bunch. Nevertheless, they are victorious in their struggle against the
bandits. 
     An adventurous friend came along with me, somehow finding the
strength to relinquish exam preparation for the three hours and 42 minutes
it takes to watch the uncut version of the film. While he was waiting for
me, he managed to discover that the two women sitting behind us had seen
it six times before! Although it was released in 1954, in Japan, and was
filmed in black and white, it still has the power to hold a jaded North
American movie-goer's attention and interest to the last minute, whether
they're seeing it for the first time or the seventh time. To be sure there
are obstacles to enjoying it, such as the subtitles, extreme length, and
especially Japanese character names which are a challenge to remember.
Consequently once I've mentioned a character in this essay, I will
thereafter provide a one or two word reminder in brackets after the
character name. Despite all this, it remains rich and spectacular
entertainment. Why do I like it so well?
     First of all it has a wonderful set of characters. They seem like
real people you've known all your life, and you care deeply about what
happens to them. Each of the seven warrior characters is fascinating.
There's Kambei, the wise old bald-headed veteran of many wars, all of
them, he says, losing ones. There's Katsushiro, his innocent young student
who experiences both combat and romance for the first time during the
movie. Then there is Kyuzo, the grizzled, silent, highly skilled
swordsman, an enigma to the end. Most intriguing of all is Kikuchiyo, the
odd one out. Unforgettably played by Toshiro Mifune, Kurosawa's favourite
actor, Kikuchiyo is a mad-dog, impulsive, irresponsible wanna-be samurai;
he starts off tagging along behind the other six, and ends up fighting
bravely and sacrificing his life. There are also a number of memorable
farmer charactersManzo, an overprotective father who forcibly cuts his
daughter's hair when he hears samurai are coming, and Rikichi, who was
forced to hand his wife over to the bandits last time they came by and
still feels crippled by guilt. You feel sorry to leave these characters
behind when the movie's over.
     What makes the film really work despite its lengthy running time is
its strong structure. Each step of the way the action has a clear
direction. The first major section has the party of four farmers in the
big city, looking for cheap and strong samurai. They are almost ready to
give up when they meet Kambei (veteran), and part two, one of my
favourites, is about him recruiting the other six samurai, using the
testing device of Katsushiro (kid) trying to whack each one with a big
stick as they are invited in. Kikuchiyo (mad dog) makes his unimpressive
entrance, falling down drunk, and receives a mighty bump on the head.
     In the third part, Kambei (veteran) surveys the territory around the
village and plans defensive strategy. Each side must have protection
against the mounted invaders. In one direction there is a bridge that can
be taken down, in another they can build a fence, and in another there are
impassible mountains. Section four has general preparations for the battle
being made, including the farmers learning to handle bamboo spears and
harvesting the barley in record time so the fields can be flooded, sealing
off the village from still another direction. Part five is the samurai's
bloody pre-emptive raid on the bandit camp, and the last part, which takes
up most of the last half of the film, is the three day siege by the
bandits. The main characters always have a specific goal they are working
towards and even in the first two hours in which there is no fighting the
tension is kept up by the ticking clock of the bandits impending arrival,
tied to the ripening of the barley. This structure gives the film a strong
backbone on which to attach the myriad subplots and minor incidents, and
keeps the action moving along.
     The setting is the beginning of the 16th century, and Kurosawa spares
no expense in recreating the period down to the last detail. The credits
list four Historical Researchersone for folklore, one for fencing, and
two for archery. I am reminded of McCabe and Mrs. Miller, Robert Altman's
trail-blazing western, in that the setting is crafted with such integrity
and gritty realism that it feels like a peek into a real place in the
past, rather than the typical idealized technicolor period piece staged on
some backlot. It is dirty and cold and miserabledid I mention dirty?and
utterly believable. From the crudely but lovingly constructed wooden huts
and the primitive farming implements to the ornate clothing and weaponry
of the samurai, everything is perfect.
     The setting is more than just a backdrop for the story, however. In
some ways the scenario is dependent on that particular setting. The 16th
century was a chaotic transition period in Japanese history and was
especially hard on the farmers. There was a great deal of civil unrest, in
the form of large bands of looting and pillaging bandits, unchecked by
government action. In addition, new ways of fighting wars brought about by
the advent of gunpowder were making the samurai obsolete (in fact all of
the samurai who die in the film are killed by primitive rifles), and many
master-less "ronin" were forced to wander the countryside looking for
temporary jobs and extorting food from farmers.
     Samurai are not used to having a village full of farmers as their
master, and part of the fun of the film is watching the growing
understanding and interaction between the two classes as they are forced
to work together. At first the peasants are very apprehensive about the
warriors' arrival, although the samurai are their only hope. They are all
hidden away inside their houses when the seven arrive. Kikuchiyo (mad dog)
breaks the tension when he rings the village alarm and everyone streams
into the square. "You suckers!" he shouts at them, "You welcomed us as you
would a plague! But when you heard the alarmoh! Samurai!'you turned to
worship us! Fools!"
     Another revealing moment occurs when Kikuchiyo (mad dog) is angrily
rebuked by Kambei for bringing in some armour from one of the farmer's
huts, originally worn by samurai the farmers had hunted down. Kikuchiyo
delivers an enraged speech:
What do you all think of farmers? Saints? Bah! They're foxy beasts! They
say, "We've got no rice, we've no wheat. We've got nothing!" But they
have! They have everything! Dig under the floors! Or search the barns!
You'll find plenty!... They pose as saints but are full of lies! If they
smell a battle, they hunt the defeated!...But then who made them such
beasts? You did! You samurai did it! You burn their villages! Destroy
their farms! Steal their food! Force them to labour! Take their women! And
kill them if they resist! So what should farmers do?
     There is a silence and Kambei says quietly, "You're a farmer's son,
aren't you." Kikuchiyo stalks out, ashamed of his humble origin. The class
system was especially rigid in Japanese society at that time; children
took up their father's station in the social order along with his trade.
Kikuchiyo is one of the few with the spunk to flaunt tradition and try to
move up the ladder. 
     There is also a sweet "forbidden" love interest between Katsushiro
(kid) and Shino, the daughter of Manzo (farmer father). On the second
night of the siege the two have an intimate encounter in an old barn, and
Manzo is furious. He starts beating Shino. "What do you mean, falling for
a samurai?" Kambei (veteran) breaks it up, and Schichiroji, Kambei's
(veteran) old side-kick, delivers some sage words: "Manzo! Don't be so
angry! When a man sees death in his path he feels the need for a woman's
arms....Have some sympathy for youngsters."
     By the end of the last battle, the two groups have been through a war
together, and many have died on both sides. The fear and distrust evident
between them at the beginning is gone, but only briefly. As the farmers
sing and plant next year's crops, the surviving samurai stand to one side
looking on, silent and alienated. Now that they no longer need each other,
the gap between the two classes has widened again. The last line of the
movie is spoken by Kambei (veteran). "Again we are defeated," he says,
looking up at the four samurai burial mounds. "The winners are those
farmers, not us."
     I must say I was a little disappointed with my first experience of
The Seven Samurai in the theatre; the 16mm print was poor quality and not
widescreen as I'd hoped, and the subtitles were much worse than in the TV
version (didn't they notice you couldn't read them at all when they were
over something white?) Despite all that it was still a superlative evening
at the cinema, enhanced by an appreciative audience and the immediacy of
the big screen. Besides what I've mentioned, The Seven Samurai has
exciting action sequences, wonderful black and white photography, and just
the right amount of humour. This film is an example of how a simple,
big-battle-oriented story can be turned into an entertaining, complex and
rewarding treatise on the victory of compassion and humanity against
tremendous odds.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: One of the ten best movies ever made.
A movie this sprawling and astonishing is easy to summarize -- I could do it
in two sentences -- but impossible to describe.
THE SEVEN SAMURAI is, more than anything else, a totally enthralling and
entertaining movie -- fun *and* profound. It is three hours and ten minutes
long, never lags, and feels too short by half. It creates a world -- or more
accurately, takes us to another world -- populates it convincingly, gives us
motives and needs that are totally uncontrived and direct, and then lets it
loose on us. Many have argued that this is Kurosawa's best film; I would
also add that it's his most entertaining and direct, even more so than THE
HIDDEN FORTRESS. It is, quite simply, perfect.
The story is uncomplicated, but not simpleminded. A small village of
Japanese rice farmers are being menaced by a gang of brigands headquartered
out in the forest somewhere. The villagers know they're doomed -- they have
no weapons, no training, and they probably won't even have enough of a
harvest to bribe the brigands to keep away. The wise man of the village
tells them to hire samurai -- preferably hungry ones, since they'll be
cheaper. And so several of the farmers go off to try and find men to fit the
bill.
They are not terribly successful at first. History remembers the samurai as
a haughty bunch, and the few they talk to at first are impossible. Then they
run into Kanbei (played by the great, fatherly-looking Japanese actor
Takashi Shimura), an older samurai who's survived many battles. Mostly by
fleeing from them, as he laughingly confesses. He's not a warlord, but a
smart, canny tactician who knows better than to try and confront thirty
warlords face-to-face, and he's eventually compelled to work for the
farmers, for nothing more than three meals of white rice a day. Kanbei
assembles several other samurai, including Katsushiro (Ko Kimura), a boyish
young man who idolizes most of the other warriors, and has a longer way to
go than he thinks. He winds up falling for one of the village girls, but the
price he and the other woman have to pay for their closeness is ruinous and
heartbreaking.
The other samurai are delineated quickly and charmingly. One of them is a
cold and surgically precise swordsman, but who has a strange side of
humanity to him. He doesn't like being idolized for his skill -- how much
depth can there be to a killer? Others are more happy-go-lucky, but still
relatively competent fighters. Another is an old war buddy of Kanbei's, who
from the git-go knows Kanbei is trying to trick him into something (again).
They make an intriguing crew, each complementing the other and filling in
where others fall short. We may have seen this before, but never this
well-done and rarely with this much energy and spirit.
They also acquire a tagalong, a drunken roustabout who calls himself
Kikuchiyou (the incomparable Toshiro Mifune). Kikuchiyou is undisciplined
and slovenly, but also has the element of confrontation that Kanbei and the
others don't really possess. In a wonderful scene, the villagers cower in
fear from the newly-arrived samurai... until Kikuchiyou beats the alarm as a
prank to get everyone out in the open, screaming for help -- and then mocks
the way they've done an about-face when they realize they're in trouble. He
does this throughout the movie, pushing every situation he gets into to the
limit. This tendency comes to a climax in a scene, possibly one of the best
monologues ever put on film, where Kikuchiyou alternately blasts and pities
the samurai and farmers for the horrible parasitic relationships they
inflict on each other in wartime. The scene is not just self-indulgent
acting, but puts much of the conflict in the movie into perspective. Who's
preying on whom here? Even more important is that the questions remain open
at the movie's end.
The pace never flags. Even when the characters are simply standing around
talking about the next thing they need to do, the tension is always there:
tension between farmers and samurai, between man and woman, youth and old
age, discipline and unrestrained passion, all embodied in different
characters. (The movie introduces at least twenty speaking roles and stays
with them, but never loses us or becomes confusing.) There are many little
plots grinding away in the corners, each coming to their own conclusion, but
none of them feel contrived or manufactured. The movie understands that life
itself is far too messy to conclude patly.
With the amount of emotional and thematic territory it covers, the movie
runs the risk of becoming muddled or defocused. It doesn't. In plain
non-movie English, it's a hell of a ride. One scene is broad comedy; the
next moving human drama. And because all of them are hitched around the same
core story, nothing is out of place or gratuitous. For a movie that runs as
long as it does, there's not a dead spot in it, not a moment where we sit
there tapping our fingers and waiting for the director to impress us with
something else.
The final hour of the movie is one giant, prolonged combat scene that spans
days and nights as wave after wave of marauders come charging into the
village, and are repulsed with a combination of tactics, quick
improvisation, and sheer sweat, blood and loss of life. Nothing like it has
ever been put on film elsewhere. The age of high-tech chases and shootouts
with digital graphics doesn't dilute the power of the movie's final stretch
-- not only because it's so unpretentiously violent, but because it's played
so raw and so close, emotionally, that it's impossible to sit back and
merely admire it on a technical level.
The film also finds the perfect way to end -- on a note of triumph that's
bittersweet and exhausted, nothing like the glitzy smile-fests that conclude
most movies of action. Unflinching honesty is not something one would
normally associate with a movie of action and grand entertainment, but there
you go. THE SEVEN SAMURAI breaks and exceeds all expectations.
