Title
Review for Psycho Beach Party (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Strohmeyer.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/cba54b75eb5a04238825696100047644?OpenDocument
Not since Rocky Horror has the film world produced such a vibrant farce
of teen angst, violence, and sexual deviance.  And here comes Rocky's
comeuppance, as off-Broadway cult icon Charles Busch has scripted a work
of sheer demented brilliance in the gleefully absurd Psycho Beach Party.
Originally performed on the stage, Psycho Beach Party is the story of a
teenage girl who wants desperately to surf.  It's also the story of a
female cop who used to be a man.  And some homoerotic surfers.  And a
beautiful movie star who's hiding from Hollywood.  And an alcoholic
mother with no grasp of the present.  And a psychotic killer who hacks
people up for their imperfections.  And it all takes place at Malibu
Beach in 1962.
Visually resplendent and constantly hilarious, this film has all the
makings of a teen cult favorite.  Combining the setting concepts of
production designer Franco-Giacomo Carbone and the costuming of Camille
Jumelle with the romping weirdness of an absolutely bizarre cast, Psycho
Beach Party is a hilarious revelation of the pervasive neuroses welling
up within the generation it represents.
Deftly acted to a sprightly, refined camp under the direction of Robert
Lee King (Boys Life, The Disco Years), the entire cast deserves kudos. 
Particularly noteworthy is Lauren Ambrose (In & Out, Can't Hardly Wait)
as Chicklet, the 16-year-old tomboy around whom the film's drama
revolves.  Through Ambrose's performance, Chicklet comes off like a
psychotropic Gidget, the sort of girl the word "spunk" might seem to
have been invented for.  Her sudden, schizophrenic shifts from one
personality to another are refreshingly ridiculous, riding a thin wire
of sincerity and self-mockery one seldom sees in celluloid.
Thomas Gibson (ABC's Dharma & Greg) is funny in his role as surf-guru
Kanaka, but often appears to be left out of the joke.  Fortunately, the
rest of the cast appears to get it and keeps the story rolling through a
cavalcade of dorky music, lame plot twists, and insanely bad special
effects.  This is a movie you can laugh both with and at.
Charles Busch's role as Captain Monica Stark is funny and self-effacing.
Australian beauty Kimberly Davies (The Next Best Thing) gives a
performance evoking Gilligan's Island's Ginger as B-movie
starlet-in-hiding Bettina.  And keep and eye out for Splendor's Kathleen
Robertson as Rhonda the wheelchair-bound psychobitch.
This movie is everything it sets out to be.  Go for the cheap thrills;
stay for the surprise ending.
Director: Robert Lee King
Producer: Ginny Biddle, Jon Gerrans, Marcus Hu, Victor Syrmis
Writer: Charles Busch
Starring: Lauren Ambrose, Thomas Gibson, Nicholas Brendon, Matt Keeslar,
Andrew Levitas, Nick Cornish, Kathleen Robertson, Danni Wheeler, Amy
Adams
URL: http://www.psychobeachparty.com
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Could the virginal Florence Forrest (Lauren Ambrose) be the "Butcher of 
Malibu Beach?"  With her innocent smile, milky white skin and 
tomato-colored hair, she certainly doesn't look like a likely candidate.  
But with her split personality, her alter ego, a foul-mouthed, sexual 
predator named Ann Bowman, might be the guilty party.
If there ever was a film genre ripe for parody, it is those goofy 1960s 
beach movies.  Robert Lee King's PSYCHO BEACH PARTY, written by Charles 
Busch and based on his play, satirizes these old movies.  Laughing along 
with PSYCHO BEACH PARTY is silly fun.  With not a pretentious bone in 
its body, the movie pokes fun at the kids' raging hormones and at the 
homosexual subtext of that genre.  In PSYCHO BEACH PARTY, however, the 
gay humor angle goes way above subtext.  
With a hall of mirrors effect, the story features many movies within 
movies, all of which are watched -- where else? -- at the drive-in 
theater.  Opening with an Ed Wood-film wannabe, a horror movie about a 
blonde waitress with 3 heads, starring Bettina (Kimberley Davies) as the 
middle head, the camera cuts back to reveal kids too busy making out in 
the cars to watch the movie.  
After the first of a series of murders, we switch to a sleazy go-go 
dancer as the opening credits roll.  Then it's off to day at the beach 
where the buff boys surf and the bikinied girls ogle them, and vice 
versa.
Florence, deemed less than a chick, earns the nickname of "Chicklet."  
She wants to be a surfer like "The Great Kanaka" (Thomas Gibson) but is 
informed that "surfing is a man's domain.  No minnows in the shark 
tank."
Movie star Bettina, who rents a house near the surfers' beach, 
immediately catches the boys' eyes.  "There's some prize tomatoes in 
that tin can," one of them remarks when they first lay eyes on her, 
wearing a revealing top.  The movie is full of such deliciously dopey 
dialog.  Another over-the-top interchange occurs between Florence and 
Starcat (Nicholas Brendon), a college student who, with his three psych 
courses, is already referred to as "doctor."  "If we were at war with 
the Soviet Union, I wouldn't even let you into my bomb shelter," she 
tells him in her version of the ultimate put-down.
The picture is wonderfully campy entertainment that doesn't ask anything 
of its viewers. Just kick back and let the laughs begin.
PSYCHO BEACH PARTY runs 1:35.  It is not rated but would be an R for 
language, sexual situations and comic violence.  It would be acceptable 
for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Strand/New Oz/Red Horse Films
 Director: Robert Lee King
 Writer:  Charles Busch (play and screenplay)
 Cast: Lauren Ambrose, Thomas Gibson, Nicholas Brendon,
Kimberley Davies, Charles Busch, Danni Wheeler, Nick
Cpornish, Andrew Levitas, Amy Adams, Kathleen Robertson,
Nathan Bexton, Beth Broderick, Buddy Quaid, Jenica
Bergere.
   Move over Jim Carrey.  Lauren Ambrose may not have the
star attraction that you enjoy, but while you played only two
personalities (sorry, me and myself add up to only one), the
pert Lauren Ambrose turns in three, maybe more, in the
kitschy Charles-Busch scripted "Psycho Beach Party."  Based
on the hit off-Broadway play by the master of camp and
successfully adapted to the big screen, "Psycho Beach Party"
is not only about a naive kid so tired of being one of the only
two people actually to watch a drive-in movie that she is
determined to break out into real womanhood.  No more "one
of the guys" for Florence Forrest, who is dubbed Chicklet by
the surfers who adopt her.  This time it's personal, and the
person she changes into every now and then is about as
tough as Jim Carrey's Hank and in a way even more
entertaining.
   Like the character she is ever so loosely based on, Joanne
Woodward in Nunnally Johnson's 1957 psychological feature
"The Three Faces of Eve," Chicklet is three characters in one
small bod just as the movie itself combines four genres--
some Hitchcockian suspense particularly when the killer is
following his final would-be victim up a ladder; the Beach
Blanket Bingo-Gidget Goes Hawaiian kitsch; the slasher flicks
that have been parodied to death but not with the original
style shown here; and a genre that could be called Charles
Busch's own, transvestite buffoonery.  (Busch shows that he
can act as campy as he can write with the most comical role,
that of police captain Monica Stark, who eventually solves the
case and goes off into the woods with one of the Malibu
Beach Adonises that director Robert Lee King trots out.)
   King takes breaks from the murders by developing the characters
that Chicklet runs into during her struggle to become a real
woman.  Most irritating is The Great Kanaka (Thomas
Gibson), who is the movie's Big Kahuna in a way, a guy who
seems trapped not only in the search for the big wave but in
the France of the great playwright Moliere: he speaks
perpetually in rhymes.  Florence is spending the season not
only with her mother (Beth Broderick), who insists that she
does every night what every good woman does (needlepoint),
and with a Swedish exchange student, Lars (Matt Keeslar). 
Florence is to make the big play for the heart of surfer drop-
out Star Cat (Nicholas Brendon) during the movie's climactic
celebration, a luau attended by all the youthful characters of
the film.
   Aside from putting across some of the cool lines, featuring
non-sequiturs like "Some people are born to die" (uttered in a
50's style diner with pink-cushioned seats), Miller and Busch
trash political correctness by featuring a mean cripple that
would be the envy of Fellini and a movie star (Kimberly
Davies) whose specialty is slasher films--where she plays a
Marilyn Monroe-like bombshell but with three heads.    
   This is the sort of movie that even today's superstars might
love to slum around in. The performers have fun without
letting on with so much as a wink to the audience--and the
audience should pick up on their merriment by getting with
the spirit of the story.
Not Rated.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Campy playwright Charles Busch's screenwriting debut is – surprise –
great campy, B-movie fun.  Psycho Beach Party is a funny murder mystery
decorated with surf music, cars with fins, poodle skirts, drive-ins,
luaus and split personality disorder.  The film's eclectic cast
literally has something for everyone.
The cherubic Lauren Ambrose (Can't Hardly Wait) stars as Florence
Forrest, an underdeveloped teenage girl from Malibu who is worried that
something is wrong with her because she doesn't like boys.  Despite all
of the reassurances from her family's Swedish exchange student Lars
(Matt Keeslar, Scream 3), Florence is perpetually down in the dumps.
One day at the beach, Florence notices some buff whitecap riders and
develops an interest in surfing.  But her wide-eyed eagerness is met
with resistance from the boys, who point out that `girls can't surf.'
Luckily, Florence befriends the Great Kanaka (Thomas Gibson, Dharma &
Greg) the local surf guru (who talks in rhyme) and, before long, she's
hanging ten with the best of them.  She even begins to get close with a
surfer named Starcat (Nicholas Brendon, Buffy the Vampire Slayer).
On a more disturbing note, Florence has a bit of an alter ego problem.
It seems that whenever she sees something circular, her personality
changes from squaresville into an acid-tongued sexpot.  And to make
matters worse, every time Florence becomes Ann, a grisly murder occurs.
Throw in a haunted beach house, guys rolling around in the sand and a
butch police captain (played by Busch), and you've got a pretty smart
whodunit.
Directed by Robert Lee King (Boys Life), Party is entertaining,
tongue-in-cheek fun that's real cool, daddy-o.  Dig?  Good.
1:35 – R for adult language, nudity, sexual content and violence
