Title
Review for Double Jeopardy (1999)
Number of Reviews
31

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Part of the appeal of cinema/narrative is the space between the scenes, the
B we have to fill in to get from A to C. It's about economy, allows more to
be said with less words. Simple stuff. Language is similarly streamlined,
and can be streamlined as such because both speaker and listener know the
codes, or, in cinema again, the conventions. We're native to the medium, so
to speak. The trick for the movie-maker, now, is to say the most in the
least amount of time, which means make the B-spaces as wide as possible
without losing the audience. And there's so many ways to lose the audience.
Simple confusion is one ('C? What, how'd we get here already?'). At the
other end of the spectrum is director Bruce Beresford's Double Jeopardy,
more or less insulting us by glossing over the past six years (etc) via
putting the explanation for those six years awkwardly in some supporting
character's mouth. Meaning that character is no longer talking to another
character, as s/he should be, but to us, for us. And this doesn't happen
just once.
But back to the beginning. Double Jeopardy opens on Libby (Ashley Judd) and
Nick Parsons (Nowhere Man himself, Bruce Greenwood), going through the
motions of a relationship so peachy-keen that it has to take a left turn
somewhere else. As the trailer gives away, it does: soon enough Nick's
'dead,' and, as a result, Libby's rushed through an indictment/trial/
sentencing/imprisonment sequence, all time-compressed to the point that
there's very little substance left to it at all, it just becomes the
obligatory prelude for what was evidently intended to be the real meat of
the movie: the double-jeopardy loophole. But still, it's unforgivable, takes
up a good twenty minutes, which is to say Double Jeopardy takes far too long
to get started.
Once it does, however, it's what we expect in a movie which pairs Tommy Lee
Jones and Ashley Judd: the Fugitive meets Kiss the Girls--Tommy Lee all
about compassion, duty, Ashley Judd all about resolve, determination. And of
course they both play their respective roles as well as can be expected, and
are great on-screen together. The problem with Double Jeopardy isn't with
them, but with the writing, or rather, the lack of writing. When Double
Jeopardy isn't skipping heedlessly from moment to moment (A to C),
neverminding causality, it's putting Libby in some Rocky-ish workout
sequence. Or having her make an early promise to a child about how the movie
will end. And of course these promises to children are never broken. Which
does a lot to not surprise us with the ending.
But so be it. In a movie with this little suspense, we tend to look to the
stunts for gratification (see: Fair Game). David Weisberg and Douglas Cook
did get writing credit for The Rock, after all (while Beresford directed
another prison movie, Last Dance...), which had all kinds of explosives. The
thing is, though, aside from a couple of car catastrophes, Double Jeopardy
falls short on the action-end as well. Or rather, it does with it what it
does with the first twenty minutes: skips over all the good parts. On the
upside, there is a cool James-Bond-ish New Orleans funeral, which is even
capped by Nick not killing Libby, but leaving her to die, Spectre-fashion.
Maybe it's an in-joke. Or, maybe the whole movie's a joke, one of those
where the concept (of double-jeopardy as plot device) preceded the script,
but financed it nevertheless.
(c) 1999 Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Bruce Beresford.
Cast: Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Bruce Greenwood, Annabeth Gish, Roma 
Maffia.
1999 - 106 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex, nudity, and blood).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 25, 1999.
Have you ever seen a film that could possibly have been successful, but was 
basically ruined due to an ad campaign that gave away literally every secret 
the picture has to offer? It's a common occurrence, but never before has a 
trailer blatantly spoiled a film the way Paramount's ads for "Double 
Jeopardy" do. If you are able to disregard this almost-fatal flaw, you will 
find that the film really is a highly servicable thriller, full of fine 
performances and blessed with brisk pacing that consistently saves the film 
from ever becoming tedious. While you watch "Double Jeopardy," you enjoy it, 
but even if the ad campaign hadn't given away every secret, it still would 
have been rather predictable, and ultimately can't escape its formulaic 
plotting.
Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd) has it all; a generous, caring relationship with 
her husband, Nick (Bruce Greenwood); a cheerful 4-year-old son; a love for 
sailing; and a beautiful, lakeside home in the northeast. While spending the 
night together on the boat Nick just bought for Libby, she awakens to 
discover she, as well as the boat, is covered in blood, and her husband is 
missing. The sea-rescue squad catches her holding the knife she has just 
found on the deck, and when Nick's body is never recovered, Libby finds 
herself facing serious time behind bars, and before long, is sentenced to a 
9-year prison term. Heartbroken that she has to be separated from her son, 
who is thus adopted by her best friend, Angela (Annabeth Gish), Libby decides 
to make the best of her time there, becoming friends with some of her fellow 
inmates and working out a lot. Then, to her horror, Angela and her son 
disappear for a month, but she is able to track them down by a telephone 
operator, where they are now staying in San Francisco. To make a long story 
short, Libby overhears her son on the phone exclaim, "Daddy!" and all of a 
sudden, she realizes that she was intentionally framed for the "murder" by 
her husband himself. A former lawyer and matter-of-fact cellmate (Roma 
Maffia) explains to Libby about a process called Double Jeopardy, in which a 
person cannot be convicted of the same crime twice. So if, say, Libby wanted 
to actually murder him once she's released, she could, and there's nothing 
anyone could do about it. 
Switch to six years later, Libby is granted a three-year parole, and is sent 
to live at a community house for recently-released convicts, run by the 
flawed parole officer Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones), who supposedly was in 
a car accident years before that killed his wife and daughter. Since then, 
Travis hasn't been able to lay off the alcohol, but he does catch on rather 
quickly to Libby's ulterior motives, and attempts to stop her when she 
escapes from his custody.
You know, I may have given away quite a few of the major plot points, but 
they were also all discussed in the theatrical trailer. And you know what 
else? The trailer also had the shameless nerve to unravel even more of the 
story, right up to the climax in New Orleans, with Libby holding the gun at 
Nick, only for it to go off. After watching a 2 1/2-minute cliffs notes 
version of the 106-minute film, one wonders why anyone would even be 
interested in spending their hard-earned money on something that they already 
know the outcome of, but judging from the fairly-packed theater last night, 
it didn't stop any of them.
Beginning with a painfully obvious 15-minute prologue in which the "murder" 
takes place, I sat back in my seat, expecting to suffer through the remainder 
of a film that had "Mainstream Hollywood" written all over it. Once Libby is 
sent to prison, however, "Double Jeopardy" quickly improves, due in large 
part to Ashley Judd's superb, touching performance, as a woman who, in a 
moment's time, finds her whole happy existence seriously altered. With an 
acting career that began with her best-ever work in Victor Nunez's small 1993 
masterpiece, "Ruby in Paradise," Judd has followed this up with some 
disappointing commercial projects (1997's "Kiss the Girls") that have 
nonetheless helped to buoy her star potential, and has wisely intermixed 
these with more independent efforts (1997's "The Locusts," 1998's "Simon 
Birch"). "Double Jeopardy" belongs squarely in the commercial category, but 
that doesn't keep Judd from creating a believable, strong-willed character 
that we easily root for.
Tommy Lee Jones, in a role that is nearly a carbon copy of everything he has 
appeared in in the last six years (save for maybe 1995's "Batman Forever"), 
manages to pull off a strong performance that is more satisfyingly-written 
than most of his other recent efforts. While his character, like the film 
itself, is an utter cliche (the troubled, alcoholic man who finally comes to 
terms with his past mistakes), Jones sparks it with more life than there 
might have been had a lesser actor been cast in the part.
It makes you wonder, though. Would I have thought more highly of "Double 
Jeopardy" if, going into it, I knew nothing about it? There would have 
definitely been some extra surprises that most likely would have been 
unpredictable, and I probably would have found the premise more ingenious. 
Despite this, the film really is needlessly implausible on the basic story 
level, and the climactic showdown resorts to that reliable struggle scene 
that ends with a gun going off and killing one of the characters. But which 
one? I'll give you a hint: there's no way Paramount would have allowed the 
picture not to have a happy ending in which Libby and her son reunite. With 
all of the film's virtues and flaws weighed equally, let's just called 
"Double Jeopardy" a near-recommendation: a well-made thriller, to be sure, 
but just about as banal as they come.
COMING SOON: My personal domain website, at www.filmhaven.com.

Author
Ross Anthony
"Double Jeopardy" starts out rather rough and lifeless, not quite sure how
to set itself up for the real story. This is where Libby (Judd) is framed
(or did she really do it?) for the murder of her hubby Nick. She's quickly
herded off to prison where she spends six (or was it eight?) years in what
seems like 30 seconds. From there she's released to an institution for
parolees which is overseen by Tommy Lee. This is where the movie really
starts (so show up to the theater at least 30 minutes late).
Double Jeopardy gives Libby the right to blow Nick away (if he's still
alive) without worry of a second trial ("not true" says one real life lawyer
I've heard). Anyway (for the purposes of the film), we're left to wonder if
this sweet loving wife, would do it. But Libby is more interested in finding
her son. So she busts out of the parole halfway house and begins breaking
all kinds of laws. Which leads to two or three big action sequences. The
first making me painfully embarrassed for the filmmakers. The second being
very enjoyable and almost perfectly believable. At that moment I was willing
to change my mind about this picture. But an absurd cemetery scene near the
end buried any hopes of that.
Tommy Lee is awesome as always. Ashley Judd is unusually un-inspired, though
on occasion delivers a zinger. For example, when getting hit-on by some
unknowing male she responds, "Sure, I'd love to sit and chat with you, but
I've just got to call my parole officer first." The movie for the most part
is a hodgepodge of drama, action and even comedy. It just doesn't flow,
giving the feel of too many writers and/or directors.
The film would have benefited from a longer more in-depth prison experience,
during which we could have seen Judd learn all the tricks of the trade.
Tricks that would come in handy later. To do this, time could be taken away
from the frame job sequences. Or trash that whole section altogether (it's
simply not compelling, even if you don't know if she really killed him or
not). Start in prison, tell the frame-job story in flashbacks (if needed).
Kill and bury the cemetery scene. Develop Lee's conflicting motivation to
both arrest and assist Judd -- that's the most interesting aspect of the
film anyway.
Double Jeopardy. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Tommy Lee Jones and Ashley Judd, with Bruce Greenwood and Annabeth
Gish.
Directed by Bruce Beresford.
Written by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook.
Produced by Leonard Goldberg at Paramount.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Double_Jeopardy_ (R) ** (out of ****)
_Double_Jeopardy_ boasts a hook that is killer--literally.  A woman is
framed her husband's murder and is accordingly sentenced to prison. 
While in the pen, she discovers that her husband is, in fact, alive and
kicking.  Informed of the "double jeopardy" law--that is, that no person
can be tried for the exact same crime twice--she decides to serve her
time and, once she's released,  _really_ off her not-so-dear hubby. 
After all, no officer of the law can touch her for committing a crime she
has already "committed," no?
The few times I saw the trailer for _Double_Jeopardy_, the clip where
the woman in question, Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd), is told about double
jeopardy by a fellow inmate (Roma Maffia), was greeted with hearty
applause.  And during my screening of the film, that same scene, in its
complete form, was met with the same approval.  But that's just five
minutes in a film that lasts at least 100, and in time it becomes clear
that the hook is all there is to _Double_Jeopardy_, with nothing equally
as interesting or surprising left to fill in the blanks.
The presence of Judd in the lead does go a long way in keeping the film
watchable.  Libby breaks her parole in Washington state and tracks down
her deceitful husband Nick (Bruce Greenwood) all the way down to New
Orleans, Judd is never less than believable, and as such there is little
difficulty buying into the often-preposterous proceedings.  Also
contributing to the urgency is Tommy Lee Jones, whose strongly
_Fugitive_-esque role as parole officer Travis Lehman is indeed one he
can play in his sleep, but that doesn't mean that he's any less
entertaining.
With the actors doing the best they can, the blame for this
less-than-thrilling thriller falls on director Bruce Beresford and
writers David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook.  From the premise, it's quite
obvious how the film's going to end.  After all, can you imagine just how
let down the audience would feel if she _doesn't_ commit the dirty deed? 
(And if the film didn't end that way, a test screening would have surely
changed that.)  So it's up to the filmmakers to flesh out the whole, and
all they come up with is the idea of lost children.  In an obvious effort
to keep Libby from being too coldblooded, her main motive to find her
husband is not to even the score, but to see her son again; to add some
sort of bonding point between her and Lehman, he's saddled with an
arbitrary back story where his own daughter was taken away from him after
a DUI infraction.  The more action-oriented "suspense" points that come
along the way aren't much more effective.  One too many scenes has Libby
smash up a car, and one critical scene down the stretch has the villain
committing the mistake made by _Austin_Powers_' Dr. Evil--that is,
assuming the heroine is left for dead when it would be much easier to
make quick work of her.
But most people won't think of these things while watching
_Double_Jeopardy_, and the film may end up sufficiently entertaining
audiences.  However, it must be said that while there was some clapping
at the end of the film, the applause was nothing compared to that which
greeted the "double jeopardy" scene.  It just goes to show that while a
great hook does count for something, it takes a lot more to reel an
audience in.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "DOUBLE JEOPARDY" (Paramount Pictures)
        In this action/revenge movie, a clever woman goes after her
conniving husband after he frames her for his supposed murder. Ashley
Judd stars as the wife and mother who is wrongly imprisoned for
killing her husband. While serving her sentence at a Washington State
Prison, she discovers that her spouse is, in fact, living with another
woman and raising their son. In addition, she's told by another inmate
that she can't be tried twice for the same crime so, when she gets
released, she figures: Why not really murder the two-timing rat?  The
vigilance of her parole officer, played by Tommy Lee Jones, is her
only obstacle. Directed by Bruce Beresford, strong and slender Ashley
Judd seems perfectly cast, yet she was not the first choice for this
plum part. Jodie Foster was supposed to do it until pregnancy forced
her to drop out. Tommy Lee Jones is stalwart, as always, doing the
relentless law enforcement officer gig which he perfected during "The
Fugitive," but Bruce Greenwood's husband part is just too slippery and
sleazy. But superficiality is the keynote of the slick, plot-heavy
screenplay by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook. As for the legal
question about whether Judd's character truly has a legal license to
kill, the answer is "no." Under the principle of double jeopardy, a
person cannot be tried twice for the same crime. But, if the crime was
really never committed, then the concept is invalid. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Double Jeopardy" is an angry, violent 4. It's
an implausible, illogical but mildly intriguing thriller.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Double Jeopardy
Rated [R], 105 minutes
Starring Tommy Lee Jones and Ashley Judd
Written by David Weisberg & Douglas S. Cook
Directed by Bruce Beresford
website: www.doublejeopardymovie.com
It's never a good sign when a movie reveals almost all there is to know
in its trailer or teevee spot. So, this CrankyCriticŽ review comes to
you guest hosted by Alex Trebek
Cranky: I'll take "Deja Vu" for $400, Alex.
Alex: The answer is: Busted for a murder she didn't commit, an innocent
runs from the law
Cranky: What is The Fugitive?
Alex: No, I'm sorry. "She" is the catch. The category is "deja vu"
Cranky: OK, then, same category for $800
Alex: The answer is: "Tommy Lee Jones hot on the trail of a Fugitive"
Cranky: Ah, you're not gonna fool me this time. What is U.S. Marshals?
Alex: Nope. Sorry. The answer to both questions is, well how about this,
Double Jeopardy!
Which, had the producers gone the low budget route and cast Priscilla
Presley and Mike Farrell, could have been sold as a Lifetime Exclusive
Movie under the title -- "I Killed My Husband . . . And Then He Stole My
Baby!"
Sentenced to jail for a gruesome murder she swears she didn't commit,
rich young thing Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd) is obsessed with finding
her young son, who has disappeared with the best friend into whose care
he had been placed. When she tracks this pair down, to a new identity in
a new city, she makes the awful discovery that her husband isn't dead!
Since authorities don't want to hear it (they've heard it all before,
don'tcha know) Libby heeds the sage advice of another ex-lawyer, also
imprisoned for murder: "You've killed him once. You were convicted. They
can't try you again for the same crime so, bide your time..."
That's a twist on the Fifth Amendment with reasoning that I'm sure any
lawyer out there could take apart in a second. It doesn't get in the way
of the story (unlike the problems I had with last year's A">http://www.crankycritic.com/archive98/asimpleplan.html">A Simple
Plan), a neat package whose loose ends are neatly tied up before the
by the book heart tugging ending. Release on parole after six years,
Libby is ensconced in a halfway house, under the eye of depressed ex-law
professor turned parole officer Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones) who has
also lost a child to a thieving ex-spouse. Driven by the need to find
her son, Libby will eventually break parole and Travis will follow. You
get a cross country chase, at least one near death escape, an
interesting story twist that Edgar Allen Poe probably dreamed and forgot
a hundred years ago and a cute boy with a fuzzy mop top. Nothing you
haven't seen before. With A-list stars to keep your attention, Double
Jeopardy is a perfectly average way to pass the time, but it isn't
gripping and thrilling storytelling. Blink twice and you'll see it on
the rental racks.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Double Jeopardy, he would have
paid...
Only the star names kick this thing into rental range.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Brandon Herring 
Starring: Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Annabeth Gish, Bruce Greenwood, Michael
Gaston.
Rated R for violence, language and some sexuality.
Underrated movies are a common reoccurrence in show business today. 1998's
'Hope Floats' was extremely underrated and was one of the best movies of the
year. We always get films that make big money at the box-office but critics and
audiences pan on them. This year 'Double Jeopardy' is one of those films.
Critics are calling it predictable and worthless, audiences are disappointed
with it and think it was a disappointment. But as I viewed 'Double Jeopardy' I
found that it was a great movie, it has a surprising sense of humor and a big
dose of heart, along with heart-pounding suspense and twists and turns here and
there it certainly is a really good movie.
The always wonderful Ashley Judd plays Libby Parsons, a woman with a seemingly
normal life: a great loving husband, a beautiful son and a great friend. Her
husband Nick Parsons has made a surprise for her and is going to buy her the
sailboat she has always wanted. After a night of bliss Libby wakes up in the
middle of the night to find blood all over her and all over the sailboat, her
husband is missing and there is a bloody knife on deck. Of course being in
shock she picks it up and a coast guard comes over and sees her.
However she isn't immediately ceased until they find out his life insurance was
worth two-million dollars and they start to wonder rather she killed him for
the money. She pleads not-guilty but is found guilty and sent to prison for six
years. While making a phone call to her best friend who adopted her son for her
and she hears him say hi to his dad, which makes Libby's heart stop right
there. She realizes she must get out and prove that he isn't dead, one of her
cell-mates tells her that as long as she has been convicted of a crime she
cannot be convicted of it again. Which means she can shoot him in the middle of
Mardi Gras and they cannot do anything about it.
After she gets out she goes to a halfway house run by parole officer Tommy Lee
Jones. He is a man who has had his share of bad things. While out for the day
she breaks into a school and tries to track down her kid and husband, leading
up to some jaw-dropping twists that are both predictable and not. Whatever
happens the film was excellent to me. I found the writing well-written as well
as the acting was great. Ashley Judd is such a talented and beautiful actress
that she is a hero in a sort in this movie. Even if you know what is going to
happen in the end, you don't know how. 
This is one of those movies that you really do know what is going to happen,
except you don't know how they are going to make it happen. It could be one way
or another, it could be this way or that way. The movie is highly stylized and
extremely well-made. It gets most of it's power from the two leads: Ashley Judd
and Tommy Lee Jones both give excellent performances. The characters are
well-realized and believable and we feel Libby's pain when she cannot see her
child for 6 years.
Even though a lot of critics didn't like the film, I loved it. The director
took his time making the movie, and put a lot of shadowing in the movie. I
found it not to be boring at all and it's only flaw comes from some
predictability. It moved at a fast pace, has suspense, humor, heart and great
acting. It earns it's right to be a great movie and to me that's what it was.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 13, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Jeff Bogart
*1/2 out of four
This is your definitive "Hollywood" movie, extremely predictable, following the
basic formula (a horrible ending), overzealous writing (meaning the writing was
bad and seemed as if it were trying too hard to make it exciting, therefore
making it look as if many things were merely tossed in there to fill space) and
if Tommy Lee Jones and his lovable wise-ass character (of which we've seen
before in The Fugitive and quite frankly, wasn't used enough here), I'm afraid
the film would have been completely unbearable.
In this film, Ashley Judd plays a women who is wrongfully convicted of killing
her husband while out sailing for a weekend. While in jail she finds out that
her husband really is alive and that he framed the murder on her. Over money
(how original). While in jail she works out, exercises and basically does her
best to get into near perfect condition. 
Now she has learned about a law titled "double jeopardy" stating that if she
serves her full sentence and get out she could kill her husband and the law
could not touch her (although there has been talk that this is not the way the
actual law works). Now her PO (Parole Officer), and a bunch of cops are chasing
after her and are conflicted whether or not to believe her claims.
Skipping over to the acting: the fact that Judd is more of a looker than an
actress (no offense, she has been good [Simon Birch] and even very good to
great [Kiss the Girls] at times, in the past  and I believe may have the
potential to be better... but she's terribly unconvincing in this and her
performance seems stale and unsatisfying) doesn't really add to the movie at
all; just takes away. As I'd said, Jones was fine, although he did not have
much to work with. He was much more of a supporting character. Which is fine,
and he handled it well; especially considering the material he had to work
with.
I feel this film had alot going for it. Originality not being an issue. The
acting was the only thing (as I said) keeping it alive. The plot seemed pretty
intriguing and could have been as well if applied better. The action scenes
were well made (however sometimes out of place). I was just left unsatisfied in
the long run.
So basically some of the action may have been exciting but genuinely
over-thought, the plot has certainly been done before (generally speaking), the
movie moves way too fast for us to get involved in either the characters or the
plot, and is basically a film that was ALMOST saved by Tommy Lee Jones, who if
he had some more screentime, could perhaps have earned the film a higher
rating; in my book, anyway. Keep this in mind, If you're in the mood for a good
action film -- rent The Fugitive.     D+
Check out the new and improved Movie Page
better quality, easier to load, more reviews.
just go here: http://moviepage.hypermart.net/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   To paraphrase the words of my esteemed online colleague,
Chuck Schwartz aka The Cranky Critic, if the story of "Double
Jeopardy" were printed in a supermarket tabloid, the headline
would be, "I killed my husband who then stole my baby." 
That's pretty much what happens, but "Double Jeopardy" is a
the sort of thriller that has been done in more or less the
same, routine style during the '70s, the '80s and the '90s. No
matter how colorful the photography (and the scenes from
British Columbia are mighty pretty) and how exciting the
chase scenes (and they do make the heart skip a beat),
director Bruce Beresford has double-jeopardized any chance he may
have considered of winning points for originality.
   Exceptionally well cast, the movie is tailored for the
likes of Tommy Lee Jones as the cynical seen-all ex-law
professor busted from his profession for a fatal accident
involving drunk driving and now in charge of a halfway house
for women on conditional parole.  But Ashley Judd walks
away with the show doing a fine job as a woman sent up the
river for a crime she did not commit who is bent not so much
on revenge as on recovering the little boy she could not hold
for the six years.
   What I hear from people who watch too much TV is that
you could easily save your eight bucks by watching the
commercial for the film, which pretty gives away the plot. 
And since the action scenes and color photography are
generic, however stirring, what good is a psychological thriller
with no twists to tease the audience?
   "Double Jeopardy" opens on what appears to be a
deliriously happy young couple, Nick (Bruce Greenwood) and
Libby (Ashley Judd), who have an adorable four-year-old boy,
Matty (Benjamin Weir).  After they set sail on a boat that Nick
has offered to buy for his wife and soon indulge in the
obligatory love-making, Libby falls asleep only to wake up to
an empty craft filled with puddles of blood.  Catching her with
a knife clenched in her fist, the Coast Guard picks her up,
she is tried for murder and sent to prison despite the absence
of a body.  She learns from an ex-lawyer in her cell area that
she could kill her husband in the middle of Times Square and
get away with it, since the prohibition against double jeopardy
would bar a  new trial.  Paroled six years later to a half-way
house under the direction of the hard-headed Travis (Tommy
Lee Jones), Libby is determined to track down her husband
who, she discovers is still alive and prospering and recover
her little boy, but the disbelieving Travis is determined to find
her and send her back to prison for curfew violations.  
   From time to time the Australian-born director Bruce
Beresford, known for more challenging work like "Breaker
Morant" two decades ago about cynical military politics and
for the Oscar-winning "Driving Miss Daisy" in 1989, cuts to
the chase.  One particularly exciting pursuit finds Libby,
already in top shape for working out in prison, outrun by two
cops who are presumably weighed down by paraphernalia. 
In yet another chase, Travis pursues his captured and
handcuffed prey into the water to the astonishment of hordes
of tourists.  (Does anyone believe he would leave his prisoner
the keys to the ignition while he goes into a cafeteria for a
snack?)
   The picture has the usual plot holes and a typical fussy
finale in which the culprit is downed because he hesitates
before he shoots.  Can  a man presumably dead who turns 
up as a high-profile hotelier in New Orleans can go unrecognized 
for six years?  The film is partially redeemed by a solid performance 
from the exquisite thirty-one year old Ashley Judd, who turned in a 
layered role in "Ruby in Paradise" some time back and a substantial 
job as a vulnerable drug addict in "Smoke" four years ago.

Author
Frankie Paiva
Now as much as I like independent movies, you know, all those movies that
feature plausible storylines and actual ideas, I couldn't help liking this
movie. Now this didn't just start with the movie, the first time I saw the
trailer with Wild Wild West I was excited about it. While not legally accurate,
this fun idea of a woman being framed and then trying to track down the man
that framed her instantly caught my attention. This is no original film, mind
you, but it is a whole lot of fun.
Libby Parsons (Judd, destined to become a great actress) is thrilled when her
husband buys her a new sailboat, she loves it of course, and after a romantic
evening they go to bed. But when she awakens she finds blood all over
everything, and she finds a bloody knife on the deck, and picks it up right
when the coastguard is coming to arrest her. Nick, (Bruce Greenwood) her
husband, left her $2 million in insurance money, the jury sees this as a motive
for killing him and she is put in prison.
It turns out Nick isn't dead at all, he's kidnapped her son and is now living
in San Francisco with her best friend. But then someone gives her a holiday
present, it's called double jeopardy. It says that any person cannot be brought
to justice on the same crime twice. While this is not actually legally
accurate, the crime would have to be commited in the same location for it to be
legal, it's a great set up and the film has fun with it. When she's put on
parole and commits a crime, her parole officer (Lee Jones) must track her down
as she tries to kill the man that framed her. This begins a thrilling chase
through the Mardi Gras season in New Orleans.
Double Jeopardy is too unbelieveable, even for a Hollywood film. Seriously,
anyone who fires a gun that close to themselves (I'm making a point without
giving away any plot points) would be deaf for the rest of the movie. But if
you can push aside anything you know about law you should have a good time.
Tommy Lee Jones doesn't do much for the film, and actually doesn't have that
big of a role. Ashley Judd is great as Libby, an excellent casting choice, now
if only there was a way to make a sequel. Fun, exciting, and suspenseful,
Double Jeopardy gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: Lots of tension, suspense, and gunfire plus a sex scene that
doesn't show much nudity. Good Age 14 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic 

Author
greg king
DOUBLE JEOPARDY (M).  
(Paramount/UIP)
Director: Bruce Beresford
Stars: Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Bruce Greenwood, Annabeth Gish, Roma 
Maffia, Davenia McFadden, Daniel Lapaine, Benjamin Weir
Running time: 105 minutes.
This exciting suspense thriller is probably the most formulaic
of ex-patriate director Bruce Beresford's mainstream Hollywood films
yet (Silent Fall, Last Dance, etc).  Yet he proves himself more than
capable of handling this familiar genre material with the same panache
and skill that he brings to even his more intelligent and personal
film projects.
Slickly written by David Weisberg and Douglas S Cook (The
Rock), Double Jeopardy is an action film that will also strongly
appeal to a female audience.
The film centres around Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd, from A
Time To Kill, Kiss The Girls, etc), a woman who wakes to a nightmare
during a pleasure cruise.  She is covered in blood, and her husband
Nick (Bruce Greenwood) has gone missing.  Eventually, Libby is charged
with Nick's murder, and even though the body is never found, the
circumstantial evidence against her is overwhelming.  When she is
sentenced to prison, she arranges for her best friend Angela (Annabeth
Gish) to take care of her young son Matt.
But Angela soon disappears.  By chance Libby discovers that
Nick is still alive and living with her in San Francisco.  Realising
that she has been framed and betrayed, she starts planning for her
revenge when she is released from prison.  A fellow inmate informs her
of the law of double jeopardy, which simply means that, since she has
already been convicted of her husband's murder once she can now kill
him with impunity.
However, Libby is no Rambette, but rather a woman out to
redress a wrong, although she proves herself quite adept at handling
herself in tricky situations.  She doesn't want to kill her husband,
she merely wants her son back and a chance to reclaim her life.  But
first she has to escape her parole officer Travis Lehmann (Tommy Lee
Jones), who won't hesitate to throw her back in jail if she steps out
of line while under his watchful eye.  Jones is again in Fugitive
mode, playing a gruff, laconic law enforcement officer whose dogged
pursuit of a runaway felon eventually, and reluctantly, turns into a
search for the truth about a miscarriage of justice.  The desperate
chase takes the pair half way across America.
Judd has her meatiest role yet here, and is quite convincing
as the desperate woman prepared to go to extraordinary lengths to find
her son.  With The Terminator, James Cameron forever changed the
perspective of female action heroines, and Judd establishes a credible
and formidable presence.  Greenwood (from Exotica, etc) is good as the
smarmy villain of the piece, and he oozes insincerity.
Even the scenery, ranging from Vancouver to New Orleans is
great to look at and provides a superb backdrop for the fast paced
action.  The plot has a few flaws in it, but Beresford proves such a
dab hand at handling the pace throughout that audiences are given
little time to dwell upon them until after the credits have finished
rolling.
Double Jeopardy's success at the box office will undoubtedly
propel him into the same league as compatriots like Phillip Noyce, who
have also established themselves as top notch directors of formulaic
Hollywood action thrillers.

Author
Fontaine Lien
That is, unless you're one of those people who have seen the preview a
thousand times on TV or in the theaters.  I can tell you one thing
now: they gave the entire movie away.  Why someone would want to base
an entire movie on one premise and then give that crucial detail away
in the trailers is beyond me.  However, if they *hadn't* given it
away, the film would've still been suprisingly devoid of suspense
given its subject matter.  Obviously, the producers thought they could
remake "The Deep End of the Ocean," throw in Tommy Lee Jones and a
couple of cliches and call it an action drama.
"Double Jeopardy" offers solid acting from Ashley Judd and Tommy Lee
Jones, who got first billing even though he didn't see to be on screen
half as much as Judd did.  It also offers some genuinely funny,
clever, or full-of-tension moments (my favorite: Judd waking up in the
coffin), but none of that can salvage the film from its insanely
predictable plot.  Half the time I'm wondering whether I'm watching
one of those overhyped TV miniseries, which always turn out to be less
exciting than advertised.  Judging by the beginning, end, and a huge
chunk of the middle, I might have been watching a special Hallmark
presentation too.  The movie's stretching for an almost two hour long
film with only 30 minutes worth of material.  Implausible material, no
less.  Loose interpretation of one of the amendments aside, too many
times in the movie I thought, "That is *not* possible*." That kind of
stuff is excusable in popcorn movies, but not one like "Double
Jeopardy" that tries to pass itself off as serious drama.  Everything
seems dragged out, overplayed.  When they should've kept us in the
dark, they let the cat out of the bag too early.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Okay, so you've all read my plot point by plot point "prediction" before I
went to see this movie (If you didn't, see the bottom of this review), which
I basically compiled to bring attention to the fact that the marketing on
this film, was one of the worst that I have ever seen! A trailer is supposed
to entice a viewer to want to see a movie, it is not supposed to give away
every single meaningful plot point! Having said that, I still went to see
this film, and confirmed the fact that I would have enjoyed it much more,
were I not to have seen their crummy giveaway trailer.
PLOT:
Woman gets convicted of killing her husband and spends six years in jail.
While in prison, this woman finds out that her husband is still alive and
well, and living under an assumed name with her son. Once out of prison,
this woman makes it her mission in life to find her "dead" husband and get
her son back. Double jeopardy refers to the fact that one cannot be tried
for the same murder twice, so in her case, she could now kill her husband
and get away with it.
CRITIQUE:
A "video movie" is a film which doesn't have enough oomph to recommend as a
"going out of the house and to a theater night", but can suffice as a lazy
evening of lounging around in the apartment. This film is exactly that type
of film. It offers very little thrills for a thriller, close to zero
suspense, considering that everything is already given away in the
stupid-ass trailer, and a couple of bogus action scenes. It did however
supply us with an Ashley Judd in her acting best, Tommy Lee Jones in his
acting the same, and an extremely interesting premise, which had many women
foaming at the mouth (Count Mrs. JoBlo as a guily party). Another good thing
about this film was the pacing which was pretty fast. Considering that a lot
of stuff actually does transpire, we are thankfully led through many of the
basic scenes at a rapid pace, in order to get to the meat of the story,
which basically has Judd chasing her "dead" husband.
The biggest problem with this film is that it offers very little in
excitement and more importantly, very little in surprises or thrills. There
were also a few plot holes here and there, which I can generally forgive in
cheezy thrillers, and certain implausibilities, but all in all, they didn't
really gnaw at me as much as the fact that I definitely would have enjoyed
this film so much more, had I not seen Paramount's inane movie trailer. I am
still recommending this film because on that level, and the level I speak of
concerns cheese and lazy Sunday afternoons and videotapes, it can be deemed
as an enjoyable trip through known territory. For others, you may want to
see this flick because Ashley Judd is in it, and she is damn cute and a fine
little actress in her own right. As for the rest of you, who don't
appreciate camp, hate the Judds and hate thrillers which don't offer you
many thrills, I suggest you skip this turkey and go rent another small, yet
effective, Tommy Lee Jones thriller called THE FUGITIVE (8/10).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
In reality, the legal theory of "double jeopardy" DOES NOT exist. According
to Harvard Law School professor, and infamous member of O.J. Simpson legal
"dream team", Alan Dershowitz, "The crime is killing a person at a certain
time and place, and if she killed him at a different time or place, it would
be a different crime" (Entertainment Weekly, Sept. 24, 1999). Wow...that
sucks.
As many of you may already know, Ashley Judd's sister and mom are the
country singers known as The Judds. Ashley has also made quite a reputation
of dating celebrities including actors Robert DeNiro and Matthew
McConaughey, and singing has-been, Michael Bolton.
Here's another fact which I think most people know by now, but if you
didn't, then know full well that actor Tommy Lee Jones once roomed with
Vice-President Al Gore during his College days at Harvard, and has never
taken an acting class. In 1994, he co-starred with Ashley Judd in another
picture called NATURAL BORN KILLERS (8/10), but unfortunately for the Judd,
her court room scenes were left on the cutting room floor.
Much of this film was shot in British Columbia, Canada, which may explain
the presence of Canadian actor Bruce Greenwood in one of the main roles.
Bruce is born in the province of Quebec, Canada.
Director Bruce Beresford is born in Australia and once directed an Oscar
winning picture called DRIVING MISS DAISY in 1989.
Here is my plot point by plot point prediction which I made BEFORE seeing
this film, just by checking out the film's trailer.
1. Husband, Wife, Kid = happy family
2. Boating trip, husband appears to have been killed by wife
3. Wife gets nailed on murder, goes to jail
4. While in jail, finds out that husband is still alive, feels set-up
5. Gets out of jail, wanting her son back, and realizing that she can now
kill her husband, because she can't be convicted twice for the same murder
6. Tommy Lee Jones, snoop extraordinaire, finds out about this and goes to
stop her
7. He catches her at one point, but she floors the gas on his car on a ferry
and escapes
8. After much research and woop-dee-do, Judd finds her husband's whereabouts
9. She finally explains the whole story to Jones, who now sympathizes with
her plight
10. They both find the husband, and she confronts him with a gun and
threatens his life, with Jones watching on. She wants her son back.

Author
Jamey Hughton
In Double Jeopardy, the stakes are high. Think of the plot as a rehash
of Sleeping With the Enemy, and then rearrange the details and the
gender of the stalker. The finished product, although able to maintain
the viewer's attention, is a predictable and unexciting thriller with an
idiotic script. `Alex, I'll take Homicide for $400...'
Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd) is a happily married mom leading a normal
life. One night, her husband Nick (Bruce Greenwood) takes her out for a
romantic escape on a sailboat. Libby awakens in the middle of the night
to find she is covered in blood and Nick has strangely disappeared. She
follows a trail of bloody footprints up to the deck, where she handles a
fallen knife (like any stupid character) and is spotted by the Coast
Guard, who are responding to a distress signal sent earlier in the
evening. Nick is presumed dead, and although she pleads her innocence,
Libby is tried and convicted for the murder of her husband.
Now, please don't think I'm spoiling any vital plot details, because the
informative trailer has already spilled most of the beans. If you
haven't seen this preview, don't read any further. But seriously, the
inane screenplay by Douglas Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook is so
elementary that the average viewer will be two or three steps ahead of
the characters. During the most vital scenes in the movie, I was
anticipating every twist or `surprise' that eventually popped up on the
screen. I imagine the writers presume their core audience for Double
Jeopardy is a very naive group of individuals. Most, unfortunately, will
be too distracted by the moronic plot to appreciate the few positive
aspects of the production.
One is Tommy Lee Jones, who plays Travis Lehman, a parole officer given
the tedious task of watching over Libby after she serves her sentence in
prison. Jones is always wonderful as an authority figure, and he's
certainly familiar with this sort of role (as he played so well in The
Fugitive and US Marshals). Judd, as a likable heroin with gusto, also
has a chance to flex her acting abilities. While emotionally
unconvincing, the actress is tremendously fun in her juvenile role,
perking up the movie like an injection of anti-depressant. The actors,
and their relationship together, present the one-two punch that prevents
Double Jeopardy from derailing itself entirely.
And now, back to the plot. While behind bars, Libby learns an
interesting little bit of information: a person can't be convicted of
the same crime twice. This law, called `double jeopardy', could be her
motive for hunting down her husband... who may still be alive. Yes, you
heard right. The movie degenerates into a cross-country chase, where
everything you expect to happen... does. The final scenes, which could
have redeemed the film, are poorly handled by director Bruce Beresford -
whose previous work centers highly around drama (Driving Miss Daisy,
Paradise Road). Ironically, it is those elements - like the driving
force of Libby to reunite with her son - that don't quite work here.
At least Double Jeopardy is paced well enough to satisfy diehard fans of
the two stars. Unfortunately, Jones lacks some of the edge that he had
as Sam Gerard in The Fugitive, and the real depth of his character is
only skin deep. But he and Ashley Judd are more than welcome considering
the material, and both have some memorable comic moments. Judd, in
particular, has a hilarious scene in which she wards off an oncoming
male by explaining she has to check in with her `parole officer'.
Hmmm... perhaps this would have made a good comedy.
It is disappointing, because there are the makings of a competent action
film here. It's nicely shot and choreographed in downtown Vancouver, and
will entertain those who aren't turned off by the woeful story-line.
Tis a shame that Double Jeopardy is an adult thriller that wouldn't
fool most children.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
"When you get out of jail, you can kill him."
Starring Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Bruce Greenwood. Rated R.
Double Jeopardy is a lurid, prepostrous thriller that's also one of the
year's most enjoyable. It's an uncompromisingly brutal, cheerfully
anarchic, hyperactive actioner that has a mission and never diverts from
it. There is not a moment here when the events on screen don't have a
direct bearing on the plot; once the film gets going it never stops. It
has been branded as the female version of The Fugitive and that's
probably a correct assessment of the plot, but the film itself has
little in common with the 1993 Andrew Davis/Harrison Ford collaboration
besides the presence of star Tommy Lee Jones.
Not even bothering with character introduction, director Bruce Beresford
floors the gas pedal from the get-go and never finds the brake. We meet,
rather hastily, Libby and Nick Parsons (Ashley Judd and Bruce Greenwood,
respectively) a seemingly happy married couple, with a son Matty, age 4.
They go out on a sailboat one night, and after a period of some rockin'
sex, they go to sleep. Libby hears a strange noise, wakes up and
discovers that she is covered with blood. She follows a red trail to the
upper deck, where she finds a knife and, out of astonishment, picks it
up. At that convenient moment, the coast guard shows up and Libby is
arrested.
Her lawyer, a friend, puts up a defense in court, but though we know she
is innocent, the evidence against her is too compelling. Her friend
adopts her son and she goes to prison. Once in prison, she makes a phone
call to her friend. Her friend gives her son the phone. Nick walks in
the room. Little Matty screams "Daddy!" The phone goes dead. Libby
realizes that the man she is imprisoned for killing isn't even dead. She
gets some advice from a prisoner/former lawyer, who tells her that since
the state already convicted her of killing her husband, they can't
convict her of the same crime again, meaning that when she gets paroled
she can kill him and they can't touch her.
After a weirdly short amount of time, she gets out of parole. She is
sent to live at a house with other recent parolees, under the command of
parole officer Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones). She sets out on a
mission to find her husband and get her son back, which turns out to be
much more difficult than anticipated. She winds up tracking him all the
way to New Orleans where she finds out that he has long killed his
girlfriend and her son's "adopter".
Double Jeopardy is based on an assumption that is legally false. The law
stating that nobody can be convicted twice for the same crime assumes
that it is the same crime: same time, same place, same circumstances.
It's not like it matters. This is a rollickingly good thriller; intense,
exciting, fast and furious. It's silly alright, but this is the kind of
film you just don't question. In some films, plausibility is everything.
Double Jeopardy, however, is not concerned with making sense: its sole
purpose is to entertain, and it does.
Judd helps the film tremendously in a difficult role. This is her
breakout box-office performance, and she is terrific. She brings some
emotion to what could have been a one-dimensional role, giving the movie
a little soul to go along with its effective chase scenes and action set
pieces. Tommy Lee Jones basically just reprises the role for which he
won an Oscar in The Fugitive, but the movie makes good use of his
stone-faced wit. Thankfully, too, Double Jeopardy refrains from
developing a romance between Libby and Travis; a subplot which
doubtlessly would have interfered with the film's story.
This is one of those movies where cops are the bad guys, and I took a
sort of sick pleasure in that. The sheer anarchy of the proceedings was
nothing short of wonderful, as Ashley Judd kicks the crap out of every
authority figure in the book. After all the idealistic Hollywood
features featuring hero cops, deft FBI agents and the virtues of the
American legal system, it's great to see a movie that doesn't so much
demonstrate their fallacy as it delights in their failure.
Double Jeopardy is really good, but it isn't the kind of good that is
remembered or recognized with awards. It's one of those movies better
viewed with the brain turned off, otherwise, your brain will be busy
ruining your experience. This is a thriller that isn't concerned with
being smart or plausible. Instead it diverts all attention to the
action, which, this year, is second to none.

Author
Homer Yen
I think that at some point, Tommy Lee Jones, who I
think is a very talented actor, must be able to find
some work that doesn't involve him reprising his role
from `The Fugitive'.  In that memorable film, (to
which this one will undoubtedly remind you of) he
plays a smart lawman with the tracking ability of a
bloodhound.  In a recent film, `US Marshalls,' he did
the same thing.   And in this film, well, you kind of
get the point. 
Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd who oozes with potential
but always winds up in mediocre movies) wakes up one
night on her yacht to find that her husband, Nick
(Bruce Greenwood) is missing.  There's blood
everywhere, and when Libby manages the courage to
begin searching around, the only thing that she finds
is a bloody knife.  Just as she picks it up, a coast
guard cutter arrives thinking that she has sliced and
diced her husband to death.  Despite the fact that the
body is never found, the prosecution convinces the
jury (through nothing but circumstantial evidence) to
convict her of the crime.  During her incarceration,
she discovers that Nick is alive.  He has somehow
framed Libby for his murder, though the reasons are a
bit unclear to me.  Now she only wants to get out of
jail to track him down.  Six years pass by and she
learns one very important thing  the principle of
double jeopardy.  It states that once the State
convicts you of a crime, it can not retry you for the
same crime.  So, in essence, she's free to walk up to
Nick and shoot him the head.
Armed with this knowledge, but with very little else,
she manages to get paroled.  Her parole officer is the
gruff and man-of-little patience Travis Lehman
(Jones).  Though he will throw any one who breaks
curfew back into jail without hesitation, Libby
escapes the first chance she gets.  Lehman now goes
after her (allowing those that he oversaw to break
curfew all they want), and the chase is on.  Can Libby
clear her name before Lehman tracks her down?  I
wouldn't think so.  She's just not well equipped to do
so.  She's not a killer, so it's hard to believe that
she would actually cold-heartedly pull the trigger
when she finally does find Nick (which the movie
trailers tell us that she does).  And though she makes
phone calls, surfs the internet and makes inquiries
here and there, she doesn't really seem to have a plan
of attack.  As a result, the film just proceeds along
like some Kansas interstate highway.  There are no
turns or twists or anything that would play on the
irony of her situation.  There are some scenes that
heighten Libby's fragile predicament such as when she
plunges over the side of a ferry or when she is
entombed next to a decaying corpse.  But this just
tries to pump some juice into a film that just doesn't
have enough electricity to keep going.
`Double Jeopardy' just lacked any significant amount
of style and intrigue.  The film doesn't exhibit the
kind of energy that these kinds of chase movies need
nor did it create any kind of chemistry between the
hunter and the hunted.  If you ever look through the
newspaper ads for movies currently playing, you'll
always notice quotes from various sources when there
is something good to say.  The funny thing is that
when you look at the ad for `Double Jeopardy,' you'll
see a quote from, of all places, NYLON magazine. 
Anybody ever heard of them?  When you start pulling
quotes from those kinds of places, it should be a sign
that this is one to avoid.

Author
Ram Balasubramaniam
Double Jeopardy
http://www.ram.org/ramblings/movies/double_jeopardy.html
/Double Jeopardy/ is a movie that could've been much superior, with
less contrivances and better acting.  The premise, based on the Fifth
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, is an interesting one, but is
executed with too much sentimentality and not enough substance.
Libby (Ashley Judd) and Nick Parsons (Bruce Greenwood) take a cruise
together, alone, and one night Libby finds herself following a trail
of blood and missing a husband. She is charged for the crime and
convicted, where she spends time in prison insisting she is
innocent. A miraculous turn of events alert her to the fact that her
husband is still alive, and convinced by one of her prison-mates, she
decides to go after him and kill him (after all, according to the
Constitution, you cannot be convicted of the same crime twice).  The
point however remains: why kill when you can expose the fraud and be
pardoned?
So she gets parole and runs into Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones), a
parole officer who has seen better days.  In her quest to find her
husband, Libby violates parole and is pursued by Travis who slowly
realises the fraud that is occurring and works with Libby to bring Nick
to justice.
So what's good about the film?  I thought /Double Jeopardy/ was
surprisingly fast-paced. Perhaps it was the company, but the time
seemed to just fly by after the initial events leading to Libby's
imprisonment.  The acting is generally mediocre though Tommy Lee Jones
has a few redeeming moments. The script/dialogue isn't great
either.  However, because of the premise, the pacing, and 
make the film  worth renting someday.


Author
Steve Rhodes
A completely formulaic thriller, DOUBLE JEOPARDY by Bruce Beresford
(DRIVING MISS DAISY) manages to be more fun than it has any right to be.
The script by David Weisberg and Douglas Cook is full of those moments
so ridiculous that the audience cries out in warning.  The characters,
who apparently aren't listening, go ahead and make one stupid mistake
after another.
So what is the secret that almost saves it?  It's funny, thanks
especially to a nice turn by the always reliable Tommy Lee Jones as a
tough as nails parole officer who eventually reveals a compassionate
side.
Jones pops one-liners with great glee.  Running a strict halfway house
for new female parolees, he lectures them sternly about the house rules
-- break them and he'll revoke their "Get-Out-Of-Jail-Free cards."  They
must toe the line.  "There are no second chances in this house, Baby,"
he says.  "This is a last chance house."
It all starts when Elizabeth Parsons's husband, Nick (Bruce Greenwood as
a good slime ball), fakes his own death while sailing with her.
Appearing to be a murderer who stabbed her husband and tossed him
overboard, she is found guilty of his murder.  Nick later reappears in
another city with another name.  And, to make it worse, he takes their
young son, Matty, with him so that Elizabeth will not be able to see
Matty again.
Most of the movie takes place after Elizabeth has been released, as she
tries to track down her husband and her parole officer (Jones) tries to
find her.  The movie's title comes from the questionable bit of legal
advice that she is now free to kill her husband since she has already
served time for killing him.  The law, you see, precludes being tried
twice for the same crime.
The casting of the wife proves problematic.  As Elizabeth, Ashley Judd
delivers half of a good performance.  When the script calls for cute,
she is absolutely adorable.  In the movie's funniest scene, she turns
off someone hitting on her by revealing her background.  With a perky
smile that cries out "date me," she nonchalantly tells her would-be
suitor that she'd love to go out for a drink with him, but she has to
check in with her parole officer first.  Although he jokes that she must
have gotten too many parking tickets, she corrects him, telling him that
she was tried and convicted of murdering her husband.  The incident
sizzles with a comedic sexual spark as she simultaneously flirts with
him with her eyes while turning him off with her words.
In a thriller, however, Judd is also expected to act scared.  In this
movie, she seems constitutionally incapable of showing fright.  In the
movie's worst moment, Elizabeth wakes up in bed, noticing that her
husband is missing and that there is enough blood everywhere for the
massacre of a small army.  She calmly calls out her husband's name, as
if she expects he just nicked his finger but somehow turned the room
into looking like a slaughterhouse.  Put yourself in her shoes.  Think
you might scream uncontrollably?  Think you might appear tremendously
frightened?
Moreover, from the time she is arrested until she leaves prison,
Elizabeth generally appears remarkably calm and accepting of her plight.
The whole first act of the story has a completely inappropriate serenity
to it, as if Beresford doesn't seem to realize its dramatic demands.
The less said about the story's conventional ending, the better.  Still,
as a comedy with a couple of likable leads, the movie delivers.
DOUBLE JEOPARDY runs 1:44.  It is rated R for language, a scene of
sexuality and some violence and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
DOUBLE JEOPARDY (director: Bruce Beresford; screenwriter: David Weisberg
/Douglas S. Cook; cinematographer: Peter James; editor: Mark Warner;
cast: Tommy Lee Jones (Travis Lehman), Ashley Judd (Libby Parsons),
Bruce Greenwood (Nick Parsons), Annabeth Gish (Angie), Roma Maffia
(Margaret Skolowski), Davenia McFadden (Evelyn Lake), Benjamin Weir
(Matty); Runtime: 106; Paramount; 1999)
A poorly made thriller, reeking from conventionality and lacking real
suspense. It is played as a revenge film about a framed housewife who
aims to get even with her slimy husband, but on the way to the film's
payoff, the action is dull and unconvincing. All the characters are
emotionally uninvolving. The script was lifeless and everything about
the story seemed contrived, not to mention that there were huge holes in
the plot. Under Australian-born Bruce Beresford's (Don's Party/Breaker
Morant/Driving Miss Daisy) labored direction, the film manages to take
the air out of every scene, even the one with the innocent woman in
prison had no feeling in it. She looked so dolled up and refreshed, that
it was hard to believe she was not at a country club, and those jailbird
ladies getting her hip to doing underhanded things, like running traces
on missing people, weren't just the sweetest dolls in the world. I felt
as if I was watching a movie done by the numbers, as it plodded through
every scene as if the film was being made for a film school class, while
the film seemed alive only in its moments of action.
Double Jeopardy in legalese means: no one can be tried again for the
same crime. If, as is the case here, the wife is found guilty of killing
her husband, and if she decides to kill the husband, she can't be tried
again for the same murder she was already convicted of. The film makes a
big deal about this in its plot, but when it comes time to have the
payoff go that way, it chicken outs to convention and ends its story in
the usual way TV crime stories end.
Nick Parsons (Bruce Greenwood) is a business shaker and wealthy art
patron, entranced by his 1911 Kandinsky, as we see him snobbily
reprimand and lecture a houseguest about the artist at his fund-raising
party, who boorishly mistakes his Kandinsky for a Picasso. In
conventional films like this one, someone who rails against the common
man's lack of art knowledge, deserves to be cast as the villain.
While faced with money problems, the handsome hubby nevertheless buys
his happily married wife Libby (Ashley Judd) an expensive sailboat she
yearned for. After lovemaking and drinking wine on the sailboat, Libby
wakes to find her white dressing gown smeared with blood, a knife in her
hand, blood smears on the deck and her husband missing, and the Coast
Guard conveniently by her boat. Though no body is found, she is
convicted of a wrongful death and serves six years in a Washington state
prison before she gets a conditional parole.
While in prison she gave her 4-year old son Matty up for adoption to her
best friend, the attractive Angie (Gish). But soon loses contact with
her, and while running a trace on her, discovers she's living in San
Francisco with her husband. Prison now becomes a place for her to
physically toughen up and become more streetwise, and to plan on how to
get revenge on her fink husband when she gets out, but most of all, the
nice lady wants to get her son back.
She serves her parole in a halfway house where she has to be supervised
for the next two years and is placed under strict regulations by a
former law professor and now parole officer, Travis (Tommy Lee Jones).
He acts tough, but has a soft spot in his heart for her, since he soon
comes to believe she is innocent and secretly commiserates with her
because he also went through a crisis when he had a drinking problem and
his wife left him after he totaled their car, refusing to let him see
his grown daughter again.
When Libby breaks curfew and is arrested after breaking into a house to
get an address, Travis takes her back to prison. On the ferry, while
handcuffed to the car, she manuevers the car into the water and escapes
from it as it sinks. Travis will pursue her all over the country as she
uses her newly gained computer knowledge to track down her husband. The
husband uses many different aliases, but is finally tracked down in New
Orleans where -- he is, believe or not, the owner of an exclusive hotel
and suddenly speaks with a perfect Southern accent. Travis is hot on her
trail and also lands in New Orleans, enlisting the local police for
help.
The story made little sense, but if you are looking for some bright spot
in the film, try the quaint New Orleans cemetery as a pivotal background
setting that helped magnify the suspense of the story. That location
scene is all I enjoyed about this rather trivial and commercially made
suspense film. No viewer should mistake it for a Hitchcock and have to
receive a scolding for that mistake by some film critic snob.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Christopher Null
     DOUBLE JEOPARDY does not take place during the latter half of a
game show.  However, it has a similar amount of credibility.
     There's an old adage in screenwriting:  You can make something up,
and it doesn't have to *be* real.  It just has to be believable.  In
other words, you can make up the lines for a priest to read at a
wedding, as long as they sound plausible.  No one's going to know if you
miss a few `Amens.'  However, this liberty does not extend to making up
laws on which to base the premise of your film.
     DOUBLE JEOPARDY has the bizarre distinction of probably being the
first movie to completely rest its fortunes on the fact that you'll buy
make-believe legislation.  And if you believe the filmmakers, you simply
can't be tried for the same crime twice.  So if your husband (Greenwood)
fakes his death and frames you (Judd) for it, and then you get
convicted, and then six years later you stalk him down to kill him, then
you can't be found guilty of murder, because you were already tried (and
convicted) for that.
     Right?  Wrong.  Very wrong.  Wrong to the point that it's scary to
think that maybe the filmmakers maybe didn't realize it at any point
during the production.
     The plot of DOUBLE JEOPARDY is very plain and obvious (Tommy Lee
Jones chases vengeance-obsessed Judd for an hour while she tracks down
hubby, just like in THE FUGITIVE).  And while the thriller is pedestrian
and straightforward and otherwise dull, the theater erupts in laughter
every time that `double jeopardy' clause is trotted out.  You keep
expecting for *someone* on screen to explain to Judd how the law works,
but they never do, and Jones's character is an ex-law professor!
     Not that I should feel surprised.  Bruce Beresford hasn't made a
good movie since 1989 (DRIVING MISS DAISY).  While Jones is campy and
fun to watch, and I could be entertained watching Ashley Judd make toast
for two hours, the film does not redeem itself with these minimal,
guilty pleasures (see also: ENTRAPMENT).  This isn't Double Jeopardy.
It's a $100 warm-up question.
Director: Bruce Beresford
Producer: Leonard Goldberg
Writer: David Weisberg, Douglas Cook
Starring: Tommy Lee Jones, Ashley Judd, Annabeth Gish, Bruce Greenwood
http://www.doublejeopardymovie.com/
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Double Jeopardy (1999)
Tommy Lee Jones, Ashley Judd, Bruce Greenwood, Annabeth Gish, Roma Maffia,
 Davenia McFadden, Jay Brazeau, Gillian Barber, Benjamin Weir, Spencer 
Treat Clark. Written by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook. Directed by 
Bruce Beresford. 105 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
For film buffs, there are few things more annoying than movie trailers 
that give away too much of the plot. The pinnacle of this peculiar form 
of marketing comes with the promotional campaign for "Double Jeopardy," a 
"Fugitive" knock-off starring Ashley Judd and Tommy Lee Jones. If you've 
seen the commercials for the film, there's no need to visit the theater, 
because the ads are a veritable Cliffs Notes version of the thriller, 
spilling every major plot point of the story. 
Here's what the ads reveal (SPOILER ALERT: THE FOLLOWING CONTAINS THE 
ENTIRE PLOT). We open with Ashley Judd and Bruce Greenwood, sailing 
happily on a sunny day. Cut to night, as Ashley searches for her husband. 
She finds a bloody knife on the deck and picks it up, just in time for 
the Coast Guard to appear and order her not to move. Cut to a man 
informing the stunned Ashley that a $2 million insurance policy would 
certainly be considered motive for murder. Ashley exclaims "I didn't kill 
my husband!" Cut to Ashley in prison, as the announcer intones "In prison 
for a crime she didn't commit... " Cut to a woman answering the phone 
with Ashley's son at her side. Just as mother and child begin their 
tender phone reunion, we see the father walk in the door. The young lad 
happily shouts "Daddy!" Cut to a close up of Ashley, shocked beyond 
belief as she realizes the truth. Cut to a fellow inmate, who explains to 
Ashley that having already been committed of murdering her husband, she 
could now kill him without fear of legal repercussions, thanks to the 
"double jeopardy" rule that protects a defendant from being tried twice 
for the same crime. Cut to Ashley, out of prison, being pursued by Tommy 
Lee Jones. Cut to an elderly lady informing Ashley that the man she is 
searching for recently lost his new wife in a "tragic accident." Ashley 
nods knowingly. Cut to Tommy Lee, telling an officer "Did you ever arrest 
anybody you thought was innocent?" Cut to Ashley, confronting her husband 
while holding a gun in her hand and saying "I could shoot you in the 
middle of Mardi Gras and the cops couldn't do a thing." Cut to Tommy Lee, 
who tells the man "As a former law professor, I can assure you she's 
correct." The panicked hubby begs for help, only to have Tommy Lee smile 
wryly and say "Why are you talking to me? She has the gun." (END 
SPOILERS)
For the benefit of those who skipped the spoiler section and didn't see 
the ads, the film, which starts in the Northwest and ends in New Orleans, 
is an idiotic potboiler, redeemed only slightly by pretty scenery, a 
couple of well-staged chase scenes and the presence of Ashley Judd and 
Tommy Lee Jones (although why they are slumming in glossy trash like this 
is beyond me). "Double Jeopardy" is fun only as a guilty pleasure, one of 
those "so-bad-that-it's good" movies. Unless you're a fan of that genre, 
I suggest you simply watch the commercial and save 105 minutes of your 
life.

Author
Stephen Sills
"Double Jeopardy" is terminally dumb -- it's probably the most insultingly lazy
and contrived screenplay of the year. Its relatively decent performances saved
it from my own personal sub-two-star hell, but just barely.
The film -- as you no doubt have learned from its trailer, which gives away too
much of the plot -- is about a woman (Ashley Judd) who is wrongly convicted of
her husband's murder. While in prison, she learns that he is alive, and had in
fact framed her for the murder. According to the movie, she has every right in
the world to kill her husband once she is released because of the double
jeopardy law, which states that you cannot be convicted twice for the same
crime. As such, she plans to do just that if he won't give her their son.
Once released, she is sent to a half-way house for women, and placed under the
authority of a strict parole officer (Tommy Lee Jones). She escapes in attempt
to carry out her plans, and he goes after her; of course they end up forming a
sort of alliance near the end.
If it sounds like a blatant and shameless rip-off of "The Fugitive," it is --
it's just not nearly as good. For one thing, the underlying premise is absurd.
I'm no legal expert, but wouldn't the murder that she was framed for and any
subsequent murders be counted as different crimes, even if they involved the
same victim? If you spent time in jail for robbing a house, would you then be
able to, once released, rob that house again without fear of prosecution
because you had already done so? Of course not, but it makes about as much
sense as this film's plot. And anyway, even if that isn't the case, I doubt she
could explain the situation and get an "Oh... okay" reaction from a judge.
Other major problems pepper the narrative. Her husband changes his name several
times, but the state officially declares him to be dead. Wouldn't the fact that
he is supposed dead pose a few problems during a name change procedure? 
In one of the most ludicrously contrived scenes that I've ever seen, her
husband shuts her in a coffin and leaves her for dead, even though she
mentioned earlier that she had a gun on her. Of course she uses the gun to
shoot off the coffin's hinges and escape. Why didn't he just kill her? Or at
least take the gun away from her before shutting her in?
The direction, by Bruce Beresford ("Driving Miss Daisy"), is almost
distractingly generic, if that makes sense. He shoots the film like a
Lifetime-movie-of-the-week, and the sad thing is that I've actually seen better
movies than this on Lifetime. 
The performances are pretty good, though, and they make the film watchable.
Although he isn't given much to do, Tommy Lee Jones is excellent as usual --
even if he is playing essentially the same character that he did in "The
Fugitive." Ashley Judd is also great; she gives her character's plight a sense
of pathos that is totally of her own doing; I doubt it's anywhere to be found
in the script. 
All-in-all, and despite the good acting, this movie is a loser. If you're
really in the mood for a brainless thriller, this may fit the bill, but you
could probably do better by randomly picking up any other cassette on the
shelf. It's disgusting that a piece of by-the-numbers, uninspired rubbish like
this can rake in more money than "American Beauty," while a masterpiece like
"Boiler Room" can come and go in two weeks.
If you liked this review and want more, check out my web site at
http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/derby/3217  Comments are greatly
appreciated!

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DOUBLE JEOPARDY *** Directed by Bruce Beresford. Written by 
DaviWeisberg and Douglas S. Cook. Photography, Peter James. Editing, 
Mark Warner. Production design, Howard Cummings. Music, Normand 
Corbeil. Producer, Leonard Goldberg. Cast: Tommy Lee Jones (Travis 
Lehman), Ashley Judd (Libby Parsons), Bruce Greenwood (Nick 
Parsons), Annabeth Gish (Angie), Roma Maffia (Margaret Skolowski), 
Davenia McFadden  (Evelyn Lake). A Paramount release.106 minutes. 
Rated R (sex, language, violence).
No-nonsense nonsense, this thriller is firmly tongue-in-cheek but 
smart enough not to push this aspect onto the audience.  It requires 
every bit of suspended disbelief you can muster -- and what's nice 
is that you can do it effortlessly.
Australian-born Bruce Beresford directs with pep, zip, velocity and 
a knack for shrugging off the outrageous. Beresford is, unjustly, 
seldom mentioned as one of the best film-makers, yet he has done 
superior works.  Among them, in Australia,  Don's Party (1976), The 
Getting of Wisdom, Breaker Morant, The Fringe Dwellers. In America: 
Tender Mercies, Her Alibi, Driving Miss Daisy; Black Robe 
(Canadian), Mister Johnson (shot in Africa) and others.  There have 
been some misses, of course, but those matter little in a career 
distinguished by variety, intelligence, sensitivity and humor.
Double Jeopardy is a legalistic term : no one can be tried again for 
the same crime.  Suppose a wife is found guilty of killing her 
husband; and that the husband is alive and well and living it up. If 
the wife decides to shoot him dead,  she'll get away with it.
That's roughly what occurs here. The film opens by the coast of 
Washington State where live, in luxury, shaker-mover Nick, his wife 
Libby, their 4-year old son Matty. At a fund-raising party "chez" 
Parsons, a man innocent of art culture tells his companion that 
they're looking at works by Picasso. Nick sets them straight. "It's 
Kandinsky" he explains, and goes on to a micro-lecture.
In US movies, someone who can perorate on Kandinsky's and Picasso's 
dates, periods and styles, may well become, ipso facto, suspect. 
Which is correct in Nick's case.
In ways too deliciously bloody to reveal, Nick fakes his death and 
disappearance, causing Libby to be found guilty of murder. In prison 
she is gutsy but misses her son terribly. In ways too clever to 
disclose, she discovers  that Nick and her best friend Angie (to 
whom Libby had confided young Matty) had hatched a plot.
So she humbles herself before the parole board and gets paroled -- 
after serving just six years -- talk of improbabilities! But then, 
verisimilitude is falling off all the windows in this film. Then 
again, things are so catchy and kinetic that we don't really care.
For the next two years, Libby will be under heavy restrictions, 
supervised by parole officer Travis (Tommy Lee Jones), who looks 
rough, acts tough, but has, as you guess right away, a great heart 
and a secret sorrow.
Libby does not seek revenge. She only wants her son back. Her own 
investigation becomes a maze of complications, escapes, near-arrests 
and full-arrests by cops and by Travis. They defy description, 
credibility and logic. Mind you, Libby has not aged even one day in 
prison. The only sign of fatigue from adventures and prowesses is 
occasional, discreet puffiness under her eyes.
Yet the perils of Libby are vastly eye-catching, entertaining in the 
action-movie sense. The more outrageous they become the funnier they 
get, even though the story is built as a  thriller more than a ha-ha 
movie. Ingeniously, it forces you to capitulate and drop any shreds 
of disbelief left in your brain.
The search for Angie concludes first, made partly possible by 
Libby's great physical shape (it legitimizes her remarkable training 
for fitness in prison). and by her newly, instantly learned skills 
in computers, faking personalities, magically getting cash, and so 
on.
The search for Nick take her, then Travis, to New Orleans, where she 
gets a free Armani evening dress (don't ask); where a barman 
spontaneously warns her against the police; where Nick is now a 
celebrity with a French name and a Southern drawl; where 
remembrances of Hitchcock movies (especially Cary Grant bidding 
"funny" at an auction in North by Northwest) and of Gothic terror, 
plus an avalanche of twists, keep us pleasantly busy until the 
telegraphed yet enjoyable happy ending.
Pleasing too is the first-rate photography by a habitual, Australian 
collaborator of Beresford's, and the beautiful visuals filmed in 
British Columbia (standing-in for Washington State) and lavish 
sights of New Orleans.
Ashley Judd is something of a revelation. Tommy Lee Jones, well 
rehearsed from The Fugitive, can play his part with the proverbial 
hands tied behind his back. Supporting roles are tops.
Don't jeopardize your fun. Avoid previews or reviews that disclose 
too much. In spite of its collection of predictabilities and 
impossibilities, or rather because of them, the film is great 
entertainment.

Author
Bob Bloom
  Double Jeopardy (1999) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee
Jones and Bruce Greenwood. Directed by Bruce Bereford
 "Double Jeopardy" is a straightforward, no-frills, guilty-pleasure movie.
 It's a simple programmer, meant only to kill some time.
 This revenge drama offers no bells or whistles, no twists, turns or
surprises.
 Everything about it is predictable and preordained.
 Basically, what "Double Jeopardy" consists of is a chase. A wife, wrongly
imprisoned for killing her husband, is paroled after serving six years,
then sets out to find her conniving spouse (who isn't really dead, of
course) and her son.
 Explanations are few and far between, and this is such a silly story that
you don't even care about the plot holes. For example, how did hubby get
off the sailboat? And whose blood was that all over the boat? And why
wasn't all the blood found on the boat checked to see if it matched that of
Nick Parsons (Bruce Greenwood), the husband Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd) was
supposed to have killed?
 Because if any of that had been accomplished, there would have been no movie.
 "Double Jeopardy" is a movie short on details but long on action. After
being paroled, Libby immediately breaks parole to begin her quest.
 Now searching for her is her parole officer, Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones).
 Of course, by film's end, he comes to believe her story of being framed.
 Nice scenery and locations, including Washington state and New Orleans,
are the main attractions here.
 Judd is adequate as the outraged spouse seeking justice, while Jones
doesn't seem to be working too hard as Lehman. Actually, he seems to be
doing an imitation of his Sam Gerard character from "The Fugitive" and
"U.S. Marshals."
 Director Bruce Beresford, who helmed the Academy Award-winning "Driving
Miss Daisy," is too good a filmmaker to just punch the clock. He keeps
"Double Jeopardy" moving, not allowing the audience to think about all the
preposterous situations and incongruities that are rife throughout.
 "Double Jeopardy" is merely a fun diversion. It's workmanlike and is only
there to entertain. If you keep your expectations grounded, you won't be
disappointed.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier. He can be reached
by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Christian Pyle
Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd) has the perfect little life -- a rich husband, a
cute son, and a house on the ocean -- but when her husband Nick (Bruce
Greenwood) takes her sailing, she awakes to find him gone and her hands covered
with blood.  Just as she makes it to the deck and picks up the bloody knife
lying there, the Coast Guard arrives in response to a distress call her
vanished husband sent.  She's convicted of his murder, of course, and leaves
her son Matty (Benjamin Weir) with her best friend (Annabeth Gish).  Time
passes, and the friend disappears with Matty.  During their last phone
conversation Libby hears Matty yell "Daddy!" and realizes that her husband is
still alive.
Libby serves six years, growing harder and driven by the desire to kill Nick
(based on the theory that because of the "double jeopardy" amendment she can
off him with impunity).  When she gets parole, she's sent to a halfway house
run by Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones), a former law professor who ruined his
life with a drunk driving accident.  After a little breaking and entering and
some destruction of property, Libby jumps parole and lams it across the country
looking for Nick and Matty.  Travis pursues, naturally.
"Double Jeopardy" is a watered-down version of "The Fugitive," with Jones
sleep-walking through his well-worn pursuer persona.  Although Libby never
leaps from a bus that collides with a train, she manages to get into a few
nail-biters -- chased down the beach by a jeep, chained to a car that plunges
into the ocean, sealed in a coffin -- that add some much needed thrills to an
anemic, slow-moving script.  
Character development is thin.  Travis' intriguing backstory is mentioned a
couple times but has no effect on the story.  (I think they only made him a
former law professor so that he could verify the double-jeopardy theory when
Libby gets the drop on Nick.  It's a long way to go for one line).  There's
considerable sexual tension between Travis and Libby (hey, there's something
"The Fugitive" didn't have!), but it never goes anywhere.  Libby is a TV-movie
Everywoman, but Judd's intense performance draws us in and makes us forget 
that her character has no distinguishing characteristics.  This is Judd's most
prominent role to date, and she proves that she can light up the screen.  Let's
hope Hollywood gives her more to work with next time around.
The quality of director Bruce Beresford's movies seems to depend on luck.  When
he has a good script and a strong cast, he turns out Oscar-caliber work like
"'Breaker' Morant," "Driving Miss Daisy," and "Tender Mercies."  When he
doesn't . . . we get "Double Jeopardy."  Screenwriters David Weisberg and
Douglas Cook previously collaborated on "The Rock," a script which probably
benefited from the numerous uncredited rewrites.
Bottom Line:  Ashley Judd tries hard but can't save this predictable bore.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY: Bruce Beresford
STARRING: Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Bruce Greenwood, Annabeth Gish
WRITTEN BY: David Weisberg, Douglas S. Cook
RATED: R for language, a scene of sexuality (nudity), and violence.
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES: Luke 21:12-15, James 1:5, Exodus 4:10-12
"No person (shall) be subject for the same offense to be twice put in
jeopardy of life or limb..." --  Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of
the United States.
A very liberal interpretation of that amendment serves as the basis for
the new Paramount feature, DOUBLE JEOPARDY.  Ashley Judd (SIMON BIRCH)
stars as Libby Parsons, a devoted mother whose life gets turned upside
down when her affluent husband is declared dead and she is charged, then
convicted, of his murder.
Her life takes another spin when, from behind bars, she discovers that
her young son and the woman to whom she entrusted his care have
disappeared.  When she finally tracks them down, she gets the biggest
surprise of all.  Her husband is apparently not dead, which means that not
only is she serving time for a crime she did not commit, she is serving
time for a crime that never took place.  The good news (if you want to
call it that) is that since she has been convicted and punished for
killing her husband, thanks to the Fifth Amendment she is now free to
really kill him without fear of legal consequence (or so we are led to
believe.)
Director Bruce Beresford (DRIVING MISS DAISY) breezes through these
premise setting introductory scenes as if he were power walking with the
wind at his back.  With the exposition so speedily dispatched, we can
settle in for the real meat of the movie which takes place six years later
as Libby attempts to find her son.   A task made more difficult due to the
relentless pursuit of her parole officer, Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones,
VOLCANO).
  But Mr. Beresford has a problem.  Because more time wasn't spent in the
beginning to involve us in the lives of these people, we aren't all that
involved in the story of which they are part.  The end result is a series
of mildly entertaining chase scenes featuring characters we hardly know
played by actors who deserve better.
Ashley Judd has some good moments as a mother singly obsessed with
finding her child.  She makes some odd choices at the beginning of the
film, underplaying her wrongful arrest and conviction, but once she wins
her parole, her characterization gets some legs and she is off and running
(literally).
One of those chasing her is the reliable Tommy Lee Jones in a role that
is becoming all too familiar for him.  We've seen him before as the
pursuer in both THE FUGITIVE and US MARSHALS.  Here, as an ex-law
professor turned parole officer, he is more embittered and less sure of
himself, but the similarities to his other films cannot be mistaken.
Bruce Greenwood (THE SWEET HEREAFTER) is cast as the "now you bereave
him, now you don't" husband.  Appropriately insincere and full of oily
charm, Mr. Greenwood leaves no doubt as to who the bad guy is in this film.
The script by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook (THE ROCK) is
superficial at best. The actions scenes are taut and exciting, but there
is little else for which to commend it.
While in prison, Libby gets some advice (some of it laughable) on what to
say to the parole board that will be what they want to hear.  While that
may have worked to her advantage in this implausible script, as believers
we are commanded to handle things differently:
"But make up your mind not to worry beforehand how you will defend
yourselves.  For I will give you words and wisdom that none of your
adversaries will be able to resist or contradict."  Luke 21:14-15 [NIV]
Standing resolutely upon the truth, building the Word of God in your
mind, and staying peaceful and calm in your heart allows God to
communicate with the spirit within you thereby teaching you what to say or
do in times of need.  No finer defense could be given.  No better counsel
could be received.

Author
Mac VerStandig
***I would like to recognize the passing of George C. Scott this week. 
He was a fine actor who delivered one of the great monologues in film 
history in Patton. May he rest in peace.***
Double Jeopardy comes at the beginning of a fall movie season that is 
expected to be one of the film business' best, both artistically and 
financially. Unfortunately, the movie serves as a reminder that those 
two qualities do not always go hand-and-hand. The production's big name 
stars and run-from-the-law plot will likely deliver big bucks for 
Paramount despite a noticeable absence of quality.
Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd) is a happily married woman enjoying the 
success of her husband, Nick (Bruce Greenwood) and very much involved 
with their son, Matty. An abrupt change occurs when she spends a 
romantic weekend on a sailboat with Nick. While at sea she finds herself 
framed for his bloody murder. Not too much later, she is behind bars, 
having put her son in the custody of her best friend, Angie (Annabeth 
Gish).
Angie disappears soon after Libby is imprisoned. With the help of some 
fellow inmates, the accused murderer finds her friend living in San 
Francisco with Matty - and the very much alive Nick. Libby doesn't 
pursue revenge while in prison, but rather patiently waits for her 
parole (advice that she gets from the same two aforementioned inmates 
that welcome her with open arms for no
apparent reason and seem to help her with everything accordingly). One 
of the two inmates used to be a lawyer and explains that since Libby is 
already convicted of murdering her husband, she cannot be tried again 
under the fifth amendment, which states "No person (shall)...be subject 
for the some offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb."
After a suspiciously short period of time for a convicted murderer, 
Libby is paroled to a halfway-house under the supervision of Travis 
Lehman (Academy Award winner Tommy Lee Jones). From there, the search 
for her beloved son is on. One night, her quest keeps her out after 
curfew. She realizes this and flees the state. Travis follows in 
pursuit, thus creating a manhunt of a manhunt. The rest of the film is 
as cliched as one might imagine, with the payoff scene having plot 
twists that hardly catch the audience by surprise.
Ever since James Bond came along, some films have gained a certain 
immunity to the laws of realistically conceivable plots. Double Jeopardy 
abuses that privilege to the nth degree. Although the fifth amendment 
clause is not too farfetched, certain not-so-small details are. I am 
quite confident that Libby's possessing a murder weapon, ruining at 
least two cars, constant fleeing of states, breaking and entering a 
school and destruction of federal property might just be enough land her 
back behind bars. It also strikes me as particularly amazing that the 
police always seem to show up at just the right moment and Libby always 
manages to escape by tripping up the officers Keystone Cops style. 
Ironically, it is the same branch of government that manages to convict 
her so quickly and efficiently in the beginning, even without a body to 
show the jury.
The brief, yet all important, scenes in prison reek of deja vu. The 
two inmates that guide Libby are pulled right out of The Spitfire Grill. 
At the same time, I was reminded of the film I saw just before Double 
Jeopardy. At the end of Mumford, a reference is made to a certain prison 
as "a country club." That doesn't seem to be far from the case here, as 
other than a little labor, the penitentiary is filled with lively 
chatter, fun and games.
If ever there were proof that acting cannot compensate for a faulty 
script, it is here. Ashley Judd is just as good as she was in Heat, A 
Time To Kill, and Norma Jean and Marilyn (A made for HBO film where she 
portrayed Norma Jean and garnered several award nominations). But the 
real treat is Tommy Lee Jones who seems to have the on-the-run film down 
to a science after his critically acclaimed role in The Fugitive and the 
more recent U. S. Marshals. The two actors are very rarely on screen 
together, as the nature of their roles requires that they be in pursuit 
of each other. However, one scene that they do share carries a rare 
emotional feeling in a movie polluted with trucks speeding on sidewalks 
and action stunts of a similar nature.
Some many years from now, when the biographies of Ashley Judd and Tommy 
Lee Jones are written, this film will be conveniently left out as not 
even their two performances will save it from the fate of joining the 
"Employee Choices" rack at Blockbuster and the ranks of pay-television 
marathons. Probably, this is the last sentence you will ever read about 
Double Jeopardy.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by UIP on January 28, 2000; certificate 15; 105 minutes; 
country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Bruce Beresford; produced by Leonard Goldberg.
Written by Douglas S Cook, David Weisberg.
Photographed by Peter James; edited by Wark Warner.
"Double Jeopardy" wants us to be amazed at the ingenuity of its gimmick, and 
enthralled by the emotion of its story. But the gimmick doesn't make any 
logical sense and the drama has all the power of a soppy TV movie. All that 
remains is an unremarkable thriller plot, which moves dully and mechanically 
toward a foregone conclusion.
Ashley Judd stars as Libby Parsons, an affluent young wife and mother who, 
while on a boating trip, wakes to find that her husband Nick has gone 
missing, and her cabin is covered in blood. There is a knife on the scene. 
There is no sign of anyone else's presence. Libby is convicted of Nick's 
murder and sent down.
While in prison, Libby discovers over the phone that Nick (Bruce Greenwood) 
is still alive, having faked his own death. So she behaves well, gets 
released on parole and determines to track her villainous spouse down, to be 
able to clear her name and get her son back. She steals a car from her parole 
officer, a sullen ex-law professor named Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones), 
then dashes across America on her search. She feels comfortable about how to 
handle Nick when she finds him, because of something she's been told by a 
fellow jailbird: Under the 'double jeopardy' clause of the US constitution's 
fifth amendment, nobody can be convicted twice for the exact same crime -- so 
Libby can kill her husband and the law can't touch her for it.
Yes, this is the gimmick I was referring to, and it's not half as clever as 
the screenwriters seem to think. Since Nick is has been pronounced dead, you 
see, Libby would officially be killing someone else, and could of course be 
convicted. Besides, she would have to serve the remainder of her life 
sentence for violating her parole conditions -- they do not allow her to 
leave the state in which she resides or own a weapon of any kind, let alone 
get away with all the destruction of property she perpetrates over the course 
of her country-wide trek.
Travis is supposed to be chasing her all the while, but "Double Jeopardy" 
never develops into an effective game of cat-and-mouse, because we see very 
little from the pursuer's point of view. Most scenes just show Libby getting 
a little closer to finding Nick, then almost getting caught by Travis and 
having to scarper. We're supposed to be engaged by Libby's desire to find her 
son, but I don't know why -- although the film's opening passages do indeed 
show her enjoying maternal pastimes, they come across as the typical 
calm-before-the-storm moments that are present in every Hollywood thriller, 
rather than something for us to get passionately wrapped up in.
Judd holds her own rather well as the film's heroine, creating body language 
tough enough to convince us she's really survived an ordeal, yet preserving 
the tender gaze of a caring parent. Jones is okay, too, but he's played the 
same role before; in "The Fugitive", which was a great thriller, and its 
sequel "U.S. Marshals", which was certainly not. "Double Jeopardy" ranks 
somewhere in between those two films -- it's not amazing or annoying, just a 
pretty well put-together popcorn flick that's impossible to care a damn about.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, The UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"Double Jeopardy" (1999) * (out of four)
Tommy Lee Jones chases an innocent victim around
America who is trying to prove that she did not kill
her spouse.  The Fugitive? Not quiteThis is the plot
for Double Jeopardy, another Fugitive copycat without
the action, excitement, and good acting that the
original had. There are other slight differences
besides one movie being bad and the other good; this
time Tommy Lee Jones plays a parole officer not a US
Marshall, clever huh? Oh and the fugitive Ashley Judd
was framed by her own husband (Bruce Greenwood) who
needed to collect two million dollars in life
insurance money not a one armed man. Both movies are
on video. Make the wise choice and pick The Fugitive. 
There are so many flaws in Double Jeopardy, it is
laughable. While serving time in prison, Libby Parsons
(Judd) discovers that she can never be charged for
committing the same crime twice. Learning that her
husband is still alive, she decides to serve her time
in prison, find him, retrieve her son, and kill her
husband if necessary. When the strict Parole Officer
Travis Lehman (Jones) stands in her way, Libby decides
to break the rules (who knows why?) and continue her
plan, despite the fact that if she gets caught, she's
going back to jail. 
Director Bruce Beresford spends way too much time
trying to convince the audience that Libby misses her
son. Every other scene, we are given a shot of Libby
staring and crying at his picture. In an action movie
like this, valuable time wasted on these shots takes
away more opportunities for Libby to get up and do
something. All that is needed in this type of movie is
a short scene in which Libby tells herself or a friend
"I miss my son." Nothing more, nothing less. Dr.
Kimble of The Fugitive didn't look at one picture of
his dead wife, his primary concern was to save
himself. Libby at times shows this same determination
but not nearly enough. 
Ashley Judd and Bruce Greenwood both are excellent
actors but if they continue to do movies like this,
they will be typecast for the rest of their careers,
kind of like their doomed co-star Tommy Lee Jones.
Winning an Oscar for The Fugitive must have convinced
Jones that audiences will never get tired of his
I-do-my-job-whether-they-are-innocent-or-guilty roles.
People still pay to see his movies and he makes plenty
of money so I guess he was right. Though I don't think
he will win another Oscar again.
The ultimate mistake in the script is what eventually
becomes of Libby Parsons. Even if she was excused for
disobeying her Parole Officer, the number of other
crimes she commits while on the run are too numerous
to count. Burglary, assault, grand theft auto are some
of Libby's slipups. The message of the movie is you
can break all of the small laws as long as you're
innocent of the major crime. Hopefully criminals won't
use Double Jeopardy as a reference in court for why
they are innocent. That would just be plain stupid. 

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
A rather unimaginative thriller  considering that the title gives away
the film's already predictable ending  about a woman (Ashley Judd,
Simon Birch) accused of murdering her husband, only to find out that the
two-timing schmuck is still alive while she rots away in the clink.
Like the titular legal loophole, Judd learns that she can get out of
prison and legally kill her spouse and not be convicted because a person
can't be accused of committing the same crime twice.
Judd plays Elizabeth Parsons, a seemingly happily married co-owner of a
child-care center in the Pacific northwest.  For Elizabeth's birthday,
her husband Nick (Bruce Greenwood, Disturbing Behavior) rents the
loveliest boat in the area and takes her out for a night of sailing and
passion - you even get to see one of her Judds and the crack of her
Ashley.  But when Elizabeth wakes up at dawn, she finds a bloody trail
that rivals even O.J.'s  and can't find her husband anywhere
(unbeknownst to her, he is experiencing financial difficulties at work
and just took out a huge insurance policy).  Acting like a person who is
about to be framed, Elizabeth picks up the bloody murder weapon on the
ship's deck just as the Coast Guard swoops in and hauls her off.
Long story short, Elizabeth ends up in prison with a lengthy sentence,
where she celebrates her kid's birthdays without him.  I've got to tell
you that this is the least frightening penitentiary that I have seen
since GoodFellas.  It's almost like a resort.  After the obligatory
prison-workout-while-plotting-revenge scene, Elizabeth is given a
conditional release to serve her remaining three years on probation and
living in a halfway house.
Elizabeth, who hasn't aged or changed her hairstyle during her six-year
absence, immediately starts to track down her ex, who has apparently run
off with their son and his new wife Angela (Annabeth Gish, S.L.C. Punk),
who was formerly Elizabeth's best friend.  Dedicated to her search,
Elizabeth misses curfew, breaks into her old office and almost eludes
the police during a thrilling beach chase.
Enter Parole Officer Travis Layman (Tommy Lee Jones, U.S. Marshals), who
staggers unpurposefully about as if he were trying to hunt down Harrison
Ford but his heart isn't really in it.  Do guys who win Best Supporting
Actor Oscars all think that they can call in performances in crappy
films for the rest of their lives?  Let me answer my own question by
saying Chill Factor (Cuba), Patch Adams (Robin) and Men in Black
(Tommy).  Thank God for Kevin Spacey.
For a few seconds, it almost seemed like there was going to be a cool
twist at the end, but then the film resumed its course toward the
inevitably mediocre ending that you know is coming.  Jeopardy was
directed by Bruce Beresford (Paradise Road) and written by Robert Benton
(Twilight), who penned the story created by two co-writers from The Rock
(Douglas Cook and David Weisberg).  My question is `Why bother?'
Imagine Citizen Kane being called Rosebud the Sled and you get the
idea.  (1:43 - R for language, brief nudity and some violence)

Author
Ross Anthony
"Double Jeopardy" starts out rather rough and lifeless, not quite sure how
to set itself up for the real story. This is where Libby (Judd) is framed
(or did she really do it?) for the murder of her hubby Nick. She's quickly
herded off to prison where she spends six (or was it eight?) years in what
seems like 30 seconds. From there she's released to an institution for
parolees which is overseen by Tommy Lee. This is where the movie really
starts (so show up to the theater at least 30 minutes late).
Double Jeopardy gives Libby the right to blow Nick away (if he's still
alive) without worry of a second trial ("not true" says one real life lawyer
I've heard). Anyway (for the purposes of the film), we're left to wonder if
this sweet loving wife, would do it. But Libby is more interested in finding
her son. So she busts out of the parole halfway house and begins breaking
all kinds of laws. Which leads to two or three big action sequences. The
first making me painfully embarrassed for the filmmakers. The second being
very enjoyable and almost perfectly believable. At that moment I was willing
to change my mind about this picture. But an absurd cemetery scene near the
end buried any hopes of that.
Tommy Lee is awesome as always. Ashley Judd is unusually un-inspired, though
on occasion delivers a zinger. For example, when getting hit-on by some
unknowing male she responds, "Sure, I'd love to sit and chat with you, but
I've just got to call my parole officer first." The movie for the most part
is a hodgepodge of drama, action and even comedy. It just doesn't flow,
giving the feel of too many writers and/or directors.
The film would have benefited from a longer more in-depth prison experience,
during which we could have seen Judd learn all the tricks of the trade.
Tricks that would come in handy later. To do this, time could be taken away
from the frame job sequences. Or trash that whole section altogether (it's
simply not compelling, even if you don't know if she really killed him or
not). Start in prison, tell the frame-job story in flashbacks (if needed).
Kill and bury the cemetery scene. Develop Lee's conflicting motivation to
both arrest and assist Judd -- that's the most interesting aspect of the
film anyway.
Double Jeopardy. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Tommy Lee Jones and Ashley Judd, with Bruce Greenwood and Annabeth
Gish.
Directed by Bruce Beresford.
Written by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook.
Produced by Leonard Goldberg at Paramount.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
