Title
Review for Out to Sea (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau, Dyan Cannon, Gloria DeHaven, Brent
Spiner, Hal Linden, Rue McClanahan, Edward Mulhare, Donald O'Connor,
Elaine Stritch Director: Martha Coolidge Screenplay: Marshall Brickman,
David Jacobs
'Row, row, row your boat gently down the stream. Merrily, merrily ....'
No, not so merrily. Twiddle your thumbs, count the number of tiny lights
along each seating row. Change cinema seats several times and see if
your perspective of the movie will improve. Count to 100, then divide
the even numbers with each alternate odd, and eventually you will have
survived a very tedious onscreen boat ride. Sure I was distracted with a
bloody nose and  contraband hot foods, but I found myself wishing the
premature end of this movie with let's say, an unsuspecting ice berg or
perhaps a lunatic saboteur with no 'Cruise Control'.
The 'Odd Couple' who became 'Grumpy Old Men', have less chemistry and
success, 'Out at Sea' than on dry land. Out in the ocean's blue yonder,
Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau are struggling to stay afloat on a thin
plot and an even weaker script. Their usually witty banter and taunts
seem rusty from overexposure to salt air, and the cool ocean breeze has
added a touch of rheumatism to their acting. One thing that hasn't been
affected is their 'one, two, turn, slide' dance feet, which is the
highlight of this movie. Watch Matthau lead Ruth McClanahan around the
dance floor - it carries the same free spirit of something futuristic
and erotic. Brent Spiner (Data from STNG) is 'surprise, surprise' a bit
of an old Crooner on the side.
So if you can sing, and also dance; with much need of a free holiday,
look no further than 'Out to Sea'. Here they hire men in their 80's to
be the dance hosts for the over supply of lonely single women seeking
romance on Ocean Liners. So what does Matthau and Lemmon have that you
don't? Absolutlely nothing. So fish away, and rest assured that your
catch will be better if not younger, than the these two unhappy
fishermen who are out of sorts, out at sea.
Comment: A very mediocre episode of 'Love Boat'

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau, Dyan Cannon, Gloria DeHaven, 
      Brent Spiner, Hal Linden, Rue McClanahan, Edward Mulhare, 
      Donald O'Connor, Elaine Stritch 
Director: Martha Coolidge
Producers: John Davis, David T. Friendly
Screenplay: Marshall Brickman, David Jacobs
Cinematography: Lajos Koltai
Music: David Newman
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     It's the return of the Grumpy Old Odd Couple.  After taking breaks 
from each other over the holidays, Walter Matthau (who sparred with 
Ossie Davis in I'M NOT RAPPAPORT) and Jack Lemmon (who traded barbs with 
James Garner in MY FELLOW AMERICANS) share screen credit for a tenth 
time in OUT TO SEA.  Unfortunately, this is one of their least 
successful efforts to date.  Instead of allowing the actors to breathe 
some life into their characters, OUT TO SEA's film makers have instead 
decided to let Lemmon and Matthau sail along on reputation alone.  And, 
as affable as their chemistry is, it's not enough to sustain a movie all 
by itself.
     This has been a bad summer for films about cruise ships (and a 
worse summer for audiences forced to endure them).  First, Sandra 
Bullock and Jason Patric got away from it all on the high seas in SPEED 
2.  Now, we have Lemmon and Matthau.  And, while the essential plot 
details are vastly different, the films climax on an eerily similar note 
-- with a motor-powered craft chasing a hydroplane.  Still, OUT TO SEA 
has a lot less in common with SPEED 2 than it does with the old TV 
series, THE LOVE BOAT.  Save for the big-screen format and the different 
crew, this could easily be an elongated episode.  It's just as lame, 
mindless, and saccharine.
     The feeble premise has brothers-in-law and best enemies Herbie 
(Lemmon) and Charlie (Matthau) going on a cruise together.  Herbie 
doesn't really want to go -- he'd rather sit at home and miss his dead 
wife.  Charlie, on the other hand, is in desperate need of money to pay 
off gambling debts, and he believes that the quickest way to amass a 
fortune is to find a lonely, rich woman and marry her.  So he signs 
himself and Herbie up as dance instructors on the ship -- a position 
that earns them free passage.  They also develop fake identities, and, 
pretending to be far more wealthy than they actually are, they start 
wooing women.  Charlie's choice, predictably, is a wealthy Texas blond 
named Liz LaBreche (Dyan Cannon), who is often on the arm of a stuffy 
Englishman (Edward Mulhare).  Herb, however, makes a far less 
ostentatious choice in Vivian (Gloria DeHaven), a widow who reminds him 
of his late wife.  Meanwhile, the ship's cruise director, Gil Godwyn (a 
deliciously over-the-top Brent Spiner), is out to ensnare the two men in 
their own web of deceit.  
     Lemmon and Matthau often seem to be sleepwalking their way through 
this screenplay-by-numbers.  And, considering OUT TO SEA's lack of 
intelligence and ambition, who could blame them?  The veteran actors 
have a few enjoyable scenes together, but, most of the time, OUT TO SEA 
pulls them apart, and there's not enough spark in the Cannon/Matthau and 
Lemmon/DeHaven matches to keep things interesting for long.  The comedy 
is also second-rate, with sit-com jokes, one-liners, and embarrassing 
situations trying vainly to generate laughter.  
     The cast, if nothing else, is diverse.  Quite a number of TV actors 
have parts (reinforcing the LOVE BOAT feel), including Brent Spiner 
(STAR TREK:  THE NEXT GENERATION), Edward Mulhare (KNIGHT RIDER), Rue 
McClanahan (THE GOLDEN GIRLS), and Hal Linden (BARNEY MILLER).  Then 
there's song-and-dance man Donald O'Connor, who stays in the background 
except when called upon to display a few moves.  And, although Dyan 
Cannon is more bubbly and vivacious than in the recent 8 HEADS IN A 
DUFFEL BAG, this is hardly the most promising rung in her comeback 
ladder.  
     The magic between Lemmon and Matthau may finally be wearing thin, 
but I don't think it has completely exhausted itself yet.  What these 
two need, however, is a script that challenges them to do something 
fresh rather than encouraging them to go over already-plowed ground.  
After OUT TO SEA, the last thing I'm in the mood for are THE ODD COUPLE 
2 and GRUMPIEST OLD MEN (both of which are apparently in the works).  
Director Martha Coolidge (RAMBLING ROSE) should have known better than 
to believe that the presence of a pair of familiar, likable comic actors 
could keep this movie from taking on water.  So, if only for the sake of 
Lemmon and Matthau's joint reputation, OUT TO SEA deserves to go down 
fast and without a trace.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     OUT TO SEA is a harmless reworking of GRUMPY/GRUMPIER OLD MEN,
with Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau masquerading as dance hosts on a
Caribbean cruise ship.  In a clime considerably warmer than northern
Minnesota, they bicker less, romance more, and spend the rest of the
movie trying to avoid the cruise dictator (Brent Spiner, of STAR
TREK), a big-band singer who proclaims himself "their worst night-
mare, a song-and-dance man raised on a military base." Though the
LOL moments are few and far-between, the cheery cast and sunny
locales are all exceptionally easy on the eyes.  As is the sight of
sixty-year old Dyan Cannon's washboard abs.  Lemmon and Matthau can
sleepwalk through their schtick, so they're fine.  And Spiner really
can sing.  Be forewarned:  there *is* a finale involving a pontoon
plane.  This time, though, nothing explodes afterward.  Be sure to
stay for the outtakes, which appear late over the closing credits.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some movies have dog written all over them.  The more I saw the
trailers to OUT TO SEA, the more I dreaded its screening.  But
sometimes, even seemingly hopeless films can prove better than one has
any reason to expect.  So it is with OUT TO SEA, a romantic buddy
picture starring Walter Matthau (I'M NOT RAPPAPORT) and Jack Lemmon (MY
FELLOW AMERICANS) as cruise dance hosts, Charlie and Herb.
     For our screening, they bussed in a load of seniors from a local
retirement home, but everyone, young and old, in the audience laughed
right along with old pros Matthau and Lemmon.  Still, I would be remise
if I did not admit that the show will be better received by the older
folks than the younger ones.  For those of us who can appreciate
angst-filled Gen X movies, action thrillers, and chick flicks, surely
we can enjoy the humor from a couple of film veterans in their 70s.  As
the ending credits rolled (complete with sweet dance numbers followed
by some hilarious out-takes), my wife and I gave each other a
I-can't-believe-the-show-was-actually-funny look.
     Ever conniving gambler Walter has conned Jack into joining him on
a "free" cruise.  Once on board, Jack realizes that to get their tiny
cabins, Walter has signed them up as dance hosts.
     Walter spends his time on the ship avoiding dancing through
various ruses while ogling the passengers.  ("Did you see the chassis
on that broad?  I bet she's worth a fortune.")
     At this point in the show, I sat there smugly confident that my
prediction of bomb would be right.  Then a strange thing begin to
happen.  As I watched the actors, their genuineness begin to take hold.
A bit hunched over, they had charisma and style, and they crafted
characters that were compelling even if sometimes too outlandish.
     Brent Spiner (Lt. Cmdr. Data from STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT) plays
prissy Gil Godwyn, the CD (Cruise Director), who is "a bit of a Nazi."
He demands obedience from his dance hosts and thus is constantly at
odds with Charlie.
     Lemon plays his part seriously.  Herb is filled with absolute
terror at the idea of dancing with a horde of spinsters and widows.  As
they descend on the poor hosts at the first dance of the cruise, he
reflects, "It's just like the beach at Normandy."
     Surprisingly, the best part of the picture is a realistic romance
between Charlie and a gold digger named Liz LaBreche played with
infectious fun by Dyan Cannon.  Cannon, who is just a few months shy of
60, looks extremely sexy and 20 to 25 years younger.  Cannon is a two
time Oscar nominee whom I had not thought about in years.  With her
lively performance in the film, she holds her own against the two
bigger stars.
     Liz shares her large stateroom with her tough talking mom, Mrs.
Carruthers (Rue McClanahan), who sounds like she eats nails for
breakfast and who looks a few years younger than Charlie.  "I saw the
way you were looking at my daughter's breasts," Liz warns Charlie.
Without missing a beat, he shoots back, "I used to a cardiologist."
     Lonely Herb provides the show with poignancy.  He was married for
47 years, and his dead wife still has his heart.  He shocks himself by
falling head over heels in love with a passenger named Vivian (Gloria
DeHaven) and she with him until a misunderstanding comes between them.
Charlie advises his old buddy not to give up.  ("No such thing as too
late.  That's why they invented death.")
     Audience reactions can sometimes add to the movie-going
experience.  So it was at our screening.  When Herb planted a big
(closed mouth) kiss on Vivian, our audience went "oooh" almost in
unison, with the younger ones making the loudest sounds.  It was as if
there were subliminal clue cards flickering on the screen.
     Soon after Charlie and Herb first board the ship, cruise host
Jonathan (Donald O'Connor) asks them if they have any questions.  "Yea,
I have a question," Herb blurts out.  "How do you get off this ship?"
You may feel the same way in the beginning, but stay aboard and get
your sea legs.  You'll meet some new friends and have some good laughs
with them.  Certainly not the best cruise of your cinematic life, but a
pleasurable one nevertheless.
     OUT TO SEA runs about 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for a little mild
language and some sexual humor.  The show would be fine for kids of any
age, but they would probably need to be nine or so to enjoy it.  I
can't believe it, but I am actually recommending this show, not only to
the seniors, who should especially love it, but to a general audience.
It gets ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
OUT TO SEA ** 1/2. Directed by Martha Coolidge. Written by Robert Nelson
Jacobs. Photography, Lajos Koltai. Editing,  Anne V. Coates,  production
design, James Spencer; art direction, William F. Matthews. Choreography,
Kim Blank. Music, David Newman . Cast:  Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau ,Dyan
Cannon, Gloria DeHaven, Brent Spiner, Elaine Stritch, Hal Linden, Donald
O'Connor, Edward Mulhare, Rue McClanahan. A 20th Century Fox release. 109
min. PG-13.
The epithet "extraordinary" can  mean " extremely good" or "most unusual."
Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau can be both. Whether working solo or as a
team, they have brought idiosyncratic talents to a variety of roles, from
farcical to dead serious. Both  actors have also been able to rescue minor
flicks, or to interest us in characters that essentially reprise the
performers' familiar shticks. It happens again in Out to Sea, the eighth
screen pairing of Lemmon and Matthau.
Lemmon, a former long-time salesman at Gimbel's department store and for
many decades happily married to (his words) a perfect wife, Matthau's
sister. Her death devastated Lemmon. Years later he is still obsessed with
the dear departed. His good buddy Matthau keeps telling him to buck up,
while regularly borrowing money from him .Lemmon disapproves of his
brother-in-law, yet the two are friends. This is nothing like the formula
of antagonism in  Grumpy Old Men.
Matthau, unemployed,  probably never did an honest day's work. He lives off
schemes seldom specified but -- here at least --  dependent on dangerous
loan sharks. To call him a scam artist might be going too far. Still, he
somehow maneuvers reluctant Lemmon into joining him in a 10-day cruise on
the beautiful cruise ship Westerdam.
After the ignominy of flying to port in cattle class (economy) comes
ignominy Number Two when Matthau reveals to his pal that he had signed up
both of them as dance hosts  (male). Ignominy Three is that their cabin is
the equivalent of modern steerage.
Matthau's general plan is to live it up with rich dames and do some
fortune-hunting. I have been on great Transatlantic liners but never on a
cruise, so that I really cannot pass on the authenticity of the ship's
travelers and such. F or that matter, since I have never watched TV's  The
Love Boat, I can make no comparisons.  But the cruise ship is very well
photographed and feels convincingly realistic in a gaudy, Vegas-y way.
Customers are of many ages but the focus is on older women. It does this
with kindness, without caricatures, and with some mild irony that does not
go overboard.  Mature ladies are, of course, the logical partners for our
heroes, except that Matthau, who cannot dance, resorts to broad subterfuges
to avoid it.
This is not easy, as both men have been singled out by the martinet cruise
director Brent Spiner (he plays Data in Star Trek: The Next Generation), a
kind of sergeant in impeccable dinner jacket (he also sings nicely). Spiner
is good and amusing as  the semi-villain. He checks his dance hosts for
particles of dust,  crooked ties and the like. Above all, with the menace
od dire reprisals, he forbids fraternization with any woman after a dance
is finished.
His severity is motivated by his ambition to rise, at long last, in the
ranks of the shipping company. He warns our friends: " I'm your worst
nightmare, a song-and-dance man raised on a military base." Later Matthau
says of him :" I think his father was cruise director on the Bismarck."
Funny -- for those who know WW2 history.
Predictably, Matthau sets his sights on youthful Texas millionaire widow
Dyan Cannon, at a poker table. With unexpected talent for long-range
planning, he dreams up ploys to charm her and to discredit another suitor,
wealthy Edward Mulhare. Cannon is with her mother Elaine Stritch who plays
beautifully her limited role of  boozing, tart-tongued grande dame --Texas
style.
Lemmon does some nifty steps with eagerly funny women -- although the ace
terpsichorean  is Donald O'Connor, in a small, welcome return that one
might call dancing relief. Lemmon soon finds mutual attraction with 71-year
old widow and former book-editor Gloria DeHaven. She's no cruise fodder
but, at their insistance, she travels with her newly-married daughter and
son-in-law.
How, through  quid pro quos, disguises, slapstick and all, Matthau and
Lemmon will fare with their ladies while evading Spiner's strictures, is
the body of the movie. Lemmon , still haunted by thoughts of his wife, is
once again good in touching moments.
The plot is slight, the mechanisms, repartees and comments often deja vu,
yet the story is serviceable. In the audience I saw it with there was much
white hair, some audible familiarity with cruises, but also a good
sprinkling of youngish and young people. All laughed a great deal and were
oblivious to some tedious stretches.
I would not  disparage the film by calling it geriatric. In a nice twist,
the scenario plus Martha Coolidge's direction seem to have come up with a
work in praise of older women. Films have accustomed us to elderly leading
men . At this writing  (July 1997) Lemmon is almost 72 1/2,  Matthau close
to 77. What is really unusual is that Dyan Cannon is almost exactly 60 1/2
years old, Elaine Stritch 70 1/2,  and Gloria DeHaven very close to 73.
How old Rue McClanahan is (she plays Spiner's superior and evaluator) I
could not find. She too is one charming lady.
Actors such as Stritch are ageless because, not being glamor-pusses they
rely on acerbic spoken lines. Cannon is incredible, seems to be having a
ball, has a constantly amused expression in her twinkling eyes. More, she
is a sexy chick  whose figure, generously  displayed, could turn any male's
head and make 20- or 30-something women emerald-green with envy. Even with
plastic surgery, personal  trainers and dietitians, the Cannon Case is
astounding.
Gloria DeHaven, once popular in breezy films (mostly in second female
leads), had  disappeared from the screen since the mid-Fifties. She
resurfaced briefly in mid-Seventies in a few films (mostly bad and made for
TV) some of which went unreleased for years. Here she does beautifully as a
lovely older woman who, like her co-performers, ought to shame the studios
for not daring to put Golden Agers in solid, even main roles. If the movies
are good, the public of most grownups will surely accept senior citizens on
the screen, whether audiences see suh films in addition to ort as
replacement of many pictures with action, special effects, teens, bimbos
and macho hulks. As Matthau tells reluctant-to-commit Lemmon "You're crazy.
Years of insanity have made you crazy. There's no such thing as too late.
That's why they invented death."
"Out to Sea" is no great comedy or farce, not even a really good one, but
not a bad one either. It has some good twists, is  unpretentious,
light-hearted,  innocuously charming, and with enough laughs to make it a
pleasant diversion.

Author
Ben Hoffman
How could a movie starring two great actors turn out so pitiful I
had to force myself to sit through the screening? When I think of
the innumerable films that Walter Matthau has made and those of
Jack Lemmon, it really hurts to report that this was a fiasco: two
old men, and they do look old, acting so out of character and
looking lost and ridiculous as they meander and stumble through it all.
It is not that the story is bad; it's that Casting and the
Director should never have chosen the two fine actors for these
roles.   Charlie (Matthau) plays the horses and always loses.  In
deep debt to his bookie, he dreams up a scheme whereby he and his
brother-in-law Herb (Lemmon) will get a job on a cruise ship as
dancers (read "gigolos") where they will charm the single ladies
who want male companionship on the cruise.  They will then fleece
the women and Charlie will be able to pay off his bookies.
Two big obstacles are that both look very aged.  What woman in her
right (or any mind) would look upon them as potential catches?
Why would a very good-looking, young-looking Liz (Dyan Cannon)
give even a passing glance at Charlie.  Why would the lovely Vivian
(Gloria De Haven) think she would like to marry the decrepit Herb?
Give me a break!   Add to that, that although Charlie and Herb are
hired as dance companions for the women, Charlie cannot even
dance.
What we have is a fine cast that is utterly drowned at sea.  There
is Hal Linden and there is Donald O'Connor in little more than
cameos.  While Linden looks as handsome as ever there is one scene
where O'Connor's paunch makes him look about 6 months pregnant.
Why would he have allowed himself to be so badly served when he
should want to be remembered as the suave, handsome, great dancer
he was?
Among the others drowning in  OUT TO SEA are Elaine Strich, Rue
McClanahan and Brent Spiner.   Sad.
Directed by Martha Coolidge who has made some pretty good films in
the past:  Lost in Yonkers, Angie, Rambling Rose, etc .  This one
she had better forget.

Author
Walter Frith
     The talents of Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau are terrific.  They
probably have more comic chemistry between the two of them than any other
comedy team working today.  They are about four weeks into making a sequel to
1968's 'The Odd Couple' which is scheduled to be released next year to
celebrate the 30th anniversary of the first film.  'Grumpy Old Men' (1993)
and 'Grumpier Old Men' (1995) are hilarious parodies on finding love late in
life and both actors excelled in those movies as well as they did many years
ago in 'The Fortune Cookie' (1966) for which Matthau won the Oscar as Best
Supporting Actor.  Lemmon directed Matthau in a touching and poignant story
of elderly life in 'Kotch' (1971) for which Matthau was nominated for Best
Actor.
     'Out to Sea' has the two buddies playing brothers in law.  Lemmon was
married to Matthau's sister and she is now deceased and widower Lemmon
reluctantly goes on a cruise with Matthau and innocently searches for love
while Matthau's got (quote) "lonely rich broads" (unquote) on his mind.  Upon
arriving aboard the cruise ship, Matthau informs Lemmon that instead of
paying for the cruise, he signed them both up as dance hosts.  Lemmon is
outraged and tries to get off the ship before it sails to no avail.  
     This movie has all the fun of a jack in the box with jokes popping up
everywhere and the comedy is equally funny both verbally and physically as
Lemmon and Matthau avoid giving the film edge and cruise along smoothly
(almost effortlessly) in their comic genius much in the way they did in the
'Grumpy' movies but their characters are much different and much more
attractive.  Director Martha Coolidge does an excellent job of keeping the
timing intact in all the routines and the closing credits feature outstanding
and hilarious outakes which are only appropriate to show in comedy films.  To
dislike this film would be difficult because its simplicity and wholesome
appeal is equal to spending a quiet afternoon with your grandparents.  It's a
joy.
     Other cast members include Dyan Cannon, Brent Spiner, Gloria  DeHaven,
Elaine Stritch, Hal Linden and dancing legend Donald O'Connor.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The latest tired collaboration from Jack Lemmon and 
Walter Matthau is called OUT TO SEA, which is where screenwriter 
Robert Nelson Jacobs should be sent. It's one more 100-minute 
collection of lame jokes, one-note sitcom characters and chances for 
Lemmon and Matthau to call each other "putz" and "schmuck" in 
every scene. There aren't too many movies that are simultaneously 
geriatric and childish, but OUT TO SEA manages to embarrass itself 
on both counts.
        This movie is essentially GRUMPY OLD MEN on a cruise 
ship -- GRUMPY OLD MEN AND THE SEA. (I wonder how many 
other movie critics, Internet and print, will think they coined that 
one themselves.) Lemmon is a depressed widower who basically 
keeps to his antique house, while Matthau is a compulsive gambler 
who owes a few thousand to his bookie. The solution: why, isn't it 
transparent? They'll go on a cruise and net some babes.
        Small-time con man he is, Matthau signs himself and 
Lemmon up as dance instructors so they won't have to pay for the 
cruise. Lemmon can dance like Astaire livening up a bored night at 
the nursing home, but Matthau can't dance a lick. It opens the door 
for so many sitcom situations, like the inevitable montage in which 
Lemmon tries to teach Matthau to dance (in a comically-bad way, of 
course) and two men walk in on them during a tender slow-dance 
moment. Call it "83's Company." Soon, Matthau is trying to 
romance Dyan Cannon, plastic surgery casefile #459, and Lemmon 
is trying to get over his ex-wife with a silver-haired siren.
        For a bad movie, OUT TO SEA has a great supporting cast. 
Most of them are aging, out-of-work actors who will apparently say 
or do anything if a big enough carrot is dangled in front of them. 
Donald "Make 'em Laugh" O'Conner is one of the genuine dance 
instructors, and does a couple interesting tap numbers, but we all 
know he'd dislocate a hip if he tried to duplicate his SINGIN' IN 
THE RAIN wall flips. Hal "Barney Miller" Linden is another dance 
instructor who has maybe five lines tops. Rue "Blanche" 
McClenahan is the owner of the ship who is the victim of a 
painfully bad dance with Matthau.
        But the down-and-out prize goes to Brent "Data" Spiner, 
who plays the movie's villain, a militant cruise director who relishes 
his chance to perform cheesy song-and-dance numbers for captive 
passengers. Spiner does well bringing the best-written character in 
the movie to life, although like the others he still doesn't have a 
whole lot to work with. Still, it's fun to watch Spiner do the lounge 
act, knowing he released a real-life lounge failure album by the 
name of "Old Yellow Eyes is Back."
        OUT TO SEA was a lot of fun for the actors to make, I'm 
sure. It comes complete with the usual grumpy old blooper reel that 
has Lemmon and Matthau laughing and cussing it up, but each one 
of these old fart movies gets increasingly hard to bear. The first 
GRUMPY had a lot of funny moments, but the second was a seldom-
amusing rehash. OUT TO SEA, at its best, seems to contain the most 
mediocre moments of both. Lemmon and Matthau, you were great in 
the '60s but now you're a couple tired old men. The only way to 
succeed now is to pick a script that's not as tired as you schmucks. 
Geez, now I sound grumpy.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!
