Title
Review for Midnight Run (1988)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Friday mornings are tough enough to wake up to; however, I have a few
habits which have made the process easier to bear in my twilight years.  I get
up at 6:45, tune the radio to NPR and twist the volume up a couple of notches.
Then I tramp into the shower and wash in a slow-motion manner while my stupor
begins to melt.  About the time coherent thoughts are possible, Tom Shale (TV
critic for the WASHINGTON POST) is on doing one of his guerrilla film reviews,
and that brings me (usually chuckling) to consciousness.  While Shales and I
don't always agree (I like films that he hates), he's so cutting and
inventively nasty that he's fun to listen to, opinion regardless.
     So, imagine my surprise upon hearing Shales' voice boisterously praising a
new film as my senses begin to function.  After checking that there wasn't any
shampoo in my ears, I struggled to hear the name of the film.  Shales actually
*liking* a film all the way through!  What freak of nature had caused this
hiccup in the law of averages?  Some new Dutch wunderkind with a film on lovers
during the Falklands war?  Well, no...it's an *action/comedy* picture!  By
the guys who did BEVERLY HILLS COP, no less!  MIDNIGHT RUN, with De Niro and
Grodin.  While struggling into my rather wrinkled chinos and rugby shirt, I
made a mental note to catch the film that weekend and see if Shales had his
shit together....
     He does.  There have been so many unsuccessful "buddy-buddy" action films
of late that it's easy to be cynical about the whole schtick.  These movies
usually walk too far on one side or the other of the the action/comedy
partition -- too funny to be real, or else the comedy is plastered on with a
trowel, hardly meshing to the plot at all.  MIDNIGHT RUN doesn't have that
problem; suspense is not a put-on to the audience, and the comedy is based
almost entirely on the relations between a series of major and minor
characters.  This film is like some molecular model: everything that happens
results from various supporting characters bouncing into the two main
characters (De Niro and Grodin), who are themselves chained together (often
literally) by their circumstances.  MIDNIGHT RUN walks the razor blade of a
genre film and pulls it off -- completely -- due to the skill of the people
involved.
     Robert De Niro is an ex-cop who works as a bounty hunter in L.A.  He wants
to make one final "midnight run" that'll pay big so he can buy a coffee shop.
He's got scruples and rules that few bounty hunters (and, as it turns out, few
cops) have.  A sleazy local bail bondsman wants him to find and bring back to
LA a mob accountant who skipped bail (Charles Grodin); he needs to be back in
five days.  Unfortunately for De Niro, a lot of other people want Grodin: the
mob, because Grodin stole millions from them and gave it to charity; the feds,
so that Grodin can testify (headed by Yaphet Kotto in his best role in years);
and a bungling bounty hunter brought in when the bondsmen gets worried about De
Niro's chances.  After finding Grodin in New York, De Niro begins a cross-
country trek with his prisoner, who both gnaws and ultimately grows on him.
And at every step of the trip, they find themselves running into or from the
supporting characters.  It almost becomes a ritual, but it gets funnier each
time it happens, and it never slows down.  This film has all the bubble and
bite (and I'm not handicapping it any) of a Preston Sturges film at his best,
and I can't think of a much better compliment than that.  The story holds up
perfectly: everything happens for a good reason and hardly anything is
telegraphed (unless it's intentionally to divert the viewer in another
direction).  The conclusion is especially good, and I walked out vowing to see
this again in a couple of weeks.  I'm looking forward to it, too.
     De Niro plays his role with the hundreds of quirks he puts into any of his
character, physically and emotionally; he can be a clown, but he never mugs for
the camera, and his character is full-blooded.  This isn't ONCE UPON A TIME IN
AMERICA, but he doesn't put anything less into it.  Charles Grodin is just as
good, but his watchword is control.  He could have played this like Tony
Randall, in a broadly neurotic TV-style eccentric.  Here, however, he is
restrained, and gets his laughs from his low-key snipes at just the right
times, and in the right tone of voice.  And he also ends up with a character
who is as three-dimensional as De Niro's; it turns out that both their
characters believe in certain rules, and sticking to them; and both of them do,
and you end up admiring them for it.
     The other actors are all (*all*) top-notch.  As I said, Kotto has a slow
burn in this film that Edgar Kennedy could envy.  The two mob underlings after
Grodin are hilarious; their obvious affection for one another (one is former
pug, and neither is too bright) is another of those bright touches that litter
this film.  Dennis Farina (of the late, unlamented "Crime Story" on TV) plays a
mob boss with the kind of vicious conviction that breaks through that kind of
role.  And Melvin, the bumbling class-B bounty hunter who competes for Grodin
with De Niro, carries out a running gag (there are *lots* of running gags in
this film, and all of them are good) with the best of the slapstick fall guys.
These guys are all archetypes, not stereotypes; they start from the standard
character type and go on from there, fleshing themselves out with each movement
and sentence.  The writer for MIDNIGHT RUN, George Gallo, had these people
pinned down in his head, and with director Martin Brest he brings each to the
forefront.
     Along with BIG, one of the best comedies in the last two years.  Worth
every penny of $5 and then some.

Author
Craig Good
     The other day I rented Brian DePalma's 1986 organized crime comedy WISE
GUYS.  It was worse than this DePalma fan thought a DePalma film could be.  So
it was with some trepidation that I went to see yet another Mafia-style buddy
film: MIDNIGHT RUN.  Perhaps the contrast accounts for why I so thoroughly
enjoyed the latter.
     There is nothing particularly new about pitting two opposites against each
other, having a cross-country chase, or dodging the FBI and the mob.  MIDNIGHT
RUN transcends the formula with a well-crafted script and terrific acting on
the parts of the lead characters.  I was never a big fan of Charles Grodin
until I saw him hold his own with Robert DeNiro.  The chemistry between these
two actors really works, and they are so compelling that they practically carry
the film.  Fortunately they are backed up by a fine supporting cast featuring
some of the dumbest and meanest mobsters ever, with Dennis Farina as the
latter.  Yaphet Koto gets in some good licks as the harried FBI special agent.
     Martin Brest also gets credit for his taught direction.  This film is a
real balancing act between comedy, drama, and action picture.  Just when things
might tip too far in one direction everything comes swinging back.  And, as
Steve Upstill pointed out at the theatre, there are at least four times during
the film where you ask yourself "How on *earth* will they get out of this
one?"  As outlandish as the answer often is, the film works well enough to let
you willingly suspend disbelief.
     MIDNIGHT RUN is certainly worth seeing, and it's actually worth seeing on
the big screen, the better to appreciate Rob Hahn's fine camera operation.

Author
David N. Butterworth
[Reviewers note: I originally saw this movie after a particularly bad
dining experience at a Chi-Chi's restaurant--over an hour wait for a nachos
appetizer!--and some of that frustration was reflected in this review.  I
have seen the movie twice since then and have developed more of an
appreciation for it.  db]
Hollywood has always been quick to cash in on popular trends in the movies.
One recurrent theme is the "buddy" picture, in which two mismatched
personalities collide, often with comic results.
The latest example is MIDNIGHT RUN in which, it appears the producers felt,
Robert De Niro's grittiness, coupled with the sensitivity of Charles
Grodin, would make for a winning combination.  Unfortunately, the film
misfires by not having enough faith in its own convictions.  Rather than
developing the obvious camaraderie between its two leads, it settles
instead for high speed action sequences and low brow theatrics.
Robert De Niro plays Jack Walsh, a disillusioned ex-Chicago cop turned
bounty hunter.  He is assigned by bail bondsman Eddie Moscone (Joe
Pantoliano, doing a good Martin Scorsese impersonation) to find and deliver
to Los Angeles an accountant named Jonathan Mardukas (Grodin).  If
Mardukas, worth a million dollars to Moscone, is returned before the 72
hour deadline expires, Walsh will earn $100,000.
Mardukas, also known as "The Duke", has embezzled $15 million from crime
boss Jimmy Serrano, a role played by TV's Dennis Farina (CRIME STORY).
Privy to incriminating evidence against Serrano, it is not suprising that
the FBI want to get their hands on Mardukas before the mob does.  As if
this isn't enough, Eddie contracts out another bounty hunter, Marvin
Dorfler (John Ashton), to complete the job, if and when Walsh fails.
Walsh develops an early animosity towards federal agent Alonzo Mosley,
played with a smoldering intensity by Yaphet Kotto.  After starting what
turns out to be a running gag concerning government issue sunglasses, Walsh
manages to steal Mosley's ID.
This makes apprehending Mardukas relatively easy.  However, delivering him
to L.A. is not as simple as Walsh had first thought.  Mardukas tells Walsh
that he is afraid to fly, as well as suffering from a string of phobias.
Walsh's response is that if he doesn't shut up, he'll end up suffering from
"fistophobia".  Such is the level of humor in this movie.
So they board a train, then a bus, and finally several cars and trucks, in
an attempt to out run their pursuers.  For all the modes of transportation
in this film, it could easily have been called PLANES, TRAINS AND
AUTOMOBILES, TOO!  In any event, all are led on a merry chase across
country as Walsh attempts to deliver the "merchandise" on time and collect
his one hundred grand.
As one would expect from a movie by the director of BEVERLY HILLS COP, an
obligatory car chase is thrown in for good measure.  A multitude of police
cars race across the Arizona desert, almost as an afterthought, and the
chase ends about as quickly as it began.
By the film's conclusion we are expected to believe that Walsh and Mardukas
have developed such mutual respect along the way that Walsh's integrity has
been renewed, causing him to renege on his contract.  It just doesn't hold
water.
It is good to see De Niro in a meatier role for a change, as opposed to his
recent larger-than-life walk-ons (notably as The Devil in Alan Parker's
ANGEL HEART and, more recently, as Al Capone in THE UNTOUCHABLES).  His
cheeky schoolboy grin certainly contribute to some of the film's lighter
moments.
Grodin, too, makes the most of his endearing qualities and at times the
chemistry between the two blossoms.  This pairing is especially effective
in the scenes in which Grodin acts as De Niro's conscience, endlessly
bugging him about his smoking and eating habits, asking him personal
questions about his private life, even talking him into visiting his
ex-wife and daughter after nine years of separation.
And the film does have its amusing moments.  For instance, when De Niro
shows his obvious lack of mathematical skills on the train and, later, when
Grodin mimics his captor in a box car.  And there's a scene in which
Pantoliano tells his right hand man that Walsh is bringing in "The Duke",
thereby saving his livelihood, to which the guy responds "This calls for a
celebration.... I'll get the donuts!"
But you have to wade through a quagmire of hackneyed and implausible
plotting in order to reach those moments, and it's too much like hard work.
Most of the laughs in this film are telegraphed way ahead of time.  Those
that are not predictable are either pretty lame or simply unfunny.  De Niro
and Grodin's subtlety is wasted in a film which would have better suited
the comedic talents of, say, Eddie Murphy.  In fact, this film bears more
than a passing resemblance to Murphy's 48 HOURS, yet it lacks that film's
wit and style.
Before boarding the plane for Los Angeles, Walsh tells Mardukas "If you
don't be quiet, this will be the worst trip of your life."  This journey
proves to be no pleasure cruise for the audience, either.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     High Concept.  Picture this: The Odd Couple in a cops-and-robbers chase
movie.  Well, maybe not the original Odd Couple, but you have the slob and
the high-strung neurotic.  The slob is a bounty hunter who smokes, eats
greasy food, cusses...that sort of thing.  He's got to bring the accountant
of a Las Vegas gangster and heroin dealer from New York to Los Angeles.  Any
of these "odd couple" movies work on the principle that if you get to know
somebody, even of a very different type, whom you start out hating, you of
course get to like the other guy as you get to know him.  The odd couple
plot has already been done at least once on the road with last year's
PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES.  MIDNIGHT RUN has its own odd couple (as
well as its own planes, trains, and automobiles).
     Bounty hunter Jack Walsh (played by Robert DeNiro having the time of
his life) has got to get Jonathan Mardukas (played by Charles Grodin) from
New York to Los Angeles.  On the up side, he will get $100,000 just for
bringing one guy in.  On the down side, 1) he cannot stand Mardukas, 2)
Mardukas is too neurotic to fly the distance so they have to go by ground
transport, 3) the FBI wants to stop them because they want to bring Mardukas
in, 4) another bounty hunter wants to stop them because *he* wants to bring
Mardukas in, and 5) the Mob would like to stop them, not just because they
do not want Mardukas to tell what he knows but also because he embezzled
$15,000,000 from them.  All this is just a quaint way of saying that Walsh's
chances of getting Mardukas to L.A. are less than ideal and that this
particular trip is across country will not be uneventful.
     The two leads of MIDNIGHT RUN are clever and funny men.  Charles Grodin
has a reputation for being, in real life, one of the funniest and wittiest
men in filmmaking, but he just cannot project it from the wide screen.  Or
perhaps he is just being himself on screen while other actors turn up the
clowning switch to "high" while the cameras roll.  He comes off not so much
funny as witty and likable in MIDNIGHT RUN.  DeNiro can be funny but somehow
the chemistry between the two men never really works.
     MIDNIGHT RUN is often funny, has a lot of action and some semi-
obligatory car chases, and is in general an okay piece of entertainment.
Rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Kong
Midnight Run shows how a simple formula film can be more than just another
road-movie or action-film. George Gallo populates his script with colorful
and memorable characters. All of the characters are thoughtful and
dimensional. The two leads are even more so than the minor characters, but
all are well rounded.
Jack Walsh is a bounty hunter, working for a sleazy lying bondsman, Eddie.
Walsh was not always a bounty hunter though, he used to be a Chicago cop,
but a mobster, Jimmy Serrano, ran him out of Chicago. The bondsman, Eddie,
has a problem on his hands; he bailed out a white-collar criminal, Jonathan
Mardukas on a very large bail, and that money means a lot to Eddie.
Mardukas, or the Duke, has embezzled a large chunk of money from the
mobster Serrano. The FBI, led by Alonzo Mosley is on the hunt for the Duke
and so is Serrano. The FBI wants the Duke to testify against Serrano,
Serrano just wants him dead. There is also a second bounty hunter looking
for the Duke, Marvin. Marvin is a clumsy and dim-witted bounty hunter.
Walsh just wants to find the Duke for the $100,000 bounty.
Walsh finds the Duke in New York and has five days to bring him to Los
Angeles, to collect his bounty, which he plans to open a coffee shop with.
Sounds easy, but not so. The movie goes from here as a cross-country road
trip with Walsh and the Duke. All of the time is trying to outrun the mob,
FBI, and Marvin.
The characters and the interaction between them are intricate, but not so
large that the audience gets lost. Action flies between airplanes, trains,
buses, cars, trains, and a few other vehicles. But, with all of this
action, the story is not lost. The director, Martin Brest (Beverly Hills
Cop), makes the movie very balanced. Just when the action is too intense,
he throws in some humor. And when the action or humor get in the way, he
stops and puts in a scene to develop character. Brest does a good job of
moving between these three.
Robert DeNiro gives a great performance as Jack Walsh. He is gives a
humorous, yet serious, portrayal of Walsh. And when he is funny, he is
funny. He gets his laughs, not by going all out for them, but by letting
his character do funny things but not know it. Charles Grodin gives an
equally great performance as the Duke. On screen they are the perfect
odd-couple. It is the chemistry of the two leads that carry the story along
the casting director should be congratulated for casting such a perfect pair.
Along side the leads are the good performances by the supporting cast.
Dennis Farina looks as if he's having a great time as the mobster Serrano.
He is mean and very scary on screen. Yaphet Kotto is also mean and scary on
screen, as the FBI agent, Alonzo Mosley, who is looking for Walsh and the
Duke. Joe Pantoliano is the wild, and potty mouthed, Eddie, the bail
bondsman. But, the most memorable supporting cast would be Wendy Phillips
as Jack Walsh's ex-wife.
The music, by Danny Elfman, is worth mentioning. Instead of orchestrating
the music for the film, the music is done by a small band. The music is
jazzy when the action kicks in, but slow and moody when there is a
character development scene. The music, like all other Elfman scores, fits
in so well with the film that at times you don't notice it.
Midnight Run is an example of the perfect smart and funny action film.
Characters that are dimensional and likeable populate it. Midnight Run is
on my list of most favorite movies, and after you see it, it'll be on yours
too. Don't miss this film.
"You two are the worst bounty hunters I have ever seen! You couldn't even
deliver a bottle of milk!" - the Duke
