Title
Review for Paulie (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
When 'Babe' came out in 1995, it surprised critics with its stunning
quantity of special effects which enabled farm animals to talk by
simulating lip movement through computers and the magic went farther
than that by combining mechanical creatures with real ones.  Seven
Academy Award nominations were inspired by that film (including Best
Picture) and it won one for Visual Effects.  No doubt inspired by the
antics of 'Babe', 'Paulie' is a clever little film in its own right.
No doubt cynics will attack it for its simplicity, forgetting that
children are the main audience and many will trash the film as a direct
copy of 'Babe', when in fact it stands on its own merit by using
primarily one animal to carry the film instead of many.  There are a
couple of brief scenes involving a few talking creatures, but one
character dominates in the end.
Paulie is a little talking parrot.  All parrots can talk, you say?
Maybe, but how many can carry a conversation, think like and concoct
their own words like a human?  Only in the movies.  The first time we
see Paulie is in the basement of a scientific institute where he sort of
befriends a janitor, a Russian immigrant named Misha (Tony Shalhoub).
They talk and Paulie tells his story of how he ended up there in the
first place.  He comes in to the world and is cared for by a little girl
named Marie, a child with a serious speech impediment.  The girl's
parents begin to worry that the little girl is starting to confuse the
fantasy world with the real one, after she claims the bird can talk like
a human and the parents send the bird away breaking Marie's heart.
Paulie one day hopes to be reunited with her.
Paulie ends up in a New York City pawn shop whose owner (Buddy Hackett)
puts a high price on selling Paulie and he is eventually cared for by a
kindly old lady (Gena Rowlands) who takes Paulie to find Marie in Los
Angeles.  Paulie eventually pushes himself to fly after convincing
himself for ages that he couldn't.  He ends up in Los Angeles and
befriends a Spanish musician (Cheech Marin) and Paulie ends up working
for a con man (Jay Mohr), but later realizes that what he's doing is
wrong.   The interesting thing is that Mohr, in addition to playing the
con man, also provides Paulie's voice in the film.
Kids were extremely well behaved at the matinee performance which I
attended and that has to say something about the quality of the film.
No animal makes for better entertainment in movie jokes than a parrot.
I'm thinking of the peg legged Peter Sellers in one of the Pink Panther
movies where the inflatable bird he had on the shoulder of his pirate
costume popped off after being over inflated and the scene where a
parrot laughs at Clouseau and goes to the bathroom on his shoulder after
Clouseau sticks his finger in a light bulb socket and feels the effects
of lethal electrocution.
This is such a simple movie that I don't want to say too much and ruin
it for kids who may be reading this except to say that 'Paulie' is a
truly touching film that entertained me more than the most recent heart
warming animal feature I saw last year, 'Air Bud', and if you thought
3.5 out of 5 was a high rating for 'Air Bud', look out cynics, 'Paulie'
is better.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The classic tale of a lost dog sold by a poor family, which
undertakes several tortuous journeys to return to them,
informs the greatest family film of all time, "Lassie Come
Home" (1943, Fred M. Wilcox, director).  The eponymous
collie was played by the remarkable Pal in a performance that
has never been surpassed by bird or beast.  The recent
"When the Cat's Away," Cedric Klapisch's buoyant Parisian
tale of a runaway feline, does not come close.  All of this
means that "Paulie" has some tough competition, but since
this is the conceivably the first full-length feature story about a
bird, it fills a niche and does so quite well.  "Paulie" has a lot
going for it: some special humor that might appeal to adults;
some fine animal photography (even granting that the scene
of the parrot in bold flight across some imposing country
scenery was shot in a wind tunnel and then superimposed
against the landscape); stellar acting by the title character
(granting here that it took fourteen Blue Crown Conures to fill
the bill); a smashing sound track; and a lesson in scruples
presented simply enough that the small fry who will make up
the major audience should catch the instruction in ethics.
   As Dr. Reingold (Bruce Davison), a research scientist
states, there is one big gap between us human beings and
our fellows in the animal kingdom: speech.  Animals can
speak but darned if they never learned English.  Paulie,
however, can make quite a dent in our understanding of those
who are further down in the food chain because this parrot
does not simply mimic; unlike most people, he can speak in
intelligent sentences.  It's no wonder that Dr. Reingold, seeing
a Nobel in his future, views a great opportunity in owning the
bird and that other folks see Paulie not as a creature with his
own integrity but as one who can enrich them as well.  As is
conventional in so many movies made principally for children,
the little ones perceive the feathered and four-legged
creations selflessly.
   The story opens as five-year-old Marie (Hallie Eisenberg), a
stutterer who is without friends because of her speech
impediment, is given a young bird by her family in the hope
that it can take their girl out of her shell.  When Marie climbs
on her roof with Paulie and suffers an almost tragic fall to the
ground, her father gives away the parrot to a pawn shop,
whose owner (Buddy Hackett) sees a talking bird only as an
aggravation.  Though Benny (Jay Mohr) sees him as a
potential assistant for his career as a petty thief, Paulie is
bought by the aging Ivy (Gena Rowlands), who is sympathetic
to Paulie's desire to be reunited with Marie and drives him
most of the way to Marie's new home in Los Angeles.  Before
arriving, Paulie is found by Ignacio (Cheech Marin), who uses
him for a dance act until he is acquired by Dr. Reingold, who
wants the bird to perform for a group of scientists.  The entire
story is told by Paulie to a janitor, Russian immigrant Misha
(Tony Shalhoub), who unknowingly is really listening to the
verbosity of Jay Mohr in the role of Paulie's voice.
   Well over one-third of American families own dogs, and so
presumably a movie about a dog ("Beethoven," "Shiloh" and
the like) would have a good chance of capturing a large,
youthful audience.  Relatively few families own parrots, so
that this one could be a tough sell at the box office.  More's
the pity, though, if a lack of familiarity with these lovely
animals would keep families away. "Paulie" is a touching tale
featuring some choice wisecracks actually spoken by
Saturday Night Live veteran Jay Mohr as Benny who, when
appearing with Paulie on the screen, is in fact talking to
himself!  When Benny's girl friend asks the parrot whether her
"diamond" is real, Paulie, who cannot lie, says, "I've seen shot
glasses cut better than that."  When Bennie drives Paulie in
his convertible to a scenic view of L.A., Paulie quips, "You're
not gonna kiss me, are you?"  
   There are some painful lessons that should come across to
those in the audience who are under the age twelve and
might be convinced more readily than adults that shearing
part of a bird's wings to prevent him from flying is just plain
wrong: "They were cutting me," Paulie says of the lab
technicians, "They were taking away the one thing that made
me different from them."  Paulie offers some excellent advice
to the small fry who may be too shy to get their feelings
across to those who love them, "Don't be afraid to speak up,"
he says, though ironically at times Paulie keeps quiet because
he insists that talking "gets you in trouble."
   Bruce Davison plays a nuanced role as a villain with more
than a trace of humanity, Tony Shalhoub a poignant guise as
a immigrant who assures Paulie "I'm Russian: I like long
stories," Gena Rowlands does a trenchant turn as a sensitive
lady who ultimately uses the bird as a seeing-eye companion,
and Trini Alvarado is the grown-up woman who has awaited
Paulie's return for years.  Given the merits of the production,
which is debut-directed by John Roberts from a script by
Laurie Craig, this bird deserves to fly.  Rated PG.  Running
Time: 92 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey
 arten

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
It's sickening, really, how adorable the parrot Paulie is in this
film.  I find the relentlessly cute images of the green, talky bird
vivid in my memory (well, it's only been a couple of days since I saw
it).  I had no intentions of seeing Paulie; I didn't even know it
existed until just a few days ago.  Going into the theater, I had no
idea what it was about, but I felt a little out of place with the
hundreds of children and parents around me.  Early into the picture, I
found out that it's about a talking parrot named Paulie, who is adopted
by a little girl named Marie.
Well, Paulie starts to talk to Marie, who has a speech problem
herself.  When her parents think that Paulie is stifling her (she isn't
making any other friends), they pawn the poor bird and move to Los
Angeles.  Paulie is adopted by a lady named Ivy (Gena Rowlands), who
vows to help Paulie find Marie.  Paulie's adventure takes him many
places and puts him in several unusual situations, until, finally, he is
discovered by scientists who find his speech capabilities amazing (who
wouldn't?).  
When Paulie refuses to cooperate, he is caged up and locked in the
basement of the university, where he is found by a friendly Russian
janitor named Misha (Tony Shalhoub).  Just to be fair to the film, I
should note that it's actually told in flashback:  the film opens with
Misha finding Paulie; Paulie then explains his sorted past to the
janitor.  I just thought you should know that.
Most of the characters in the film don't find it very strange that the
bird speaks perfect English, and that it can apparently comprehend
everything with human-like capabilities.  Only the scientists are truly
amazed, and even they do very little about it (and end up banishing the
bird to a basement, where it talks and talks forever, all night long,
and all day . . . every day . . .).  What I thought interesting is that,
as a viewer, I didn't even realize the abnormality of the situation
until almost an hour into the film.  Suddenly, for no particular reason,
I said to myself, "Birds don't talk to people like this."  I give the
makers credit for sufficiently pulling my attention away from the
gimmick.
Of course, what makes Paulie such a severely enjoyable film is the bird
himself.  The special effects, to begin with, are seamless, and provide
a perfect illusion of a speaking bird (no explanation of how a bird
forms words without lips is given, but I'll overlook that).  The bird
ranks right up there with Babe in the cuteness factor; in the scenes
early on, when Marie places a sorcerer's hat on Paulie's head, or when
Paulie evades the vicious cat while spitting off some truly funny quips,
the bird is so incessantly lovable that I couldn't help but smile
through the entire film.  
What I really like, though, is Paulie's personality; this is due, in
part, to Jay Mohr's exceptional voice work, and also to Laurie Craig's
thoughtful script.  The bird is funny, and nice, and therefore works
perfectly as a main character for a feature-length film.  The fine
supporting work by Gena Rowlands, Tony Shalhoub, and Cheech Marin give
Paulie a boost in its high-quality atmosphere.  
Most amazing, however, is that parents are going to be equally
enthralled in Paulie as their kids.  From start to finish, this film
provides lively entertainment, in addition a few good kid-oriented
lessons.  But don't see it for the lessons--see it for this bird, this
talking parrot that is quite possibly the cutest thing I have ever seen
in my entire life, ever.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Marie couldn't talk," Paulie, the parrot star of his own movie,
tells us about the daughter in his original family.  "Dad couldn't
listen.  And Mom couldn't cope, so they got rid of me."
     PAULIE, the autobiography of a talking, not merely a mimicking,
parrot, has Jay Mohr in the lead role of the bird - the voice, not the
body - and as the minor character of Benny, a small-time crook who uses
Paulie to pull off small scams like stealing twenties from ATMs.  As
the parrot, Mohr is delightful when director John Roberts allows him to
cut up.  Benny, on the other hand, is a character you've seen a
thousand times before, and Mohr brings nothing new to that role.
     Roberts's deliberately slow pacing of Laurie Craig's script lends
a subtle sweetness to its humor but creates some definite problems.
When a kids' movie wants to mosey along, watch out.  If the material is
not crisp and perfectly composed, beauty can sometimes dissolve into
tedium.  So it is with PAULIE.  When they let their bird do his
stand-up comedy routines, the show hums and the audience roars.  Too
often, however, a sleepy silence ensues among the viewers as they wait
for the story to pickup again.
     Tony Shalhoub, the smart-mouthed chef from BIG NIGHT, plays Misha,
a recent Russian immigrant to the U.S.  He had been a teacher of
literature at home, but now he makes his living as a janitor in the
animal research lab to which Paulie has been taken for study.  Although
Misha gets a few nice lines ("I'm Russian.  I like long stories."), his
somber part seems designed only to elicit our sympathy.
     Besides Paulie, the only character worth noting - other than 2
cute small parts played by Cheech Marin and Gina Rowlands - is the
speech-impaired Marie, played in a precious performance by cinematic
newcomer, 5-year-old Hallie Kate Eisenberg.  Naturally enchanting, she
gives the picture genuine heart.  The bad news is that her part is
confined to the first half.
     The best scenes have the bird dancing and strutting to show off
his comedic skills.  When Marie's family gets a cat, for example, the
bird, who hasn't wanted to learn how to fly until then, takes an
instant interest in soaring.  Tricking the cat while insulting him at
the same time, Paulie calls him a stupid hairball.  Their rapid
physical antics add to the humor of the situation.  It's good quality
sitcom material but performed by animals.
     When one of the humans without much of a voice begins to sing,
Paulie cringes.  "I'm a bird," he explains with his frequently subtle
humor.  "I have a small brain, and it's about to explode."  The movie
contains rich doses of John Debney's dreamy music.  With heavy use of a
solo violin, he keeps reinforcing the film's heart-warming themes.  And
when Paulie finally takes off in flight, the orchestra comes up loud
and strong with cymbals clashing.
     "It's a long story," says Paulie.  "It's the only kind he knows,"
reflects Misha.  And the motion picture, which runs the standard length
for a kids' movie, still feels too long.  The best parts are
enthralling, but then there are all of those dead spots in-between.
PAULIE is a movie that never quite lives up to its promise but manages
to charm nevertheless.
     PAULIE runs 1:32.  It is raged PG for a few mild profanities and
would be fine for all ages.
     My son, Jeffrey, age 9, gave the movie ** with his biggest
complaint being that there wasn't enough action.  He thought Paulie was
funny, and the actress that played Marie was quite good.  His friend
Sam, almost 9, thought the movie was "awesome, excellent," and gave
it ****.  He thought Paulie was good, but he didn't believe the way
Marie's speech impediment was acted.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 17, 1998
Starring: Jay Mohr, Tony Shalhoub, Gena Rowlands, Cheech Marin, Bruce
Davison, Trini Alvarado, Hallie Kate Eisenberg
Directed by: John Roberts
Distributed by: DreamWorks Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG (brief mild language) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/paulie.htm
After a while, although probably inconspicuous to the target audience,
movies with animal protagonists gain a campy or hokey aura as a genre.
(It may be interesting to note that, for some reason, an animated animal
can talk and no one bats an eye; but if a live animal mouths anything
more than 'Polly want a cracker,' it becomes unrealistic and
unacceptable.) Perhaps it's the inability for a human audience over the
age of ten to root for a protagonist that isn't of the same species, or
perhaps it's the ability to more readily point out the shortcomings of a
film that has little respect for physical reality. Whatever the case,
Paulie has a tough audience to win over. 
Sure, most kids whose age has not yet broken double digits will want to
pay to see Paulie. What's not to like? The bird fires off jokes like an
assault weapon fires bullets: rapidly, but hardly with good aim. His
voice, done by Jay Mohr (Jerry Maguire), has that annoying little twang
to it that gives him his cocky air. The Jay Mohr we see onscreen,
similarly, plays a brainless petty thief named Benny. Benny uses the
intelligent bird to aid his career, but at the first sign of trouble,
abandons the creature to the ownership of a laboratory testing facility.
None of the characters show much smarts, including the kindly old Ivy
(two-time Academy Award nominee Gena Rowlands), and the only one to make
an intelligent decision is the good-hearted Misha (Tony Shalhoub).
Unfortunately, he's a janitor. Who likes janitors? 
The movie follows the life of Paulie, from his "birth" as a gift to the
child Marie (Hallie Kate Eisenberg) to his reunion with her (now played
by Trini Alvarado) a good many years later. (Should I have called a
spoiler there? Isn't it painfully obvious, in these movies, that the
animal always makes it back?) Although sold off by Marie's father (Matt
Craven) early on, Paulie survives on his own. Pawned off by a guitarist,
taken cross country by Ivy, hired by Ignacio (Cheech Marin) the taco
man, picked up by Benny, and finally given to Dr. Reingold (Bruce
Davison), Paulie comes to be locked away in the basement of the
laboratory, where he meets Misha. He tells the Russian janitor of his
life, and soon the man takes pity on him. 
You have to be in a Lassie Come Home sort of mood to see Paulie with any
sort of plausibility. Some of the jokes the parrot makes might be funny
to the adult crowd, but the maturity level isn't that high. This movie
is good as the product it's intended to be, and from a child's point of
view it's most likely highly entertaining. Unfortunately, I can't
comment with any expertise there, and so any outstanding qualities lose
value in the translation. Not recommendable, but good if there's nothing
else to see and you're dying to spend seven bucks.
FINAL AWARD FOR "PAULIE": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.

Author
Scott Renshaw
PAULIE
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  voice of Jay Mohr, Tony Shalhoub, Gena Rowlands, Cheech Marin,
Bruce Davison, Hallie Kate Eisenberg.
Screenplay:  Laurie Craig.
Producers:  Mark Gordon, Gary Levinsohn, Allison Lyon Segan.
Director:  John Roberts.
MPAA Rating:  PG (mild profanity, adult humor)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Even before I was a film critic, I was a studio marketing executive's
worst nightmare.  The standard for selling films has long been to provide
an easy frame of reference for the potential viewer, some comparison to a
well-known and well-liked predecessor to latch on to.  "From the director
of INDEPENDENCE DAY" one ad might trumpet, while another features a
critical comment that the film is "the best romance since GHOST."  Such
tactics have long left me skeptical, fearing yet another bandwagon-riding
copycat rather than looking forward to something with enough substance or
style to stand on its own.
     In my heart, I know PAULIE is an attempt to cash in on the family
film success of recent talking animal pictures like BABE and HOMEWARD
BOUND.  Like BABE, Paulie features a friendly, stubbornly loyal animal as
its protagonist, this one a smart-aleck parrot named Paulie (voice of Jay
Mohr); like HOMEWARD BOUND, it sends the talking animal on a long journey
to find his owner.  If your first instinct is to think of PAULIE as a
dopey rip-off, be prepared for a pleasant surprise. PAULIE may never reach
the enchanting heights of BABE, but it's consistently charming in its own
low-key way.
     PAULIE begins at the ending, in an animal research facility where
gentle immigrant janitor Misha (Tony Shalhoub) is amazed to find a
babbling, mango-loving bird caged in the basement.  Paulie then proceeds
to tell Misha a strange and wondrous flashback tale:  his separation from
Marie (Hallie Kate Eisenberg), the little girl who loves him; a friendship
with a kindly widow (Gena Rowlands); a stint entertaining the customers of
a mobile taco stand owner (Cheech Marin); and eventually a life of crime
assisting a small-time hustler (also played by Jay Mohr).  Though the
adventures are basic and sometimes silly, they are accompanied by lessons
gently taught.  Paulie learns about death, about the consequences of
stealing, about the virtue of politeness, and about the importance of
persistence in pursuing one's dream.  Simple stuff, to be sure, but more
edifying family fare than a dozen recent Disney films put together.
     More generally, PAULIE is a family film which doesn't begin with the
assumption that young audiences respond only to stupidity.  With the
exception of a token instance of flatulence humor and a few coarse
insults, scripter Laurie Craig keeps the gags above the belt, opting to
use animal tricks and verbal sparring for amusement.  Jay Mohr's Paulie is
an obvious hommage to Buddy Hackett (obvious enough that Hackett shows up
in a cameo), but he creates just enough feisty personality to make the
bird's story matter without making him annoying.  PAULIE also features an
unusually strong cast, headed by a grandmotherly Rowlands and the always
appealing Shalhoub (adding a Russian accent to his Nationality of the Week
repertoire).  This is one feature parents and kids will be able to sit
through together with smiles on every face.
     It would be easy to embrace PAULIE excessively simply because it
doesn't crash into a pile of singed green feathers the way you might
expect.  In fact, it's hardly a classic-in-the-making.  The episodic flow
of the narrative sends Paulie jumping to his next new pal just as we've
gotten interested in the last, and takes off on odd tangets involving a
flirtatious female parrot (voiced by Tia Texada, who also plays Mohr's
girlfriend in human form) and tentative swipes at animal testing.  Most
disappointing of all is a conclusion which leaves us with an odd romantic
pairing as its happy ending.  It's an uneven effort, but it's satisfying
to note that it's actually an _effort_.  PAULIE could have cruised along
on talking animals and foolishness; instead, it tells a story of
friendship and good manners with a few sharp jokes.  How nice to find a
fun bit of entertainment, and not just "the best talking animal movie
since BABE."

Author
Matt Williams
In the wake of Babe, you would expect to be doused by a flood of talking
animal movies.  Paulie is the first of three we can expect this year
(the others including Dr. Dolittle and Babe 2).  If the others are as
good as Paulie, we'll be lucky.
The film opens with Misha (Tony Shalhoub), janitor at an animal research
company, discovering a parrot in the basement.  But this is no ordinary
parrot...this is Paulie (voiced by Jay Mohr), and he can talk.  Not just
mimicking like most parrots, but true intelligent speech.  Misha and
Paulie become friends, and Paulie tells his tale.
It all started when he was a hatchling.  He was bought as a present for
a young girl, Marie Allweather (Hallie Kate Eisenberg).  She has trouble
speaking and few other friends, but Paulie soon becomes her best friend
and teacher (helping her overcome her stutter).
But good things never last, and after being blamed for being a bad
influence, Paulie is sold.  He makes a vow to return to Marie any way he
can.  The film follows Paulie on his journey, as he meets a wide variety
of people. There's a kind old painter, Ivy (Gena Rowlands), a shifty
con-man, Buddy (Jay Mohr), a happy-go-lucky restaurateur, Ignacio
(Cheech Marin), and a scientist, Dr. Reingold (Bruce Davison).
Overall, the film is cute, and a little oversentimental.  The film it
most hearkens to is Babe.  However, it doesn't have as strong a sense of
magic as the talking pig flick...but Paulie packs a heftier sense of
humor.
What really sells the film is the character of Paulie, himself.  Many
animal films rely completely on the animal's cuteness to sell itself.
Although there are a couple of the requisite "awwww" scenes, the film
doesn't dwell on them.  Instead, we get to know and like this parrot as
a person.  In fact he's more interesting than the majority of characters
that we get to meet in many films today.
Plus, Paulie has quite a cast to back him up.  Tony Shalhoub in
particular does a noteworthy job as the kindred spirit who lends a
sympathetic ear to a talking bird.
There are a couple of cute parrot tricks in the film, particularly those
involving an ATM, but not as many as you might expect in a film of this
type.  The speech effects are convincing, but considering they involve
an immobile beak, they don't seem to have the same finesse as Babe.  A
minor complaint:  we never quite learn why Paulie is so unique.  We meet
several other animals (even other semi-talking Parrots), and none seem
quite so human as Paulie.
The cinematography is not quite as good as it tries to be.  For example,
there is a sunrise sequence which is supposed to be awe inspiring, but
comes off as particularly bland.
But that aside, Paulie is quite entertaining.  The film has a heart, and
a mind as well.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Jay Mohr, Hallie Kate Eisenberg, Tony Shalhoub, Cheech Marin,
Trini Alvarado
Ingredients: lost parrot trying to get home, friends
Synopsis: 
A Russian janitor named Misha (Tony Shalhoub) discovers a little old
parrot languishing in the basement of a science research facility.
"Paulie the talking parrot" (the voice of Jay Mohr) soon regales Misha
with his life story. 
As a young bird Paulie is raised by Marie (Hallie Kate Eisenberg ), a
little girl with a speech impediment. By attending Marie's speech
lessons, Paulie learns to act/speak like a regular person.
Unfortunately, after being unfairly blamed for an accident, Paulie is
taken to a pawn shop and sold. 
Paulie's biggest wish is to return to Marie. Many years later, and after
a succession of memorable owners (Gena Rowlands, Cheech Marin, and Jay
Mohr), Paulie falls in with a bad crowd and is apprehended in Los
Angeles trying to steal jewelry. He is sent to a cruel research
facility, where he refuses to participate and is imprisoned the
basement. 
Will Misha help Paulie get back to Marie?
Opinion:
Every time people watch movies that portray animals as beings with cute
human personalities, some well-meaning audience members go out next
Christmas or birthday and buy a Dalmatian or whatever creature is
currently popular. Soon enough, "birthday kid" loses interest and the
purchased pup ends up at the local pound, a victim of neglect. 
My sister owns a real PAULIE: it thinks like a parrot, bites like a
parrot, and requires as much attention as a newborn human infant. Please
think twice before buying one. 
Okay. Back to the story. In movies, parrots usually play support
characters, but PAULIE might be the first movie where the (animatronic)
bird gets main billing. Paulie, like those side characters in Disney
cartoons, is cute and sassy, a strutting, miniature human. Actually,
Paulie is the voice of Jay Mohr (he played Jennifer Aniston's boyfriend
on PICTURE PERFECT) doing his best Buddy Hackett impression (which is
interesting, since Hackett himself cameos as the pawn shop owner, and
Mohr doubles as a customer).
PAULIE is for kids. While watching PAULIE you hear little tykes in the
theater laughing hysterically when Paulie calls the cat a "stupid
furball."  Sometimes, however, there are statements the kids don't get.
For example, when Paulie's elderly owner Ivy (Gena Rowlands) dies,
Paulie explains, "Well, one day, the cat got her." And you hear kids
exclaim, "What cat?!" 
Imagine LASSIE COME HOME, except with a doll-sized human dressed as a
bird, and you'll have a good idea of the plot and characterization. Bird
tries to get home. Bird meets elderly friend. Bird loses elderly friend.
Bird meets eccentric friend. Bird loses eccentric friend. Bird meets bad
influence. And so on and so forth, with Paulie meeting friends and
saying goodbye at a meandering pace until he finally makes it back to
Marie (Trini Alvarado). 
The bottom line? Break out the popcorn money, Moms and Dads. PAULIE may
be the low end version of LASSIE, BAMBI, or BABE, but he'll do.
Sometimes the wisecracks go over their heads, but I'm sure youngsters
can appreciate a story about a little person (Paulie) trying to get
home, meeting friends and experiencing moral lessons on the way. 
And good luck explaining what it means when Paulie says of Ivy, "Well,
one day, the cat got her."
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Put out a movie with a talking parrot and my ass will be at the theater
in no time.  What kind of entertainment can top that?  While you stumble
about for a response, let me unleash the powerful story of Paulie.
Mind you, my friend Misha, a Russian immigrant janitor at the
university, passed on this tale to me.  He found Paulie locked up in the
dingy dark basement of the school and was amazed when he heard the bird
talk and sing like a human.  Now, when I see a bird that can talk and
sing like a human, I get a look on my face like that guy who dug up the
singing frog on the old Bugs Bunny cartoon.  But, my friend Misha is a
little bit naďve when it comes to exploitation, so I digress.
It turns out that Paulie has had one hell of a journey.  He started out
as a gift to a little girl named Marie.  They were the best of friends,
until her overbearing father came home from the war and got all nutso
when he found out that Marie had a stuttering problem.  The next thing
you know, the stupid kid takes a dive off of the roof like Michael
Douglas in The Game and Paulie is sent packing.
He finds his next home in a pawnshop run by Artie (Buddy Hackettisn't
he dead?) and frequented by a two-bit hoodlum named Benny (Jay Mohr,
Jerry Maguire and the voice of Paulie).  Apparently, this is where he
picks up his tough Jersey accent and insulting demeanor.
Paulie is bought by a lonely widow named Ivy (Gena Rowlands, Unhook the
Stars) and the two decide to make their way across the country to find
Marie.  But, in a strange twist, Ivy is suddenly rendered blind and
Paulie is forced to continue on his own.  This is an important message
to all the kids out there  help a bird find his owner and lose the
power of sight.
His next stop is in East Los Angeles, where Paulie finds work at a taco
stand run by Igancio (Cheech Marin).  He falls in love with another
parrot named Lupe, but is again forced to move on.
A bit too heady, Paulie may turn kids off with little action and a lot
of talking.  But screw them, I liked it.
