Title
Review for Twilight (1998)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   It has been suggested by some who have seen "Twilight"
that the picture is a rehash of standard private detective
conventions dating back to Raymond Chandler.  While Robert
Benton has indeed directed the movie in the noir style, it
would be a mistake to lump it together with standard-fare
detective tales.  "Twilight" conveys the California ambiance
during the wee hours, as the title suggests, the milieu 
furthered by Elmer Bernstein's moody, dissonant score.  But
while the film is built around a murder which at least one
retired member of the L.A. police force is trying to solve after
a score of years, screenwriters Robert Benton and Richard
Russo have a more universal intention in mind: aging and
mortality, particularly the need for folks in their twilight years,
strengths gradually diminishing, to recover the zest of youth
and to continue to find purpose and function.
   With this ambitious design in mind, Benton is fortunate to
have assembled a crackerjack team of veteran actors,
generally considered among the best in the field.  He
succeeds quite well, particularly given the chemistry between
Harry Ross (Paul Newman) and Catherine Ames (Susan
Sarandon), both over the hill in their fields, both grasping at
their newly-found passion despite considerable roadblocks in
the way of its satisfaction.  Benton is not so favored in putting
across other aspects of the story, particularly those dealing
with murder, blackmail, vengeance, and even a commentary
on social class resentments.
   The narrative begins in the resort town of Puerto Vallarta,
Mexico, where Harry, working as a shamus for wealthy former
Hollywood stars Jack Ames (Gene Hackman) and his wife
Catherine (Susan Sarandon), locates the couple's nubile 17-
year-old, jail-bait daughter Mel (Reese Witherspoon) in the
arms of Jeff Willis (Liev Schreiber).  While attempting to
escort her forcibly home, Harry is accidentally shot in the
groin by the young siren and, to keep the incident under
wraps, is taken into the Ames' luxurious home where he
earns his keep doing odd jobs.  
   Harry feels a growing lust for the witty and seductive
Catherine and enjoys a friendship with Harry, whose cancer is
no longer in remission and who has a year to live.  Asked by
Harry to deliver a package to one Gloria Lamar (Margo
Martindale), Harry suffers a series of ill-fated incidents, as he
is beaten and shot at by men with a variety of motives from
vengeance to frustrations at not receiving the blackmail
money they had been expecting.  Episodes of this kind lead
Harry into a complex, even convoluted assortment of
experiences which place him in a position to solve a murder
which had taken place 20 years earlier, while on a different
level he struggles with his feelings for his employer's wife and
his former girl friend, Verna (Stockard Channing).
   At times "Twilight" becomes far-fetched, particularly when
Harry's liaison with Catherine is interrupted by Harry's
suffering a seizure virtually in the next room, and even more
so in unfolding a comic episode involving the efforts of
Reuben (Giancarlo Esposito) to hook up with Harry in a
private-eye business.
  The picture features James Garner (as Raymond Hope) in
his typically avuncular role as a man who resents his role in
life, which is to clean up the messes of the rich.  What makes
his bitterness hard to swallow is that he has apparently been
paid very well by those he envies, living in a mountaintop
retreat.  It's a pleasure to watch Garner as the plot undergoes
a series of twists and turns, and while the movie is often
unconvincing and painfully slow, it offers valuable insights into
the cares of older people who no longer are given the
opportunity for career adventure and who therefore must rely
on themselves to make their own fun.
   Because of its accent on older people and Benton's slow,
conventional style of filming, the film will probably have little
appeal to a potential young audience, but should garner at
least adequate attention from folks who are at a stage in
which they realize that age does not particularly confer
wisdom but is noted principally by its partiality to physical
disorders (cancer, heart disease, vulnerability) and the
realization that life's chief adventures are past.  Rated R. 
Running time: 91 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten
1998

Author
Scott Renshaw
TWILIGHT
(Paramount)
Starring:  Paul Newman, Susan Sarandon, Gene Hackman, Stockard Channing,
James Garner, Giancarlo Esposito, Reese Witherspoon, Liev Schreiber.
Screenplay:  Robert Benton and Richard Russo.
Producers:  Arlene Donovan and Scott Rudin.
Director:  Robert Benton.
MPAA Rating:  R (brief nudity, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  91 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I suspect that there was a great deal of good feeling on the set of
TWILIGHT, the kind that comes when people believe they're about to make a
point.  After all, this would be a film where the title could be
interpreted two ways.  On the one hand, it would evoke the appropriately
moody atmosphere required in a tale of Hollywood murder, blackmail and
corruption, this one centered on a retired private eye named Harry Ross
(Paul Newman) and his complex friendship with two aging movie stars,
cancer-stricken Jack Ames (Gene Hackman) and his wife Catherine (Susan
Sarandon).  On the other hand, it would describe the cast of veteran
actors and the charactes they play, all trying to show they are just as
vital in the present as they were in the past.  It would be a sly, subtle
story brought to life by a group of sly, subtle performers.
     Perhaps too sly and subtle for its own good.  As a narrative,
TWILIGHT offers virtually nothing you haven't seen in a dozen other
mysteries set among Southern California's privileged set:  dirty cops,
friends who turn out to be enemies, enemies who turn out to be friends,
wads of cash exchanging hands, a little rough stuff, a little gratuitous
nudity.  This one happens to focus on the 20-year-old unsolved
disappearance of Catherine's first husband, though that focus is fuzzy at
best.  Sub-plots and supporting characters materialize with alarming
frequency, far too many to be fleshed out adequately in the lean 91
minutes provided by Robert Benton and Richard Russo's script.  TWILIGHT 
introduces enough ideas about decaying affluence and influence that it
always seems to be moving forward.  It just doesn't feel like it's headed
anywhere in particular.
     The only reason TWILIGHT doesn't feel like a thoroughly generic
time-waster -- and in fact offers a moderate level of satisfaction -- is
the pleasure which comes from watching great actors share the screen.
Newman wears the layers of disappointment in Harry's 
cop-turned-shamus-turned-drunk life like an old sweater, yet maintains a
core of idealistic morality.  His scenes with Hackman, Stockard Channing
(as an old flame and current police lieutenant) and James Garner (as
another ex-cop gone private sector) spill over with the easy chatter of
old friends, directed by Benton (KRAMER VS. KRAMER, NOBODY'S FOOL) in his
typical restrained style.
     In fact, the actors are so good that they might trick you into
thinking you're watching well-rounded characters.  It's only when Reese
Witherspoon, Liev Schreiber and Giancarlo Esposito stumble over their
underdeveloped parts that it becomes apparent how sketchy those characters
truly are.  TWILIGHT generally feels rushed together as an opportunity for
all these actors to appear in a movie together; for all the talking going
on, it's tough to get a handle on who these people really are.  There's a
fair amount of sharp, tart dialogue to go around.  Unfortunately, not
enough of it is used to bring the characters into focus.
     The best clue as to what TWILIGHT is really all about comes from a
minor sub-plot which finds several old friends of Harry's mistakenly
believing that a gunshot wound has left him -- ahem -- less a man.  Harry
laughs richly at the rumor when he learns of it, but the film may take
the idea a bit more seriously.  The principal male characters in TWILIGHT
all seem to be worrying about the degeneration of their lives into
physical ailments, inertia and self-pity; in a town where youth is
worshipped, they may be wondering whether or not they can still "perform."
It's intriguing to watch both the actors and the characters trying to
re-define themselves in the present and put their past behind them.  And
maybe that's even enough subtext to give TWILIGHT the edge it needs to
make up for its lack of actual text.  The story may be only half-finished,
but the stars sure aren't.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TWILIGHT ** 1/2 Directed by Robert Benton. Written by Benton and Richard
Russo. Photography, Piotr Sobocinski. Editing, Carol Littleton. Production
design, David Gropman. Music by Elmer Bernstein. Cast: Paul Newman (Harry
Ross), Susan Sarandon (Catherine Ames), Gene Hackman (Jack Ames), Reese
Witherspoon (Mel Ames), Stockard Channing (Verna), James Garner (Raymond
Hope), Giancarlo Esposito (Reuben), Liev Schreiber (Jeff Willis), Margo
Martindale (Gloria Lamar), John Spencer (Capt. Phil Egan), M. Emmet Walsh
(Lester Ivar).A  Paramount release. 96 minutes. Rated R (violence, sex)
Cybill Sheperd has been complaining loudly that TV ignores actresses past
age 40. She claims that mature women bring to the screen experience, their
own kind of beauty, and other goodies. Cybill herself,  recently turned 48,
is as attractive and even more interesting than ever.
The cruelly though realistically titled "Twilight" gathers a splendid cast
of actors now in their golden years. Paul Newman, 73; Gene Hackman, 68;
James Garner, almost 70. Compared to them the women are youngsters of near
52 (Sarandon) and 54 (Channing). All these performers vindicate Cybill
Sheperd's arguments.
Newman has the lion's share in "Twilight." Present in every scene, he is
still appealing and handsome. The old charisma, the blue eyes, the
under-acting that suggests hidden depths, still work their magic. He plays
again a private eye (shades of his 1966 "Harper"), called Harry Ross. Harry
was a cop for 20 years, a P.I.  for 5, then, for an unspecified period, an
alcoholic, following his daughter's death. He is unattached.
Frustratingly, the scenario gives only the barest bones of his past. Did
his alcoholism follow or precede the separation from his wife? Was it a
divorce?  And so on. This murkiness, typical of the whole movie, does not
help our understanding of who Harry really is. More's the pity since Newman
deserves roles that document his characters' complexities.
The prelude is in Puerto Vallarta where musicians are lifelessly playing
"Solamente una vez," and where we see 17-year old Mel Ames
(ReeseWitherspoon, 22 any day now) topless in the water, in the altogether
in bed, and happily unsullied by silicone.
Harry, employed by her family to rescue her from her scummy lover Jeff,
gets her back, but only after Mel accidentally wounds Harry with his own
gun. This will launch the false rumor that Harry has lost his manhood, a
joke that joins other sexual ones, on aging, prostates, lighters that work
only after several tries, and such...
Cut to Los Angeles, two years later. We meet Mel's shapely mom (Sarandon,
or a body double) "au naturel" in her mansion's swimming pool. Like
daughter like mother.
Jack and Catherine Ames have taken in Harry as expiation for their
daughter's involuntary gunshot. Living in comfort over the garage, Harry
performs vague duties, playing cards with Jack being the clearest of them.
Jack is dying of cancer. Mel is snooty to the "handyman." Harry politely
lusts after Catherine. Catherine, still very much in love with her husband,
flirts with Harry.
When Jack charges Harry with a mysterious delivery of money, all kinds of
bizarre wheels are set in motion. The movie is an obvious attempt to
recapture the old "film noir" genre of, primarily the 1940s, with many of
its conventions: voice-over narration by the hero, an L.A. location,
double-crossings, false leads, faded newspaper clippings, sudden corpses,
etc. But no rainy streets at night or  lamps swinging symbolically from
light to shadow.
A great old film noir was "Out of the Past." The past was an oft-used
element of the genre. The Ames couple are former movie stars, whose
original affair coincided with the disappearance of Catherine's first
husband. This mystery is now unconvincingly re-woven into the current plot.
An addition for the 1990s has Stockard Channing as an old fling of Harry's.
Now a police lieutenant, she takes chances with her promotion by being
protective of him. It makes for some nice but improbable scenes.
Several more nice but improbable scenes go hand in hand with good
performances, snappy dialogue, zippy repartee. The movie's components, and
for that matter their sum, are none too coherent. No one is fleshed out,
from the principals to the supporting characters. The latter include blowzy
blonde Gloria  who is colorful; the reappearing Jeff who is pretty good;
gumshoe Reuben who is artificially dragged in for comic relief.
In the heyday of Hollywood's film noir, many of its directors were prolific
servants of the studios. Robert Benton is a post-studio-era writer-director
whose enviable track record barely exceeds a dozen titles: "Bonnie and
Clyde," " Bad Company," "The Late Show," Kramer vs. Kramer," "Places in the
Heart,"  "Nadine," and others, down to Benton's and Newman's collaboration
in "Nobody's Fool," from a novel by Richard Russo, the co-scripter of
"Twilight."
Benton's movies are often high-key imbedded with affecting low-key
passages. In "Twilight" he apparently opted for a high-key subject with an
unusually subdued treatment. It's in keeping with the characters of Harry
and his contemporaries Jack and the ironic Raymond (Garner), a former cop,
later a film-studio's security chief, now retired and living in a dream
house..
At the same time, while the typical classic film noir, although not
humorless, takes itself with seriousness, has passion and, inevitably, a
"femme fatale," "Twilight" departs from this norm. It is facetious at times
yet not at the high, often parodistic level of the new "noirs" of recent
years. And "femme fatale" by no stretch of the imagination can apply to the
appealing Susan Sarandon. This, and more, adds up to "Twilight" intending
to be a "new old noir," but hybridizing itself and falling between two
stools.
It's a risky concept, an interesting approach. Much happens, but in an
autumnal rhythm that feels slow. The film holds your attention all right
but dilutes itself with overkill in complications and underkill in
character exploration. The makers' gamble is not quite successful.
Production values are classy. Among them: three great houses (one left
unfinished by Frank Lloyd Wright); veteran Elmer Bernstein's good and
unobtrusive score; the photography by Piotr Sobocinski, one of the several
graduates of the Lodz Film School who now work  in America and keep
reminding us that Poland's losses are our gains.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critic's Association' at:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
I was reminded throughout 'Twilight' that with all of the
accomplishments the creators of this film have had that none of them
turn in their best work and they didn't intend to.  With an Elmer
Bernstein score to keep things running, if you closed your eyes, you
would swear that a film from the 1940's or 50's was being played out,
with the exception of a few four letter words of unnecessary choice for
the tone of this movie's intended audience.  It isn't limited to only
fans of those old gumshoe adventures involving murder, sex, seduction,
blackmail, or otherwise, but it is a film more suited to those who know
the history of its leading actors and the dangling intrigue of suspense
thrillers.
At 73 years young, Paul Newman has the masculine prowess of a man 15
years younger and although he sports an unwanted mustache (women will
like it), he still manages to give it all he can and succeeds
magnificently.  Newman stars as a former police officer and former
private investigator who now dabbles in the occasional assignment,
mostly for his friends, a couple of former Hollywood stars, portrayed by
Gene Hackman and Susan Sarandon.
At the beginning of the film, Newman is in Mexico to bring Hackman and
Sarandon's daughter (a minor at 17) back to the States and he encounters
a rough time as the girl knocks his gun loose and nearly shoots off
his....*ahem*, you figure it out.
Newman is asked by Hackman to deliver a package and encounters a few 9mm
rounds fired at him in the attempt.  Newman later discovers that someone
could be blackmailing his friends as they are possibly implicated in the
mysterious death of Sarandon's first husband and that is all I will tell
you about the inner complexities plot.
Almost 70 himself, Gene Hackman plays his role with a sense of
simplistic style, naive of his wife's infidelities and his health begins 
to fail.  He collapses one night from assumed heart failure and tries to
contact Newman who hears him on his answering machine and Sarandon jumps
out of Newman's bed, complete with his recognizable polo shirt on and
comes to Hackman's aid, exposing the affair.
Susan Sarandon is sultry in the role of the cheating wife and throw in
James Garner for good measure as a cop turned high paid security chief
and you have the makings for all the conflicting elements of human
nature and the mix for a great set of actors to recite some snappy
dialogue written by Robert Benton and Richard Russo and directed by
Benton who last directed Newman in 'Nobody's Fool', from 1994.  Benton 
is the owner of three Oscars including his writing and directing efforts
on 1979's 'Kramer vs. Kramer', which also won Best Picture.
Not a classic film but a film done with class, 'Twilight' is a fitting 
title bestowed upon a cast whose best work is probably behind them and 
they can now choose work more subtle because they don't need 
the challenges of motion pictures and their past work shows they have
nothing left to prove.  A mild success which many may mistake as
being unnecessarily tame.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Considering that TWILIGHT is only 94 minutes long and moves at
such a slow pace, the plot is surprisingly complex, not to say
downright confusing.  The three main male characters are in their
sixties and are taking that fact rather hard.  Harry Ross (Paul Newman)
has been a cop and a detective, but these days he is a houseguest for
the well-off Jack and Catherine Ames (Gene Hackman and Susan Sarandon).
Harry pays back his hosts by being a companion for Jack and
occasionally running errands.  Two years earlier the errand was to pick
up Jack's daughter who had run off with her boy friend to Puerto
Vallarto.
     Given a private package to deliver to a woman runs Harry into a
man dying of a fatal dose of bullets.  The man's last act is to try to
kill Harry.  Both the police and Harry are anxious to know why.  Harry
is able to discover that the dead man was anxious to uncover the story,
never fully explained, of what happened to Catherine's first husband
before she married Jack.
     Director Robert Benton, director of NOBODY'S FOOL, co-wrote this
film trying for the depth of character that film had and at the same
time the sort of mystery that Newman had with HARPER.  It must have
looked good on paper.  Clearly a lot of good actors had some respect
for the production and were willing to take non-starring roles.  We see
people like Stockard Channing and James Garner in supporting roles.
M. Emmet Walsh appears just long enough to die on camera.  It is hard
to judge from a script if a mystery will be a good one or not.  While
the plot complications were convoluted, I picked out the killer early
in the film, never wavered from my belief, and I was right.  I suspect
many viewers did the same.  The film was probably made with the
assumption that audiences would want to go along with Newman's easy-
going rapport with his fellow actors, particularly James Garner with
whom easy rapport does not seem like much of an accomplishment.
However, with too much being so mellow the film robs itself of a sense
of any real tension.  Hackman tries to give some power to his role, but
there is only so much he can do playing a man dying of cancer.
     Of some additional interest is that the Ames mansion was really
the home of Cedric Gibbons and Delores Del Rio.  Gibbons was the art
director on films like A NIGHT AT THE OPERA, THE BAD AND THE BEAUTIFUL,
and LUST FOR LIFE.  Del Rio was a fiery Latin beauty in films of the
1930s and 1940s. The Ames's other home was one actually built by Frank
Lloyd Wright, though never completed.
     The aptly named TWILIGHT seems full of characters in the twilight
of their lives and reaching a point where they think and talk rather
than act.  The point is carefully driven home that Newman's character
is still a lover, but the viewer has reason to be skeptical.  The
actors give the feel of people going gently into that good night.  I
rate TWILIGHT a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Robert Benton 
Cast:  Paul Newman, Susan Sarandon, Gene Hackman, Stockard Channing,
Reese Witherspoon, Giancarlo Esposito, James Garner, Liev Schreiber, M.
Emmet Walsh
Screenplay:  Robert Benton, Richard Russo
Producers:  Arlene Donovan, Scott Rudin
Runtime:  96 min.
US Distribution:  Paramount
Rated R:  Violence, language, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        It's not a good sensation to walk away from a film feeling hungry for
more.  At the end of Twilight, when the image blacked out and I saw the
word "Cast" peek up from the bottom of the screen, I was wondering where
the other three or four reels had gone.  Much to my dismay, it turns out
that I saw the whole thing.  Twilight is a mystery that runs just over
90 minutes; there are three extremely interesting and well-acted
characters that are given a depressingly short amount of time to make
their appearances and tell their stories.  I can't think of a film that
feels more rushed and unexplored as this one.
        The first scene is unimpressive, and had me prepared for an overall bad
film.  Paul Newman stars as Harry Ross, who, in this opening scene, is
in Mexico to retrieve a young woman (Reese Witherspoon) who is on
vacation with her boyfriend (Liev Schreiber) without the consent of her
parents.  Things go wrong, and she accidentally shoots him in the leg. 
The scene is dry and poorly choreographed, and is plagued by an insipid
and unoriginal music score.  
        Fortunately, things pick up a little.  We are transported two years
past the time depicted in the first scene; we learn that Harry lives
with some old friends, wealthy actor/actress couple Jack and Catherine
Ames (Gene Hackman and Susan Sarandon).  Basically, Harry is Jack's
personal private investigator.  Jack sends Harry on a job that he
describes as "safe"--he must deliver a package to a woman.  When Harry
arrives at the address, he finds a bleeding man who has been shot (M.
Emmet Walsh), and he tries to kill Harry.  Quickly, Harry finds himself
caught up in a web of criminal activities, and his primary motive in
attempting to bring the issues to closure revolves around his wanting to
know if the Ames are responsible.
        In the end, I found myself disappointed not in the film's execution,
but in it's completely limited approach to a situation that is so
complex and interesting.  Perhaps the best thing about the film is
Newman, who is a fantastic, seasoned, and completely engaging performer
to watch on screen.  He's great here--Harry is funny and well-written,
and he has a life outside of what we see.  Newman's performance is deep
and sympathetic, and he had me hooked immediately--he plays his part
like a pro.
        Hackman and Sarandon are equally good, and are both given fascinating
characters to embody.  Jack, who is dying from cancer, is a very flawed
individual, but Hackman elicits our sympathy and makes us like him
despite some of the things he does.  And Sarandon, as the woman who will
do anything for her husband, is also excellent:  she shows all of the
depth and complexity that she did in Dead Man Walking, but in half the
screen time.  There is also a colorful supporting cast, including James
Garner and Stockard Channing.
        These characters are so well-written that I simply can't believe
writer/director Robert Benton didn't do more with them.  Twilight could
have been a full hour longer without overstaying its welcome.  I wanted
to see these people in more situations; I wanted to see them interact
with each other more.  I wanted to see moments of emotional rage, and
moments of quiet, probing tenderness.  There are small bursts of all of
these things in Twilight, but the moments are so short and yet so tasty
that I felt kind of the same way I do when I eat just one potato chip on
an empty stomach.
        And it doesn't help that there are things here that I didn't like.  The
subplot involving a delusional man who thinks he is Harry's partner is
intrusive and pointless.  Much of the dialogue feels forced:  in one
scene, Witherspoon (who plays the Ames' daughter) meets Harry as he is
watching Jack and Catherine cuddle on their bed.  "This is their story,"
she says.  "You and I just have bit parts."  And while it's a nice
comment and probably holds a lot of truth, it feels wrong as dialogue,
and is certainly out of place from a girl who we're lead to believe is
of questionable intelligence.
        It's common to criticize a film because it feels long and tedious; I
criticize Twilight because of the opposite.  Benton rushes the
fascinating story to a premature conclusion, and the result is a film
that feels incomplete.  The three hours of Titanic feel swift, but we
are fulfilled and exhilarated when it's over.  The 90 minutes of
Twilight feel alarmingly brief--they whet our appetites for a main
course that will never arrive.

Author
Frankie Paiva
"Doesn't it bother you that people like Catherine Hayward and Jack Ames can
prance right through life with everyone else, guys like you and me left to pick
up the pieces?" Asks Raymond Hope (James Garner) to Harry Ross. (Newman) They
are discussing Susan Sarandon and Gene Hackman and the sudden disappearance of
Susan's former husband in Twilight, a supposed nostalgic piece of the old 40s
crime dramas. Yes it bothers me! Especially since the audience is asked to pick
up the pieces of this horrible modernized detective story.
Harry is being interviewed about his past in a jail cell, he begins to tell the
tale of how we got involved with the Ames family. He was referred by Raymond
just after his alcoholism destroyed his life. This begins is a mindless chase
over a $10,000 payment of something that happened in Mexico that's full of
stereotypical characters and bad acting to reach a final conclusion. The actual
parts of the film that lead to the finale (if you can even call it that) take
no more than ten or fifteen minutes.
So, what else is offered to make this a 96 minute movie you ask. The nostalgia
forties piece gets a modern dose of sex and violence. For instance, Stockard
Channing is the only female character, whose breasts, we do not see! James
Garner is the only one not having sex. And Gene Hackman is the only person who
hasn't shot anyone! If this sounds like a piece of filth, it is. 
The use of Gloria as a subplot is also a very weak excuse to pile on the
violence. Even when she clubs him over the head, puts a gun to his face, and
later tries to demand more money and kill him again. A couple of minutes before
she dies (yes I'm giving away the plot, but trust me, you won't care anyway)
she is suddenly made into a complex character with feelings that we are all
supposed to grieve for.
This isn't to mention the fact over overwhelming cheese. Whereas in Dead Men
Don't Wear Plaid (yes that was a comedy but I'm on a roll here) the cheese was
used effectively and the actors were aware of it, this is supposed to come on
as real drama. 
Let me make this review shorter for you: If you enjoy inflicting pain on
yourself, over and over again while constantly swearing and making crude sexual
comments while baring your chest, than this is the film for you. If not, don't
see Twilight, the film gets my * star.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
A powerful cast comes together with dulled results in TWILIGHT, four-time
Oscar winning writer/director Robert Benton's latest project, about an ex-
private investigator who makes a return to his gumshoe days when a simple
package delivery turns up a dead body. The ex-P.I. in question (er,
questioning? the film is setup as he recounts the events to the police) is
Harry Ross (Paul Newman), also a former police officer, husband, and father,
who has since gone into retirement and found his purpose in bottles of
bourbon. For quite some time, Harry has been living with Jack Ames (Gene
Hackman) and his wife, Catherine (Susan Sarandon), a pair of aging Hollywood
stars living a reclusive lifestyle in their luxurious estate.
When the terminally-ill Jack asks his old friend to deliver a package, Harry
agrees, but when Harry reaches the rendezvous point and finds anything but the
expected, he sets out to solve a strange murder mystery. A dead man and a
stash of newspaper clippings concerning Catherine, her first husband's
mysterious death, and her marriage to Jack, spark Harry's intrigue, but
unfortunately the audience isn't as lucky. Without being pulled into the
circumstances, we're left almost indifferent as to who, what, why, where, and
how any of this came to be. The side plot of a possible love interest between
Catherine and Harry seems pointless and irrelevant, while the opening scenes
involving Harry's retrieval of the Ames' teenager daughter from a Mexico
vacation with an older boyfriend offer nothing but an opportunity for a lame
running gag.
James Garner has a supporting role as Raymond Hope, an old friend of Harry's
from his days on the police force. Garner completes what should be the most
impressive cast capable of receiving the senior citizen discount at Sizzler,
but such a boringly low-key film wastes every single one of them. While they
all possess a strongly dignified presence onscreen, there is nothing in
TWILIGHT for them to sink their teeth into; no chances to boast that their
acting abilities have a greater longevity than their hearing abilities. This
film unfortunately takes the magnitude of its cast for granted.
Besides unoriginal plot devices and an unfueled storyline, Elmer Bernstein's
musical score also misfires, becoming an annoyingly ever-present nuisance. It
seems as though one scene may not pass without a symphonic tension builder,
when in reality, the scene could be much more affective without it. Musical
scores are meant to enhance the emotional stimulations a film creates, not cue
them as Bernstein tries to do here.
Playing like L.A. CONFIDENTIAL at a geriatric pace, TWILIGHT is a sub-par
example of film noir. No matter how interesting your plot may be, there are
crucial elements every story must possess. From elementary school to high
school graduation, English teachers try their hardest to teach them to their
pupils. Take away just one of these attributes and the story suffers. What's a
good story without a climax? What's a good story with no real resolution?
TWILIGHT is probably a good example.

Author
Michael Dequina
Three, count 'em, three Academy Award winning thespians in prime
form--Paul Newman, Susan Sarandon, and Gene Hackman--lead the cast of
Robert Benton's Twilight.  While that would appear to be enough to
distinguish the film, Twilight is curiously missing the one element that
should be a mystery-thriller's stock-in-trade: the element of surprise.
But I suppose Twilight _does_ hold some surprise in its lack thereof.  The
story is not without promise.  Burnt-out former cop, ex-private
investigator, and recovering alcoholic Harry Ross (Newman), has been in the
exclusive employ of married actors Jack and Catherine Ames (Hackman and
Sarandon) ever since rescuing their rebellious young daughter (Reese
Witherspoon, whose character's major contribution is appearing topless)
from an illicit Mexican getaway with an older lover (the ubiquitous Liev
Schreiber) years before.  As the poster's tagline goes, "Some people can
buy their way out of anything.  Except the past."  This dark past starts to
come to light when the cancer-stricken Jack enlists Harry to drop off a
stash of money to a woman at a seedy apartment.  Instead of finding the
woman, Harry finds a gravely wounded, gun-toting man, which leads to the
reopening of the mystery behind years-ago disappearance of Catherine's
first husband.
Benton and co-scripter Richard Russo run into trouble once the set-up is
out of the way.  While they infuse the proceedings with an appealing sense
of humor, and Newman's Harry is an unconventionally self-effacing hero, the
story's would-be twists are obvious and telegraphed, and to call its
resolution a "payoff" is to suggest a satisfaction that it does not
deliver.  Benton and, surprisingly, cinematographer Piotr Sobocinski (who
created the gorgeous palette of Krzystof Kieslowski's Three Colors trilogy)
botch the atmosphere, which is much too light to create an appropriate aura
of mystery; only Elmer Bernstein's evocative score generates the right
effect.  At the very least the top trifecta of Newman, Sarandon, and
Hackman turn in terrific work, but, again, where is the surprise in that?
It is nice to see three fine actors in the upper reaches of age headline a
major project from such a youth-obsessed industry.  As refreshing as that
fact is, though, it is dispiriting that the film they are given to carry is
as unsatisfying as the dull (and dully titled) Twilight.  (opens March 6)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
CinemaReview Magazine: http://www.CinemaReview.com
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html

Author
Frederick Vallaeys
--------------FABCCB9FB9A2AB93FE5DE43F
Twilight: a Crowd Pleaser, But Not For Young People
If the entire movie was more like its prologue, it would
have been a definite crowd-pleaser for college
audiences. The sexy, comical prologue takes place in
Mexico. There, a teenager named Mel Ames (Reese
Witherspoon), daughter of Hollywood actors Jack and
Catherine Ames (Gene Hackman and Susan
Sarandon), has eloped with her older boyfriend (Liev
Schreiber) to enjoy the pleasures of life. When private
investigator Harry Ross (Paul Newman) finds her and
tries to return her to her parents, he accidentally gets
shot in the leg by Mel.
After that, the movie shifts to the present. Harry has
retired and is in the permanent service of Jack and
Catherine. When he agrees to deliver a mysterious
package for Jack, he discovers what appears to be the
murder of an innocent man. An ex-cop, Harry hasn't
lost his desire to investigate, and he thinks the killing
might be connected to his employer. His only clue is
the fact that Catherine's ex-husband disappeared
under suspicious circumstances right before she
married Jack. From that point, the movie slowly
progresses to uncover some muddled clues. By the
end, the obvious has been exposed.
The members of the cast fit their roles perfectly.
Sarandon, Hackman and Newman are all aging actors
adept at portraying their characters' struggles. Only
Newman seems to have fun with his role as a
divorced, ex-alcoholic and former private investigator.
Newman charmingly portrays his character's revival
after having been thrown in the middle of a murder
mystery. The humor he inserts into his character is the
best part of the film. Sarandon and Hackman are fairly
uninspired, but then again, their characters basically do
nothing more interesting than vegetate.
"Twilight" may sound appealing from the way it is being
marketed, but it is not the type of film many young
people will enjoy. Unlike most of today's movies,
"Twilight" progresses very slowly, without any very
memorable scenes. The dialogue is contemplative and
filled with long moments of silence while Catherine is
playing the piano for Harry.
While this film likely has value for older people, I am
not in a position to appreciate that fact. As a college student,
I can't recommend this film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TWILIGHT is an atmospheric thriller, which unfortunately isn't much
more than that.  Written and directed by KRAMER VS. KRAMER's Oscar
winning writer and director Robert Benton, the movie plays like an L.A.
CONFIDENTIAL-lite.  It has the mood down perfect thanks particularly to
a richly textured and somber score by Elmer Bernstein.
     All of Hollywood's old school seem to have parts, but there isn't a
single character worth caring about.  Still, one could think of many
worse ways to spend a couple of hours than hanging out with old pros
like Paul Newman, Gene Hackman and Susan Sarandon -- too bad their
material is rarely worthy of their talents.
     The show's highly convoluted plot bound in a film noir wrapper
starts in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, where detective Harry Ross has been
sent by his old buddy Jack Ames.  It seems that Jack's teenage daughter
Mel (Reese Witherspoon) has left town with her older boyfriend Jeff
Willis (Liev Schreiber) for some sex and surf south of the border.  Jack
wants Mel back, and Jeff thrown in jail for cavorting with a minor.
     As the heavily tanned and wrinkled Harry, Paul Newman gives a
meticulous performance and does all he can to enliven the cliched role
of the detective way past his prime.  Harry has a hard luck story which
he shares with the audience.  He used to have a family, a profession as
a cop, and generally, a life.  Now he merely exists.
     Mel grabs Harry's gun when he tries to bring her home.  In the
show's running joke, Mel's shot is rumored, incorrectly, to have blown
away Harry's private parts.
     The show skips ahead two years where Harry incongruously now lives
with Mel and her parents.  Her father, who has cancer and is about to
die, is played by Gene Hackman in one of his least interesting
performances.  Mel's mother Catherine (Susan Sarandon) along with her
husband have some secrets they're not telling.  And Harry has a quickly
discovered one night stand with Catherine.
     Soon people start dying, and cops start investigating.  But,
everything is intentionally kept obscure until the end as if the
filmmaker was worried that we might leave or fall asleep if he didn't
keep everything murky.  While we are awaiting the conclusion's out of
the blue explanation, Stockard Channing, James Garner, M. Emmet Walsh,
and others drop by the set to act a few scenes.  With the film's glacial
pacing, the audience would have been happy to swap a few of the stars
for a little more energy.
     As a chance to see some old Hollywood luminaries act together, the
show delivers.  Why they weren't given a decent script is the movie's
real mystery.
     TWILIGHT is rated R for nudity, violence, and profanity and would
be fine for teenagers.


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Paul Newman, Susan Sarandon, Gene Hackman, James Garner, 
      Stockard Channing, Reese Witherspoon, Giancarlo Esposito
Director: Robert Benton
Producers: Arlene Donovan, Scott Rudin
Screenplay: Robert Benton & Richard Russo
Cinematography: Piotr Sobocinski
Music: Elmer Bernstein
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     TWILIGHT may end up being the most disappointing film of 1998.  It 
certainly holds that distinction to date, but I'm aware that there are 
ten months left in the year.  And let me emphasize that by 
"disappointing," I mean something that falls drastically short of my 
expectations.  That's different from "bad," which TWILIGHT certainly 
isn't.  There are pleasures to be found within, but this movie never 
comes close to living up to its potential.  It's like the baseball 
rookie phenom who's supposed to hit .300, but can't get his bat on the 
ball.  
     Look at the talent involved in TWILIGHT.  The three leads -- Paul 
Newman, Susan Sarandon, and Gene Hackman -- all have gold statuettes on 
their mantelpieces (and for good reason).  The supporting cast includes 
the always reliable James Garner, Stockard Channing, and M. Emmet Walsh, 
not to mention up-and-coming actress Reese Witherspoon.  The director, 
Robert Benton, has written and helmed such efforts as NOBODY'S FOOL and 
KRAMER VS. KRAMER.  The cinematographer, Polish-born Piotr Sobocinski, 
was one of Kieslowski's favorite collaborators, and did the photography 
for RED.  Considering all of this, it's no wonder that I had high 
expectations for TWILIGHT -- expectations it didn't come close to 
fulfilling.  
     The problem is the script, which could charitably be called 
unspectacular.  This is a B-movie screenplay with an A-level cast and 
crew.  Ultimately, no matter how talented the people making the film 
are, there's a limit to what they can do with a plot this contrived and 
predictable.  True, the high level of acting and rich, noir atmosphere 
keep viewers intrigued and involved, but, when the final credits start 
to roll, there's a vague sense of dissatisfaction.  The question 
foremost in my mind at that moment was "Is that all there is?"
     Paul Newman plays Harry Ross, an ex-cop turned ex-private 
investigator turned alcoholic.  He's in the twilight of his life, 
looking back on the wreckage of an existence that he's not especially 
proud of.  "When I started out," he remarks, "I had a wife and daughter.  
Now, I'm a drunk."  The only time TWILIGHT'S screenplay truly shines is 
when it contemplates questions of age and mortality.  Normally, 
mystery/thrillers have younger, stronger protagonists -- not white-
haired retirees who have to worry about prostate problems.  If nothing 
else, TWILIGHT captures a slice of the melancholia associated with 
growing old.
     Harry lives with his good friends, the actor/actress couple of Jack 
and Catherine Ames (Hackman and Sarandon).  In return for their 
hospitality, he does an occasional odd job for them.  His latest errand 
lands him in hot water.  What is supposed to be a routine transfer of a 
sealed manila envelope puts Harry on the wrong end of a gun wielded by 
another ex-cop (M. Emmet Walsh) -- only this guy has blood leaking from 
several bullet holes in his body.  Unsurprisingly, Harry soon finds 
himself involved in a web of intrigue that involves murder, blackmail, 
and a secret buried 20 years in the past.  Meanwhile, he learns that 
Jack is dying of cancer and Catherine is all-too-willing to have an 
affair if that's what Harry wants.
     TWILIGHT is classic potboiler stuff, and it's easy to figure out 
how things are going to turn out in the end.  The few twists and 
surprises are obvious and the seams are visible in the pedestrian 
screenplay.  Still, although the story isn't likely to stave off 
boredom, Newman's acting accomplishes that.  This isn't the actor's best 
work, but, even not in peak form, he is adept enough at his craft to 
create an engaging personality.  Harry may be caught in the midst of a 
silly plot, but we're still interested in how he gets out of his 
predicament and whether he makes peace with himself.  Sarandon is a 
wonderfully mature-yet-sultry femme fatale, Garner is enjoyable as one 
of Harry's old friends, and Witherspoon is fresh and sexy.  The only one 
who rubbed me the wrong way is Giancarlo Esposito, who plays a fatuous 
would-be sidekick.  
     TWILIGHT drips atmosphere.  Even though it's a contemporary tale, 
it has the feel of something set forty or fifty years ago.  But 
stylistic photography and solid acting aren't everything, and there are 
only so many plot imperfections such assets can mask.  TWILIGHT should 
have been a better movie.  It's rare that this much talent is assembled 
for a single production, and it seems criminal to waste it in this 
manner.  With a lesser cast, the film would have been easy to shrug off.  
But with this bunch, although the final product is undeniably better 
than it would have been with a group of secondary performers, the 
aftertaste is vaguely bitter.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Michael Redman
The lives of older people in the twilight of their years attempting to come to
grips with their shared histories and possible futures is a fascinating topic.
Finding an all-star cast for such a film is a stroke of genius. Combining all
that with a three-time Oscar-winning director (Robert Benton of "Kramer Vs.
Kramer") and creating a decidedly mediocre movie is the stuff of disappointment.
In yet another noir mystery set in Hollywood -- how many of these have we seen
during the past few years? -- the atmosphere is moody, the actors enjoyable to
watch and the story goes nowhere.
Over-70 Harry Ross (Paul Newman) is a washed up cop-turned-private eye-turned
Man Friday trying to figure out how to live what remains of his life. He's
screwed up things pretty well ("I had a wife and daughter. Now, I'm a drunk)
and is at a crossroads.
A couple of years ago, he traveled to Mexico to bring back Mel (Reese
Witherspoon), the under-age daughter of Jack (Gene Hackman) and Catherine
(Susan Sarandon) Ames and now lives with them. The Ames are former movie
stars, past their prime and the three have become fast friends. One gets the
impression that Ross is just hanging out waiting for something to wake him up.
 To fill his time, he does odd jobs for Jack and falls in love with Catherine.
Jack is in even worse shape than Harry. He's dying of cancer with only a year
to live.
Things do turn more exciting when Jack asks Harry to drop off a sealed manila
envelope for him. Instead of the routine errand that Ross expects, he walks
into a barrage of bullets from the gun of another ex-cop who is, himself, full
of bloody holes. This unsettling event gives the former detective a project to
throw himself into and launches an investigation that revolves around the
mysterious disappearance of Catherine's first husband 20 years before.
Through a series of very complex and convoluted plot devices that involve
murder; blackmail; guns; Mel's Mexico traveling partner and his parole
officer; Ross's former cop buddies, ex-lover and would-be sidekick, the tale
finally ends up exactly where everyone expects it to. It's a film noir
tradition that the story twists and turns down side roads for an unexpected
finale, but here the journey meanders towards an ending that no one cares
about. The only surprises are exactly whose face fits which role in the
scenario. By the time they show you, it doesn't matter.
The storyline gets goofier and goofier exemplified in Ross's relationship with
Rubin (Giancarlo Esposito), a partner wannabe. These scenes are obviously
designed to be comic relief, however they are neither. Rubin and Ross have
some past relationship but either it's not explained or I didn't care enough
at that point to remember.
A running joke about where Harry was supposedly shot while in Mexico is
probably meant to mirror his questions about whether he is still able to
perform. It's also not funny, doesn't connect and keeps on showing up long
after it has run its course.
On the positive side, it's often enjoyable to watch the seasoned actors on the
screen. The three leads all have well-deserved Academy Awards and turn in
accomplished, if not extraordinary jobs. Newman is  a grand actor, but doesn't
seem quite suited to the dark film style. He is a bit too clean and
understated to come across as desperate and down and out. Hackman, also
low-key, is believable but lacks sparkle. Sarandon comes across well as an
sultry older babe although she is one-dimensional.
The actors do what they can with lame dialog, but they can't pull the film out
of the hole it's dug for itself. James Garner who plays Ross's old buddy
ex-cop Raymond Hope is always a treat, but even he half-heartedly struggles
through lines like "I'm glad they didn't shoot your pecker off."
The best part of the film is the look at old friends, how their relationships
change over the years and the difficult choices they must make. The genuinely
easy and casual interactions among the actors hint that being on the set was
much more interesting  than what ended up on the screen
The film doesn't run very long before the audience realizes that it's
hopeless. The only reason for watching is the actors. It reminds me of
disaster movies such as "Towering Inferno" where the star power is supposed to
make everyone ignore the film's problems.
In a better world, there would have been second-rate actors in this
second-rate movie and the ones here would have been saved for something
better. Of course, we don't live in that better world, but you could make
yours a little nicer by choosing a different movie.
(Michael Redman has written this column for 23 years and was fascinated to see
that we got a week of winter this year just as spring is due. Email him at
redman@bvoice.com with your witty comments.)
[This appeared in the 3/13/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
David N. Butterworth
        After "Nobody's Fool" (the low-key, unsullied Paul Newman drama
from 1994, not the Rosanna Arquette romantic "comedy" from 1986), I had
high hopes for "Twilight," the latest film to team director Robert Benton
with the man whose salad dressing has become a staple in my household.
        Benton's "Nobody's Fool" was a thoughtful, satisfying, small-town
drama which, along with Newman's typically fine work, was tempered by a
couple of standout performances from the unlikely guises of Bruce Willis
and Melanie Griffith.  In his first film since then, Benton has assembled
another first-rate cast headed up by Newman, Susan Sarandon, and Gene
Hackman.  But this small-time film noir, about an ex-cop turned private
investigator, turned retiree, turned drunk, is remarkably--and
disappointingly--ordinary.
        Sarandon and Hackman, who play fading movie stars Jack and
Catherine Ames, are as solid and dependable as you'd expect from two
performers with over fifty films each to their credit.  Newman, too, is as
every bit believable as Harry Ross, the ex-P.I. who lives with the Ames
family and for whom he does occasional odd jobs.  Jobs such as heading down
to Puerta Vallarta to retrieve their teenage daughter Mel, played awkwardly
and toplessly in the opening scenes by the up-and-coming Reese Witherspoon.
        "Finding her was the easy part" Harry intones in the film's noirish
voiceover and, as it turns out, he was right.  This transaction sets up a
boorish running gag about Harry being accidentally shot in the, ahem, inner
thigh.
        But it's his next gig (since nobody's fool enough to buy the
"retired" line) that lands him in even hotter water; Harry finds himself
the unwitting focus of a murder investigation.
        The film pours on the supporting cast like there's no tomorrow but
I took great delight in seeing Liev Schreiber (from "The Daytrippers"),
then M. Emmet Walsh, then Stockard Channing, then James Garner, then
Giancarlo Esposito, then John Spencer, all popping up and contributing to
the proceedings.  It's the proceedings that just aren't all that special.
        "Twilight" is a moody gumshoe tale that, although well acted,
doesn't really take off.  The plot's twists and turns, if you can call them
that, aren't particularly riveting, and the substance of the piece, while
tried and true, seems almost too tried and true.  It's always fun watching
Newman, Sarandon, and Hackman--even though they've all done better work
elsewhere--as well as the supporting players but the writing (by Benton and
Richard Russo) is, sadly, tepid and uninvolving.
        There's not enough mystery, intrigue, or depth to make the film
play like something from the pen of Dashiell Hammett.  And there's not
enough style or atmosphere for it to rank alongside such noir classics as
"Chinatown," "The Maltese Falcon" or yes, even "L.A. Confidential" (nor do
I believe it's even aiming that high).
        No, "Twilight" has much smaller aspirations.  Unfortunately small,
as it does here, often amounts to less.

Author
Bill Finch
Twilight is a crime/detective film done in a nouveau 1940's style.  The
cast is superb.  The film is not.  Is the film worth seeing?  Maybe.
Although Twilight misses it's mark by a mile, the actors are all quite
competent.  If you're a fan of any of the principals you may enjoy this
film.  My favorite character actor, M.  Emmet Walsh, has a wonderfully
satiric 45 second part as terminally wounded private eye.  Unfortunately
the principal characters are poorly developed and unbelievable.  It
frequently seems like the actors are just reading their lines.  The
direction is minimalist.  The story is simplistic.  The dialog is
trivial.  Robert Benton, who directed and wrote the script (with Richard
Russo) has done much better in his many previous efforts (Nobody's Fool,
Nadine, Places in the Heart, Kramer vs.  Kramer, etc.).
Twilight suffers in another major area.  The pace is uncharacteristic
for a would be detective drama.  At times I feel like the actors, and
quite possibly the audience, are about to fall asleep.  The classic
1940's crime/detective films were often cheesy, but they were tightly
cut.  L.  A.  Confidential and Pulp Fiction, with their rich additions
to the classic style, attest to the viability of this kind of project in
modern times.  They both have tightly woven complex scripts that are
cleanly executed.  Twilight ambles.  The editing lacks a philosophical
consistency.  The timing of the scenes is irregular.  It's as if the
editor had too much footage for some scenes and used this as padding to
make up for missing footage in other scenes.  The film exceeds the
traditionally requisite 90 minutes by just one minute, but it seems more
like an additional hour.  Don't see this film when you're tired.
Harry (Paul Newman) is a rundown private eye who spent 20 years with the
LAPD before going into business for himself.  His career as a private
detective has been lackluster.  The film opens in Mexico with Harry
rescuing Mel, the 17 year old daughter of Catherine (Susan Sarandon) and
Jack (Gene Hackman).  It seems that Mel is having a youthful tryst with
the not so bright punk, Jeff.  Harry, true to his character, spirits the
girl away but manages to get accidentally shot in the groin area by Mel.
The action jumps forward two years and finds Harry semi-retired and
living with Catherine and Jack.  Catherine is a retired actress and a
bit of a tease.  Harry has the hots for Catherine.  Jack has plenty of
money and a case of cancer.  Harry passes time playing cards with Jack
while keeping an eye on Catherine.  Harry wants Catherine but we're not
sure what Catherine wants.  This arrangement works well until Harry and
Catherine finally make it to the bedroom.  As one would expect, this
behavior is discovered by Jack.  Needless to say Jack is pissed at
Harry, with a "how could you" directed at Catherine.
Meanwhile, Harry is doing Jack a favor by delivering an envelope to a
stranger.  Things get bloody as one by one everyone Harry contacts
either beats him up or gets blown away by an unknown assailant.  Harry
keeps getting arrested by Verna (Stockard Channing), his former partner
(in more ways than one) on the LAPD.  Verna keeps letting Harry off
because she feels sympathy for him.  Rumor has it that Harry's private
parts were blown off by the 17 year old Mel in Mexico.
Meanwhile a maguffin develops.  Catherine's former husband went missing
20 years earlier.  It begins to look like maybe he was killed and that
hush money is being paid to someone.  Who did it?  Was it Jack?  Was it
Catherine?  Should Harry investigate and turn in his buddy or lover?
You'll just have to see the film to find out.

Author
Bob Bloom

 Twilight (1998) 3 stars out of 4. Starring Paul Newman, Gene Hackman,
Susan Sarandon, James Garner and Stockard Channing. Directed by Robert
Benton.
 A feeling comes over you while you're watching Twilight. The simplest way
to describe it is reassurance, a confidence that the movie will not
disappoint you.
 This feeling, no doubt, can be attributed to those involved both in front
and behind the camera of this laid-back mystery. Twilight stars Paul
Newman, Susan Sarandon and Gene Hackman, plus it features James Garner and
Stockard Channing. And, the movie is directed and was co-authored by
Oscar-winner Robert Benton (Kramer vs. Kramer, Places in the Heart,
Nobody's Fool).
 With credentials like these, Twilight can't fail.
 Well, that depends. For today's young audiences, used to MTV-style rapid
cuts, dramatic explosions, testosterone machismo and music loud enough to
drown out inane dialogue, Twilight will seem quaint.
 But for the serious filmgoer - those who, no matter what their age, can
appreciate crisp dialogue and good acting - Twilight will be a treat.
 It is a languid melodrama, set in contemporary Hollywood and features
stock characters familiar to those who enjoy the film noir genre. There's
the burned-out ex-cop-retired private eye who, though he observes the world
through cynical eyes, nonetheless still retains a modicum of idealism.
There's the rich movie star couple who, behind the facade of having it all,
share dark secrets. There's the rebellious, sexpot young daughter who's too
mature for her age. And there's the decent police detective who, though
bound to do her duty, also is compassionate enough to bend the law to aid a
friend.
 Newman is Harry Ross, ex-cop, ex-P.I., who has fallen on hard times. He
lives above the garage of the mansion of his last clients, screen legends
Jack and Catherine Ames (Hackman and Sarandon). Two years earlier, Ross was
hired by Jack Ames to go to Mexico to retrieve Ames' then-17-year-old
daughter.
 Ross caught the teen, but in the ensuing struggle, she got hold of his
gun, which discharged, hitting him in the upper leg. However, as Ross was
to learn later, the rumor circulating around L.A. was that he was shot in
his manhood.
 It is two years after the shooting incident and Ross, who claims to be
retired, is asked by Jack Ames to deliver a package.
 Being this is Hollywood and a murder mystery, the package, of course,
contains hush money for a blackmailer. From this starting point, the bodies
and mayhem begin to pile up.
 Like most types of tales in this genre, there are some lapses in
plausibility, but the script is so slick, the acting so intriguing, that
it's not until you are leaving the theater that you pause and ask yourself,
"Hey, why didn't he just ...?"
 Newman, as Ross, glides through his role. His voice has the raspiness of a
man who has downed a hundred too many Jack Daniels, and his observations -
especially in his voice-over narration - are that of a weary man who has
seen too many double-crosses and listened to too many lies.
 Wisely, Sarandon is not a smoldering femme fatale, but a mature woman who
exudes sexuality without needing to advertise it. She is fierce and sharp.
 Hackman's character, the onetime matinee idol, is the weakest of the
three, both literally and figuratively. He is dying of cancer. But, despite
his illness, he remains a shrewd observer of the human condition, playing
on Harry's guilt to get the detective to work for him.
 Garner, as Ross' colleague and rival, matches his longtime friend's
cynicism. What he lacks is the moral center that Ross is still able to
maintain.
 Channing, as the police lieutenant and Ross' former partner, again
demonstrates what a fine actress she is. Her Verna is a good cop with
divided loyalties, first to the department, the other to her ex-partner.
 Twilight is a stylish film. Benton's dialogue is mature and wry. The
musical score by the legendary Elmer Bernstein is appropriately plaintive.
 Twilight, though set in contemporary L.A., has a nostalgic aura. It
doesn't rush its story, allowing the viewer to get to know its protagonists
as it ambles along. It's a first-class production.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Matt Williams
Robert Benton has assembled a stellar, mature cast for his latest
feature, Twilight, a film noir mystery set amid the fading stars of
Hollywood.
Paul Newman stars as retired detective Harry Ross.  Harry has spent the
last couple of years doing odd jobs for Jack and Catherine Ames (Gene
Hackman and Susan Sarandon), a pair of married actors who have fallen
from the limelight.
When Jack sends him on a routine delivery job, however, the old
instincts kick in.  Soon, Harry is wading through a mystery where
friendships and lives are on the line, and he no longer knows who to
trust.
There are plenty of familiar faces throughout Twilight, in addition to
Newman, Hackman and Sarandon.  James Garner plays Raymond Hope, a former
cop and one of Harry's best friends.  Stockard Channing plays Verna,
Harry's former partner, and possibly a former love interest.  Reese
Witherspoon is Mel, the distrustful daughter of the Ames', and Liev
Schrieber is her scuzzy boyfriend.  Giancarlo Esposito appears as
Harry's bumbling detective protigi, and John Spencer is a suspicious
police captain.
With a cast like that, it's almost worth watching Twilight just to
stargaze. Luckily, there's more to the film than some sort of actor's
recognition ceremony. Twilight has a solid film noir-ish plot.  It may
not have as many twists and turns as some of the classics, but it has
much more than a lot of what passes for film these days.
The major cast members all deliver strong performances, as can be
expected of their caliber.  However, none of them have that little extra
oomph which would make them memorable.  The supporting cast is
enjoyable, if a little underdrawn.  Stockard Channing's character, in
particular, is a cipher.  There's more to her character than the film
takes the time to describe. It's a minor, but irritating, flaw.
With a solid cast, and a good plot, there's a lot to recommend about
Twilight. It's biggest flaw is actually its short running time.  At a
slim 94 minutes, there's a lot of stuff that's packed into an awfully
small package.  Still, the chance to see Newman, Sarandon and Hackman
working together is worth a cramp or two.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Christian Pyle
In "Twilight," a ex-alcoholic, ex-cop, ex-husband, ex-private-eye, Harry Ross
(Paul Newman), works for a pair of aging Hollywood actors, Catherine (Susan
Sarandon) and Jack Ames (Gene Hackman).  Jack is being blackmailed, and he asks
Harry to deliver the payoff.  Instead of the blackmailers, Harry finds a dying
ex-cop (M. Emmet Walsh).  As more bodies begin to pile up, Harry realizes that
he will have to solve the disappearance of Catherine's first husband twenty
years earlier to find out who's willing to kill to keep that secret buried.
Newman.  Sarandon.  Hackman.  With an A-list cast of Oscar laureates like that,
"Twilight" would seem very promising.  However, the script is tired and
predictable.  It would serve well as a TV-movie-of-the-week, possibly with some
1970's detective hero reprising his role.  The appeal of the project for its
stars and its director, Robert Benton, is nostalgia.  "Twilight" wants very
much to be a 1940's film noir with Alan Ladd or Dick Powell.  All of the
standard tropes are here:  a hard-boiled P.I. among the rich and beautiful
whose glamour hides sinister secrets, a femme fatale who tempts and confounds
the hero, shadowy figures shooting from doorways, dead bodies confronting the
hero at every turn, cops dogging his path and interfering with his
investigation.  The script offers little originality, and co-authors Benton and
Richard Russo seem unaware that what was original in 1948 is a cliché in 1998. 
Elmer Bernstein's score is hauntingly melodic and could have been drawn
note-for-note from a vintage noir.
The lead actors try hard-none of the three has every made less than a full
effort, even when burdened with a bad script.  They try to invest every line
and gesture with meaning, and they create a convincing sense of the
relationships between the main characters.  Harry is fond of Jack but is in
love with Catherine.  Jack is dying of cancer and is jealous of Harry's love
for Catherine.  Catherine teases Harry and enjoys his attention, but her real
feelings are hidden beneath a carefully-maintained veneer.  "Twilight" wants to
be character-driven like "Nobody's Fool" (also directed by Benton, also
starring Newman, based on a novel by Russo) was, but the tired script gives the
actors too little to work with.
"Twilight" also squanders a fine supporting cast:  Stockard Channing (Harry's
friend on the police force), Reese Witherspoon (Jack & Catherine's bratty kid),
Giancarlo Esposito (the humorous sidekick), John Spencer (Harry's nemesis on
the force), Liev Schreiber and Margo Martindale (the blackmailers), and James
Garner (a cop who bailed movie stars out of trouble).

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 6, 1998
Starring: Paul Newman, Susan Sarandon, Gene Hackman, Stockard Channing,
Reese Witherspoon, James Garner, Liev Schrieber, Margo Martindale, John
Spencer
Directed by: Robert Benton
Distributed by: Paramount Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (violence, language, some sexuality)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/twilight.htm
By all rights and properties of the American movie-going public,
TWILIGHT should and will not be a popular movie. It has a target
audience of people who were in the prime of their life the last time
Paul Newman was in a feature film and it opens on a very crowded weekend
with three other, more popular releases (by "popular" I mean a wider
target audience). But popularity and weekend gross statistics are by no
means a measure of a film's quality, and every once in a while a gem
such as TWILIGHT slips through the net. 
The storytelling style that Director Robert Benton adopts is equal parts
film noir and complex mystery thriller. Although the plot isn't too
confusing, it is a prerequisite that the viewer follows along throughout
the entire movie: characters' names are important and connections are
immediately lost if a role is regarded as unimportant. Although Paul
Newman's tongue-in-cheek voice-overs are part of the film noir style,
they don't really help to keep the story clear. Fortunately they don't
get tiresome or annoying - they were written in to elevate the
comfortable level of cyncism that Newman's character of Harry Ross
shows. 
Harry Ross (Newman) is an ex-police officer, ex-private investigator,
and current friend to Jack and Catherine Ames (Gene Hackman and Susan
Sarandon). Both former thespians, the Ames' have their share of
antagonists. At the time of the movie, which takes place in the
Hollywood area, Jack Ames is at the beck and call of a blackmailer (Liev
Schrieber) who has information about the death of another actor. At the
onset, the danger of this information is unclear, until Jack calls Harry
in to pay off the blackmailer. Harry, being an former investigator and
policeman, checks out the situation a bit more thoroughly and discovers
that Jack and Catherine may not be as innocent as they seem. 
The main cast is pretty small, which allows for a lot of plot
intricacies to develop. I can't remember the last time I've seen a noir
drama with as many plot twists as TWILIGHT. Even the likes of MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE, which countless people have told me was far too confusing,
didn't have as many turnabouts as TWILIGHT. Even so, some supporting
characters were a bit superfluous: both Jack's daughter Mel (Reese
Witherspoon) and the blackmailer's parole officer (Margo Martindale)
were nothing but excuses to show off a lot of Hollywood's immoral
excesses (sex and money, respectively). Nevertheless, quality
performances from the upper-echelon likes of Hackman, Sarandon, and
Newman didn't hurt, and a believable and interesting story were what
powered this movie. Recommendable to everyone except the
action-at-any-cost types.
