Title
Review for Wishmaster (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Scott Renshaw
WISHMASTER
(Live)
Starring:  Tammy Lauren, Andrew Divoff, Chris Lemmon, Robert Englund.
Screenplay:  Peter Atkins.
Producers:  Pierre David, Clark Peterson and Noel A. Zanitsch.
Director:  Robert Kurtzman.
MPAA Rating:  (graphic gore and violence, profanity)
Running Time:  88 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I think it happened around 1973, with the release of THE EXORCIST,
though some might go back to NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD in 1968.  Prior to
that point, cinematic horror was generally restricted to innocuous
creature features and the occasional genuine thriller (PSYCHO, THE
HAUNTING) which was more in your head than in your face.  The phenomenal
success of THE EXORCIST changed all that, giving rise to the notion that
the way to shake up an audience was from the stomach out.  And so there
came TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE, and Brian DePalma's CARRIE, and John
Carpenter's HALLOWEEN, and a decade of slasher film wannabes too numerous
to count.  Special make-up effects became Hollywood's growth field of the
80s, turning experts like Dick Smith, Rick Baker, Rob Bottin and Tom
Savini into talent as hot as any star.  There was even one teen scream
film, HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO ME, which trumpeted in its ad campaign that it
contained some of "the most bizarre murders you will ever see."  The Cult
of the Gross-Out had been born, dedicated to the principle that if you
came up with new and innovative ways to hack the human body to ribbons,
they would come.
     WISHMASTER, a limp and generally tedious horror film about an ancient
Djinn (Andrew Divoff) accidentally released into modern-day America by a
jewelry appraiser (Tammy Lauren), would have no reason to exist if not to
show off a gaggle of grotesqueries:  skin flayed from flesh, a skeleton
tearing loose from its body, eviscerations by the cartload, cancerous
pustules erupting on a pharmacist's skin, all manner of creepy-crawlies
emerging from the orifices of human hosts, a face indented by an iron mace
like something out of a Warner Bros. cartoon, and a few garden-variety
shootings for street cred.  Director Robert Kurtzman -- a former
special-effects man handed a basic premise for a story (an ancient Djinn
loose in modern-day America), a budget and an R rating -- occasionally
stumbles across an innovative visual idea which doesn't involve exposing
anatomical features generally hidden from view.  More often, when in
doubt, he lets loose with the red Karo syrup.
     WISHMASTER also wouldn't exist without a few noteworthy antecedents
like "The Man in the Bottle" episode of the original "Twilight Zone" and
"The Monkey's Paw."  Screenwriter Peter Atkins seems convinced that his
notion of a malevolent genie is wildly original, and that the idea of that
genie providing literalist renderings of vague wishes is positively
ingenious.  In fact, the results of the wishes range from fairly
uninspired to purely plagiaristic (stop me if you've heard the one about
the guy who wishes for a million dollars, then has a family member with an
insurance policy die).  An original idea isn't necessary when you can take
an old one and spice it up with state-of-the-art viscera-spilling.
     Like far too many supernatural horror films, about half of
WISHMASTER's exposition seems devoted to explaining the detailed rules for
how the monster wreaks his havoc, how he can be destroyed, etc.  The good
news is that that exposition provides a few memorable moments for Jenny
O'Hara, sharp and sassy as the occult expert every monster movie needs.  
The bad news is that the whole business is pointless, a foolish stab at
internal logic in a genre where internal logic matters far less than what
kind of mayhem a Djinn can inflict when someone wishes for a "wild party."
Horror films can work when the people who make them display a sense for
the giddy catharsis of a good scare, but there's nothing scary about
WISHMASTER unless you count the half-dozen or so times the music cranks up
to a decibel level just this side of the Concorde.  It's just a humorless
display of special-effects prowess, the latest installment in the ongoing
game of "Can You Top This?" which all began when zombies noshed on human
femurs, or when Linda Blair first returned a can of pea soup whence it
came.

Author
James Brundage
Old theme, new psycho. That's what this movie can be summed up as.
Put simply, its about the Djinn (pronounced "jin"), the source of the genie
legend. The Djinn, however, as put in the movie "is neither funny nor
smiling". It is a creature that hates us and is bent on our destruction.
Something horror fans are definitely familiar with, right.
Like most horror movies, the film's storyline is relatively predictable,
letting you know what will happen if you stop to think about it. Unlike most
horror films, however, there is a good element of surprise and a liking of
the villain, the stark ugliness of the Djinn as he goes through Earth
granting wishes in such ways that the person to whom the wish is granted
never wins.
The Djinn itself has been trapped inside of a fire opal for nine hundred
years and, after an accident on the docks of a port, which kills a man and
breaks open a statue that contains the fire opal. A greedy worker takes it.
>From there the Djinn is freed and begins to wreck havoc in LA.
If you like horror movies than this one should end up on your list but isn't
anything that you should really go out of your way to see. Besides a funny
yet malevolent Djinn, and a few surprises there's nothing in this horror
film that you won't find in the next.

Author
Jerry Saravia
There is one great shot in the hopelessly overwrought "Wishmaster." It is a 
quick shot but definitely a keeper. The heroine of the film, Alex (Tammy 
Lauren), visits the well-kept house of a curator (Robert Englund). He shows 
her various historic, priceless statues, including one of Pazuzu! Yes, the 
very same one from "The Exorcist," though perhaps smaller. It is a great 
shot, and one of mystery, allure and introspection, all the things the rest 
of "Wishmaster" is not. 
The titled character is an evil genie, also known as the Djinn (Andrew 
Divoff, who played the anonymous biker villain in "Another 48 HRS."), who is 
ready to wreck havoc on the world by granting people their innermost wishes 
and desires. The trouble is that he takes their simple wishes and exploits 
them in an evil manner. For example, he grants a wish to a homeless man who 
wishes the rude pharmacy manager would contract cancer and die. The Djinn 
grants the wish, yet the manager grows pale and dies within a few minutes 
after the wish is granted. Surely the homeless man did not mean to do that!  
Alex, the jewel expert, inadvertently unleashes this evil spirit from a fire 
opal and, in a nod to "Nightmare on Elm Street 4," she can feel pain each 
time a victim falls prey to the genie. She has to grant him three wishes and 
in return, he gets to destroy the world or rule it or whatever he plans to do 
with it. 
"Wishmaster" could have been an enjoyable, highly moralistic little horror 
film if done with some imagination and taste. Instead it feeds on buckets of 
gore to make its exclamatory points about why you should think about the 
wishes you make before making them. The film quickly grows ponderous and 
silly, particularly with the Wishmaster's tired one-liners (do genies truly 
utter four-letter words? Haven't they been around long enough to make more 
snappy remarks?) Divoff is convincingly menacing as the Djinn but he even he 
grows tiresome. Here's a wish: I wish Wes Craven would direct the films he 
produces.    
P.S. Buck Flower plays the toothless homeless man in "Wishmaster," a similar 
role to his Bread character in the "Back to the Future" movies where he also 
played a homeless man. Alluding once again to the "Exorcist," Flower has a 
similar line to the homeless man in that film: "Hey, can you help an old 
altar boy? I am Catholic." Sacrilege!
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
James Sanford
As if there weren't already enough good reasons not to do drugs on
the job, "Wishmaster" offers one more; You might get loaded and shatter a
priceless Persian statue, thereby releasing an evil genie on the world.
Wouldn't want that on your conscience now, would you?
True, "Wishmaster" may run into trouble qualifying for any Oscars,
but rest assured it's a shoo-in to win in the Goriest Feature-Length Public
Service Announcement category -- should anyone see fit to create one. This
utterly pointless foray into idiocy begins when a malevolent "Djinn" is
accidentally freed from the opal he's been locked inside for centuries, by
the manner described earlier. Thankfully, for the Djinn's purposes, he's
been unleashed in a part of California inhabited solely by greedy morons, so
this genie-meanie has no trouble finding suckers willing to trade their
immortal souls in exchange for some flashy material rewards.
Only jewel expert Alex (former child star Tammy Lauren) knows the
Djinn's little secret, leading -- after multiple murders and scores of lame
jokes -- to a showdown in a red crepe-paper Hell that looks like it was
built for the school play, followed shortly thereafter by an unintentionally
uproarious finale in which sculptures magically spring to life and
disembowel snooty guests at a swanky cocktail party.
Trying her best to show dread and anxiety at every opportunity
Lauren contorts her face into a variety of grotesque expressions that should
make Jim Carrey jealous, and to give the movie some glimmer of horror-film
credibility "Nightmare On Elm Street" veteran Robert Englund hangs around
just long enough to cough up a slimy demon, once again putting to use all
those years of classical theater training he often spotlights in his
biographies.
Makeup artist-turned-director Robert Kurtzman's idea of a good scare
is a phone that rings ridiculously loudly or a masked actor who pops in out
of nowhere to startle someone. When in doubt, he splashes around as much
blood as possible to cover up the fact that "Wishmaster"'s script is about
as consistently terrifying as "Pocahontas."
"Forget Barbara Eden! Forget Robin Williams!" warns a genie expert
midway through the madness. She forgot to add you should forget about seeing
"Wishmaster" while you're at it. James Sanford

Author
Chuck Dowling
WISHMASTER (1997)
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling
Copyright 1998 - The Jacksonville Film Journal
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Cast: Wendy Benson, Chris Lemmon, Andrew Divoff, Robert Englund, Tony Todd,
Kane Hodder, Ted Raimi, Ethan Embry, Buck Flower, Reggie Bannister
Written by: Peter Atkins
Directed by: Robert Kurtzman
Running Time: 90 minutes
My Rating: NO STARS out of *****
"Wishmaster" is a worthless excuse for a movie, horror or otherwise. It's a
cross between "The Monkey's Paw" and "A Nightmare on Elm Street", as we
learn about evil genies and their desire to take over the world. They can
only cause harm however when you ask them to grant you a wish. Of course,
whatever you wish for has some sort of sick and twisted spin on it, to only
benefit the evil genie (Andrew Divoff).
The film is your typical horror nonsense, lots of gore and screaming just
for the sake of having gore and screaming. The script is standard and the
acting is fair at best (Divoff, if he's using his actual voice, is pretty
interesting though). And fans of the genre will most likely enjoy seeing
various actors from other horror films in cameos here and there.
When the story begins we're in the middle ages, and a wizard or something is
battling these evil forces. The wizard manages to gain the upper hand, and
encases the evil into a brilliantly beautiful red gem. Why do that? Why put
pure evil in something which is bound to gain attention from people? Why not
encase the evil in a dirt clump or a rat dropping? No one's going to pick up
a rat dropping and polish it, breathe on it, and talk to it. This is the
type of stupid "movie logic" we're dealing with here. Just wish that you'll
never have to sit through this, like I did. [R]

Author
Jamie Peck
Live / 1:30 / 1997 / R (gore, gore, gore, gore, gore, language)
Cast: Tammy Lauren; Andrew Divoff; Robert Englund; Tony Todd; Wendy 
Benson; Tony Crane; Jenny O'Hara; Kane Hodder 
Director: Robert Kurtzman 
Screenplay: Peter Atkins 
The horror ... the horror. The horror of a horror film with no sense of 
horror. That statement would perfectly sum up "Wishmaster" were it not 
for one thing -- the movie's so laughably ludicrous that sitting through 
it is almost no chore at all. Don't go expecting legitimate thrills and 
chills, or you'll be quite disappointed; the words "Wes Craven Presents" 
have been plopped over the title in an attempt to get people buzzing 
about this hammy howler. The "Scream" director only serves as an 
executive producer here, but his reputation should remain intact after 
"Wishmaster" flops -- Craven has "Scream 2" scheduled for release this 
winter. 
"Wishmaster" tells what happens when the gem-imprisoned Djinn (Andrew 
Divoff), sort of like Barbara Eden's evil mutant uncle, gets unwittingly 
released into modern society by a geologist named Alexandra (Tammy 
Lauren). Djinn gets his kicks by manipulating mortals to wish for all 
the usual stuff (everlasting life, vengeance against one's enemies), and 
then turning their requests against them in devious ways. An example: 
Djinn transforms a Structure salesgirl into a mannequin after she 
requests eternal beauty. If he can get three wishes out of Alexandra, 
then an army of Djinns will be released to take over the world. Or 
something like that. 
If "Wishmaster" wasn't so unintentionally hilarious, it'd probably be a 
long, wooden bore. But there are so many scenes, situations and scares 
with the exact opposite effect than intended that the viewing experience 
is packed with many a hearty laugh. The gore is so frequent and macabre 
that it's downright hysterical -- one guy takes a mace in the head, and 
his cranium bears a large indent that'd be completely believable were he 
in a Warner Bros. cartoon. A jewel appraiser asks the Djinn to make him 
rich, so the plane carrying his wealthy mother explodes in take-off. And 
when an Ancient Persian party-thrower wishes for things to kick into 
high gear in the movie's grisly prologue, the guests begin tearing their 
own flesh off! Talk about killing the livelihood. Sheesh. 
In the movie's production notes, the filmmakers guess that Djinn "could 
very well be one of the greatest horror figures of our time." Um, I 
don't think so -- he's not particularly frightening, but he is annoying. 
For some reason, Divoff insists on pronouncing his wannabe-scary lines 
phonetically ("Lis-ten to the mu-sic of their souls, Al-ex-an-dra!"). 
After you laugh and laugh and laugh at Wishmaster, you realize something 
sad -- the ideas here ain't half bad. If Djinn was a truly horrifying 
monster, if we were given a better protagonist than the annoying 
Alexandra, if there was a real story amidst the massive blood-letting, 
"Wishmaster" could have been a success. As it stands, it's strictly for 
bad movie buffs who couldn't get enough involuntary guy-puking from 
"Event Horizon."
Š 1997 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Brandon Herring
Wishmaster
* * * * out of * * * *
Rated R for strong horror violence and gore, and for language.
Wes Craven produced this stylish, well-made, and extremely gory, and great
movie. When I first saw this, my expectations were low, because people had said
it was pretty bad. But I must say, it exceded my expectations, and was a good,
scary, and gory movie. Well-worth the watch, Wishmaster has become to me, a
camp classic, and one of my favorites.
The movie starts out about 3,000 years ago, and gives us a message on what
Djinn's are. What is a Djinn? Read on and you will learn. In the opening
sequence, an ancient king has wished to have the best party in history. Well
the Djinn (Played devilishly good by Andrew Divoff) is best described as a
smarta--, and the wishes he grants backfires on the people who are wishing it.
In this case, all the people at the party come to gruesome deaths, some turn
into lizards, another has his skeleton come completely out of his skin, and his
skeleton walks around attacking people. Another has something coming out of his
stomach, and one gets smacked against the wall. The wizard, comes in and tells
the king to stop before he makes his last wish, which would make the Djinn be
able to take over the world. The wizard takes the jewel (too which the Djinn
lives) and commands he goes back in, he does, and stays there for 3,000 years.
Then we see a statue, being delivered to a man named Raymond Beaumont (Robert
Englund, best known as Freddy Kruegar). He has bought a new statue to put in
his collection at his museum-house. While the statue is being lowered, the
crane operator spills his coffee on the controls, and drops the statue on a man
below, causing it to bust in pieces. One of the construction workers spots a
jewel, and takes it out and puts it in his pocket. 
The man brings the jewel to a museum to which Alexander Amberson (Tammy Lauren)
works. She investigates the jewel, and tries to find out how old the jewel
itself is. She asks her friend Chris Lemmon (Nick Merrit), a jewel anologist to
find out how old, and what kind of jewel it is. When he puts the jewel into the
computer to be analyzed the laser hitting ther jewel causes the jewel to
explode as well as the cpu, and injures Chris. The Djinn is now released, and
asks Chris, if he wants the pain to go away, Chris wishes it away, and it does,
but so does Chris's life. The Djinn is now free to find the one that released
him to which that is Alexandra.
He takes human form as Nathaniel Demerest, and goes out to ask people what they
wish to do or not to do. And if they wish, they die. Say one wishes that his
enemy would get cancer, and he grants his wish, and his enemy dies of cancer. A
woman, wishes that she would have eternal beauty, and turns into a manequinn. 
The Djinn, who was released by Alexandra, makes her see all that he does. If he
kills she sees, if they wish she sees, and has to live it all up. She has to
proctect herself, as well as her sister from this evil Djinn, and try to make
him not take over the world. Nathaniel, then goes to the party to which Raymond
is at, and of course Raymond wishes to have a party that will go down in
history, and he does (I wont spoil it). Alexandra must now, find out how to
defeat this Wishmaster without dying herself, or her friends. Her final thought
of defeating him is brilliant.
As is the movie, I found myself entertained to the limit. I found no flaws, no
gratitous gore, and no dumb story. Andrew Divoff who plays Wishmaster, and
Nathaniel Demerest, does a brilliant performance, and w wicked one at that. And
really gets into his performance, mixing wit with terror. As does Tammy Lauren,
she does a great job as her character, and gets realistically into it. Robert
Englund (Who as always) plays his character well.
As the movie itself? It had some great suspense sequences, most coming toward
the end, and a really high count of graphic violence/gore. But what got me the
most, was how fun the movie was. It was never flawed, never boring, nor was it
stupid. The make-up effects on Andrew Divoff, spectacular. And the gore
effects, with people being ripped open, and one gets his mouth ripped off, this
is definately not for the squeamish. But, But, If you are a horror fan, who
loves fun movies, this is one for you, believe me, I dont think youll be let
down.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring (HorrorMvFn@aol.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Tammy Lauren, Robert Englund, Andrew Divoff, Reggie Bannister, 
      Kane Hodder, Tony Todd
Director: Robert Kurtzman
Producers: Pierre David, Clark Peterson, Noel A. Zanitsch
Screenplay: Peter Atkins 
Cinematography: Jacques Haitkin
Music: Henry Manfredini
U.S. Distributor: Live Entertainment
     Every once in a while, a movie like SCREAM comes along and makes 
film critics everywhere "re-evaluate" the horror genre.  However, the 
sad truth is that for every HALLOWEEN or A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET or 
SCREAM, there are literally dozens of bad-to-unwatchable entries.  
Remember LEPRECHAUN?  Or DR. GIGGLES?  Or THE MANGLER?  Horror films 
made with intelligence and wit can be great fun.  Those made on auto-
pilot can be the most difficult-to-endure motion pictures around.  
WISHMASTER fits firmly into the latter category, and is a shoo-in for a 
spot on 1997's Bottom Ten list.
     The premise is exceedingly dumb, and the solemnity with which 
WISHMASTER attempts to convince us of its viability is embarrassing.  
Apparently, sometime between God's creation of the angels and man, he 
paused to generate a race of evil, magical creatures called the djinn.  
They exist for one reason -- to bring chaos to the universe.  But, to be 
free to unleash their will upon creation, they have to grant three 
wishes to the man or woman who frees them from their prison.  Of course, 
since people are notoriously clumsy about wording their wishes, that can 
lead to all sorts of unpleasantness.  
     WISHMASTER is an inept retelling of W.W. Jacobs' "The Monkey's 
Paw", a horror classic that I recall first hearing while sitting around 
a campfire when I was 12.  It's about a magical talisman that grants 
three wishes, the consequences of which are terrible to behold.  
WISHMASTER takes that basic premise, dumbs it down considerably, adds an 
incredible amount of gore, and presents it as a movie.  The result is 
dull, lifeless, and devoid of even minimal chills.  And, since Wes 
Craven, the director of A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET and SCREAM, is on 
board as Executive Producer, the film makers felt completely justified 
in calling this "Wes Craven's WISHMASTER."  I assume that the hope is 
that Craven's name on the marquee will get some viewers into a film that 
no one would otherwise see.
     The main character is a woman named Alex (Tammy Lauren), who comes 
into possession of an incredibly rare and valuable fire opal.  Little 
does she realize that trapped inside is a vicious djinn that she 
accidentally sets free.  Then, while the djinn is waiting for Alex to 
make her three wishes, he wanders around the streets of a nameless West 
Coast City, granting wishes at the cost of souls.  But the djinn always 
uses the nastiest interpretation of any ambiguous wish.  So, for 
example, his version of "freedom" is death. 
     Sadly, WISHMASTER rarely attains the level of badness necessary for 
it to be enjoyable, although there are times when it can be a hoot to 
watch some of what passes for acting.  In a moderately clever (but 
ultimately pointless) turn of casting, the men who played Freddy Krueger 
(Robert Englund), the Candyman (Tony Todd), and Jason (Kane Hodder) all 
show up, although none of them demonstrate the slightest bit of talent 
with their makeup removed.  Lead actress Tammy Lauren gives a listless, 
lackluster performance that has us actively wishing for her character's 
death.  Director Robert Kurtzman, who has spent most of his career 
working as a makeup effects man (for such films as SPAWN, SCREAM, and 
PULP FICTION), displays the kind of heavy-handedness that should 
immediately invalidate him for another shot at helming a major feature 
film.
     As a matter of personal policy, I never walk out on a movie, but 
that doesn't mean that I don't occasionally toy with the thought.  In 
the course of an especially bad film, the seductive lure of getting up 
and heading for the exit can be almost overpowering.  During WISHMASTER, 
that sensation began creeping up on me only a half-hour into the movie.  
I stayed to the bitter end, but it was a struggle.  My best advice to 
anyone reading this review -- even someone who considers himself or 
herself a fan of horror movies -- is to stay away.  That way, you won't 
have to wish that you had never coughed up the money in the first place.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
** (out of 4)
Directed by Robert Kurtzman
Starring Tammy Lauren, Andrew Divoff, Jenny O'Hara, Robert Englund
The success of movies like From Dusk Till Dawn, The Craft, and especially 
Scream have revived the once dead horror genre. Movies that for the past 
few years have been released by companies like Full Moon entertainment 
are now getting released to theaters. Wishmaster (I refuse to attach 
Craven's name to this) is a current and annoying example of this recent 
trend. Unfortunately, the very flaws that killed this genre in the late 
80's are evident in this movie.
Wishmaster tells the story of a Djinn, an evil genie who must receive 
three wishes from the person who awakens him to conquer the world. He has 
magical powers, but can only utilize them if someone makes a wish. The 
movie begins in medieval times, where a Djinn grants an unwise wish to a 
King and makes a mess of a party in his castle. The king's magician 
advises against a 3rd wish and is able to trap the Djinn in a gemstone.
Flash forward to the present. An art dealer is receiving a shipment of a 
statue. There is an accident however, as the crate comes loose and 
crushes someone underneath. Guess what gem is found in the wreckage?
The gem is taken to a local gemologist (Lauren) for an appraisal, and 
guess who she wakes up? The Djinn escapes during an examination by her 
colleague and longtime friend, who is of course killed.
The Djinn then promptly goes searching around for the gemologist who 
awakened him, so he can receive his 3 wishes. During this, he tricks 
several unexpected victims into making some very unwise wishes. The best 
moments of the film come here, when the film shows the creative ways in 
which the victims are conned.
There is some good material here that could've worked in the hands of a 
talented director. Unfortunately, the direcotrial chores were given to 
Kurtzman, a former makeup and FX artist who was more interested in 
showing us how creative he is with gory makeup and special effects than 
suspenseful sequences with horrific payoffs. The movie turns out to be a 
freak show, as Kurtzman seems to be pissed off he didn't get the Freddy 
vs. Jason job (which unfortunately also went to a makeup/FX guy). I don't 
mind much gore in my horror movies, but this movie goes way too far over 
the top several times.
Tammy Lauren is a very weak and uninspired lead. She doesn't even know 
how to scream right for this kind of movie. Her ineptness kills several 
moments. However, Andrew Divoff (who has a very cool voice) is very 
effective as the Djinn, and veteran character actress Jenny O'Hara plays 
the part of a kooky theater director and expert on Djinn's on the perfect 
note of wide-eyed oddity. 
My advice to Kurtzman: Watch Halloween and Psycho. Look at how much gore 
is in those movies. Look how scary and suspenseful each of them are. 
Learn how to direct a movie. then get back to me.
