Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Eric Grossman
     Transvestites, flying-saucers, and alien grave-robbers, how could
anyone ask for more?  Director Tim Burton's latest effort, ED WOOD
offers all of this and yes, far, far more.  Burton (BATMAN, EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS) has always been a director who is long on mood and
atmosphere but short on story skills.  For ED WOOD, Burton comes in
swinging not only with his usual arsenal of visuals but also with a
strong narrative to tell this story of a cross-dressing B, or make that
C-movie filmmaker.
     Johnny Depp, a good actor who does not mind risky roles, plays Ed
Wood, the director who is remembered for making one of the best, worst
films of all time, PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.  Depp's performance is a
caricature but he is successful in bringing out a deeper emotionalism
that makes us genuinely like Ed.  Struggling to make it in Hollywood as
an actor/writer and director, just like his idol Orson Wells, Ed is
able to convince a B-movie producer to allow him  to make a film about
a man who becomes a woman.  Ed believes he is the best for the job
because he himself likes to wear women's clothing, especially angora
sweaters.  Ed makes his first film, GLEN OR GLENDA?, in which he
stars with his girlfriend Dolores Fuller (Sara Jessica Parker).  After
giving Dolores the script, Ed confesses to her that he has an affinity
for wearing women's garments.  Shocked and confused, Dolores is at
least comforted when she learns why her angora sweaters always seemed
to be mysteriously stretched out.  As much as she tries, Dolores can
never accept Ed's non-conformist behavior and ultimately their
relationship does not survive.  However, Ed does meet Kathy O'Hara
(Patricia Arquette), a quiet, sweet woman who understands that Ed's
desire to cross-dress is not a perversion, but is instead a way for him
to express his deep love for women.
     The true treat of the film is Martin Landau who plays famous
DRACULA star, Bela Lugosi.  Delivering a performance full of warmth,
humor and sorrow, Landau once again proves that he is one of the best
character actors working today.  Long forgotten by the Hollywood
machine that "chews you up and spits you out," Lugosi's career and life
is on the rocks.  In a chance encounter, Ed meets Lugosi and a deep
friendship begins.  Their relationship is the backbone of the story as
they inspire and aid each other in times of need.  In addition to his
charm and other endearing qualities, screenwriters Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski do not gloss over the fact that Lugosi was hooked on
morphine.  It is more than once that he calls Ed up in the middle of
the night, in a semi-conscious voice, begging for help.  For Ed, Lugosi
validates his "art" as well as being an important element in getting
his pictures made.  The friendship is a father/son relationship where
they each take turns being the father and the son.
     As we watch Ed try desperately to get his films made, we find
ourselves both laughing at him and admiring him for his courage.
It takes guts to make "your" film, especially when everyone thinks
it is garbage.  As bizarre and funny as it is, it takes guts to
admit you like to wear women's clothing and then walk out on the
set in a skirt, heels, and a wig while yelling "okay, everyone,
let's make this movie."  Finally, Ed is a portrait of pure
determination.  He is able to get PLAN 9 made by promising a Beverly
Hills Baptist church that their investment in a sci-fi/horror film
would bring enough profits to finance religious films.  As Bill
Murray's silly Bunny Beckinridge asks Ed, "How do you do it?  How do
you convince all your friends to get baptized just so you can make a
monster movie?"  The answer, charm and persistence.
     Like all of Burton's films, ED WOOD is pure eye-candy.  The
black-and-white cinematography is by Stefan Czapsky and the atmospheric
production design was created by Tom Duffield.  The serio-comic score
was composed by Howard Shore and the film was edited by Chris
Lebenzon.  Ed's angora sweaters and pumps as well as the other
character's outfits were put together by costume designer Colleen
Atwood.  Other cast members include Jeffrey Jones and Vincent D'Onofrio
in a small part as Orson Wells.
     As endearing as it is bizarre, ED WOOD is a very entertaining
movie that achieves what it aspires to be, an unconventional film about
an unconventional man.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Johnny Depp, Martin Landau, Sarah Jessica Parker,
Patricia Arquette, Jeffrey Jones, Bill Murray.
Screenplay:  Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski.
Director:  Tim Burton.
     It's hard to imagine a more unlikely subject for a film biography
than Edward D. Wood Jr.  When I think of bio-pics, I think GANDHI, MY
LEFT FOOT, MALCOLM X--epic tales of great and inspirational figures.
The director of PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE does not seem to be cut from
quite the same cloth.  The great surprise of ED WOOD is that in his own
unique and twisted way, director Tim Burton has turned one of the worst
filmmakers of all time into one of those inspirational figures.  Rather
than holding Wood up to ridicule, Burton makes his life an example of
artistic integrity, an extremely entertaining look at an auteur unlike
any other.
     Johnny Depp stars as Ed Wood, who is a playwright, studio hand and
would-be filmmaker when our story begins.  Ed sees his chance for a big
break in a planned screen biography of transsexual Christine Jorgensen,
which Ed thinks he's perfect for because of his own closet fetish for
women's clothing.  He is also able to deliver a "big star" for the
production:  Bela Lugosi (Martin Landau), now nearly destitute and
addicted to morphine.  With Lugosi and girlfriend Dolores Fuller (Sarah
Jessica Parker), Ed makes GLEN OR GLENDA?, a phenomenally incompetent
melodrama.  But Ed is undaunted by the ridicule of others, and forges
ahead to make more films, as well as forging a friendship with the
ailing Lugosi.  Eventually comes Ed Wood's magnum opus:  the infamous
PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.
     Burton based his vision for ED WOOD on one question:  what if
someone had all the drive of Orson Welles, but none of the talent?
That question, and its answer, are what make Edward D. Wood Jr.'s story
a comedy rather than a tragedy.  Johnny Depp plays Ed Wood with a kind
of childlike awe in the mere fact that he is able to make films, and
his mantra of "Perfect!" after every clumsy take becomes not simply a
paradigm for self-delusion, but a reminder that sometimes process is as
important to art as product.  In one delightful scene, Ed runs into
Orson Welles (a dubbed Vincent D'Onofrio) in a Hollywood bar.  There
they exchange stories about funding problems with their latest projects
(PLAN 9 and the recently restored DON QUIXOTE, respectively).  The
sincerity with which Wood speaks to Welles as an equal, and his
determination to stay true to his vision, make him anything but
pathetic.  He becomes a strangely heroic maverick, doing it his way
even if it means doing it the wrong way.
     Yet Burton manages to tell another story in ED WOOD, that of the
curious friendship between Ed and Bela Lugosi.  It is truly an example
of mutual need--Wood needs Lugosi to lend his movies credibility;
Lugosi needs Wood to give him work, any work--but it's also something
even more touching.  As played with eerie brilliance by Martin Landau,
Lugosi is bitter, broke and depressive when Wood finds him in the late
1950s, and completely without respect.  It is respect which is the
greatest gift Ed gives him, and Laundau's portrayal of his slow return
to humanity is one of the finest pieces of acting this year.
     It is ED WOOD's niftiest accomplishment that it links these two
stories so effortlessly.  Ed Wood's uniquely wonderful naivete comes
from the fact that he never fully grasps that Hollywood was a business
first.  He is unable to understand how Lugosi could be unable to find
work, because to Ed, his talent is all that should matter.  Even
through fund-raising parties and creative recruiting of backers for his
films, it's not about the money to Edward D. Wood Jr.  It's about art.
     ED WOOD is occasionally quite slow-moving, and loses much of its
steam in its final twenty minutes.  The making of PLAN 9 seems to
deserve more than a montage, and Ed's relationship with wife-to-be
Kathy (Patricia Arquette) is given only a cursory treatment.  But the
affection in Burton's telling of this tale is infectious, and makes one
wish more talented contemporary filmmakers were as relentlessly
individual.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Dir: Tim Burton
Starring: Johnny Depp, Martin Landau, Sarah Jessica Parker,
          Patricia Arquette, Jeffrey Jones, Bill Murray
     There are may ways to approach the life of down-and-out
independent producer/director Edward D. Wood, Jr.  The story of his life
has all the scope of a tragedy- hopeful young actor and writer declines
into writing porn novels and dies penniless on a distant friend's
couch.  That Tim Burton and his screen writers could take this tragic
life and make a comic biopic film so full of joie de vivre is somewhat
of an accomplishment.
     The film centers on Wood's best years, those with his big star,
Bela Lugosi.  Depp is fine as Wood, managing to look like him and
boldly presenting himself in angora sweaters and high heels.  Martin
Landau, perhaps the most underrated actor, steals the film completely
as Bela Lugosi, the near death former horror star.  At the New York
Film Festival screening, Landau got endless applause.  He said that he
studies twenty-five Bela Lugosi films, plus interview footage.  Landau
described differences in their acting styles, kindly referring to
Lugosi as "minimalist."  His makeup was designed by Rick Baker.  Johnny
Depp claimed his preparation included watching Ronald Reagan videos for
part of the voice.  Bill Murray said he was unfamiliar with the concept
of preparing for a role.  Vincent D'Onofrio gave a good stab at
portraying Orson Welles (don't ask), but he seems to be dubbed by an
impressionist.
     Director Tim Burton abandoned the saturated color and
expressionist sets of his Batman films.  Ed Wood is in stark black and
white, with a lot of real dingy Hollywood locations.  Much of the film
is lit like Ed Wood's real productions, and played out on sparse barely
decorated sets.  This blends the reality of Wood's life into the
fantasy of his films.  Scenes from his three big classics are matched
perfectly.  The black and white sunlit crumbling facades of the
minuscule studios are a Hollywood that is seldom depicted.
     The film falls into the recent genre of energetic independents
trying to raise money for a film like MY LIFE IS IN TURNAROUND, or
IN THE SOUP.  The extent that Ed Wood goes to make his films, and the
truly bizarre raft of Hollywood would-be's that he accumulates
transcends the bounds of the making a film genre.  If these characters
were not certifiably real, they would not be believable.
     Almost all biopics of Hollywood stars soft step the stars true
faults.  ED WOOD is no exception.  While Bela Lugosi's addictions are
played up in the film, Ed Wood's real life alcoholism is not
mentioned.  Wood is treated as with an amount of reverence that he
certainly never received in his real life.  Tim Burton also injects an
amount of optimism into the film by showing the production and premiere
of his films from Wood's own hyper enthusiastic perspective.
     The real irony of the film is that some of the acting and
technical elements of the film are so good that there might soon by
Oscars with the name ED WOOD engraved on them.  Landau will certainly
be nominated for playing Bela Lugosi, something that Bela could never
hope for.  Can posthumous Lifetime Achievement awards be far away?
     Those who enjoy the work of the great cinematic individualist Ed
Wood can also check out his recent biography that is the source of the
screenplay, "Nightmare of Ecstasy" by Rudolph Grey.  BRIDE OF THE
MONSTER is the best of Ed Wood's real films.  Bela Lugosi finished that
one.  The much-hyped PLAN NINE FROM OUTER SPACE really does suffer
from the fact that it is constructed around a few short unused clips of
Bela.  GLEN OR GLENDA, also featuring Lugosi, cannot be described but
must be seen to be believed.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1994,, R, 124 minutes [2 hours, 4 minutes]
[satire]
starring: Johnny Depp (Ed Wood), Martin Landou (Bela Lugosi), Sarah Jessica
Parker (Delores Wood), written by Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski,
produced by Denise Di Novi, Tim Burton, directed by Tim Burton.
Did you ever wonder who made those bad sci-fi/horror movies they show at 2
a.m. that also end up being ridiculed on "Mystery Science Theater 3000"? Well
Edward D. Wood Jr. is the man responsible for starting an entire industry of
bad movies, unfortunately he never really saw it that way, and "Ed Wood" is a
good satirical portrait of his life.
Ed Wood was a man so in love with the filmmaking process itself he didn't
care if things went wrong, the script was terrible, or the props were fake.
To him, it's not about scrutiny, it's about the joy of the movies and as long
as people are having fun nothing else matters. Johnny Depp is excellent as
the quite neurotic, obsessive, cross-dressing Ed Wood. He starts his
showbusiness career by taking on projects no one else will touch, with
stories so terrible it's a wonder they're even thought up. He writes his own
scripts, does all the casting, and even manages to raise the money to make
the movies himself. 
But Ed has a heart, he knows who the respected people in the business are
like Orson Wells, and feels the need to succeed as his role models have done.
One day, he stumbles upon Bela Lugosi (Landou), a symbolic character in films
of these types. He's a morphine addict, and thinks he's still a huge star but
can't accept the fact he's a wash-up. Lugosi is going broke, but much like
Ed, he is so in love with film he'll take any job just to work. It's obvious
we are meant to feel for the pathetic old man, but the attitude of the film
isn't some type of sappy melodrama, it is a satire through and through. 
Even Ed's home life is portrayed in a very satirical and funny manner, as a
parody of 50s sit-coms. The dialogue is so over-the-top it's hard to tell
what's scripted and what's improvised.
There is a fair amount of events and actions going on in this movie, yet
there is no specific plot, just the adventures of Ed Wood. We see him pitch
his ideas and not understand how anyone couldn't like anything shown to them
on a screen. He actually believes the audience is scared by his monsters and
aliens, and he is going to win an Oscar for his work. Ed and his crew aren't
even discouraged when they are attacked by an angry mob of frustrated
movie-goers!
Finally Ed embarks on the infamous "Plan 9 From Outer Space," a film so bad
and so stupid it's almost brilliant. One of the final scenes depicts the
opening night of "Plan 9" and we can see the excitement bristling in Ed's
eyes. His face is so lit up with joy he is in ecstasy just watching the
picture... it's both pathetic and funny.
I liked "Ed Wood" even though there wasn't much to it. It has a great sense
of mood and is very clever overall. Why did he make all those bad movies
anyway? The good thing about this film is that it doesn't try to answer that
question (6/4/96) (1/18/97) (6/11/97) [see also: "Barton Fink," also by
Burton: "Batman"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Max Hoffmann
     Film director Ed Wood has a cult following composed of millions of
fans like me, who've poured over repeated viewings of such junkyard
classics as BRIDE OF THE MONSTER and PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.  How
could such an eccentric character and high camp material possibly
succeed as the premise for another celebrity biography?  With ED WOOD,
producer/director Tim Burton redeems himself after a string of near
misses like THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.
This deliriously funny yet touching portrait succeeds where other bios,
like CHAPLIN failed.
     This film finally balances the mean-spirited portraits of Wood and
Bela Lugosi propagated in Michael Medved's "Golden Turkey" book of the
late '70s.  No doubt, Mr. "Hollywood vs. the USA" will approve of the
mysterious R rating for a film with neither sex nor violence, but a few
cuss words and some tasteful cross dressing.
     Johnny Depp successfully employs the same "lost in his own
world--aw shucks" persona that failed miserably for Jeff Bridges
in TUCKER.  But the biggest surprise is Martin Landau's stunning
performance as the dying, morphine addicted Lugosi.  Landau's amazing
"dual performance" captures every nuance of Lugosi's persona in Wood's
first three films, also broadcasting his tragic humanity on an unspoken
level.  Fans who've previously only laughed at Lugosi's final "I have
no home" speech in BRIDE OF THE MONSTER will gasp, and possibly
stifle sobs, when they see the added level of irony the Laundau and
Burton bring to that scene.
     Burton employs a deliberately deadpan B/W camera, that apes the
unintentionally funny driver's training or "drug" films of the '50s.
He also honors Wood with a few deliberate mistakes, like mismatched
hairstyles for Sara Jessica Parker, in her final scene as Dolores
Fuller.  But the infamous sets of GLEN OR GLENDA and PLAN 9 are
true to the last lamp shade and cardboard tombstone.
     A large ensemble cast credibly replicate Wood's "family" of
eccentrics and outcasts, from Bill Murray (surprisingly on target as
tired old queen Bunny Breckenridge) to Lisa Marie, very true as
Vampira.  The only disappointment is Jeffrey Jones who misses the mark
on my personal favorite, Criswell.
     Expect ED WOOD to be another surprise "cross-over" hit that has
an element of drag, (this time with a hetero central character.) I
predict at least two Oscars next March, certainly one for Landau.
Required viewing.  A video rental of GLEN OR GLENDA ahead of time
will increase your enjoyment immeasurably.  Don't miss the Ed Wood
retrospective at SF's Castro theatre Oct 28th through 31st!

Author
Tim Voon
Starring: Johnny Depp, Martin Landau, Sarah Jessica Parker, Patricia
Arquette, Jeffrey Jones, Bill Murray. Screenplay: Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski. Director: Tim Burton.
Ed Wood is a man with an impossible dream, a Don Quixote of the movies.
This man made movies that nobody wanted to see because they were darn
awful. He is a man with a childlike naivety about life and movies, who
is unable to see how bad his productions actually were. Despite his
continued failures, he persists with his dream to make pictures that he
wanted to see. To become the Orson Welles of sci-fi\ horror flicks. One
cannot help but admire his persistence and dedication, but at the same
time be dismayed and heartbroken at his inability to learn from his
mistakes.
He is a man with all heart and vision. A dreamer who is driven by his
great passion and love for film making; but somehow, in the midst of his
shabby directing, all of his good intentions become blurred and
misplaced. That perhaps his talent lay not in the quality of his movies,
but in the heart of the man himself.
He is in essence a child with a dream. Despite numerous failures and
poor quality work, it is the dream which matters and that cannot be
taken from him. To remain true to himself and what he believed in.
Sensitive direction from Burton, and exceptional performances by Landau
and Depp.
Rating: A failed artist who would sing 'Don't cry for me Hollywood' on a
burning flying saucer over L.A.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Edward D. Wood, Jr. was in love with filmmaking.  He flourished,
if that is the word, in the 1950s through 1961.
     Wood, unfortunately, had no talent for directing,  Too bad he was
unaware of it, making one miserably inept film after another.  These
are the titles: BRIDE OF THE MONSTER, GLEN OR GLENDA, JAIL BAIT, THE
SINISTER URGE, NIGHT OF THE GHOULS, and the one he thought would bring
him fame, PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.
     Three of his films starred Bela Lugosi who himself had begun to
confuse his real life with that of his film roles as the eerie,
sinister Dracula.  Eventually, Lugosi died of drug addiction. The one
reason to see the film is Martin Landau's interpretation of Lugosi.
Beautiful.
     Director Tim Burton says of Ed Wood, "There's something beautiful
about somebody who does what they love to do, no matter how misguided,
and remains optimistic and upbeat against the odds." I would argue that
it is far from beautiful and that insane asylums are filled with people
who cannot face reality.
     Burton adds, "We're not making fun of Wood (a cross-dresser) nor
of his transvestitism.  I really care about these people."  All well
and good but just showing Wood's utter ineptness in making films and
walking around in women's clothes is making him the subject of
ridicule.  I do not think that making fun of someone, who is already a
pathetic figure, is tasteful, despite the protestations.
     The film surprisingly ends up-beat, omitting that Wood eventually
ended up making porno films and becoming an alcoholic.  Johnny Depp
(WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE. BENNY AND JOON) does well enough as Wood
though he could have been a bit more quirky.
     Bill Murray has a small part as Bunny Breckenridge who is thinking
of getting a sex change.  We could have done without Murray.  Again, it
is Martin Landau's performance that stands out.  Sara Jessica Parker is
Wood's girlfriend.

Author
Pedro Sena
The emotional trauma that one goes through to make a film..... specially
when one is new, and does not have a record to go with the resume.  This is
really what this film is about.
And this film is as much a tribute to those efforts, as much as it is for a
man who tried to get into film, but eventually, he could only find his way
into an area, that in years to come, Hollywood would finally learn to use to
its advantage.  Ed Wood, unfortunately,
became synonymous with the worst films ever made, not so much because of the
subject matter ( total surrealism, Hollywood style ), but because he ended
up being stuck in his own image.  And in those days, one never left it, or
so it seemed.
This film, is a kind, loving, and caring look at the trials and tribulations
of a film maker.  In the process he has the fortune of making the
acquaintance of one famous actor in the decline, Bela Lugosi, who is
terribly addicted and confused.  And the question is how to get the old
actor into a costume for another story, something which even Bela, might
have hoped would bring his star back to life.
And, what makes this film so nice, is without any doubt, the exceptional
performances all around.  Martin Landau won an Oscar in March of 1995 for
this film, and deservedly so.  The great Bela Lugosi could never get that
much attention, but the legacy he left behind was his mark, and this is
probably as close as he will ever get to the Oscar.  And Johnny Depp, tends
to look like a fifties kid just trying to make it through the 30's and 40's
and make a film.  Sad to say, that the demise of Bela Lugosi had a lot to do
with the depression and how no one could afford to go to see a film, and
thus,
support an industry.  All of the film's attention is on the inside story,
and how some people are trying desperately to make a living, in an era, when
it was virtually impossible to do so.
And the only material that was trying to break the Hollywood traditions of
the time ( already in place ), were the ones that did something different.
And Ed Wood personifies them all.
With a few bit parts here and there, like Bill Murray as Bunny ( eventually
Myra ) Breckinridge, the film plods along.  Ed Wood couldn't afford real
actors, so anyone who wanted to be in a film was going to have the honors.
Many did, to help develop the oddest collection of characters in any film,
to come up with some unusual surrealistic material Hollywood style, which
this stuff really is.
Good film.  Worth seeing.  A great look at the film business as well.
4 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
     Tim Burton's latest offering, ED WOOD, is an affectionate
one-could-say tribute to a director many consider to be the worst of
all time (my vote goes for Michael Cimino).  ED WOOD has the usual
Burton strengths and weaknesses: a thorough sense of time and place,
more interesting characters than the plot can handle, and a storyline
that seems to be mostly a daisy chain of spot gags.
     To be fair, though, the film has more story structure than any
other previous Burton effort--screenwriter Michael Lehmann figured out
a good way to trick Burton into thinking he didn't have a three-act
story while in actuality giving him what may be the closest thing he's
had to one.  The film focuses on the making of three Wood "classics,"
so no matter what else happens, the result of each production will give
a resolution of sorts.
     If ED WOOD had been a half-hour, or even an hour long, it would
have been a quirky entertaining novelty.  At two hours, though, the
gags are repeating for the third time, and one begins to wonder if
the film isn't spliced into a loop, and that you'll never get to
leave.  There's only so many times that seeing Johnny Depp in an angora
sweater can provoke any sort of reaction before you start checking your
watch.
     Tha cast's performances are stronger than most Burton outings, but
Martin Landau stands alone in giving his Lugosi portrait sufficient
weight and depth to engage you beyond the gags.  The relationship
between Depp and Landau is the strongest thing in the film, and the
film might have been better all around if this had been focused upon
more.  As it is, the film has to fall back on a "stick-to-your-artistic-
vision-kid" message (from a pretty implausible source) that rings
particularly hollow (especially from the director of BATMAN).  ED WOOD
is consistently entertaining, but wears out its welcome too
soon ... people who aren't rabid Wood fans will probably come away
wondering why Burton went to all the trouble.  Not Recommended.

Author
Lawrence Mixson
Review by Laurence Mixson (venom8@hotmail.com)
Starring Johnny Depp, Martin Landau, Sarah Jessica Parker, Bill Murray,
and Lisa Marie
        Ed Wood is the most infamous(note I didn't say "famous") director of
all time: his movies are generally regarded as some of the worst schlock
ever filmed. He used measly budgets, stock footage, poor actors, and bad
dialogue to bring together some of the most hideous pictures of all
time. Yet Ed Wood did not see it that way: he was in love with the
complete process of cinema, and believed that no shot of film, however
flawed or illogical, was bad. To him, it was all great.
        Tim Burton's biopic of Wood is regarded by most critics as his
best film yet, and it certainly is one of the better movies of 1995.
While not relying on megastars or a large budget, it manages to create a
eerily realistic atmoshpere of sleazy Hollywood, early 1950's. It
captures this feeling not only with its black and white photography but
also with its set design and, most importantly, actors. 
        Ed Wood, the man, was interesting even by himself: he was a
transvestite, who had a particular weakness for his girlfriend's
anghorra sweater. Although completely heterosexual, he revels in
dressing up in women's clothes, and eventually places a large distance
between himself and his girlfriend(Dolores Fuller, an unnotable actress,
who is played by Sarah Jessica Parker)because of his strange urges.
Johnny Depp plays Ed Wood perfectly: his portrayal is that of a nervous
yet kind man, who loves what he does and tries to help everyone through
it. The movie follows Ed through the productions of three of his worst
movies, from Glen or Glenda? to Bride of the Monster and finally to Plan
9 From Outer Space, which has been recognized internationally as the
worst movie ever made.
        Along the way, Wood encounters what he perceives to be a huge
star: Bela Lugosi(Landau, who won an Academy Award for Best Supporting
Actor for his role), star of 20's and 30's horror films, and most
notable for bringind Dracula to America. But despite what Wood perceives
of him, Lugosi is now a washed-up has been who is also a
morphine-addict. Wood, however, with his typical blind eye to reason and
glee for anything movie-related, still views Lugosi as a great horror
actor, and is amazed when none of the studio heads see it that way(as a
matter of fact, their usual response is "Isn't he dead?")
        Glen or Glenda, Wood's first major films which was produced by a
grade-z schlock studio, tells the story of a young man engaged to his
beautiful wife, who loves her deeply but hides his cross-dressing and
anghorra-weakness from her. If this sounds familiar of Wood, you're
right: not only did he direct it, but he also wrote and starred in it.
        The movie tries to take itself seriously, telling the story of
Glen(played by Wood) in a documentary style. It fails at this, however,
as Wood uses stock footage liberally and spices it up with Lugosi. In
what could be called simultaneously both the most hilarious and worst
scene ever captured on film, Lugosi shouts "Pull the strings! Pull the
strings!" as the film fades into a herd of buffaloe stampeding. Of
course, this has absolutely nothing to do with the subject matter, but
as told in "Ed Wood", Wood never met a piece of film he didn't like, and
thought it would be a waste not to include Lugosi or the buffalo
stampede. *Sigh*. The film is so bad, that when shown to a Studio mogul,
he believes it is a practical joke by a friend.
        The actors and crew members of Wood's films were horribly
pathetic themselves: We already know the story of drug-addicted Lugosi,
but Wood also featured such favorites as Butterfly, a gay queen played
unexpectedly well by Murray, Dolores Fuller, Wood's real-life
girlfriend, Vampira(Lisa Marie), a local horror-host, a la Elvira or
Rhonda-Up-All-Night, Tor, a huge wrestler, and various grips and gaffers
who obtain special-effects, like a non-working rubber octopus, by
breaking into studio storage houses and stealing them.
        Tim Burton was the perfect choice to direct Ed Wood: not only is
he known for bringing outsiders to the screen with gusto(Jack
Skellington, Batman, Edward Scissorhands, etc.), but he himself is an
eccentric, odd director, who  likely understands Wood more than any of
us can. And although this film has it's faults(it stretches a little
long with its second act, and it doesn't go in-depth enough into Wood's
filmmaking career), it's a most enjoyable flick, and certainly one of
the oddest of the year. Exactly like all of Burton's other films.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Ed Wood (R, 1994)
Directed by Tim Burton. Written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski.
Starring Johnny Depp, Martin Landau, Sarah Jessica Parker, Patricia Arquette.
        Ed Wood  has been billed as a comedy, and its material certainly seems
like the perfect material for laughs. After all, this is the story of Ed Wood,
the universally acclaimed Worst Director of All Time and the man responsible
for the cinematic disasters Glen or Glenda?  and Plan 9 From Outer Space ,
among others. But when I heard that the film was directed by Tim Burton, who
has a reputation for championing the lonely outsider in films such as Edward
Scissorhands  and Batman,  I thought that it really might be something else.
Maybe this movie would actually show us Ed Wood as a human being rather than a
caricature, the Ed Wood that was determined to make movies and to make them
his way, the Ed Wood that was blissfully unaware of his own lack of talent.
        And indeed it did. That's not to say that the film isn't funny, which
it certainly is. But it's more than that: Wood, played here by Johnny Depp,
ultimately emerges as a sympathetic character. This is not because the film
waters down Wood's lack of talent; the script devotes considerable attention
to the making of Glen or Glenda?, Bride of the Monster,  and of course Plan 9 
 and does not attempt to portray them as anything other than scatterbrained
nonsense. Nor does it apologize for him by suggesting that it wasn't really
his fault that his movies were bad; in fact, his sponsors try to interfere and
bring some sense to Plan 9,  but he refuses to listen to their suggestions.
        Yet Wood comes across as a likeable human being. He is certainly
dedicated and enthusiastic about his profession, however incompetent he may
be. And if the film is historically accurate, he was one of the few true
friends that actor Bela Lugosi (Martin Landau) had in the last years of his
lonely, drug-addicted existence. Wood, Lugosi, and the others involved in
Wood's films, most of them occupying the fringes of society (Wood himself was
a known transvestite), may have been dismal failures in terms of the quality
of the movies they made, but Burton portrays their cinematic misadventures
with an odd romantic touch that makes it hard not to admire their
perseverance. Wood's relationship with his girlfriend and later wife Kathy
Johnson (Patricia Arquette) is treated much the same way; their idea of a
romantic evening seems to be sitting on the couch reading a book about space
invaders from Mars, but their goofy innocence is admired much more than it is
mocked. Near the end of the film, when Wood firmly tells his sponsors that
their suggestions for Plan 9 From Outer Space  would not be needed, I actually
found myself cheering for him as he and his crew managed to realize the
project in all its stupidity.
        What Burton and screenwriters Alexander and Karaszewski seem to be
saying is that yes, of course Ed Wood was a nut, but if all this silliness
made some sense to him and those around him at the time, then maybe everyone
else should at the very least leave him alone. This is certainly an
understandable sentiment from Burton; when a movie mogul chews Wood out for
playing Glen or Glenda?  as an (albeit mishandled) attempt at social
commentary rather than the sensationalist exploitation flick that he wanted, I
cannot help but think of those who slammed Burton for making Batman Returns 
into a dark, psychologically unsettling film rather than the campy superhero
movie that was expected. Ed Wood  does not have the visual flash of Burton's
other work (it is shot in black and white), but at the same time it is
probably his best and most personal film. They are light-years apart in terms
of talent, of course, but in a way I can see Tim Burton and Ed Wood as kindred
spirits: two filmmakers determined to do things their own way, regardless of
the pressure from above.
        Burton and his writers are making a pretty extreme statement in Ed
Wood -that nothing, not even lack of talent, should stand in the way of
dedication and honesty when it comes to art. Whether you agree or not, this
film is probably just about the best argument there is for such a position.
Along with the Coens' Barton Fink, Ed Wood is one of the most off-beat, and
one of the best, films to tackle the entertainment industry in recent years.

Author
Matthew Springer
     Tim Burton has finally found a film to which his unique talents as
a filmmaker can be perfectly wed: ED WOOD.
     If you've seen and been disappointed by Burton's work in the past
as I have, then you'll thrill to this biopic of B-movie director Edward
D. Wood, Jr., whose credits include GLEN OR GLENDA? and PLAN 9 FROM
OUTER SPACE," widely regarded as some of the worst films of all time.
Wood is also known for surrounding himself with people as strange as he
himself was, such as former horror film star Bela Lugosi, whose
relationship with Wood is at the heart of ED WOOD.
     I've often thought of the problems in Burton's past films as a
battle between screenplay and director; his gifts are such that they
often can stifle an otherwise good script.  In this case, I think the
script was ideally suited to his directing style, and the marriage
between director and screenplay a perfect one.  Burton has hit a peak
as a director with this film; he invokes emotions in this film that I
would have thought him incapable of understanding, let alone conveying
on celluloid.
     Burton is also aided by an extremely talented team of actors, led
by Johnny Depp in a virtuoso performance as the title character and
Martin Landau as Lugosi.  It's clear that Landau deserves an automatic
Supporting Actor Oscar nomination for this performance; the battle
between him and Robert Downey, Jr., for his insane and sharp portrayal
of Wayne Gale in NATURAL BORN KILLERS should be an especially bloody
one.
     Also not to be overlooked are Sarah Jessica Parker as Dolores
Fuller, Wood's first wife who in the end leaves him because she is
incapable of understanding his friends and lifestyle; Jeffrey Jones as
Criswell the Seer, a false psychic who lands roles as narrator in
several Wood films; and Bill Murray in an insanely funny, but small
role as Bunny Breckenrige, a homosexual actor who longs to become a
woman.  His small work alone is enough to warrant seeing this film;
it's a credit to the cast that a performance that hilariously
over-the-top can be lost amidst such other fine work.
     In the end, what makes ED WOOD fabulous is the humanity which it
reveals in its characters.  All of them are obviously freaks, but just
when the audience seems about to realize it and begin to laugh too much
at them, Burton gives us a glimpse of these people as human beings that
brings us right back to square one.  This is especially seen in the
Wood/Lugosi relationship; it would have been easy to play Lugosi just
for laughs (and lines like "Karloff isn't worthy to smell my s---!"
certainly make this clear), but Burton chooses instead to develop this
father-son relationship to the fullest, with the roles of father and
son being reversed by the time Lugosi has died.
     All in all, ED WOOD is a must-see.  It showcases Burton's
abilities as director to the fullest, while still allowing him to
expand those abilities in new directions.  It features an incredible
ensemble of actors who deliver amazing performances; none seem weak or
miscast.  And it recreates some of the laughingly bad moments in Wood's
actual films down to the letter.  Whether you're a fan of Wood's unique
talents or have never heard of him, you'll get a kick out of this
movie.

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     One of the most unusual aspects of the film industry is the
fondness that some people feel for some of the worst that the industry
has to offer.  That aspect is most vividly demonstrated by the cult
following of the amazingly inept films written and directed by Edward
Wood Jr.  Ironically, director Tim Burton tells Wood's story in one of
the best films of 1994.
     Burton's film, which is simply titled ED WOOD, is centered around
the friendship between Wood (Johnny Depp) and an aging, washed-up Bela
Lugosi (Martin Landau).  The film also follows the making of Wood's
three most legendary films: GLEN OR GLENDA?, BRIDE OF THE MONSTER, and
PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.  In the process, we are introduced to many of
the bizarre individuals who populated Wood's films and his life.  Among
the people we meet are Swedish wrestler Tor Johnson (George "The
Animal" Steele), would-be transsexual Bunny Breckinridge (Bill
Murray), phony psychic Criswell (Jeffrey Jones), and TV horror movie
hostess Vampira (Lisa Marie).
     If these characters had been created for a fictional film, nobody
ever would have believed them.  This movie is mostly non-fiction,
though, and we are therefore more inclined to accept them.
Screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski have wisely written
most of the film as a comedy, recognizing that it is difficult to take
these people too seriously.  This is a *very* funny movie, but the
comedy never seems mean-spirited.  Burton and the writers allow the
humor to build naturally.  A lot of inherent humor comes out of the
image of a cross-dressing film director shooting ineptly conceived
scenes with a bizarre cast of non-actors.  There is no need to
artificially create humor through put-downs and this script is smart
enough to know that.
     At the heart of the film is the surprisingly touching relationship
that builds between Ed Wood and Bela Lugosi.  When Wood meets Lugosi,
he is a bitter, dying old man who is hopelessly addicted to morphine.
He is flattered by the fact that Wood still remembers, and even admires
him.  Lugosi is able to use his faded stardom to provide Wood with a
small link to legitimacy while Wood allows him to live out his final
days as a working actor.  Depp and Landau play very well together and
really make this relationship work.
     Johnny Depp first demonstrated some skill as an actor in Burton's
EDWARD SCISSORHANDS and Burton gets another strong performance out of
him here.  Some may feel that Depp goes over the top a bit with this
performance, but how else could Ed Wood be played?  Depp plays Wood as
a man who is totally committed to his art, while also being mostly
unaware of his lack of talent. The script places quite a bit of
emphasis on Wood's admiration for Orson Welles.  In his own strange
way, Wood is simply emulating his idol.  Depp's performance
successfully captures the dedication that separates Wood's films from
most other bad movies.  It is hard not to feel some affection towards
his films simply because of their utter *sincerity*.  When Wood shouts
"Cut! That was *perfect*!" at the end of every lousy take, you truly
believe that he means it.
     Martin Landau's performance as Bela Lugosi is so right on the mark
that the Academy should go ahead and engrave his name on the Best
Supporting Actor award statue now.  Landau manages to sound, behave,
and even look (with a little help from Rick Baker's makeup effects)
like the real Lugosi.  His performance is much more than just an
impersonation, though.  He plays Lugosi as a sad, proud man who simply
wants to get back into the limelight that he once knew. It is an
outstanding performance.
     Wood is not portrayed as a saint, by any means.  He is willing to
do whatever it takes to get his films made.  He is very quick to agree
to casting people in his films if they are willing to put up money.
His GLEN OR GLENDA? co-star and girlfriend Dolores Fuller (Sarah
Jessica Parker) eventually leaves him after she is replaced for the
lead role in BRIDE OF THE MONSTER by another actress who helps with
financing.  Her willingness to still appear in a tiny role in the film
shows the unusual loyalty that Wood inspired, though.
     The film is full of other strong supporting performances.  Each of
the actors playing the members of Wood's regular acting company are
very convincing.  Bill Murray is the most familiar face in the cast and
it is sometimes a bit difficult to see Bunny Breckinridge instead of
Bill Murray, but he is still very appealing and generates a lot of
laughs.  Parker believably portrays Fuller's uncertain loyalties and
Patricia Arquette does her best in a rather thankless role as the
future Mrs. Ed Wood.
     Like all of Tim Burton's films, the production design and style
plays a very major role in ED WOOD.  Burton selected to shoot this film
in black and white and lights the movie to largely match the look of Ed
Wood's own films. Howard Shore's score also does a nice job of
duplicating the music commonly used in that era, although there were a
few occasions where it sounded a bit like Shore was borrowing the style
of Burton's usual collaborator Danny Elfman.
     ED WOOD is a loving tribute to one of the strangest filmmakers in
the history of Hollywood.  It is one of the funniest movies in recent
memory, while never letting the laughs get in the way of telling the
story of the unique friendship between Wood and Lugosi.  This is one of
the best films ever made about filmmaking and one of the best movies of
1994.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     You may or may not think this is one of the best movies of the
year (Siskel and Ebert, I know, do), but for pushing the limits of an
idea, the movie ED WOOD by director Tim Burton has got to be one of the
most innovative.  I was surprised how much I liked Burton's vision of
ED WOOD since I am not a fan of Burton's work other than his BATMAN
series which I sort of liked.
     Imagine making a movie about a director, Edward D.  Wood Jr., who
was voted the worst director of all time.  Not only that, Ed Wood made
what is widely credited as being the worst movie of all time, PLAN 9
FROM OUTER SPACE.  Moreover, he also made GLEN OR GLENDA, BRIDE OF THE
MONSTER, and other such classics.
     There are two great things going for this movie.  One, is the
amazing true life story.  Ed Wood was the eternal optimist who made one
stinker after another, but still believed his next movie would be a
success.  The other is the amazing and infectiously happy acting of
Johnny Depp (whom I loathed in WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE) playing Ed
Wood.  If you don't come out of this theater feeling upbeat, you must
have gone in the wrong door in the multiplex.  If the movie you saw was
not filmed (Stefan Czapsky) in glorious black and white, then you saw
the wrong movie.
     Actually one of the problems I had with the movie was that it is
playing the movie house with screens the size of small states.  This is
strictly an art house flick.  This was a real problem for me.
     Back to the fascinating story.  You get to meet Bela Lugosi played
by Martin Landau.  At Oscar time, expect to see nominations for best
actor to Depp and supporting actor to Landau.  The movie happens during
at a time when Lugosi career was about over with which is somewhat of a
parallel to Landau's career, before this movie.
     This is one of those films filled with minor actors and actresses
you have seen before.  Sarah Jessica Parker, who was great in HONEYMOON
IN VEGAS, plays Wood's girlfriend.  Jeffrey Jones, the principal from
FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF, plays Criswell, the "great", well famous,
psychic of the time.  G.D.  Spradlin who played the evil Senator, the
one with the dead horse in his bed, from GODFATHER II, here plays the
head preacher of the Beverly Hill Baptist Church which aids Wood's most
trashy classic.  Fact is stranger than fiction.
     Since I have never liked Johnny Depp nor Tim Burton very much,
that I am liked this film at all, is probably a testament to just how
good it is.  If you like Burton movies, hey, you are probably going to
go gaga over ED WOOD.
     As fascinating as the plot of this movie was, I found it lost my
interest in parts.  There is just so much to say about someone whose
specialty is making something terrible.  Nevertheless, if you like
quirky movies or if you are interested in the art of making movies, I
am sure you will like this film.
     ED WOOD runs a little long at 2:05.  The movie is rated R for
profanity, cross-dressing, and drug use, but it actually is a fairly
harmless movie.  I would have no trouble letting older teens see it,
and you could take younger teens with you.  I recommend it to everyone
except the totally non-experimental types--you probably don't want to
take "the grandparents" to see it.  I give ***.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 10, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mike Church
     The story: The film is a loosely biographical look at the life of
Ed Wood (duh), the maker of truly terrible films such as PLAN 9 FROM
OUTER SPACE and GLEN OR GLENDA.  Wood is shown to be a person desperate
to live up to the image of his idol, Orson Wells, who wrote, directed,
and starred in CITIZEN KANE in his late 20's.  Unfortunately, Wood
appears to have several handicaps as a filmmaker: he has very little
talent, no connections within the movie industry, and no money.  In his
favour he has enormous enthusiasm, massive confidence, support from
friends (such as Bela Lugosi, the legendary ex-Dracula, fantastically
portrayed here by Martin Landau) and his girlfriend.  He's also a great
bullshitter.
     The films he makes are hampered by his scripts, the actors he
hires, the meddling of his financial backers (in some cases, he gets
money for the movie in exchange for letting the donor play a key role),
and lack of quality control: scene after scene is showed being shot
with disastrous flaws, and in each case Wood calls "Cut!  Perfect,
print it," never once calling for a second take.  The result is a batch
of truly awful Ed Wood films.
     Johnny Depp strikes me as the kind of actor that some people love
and others hate.  Having seen him in BENNY & JOON and WHAT'S EATING
GILBERT GRAPE, I like him a lot.  His work in title role of ED WOOD is
great: he does a terrific job of playing this hack moviemaker with
compassion and style.  He does not play "Johnny Depp;" in other words,
he plays each of his roles very differently.  He gives Ed Wood energy,
charisma, warmth, and vulnerability, but doesn't prevent you from
believing that his character is fundamentally handicapped as a
filmmaker.  Martin Landau does an unbelievable job of playing Bela
Lugosi, now well past the end of his career and a junkie.  Despite the
major roles played by these two actors, there is no sense of one trying
to upstage the other; rather, they reinforce each other--perhaps at
the expense of the other actors, none of whom made any great impression
on me.  Even Bill Murray, who I normally find very charismatic, seems
firmly in the back seat in this movie.
     Still, the movie kinda bummed me out.  I got the same feeling from
BATMAN, another film directed by Tim Burton, so maybe it's his fault.
Despite having some laughs written into it, the movie wasn't very much
fun.  Wood obviously had a shitty life, desperately trying to re-live
Orson Wells' life, and the point of the movie seemed to be to jeer at
Ed Wood for not being able to fulfill his dream.  He bounced perkily
through his life making one crappy movie after another, always a day
late and a dollar short (Tom Waits) and clearly going nowhere.  As if
showing Wood to be a blinkered, talentless (but likeable) geek weren't
enough, Burton spends way too much time and footage on his subject's
closet transvestitism, which starts out funny and ends up looking like
a long series of cheap shots.
     But: the movie oozes style, from the fantastic opening titles (a
parody of all the B movie openings you've ever seen) through the
all-black&white production, with its wonderful camera work (alternating
classic B movie "what-is-he-thinking" ultra-closeup face shots with
fantastic helicopter pans blending seamlessly into flawless miniature
sets) to the "where are they now" closing credits.  Speaking of the
latter, again it was pretty depressing to find out what happened to
some of these actors--very little good news here.
     Rating: if you liked BATMAN, don't mind admitting that you had fun
watching B movies before you got old and sophisticated, and are on the
right side of the like/hate Johnny Depp fence, you'd happily give this
movie $7.50 on the unattainable $8.00 scale.  If you wouldn't be caught
dead eating popcorn in the same room as Godzilla and a miniature
disintegrating Tokyo, or if you found BATMAN irredeemably gloomy, you
probably won't find much to like here either--say $2.50's worth.  I'd
give it a solid $4.00, with a $.50 bonus for having no gunfire, car
chases, or helicopter battles, which means that I once again got my
money's worth from the Ridge.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Tim Burton has made just about the only biography that could have
been made of the film-making career of Ed Wood Jr. since there are so
many legends of filmmaker.  He has probably correctly assumed people
who come to see the film are less interested in delving into the
character of the man and more in having and extension of the experience
they have laughing at the ineptitude of the films Wood made.  Burton
has created a stylish film to poke fun at Wood.
     When the film opens Wood (played by Johnny Depp) is a handyman at
Universal Studios who produces silly, pretentious plays with the Ed
Wood touch of ineptitude.  But Wood idolizes Orson Welles, who was
writing, directing, and acting in his own film at 26.  Wood is already
30 and feels the need to be an auteur filmmaker, right now.  The
problem is that with the exception of producing some really terrible
plays he has no experience relevant to making films.  However, he has
the confidence that he knows everything that he needs to know.  A
chance meeting with Bela Lugosi give him the edge he needs to get his
first film made as well as beginning a friendship that would last the
rest of Lugosi's years.
     Wood's one flaw time and time again is in assuming he has talent
and is creating great art.  Of course the films he really does create
are notorious for their ineptitude.  On a small scale he is not unlike
Roger Corman--he will give anyone an opportunity to be in his films
without discrimination on the basis of talent.  This gets earns him a
sort of the following of a coterie of talentless actors who find easy
employment with Wood.  The list centers on the fading Bela Lugosi but
includes Swedish wrestler Tor Johnson, fake psychic Criswell, and
horror show host Vampira.  Unfortunately, with the exception of one
marquee reference, the film never mentions Lyle Talbot.  Talbot had
been in major productions before and after the Wood films he was in as
well as being a regular on the TV show "Ozzie and Harriet."  It would
have been interesting to know more about why he was willing to accept
minuscule wages to appear in Wood's productions.
     The style of the film is to weave together many of the anecdotes
that have appeared elsewhere for years.  Many are probably true, others
apocryphal.  Wood was certainly a transvestite, as shown in ED WOODFR
WOOD, and much of what was coherent about GLEN OR GLENDA? was an
autobiographical study of a transvestite.  Whether or not he would let
being a transvestite affect his directing in later films as shown could
well be just legend.  Wood's friendship and attention did help Lugosi
through the aging actor's final years, but whether his relationship was
really as close as shown probably depends on to who is telling the
story.  And certainly the ending of the film is a fantasy in Ed's mind
and one wonders how much else is a fantasy in this film.  There are
obvious anachronisms in the film.  The producer of GLEN OR GLENDA? has
a stack of film cans behind his desk including one labeled "One-Eyed
Samurai."  I find this very unlikely for an American film producer in
1952.
     Johnny Depp puts a little too much energy into Wood.  At least on
screen Wood's body language seems to indicate a man a bit more placid
and laid back than Depp plays him.  Landau's ailing Bela Lugosi really
looks very good, a combination of Rick Baker's excellent makeup and
Landau's own study of Lugosi's facial expression.  Burton is banking on
not too many people being able to recall Wood's looks and demeanor, but
Lugosi's is too familiar a face too familiar for Burton to take similar
liberties.
     Story accuracy beyond that point is open to some interpretation.
Though the film is based on Rudolph Grey's NIGHTMARE OF ECSTASY: THE
LIFE AND ART OF EDWARD D. WOOD, JR.," I doubt if it or any other
existing piece of research is a serious study of Ed Wood, and perhaps
Wood does not deserve a serious study.  If the film adaptation is any
indication, the book is not always well researched.  Lugosi is shown to
be lonely and alone, a drug addict for twenty years and not having made
a film in the last four.  It is true this was a particularly rocky
period in Lugosi's life.  After DRACULA Lugosi was always the victim of
his own poor discretion in the roles he chose and of the narrowness of
his acting repertoire.  He really as an actor better suited to silent
film than sound.  There are only so many roles that require his forte,
which was looking mysterious.  He ended up playing too many red herring
butlers in too many cheap horror mysteries.  After he played Dracula
for the last time on screen in ABBOTT AND COSTELLO MEET FRANKENSTEIN he
was also the victim of Universal Studio's ingratitude for his previous
contributions.
     But Lugosi's state was looking up as a look at Lugosi's
filmography indicates. And there was a revival in his career--of sorts-
--from 1952 to his death in 1956.  GLEN OR GLENDA? was actually the
second of three films he made in 1952 after OLD MOTHER RILEY MEETS A
VAMPIRE and before BELA LUGOSI MEETS A BROOKLYN GORILLA.  After his
drug rehabilitation Lugosi also married his fifth wife, a fan as a wife
who remained loving and loyal to him until his death.  In 1956 he made
THE BLACK SLEEP and took some part in the publicity campaigns.  It was
not even a speaking role but presumably between that and TV appearances
he could at least squeak by.
     This film opens trying to give the feel of an Ed Wood film but the
haunted house we see in the beginning has more the feel of Burton's
films with miniatures much like we have seen in Burton fantasy films
since "Frankenweenie."  On the other hand Burton does a fairly good job
of recreating scenes that look much like they did in the original Wood
films.  Actors do not always look quite like their original
counterparts, especially Bill Murray as Bunny Breckenridge, but some
scenes do bear an uncanny resemblance to their original film versions.
One need look no further than Universal's MAN OF A THOUSAND FACES to
realize how much worse the recreations could have been.
     If one is really interested in the real behind-the-cameras dirt of
popular 1950s entertainment, the current QUIZ SHOW is far better done
and more credible.  But for a diverting couple of hours, ED WOOD is
enjoyable entertainment.  I rate it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
David Cowen
     Back when I was in high school I used to sit down in the basement
watching TV late at night, hoping I'd find something bizarre or
entertaining to watch.  I'd flip through the channels seeing the same
kind of banal fare typical of late-night TV ... but occasionally,
flipping past PBS, something magical would happen--I'd flip to Glen
or Glenda, Ed Wood's first film about cross-dressing, and spend the
evening laughing and marveling as to where such a goofy piece of
celluloid might come from.  Now, years later I get the answer, in the
form of a brilliantly crafted film by Tim Burton.
     Ed Wood, a struggling studio worker in Hollywood, has bigger
dreams--to write, direct, star in and produce his own film, just like
his idol, Orson Welles.  When Ed finds out a docudrama about
cross-dressing is being made by a B-film company called "Screen
Classics", he phones up the head of the "studio" and tells him that
he's more qualified than anyone in town to make the film.  His
"special" qualification?  Having an affinity for his girlfriend's
angora sweaters.
     Eventually, Ed gets the job, produces Glen or Glenda, and begins
working on a string of horrendously bad pictures (the film examines the
production of two more, the classic BRIDE OF THE MONSTER and PLAN 9
FROM OUTER SPACE) with an amazing amount of vigor and passion for
his ... "art"--never before have I seen such unbridled enthusiasm for
stilted dialogue, cardboard set pieces, and fake octopii.  The film
also explores Wood's friendship with Bela Lugosi, star of DRACULA, as
he tries to make a former screen great a big star again ... even when
that screen great dies before the production of the film.
     Tim Burton could have done a straight biopic, documenting Woods
"fall" into bad monster/nudie films (the abysmal ORGY OF THE DEAD is
a standout), but instead Burton portrays Wood as enthusiastic,
artistic, and full of life--a true believer in his films, as opposed to
just a bored B-movie director.  Wood's enthusiasm is radiated from
Johnny Depp, who with wild-eyes and a big-toothed (yet somewhat
maligned) smile makes even the worst of Wood's dialogue echo with
poignancy--believe it or not.
     The attention to detail is outstanding--I was lucky enough to
catch BRIDE OF THE MONSTER on TV the night before, and except for a
few minor differences, Burton went to a lot of trouble to capture the
look and feel of the movie--and the actors deliver the lines with the
same sort of stuttered bad-acting flair as in the originals.  I felt I
was getting a real look behind the sets.  The entire film feels like it
was directed by Wood himself, with extra-long establishing shots, the
grey-and-white film stock, the lack of music except in points of
highest schmaltz ... and at the theatre I was at, the frequent
projector problems made it all the more realistic--the matte was set
too high, so every time a boom mike got in the shot, there were squeals
of laughter and applause.
     Out of 10: 8.  I haven't had this much fun at a movie in a long
time.  ED WOOD is funny, passionate, and if you've ever seen any of Ed
Wood's work it'll be amazing to see how it was made.  ED WOOD is a
must-see for any self-proclaimed fan of bad cinema, or movies in
general.
esch@fische.com
(Eschatfische!) -------------------------- http://execpc.com/~esch/home.html
