Title
Review for Party Girl (1995/I)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
First Look Pictures Releasing
Directed by: Daisy von Scherler Mayer
Cinematography by: Michael Slovis
Written by: Harry Birckmayer, Sheila Gaffney, Daisy von Scherler Mayer
Edited by: Cara Silverman
Starring: Parker Posey, Omar Townsend, Sasha Von Scherler, Guillermo Diaz
     PARTY GIRL is the kind of movie that brings out the kitschy
adjective thesaurus in me:  It's a swanky flourish of a movie that
grooves its way into your heart.
     Parker Posey, as Mary, is the driving force behind the movie.
Without her, the film would be a fairly run-of-the-mill Happening Scene
movie about glammy people in New York.  Without Posey, in fact, the
movie would be downright dull.  Posey, however, incarnates a wonderful
screen charisma.  Not only does she have great gams, slightly pouty
lips, and a killer jawline (reminiscent of Ione Skye), but she's got
capital-P Pizzazz!  She's the life of the party, the belle of the ball,
the hostess with the mostest.
     You might remember Posey from DAZED AND CONFUSED, the film from a
couple of summers ago about high school in the '70's.  That film
featured a large, diverse cast, but Posey still stood out (more so than
Milla Jovovich, who had a larger but less inhabited part) as a sadistic
senior princess putting freshwomen through their paces.  PARTY GIRL
puts Posey front and center, and she runs away with the movie.
     Part of Posey's charm is her complete ease in being the center of
attention, even when she's the only person in the room.  It's easy to
look like a sophisticated party queen, but Posey manages not to look as
foolish as mere mortals would while dancing in her kitchen, humming
Middle Eastern melodies while faux belly-dancing with a dishtowel.
It's quite a feat.  If PARTY GIRL does at all well, Posey should (she
deserves to) move into the on deck circle of Hollywood stardom.  Now
that Sandra Bullock's all but clinched the dream-girl-next-door
starring role position in Hollywood, Posey's poised to take Sandy's
empty slot in the lineup.
     Oh, yeah--the plot (such as it is).  Posey is Mary, a party girl
(hence the title) in New York who lives in a low-rent apartment but
wears a high-class wardrobe.  At the beginning of the film, Mary is
arrested for throwing an illegal party, and calls her godmother, Mrs.
Lindendorf (Sasha Von Scherler), her "only family," for bail and a
loan.  Her godmother is not pleased, of course, and to repay the loan
Mary takes a job under her godmother at the public library as a clerk
(Mrs. Lindendorf is a full-fledged librarian).  At first she breezes
through the position, not much caring, but when challenged decides to
master the Dewey Decimal System and become the best damn clerk she
can.
     There's also a love story between Mary and Omar, a falafel vendor
from Lebanon, and Mary's roommate's efforts to get hired as a DJ in a
really trendy club.  PARTY GIRL is only loosely about its plot,
however.  It doesn't even have nearly as much partying as you might
expect.  The film rises and sets with Posey's performance, so the
filmmakers are lucky (or were perceptive enough to see) that Posey's up
to the challenge.
     What sets Posey apart from just any actress in the role is her
ability to play a character most people (including herself) believe is
a low-density flibbertigibbet, while letting the audience see, in the
tilt of her head and the low-key intensity of her voice, that Mary's
not as dumb as she likes to project.  She manages to surprise herself
with her library talents, but not us.  We knew she had it in her,
because Posey let us see it all along.
Grade for the course: B (I'm changing to the ENTERTAINMENT WEEKLY 
report-card summary method--it's much more satisfying)

Author
Christopher Null
     This pretty much sums up the early attitude of the title character
in PARTY GIRL, a new film by Daisy von Scherler Mayer, about the
misadventures of a New York City diva who finds her life suddenly
falling apart.  Parker Posey plays Mary, the Party Girl in question,
whose flair and style are matched only by her inability to do anything
productive with her life.
     Mary is an old-style slacker of the first degree.  The picture
opens with Mary hosting a party to cover this month's rent, only to get
busted by the cops and having to call her librarian godmother (Sasha
von Scherler) to bail her out.  Godmother takes pity and gives Mary a
job as a library clerk, which seems to suit the carefree socialite like
a designer muumuu.  Interspersed with Mary's quest to find her place in
the fascinating world of library science, she frequents party after
party, always in search of the hippest hangout and the ultimate cool
time.
     PARTY GIRL is something of an allegory to the existentialist
literature it refers to: Mary is in search of life's meaning in a
world which appears to have none.  This New York is completely surreal,
full of ultra-hip people and places that are usually too cute for their
own good.  In the end, Mary can't find a shred of meaning in this
world, so she turns to...the Dewey Decimal System.  And it gets weirder
than that, perhaps the most bizarre part of the film being an
inexplicable romance Mary has with a street falafel vendor (Omar
Townsend).
     PARTY GIRL ends up being a mostly-entertaining movie.  It isn't
the raucous comedy it's billed as, but the funny bits are worth the
price of admission.  Posey is electric, a consummate professional (and
the only one in the cast who nails her lines every time).  It's
incredible how she makes the most mundane thing look cool; the most
enjoyable part of PARTY GIRL just might be seeing what Posey is wearing
in the next scene, and managing to outdo what she had on previously.
     The film takes quite awhile to really get rolling, and that's
largely due to the relatively inexperienced supporting cast and the low
low budget which allowed for only two takes of any scene.  As a result,
much of the movie's dialogue is stilted and just doesn't flow smoothly
enough to convey the sarcastic wit all of these characters are supposed
to be imbued with.  The budget has also burdened PARTY GIRL with some
damaging sound problems.
     Also, while Mary's parties are to die for, her search for a career
is uninspired.  What begins as a comedic Mary vs. The World ends up
being an overdramatic Mary vs. The Dewey Decimal System--not what I was
expecting, and probably not what the audience wants to watch.  I wish
the filmmakers had taken Mary's own advice here:  "Lighten up!  It's a
party!"

Author
Seth Bookey
  Seen with Tony in June 1995 at the Angelika.
   You very well might have missed Party Girl, which came and went from
   theaters quicker than you can say "library card." While many reviewers
   judged it mainly on the merits of lead actress Parker Posey (Tales of
   the City, Dazed and Confused), with Entertainment Weekly and People
   magazines giving it "B" ratings, this fun little film rises in ratings
   appeal when seen from the librarian's point of view.
   [INLINE] Our protagonist is Mary, a doyenne of the Downtown scene.
   When her latest illegal rent party is busted by the police, she is
   bailed out by her godmother (played by Sasha von Scherler), a NYPL
   librarian. To pay off her debt, Mary becomes a clerk at a branch
   library (a Jersey City library posed as a NYPL branch for this film)
   and is immediately challenged as irresponsible and not up to the
   "challenge." Mary eventually memorized the DDC20 and begins her
   quest--better living by getting an MLS.
   Along the way, Mary is also involved in helping her disc-jockey
   friend, Leo (Guillermo Diaz) get a job, and in a romance with falafel
   vendor Mustafa (Omar Townsend)
   I noticed that the scenes I reacted to most did not concur with the
   audience's. Those who reacted along with me must have also been
   librarians and other likeminded people. Hearing the librarians'
   professional bickering, seeing the fans blowing on water-damaged
   books, and other little touches would most likely only be best
   appreciated by those in the know. Scene to watch for: Mary confronts a
   patron who reshelves a book improperly.
   What really makes Party Girl stand out, from the MLS (Masters of
   Libary Science) point of view, is that becoming a librarian is seen a
   constructive, positive objective, rather than a punishment. Fifty
   years ago, the worst thing that could have happened to Mary Baily in
   It's a Wonderful Life is to have become a librarian. After decades of
   Hollywood showing the profession in the most unflattering poses, Party
   Girl shows us a hip downtowner deciding to improve her life by getting
   an MLS. A nice change of pace and certainly worth looking for in the
   videostores.
   Basically, if you are somewhat familiar with libraries, falafel, the
   Dewey Decimal System, house music, babganoush, or New York City, you
   will probably enjoy this movie. The perfect break for those times your
   not at the library yourself.
     Note: This review originally appeared under this title in KEYWORDS,
     the Newsletter of the Queens College Graduate School of Library and
     Information Studies Student Association. Reprinted with my
     permission (since I wrote the review and edit the newsletter).
   Librarians will also enjoy Desk Set (1957).
   _________________________________________________________________
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
