Title
Review for Flirt (1995/I)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginnning 9/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:25
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, profanity, nudity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: William Sage, Martin Donovan, Parker Posey, Dwight Ewell, 
      Dominik Bender, Miho Nikaido, Toshizo Fujiwara, Chikako Hara, 
      Hal Hartley
Director: Hal Hartley
Producer: Ted Hope
Screenplay: Hal Hartley
Cinematography: Michael Spiller
Music: Ned Rifle and Jeffrey Taylor
U.S. Distributor: C/FP Distribution 
In English, German, and Japanese with subtitles
     FLIRT is one of those films where I appreciate the idea a lot more 
than its  execution.  In fact, even though the film features all the Hal 
Hartley trademarks -- offbeat dialogue, quick cuts, bizarre diversions -
- it loses its energy before the two-thirds point.  Despite a few clever 
twists, the last half-hour is tired, illustrating that not all 
intriguing premises can be successfully transformed into a solid motion 
pictures, no matter how talented the film maker is.
     FLIRT is actually a trilogy of shorts, all of which focus on 
identical subjects:  betrayal and uncertainty about love.  In fact, not 
only do the episodes explore similar issues, but they do so in exactly 
the same manner.  Each segment is a slightly distorted image of the 
other two, down to individual lines.  The characters and settings 
change, and there are small differences and individual quirks, but FLIRT 
is basically one story told three times.  The third time is definitely 
not a charm.  A certain amount of repetition is fine, but Hartley goes 
overboard, making this more suitable for film school study than 
theatrical entertainment.
     Story #1 takes place in New York City during February of 1993.  
Hartley alum, Martin Donovan (AMATEUR), plays Walter, a man with a 
dilemma.  His girlfriend, Emily (Parker Posey), has just issued an 
ultimatum:  commit to a relationship or watch her fly off to Paris.  
Walter is torn, and, after asking for a ninety minute reprieve, he seeks 
out another woman he's involved with to find out whether she's willing 
to commit to that relationship.  Instead of meeting the woman, however, 
he encounters her suicidal husband (Bill Sage), who is nursing a drink 
and a gun.  
     Story #2 takes place in Berlin during October of 1994.  This is a 
homosexual version of the same plot.  Here, the recipient of the 
ultimatum is Dwight (Dwight Ewell), and the person issuing it is an 
older man, not a woman.  Other than that, it's all basically the same:  
the uncertainty about commitment, the meeting with the gun-toting 
spouse, and the events that follow.  Story #3 is set in Tokyo, March 
1995.  The main character this time is a woman, Miho (Miho Nikaido, from 
TOKYO DECADENCE).  Her boyfriend is director Hal Hartley, and the gun-
wielder is her college professor's wife (Chikako Hara).  By this time, 
not only will you know what's going to happen, but you'll have whole 
chunks of dialogue memorized.
     There are times when FLIRT approaches brilliance.  During the first 
segment, Walter walks into the men's room and asks for advice from a 
stranger at a urinal and those in the stalls.  Their thoughtful, 
existential responses are hilarious.  In the Berlin episode, a group of 
construction workers discuss whether the director of this film has 
failed, and whether "the failure is interesting."  And, when in Tokyo, 
it's hard to miss that Hal Hartley is carrying a canister of film marked 
"True Fiction Pictures:  FLIRT".  Unfortunately, the movie only 
occasionally rises to this level.  Most of the time, it's just 
repetitive.  
     Akira Kurosawa's RASHOMON (which inspired this year's COURAGE UNDER 
FIRE) proved that it's possible to tell the same story more than once 
and still retain the audience's attention.  Perhaps if FLIRT had used 
RASHOMON's hook -- varying the viewpoint -- it would have been more 
involving.  As it is, however, the viewer's level of interest is likely 
to drop off long before the closing credits start to roll.  Frankly, if 
I wanted to see repeats of the same half-hour story, I'd watch 
television.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Joan Ellis
     "The publicity release for FLIRT sums it up: "FLIRT is the same
story set in three different places and told in three different ways;
an exploration of the universal themes of commitment, betrayal,
indecision, catching a plane, losing a lover, and getting shot in the
face."  That's it.  That's the movie, and that's Hal Hartley.
     He has made an extremely funny and provocative statement about
personal commitment as a global condition, and he has made it in bold,
direct language and colors.  The colors, even in the Tokyo night, are
strong and clear, and the story is presented with stark clarity by
American, German, and Japanese actors in Los Angeles, Berlin, and
Tokyo.  By keeping his script spare, Hartley shines the spotlight on his
chosen themes with an economy of words, the better for us to ponder
them.
     The script is superbly superficial, a wonderfully comic statement
that we humans usually reduce big themes to simple terms.  When we're
surprised, words fail us altogether.  Mired in indecision, Hartley's
characters beg others to make their decisions for them.  They look at
their  dilemmas through a magnifying lens, making each decision far
bigger than it need be, talking each one to death in the absence of
ability to take action.  Maybe the problem will go away, or at least
solve itself.
     Bill (Bill Sage) is comfortable in his lack of commitment to Emily
(Parker Posey).  Maybe there's something better out there, maybe he can
have it all.  In the 90 minutes she gives him to make his commitment to
her as she leaves for Paris, Bill explores his options, gets shot in
the face, and ends up in the hands of the most indecisive emergency
room doctor this side of hell.
     Desperate for help with his decision, Bill finds it in the men's
room from a trio of toilet stall philosophers, who discuss his
situation with hilarious self-absorption.  And so it goes in Berlin,
where a group of construction hard hats addresses Dwight's dilemma with
utter gravity: "To flirt is to exist in ambiguity; we can't exist in
ambiguity forever."  And so it is in Tokyo with Miho, who is jailed for
gun possession and receives wise and comic counsel from a marvelous
trio of cellmates.
     In a world where everyone tries to make decisions of the heart
with reason, love and passion are lost in triviality.  Someone always
asks, "Is there a future for us?"  Can a flirt ever stop wanting more
time or more proof?
     The movie is sharply suggests that we take ourselves far too
seriously, that we reason the love right out of our lives.  It hands us
the comforting remedy of perspective by reminding us, three times over,
that everything we have ever said, done, or thought of doing has been
done a thousand times in our own and other languages.  A flirt is a
flirt is a flirt.


Author
Joan Ellis
"The publicity release for "Flirt" sums it up: " 'Flirt' is
the same story set in three different places and told in three
different ways; an exploration of the universal themes of
commitment, betrayal, indecision, catching a plane, losing a
lover, and getting shot in the face."  That's it. That's the
movie, and that's Hal Hartley.
He has made an extremely funny and provocative statement
about personal commitment as a global condition, and he has made
it in bold, direct language and colors. The colors, even in the
Tokyo night, are strong and clear, and the story is presented
with stark clarity by American, German, and Japanese actors in
Los Angeles, Berlin, and Tokyo. By keeping his script spare,
Hartley shines the spotlight on his chosen themes with an economy
of words, the better for us to ponder them.
The script is superbly superficial, a wonderfully comic
statement that we humans usually reduce big themes to simple
terms. When we're surprised, words fail us altogether. Mired in
indecision, Hartley's characters beg others to make their
decisions for them. They look at their  dilemmas through a
magnifying lens, making each decision far bigger than it need be,
talking each one to death in the absence of ability to take
action. Maybe the problem will go away, or at least solve itself.
Bill (Bill Sage) is comfortable in his lack of commitment
to Emily (Parker Posey). Maybe there's something better out
there, maybe he can have it all. In the 90 minutes she gives him
to make his commitment to her as she leaves for Paris, Bill
explores his options, gets shot in the face, and ends up in the
hands of the most indecisive emergency room doctor this side of
hell. 
Desperate for help with his decision, Bill finds it in the
men's room from a trio of toilet stall philosophers, who discuss
his situation with hilarious self-absorption. And so it goes in
Berlin, where a group of construction hard hats addresses
Dwight's dilemma with utter gravity: "To flirt is to exist in
ambiguity; we can't exist in ambiguity forever."  And so it is in
Tokyo with Miho, who is jailed for gun possession and receives
wise and comic counsel from a marvelous trio of cellmates. 
In a world where everyone tries to make decisions of the
heart with reason, love and passion are lost in triviality.
Someone always asks, "Is there a future for us?"  Can a flirt
ever stop wanting more time or more proof?
The movie is sharply suggests that we take ourselves far too
seriously, that we reason the love right out of our lives. It
hands us the comforting remedy of perspective by reminding us,
three times over, that everything we have ever said, done, or
thought of doing has been done a thousand times in our own and
other languages. A flirt is a flirt is a flirt.  

