Title
Review for Darkman (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Billy Newsom
This is absolutely, without a doubt, the worst movie that I've ever
seen.  If you want to see a proper review, then you're in the wrong
place.  This is how vividly this movie stuck to me as the most horrible
excuse for entertainment I've ever encountered:
I can remember the reason I saw this movie, where, when, and I can
especially remembering having thoughts about walking out of the
theater.  You must know that if I had had anything better to do, I would
have left.  (In fact, I've never walked out on a movie.)
Darkman truly delivers in every single bad category.  It lacks any sense
of purpose, plot, or entertainment value.  There are dozens of movies
which I could name that I'd gladly watch before I'd watch this movie
again.  Movies which people consistently rate 1/2 stars.
The major thing that mystifies me about this, uh (shall I say it?) movie
is that there was a sequel.  (Okay, only on video.  But there were two
sequels.)  It makes me sad to think that there was any interest in this
trash enough to let it linger.  I have heard a rumor that either Siskel
or Ebert gave it a good rating.  If so, rest assured that either they
were given a large sum of money to do so or they truly are the most
inept of critics.  Any critic that would have a positive 
If all of my words have made you want to see it for the sake of
adventure, then no doubt you have the same idea I had when I failed to
leave the theater.  I knew that this movie was insidious and yet I kept
watching.  Let's just say that curiosity will kill you on this one.
Note that Sam Raimi directed - a pseudonym used by permission of the
Director's Guild if I'm not mistaken.  I would be most interested to
know the true culprit.  I would like to ask him, "What were you
thinking?"
It might be Bradford May - the guy who directed the two Darkman sequels
and a director of foreign TV movies.  I've never seen any of his other
stuff.
He also directed "The Amy Fisher Story" and "Madonna: Innocence Lost." 
I have a feeling that this guy's stuff isn't quite what I'd call
"quality."
One final note: I have not seen either Darkman II or III.  I can imagine
that these movies must be just as terrible as the original.  Don't
bother warning me about them, I will never see them.

Author
Mike Gobbi
NOTICE:  A non-computer-using friend saw this movie and is using my
account to review it.  After (if) I see the movie I may (or may not)
issue a contradictory review.  Or maybe even one that compounds his
criticisms.
     The first thing I'd like to say is that Gene Siskel, Roger Ebert,
and Rex Reed are all wrong.  This film sucks.
     The premise, that a man can change his face merely by changing the
skin on top of it, with no regard to any difference in the shape of his
skull, is hopeless.  If you feel like accepting this, it  would help if
the scientist responsible for inventing this skin came across as
intelligent rather than as a retard who grunts  through the film without
uttering a single piece of intelligible dialogue.  (DISCLAIMER:  I have
nothing against retards.  I just don't think they make believable
scientists).  Add to this the fact that all of his skin reconstruction
work is performed with materials salvaged from a completely annihilated
laboratory, reconstructed in a disused factory with no explanation as to
who is paying the power bill.
     If you feel like accepting all of this, you must deal with a head
villain capable of wiping out forty-odd of a competitor's muscle-men,
using only one gun and lacking any cover.  You must deal with the idea
(we cannot call it a fact) that the fake skin alone is enough to fool
numerous "bad guys" into believing that our "hero" is who he pretends to
be, faulty mannerisms (and lack of knowledge) notwithstanding.  (I mean
let's face it:  it's easy to fool us, as we're willing to suspend our
disbelief, and every time he has assumed a new personality they merely
used the actor who portrayed the role that he is assuming, but when you
are dealing with a person  close up, and you haven't suspended your
disbelief, you're going to note nervousness and fake skin.  And come on:
criminals are a suspicious lot anyway).
     If you want to accept all of this, I should tell you that the plot
is essentially the same as that of ROBOCOP, with the big corporate bad
guy with his right-hand-man who destroy the hero only to have him come
back to life and hunt them down.  I'm not comparing this film to
robocop, as it lacks all the satire and intense pacing and genuine
suspense of that film.  If you need to see this story again, rent
Robocop from a video store.
     If you *still* want to see this film, I can't help you.  But
please, go alone.  This is without a doubt the worst film I've ever
seen, and I've seen a lot of films.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Sam Raimi is a director who came from out of nowhere to become a major
name in the horror film genre.  His film EVIL DEAD (1983), produced on a
shoestring, was nonetheless a very impressive debut.  He had a lot of novel
variations on what was basically a zombie film.  Raimi's second film, EVIL
DEAD II (1987), proved to be a terrifically inventive horror film with an
amazing array of weird twists and visual playing.  You have little idea
watching EVIL DEAD II what is likely to happen next but you can be fairly
sure it will further twist the horror film cliches into a knot.  With
DARKMAN Raimi is taking on the comic book superhero film and trying to twist
it the way he twisted the zombie film in his previous efforts.
     With DARKMAN, however, Raimi is telling a more complex story than
before and it shows up weaknesses in his story-telling abilities.  In fact,
by making the short trip from horror/fantasy to what is basically science
fiction, Raimi has managed to turn his greatest virtue into his greatest
flaw.  What was good about the EVIL DEAD films, particularly the sequel, was
the feeling that just about anything could happen.  That is the same feeling
we get with DARKMAN, but it is a fault.  As a fantasy, the EVIL DEAD films
take place in a world of the supernatural.  DARKMAN occurs in the world of
the rational and it has a much more complex plot.  With a rational film you
have the right to observe that something does not make sense.
     Liam Neeson plays Dr. Westlake, a scientist working on synthetic flesh
a la 1932's DR. X.  His girlfriend Julie Hastings (played by Frances
McDormand) runs afoul of some particularly sadistic heavies and they
horribly disfigure Westlake in an attempt to kill him.  To treat Westlake,
his doctors cut his pain sensors, a standard procedure operation that leaves
Westlake with great strength and also makes him just a little mentally
unbalanced.  As his doctor (Jenny Agutter in a cameo) explains, this is
pretty generally what the operation does. The first question to ask is why
there are not a bunch of very strong people running around.  Even if, as the
doctor suggests, the vast majority of people who have the operation do not
survive, wouldn't the few who do have the Darkman's strength?
     Westlake, disfigured, then escapes and hides in sewers with perhaps
more than just a slight tip of the hat to the 1943 PHANTOM OF THE OPERA.
Eventually he finds a place and stocks it with very advanced scientific
equipment.  (How does he find such a nice place that is just abandoned?
Where does he get the equipment?  Who knows?)  He uses his synthetic flesh
to make computer-generated masks that are perfect replicas of people using
only the information in a single photograph.  (Bosh--he could not possibly
get all the information he needs from so few photographs.)  When he puts on
the mask he can look so much like the other person as to fool even close
associates.  (How does he get the right voice?  Assume the right stature?)
Apparently after having built this laboratory with his own hands he suddenly
discovers that all along his hands have been as badly destroyed as his face.
(How could he do as much as he did without realizing the state of his
hands?)  The logic of DARKMAN is not just bad, it is shockingly bad.
     The technical credits are somewhat better.  The score by Danny Elfman
is somewhat in his BATMAN style but stands fairly well on its own.  With his
first real budget, Raimi has managed a number of nice visual effects though
at times he almost borders on being pretentious.  One such touch has
Hastings watching the death of her lover.  First the background fades to a
graveyard, then her clothing fades to a black mourning dress.  A number of
visual touches seem to borrow from ALTERED STATES.  But there are also
surprising visual gaffes such as shots shown in mirror image with tell-tale
backwards lettering.  At one point we see a truck with a clown smile face on
it destroyed and seconds later we see it miraculously undestroyed.  The tone
of the film abruptly shifts to tongue-in-cheek toward the end, damaging the
feeling.
     DARKMAN has been getting some very favorable comment from critics.  And
I tried to turn my mind off and just enjoy the film.  But I have to say
DARKMAN did not do very much for me.  I give it a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
David Alba Jr.
     When I first entered the theater, I had somewhat mediocre
expectations for the film DARKMAN.  The trailers looked good but I
really didn't know much about the director (I have never seen any of the
EVIL DEAD movies), but when I left the theater I was glad I took a
chance on seeing this excellent movie.  
     The story involves a scientist Dr. Peyton Westlake (Liam Neeson)
who is working on an invention that will create realistic synthetic
skin.  His girlfriend, Julie Hastings (Frances McDormand) who works for
the District Attorney's office uncovers a document revealing some
illegal transactions between Trask Industries and Robert Durant (Larry
Drake).  One night when Westlake is on the brink of perfecting his
invention, Durant and his hoods break into Peyton's lab in search of the
document.  After roughing up Westlake they find the document.  Durant's
henchmen dunk Westlake's hands and face into a vat of acid, afterward
they blow up his lab.  Julie arriving home after work sees this
explosion and assumes Peyton is dead.  Later we find out that Peyton
wasn't killed, instead he was taken to the Hospital Burn Unit with
severe burns over 40% of his body, the worst being on his face and
hands.  After Peyton regains consciousness he escapes from the hospital
and becomes DARKMAN.
     DARKMAN has the ability by using his invention, to assume the 
identity of anyone he chooses simply by using their photograph.  He also
possesses incredible strength and no longer has the capability of
feeling any physical pain, due to an operation that was performed in the
hospital.
     The visual effects in this film were quite good.  I also enjoyed
the directorial style of Sam Raimi.  The performances of the actors were
also very good, especially Liam Neeson.
     The latest trend in films today is making movies about comic 
heroes.  We have been treated to BATMAN and DICK TRACY.  CBS has a
television series called THE FLASH due for its fall season, and the
films CAPTAIN AMERICA, SPIDERMAN and the BATMAN sequel are also in the
planning stages.  DARKMAN had the look of a comic book that BATMAN was
missing and DICK TRACY never achieved.
     So, the next time a stranger bumps into you on the street or your
loved one doesn't seem to be themselves.  You might want to ask
yourself: is it really them or could it be DARKMAN??  I give this film a
rating of +2.
