Title
Review for Birds, The (1963)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
John Smyth
A beautiful socialite Melanie Daniels (Tippi Hedren) arrives 
in the small town of Bodega Bay, ostensibly to deliver two 
lovebirds to someone. While out on a boat, she is attacked 
by a gull. She meets up with Mitch Brenner (Rod Taylor) with 
whom she had a previous encounter in San Francisco. He invites 
her to his young sister Catherine's (Veronica Cartwright) 
birthday party the next day. She seeks out lodging in the 
nearby home of Annie Heyworth (Suzanne Pleshette). That night, 
a bird smashes against a window. At the party the next day, a 
flock of bird descend on the children and attack them.
Alfred Hitchcock made The Birds in 1963, arguably at the height 
of his fame. His three previous pictures were Psycho (1960), 
North by Northwest (1959) and Vertigo (1958), and during the 
Fifties, he also made Dial M for Murder (1954), Rear Window 
(1954) and To Catch a Thief (1955). It seemed that he could 
master any genre to which he turned his attention; suspense, 
horror, comedy, romance or a mixture of all. He was fascinated 
with the dark consequences of apparently minor human failings. 
In Psycho, white-collar crook Marion Crane (Janet Leigh) pays 
the ultimate price as a result of her theft, while the seemingly 
innocuous habit of bored invalid Jeff Jeffries (James Stewart) 
leads him to a very dark place indeed in Rear Window. Hitchcock's 
work could be light and humorous (To Catch a Thief) but he preferred 
his comedy black (The Trouble with Harry) or even macabre. He 
used romance to explore the obsessive (and therefore disturbing) 
side of love, such as Vertigo and, in a perverse way, Psycho. 
The Birds shares many of Hitchcock's trademarks. It is a horror 
story but the cause of the horror is so banal, so ordinary, that 
nobody can believe it to be true. It is also a tale of obsession. 
Mitch Brenner is a highly successful lawyer and very eligible 
bachelor but spends most of his weekends at home with his possessive 
mother Lydia (Jessica Tandy). He is powerful and self-confident, 
and is surrounded by women who care for him. Aside from his mother, 
Annie Heyworth, Melissa's landlady for the weekend, was once Mitch's 
girlfriend, and moved from San Francisco to Bodega Bay just to be 
near him, after they broke up. Melissa is also attracted to Mitch, 
and her errand of love-birds is merely an excuse to meet him again.
Even though Melissa makes a good impression on Mitch, she receives a 
much cooler reception from his mother Lydia. She finds out that 
Annie's relationship with Mitch had cooled only after his mother 
had voiced her disapproval of her. Melissa is beautiful, rich and 
famous and has led a privileged existence, but feels trapped in the 
glare of the public eye (much like the caged lovebirds she has 
brought to Bodega Bay). 
The psychological elements of the story are consigned to the background 
once the bird attacks begin. There is no real attempt to explain why the 
birds turn nasty, though there is a suggestion that perhaps the caged 
lovebirds may be the source of the problem. It is this element of the 
story that has dated badly. One can only imagine the gleeful sequences 
Hitchcock would have devised if he had the benefit of 1990's special 
effect technology.
Nevertheless, many of bird scenes are chilling, particularly when they 
gather silently at a school playground before attacking the 
schoolchildren. Indeed, Hitchcock anticipates by decades big-budget 
horror movies of the Seventies (such as Swarm) and also sci-fi movies 
such as the Alien series and Jurassic Park. (Of course, Hitchcock was 
cleverly updating the familiar scenario of the Western, by substituting 
Mitch and the others for the embattled homesteaders and normally 
harmless 
birds for ferocious Indians). In fact, there is a direct link between 
The Birds and Alien, since Veronica Cartwright plays a screaming (and 
for the most part, fleeing) character in both movies.
Despite Hitchcock's skill, The Birds is not one of his better movies, 
though memorable nevertheless. Neither Taylor nor Hedren are 
particularly 
strong leading characters. Taylor's character should exude power and 
charm, but comes across as bland. Tippi Hedren made her debut here as 
a leading lady but doesn't measure up when compared to previous 
Hitchcock female leads, like Grace Kelly and Kim Novak. Some of the 
action is a bit hokum too. In the history of hysterical leading ladies 
doing something stupid to advance the story, Tippi deserves an 
honourable mention. In one scene, she opens a door slightly to glance 
inside, screams in fright when she sees it is full 
of birds, and then manages to fall inside the room, so that her body 
blocks the door. I suspect an unfinished page in the script. There is 
also a bizarre scene with an ornithologist who just appears to 
order to reel off a list of statistics about birds. It is also difficult 
to overlook the creaking special effects - both the super-imposed and 
the mechanical birds are not very realistic. Now, if Gus Van Sant had 
decided to re-make The Birds with state-of-the-art special effects and 
strong leading roles, instead of messing around with a masterpiece 
(Psycho), he might have actually done something useful.
Directed by Alfred Hitchcock.
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Alfred Hitchcock. Written by Evan Hunter. Starring Tippi
Hedren and Rod Taylor, with Jessica Tandy, Veronica Cartwright, and Suzanne
Pleshette. 1963, 119 min., Not Rated.
     The plot of Alfred Hitchcock's 1963 "The Birds," taken from a Daphne Du
Maurier (who wrote the novel "Rebecca") short story, seems ludicrous. Birds
attacking a small town, actually killing people. But in the competent hands of
the master of suspense, the movie is frighteningly, well, suspenseful. Evan
Hunter (who also writes under the name Ed McBain) wrote the screenplay, and
while not all of the characters are well enough developed for the viewer to
understand their occasionally awkward behavior, has nonetheless crafted an
interesting story that captures and maintains interest.
     Birds are flapping about in the opening shots, a forewarning of their
sinister activities to come, before we're introduced to Melanie Daniels (Tippi
Hedren), the daughter of a newspaper owner. As she walks into a pet shop
director Hitchcock makes his signature cameo appearance (walking his two
real-life dogs). She meets a handsome defense attorney named Mitch Brenner (Rod
Taylor), and pretends to work at the store when he asks for help finding
lovebirds for his little sister's birthday. He embarrasses her by saying that
he remembers her from a court appearance (one of her practical jokes resulted
in a broken window), and that he just led her on to give her a taste of her own
medicine.
     Curious about Mitch and not to be outdone, Melanie buys two lovebirds and
tracks him down. She makes a trip to Bodega Bay, where he lives on the weekends
with his widowed mother, Lydia (Jessica Tandy) and sister, Cathy (Veronica
Cartwright), sneaks into the empty house, and leaves the birds for Cathy. He
spots her as she begins leaving in a boat, and drives off to meet her at the
dock, when, as she comes closer to it, a gull sweeps down and pecks her head.
Mitch takes her to the local diner and takes care of her cut.
     Melanie decides to stay in town for the night, and reappears at the home
of schoolteacher Annie Hayworth (Suzanne Pleshette), who had given her
directions to the Brenner house earlier. She sleeps over at Annie's house, and
the two women talk. Annie's odd behavior earlier in the day (her presumptuous
questions about Melanie's relationship with Mitch, etc.) is explained when she
says that she used to be involved with Mitch. Melanie is about to get ready for
bed when the women hear a noise at the door. Annie opens it to find that a bird
had flown into it, falling to the porch, dead.
     The birds begin more direct attacks on the town, first going after
children at Cathy's birthday party, and then infiltrating the Brenner's house
through the fireplace. The next day, Lydia leaves to drop Cathy off at school
and goes over to a farmer's house to talk about why her chickens aren't eating,
when she discovers the man's dead body, ravaged by the birds. In a surprisingly
graphic shot (for 1963), we see his blood-filled eye sockets. Lydia rushes
home, shaken, and when Melanie brings her tea in bed later that morning, the
two women have a conversation that sort of clears up the indifferent attitude
Lydia had been displaying towards Melanie.
     Melanie tells Lydia, who isn't certain that Cathy is safe at school, that
she will go  to the school and bring her back. Class is in session, so Melanie
goes outside to the playground and, as she lights a cigarette, birds begin
gathering quietly behind her. When she becomes aware of them, she goes inside
and notifies Miss Hayworth.  They give the children instructions as to how to
evacuate, hopefully without provoking attack.  In one of the many cool scenes
where birds are chasing people, the school children are shown being attacked as
they are running home.
     I don't want to give away too much more of the story, but I will say that
the following things occur: more talk about other weird bird encounters from
people who learn of the attack at school, an explosion, another dead body is
found, there is another attack, a power outage, and an attack on Melanie that
is at times visually reminiscent of Janet Leigh's shower stabbing in "Psycho."
     One of my favorite things about "The Birds" is the ending. It doesn't
offer an explanation, and it doesn't offer a way out. Instead, it shows birds
covering almost everything in sight. Originally, Hitchcock wanted the last shot
to be of the Golden Gate Bridge covered in birds, but it didn't work out.
Cleverly, this is the only of his films that don't end with the words, "The
End." He wanted to suggest endless terror, and indeed the closing shots of the
movie are potent.
     Tippi Hedren, who starred as a kleptomaniac in Hitchcock's "Marnie" the
year after "The Birds" was released, is very good as Melanie. Rod Taylor does
well with his character, one of the few leading men in a Hitchcock film who
isn't given the hero treatment, and Suzanne Pleshette is noteworthy as the
fairly mysterious Annie.  But I found myself focusing more on Jessica Tandy as
Lydia. Her character was the most complex, and she gives the best performance
in the film as the mother who wants her son to be happy but is struggling with
the unresolved abandonment issues deriving from her husband's death. Veronica
Cartwright is a bit uneven as Cathy, but becomes more believable towards the
end.
    Many people assumed that a movie about killer birds couldn't be as
satisfying a thriller as such (then) recent Hitchcock fare as "Vertigo," "North
by Northwest," and "Psycho."  But quite on the contrary, he makes the danger of
the situation palpable from the start, and builds to an even more tense and
unresolved ending that is riveting. The script, especially the setting, is most
commendable for never making suspension of disbelief necessary, as it would be
if reasoning behind the bird's behavior had been thrown in (such as the end of
"Psycho," where the psychologist's monologue, which didn't diminish the film,
was still unnecessary). One could argue that if you watch a movie about
homicidal birds, you have to suspend your disbelief, but such people have
doubtlessly never seen "The Birds," which has such convincing performances and
meticulous direction lending to an atmosphere that never makes it seem odd that
such small, harmless looking creatures could unleash such terror.
     Notes: Hasn't been released on DVD. Originally, this film wasn't given a
rating, as the rating system didn't get its start until three years later.
However, it has since been classified as PG-13.
    The Verdict: Sit back and enjoy the atmospheric suspense. Hitchcock's "The
Birds," is required viewing for any fan of the genre or the Master.
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
