Title
Review for Teaching Mrs. Tingle (1999)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Dimension Films
 Director: Kevin Williamson
 Writer:   Kevin Williamson   
 Cast: Marisa Coughlan, Vivica A. Fox, Katie Holmes, Michael
McKean, Helen Mirren, Molly Ringwald, Liz Stauber, Jeffrey
Tambor, Lesley Ann Warren, Barry Watson, John Patrick
White
   If Karl Marx were alive today, he'd have a ball writing up
the American school system.  He would surely compare the
power relationships there with those in the factories and in
the offices.  While on the surface, the students and teachers
are working together toward a common goal, not far beneath
the thin veneer of civilization lies a darker truth.  Teachers
and their students are engaged in a class struggle with the
former--despite having to take a lot of guff the year 'round--
emerging as the ruling class while the young people behind
their cramped desks suffer the often arbitrary decisions of
their overlords.  Given the natural rebelliousness of adolescents--
their general dislike of being told what to do--you cannot
expect this relationship between unequals to be a peaceful
one.
   By taking this point to an extreme, caricaturing both one
small group of students as they play a deadly metaphoric
chess game with a particularly malicious teacher, director
Kevin Williamson should be able to engage his mostly teen
and 20-something audience in quite a show. The trouble is
that the very target audience for this scripter of large box
office successes "Scream" and "I Know What You Did Last
Summer" is less likely to appreciate the nuances of
Williamson's directorial debut.  Nor are some adult critics. 
Kirk Honeycutt, reviewing for The Hollywood Reporter, states
that "there is no subtle psychology to this performance; Mrs.
Tingle is pure evil."  Some reviews that came over the 'net,
particularly on Harry Knowles's youth-dominated "Ain't It
Cool" website, have complained that "nothing happens." 
Silly.
   Think again.  True enough, Mrs. Tingle is more Miss Jean
Brodie than she is Our Miss Brooks.  But in our present time
of inflated grades, insipid advice such as "You can be
anything you want to be if only you apply yourself," and a
general refusal of so many teachers in secondary schools
and even colleges to assign more than ten minutes'
homework a night, Tingle's attitude represents a stinging
antidote to the country's anodyne educational philosophy.  In
fact, dare I say that she is the kind of teacher that all should
experience at least two or three times in their high-school
lives.  Despite her barbs, her off-the-wall sarcasm to students
in the presence of their classmates, she challenges her
charges to work their butts off even if what they produce is
met with mediocre grades.  How many educators can get the
sorts of projects from their pupils that Tingle gets in her
history class?  Let's put to rest the major criticism made so
far of the movie: that the title character is so evil, so totally
without scruples, that there is no way we can believe such a
person can remain in her position for twenty years.  
   This bring us to the second major criticism--again made by
the young set for whom the film was made.  That nothing
happens. This is the sort of remark that might be made by a
person who knows little about chess, who watches a riveting
match between Fisher and Spassky, and concludes, "What's
the big deal?  Just two boring people staring at a board as
though the squares were spinning scenes from a Spielberg
movie, and then moving a small plastic figure an inch or two." 
"Teaching Mrs. Tingle" does possess a reasonable degree of
physical action but more important is the psychological cat-
and-mouse game played between a teacher and three
students who are obviously outmatched.  Had the students
gagged their enemy, we'd have no story.  The narrative's key
strength is in the biting wit, the venomous observations, the
jousting match between three high-school seniors who have
little more than physical force to overcome their captive and a
woman of experience who uses her cleverness to outwit
them.
   But we get ahead of ourselves.  "Teaching Mrs. Tingle"
opens on a well-written classroom scene of the sort we tend
to see in films investigating the goings-on behind closed
doors.  While one student after another presents the final
project for the history class of Eve Tingle (Helen Mirren), he
or she becomes the object of gratuitous, lacerating
comments.  When Leigh Ann Watson (Katie Holmes from
Williamson's "Dawson's Creek"), eager to finish her
high-school career as valedictorian thereby to capture a
scholarship that could get her out of her small town, presents
a knockout album of memorabilia from the Salem Witch
Trials, she is put down most unfairly by the teacher for trying
to make women always victims.  When the more cynical Luke
(Barry Watson) simply plunks a stone on teacher's desk and
announces "Plymouth Rock," he is verbally lashed by Mrs.
Tingle as the kid who will become an abysmal failure like his
father--whom she had taught 20 years earlier.  Later, Tingle
catches Leigh Ann with a planted copy of her final exam in
her pack--reminiscent of a similar incident that ruined a
vacation in Thailand for "Brokedown Palace"'s Alice.  She
intends to report the innocent girl to the principal.  When
Leigh Ann, Luke, and Leigh Ann's best friend Jo Lynn (Marisa
Coughlan) show up at Tingle's home to try to talk her out of
making the report, Tingle makes some predictably biting
remarks which leads to a fracas in which the teacher is
knocked out and tied to her bed by the trio.  As the
youngsters take turn guarding their fearless captive, Mrs.
Tingle uses her acumen, her cleverness, her very knowledge
of life's bitterness to play the kids off against one another. 
The repartee--which forms the major segment of the story--is
the very verbal game that might turn off a callow crowd of
Williamson's constituency.  As Tingle describes the years she
has spent in this insufferable town and characterizes her
former husband, we in the audience are likely to feel more
sympathetic toward her, even if we discount a good deal of
her story as invention.  In the midst of the give and take
between teacher and students, Williamson tosses in a
moderately humorous episode involving a visit by the balding
school coach (Jeffrey Tambor) who is uncharacteristically
nicknamed Spanky by the unfortunate history teacher whom
he is courting.
   As a whole, the narrative is not what anyone could call
riveting.  The cutesy performance of Tingle's cute dog, a
Brussels Griffon similar to the pooch in "As Good As It Gets,"
is resorted to, a technique that in many a movie is a sign of a
director's desperation.  Helen Mirren is the ingredient that has
this movie soaring above Williamson's other efforts, "Scream,
"Scream 2" and "I Know What You Did Last Summer."  The
53-year-old actress, known to connoisseurs of the theater for
her roles on the British stage as Cleopatra at the Old Vic and
to a broader audience for her capacity as policewoman in the
TV series "Prime Suspect," is so dazzling that she single-
handedly makes this a film that should be seen by adults as
well as adolescents.  Simply casting her opposite such
decent but green actors as the adorable Katie Holmes and
the bland Barry Watson throws into bold relief the difference
between a seasoned performer and inexperienced neophytes.
"Teaching Mrs. Tingle" ends on an absurd note (as you'd
expect of any movie whose concluding lines include "I'm
calling the police").  But with a watchable story and a
dazzling appearance by Ms. Mirren, "Tingle" is a movie to
which attention must be paid.

Author
Scott Renshaw
TEACHING MRS. TINGLE
(Dimension)
Starring:  Helen Mirren, Katie Holmes, Barry Watson, Marisa Coughlan,
Jeffrey Tambor, Michael McKean.
Screenplay:  Kevin Williamson.
Producer:  Cathy Konrad.
Director:  Kevin Williamson.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, violence, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Kevin Williamson needs to remember why he was in a position to direct
a film in the first place.  On the big screen, Williamson made buckets of
money for Dimension Films by writing SCREAM and SCREAM 2; on television, 
he helped raise the WB network's profile by creating "Dawson's Creek."  In
both cases, he managed the nifty trick of subverting the conventions of a
genre -- teen horror and teen angst melodrama, respectively -- while still
satisfying the traditional audience for each.  TEACHING MRS. TINGLE, an
early Williamson script dusted off for his first stint in the director's
chair, seems to have been written before Williamson figured out tone and
avoiding cliches.  As a teen drama, it's soggy and predictable; as a
thriller, it's a soggy and predictable teen drama; as a comedy, it's a
soggy and predictable teen drama.
     Williamson's "Dawson" ingenue Katie Holmes stars as Leigh Ann Watson,
a high school senior counting on her academic excellence to get her out of
her dead-end small town.  Standing in her way is Mrs. Tingle (Helen
Mirren), a nightmarish history teacher from whom no one is safe.  When an
innocent Leigh Ann is caught in a compromising position with a stolen
final exam, Mrs. Tingle appears ready and eager to destroy her.  Leigh
Ann's best friend Jo Lynn (Marisa Coughlan) and surly stud Luke (Barry
Watson) have other ideas, however, and pay Mrs. Tingle a home visit.  That
visit soon goes dreadfully wrong, ending with Mrs. Tingle tied to her own
bed and the three students seeking a way out of the mess.
     You might be expecting a dark satirical comedy from that set-up, or
perhaps a humor-laced thriller.  Either choice might have salvaged
TEACHING MRS. TINGLE, which instead opts for absurd sincerity.  Williamson
is careful to place Leigh Ann's anxieties and moral quandaries at the
forefront of every scene, delving into her insecurities at being the
daughter of a single mother waitress (an uncredited Lesley Ann Warren).
Holmes is an appealing actress, but she's stuck looking pensive and
wounded much of the time, thinking deep thoughts while the soundtrack
blares with angsty rock.  Her ostensible growth from timid schoolgirl to
self-assured woman is the heart of the film, and a frighteningly weak
heart it is.  Introspection and depth of character has rarely felt such a
bore, or so wildly inappropriate.
     Sadly, the same could be said for Helen Mirren's performance as Mrs.
Tingle.  At the outset, she's the manifestation of every high school
survivor's nightmares of unforgiving instructors.  Mirren goes for the
jugular with every line, and she has some fantastic moments.  Williamson,
unfortunately, isn't sure quite what to do with her.  At times, she's an
inhuman demon, smacking Luke around and returning from the dead like
Michael Meyers. At other times, she's an insidious Hannibal Lecter-like
psychological game-player, or an object of ridicule when the teens
discover her dominatrix relationship with the football coach (Jeffrey
Tambor).  And in the final, worst possible decision, she becomes a vaguely
pathetic victim of her own tormented past.  The many sides of Eve Tingle
don't add up to a multi-faceted character.  They add up to confusion.
     Williamson's inability to figure out Mrs. Tingle is exemplary of his
inability to figure out much of anything in the film.  The farcical gags
with Tambor's masochistic coach are over-played, especially when
juxtaposed with Leigh Ann's sympathy for the coach's unsuspecting wife.
Only Marisa Coughlan truly emerges unscathed, sparking her every scene as
the theatrical Jo Lynn.  Coughlan's funky energy, and Williamson's fairly
effective pacing, keep inspiring the hope that something entertaining will
be just around the corner.  Instead, there's only a sort-of-thriller, a
not-quite-comedy, and a story ultimately about how someone learns an
important lesson in self-acceptance, and not to steal her best pal's guy.
Even when he's flopping, Williamson is still subverting genre  
expectations.  He's taken a provocative dark comedy thriller and turned it
into mush.

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: ** (out of four)
Dimension / 1:35 / 1999 / PG-13 (language, thematic material, muted sex)
Cast: Katie Holmes; Helen Mirren; Barry Watson; Marisa Coughlan; Jeffrey
Tambor; Michael McKean; Lesley Anne Warren; Molly Ringwald; Vivica A.
Fox
Director: Kevin Williamson
Screenplay: Kevin Williamson
One exits "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" wishing horror scribe extraordinaire
Kevin Williamson had been taught a few more lessons before being set
loose on his own. Sure, the guy knows his genre well, as evidenced by
his fun screenplays for boo-machines from "I Know What You Did Last
Summer" to "The Faculty." And no doubt he learned the tricks of the
trade during his two "Scream" collaborations with suspense maestro Wes
Craven. But for some reason, tangled "Tingle" - Williamson's debut
wearing both screenwriting and directing hats - doesn't find the
wunderkind at the top of his game.
Maybe it's the story, which exchanges the subversive humor, staggering
body counts and spiffy plot twists synonymous with Williamson projects
past for 90 minutes of talky, tawdry psychological warfare between four
people - a trio of high school students and the meanest history teacher
to ever grade papers. As the terrible Mrs. Tingle (the latter, in case
you're wondering), great British actress Helen Mirren comes off like
Margaret Hamilton in librarian ensembles and would feel right at home
alongside the evil educators in "The Faculty." For finer Williamson,
rent that 1998 sci-fi lark and skip this messy melodrama.
Tingle catches straight-A senior Leigh Ann ("Dawson's Creek"'s Katie
Holmes) with a crib sheet she was only holding for her boozer
boyfriend-wannabe (Barry Watson) and decides to report them to the
principal - just days before graduation. What's a distressed missy with
valedictorian potential to do? Why, traipse across the neighborhood to
Mrs. Tingle's residence with a third pal/witness (Marisa Coughlan) and
plead her case in person, of course. And if, upon arrival, a struggle
erupts and Tingle ends up tied to her bed? Well, this kind of
problem-solving they didn't cover in fifth period.
Never explored: How Tingle retains her Mrs. status when no husband is in
sight and she's carrying on with the football coach (funny Jeffrey
Tambor, around to enliven the movie's midsection). Or if woodworking is
among the talents of one character, who breaks and then must reassemble
a headboard so that a later scene can occur. Or from where a strangely
sudden sex romp between Holmes and Watson comes. This kind of disturbing
behavior is expected from a hormonally-charged "Creek" gal, but he - a
regular on the WB's inspirational "7th Heaven" - should know better.
Mirren adds chilly class to "Teaching," then gets shortchanged when her
Tingle goes full-tilt psycho for a bone-smashing, crossbow-chucking
climax. Holmes surrenders to similar circumstances, introduced in the
movie as a rational straight-arrow and finishing on a level of dementia
equivalent to that of her adversary. By the time the final image
flickers across the screen, ask yourself two highly problematic
questions: Does a key line of dialogue negate the fact that these kids
committed a vast array of imprisonable offenses? And does the film
really suggest they deserve what they get?
"Teaching Mrs. Tingle" might keep you interested to see how Holmes and
posse escape from the corner they paint themselves in, but it's soon
apparent that a similar fate has befallen Williamson. However, since his
treatment for the eagerly-awaited "Scream 3" is currently finalizing
principle photography and slated for a December release, we'll cut him a
bit of slack for this dishonor-roll flick: detention instead of
expulsion.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu | darth_fluff@yahoo.com
Hey! You! Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"The best possible argument for including [a shot of Bruce] Willis'
genitals would have been that the movie, after all, contains everything
else." -Roger Ebert on "Color of Night"

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "TEACHING MRS. TINGLE" (Dimension/Miramax Films)
Filmed under the title "Killing Mrs. Tingle," this demented
teen comedy is about high-school students who kidnap and torture their
nasty history teacher. But, after shooting incident at Columbine High
School in Littleton, Colorado, in April, the title was quickly
changed. Kevin Williamson wrote the screenplay before "Scream" and
long before TV's "Dawson's Creek," but he couldn't sell it until he
became famous. Now he's using it to make his directing debut. The plot
revolves around a bitchy, sarcastic, sadistic schoolmarm (flamboyant
Helen Mirren) who terrifies everyone, even the principal (Michael
McKean) - whom she pointedly rebukes for his alcoholism problem.  Her
students' anger boils over when Mrs. Tingle unfairly thwarts a college
scholarship for her most ambitious, over-achieving student (Katie
Holmes) by accusing the girl of stealing a copy of the final history
exam.  The theft was actually arranged by another student (Marisa
Coughlan) and her boy-friend (Barry Watson). When the trio go to the
teacher's house in hopes of clarifying the situation, they're mocked
by terrible Mrs. Tingle (think of Margaret Hamilton as the cruel,
cackling Wicked Witch in "The Wizard of Oz") and the confrontation
gets out of hand.  Mrs. Tingle winds up tied to the headboard of her
Victorian bed as the enraged students make macabre mayhem. Will they
kill her or won't they?  Obviously not - since this is a PG-13 movie -
and clever Mrs. Tingle can outwit the dumb, childish clods with mind
games even when she's in bondage, but that's still no excuse for
plodding caricatures rather than sympathetic characters. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" is a tedious,
tawdry 1.  There's simply nothing amusing about this mean-spirited
glorification of violent revenge.

Author
Brandon Herring
Starring: Helen Mirren, Katie Holmes,  Melissa Coughlan, Barry Watson, Vivica
A. Fox, Molly Ringwald.
Rated PG-13 for thematic content, language, violence, and sexuality.
By first glance 'Teaching Mrs. Tingle' looks like a teen comedy with lots of
laughs. Well it is a teen movie, but the laughs are there, but not as much as I
had hoped. I did however like the plot, and the performance by Helen Mirren,
which saves the movie from being a washout. She is a very good actress, and it
shows in this smart, clever, and sometimes funny comedy/thriller. Katie Holmes
delievers another good performance, besides the mediocre performance by Barry
Watson, the film seems to have all it takes to be a successful film, now we
just have to get past the box-office performance of this movie for being so
long-delayed.
Kevin Williamson, the 'mastermind' behind films such as 'Scream and Scream 2'
'I Know What You Did Last Summer', 'Halloween: H20', and 'The Faculty' wrote
and directed this movie. He as most of you know also writes and executive
produces the popular TV show 'Dawson's Creek.' He did do a good job with
writing and directing this movie. The script is very clever with some good
lines and gags. The directing which he did himself was good too, except for
some derivative camerwork. 
Katie Holmes plays a not-so-rich girl names Leigh Ann. Her friend Jo Lynn
(Marissa Coughlan) (Notice the two names?). After Mrs. Tingle (Helen Mirren)
gave a not-so-good grade to Leigh Ann for her history work, she has to do extra
credit to make up. A guy named Luke (Barry Watson), who stole a copy of Mrs.
Tingle's final exam test, gives it to Leigh Ann, and sticks it in her bag.
After Mrs. Tingle finds out, she goes right to to the principle's office. He's
not there so she goes home.
The kids go to her house and try to explain what happened. After some words are
spewed, Mrs. Tingle is grazed by an arrow, and knocked out cold. The kids tie
her up, and try many things to keep her quiet, blackmail, torture, and making
her feel bad. But Mrs. Tingle is the teacher from hell. She has no feelings, no
heart, no nothing. Some surprising revelations are found towards the end, which
makes Mrs. Tingle a whole new person. 
I must say, this movie IS NOT the best ever made. Nor is it ever close to being
great. But the movie itself was entertaining, and I did enjoy it. I thought
some of it was ludicrous (AKA Jo Lynn's re-enactment of 'The Exorcist'). But it
was non-the-less enjoyable. The acting was good too. I was kept on the edge of
my seat by the end, and was glad I got to see this movie. "Teaching Mrs.
Tingle" is no classic, but it is a worthy peice of work by Kevin Williamson.
Reviewed August 21, 1999 by Brandon Herring.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
James Sanford
         One of the perks you can get if you're a highly successful
screenwriter is the freedom to direct your own little vanity
productions. If, for example, you're Kevin Williamson, the creator of
the enormously profitable "Scream" films and the highly successful
"Dawson's Creek," you might even be able to take an old script out of
the closet, dust it off and sell it to Dimension Films.
         That's exactly how "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" came to be. Unfortunately,
the downside of having so much creative license is that you might wind
up putting something on the screen that in no way compares with your
best work. "Tingle" is just such a picture.
 The movie has already been a subject of controversy in light of
the Columbine shootings last spring -- Dimension was forced to alter the
original title "Killing Mrs. Tingle" and shelve some TV ads that made
light of alcoholism -- but the film itself is essentially rather tame
and bland. Viewers expecting a bloody black comedy won't find it here.
 What they'll get instead is a stellar performance from Helen
Mirren as Mrs. Tingle, a vicious history teacher who rules her classroom
-- and the entire school, it seems -- with an iron fist and withering
sarcasm. Mirren singlehandedly rescues the project from being pointless
nonsense; this brilliant actress can communicate more with a twitch of a
lip or a well-timed flick of her eyelashes than anyone else in the cast
can with pages of dialogue.
 Katie Holmes (of "Creek" fame) plays Leigh Ann, a would-be
valedictorian whose chances of getting much-needed scholarships hinge on
her grade from Tingle. But despite having prepared as a final project an
elaborate diary of an accused witch in 17th-century Salem, Leigh Ann
finds Tingle is impossible to impress. In fact, Tingle despises Leigh
Ann and jumps at the chance to implicate her in a cheating scandal.
 In the hopes of setting things right, Leigh Ann and friends Jo
Lynn (Marisa Coughlan) and Luke (Barry Watson) pay a visit to Tingle's
home one night. Unexpected complications ensue, and therein hangs the
rest of the plot.
 For a movie that spends much time discussing and defining
"irony," "Tingle" doesn't have many twists to offer. Nor has Williamson
brought along the quirkiness that made "Scream" and "Scream 2" so much
fun. Almost everything in "Tingle" is predictable, from Tingle's uptight
wardrobe to Leigh Ann's long-suffering waitress-mom (Lesley Ann Warren)
to the sight of a long and winding staircase just waiting for someone to
fall down it. Even the musical score, which combines bits of the Wicked
Witch's theme from "The Wizard of Oz" and Bernard Herrmann's "Psycho,"
is overly obvious.
 Though Holmes, in garish eye makeup, tries valiantly to turn
Leigh Ann into someone worth caring about, she's defeated by the script,
which constantly forces supposedly smart people to do ridiculous things.
As the stereotypical hunk and ditz, Watson and Coughlan barely squeak
by.
         Aside from Mirren, the only other cast member to make an impression is
former teen queen Molly Ringwald, who shows up as an office clerk
recruited as a substitute in Tingle's classroom. The improbable sight of
Ringwald teaching school is certain to make anyone over 30 feel every
bit their age. James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
Will they kill her, or won't they?  Is she dead, or isn't she?  These
are some of the stock horror movie questions that writer and director
Kevin Williamson, the writer of the SCREAM series, poses in the black
comedy KILLING MRS. TINGLE.  Oops, I mean TEACHING MRS. TINGLE.  The
original title about the killing of a teacher by her high school
students didn't seem like a wise marketing choice after the real-life
Colorado tragedy.
Tamed down to the PG-13 level, the predictable movie pulls its punches
whenever possible.  Just when a horrible deed is about to be done, for
example, the perpetrators observe the intended victim's spouse reading
the bible.  This bit of piety causes reflection and possibly a change in
course.
Managing to shine in the mediocre movie, Helen Mirren ("Prime Suspect"),
as Mrs. Tingle, delivers one of those hard-edged performances that she
can do so well.  Although her characters usually have sympathetic sides,
Mrs. Tingle, as her students and fellow teachers agree, is a classic
bitch.
Walking down the school hall in her proper, tight-fitting black suit,
Mrs. Tingle parts students like Moses did with the Red Sea.  Even the
principal is scared stiff of her.  With perky confidence, she wishes him
a happy birthday, "happy AA birthday" that is.  He had a drinking
problem that she will forever use against him.  In fact she loves
nothing better than playing mind games with everyone, especially her
students.
Full of sarcasm, she loves putting students in their place by reminding
them how unsuccessful their parents were.  "He too had the words 'no
future' painted on his forehead," she tells Luke Churner (Barry Watson)
about his father, whom she had taught.
She enjoys letting her students perform and make fools of themselves in
class so that she can ridicule them.  "Ask not what your mistress can do
for you, but what your mistress can do for the country," a would-be
starlet named Jo Lynn (Marisa Coughlan) does in a bad Marilyn Monroe
routine.  Needless to say, Mrs. Tingle annihilates her.
Straight-arrow honor student Leigh Ann Watson (Katie Holmes) is one
point shy of beating out a rich kid for class valedictorian.  Unless she
can be top in her class, Leigh Ann will not be able to get the
scholarship she needs to go to college.  And unless she aces Mrs.
Tingle's class, she has no hope of being anything other than second
best.
When Leigh Ann accidentally ends up with a copy of Mrs. Tingle's
upcoming test and is discovered, Mrs. Tingle vows to wreck the girl's
academic record.  Through a series of misadventures, three teens --
Leigh Ann, Luke and Jo Lynn -- end up holding Mrs. Tingle hostage in her
own home.  Tied to her bed, she begins to play mind games with the
three, whose collective IQs seem to be vastly inferior to hers.
Mirren acts circles around the younger actors, who appear as confused
and disoriented as their characters.  The movie needs better-matched
opponents as well as sharper writing and less obvious directing.  When
Jo Lynn, who thinks she's Hollywood bound, tries to pull the wool over
Mrs. Tingle's eyes with a dramatic sob routine, Mrs. Tingle just glares
at her.  "My poor dear, I hope you're a good waitress" is all she
responds.
The teens throw childish temper tantrums.  "Bored, bored, bored, I can't
believe you don't have TV," Jo Lynn complains while holding Mrs. Tingle
hostage.  "It's like not having toilet paper."
So does TEACHING MRS. TINGLE contain any surprises?  Maybe one.  The
weapon of choice is not a gun but a medieval crossbow.  There, I've done
it.  I just told you the only unexpected thing in the entire movie.
Now, you have no reason at all to see it.  Enjoy the time I just saved
you.
TEACHING MRS. TINGLE runs about 1:30.  It is rated PG-13 for thematic
content, violence, sexuality, language and some teen drinking and would
be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Teaching Mrs. Tingle
Rated [PG-13], 93 minutes
Starring Molly Ringwald, Katie Holmes, Helen Mirren, Marisa Lesley,
Barry Watson
Written and Directed by Kevin Williamson
website: http://www.dimensionfilms.com
IN SHORT: Teen dateflick. Not Scream-type horror but fairly enjoyable.
Cranky has found himself making references to his film school
screenwriting teacher in several of the reviews he's composed this week.
So, since it's appropriate to the subject at hand, let us now recall our
first efforts at screenplay writing, the stuff we hold near and dear to
our hearts. A television producer friend, under the guise of making the
move to the big screen, exercised his energy on a bad story that
exorcized the demons of his divorce and the painful process of returning
to dating hell as a nigh on middle aged guy. Cranky spent four years
novelizing the events of the accident that created him (an easier read
on the history pages).
Kevin Williamson took aim at a teacher he once had who advised the
future creator of Scream and Dawson's Creek that he had no foreseeable
future as a writer. It is that first, and previously unproduced, effort
that Williamson has resurrected as his directorial debut, Teaching Mrs.
Tingle. For some reason, the humiliated student in the movie is female.
We'll chalk that up to "keeping a distance from the subject".
The pre-release Internet buzz on this one was so bad, it was hard to
lock out. The teenboys over at AICN are way off the mark in their disses
about Teaching Mrs. Tingle for the very simple reason (I'm guessing
here) that they were expecting another Scream or I Know What You Did
Last Summer or The Faculty, in short, Williamson's usual thriller and/or
scareflick. Teaching Mrs. Tingle is a different animal. It is a
psychological battle between teacher and student, less about criminal
acts and more about mental control. It is not a bad flick.
Leigh Ann Watson (Katie Holmes) comes from a single-mom-with-two-jobs
household (Lesley Ann Warren plays mom). Leigh's a great student, she
needs to land the valedictory position to get a college scholarship. In
her way is Trudy (Liz Stauber), a rich kid and history teacher Mrs.
Tingle (Helen Mirren), a mean, nasty, tight assed witch of a teacher who
scares, humiliates and gently blackmails students and school
administrators with verve and skill. Rounding off the principal cast are
Leigh's best friend Jo Lynn (Marisa Coughlan), who has the hots for
second generation slacker Luke (Barry Watson). Luke prefers Leigh but
had his chance, blew it, and knows it. Thinking it would help Leigh land
the number one slot, Luke gets his hands on a copy of Tingle's final
exam and offers it to Leigh and Jo Lynn. Leigh turns it down, but Tingle
catches 'em in the act. Drop the curtain. Close the show. Leigh's life
is over.
That night, the three go to Tingle's house to plead their case; to
convince Tingle that Leigh is as innocent as the Salem Witch profiled in
her final. Tingle won't hear any of it, but Luke magically produces a
crossbow and Tingle is bound to a bed until the kidlets can figure out
what to do.
Talk about tight . . . Tied to the bed for a day the old lady never has
to go to the bathroom. That's control!
And that's really all I need to tell you. From this point on the film
pits Tingle versus Leigh versus Jo Lynn as the teacher spins verbal
spider webs around her inexperienced students. This is also where the
supporting actors add little comic nuggets to the story: Molly Ringwald
(and can you think of anyone better to be cast in a high school flick?)
as the substitute who covers Tingle's classes; Vivica A. Fox as the
sympathetic guidance counselor; Michael McKean as the principal and
Jeffrey Tambor as the Coach, whose secret is so titillating that the
kidlets at the screening I attended were guffawing.
For his first time in the director's chair Williamson does a good job.
There were a couple of visual continuity errors I caught and I'd have to
take another look to see if that crossbow really did "magically" appear
but, all in all, this was a good popcorn flick. The kidlets were happy
and they're the ones buying the tickets to this one.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Teaching Mrs. Tingle, he would have
paid...
Rental for this old fogey. $5 dateflick level for the teens.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Kevin Williamson.
Cast: Katie Holmes, Helen Mirren, Marisa Coughlan, Barry Watson, Jeffrey 
Tambor, Molly Ringwald, Michael McKean, Liz Stauber, Vivica A. Fox, Lesley 
Ann Warren.
1999 - 95 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for violence, sexual situations, and profanity).
Reviewed August 21, 1999.
Now that I've seen "Teaching Mrs. Tingle," the directorial debut of "Scream" 
scribe Kevin Williamson, just one question lingers: exactly what type of film 
is this? If it is a black comedy, there are too many serious moments for it 
to fully take off; if it's a drama, the silliness definitely needed to be cut 
down; if it's a thriller, it's one in which suspense is promised but never 
arrives until the climactic scene; if it belongs in the horror genre, the 
film, with a PG-13 rating and very little violence or terror, is overly mild; 
and if it's a teen angst picture, the writing certainly leaves something to 
be desired.
Leigh Ann Watson (Katie Holmes) is a high school senior nearing graduation 
whose mother (Lesley Ann Warren) is stuck in a dead-end life as a waitress, 
and whose only hope to get into college is if she receives the scholarship 
given to the valedictorian of her class. Unfortunately, her two hurdles are a 
stuck-up fellow student (Liz Stauber) who currently is one point higher than 
she is, and an 'A' in her history class, which is seeming more and more 
unlikely because of her nasty, bitter teacher, Mrs. Tingle (Helen Mirren), a 
middle-aged Wicked Witch of the West who gets her kicks out of putting all of 
her pupils down and being the one to stand in the way of their dreams. When 
Leigh Ann is falsely caught by Mrs. Tingle with the answer sheet to the final 
exam in her bookbag, despite the culprit actually being the rebellious 
slacker, Luke (Barry Watson), Tingle threatens to report Leigh Ann the next 
morning and, thus, basically ruining her whole life. Convinced by Luke and 
Leigh Ann's best friend, the aspiring actress Jo Lynne (Marisa Coughlan), the 
three of them set off that night to Mrs. Tingle's home to explain and plead 
the whole misunderstanding with her. Things get out of hand and the plot 
thickens when Tingle threatens to call the police on them and ends up getting 
a crossbow accidentally shot at her, side-swiping her face and knocking her 
out. In desperation, the three drag the unconcious Mrs. Tingle upstairs to 
her room and tie her to the bedpost, ready to talk their way out of the 
situation once she comes to, but their elder has some surprises in store for 
them too, as she works to turn them against each other with some tricky mind 
games and believable lies.
"Teaching Mrs. Tingle" is the film that Williamson is known to have written 
the screenplay for before his fame with "Scream," and it was only after 
adding clout to his name was he allowed by Miramax's genre label, Dimension 
Films, to make the picture. Easy to believe, as "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" has 
all of the signs of a strictly novice effort, with the writing having almost 
none of the cleverness, style, and originality that has marked all of his 
other projects, from "Scream" to "I Know What You Did Last Summer" to TV's 
"Dawson's Creek." And as for being a director, Williamson shows some promise, 
but since the screenplay is seriously flawed and never takes off, neither 
does the film.
If there is one word to describe "Teaching Mrs. Tingle," that word is 
'bland.' If the movie is never necessarily boring, it also is rarely 
interesting, and almost everything that occurs in the film (which, let's face 
it, isn't much) is strictly dull and insipid. The premise of an unforeseen 
hostage situation with the "Teacher From Hell" could have easily been 
exciting and inventive, with the three teens having to solve one complication 
after the other, but aside from one pedestrian instance in which the gym 
teacher (Jeffrey Tambor) arrives at Mrs. Tingle's home and addresses himself 
as, "Spankey," nothing of the sort ever happens. Instead, what we have are 
three characters essentially standing around a house, with the sly Mrs. 
Tingle occasionally playing with each one of theirs' emotions, and a 
non-graphic, but exploitative sex scene popping up at the most inopportune 
time for the simple reason of adding some spice to the proceedings. All it 
ends up adding, however, is an extra level of ludicrous plotting.
Veteran British actress Helen Mirren, as the cruel Mrs. Tingle, is far more 
astonishing and scene-stealing than she has any right to be, and raises this 
otherwise tepid film up a notch so that it could be classified as an "OK" 
film, rather than a downright bad one. From her early, brutal scene in which, 
one by one, Mrs. Tingle cold-heartedly criticizes her students as they get up 
to present a project, Mirren creates a character that is just about the most 
distinct, memorable movie villain I've ever seen. Not only that, but Mirren 
also creates an added dimension to Mrs. Tingle that probably would never have 
appeared had the performance not been as powerful, as we learn she is an 
unhappy woman hellbent on destroying her students because of her 
uncontrollable jealousy that many will become big-time successes, when she is 
still stuck in the same little town with the same job she had thirty years 
ago.
As the three central teen characters, Katie Holmes strikes an honest chord 
with her desperate character, but is not given the chance to really test her 
acting skills as she was with this past spring's "Go" and on "Dawson's 
Creek," due to a flat character that is never very appealing. Faring even 
worse is Barry Watson (TV's "7th Heaven"), who is stuck for the majority of 
the film blending into the background. His character of Luke is so thin, and 
not given the chance to do anything but act as an unconvincing love interest 
to Holmes, that he makes next to no impression. Marisa Coughlan is a 
different matter altogether; a fresh, talented find that will next be seen on 
Williamson's latest televsion excursion, "WasteLand," Coughlan's Jo Lynne is 
engaging in a way that Leigh Ann never is, and is given some of the more 
notable scenes, including a dead-ringer reenactment of the possessed Linda 
Blair in "The Exorcist" and another scene where she puts on a plausible act 
in front of Mrs. Tingle, only for the acid-tongued Tingle to respond, "I hope 
you make a good waitress." In supporting roles, everyone is wasted in 
basically cameos, particularly Vivica A. Fox, who has all of one scene as 
Leigh Ann's understanding guidance counselor. Only former teen queen Molly 
Ringwald is able to stand out, as the principal's assistant who takes over as 
substitute for Tingle and ends off teaching the material to the class 
equipped with a neverending slew of curse words.
"Teaching Mrs. Tingle" wraps up its story in an unconvincing manner that 
hammers the final nail in the film's coffin. Although Leigh Ann was right to 
fight for what she believed was right, that still does not excuse her or her 
two friends' criminal behavior, something which they get out of far too 
easily. And the last scene might have been satisfying had the end credits not 
have popped up so abruptly while in the middle of the scene. Was Williamson 
in such a breakneck rush to end the film that he didn't feel there was time 
to film a complete last scene before going to black and then starting the 
credits? Who knows? "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" has only one claim to notoriety, 
and it's Mirren's sparklingly vicious performance. Without her, the film 
would ultimately be a black hole of nothingness.
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman. 
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
This movie is written by the man who is deemed to be "one of the hottest
writers in Hollywood". He wrote the groundbreaking screenplay for SCREAM
(8/10), then added the successful I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER (7.5/10)
script to his mix, and also created the popular TV series "Dawson's Creek".
So when he asked to direct his first movie, based on his first ever script
written, everyone and their grandma said "Sure, go for it!". Uhhm, my
question is...did anyone bother reading this stupid script???
PLOT:
Ace student Leigh Ann Watson is mistakenly caught with some cheating papers
by the bitchiest teacher in the West, Mrs. Tingle, and set to lose her
scholarship to College. When she and her friends visit the teacher at home
in order to explain their side of the story, they end up tying her up, and
slowly trying to talk some sense into the hardheaded woman.
CRITIQUE:
It's not so much that this is a bad movie, than the fact that it sucks. This
movie is chock-full of one-dimensional characters, contains no actual humor
that I was able to zone in on, zero tension or thrills, plot holes the size
of my big ass, lame pop tunes played to mask nothing going on in the movie,
and Molly Ringwald, Vivica A. Fox and Lesley Anne Warren tossed away in
throwaway roles. I was primed for this film as its interesting premise had
me thinking MISERY (8/10) and 9 TO 5, but unfortunately for Williamson, he
went nowhere with the bright foundation, making references to THE EXORCIST
and DR. ZHIVAGO, which I doubt many in his target market will appreciate. He
also forgot about suspense, with all of his characters based on
incomprehensible decisions, unbelievable motivations and simply boring us
with all of their trite dialogue.
Sure, Katie Holmes is cute, and her co-star, Marisa Coughlan, did a
reasonably amusing impression of THE EXORCIST (Worth two points out of my
three on ten), but how can we forgive the biggest one-dimensional character
in any film, Holmes' rival in the film, Mrs. Tingle's complete
unprofessionalism being let go by all others around her (Are teachers
allowed to behave that way nowadays?) and a transparent romance between
Holmes and some long-haired dude, hired to be the poor man's version of
Skeet Ulrich (Who himself is a poor man's version of Johnny Depp!). All in
all, this movie was laughable for me, provided me with no insight into
anything, demonstrated Williamson's genuine lack of directorial skills
alongside a juvenile script, and provided Helen Mirren with a great role to
chew into, unfortunately forgetting to give her character any believability,
humanity or capacity to comprehend. No hip lines, no cheap thrills, just a
dull time at the movie theater. If you want to see a funny teenage movie, go
see DETROIT ROCK CITY (8/10), and thank my drunken, sorry ass in the
morning.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Kevin Williamson's father was a fisherman. Kevin used his knowledge of
fishing hooks and winches when creating the killer in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID
LAST SUMMER (7.5/10). He is also a huge fan of Steven Spielberg and
coincidentally, so is Dawson Leery on TV's "Dawson's Creek", a show Kevin
created. He was once an aspiring actor. In fact, he even landed a bit part
on TV's "Another World". Also, Williamson has gone on record to say that an
unsupportive English teacher who once told him that he would never amount to
anything was the inspiration for Mrs. Tingle, which is also loosely based on
the book "Killing Mr. Griffin" by the writer of I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST
SUMMER (7.5/10), Lois Duncan. He has also come out and said that he is a gay
man.
Helen Mirren was born in London, England under the name Ilynea Lydia
Mironoff. She is married to director Taylor Hackford, whose works include
DEVIL'S ADVOCATE (8/10) and AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN (8.5/10).
This film was originally titled KILLING MRS. TINGLE, but was changed after
the Columbine high school shooting incident.
Actress Marisa Coughlan will star in Kevin Williamson next TV project called
"Wasteland".
This is actor Barry Watson first full feature film. He has played the
character of "Seth" on TV's "Malibu Shores" several times.

Author
Jamey Hughton
I'm a dedicated fan of writer Kevin Williamson's work. He always finds a
clever way to spice up old material with witty dialogue and fresh ideas
that stem from his inventive brain. With Teaching Mrs. Tingle, his
directorial debut, Williamson has reached the end of his rope. What used
to be intelligent about his films is hopelessly stale here. The
components are all there, including an encouraging premise that all high
school students can relate to. But where are the thrills? The laughs?
Both are supposedly absent from this draggy exercise in elaborate
revenge. And what a shame that is.
I loved the Scream films - heck, I even enjoyed the sci-fi goofiness of
The Faculty. Kevin Williamson was the reason horror films were such a
big draw at the box office. Teaching Mrs. Tingle, a black comedy that
will leave a gaping void in his optimistic followers, may put an end to
his reign. Or perhaps it will encourage him to spend more time
perfecting a script than to worry about his directing duties. I still
have my faith, but I fear the name of Kevin Williamson may soon be a
forgotten echo of the past.
The title character of his pet project is a vicious, uncaring History
teacher who is played deliciously over-the-top by British actress Helen
Mirren. Mrs. Tingle is basically every student's worst nightmare: a
heartless human being bent on distributing poor marks to even the most
hard-working of her pupils. The principal (Michael McKean) is horrified
of her, and she is unanimously despised among her fellow staff members.
I enjoyed the fact that everyone in the hallway quickly steers out of
her way. Mirren's performance is one of the very few delights in this
distressingly hollow black comedy that goes down like a flat soft drink.
In other words, it's a poor substitute for Williamson's best work.
The plot is a big problem here. Material that could have been enjoyable
is rendered totally ridiculous by poor handling on the part of the
director. The likable Katie Holmes plays Leigh Ann, an over-achiever
hoping to get a college scholarship. But typical Mrs. Tingle says her
History project, which she worked on for countless hours, is laughable.
Later on while studying in the gymnasium, a classmate (Barry Watson)
offers her a photo-copied duplicate of Mrs. Tingle's final exam. Leigh
Ann's best friend (Marisa Coughlan) encourages her to use it. Alas, the
old hag herself finds the three scheming, and snatches the test, and
prepares to talk to the Principal in the morning.
In the morning... how convenient! The three students head to Mrs.
Tingle's house, attempting to set the facts straight and clear Leigh
Ann's name. Things get out of hand, and the teacher gets knocked
unconscious in a tussle. The plan is to tie her to a bed and try to get
some reasoning out of her. Of course, not everything goes entirely to
plan.
Besides pointless sub-plots involving the football coach (Jeffrey
Tambor, horribly wasted), there is little by way of actual progress.
There is no urgency to the situation; little tension or laughs are
involved. The humor is completely inconsistent. After many of the jokes,
the theater was so silent I could have heard a fly sneeze. You continue
to await some momentum in the story, something that could possibly
revive the slow pace. A moment like that never arises. Williamson also
does a handsome job of wasting some of the key supporting players,
including the talented McKean and Larry Sanders' vet Tambor. And the
beautiful Vivica A. Fox has one lifeless scene as a caring guidance
counselor, and then Williamson disposes of her character entirely. On
the plus side, Holmes and Coughlan are admirable (with the latter giving
a frighteningly believable exorcism impression), and Molly Ringwald has
an amusing cameo appearance as a substitute teacher.
While everything is pretty lifeless, Teaching Mrs. Tingle remains
watchable. There are a few promising ideas that pop up now and again,
but anything remotely interesting is squandered by the inane script.
Mirren is easily the best reason to keep watching. She is convincingly
evil and fun to watch, but even her gifted delivery can't save
individual scenes that flounder in boredom. If there is one word for the
movie surrounding her, it would be `disappointing'.
Basically, Kevin Williamson is his worst enemy here. His uneventful
direction prevents any aspects of his screenplay to be appreciated (not
that his writing here is especially good). We will see, when rookie
screenwriter Ehren Kruger writes the third installment in the Scream
franchise this Christmas, whether Williamson is for real.

Author
Greg King
TEACHING MRS TINGLE (M).  
(Miramax/Dimension Films/Village Roadshow)
Director: Kevin Williamson
Stars: Helen Mirren, Katie Holmes, Barry Watson, Marisa Couglan, Jeffrey 
Tambor, Liz Stauber, Molly 
Ringwald, Michael McKean, Vivica A Fox, lesley Ann Warren (uncredited)
Running time: 95 minutes.
Kevin Williamson is one of the hottest writers in Hollywood at
the moment.  He reinvigorated the slasher genre with Scream, and gave
us the intelligent, articulate, but typically angst-ridden teens of
the popular tv soap Dawson's Creek.  It seems he can do little wrong -
which is probably why the brains behind Miramax optimistically allowed
him to direct this screen adaptation based on the first screenplay he
wrote.
Williamson's main strengths as a writer are his sense of irony
and his ability to subvert genre clichés, and although many of
those typical touches are in evidence here, there is also something
lacking.  As a director, Williamson fails to make the grade with this
inauspicious debut.  The pacing is uneven, and the dialogue often
banal.  His direction is laboured and uninspired.  One feels
Williamson would have been better off leaving the directorial duties
to someone else.
The eponymous Mrs Tingle (Helen Mirren, from Prime Suspect,
etc) is a history teacher and a humourless curmudgeon who has been a
fixture at Grandsboro High for twenty years.  Far from inspiring her
students, she belittles their endeavours at every opportunity and
ruthlessly tramples over their ambitions and aspirations.  But now she
is about to get her comeuppance.
 
Leigh Ann Watson (Katie Holmes, from Dawson's Creek and the
recent Go, etc) is a top student, who has pinned her hopes on earning
a scholarship to college, thus enabling her to escape this dead end
town.  But Mrs Tingle puts a crimp in her hopes of becoming school
valedictorian by giving her a low grade for her history project.  Then
when Mrs Tingle catches Leigh Ann with a copy of the forthcoming exam
paper in her possession, she faces expulsion and humiliation.  In
desperation, Leigh Ann and her two friends, Jo (Marisa Coughlan) and
Luke (Barry Watson), the handsome but dumb jock, visit Mrs Tingle at
home and try to explain the misunderstanding.  Things quickly get out
of hand, and before long they have their unforgiving teacher tied to a
bed.
Even though helplessly bound, Mrs Tingle musters all the
skills developed over twenty years of negotiating the blackboard
jungle to unnerve her three captors and slowly turn them against each
other.  What begins as a promising scenario quickly degenerates into
unconvincing farce.  The ending itself is contrived and makes no real
sense dramatically, especially given the events that preceded it.
Although she spends a good deal of time uncomfortably tied to
a bed, Mirren still manages to steal the film with a polished
performance.  She delivers her acerbic one-liners and venomous put
downs with a relish that comprehensively outshines her adolescent
co-stars.
Williamson has cast '80's icon Molly Ringwald (a veteran of
John Hughes early comedies like The Breakfast Club, etc) in a small
role as the school assistant who briefly takes over Mrs Tingle's class
and becomes something of a hero to her students with her irreverent
interpretation of historical events.
Originally entitled Killing Mrs Tingle, the film underwent a
name change following the last high school massacre in the States to
the more inoffensive Teaching Mrs Tingle.  Under any title this is
still a rather tired blend of black comedy, horror and typical
adolescent high school drama that will only appeal to undemanding
teens.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Katie Holmes; Helen Mirren; Marisa Coughlan; Barry Watson & Liz
Stauber
There was a time when I thought Kevin Williamson was pretty much invincible
when it came to churning out quality material. I'm not sure if the man has
just overextended himself, or he has reached the end of his brilliance.
Either way, Teaching Mrs. Tingle marks the end of his current string of
excellent movies that he has been responsible for writing. With Teaching
Mrs. Tingle, Williamson takes on the role of director as well as his normal
role of writer. It almost seems that the two jobs were just a bit too much
for him. While his directorial debut is a competent, if unremarkable effort,
the screenplay is, at best, just slightly above average. And at times it
borders on bad. The story is a fairly ridiculous one, and the only thing
that saves it is that the characters are pretty good. But the true reason
that this movie doesn't die completely is the fine cast of actors that have
managed to save this film.
Katie Holmes plays Leigh Ann Watson, a very bright girl from an under
privileged family. Her only hope of ever getting out of her small town is to
become valedictorian of her high school graduating class. That way she can
score a big scholarship, which will be her only ticket to university. Sound
familiar to any of you? It should. This is almost the exact same character
that Holmes plays on Dawson's Creek -- a character that Kevin Williamson
created. I guess Kevin should get some credit for not ripping off somebody
else's characters. At least he had the decency to rip off his own work.
Anyway, Leigh Ann has one obstacle in her quest for her scholarship -- her
history teacher, Mrs. Tingle (Helen Mirren). Tingle is like every bad
teacher you've ever had all rolled into one. Tingle finds herself in the
position to ruin Leigh Ann's plans to better herself, and seems to take a
great deal of glee doing it. Actually, the reason that Tingle is going to
ruin Leigh Ann is fairly legitimate, but Williamson is hoping that you will
look past that minor inconvenience and just focus of the fact that Tingle is
a first class bitch. So Leigh Ann and her two friends, Jo Lynn (Marisa
Coughlan) and Luke (Barry Watson), decide to try to talk Tingle into giving
dear sweet Leigh Ann a second chance. But in the end they end up holding her
hostage in her own home. Unfortunately they aren't quite prepared for
dealing with Mrs. Tingle.
I'm not sure if this idiotic plot line was supposed to serve as the basis
for some sort of dark comedy, but it didn't work for me. As dumb as the
story was, I have to give Williamson credit for his characters. The
interaction between Tingle and her young captors was excellent. It was just
too bad that Williamson couldn't have found a better way of making this
story happen besides this very lame impromptu kidnapping.
While Katie Holmes and Barry Watson were the obvious audience draws in this
film, the real star is Helen Mirren. This woman plays her character to the
hilt. The best part of the movie was watching Mirren's Tingle play with her
captor's minds. Everyone in this film is great. That also includes Michael
McKean and Jeffrey Tambor in what amounted to glorified cameos. All were
good, but all could have been better if they had had a bit more to work
with. I never really got over the feeling that Holmes was just repeating a
recycled script from Dawson's Creek.
Williamson may have been doomed to fail on this movie. The film's release
came around the same time as the Columbine High School shooting in
Colorado -- prompting the producers to change the title of the film from
Killing Mrs. Tingle to Teaching Mrs. Tingle. I'm sure that little marketing
problem didn't help the film's chances at the box office. Then we have the
fairly schizophrenic way in which this movie was directed. Parts of it
almost seem to be played for pure comedy, while other parts are a failed
attempt at the darker side of humor. Then we have the director himself. For
an open homosexual, his direction certainly seemed to show a preoccupation
with Katie Holmes' breasts. Not that I'm complaining, it just seemed a bit
strange. (I guess if you have to be preoccupied with something, it might as
well be Katie Holmes' chest.)
High marks to the cast for keeping this sucker from going completely in the
crapper. With most of the praise leveled squarely at Mirren. If she hadn't
been so much fun to watch, I'm sure that I would have dozed off.
Williamson's characters were good; it's just that the situation that he put
them in took away from any positives that he brought to the table. My advice
is to skip Teaching Mrs. Tingle and check out another of Williamson's far
superior efforts. Keep an eye out for Holmes' future work. She hasn't found
the right film yet, but when she does, I guarantee you it will be something
to see.

Author
John Sylva
Teaching Mrs. Tingle by John Sylva    Rating: B-
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Teaching Mrs. Tingle, the directorial debut of Scream scribe Kevin Williamson,
is his final attempt in his own genre of teen movies, as he will be "leaving"
the genre, excluding his role of producer and co-writer of this fall's Scream
3, and move onto the romantic comedy genre next, where he hopes to do the same
for that genre, as he did for the entire teen/horror genre, which would be-
revive it with a new feel and edge.  Kevin, you did great while you were in
teen genre, as your biggest hits, Scream and TV's Dawson's Creek, both carry a
cult following, and your name is one of the few movie writers/directors that
any teen could recognize.
Like Williamson's cult phenomenon Scream, Teaching Mrs. Tingle focuses on a
central group of diverse, and offbeat characters, who join forces once
realizing the trouble that could evolve from the situations that are put forth
at them.  Straight A student, potential valedictorian recipient Leigh Ann
Watson (Katie Holmes) wraps up her history project, the grade that will be the
control in receiving a scholarship, and the Valedictorian  honor- A diary
covering the Salem Witch, who was burned at the stake- and she, along with
waitress mother Faye (Lesley Ann Warren), know she has an A project on her
hands.  The only thing standing her Leigh Ann's way of becoming the most
successful student in her class at Gransboro High- the wickedly evil Mrs. Eve
Tingle (Helen Mirren).  Of course, Mrs. Tingle shares not the same gratitude
and excitement as the ambitious Leigh Ann, but instead repulsion, jealousy.  
The above is our introduction into this fun, somewhat clever, sometimes
thrilling film, which slows down for not a second, which isn't necessarily a
good thing, as just as the decisions and choices the lead characters make
aren't so great, Williamson doesn't make the best decisions either, creating a
somewhat mediocre film.  What results from the setup, that does everything it
should- make you hate this evil witch- Teaching Mrs. Tingle transfers to the
dark, wicked type humor used in this summer's Drop Dead Gorgeous, or last
spring's Jawbreaker- Which by the way, holds no such quality as this film.
Jo Lynn (Marisa Couglan), an aspiring actress, who is loyal best friend to
Leigh Ann, is willing to take any risks to get Leigh Ann where she wants to go
in life- to become a writer.  When the two best buds and junkie student Luke
Churner (Barry Watson) get caught in a scandalous situation in the school's
gymnasium, which could potentially ruin the three's entire futures, by Mrs.
Tingle, the three are desperate to redeem their futures from Tingle, at her
home, where they offer their apologizes.  Of course, Tingle rejects any such
apology, and the night changes from trying to make up for wrong doings, into 
an extreme wrong doing- Holding Tingle captive in her own home, tied to her
bed, gagged, only fed sparingly. 
For the rest of the film, Teaching Mrs. Tingle delivers its share of big
laughs, suspenseful moments, and strong performances.  The latter mainly stands
for the devilishly clever performance by Helen Mirren, who conducts herself as
if she were Queen Elizabeth, strutting around school passing out failing
grades, and spewing downright nasty dialogue, creating an unlikable, yet
fun(ny) antagonist.
Katie Holmes' great talent for acting is fighting for a bigger, more mature
character, but Holmes continues to go into teen roles like this one, and in
1998's Disturbing Behavior, in which she will be limited to in her career,
unless she gets out of the role as Joey Potter on T.V.'s Dawson's Creek. 
Holmes adds a needed edge on the hit T.V. show, but more serious, mature roles
are out there, which Holmes could grab in an instant.  Holmes shined in last
spring's Go, which was her first attempt outside of the teen genre, but she
falls back into it here.  Although Holmes portrays her character with a touch
of sympathy and reality, her acting skills, which can be seen best in Go and
Dawson's Creek, are way beyond Leigh Ann Watson.
Marisa Coughlan, a relative newcomer, gives a hilarious, often over the top
performance, delivering the strong dialogue and gimmicks (The Exorcist
imitation comes to mind) perfectly from the screenplay.  Barry Watson, who
appears on the television hit 7th Heaven, doesn't bring his character to life
as he could have, but the way the screenplay has him conducting himself is
enough to form a semi strong character, even though Watson doesn't carry out
the duty fully.  
Williamson's lead four characters are so vivid and bursting with life, you wish
they could have landed roles in a film that is as full as they are, but like
last winter's The Faculty, which Kevin also wrote, Teaching Mrs. Tingle's
characters and cast are the standouts, as the screenplay, setting, etc. become
only an afterthought of the overall product.  The screeplay isn't highly
original and doesn't exactly break new ground, and shows signs around the edges
of the average teen flick, which is a strong weakness, but Williamson's writing
edge, which can be seen in every one of his movies, is shining big and bright
here - The quick, sarcastic, snappy dialogue, the stereotypical characters, the
dark humor, the suspense- What one could call Williamson-esque.  
Teaching Mrs. Tingle is the most mediocre Williamson works as of yet, as the
film isn't always interesting, as in the second half, repetitiveness becomes a
strong problem for the film, but the characters power Teaching Mrs. Tingle from
start to finish, as the screenplay just plods along.  
It's impossible for a movie to be completely character driven and still be a
great one, and that's where the problem lies in Teaching Mrs. Tingle.  It's
obvious that not much time and effort was spent bringing the potentially great
screenplay to the big screen, as Williamson has stated many times that he is
very busy with his upcoming television show, WasteLAnd, but if Williamson
really wanted to add another strongly successful title to his genre, he could
have at least polished up the screenplay with more originality and twists,
instead of only concentrating on his quirky characters.  Williamson's
screenplay redeems itself for the most part in the final moments of the film,
in the suspenseful, and hilarious climax, that you actually start feeling bad
for the evil witch, that is Mrs. Tingle.
The Bottom Line- Teaching Mrs. Tingle isn't as clever or as edgy as
Williamson's other works, but the stereotypical characters and strong
performances from Mirren, Holmes, and Coughlan allow Tingle to be entertaining,
summer fun.    

Author
Michael Dequina
_Teaching_Mrs._Tingle_ (PG-13) *** (out of ****)
Once upon a time, there was a 10th grade English class run by one Mr.
Jerry Stover, a teacher who was a pain to (with a few exceptions) all of
his students but made an extra effort to continually tear down one
student in particular.  This usually strong English student found all of
his best efforts met with indifference at best, outright derision at
worst by Stover, who often seized every opportunity to humiliate the
student in front of the whole class.  When called on to do an oral report
on a reading assignment, the student only got about two words in before
Stover criticized his barely-begun report and asked him to sit down.  But
that was nothing compared to what came at the end of the school year,
when the student's year-ending speech project--which was capped off with
a spirited song number that was wholeheartedly embraced and warmly
praised by his classmates--was verbally torn to shreds by Stover in front
of everyone.  That public attack was just a warm-up for a comment Stover
made during a subsequent private meeting with the student: "I don't like
you."
As you can guess, the student in question was yours truly, and while it
did take some added effort--and, I'd like to think, guilt on Stover's
part--to get an A in that class, I didn't have to resort to anything
resembling the over-the-top antics presented in hot scribe Kevin
Williamson's directorial debut, _Teaching_Mrs._Tingle_.  My own
experiences undoubtedly contributed to my enjoyment of this admittedly
junky but wickedly watchable revenge fantasy.  I immediately identified
with the film's protagonist, solid A student Leigh Ann Watson (Katie
Holmes), who, in an early scene, presents a much-worked-on project in her
history class, only to have her presentation abruptly cut short by
vicious barbs hurled by the class's instructor, Mrs. Eve Tingle (Helen
Mirren).  This scene (and the entire film, for that matter) has been
criticized for being grossly exaggerated, and indeed it is, to biting
comic effect.  But there is a ring of truth--not just for me personally,
who knows it is possible for teachers to have unfounded personal grudges
against students; but I'm sure for many other people who have had
similar, if not overly so, trying experiences with hardass teachers.
Williamson sends all basis in reality out the window, however, when the
film's main story kicks into gear.  After Mrs. Tingle falsely accuses
Leigh Ann of cheating, she and her friends Luke Churner (Barry Watson)
and Jo Lynn Jordan (Marisa Coughlan) confront Mrs. Tingle at her home. 
One thing leads to another, and soon Mrs. Tingle is tied to her bed, held
prisoner by the three students, who try to reason with her--and teach her
an overdue lesson or two.  The stage is set for a tense and witty
psychological battle between the teens and Tingle, who is as adept at
manipulative mind games as she is mean.
For a first-time director, Williamson shows great skill working with
actors.  While Watson is fairly bland as the hunky bad boy, he does share
palpable chemistry with the other core three, who make good impressions. 
Holmes is an instantly likable screen presence, and her calm and poise
grounds the film in some level of reality and plays well off of newcomer
Coughlan, who has the showier role as the kooky aspiring actress Jo Lynn.
 The showiest role of them all, of course, is the title character, and
Serious Actress Mirren sinks her teeth and then some into this
change-of-pace part.  Her venomous performance has been criticized as
being one-dimensional, but the point of the part is to be an
over-the-top, love-to-hate villain, and does she ever succeed at that.
That said, one does wish there were more of an explanation of Tingle's
wicked ways, or at least a clearer one for her malice toward Leigh Ann;
it is implied that she is jealous of her ability and bright prospects,
but the implication is a bit too vaguely made and not altogether
confirmed.  (After all, Mrs. Tingle does have one bright pet student.) 
_Tingle_ was the first script Williamson ever wrote, and it is indeed the
least polished of his heretofore produced works, and his inexperience in
the director's chair doesn't serve the more awkward moments well.  There
are a couple of scenes that establish Leigh Ann's warm relationship with
her mother (Lesley Ann Warren) that are not only ridiculously saccharine,
but feel completely out of place in what is otherwise a gleefully
heartless film.  A bit more in line with the tone is Jo Lynn's hyper
reenactment of scenes from _The_Exorcist_, and while it is good for a
chuckle, the scene is a showstopper of the worst kind, a dead halt in the
action; it is also a rather obligatory movie reference, a device worked
well--and served a recognizable purpose--in Williamson's _Scream_ films
but adds nothing in this context.
To borrow an obvious metaphor that has been used--and will surely
continue to be used--by detractors of the film, Williamson does, in fact,
need to be taught a few more lessons on film direction.  But with
_Teaching_Mrs._Tingle_, it is evident that Williamson does possess some
natural filmmaking ability, and he has already found a distinct
voice--something that many more established filmmakers have yet to
discover.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Frankie Paiva
Whoever thinks that this type of film will appeal to teenagers is obviously
wrong. Teaching Mrs. Tingle opened to mediocre box office and mostly bad
reviews. And yes, there is a very good reason why.
Leigh Ann Watson (Holmes) is a straight-A student, she's hoping to become
valedictorian and get a scholarship to college but her plans have to pass by
one person. The teacher from hell, Mrs. Tingle. (Mirren) She enjoys being mean
to everyone just for the sake of being mean. She uses long and confusing words
often to criticize and poke fun at her students. Leigh Ann is trailing a rich
snobby girl by one point and Tingle's C doesn't help. When Luke (Barry Watson)
brings the answers to the final exam to her and her best friend Jo Lynn (Marisa
Coughlan) they are confronted with their morals. But when Mrs. Tingle catches
them, she can't wait to break out the scandal.
When they appear at her front door to tell her tell are sorry, one thing leads
to another and they eventually have her hands tied to the side of a bed and
have decided to blackmail her with incriminating photos. This begins a bunch of
mind games that set off the trio and make them even more determined to make her
pay. Also included is an embarrassing role for Jeffrey Tambor (and right after
Muppets From Space too) and a crossbow that keeps firing in all the wrong
places. 
With all of the controversy surrounding this film and Columbine, it's not
surprising the film did bad. While it's not really all that violent (the bad
attitudes between teachers and students should rank the highest amond parental
concerns) there really was no reason to call it Killing Mrs. Tingle in the
first place.
Mirren rounds out a well-cast cast. As the bitchy Tingle she has a chance to
flex a different kind of acting. Marisa Coughlan also does an uneeded, but
funny spoof of The Exorcist (it got her the part) and steals a lot of scenes.
The rest of the cast (including WB veterans Holmes and Watson) don't turn in
the same calibur performances. Since the film is set to appeal to my audience,
I obviously liked it more than the average movie critic, so Teaching Mrs.
Tingle gets ** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains extremely bad attitudes towards people and
authorities. It also contains some violence and a passionate make-out scene.
Good Age: 12 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic

Author
Christopher Null
     Once upon a time there was a writer named Kevin, who wanted to make
a big splash in Hollywood.  He wrote a movie called KILLING MRS. TINGLE,
which didn't sell, so he tried again.  The next time he wrote a movie
called SCREAM, which single-handedly revived the horror genre, paving
the way for big horror flicks... and even small ones like THE BLAIR
WITCH PROJECT.
     And then he made a TV show called `Dawson's Creek,' which was also
a huge success.  And another horror flick.  And SCREAM 2.  And then this
writer was the hottest thing on Sunset Blvd., and even KILLING MRS.
TINGLE started to look good.  Miramax bought it.  They even let the guy
direct.
     Uh-oh.  Mr. Williamson may have a great gift for writing, but it's
not on display here.  There was, it turns out, a good reason MRS. TINGLE
didn't get sold: It's not that good of a story.
     That story involves a wicked schoolteacher (Mirren), who tortures
her pupils ruthlessly just for kicks.  When valedictorian-wannabe Holmes
is wrongly implicated for cheating, Tingle threatens expulsion.
Naturally, Holmes and friends decide to make the woman a hostage in her
own home and teach her a lesson.
     So much fun could have been had with this movie, but so little is
(see also: SUICIDE KINGS).  Though it's ostensibly a black comedy, the
jokes are deathly flat.  There's no `thrill' to speak of.  No scares.
Just some workmanlike acting that plods through about 90 minutes of
obvious tedium before the also-obvious ending arrives.  It's not a
hideously bad picture, it's just so unmemorable that I can hardly bring
myself to form an opinion about it.
     Changing the title to TEACHING MRS. TINGLE, big surprise, has not
made one bit of difference in the quality of the picture, either.
Director: Kevin Williamson
Producer: Richard N. Gladstein, Cathy Konrad
Writer: Kevin Williamson
Starring: Helen Mirren, Katie Holmes, Marisa Coughlan, Jeffrey Tambor,
Barry Watson, Michael McKean, Lesley Anne Warren, Molly Ringwald, Vivica
A. Fox
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TEACHING MRS. TINGLE (1999) * 1/2. Written and directed by Kevin Williamson;
Photography, Jerzy Zielinski. Editing, Debra Neil-Fisher. Production 
design, Naomi Shohan. Music, John Frizzell. Produced by Cathy Konrad. 
Cast: Helen Mirren (Mrs. Tingle), Katie Holmes (Leigh Ann Watson), 
Jeffrey Tambor (Coach Wenchell), Barry Watson (Luke Churner), Marisa 
Coughlan (Jo Lynn Jordan), Liz Stauber (Trudie Tucker), Michael 
McKean (Principal Potter), Molly Ringwald (Miss Banks), Vivica A. Fox 
(Miss Gold). A Dimension Films release. 93 minutes.PG-13
Kevin Williamson's first feature as director is a fizzle. He has been 
one of the new,  hot  Hollywood screenwriters since 1996, beginning 
with Scream (and later with Scream 2). His popular but puerile I Know 
What You Did Last Summer (1997) deserves what a critic (in, I think, 
Time) wrote about  the 1965 I Saw What You Did. His full review : " 
And I wish to hell I hadn't."
In 1998 Williamson  also created the TV series "Dawson's Creek,  was 
an uncredited writer for Halloween H20, and  scripted The Faculty. 
According to an AP story  "much of his work is based on things that 
really happened to him." In particular, a high school teacher 
described as a true monster crushed all his hopes for becoming a 
writer. The discouragement was repeated in a college writing class. 
Poor Kevin! But at least and at last  his deep traumas found their 
way into his eventual success as a writer, and certainly in his 
creation of the revenge movie Teaching Mrs. Tingle which centers on 
a small town school's history teacher from Hell.
American high school pictures are a genre with hundreds of entries, 
especially following the success of the appealing Fast Times at 
Ridgemont High (1982). Most of them try to be amusing and depict 
students doing anything except studying and learning.  In the light 
as well as in the few "serious" pictures the teachers are the victims 
of their classes. The grandpa of such works may be the famous The 
Blackboard Jungle (1955) whose screening at the Cannes Festival 
brought out protests by Americans because "of the bad name it gave 
U.S. schools."
Teaching Mrs. Tingle turns the tables on most high-school films, as 
Mrs.T., a martinet and a tyrant, is the persecutor of the kids.
The title was originally Killing Mrs. Tingle, but given the 
increasing rash of real-life school killings, it was changed. There 
may be a loss of audience among some amateurs of teacher-murder, but 
since there are no corpses in the film, "Teaching" is a better title 
and has the benefit of catchy alliteration. Yet even then, the name 
Tingle sends the wrong message. It would have been fine if it evoked 
someone who does things to you, such as appeal or titillation.
On the other hand, could this be an attempt at irony, which is 
something that Mrs. T  likes to define, and to dispense nastily and 
sarcastically to all: students, staff, colleagues, administrators 
--and most likely to grocery clerks, waiters, salespeople and 
everybody else. Worse yet, she's a master of put-downs which 
inevitably make all wilt in her presence and all hate her.  She even 
uses her unpleasantness to get her wishes via innuendoes, as when she 
blackmails the principal whose secret (he's in Alcoholics Anonymous) 
she knows.
The story. Graduating Leigh Ann Watson (Katie Holmes) is the top 
candidate for valedictorian. All she needs is another A, which will 
get her a college scholarship - indispensable, since her mother (a 
single) does not have the means to pay tuition.
The girl slaves over a first-rate project for her history class which 
she presents to Mrs.Tingle. Probably jealous of Leigh's looks and 
promising future, and, as later revealed,  frustrated by her own life 
(she was herself a student in that school and had been unable to 
leave that small town), Mrs T deprecates the project and gives Leigh 
a grade of C.
Desperate Leigh and her best friend Marisa (a lively actress 
wannabe), run into classmate Barry, a good-looking slacker on whom 
Marisa has a crush. He has just gotten an illegal copy of the history 
final.  Horrified, Leigh takes it away from him, puts it in her bag. 
In one of the first artificial developments of the movie, Mrs. T 
walks in, somehow spots the exam, and guarantees expulsion for Leigh.
The youngsters, trying vainly to explain Leigh's innocence, have to 
resort to a visit to Mrs. T's home but the teacher, considering them 
as invaders, throws them out.
And here begin a dumb, dull, unreal chain of events that do not 
deserve analysis. Fake semi-climaxes follow one another. The status 
of the kids goes from bad to worse after they tie Mrs. T to her bed. 
For three (I believe, but who cares?) days, during which Mrs. T gets 
fed but never goes to the bathroom. Involved, among other artifacts 
and events are a crossbow (sic), the loss of Leigh's presumed 
virginity, and a visit by  Mrs. T's secret lover, or at least sex 
partner. He goes by the nickname Spanky, which gives you a clue about 
the couple's activities. The man is an awfully  unlikely a choice. I 
will not reveal who plays him except that it 's a waste of an actor 
who has been marvelous on cable TV.
The movie is a waste of the audience's time and of the performers' 
abilities, including Molly Ringwald. She has been relegated to a 
tiny, innocuous part as office help and substitute teacher. Michael 
McKean, that superbly versatile actor of film (Coneheads, etc., etc.) 
and TV (Brian Benben's Aussie boss in HBO's Dream On) has a mere 
cameo, which cries out for expansion. Otherwise, the movie belongs 
entirely to Ms Mirren.
England's  Helen Mirren has been on much TV and many films for 
decades. She is a great actress who, in the USA at least, in spite of 
dozens of movies in which she held main or supporting roles, is far 
from a household name. The reasons? She is a mature woman and not the 
regulation gorgeous chick. Not all of her films have been displayed, 
and if so, insufficiently. Many of the best were specialty  "art" 
items: The Long Good Friday,  Cal, Pascali's Island, The Cook The 
Thief His Wife and her Lover, Some Mother's Son, and others.  She 
eventually acquired some name recognition through  The Madness of 
King George and the several Prime Suspect TV series (as Detective, 
then Superintendent Jane Tennison)
Her Mrs. Tingle showcases her talent. Not only as a demonic teacher, 
but as a diabolical captive who manipulates her captors with speech 
--while tied to her bed. Proud, coaxing, menacing, scheming, 
attempting to disunite the youngsters, and eventually pathetic, she 
does not merely steal the show, she IS the show. But even  Ms Mirren 
cannot save this concoction where  contrived drama and would-be humor 
co-exist without ever hitting their marks.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated PG-13
Dimension Films
96 minutes
starring Helen Mirren, Katie Holmes, Barry Watson, Marisa Coughlan,
Liz Stauber, Jeffrey Tambor, Michael McKean, Molly Ringwald, Lesley
Ann Warren, Vivica A. Fox
written and directed by Kevin Williamson
We've all had her before; the teacher that seems to hate us for no
apparent reason, other than the fact that she's jealous of our
future. Such is the title character of "Teaching Mrs. Tingle", a
flawed but fun dark comedy. Mrs. Tingle, played by Helen Mirren, is
kidnapped by three of her students(Katie Holmes, Barry Watson, and
Marisa Coughlan) after she catches them cheating for her final
test. The three students tie her to a bed in her home, and take turns
watching her, while she plays mindgames and tries to make them free
her. Despite a lame script and unfocused direction by "Scream"-scribe
Kevin Williamson, "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" is devilishly entertaining,
and almost becomes the high school satire that "Jawbreaker" tried to
be. The best thing about "Tingle" are the performances of Helen Mirren
and newcomer Marisa Coughlan. Mirren commands the screen and never
loses her edge, while Coughlan always entertains(especially in an
improvised "Exorcist" performance). Katie Holmes and Barry Watson(TV's
"7th Heaven") are merely competent and don't hold the viewer's
attention. I enjoyed Williamson's scripts for "Scream" and "The
Faculty", but a good screenplay here could have made for quite a
surprising film. "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" is his first directing foray,
and he seems to be derivative of anyone with whom he's ever
worked. But the film moves along at a good pace and is a breath of
fresh air from the thankfully forgotten teen horror genre. Teens will
like this film, but wait to rent it on video.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 

