Title
Review for Marquis (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
Costume drama set in France at the time of the revolution (1788-89), centered
on the activities of the Marquis deSade.  Unlike other films on the subject,
all the actors in this film wear animal masks and portray animals!  Raunchy and
very sick, the film is filled with S & M, political humor, and phony
bestiality.  One redeeming social virtue -- it's outrageously funny!
Belgium/France (English subtitles), color, 1989, 83 minutes.
Director/Writer: Henri Xhonneux 
Creature Design/Art Director: Roland Topor
     This film deals with two years in the life of the Marquis, who is
imprisoned in the infamous Bastille for religious crimes.  The Marquis spends
his time in prison writing the dirty S & M fantasy stories for which he is
famous, and talking with his huge (nearly a meter long) phallus, which has a
human face and talks back!.  His phallus has a rather unique and impulsive view
of life, and serves as a literary critic as well.
     The Marquis has the face of a dog, but his other features are human.  The
jailer has the face of a rat, is bisexual, and lusts for the Marquis.  The plot
of the film concerns the political intrigue surrounding the Marquis, who is
blamed for impregnating a "woman" who has the face of a cow (she was really
raped by the King).  Additionally, revolutionaries are plotting the overthrow
of the monarchy, and want to release certain prisoners (they ask for help from
the Marquis in their plot).
     That's all I will reveal of the plot, to avoid any spoilers.  This is
certainly the strangest film I have seen in some time, and also one of the
funniest.  The animal masks & costumes are very well done, and make a strong,
realistic impression on the viewer.  The result is a film that lies between
animation and live-action.  Perhaps it could be described as similar to the
Muppets, but done by someone on drugs with a truly warped sense of humor.
     This is not a film for everyone.  It is very funny, but also very dirty
(sexual humor) at times, and there is plenty of S & M, and some blood/gore.
There is some clay animation in the film, which is used to portray certain of
the more violent fantasies of the Marquis (which might be offensive to some
viewers).
     Because of the subject matter, the film is not suitable for children,
prudes, the squeamish, the humor-impaired, or anyone with an attitude problem.
The film should appeal to those with an offbeat, very raunchy sense of humor.
Note also that despite its sexual nature, there appears to be no genuine
(explicit) sex in it.  However, it is worth seeing, if your tastes include the
bizarre!
Distribution.  U.S. premiere now in progress at the San Francisco Int'l.  Film
Festival.  Next showings: Friday/Saturday 5/11-12 at the AMC Kabuki Theater in
San Francisco.  No information on future release plans.  Print Source:
Constellation Productions, 108 rue des Dames, 75017 Paris, France.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
