Title
Review for Lord of Illusions (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Max Fornasier
     Okay, just a brief review of Clive Barker's LORD OF ILLUSIONS.
If any of you out there are familiar with Barker's work and style then
this movie will not disappoint. Barker has again managed to create a
movie so powerful and disturbing that it gets under your skin and stays
with you long after the movie ends.
     The movie itself stars Scott Bakula of "Quantum Leap" fame, as a
private eye who gets assigned an unusual case involving a cult leader
and his followers.  Whilst the story itself is at times predictable,
the gory and sometimes sickening effects have you glued.
     All in all this movie is definitely not for the faint hearted but
a must see for those of you who crave a good horror flick but are sick
of the usual hum drum efforts of "Freddy" and the like.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Scott Bakula; Kevin J. O'Connor; Famke Janssen; Vincent Schiavelli
& Barry Sherman
If you could say one thing about Lord Of Illusions, it would be that it is
definitely different. Scott Bakula stars as a private eye that specializes
in cases dealing with the paranormal, such as demonic possessions and the
like. Dorothea (Famke Janssen), who is the wife of a magician, approaches
Bakula's character, Harry D'Amour. She is worried about her husband's
safety. Hubby was involved in an incident, years before, where he and
several others tracked down and killed a cult leader who had kidnapped a
little girl. This was no ordinary cult leader -- this guy had the power to
control people's minds using the power of illusions. Well, all these years
later the folks that helped to get rid of the cult leader are starting to
die. Famke's character thinks the reason for the deaths is that the cult
leader is coming back to get revenge for his death years earlier. She wants
Bakula's character to get to the bottom of it, and provide some protection
to boot. That's pretty much the story in a nutshell, and if it sounds
strange, it's not just because I'm lousy at describing movies. The story
really is a little on the strange side, although surprisingly easy to
follow.
On the whole, the acting isn't bad in this film, but some performances are
over the top to the extent that they end up being just plain terrible. That
goes for pretty much all the villains in the movie. No, strike that. Bakula
and Janssen are OK in the film, but everybody else is bad or borders on it.
With that being said, it really doesn't hurt the film all that much. That is
to say that you could have had Robert De Niro or Jack Nicholson in some of
these parts and it wouldn't have made the film a whole lot better.
It really isn't a bad film all and all. Although, if you are someone who
can't stand magic, and really can't swallow mind over matter plots, then you
should definitely stay far away from this movie. The special effects in the
illusion sequences aren't bad, but they look like something that you would
see on television as opposed to a production intended for theaters.
Confusion, bad acting, and a less than wonderful idea for a movie all
contribute to making Lord Of Illusions just your average thoughtless horror
film. The only saving grace is the fact that Bakula can actually act, and
Famke Janssen is a major babe. (I'm sexist, so sue me.) But even Famke
couldn't get me to sit though Lord Of Illusions for a second time. I've
never understood why Clive Barker is held up with such great regard among
horror fans. His writing and direction of this film leave me even more
puzzled than before over his popularity.
