Title
Review for Odd Couple II, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
When I first saw 'The Odd Couple', it was the television series starring
Tony Randall and Jack Klugman.  A brilliant show that I read somewhere
never cracked the top 10 on television in its run between 1970 and
1975.  It won Emmy awards for its two leading men throughout that period
and provided some of the most uproarious belly laughs in the history of
sitcoms.  The show was brash, frank and uncompromising in its portrayal
of two New York City roommates, Oscar Madison (Klugman) and Felix Unger
(Randall).  The t.v. series was inspired by the 1968 movie which came
about from an earlier play written by Neil Simon (as was the film) in
which Oscar and Felix were portrayed by Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon.
That movie didn't have the in-your-face fast pace and high spirited
hilarity of the sitcom but its basic good nature and original idea were
to be admired.  To tell you the truth, I've always preferred Klugman and
Randall to the other two but that is intended to take nothing away from
the talents of Lemmon and Matthau.
Everyone knows Oscar's the sloppy one and Felix is the "clean freak" or
as Matthau refers to him this time as "a human vacuum cleaner".  Thirty
years have passed and I'm sorry to say that the fire has gone out on any
idea Simon may have had for a sequel.  As 'The Odd Couple II' progresses
in the early stages, Oscar receives a phone call from his son, informing
him that he plans to be married to who else....Felix's daughter?!
Matthau is surprised to say the least.  After getting the details of the
wedding plans, Felix and Oscar meet at the airport in California and
haven't seen each other in 17 years?  I don't know about you but I don't
get in contact with people I met previously in my life and haven't
spoken to in 17 years and while you would think it to be natural that
the future in-laws would have to see each other at the wedding, what are
the chances that Oscar's son and Felix's daughter would meet and want to
get married?  Let's see, 6 billion people in the world and that's about
three billion men and three billion women, right?  The odds would be 3
billion to 1 that they would meet each other.  You have a better chance
of seeing two royal flushes come up in the same hand at a poker game.
Who does Neil Simon think he's fooling with this preposterous story?
Anyway, after they do meet, they encounter one disaster after another
and end up in a small town sheriff's office several times after being
caught in the wrong place at the wrong time, suspected of committing
offenses but in each case, the sheriff finds there was a freak
misunderstanding like you would find in a Laurel and Hardy movie and
releases Oscar and Felix each time.  Other mishaps in the film include
Oscar and Felix leaving the airport with Felix's suitcase getting left
behind with almost $20,000 in wedding presents inside, their car rolls
over a desert cliff and explodes, they get busted for an association
with illegal immigrants, get pesticide dumped on them and even manage to
pick up two girls whose boyfriends are rednecks and want to do them in.
These scenarios all look just a little too written and don't seem
natural and that along with the film's one liners look like a series of
amateur night comedy sketches at a local theatre featuring local talent.
There are countless attempts to poke fun at the senior citizen's way of
life which I found to be a little tasteless and unfunny (and I'm only
32) and while I'm sure it's intended to be in good taste and while some
seniors will find it funny (my parents probably will), others will be
crossing their fingers for a third 'Grumpy Old Men' film.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE ODD COUPLE II ** 1/4. Directed by Howard Deutch.Written by Neil Simon.
Photography, Jamie Anderson. Editing,Seth Flaum. Production design, Dan
Bishop.Music,Alan Silvestri.Produced by Simon, Robert W. Cort and David
Madden.Cast: Jack Lemmon (Felix Ungar), Walter Matthau (Oscar Madison),
Christine Baranski (Thelma), Jean Smart (Holly), et al. A Paramount
release. 90 minutes. PG-13.
Sequelitis is almost always a fatal disease in movies. A new film with an
old title followed by a "II" is like a red cloth waved before a bull, the
bulls being the cinephilic public and experienced film critics. It's hard
to think of exceptions, such as "The Godfather Part II." Or, in a far
lesser category, "Grumpier Old Men," which was also directed by "The Odd
Couple II"'s Howard Deutch and improved on the weak original "Grumpy Old
Men."
In 1967, "Barefoot in the Park," adapted by Neil Simon from his own play,
was the first collaboration of Simon and director Gene Saks. The two teamed
up again the following year with "The Odd Couple," in 1986 with "Brighton
Beach Memoirs," and now with "The Odd Couple II."
While the two Odd Couples are separated by 30 years, Part II plays with
time by being set  today yet reuniting for the first time in 17 years,
Felix, the much-divorced,obsessive neatnik, sinusoidal snorter and
hypochondriac who still dwells in New York, with Oscar, the sloppy slob,
more bloodhound-like than ever,who now lives in a Florida retirement
community. This conveniently  allows their respective son and daughter to
be young, to have (ah, coincidences!) met in California and to be getting
married. It's all news to F & O who get invited to the wedding at a
moment's notice. Suspension of disbelief is sorely needed in this movie,
but at least it's in a comedy, where making sense is not crucial.
>From the very instant incoming passengers Oscar and Felix meet again at a
California's LAX airport, things go wrong and keep escalating. Felix hurts
his leg. The men rent a car for the drive to San Malina, where the wedding
is. Felix's suitcase is left on the curb, the car burns up, the companions
are stranded, and, and, and.....Part II becomes straight away a comic road
movie with a series of unrelieved misfortunes, some mechanically plotted
but  not without laughs.
It's not exactly original, yet the dialogue, jokes, gags and repartees,
even when deja vu and deja heard have both the tired look and sound of
vaudeville acts and the comfortable feeling that goes with vaudeville. Neil
Simon and his stars, all septuagenerians now, are neither  charitable nor
complacent with old age. The film  opening's card-game (a regular affair
chez Matthau, with a short geezer and several old ladies) is a pretty
merciless blend of realistic and caricatural Jewish humor. The California
Odyssey. among other features, switches to dreams of sex when the men
encounter in a bar a couple of quite delightfully trashy ladies, Baranski
of TV's sadly discontinued "Cybill" and Smart. I regret however that Simon,
bending over backwards, makes our protagonists refer to them as "old
bikers" which is unfair to their appeal and youthfulness.
It is a propos of this encounter that Oscar and Felix engage in talk about
sex which in turn elicits  this clever Simonism from Oscar: "We use so many
metaphors that I forget what we're talking about."
The main thread is that O & F's final destination is the town of San
Malina, whose name is forgotten by both men except for the "San." This, in
turn, gives birth to the running (but still funny) jokes about California
being chockfull of places that start with San or Santa. In one of them, San
Menendez (cf. the Menendez Brothers), the cascading mix-ups have the odd
couple thrice arrested, and thrice let go by the bewildered local police
chief. This sequence of repeats gambles with the dangerous three-step
principle of gags: first comes the original gag, then it gets topped, then
another tops the topper. Step Three is risky business yet succeeds here and
produces another Simonism as Oscar (who has the best lines) tries to
explain the latest imbroglio to the Chief :"I'd hate to have to repeat all
this to a judge." In context, it's quite a funny remark.
The movie has its share of tedious,predictable or facile moments, but
geriatric it is not. Many of the flabbier scenes manage to come up with
reinforcements via  zingers or mini-novelties.Granted that it lacks the
freshness of the original "The Odd Couple," and that it  cannot hold a
candle to Neil Simon's great, hilarious and three-dimensional "The Sunshine
Boys" (1975, Matthau and George Burns), it is about as unsubstantial,
forgettable yet entertaining as that other trifle "Out to Sea," the
previous (1997) Lemmon-Matthau vehicle. Alan Silvestri's score is good and
appropriate.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Matt Williams
Since 1966, Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon have collaborated eleven
times (remarkably, over half of those films have been in the last seven
years). However, most of their recent work has hearkened back to their
cantankerous relationship in 1968's The Odd Couple.  Grumpy Old Men and
Out to Sea were both sequels in spirit, if not in name, so it doesn't
seem like it has been thirty years since the original Odd Couple graced
the screen.  But now, our old friends Oscar and Felix have returned, a
little more vulgar and a whole lot older than before.
The old roommates have gone their separate ways, and haven't seen (or
thought much about) each other since 1981.  But, time hasn't changed
them.  Oscar Madison (Walter Matthau) is still a human pigsty, and Felix
Ungar (Jack Lemmon) is still compulsively antiseptic.
Both have gone through failed marriages, and the catalyst that brings
them back together is the upcoming marriage between their children:
Felix's daughter Hanah (Lisa Waltz) and Oscar's son Bruce (Jonathan
Silverman). The wedding is going to be held in a town about two hours
north of L.A. The two men plan to meet, rent a car and drive to the
town...but with these two, things aren't going to be that simple.
Oscar Madison and Felix Ungar were never the most complex of characters.
Each was simply a single personality trait taken to the extreme.  What
makes their characters come alive is the vibrant chemistry between
Matthau and Lemmon. The two actors simply work well together.  Whether
they are bickering or expressing their idiosyncrasies, it's a joy to
watch them together.
This time, they're helped out by a good script (by Neil Simon), which,
although it formulaically relies on a road-trip structure, has a few
genuine surprises.  The script's biggest weakness is an unnecessary coda
which seems to exist only to draw allusions to the original Odd Couple.
One problem that arises with The Odd Couple II is the age of the
protagonists. They seem like they're about 10-15 years too old for the
roles. Seeing them flirt around with Christine Baranski and Jean Smart
is like watching the antics of two dirty old men.  And when we meet with
their kids, the men seem more like grandfathers than fathers. While not
outside the realm of possibility, the film does seem to be pushing the
envelope.
Still, it is funny, and when that's true, most other considerations are
secondary. It may not be a classic like the original, but it sure is
enjoyable to revisit these old friends.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW:  The Odd Couple II
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Walter Matthau, Jack Lemmon, Barnard Hughes, Christine Baranski,
Jonathan Silverman, Lisa Waltz
Director: Howard Deutch
Screenplay: Neil Simon
Australian Distributor: UIP
Australian theatrical release date: August 6 1998
The addition of yet another Jack Lemmon-Walter Matthau combo film will
no doubt bring cheers from many and groans from some. I was optimistic:
the only Matthau-Lemmon films I had seen were Grumpy Old Men and its
sequel, and I enjoyed both.  Whilst The Odd Couple II is not
particularly fresh, funky or funny, it is nice to see these two
old-but-energetic actors up to their usual antics.
Reunited after many years, Felix Ungar and Oscar Madison (Walter Matthau
and Jack Lemmon) are the classic odd couple.  They find themselves on
the open road, and on the way to a wedding.  During their trip, Felix
and Oscar have all kinds of wacky adventures: their car explodes after
rolling off the side of a road, they become imprisoned three times for
three different reasons, and a mate of theirs dies whilst driving
possibly the world's slowest Rolls Royce.  If it could happen to anyone,
it happens to them.
Neil Simon has passively written the screenplay which, at times, is a
touch too simplistic and a lot too dependent on its main characters.
That is the best and the worst thing about the film - Lemmon and Matthau
are wonderful in their roles, but are given way too much screen time.
Thus, the gags and capers end up feeling cramped and forced, as there
are no other characters to lighten the load.  In the two Grumpy Old Men
films, we were not only treated to a terrifically cynical extra-old-man,
but also love interests for the two men.  This is something that is
severely lacking in Odd Couple II, and is most felt about three quarters
of the way through when we start to get a little tired of their
bickering.
But The Odd Couple II is never boring, never intimidating and never
patronizing.  I really got the feeling that I was there because I wanted
to be; and if you know what to expect, you're not likely to be
disappointed.  It's far from perfect - but it's far from boring.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Nothing has changed," says consummate slob Oscar Madison to his
sickeningly fastidious ex-roommate, Felix Ungar.  "I'm still a pig, and
you're still a human vacuum cleaner."  Yes, it's been two decades, but
the original odd couple, Walter Matthau as Oscar and Jack Lemmon as
Felix, are back again in THE ODD COUPLE II.  Seen last, and better, in
last year's OUT TO SEA, these two old troopers and real-life buddies
clearly enjoy every minute of their time together.  Their joy in their
work is so infectious that the picture, with its recycled jokes,
becomes more enjoyable than it has any right to be.
     The setup to bring them back together again is that their grown
children are getting married to each other.  The movie is a road
picture, in which our two heroes get lost in the middle of nowhere and
spend the rest of the movie trying to locate the wedding.  They know
it's in one of those "San" something cities in California.  Along the
way they put the moves on some middle-aged biker women in a bar, and,
through a series of misadventures, they manage to get themselves
arrested three times by the same police officers.
     Matthau gets the verbal humor, and Lemmon the physical.  Most of
Matthau's lines, like the ones he tosses out to a young policewoman
friend of his ("If I call 911 tonight, any chance of mouth-to-mouth?")
are funny only because of Matthau's charisma.  The lines are so lame
that they would fall flat if delivered by most comedians, and even
Matthau has trouble with such limp material.
     So meticulousness is Felix that he has been through three
marriages, countless relationships and five walkout dates - ones where
the women went to the restroom and never returned.  As Felix, Lemmon
can be annoying with his repetitive, bad throat joke that is about as
much fun as fingernails scraping on a blackboard.
     When the two are together in what feels like ad libbing, the movie
really starts to click.  Oscar complains, for example, that he is
always having to stop for Felix to urinate.  Oscar claims that he
solves the problem himself by going once for thirty minutes in the
morning and then he can skip the rest of the day.
     The movie's best visual has them hitching a ride with a rich
elderly gentleman in an antique car that goes so slow that joggers and
even fast walkers easily pass them by.  The scene's end could be
considered in poor taste, but it does work in the context of the story.
     "There's more to life than a job, a dinner alone and a TV show,"
Felix says, explaining to Oscar why he enjoyed their adventure despite
all their disasters.  And the audience shares vicariously in their
silly little episodes.
     THE ODD COUPLE II runs 1:37.  It is rated PG-13 for brief strong
language and would be fine for kids around ten and up.

Author
Rob Strong
Starring:  Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau, Christine Baranksi,
Barnard Hughes, Jonathan Silverman, Jean Smart, Lisa Waltz,
Mary Beth Piel, Jay O. Sanders, and Richard Riehle.
Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau are at it again.  Their
grumpy old men shtick, which was at its best in the
film GRUMPY OLD MEN, gets another go round, this time
with writer Neil Simon in THE ODD COUPLE 2.  It's the
sequel to THE ODD COUPLE, which started the whole 
grumpy old men thing.
Seventeen years after Oscar Madison (Matthau) has moved
to Sarasota, Florida, nothing has changed.  He's still
a unreformable slob of a sports writer who plays poker
for stakes of 30 cents with a group of old women.  At
one of these games, he gets a phone call from his son,
Brucey. (Jonathan Silverman)  Brucey has great news:
he's getting married.  Then he tells his dad to whom:
Hannah Ungar, daughter of Oscar's old roommate, 
ultra neat freak Felix Ungar. (Lemmon)  Time hasn't
changed Felix either.  He's still, in Oscar's words,
"a human vacuum cleaner."  The two reunite at the 
airport out in California to go their childrens'
wedding which is in "San something"--they can't
remember the last part.  From there, the rest of the
film is basically a road buddy movie, that depicts
the various misadventures the pair gets themselves 
into.
A great plot?  No.  Are there plot holes?  Yes.
Do some jokes fall flat?  Yes.  But is it funny the 
great majority of the time?  Undoubtedly.  Neil Simon 
shows he still has the touch, not as powerful as it once
was, perhaps, but it's still there.  Lemmon and 
Matthau display their always great chemistry as 
the churn out Simon's frequently funny one-liners
at one another.   The situations themselves are 
amusing.  The dance with two biker chicks and the
next morning they get taken hostage by the womens'
angry boyfriends.  They get dusted by pesticides,
arrested for hauling illegal immigrants, their
car rolls down a hill and explodes, and the list
goes on.  
The movie's funniest moment comes when they hitch
a ride with an old geezer in his antique car.
They drive very slowly.  So slowly, in fact, that
they are soon being passed by everything imaginable.
It's hilarious to watch as the car gets passed by things
whose speeds get progressively slower.  Then the
old man dies, leading to yet another great scene where
his toupee blows off and Oscar has to retrieve it.
Many people have raised the cry of "enough is enough" with
regards to Lemmon and Matthau.  I say, if it's done well,
bring it on!  And this film is done well.
THE ODD COUPLE 2 is a light, funny, inoffensive comedy
with great stars and a great writer.  It certainly won't
win any awards or go down in history as one of the 
great comedies of all time, but it is still a good, fun
way to spend an afternoon or evening.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When the most successful playwright in history grinds out
another script, the public takes notice.  Neil Simon, whose 
Tony award-winning "Biloxi Blues" in 1984 won him renewed
respect from critics after a couple of years of duds, received
even more kudos during that Broadway season for recasting
"The Odd Couple" for women.  But the film version of "The
Odd Couple" did not match its 1970s TV embodiment when
Felix Ungar (Tony Randall) played his cranky, compulsive
personality off the slob-inspired character of his boorish
roommate, Oscar Madison (Jack Klugman).  The trouble with
"The Odd Couple II" is not so much its deja vu, but its inability
to make two seventy-year-olds as vital as the youthful
originals.
   "The Odd Couple II" is on a level with "Grumpy Old Men,"
which is about two single retirees (Walter Matthau and Jack
Lemmon) living in Minnesota who turn into libidinous
teenagers when a beautiful widow (Ann-Margret) moves
across the street.  As though Howard Deutsch felt he could
direct a less malnourished comedy than Donald Petrie, he
dished out its sequel, "Grumpier Old Men," whose claim to
classic status consisted of the same odd couple spouting
epithets at each other and arguing about their children's
coming wedding.  Now, in "The Odd Couple II," Oscar
Madison and Felix Ungar are back after a seventeen-year
period of living apart--Oscar in Sarasota and Felix in New
York--reuniting to attend the marriage of two of their children.
   Most of the story takes place on Los Angeles highways as
the two old buddies renew their animosity as they travel from
the L.A. airport to the site of the wedding in a small California
town whose name, San Melina, they seem unable to recall. 
Admitting that they get along "like oil and frozen yogurt," the
two travelers lose their Budget rent-a-car as it rolls down a hill
and bursts into flames. They get mixed up unwittingly in a
scheme to transport illegal aliens, winding up in the office of a
small-town sheriff (Barnard Hughes).  They are sprayed by
pesticides on a remote California highway, have a near-affair
with two biker girls, Thelma and Holly (Christine Baranski and
Jean Smart), and are briefly taken on a joy ride by the two
trashy husbands of the aggressive women.  
   Most of the one-liners center on sex and aging,  Oscar and
Felix metaphorically discussing the decline of their "wicks"
and determined to revive the joys of adolescence before their
situation regresses even more. (Remember that the movie
was made before the FDA approved the drug, Viagran.)  In
one unconvincing episode Felix, despite his experience with
three marriages, is tongue-tied when he acts to take an
aircraft seat next to a woman he has just met, Felice (Mary
Beth Peil).
   The movie's main intention is to spoof old age, which it
does by its stereotypes of the elderly, taking particular aim at
the man-hungry Florida widows (nicknamed in the cast notes
as "The Grouch," "The Whiner," "The Nosher," and "The
Vixen").  During a poker game in Sarasota Oscar serves them
the only  foods that senior citizens are allegedly capable of
handling, including tofu corned beef and a no-fat, no-
cholesterol, no taste pastry.  The men get off easier.  In the
opening baseball game, the youthful players, who are making
one error after another on the field, are chided by Oscar, who
is commenting on the game from the stands: "The old cockers
in the stands are better than the young cockers in the field."
   There are some amusing moments in the film as you might
expect from a Neil Simon script acted by two veteran comics,
but you may at times actually wish that director Howard
Deutch would install a laugh track to avoid the periods of
dead air between one-liners. Cognoscenti of Simon's works
will recognize a repetition of the theme of the final scene of
his "Plaza Suite," as a mother and father fight among
themselves over the best way to get their daughter out of the
bathroom and down to the ballroom where her guests await
her.  But where Mamma yells in that one "I want you to come
out of the bathroom and get married!" there is only a pale
imitation of that wit as Oscar confronts his about-to-be-
married son (Jonathan Silverman), who has escaped to the
roof in conflict.  Rated PG-13.  Running time: 95 minutes.  (C)
Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Robert Workman
Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review:
Grumpy Old Men, it ain't.  Hell, My Fellow Americans, it ain't.
Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon team up again for an even more worn out
vehicle than any of their films over the past few years.  Odd Couple II
feels terribly generic, where in the first movie, made thirty one years
ago, feels like a wonderful tale.  That's like repackaging Campbell's
Soup in a generic food can, really.
How writer Neil Simon could've made such a horrible mistake in screen
writing is beyond me.  Throughout the movie, I really didn't laugh once.
Honestly.  I mean, there were dumb situations, yeah, like the cropduster
who let these old geezers have it without any notice, but they just
really didn't seem funny to me.  And that car rolling off the cliff?
The only way I would've seen humor in that is if they were still in it.
And the ending gets all super-mushy, too.  In the final twenty minutes
or so, Lemmon meets a girl he thinks is the one, then loses her; Matthau
talks to his son (a wasted Jonathan Silverman) about his amrriage to
Lemmon's daughter; and, of course, Lemmon and Matthau have another
roomie situation on their hands.  Ooh, I really gave a lot away there,
I'm sure.  Consider it a hospitable gester, you won't waste your time
renting this muck.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Walter Matthau, Jack Lemmon, Barnard Hughes, Christine Baranski, 
      Jonathan Silverman, Lisa Waltz
Director: Howard Deutch
Screenplay: Neil Simon
Cinematography: Jamie Anderson
Music: Alan Silvestri
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Oscar Madison and Felix Ungar are back on the big screen.  It has 
been thirty years since Neil Simon's play, "The Odd Couple," was 
transformed from a stage production to a movie, with Walter Matthau as 
the disorderly, ill-mannered Oscar and Jack Lemmon as the "human vacuum 
cleaner" Felix.  And, as the play led to a film, so the film inspired a 
popular TV series in the '70s, with Jack Klugman and Tony Randall in the 
lead roles.  Now, in 1998, Simon is attempting to revive his flagging 
career as a comic writer by resurrecting his two most popular creations.  
It doesn't work.
     Six or seven years ago, this film might have been worthwhile for 
nostalgic reasons – Matthau and Lemmon together again, their bickering 
as enjoyable as ever.  The problem is, in the last five years, the two 
veteran actors have appeared opposite each other three times (four, if 
you count THE GRASS HARP).  And, whether they're called Herbie and 
Charlie (OUT TO SEA) or Max and John (GRUMPY OLD MEN, GRUMPIER OLD MEN), 
Matthau and Lemmon rarely let their characters stray too far from Oscar 
and Felix.  As a result, THE ODD COUPLE 2 comes across as redundant.  
That wouldn't have been the case if it had offered more than a few token 
laughs and a series of unconvincing "buddy moments," but this movie is 
far removed from Simon's best work.
     It has been 17 years since Oscar, who moved to Sarasota, Florida, 
and Felix, who still lives in New York City, have seen each other.  In 
the interim, neither has changed.  The occasion of their reunion is the 
most improbable of circumstances – Oscar's son, Bruce (Jonathan 
Silverman), is marrying Felix's daughter, Hannah (Lisa Waltz).  The two 
ex-roommates greet each other in Los Angeles International airport, then 
jump in a rental car for the trip to San Melina.  It's not long before 
they're lost, and that's when the series of misadventures begins.
     Aside from the always-enjoyable chemistry between the stars, THE 
ODD COUPLE 2 doesn't have much to offer.  The script has the same kind 
of stale, made-for-TV feel that is evident in many of today's big screen 
comedies – all that's missing is a laugh track to tell us when something 
is supposed to be funny.  To be fair to Simon and director Howard Deutch 
(who previously directed Matthau and Lemmon in GRUMPIER OLD MEN), the 
film has several amusing sequences, but nothing is gut-bustingly 
hilarious.  Felix and Oscar also have their share of clever one-liners 
interspersed between more banal insults.  As always, despite getting 
along "like oil and frozen yogurt," their affection for each other is 
evident.
     THE ODD COUPLE 2 sports a low-key supporting cast, which is 
understandable, since the last thing the film makers wanted was anyone 
upstaging Matthau and Lemmon.  Jonathan Silverman and Lisa Waltz play 
the soon-to-be-married couple.  Christine Baranski has a nice, over-the-
top appearance as a biker chick who's trying to do a THELMA AND LOUISE 
thing with her best friend.  And Barnard Hughes is a small-town sheriff 
who sees entirely too much of Oscar and Felix.  
     THE ODD COUPLE 2 is for everyone whose nostalgia for the 
misadventures of the duo hasn't been satisfied by the TV series or the 
recent Matthau/Lemmon pairings.  As far as big-screen comedies go, this 
one is strictly generic, with the only distinguishing mark being that 
the protagonists are over 60.  Still, the real problem isn't the actors 
or their work; it's the screenplay.  And, while Neil Simon may have once 
been numbered among America's premiere comedy writers, he, like Oscar 
and Felix, is lost this time around.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Christian Pyle
So, it's thirty years later, and Oscar and Felix are together again.  That
might have been an exciting notion if it wasn't for the fact that the "odd
couple" of Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau have been reunited in several recent
movies:  1993's "Grumpy Old Men," 1995's "Grumpier Old Men," and 1997's "Out to
Sea" (i.e. "Grumpiest Old Men").  So, "The Odd Couple II" (i.e. "The Grumpiest
Old Men of All, Really") seems just another entry in a tired series.
The plot is even similar to that of "Grumpy Old Men" in that Lemmon and
Matthau's mismatched characters are brought together by a romance between their
children.  Oscar's son (Jonathan Silverman) and Felix's daughter (Lisa Waltz)
are getting married, and former roommates Felix Ungar (Lemmon) and Oscar
Madison (Matthau) meet at the airport and decide to share a car . . . then
hilarity ensues.  Well, a few chuckles ensue anyway.
Neil Simon, the award-winning playwright who created Oscar and Felix, provides
the screenplay, which is a shock, because the script is a piece of talentless
hackwork from beginning to end.  Unlike the original play/movie, "Odd Couple
II" doesn't find its humor in the personality conflict of its characters. 
Instead, it depends upon a series of humorous situations:  Oscar and Felix lose
the car over a cliff, are caught smuggling Mexicans over the border, take up
with two women on the run from their violent husbands (the women are played by
Christine Baranski of "Cybill" and Jean Smart of "Designing Women"), and hitch
a ride with a man who dies in the desert.
The original 1968 movie "The Odd Couple" remains a classic comedy.  It
introduced the motif of roommate-as-spouse that has provided gags for movies
and sitcoms ever since.  It was the second outing for the Lemmon/Matthau team
(which debuted in 1966's "The Fortune Cookie"), and they made a couple more
worthwhile comedies, "The Front Page" (1974) and "Buddy Buddy" (1981), before
going their separate ways.  The reunion of Lemmon and Matthau in "Grumpy Old
Men" six years ago was delightful, and its sequel seemed appropriate because it
tied up some loose ends from the first movie.  But "Out to Sea" and "The Odd
Couple II" are just beating a grumpy old horse.  (You can add Lemmon's "My
Fellow Americans," i.e. "Grumpy Old Presidents," to that list, too.)  Let's
hope that Hollywood offers these two actors something fresh to do.  Let's hope
also that we see Neil Simon's name on movies that do it justice (this is his
first since 1993's "Lost in Yonkers").

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Neil Simon's The Odd Couple II (1998)
Walter Matthau, Jack Lemmon, Barnard Hughes, Christine Baranski, Jonathan 
Silverman, Lisa Waltz, Jean Smart. Directed by Howard Deutch. 95 minutes.
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
You should have heard the old guys in the crowded bathroom following the 
"Odd Couple II" sneak preview. They were as happy a group of men as I've 
ever encountered. "What a great movie," exclaimed one gent at the urinal, 
"Everything was so true!" "Yeah," laughed a man standing next to him, "I 
drive as slow as that one guy did. My kids give me holy hell for it!" 
"And peeing is a big part of my day, just like with Felix," chuckled 
another fellow, as he fastened his trousers up around his nipples and 
prepared to rejoin his wife. 
If you're over 60 and in the habit of driving at least 20 miles per hour 
below the posted speed limit, "Neil Simon's The Odd Couple II" may be 
just the film for you. Others will likely be less charitable. While "The 
Odd Couple II" is amiable enough, Neil Simon's shockingly lazy screenplay 
feels like a slapped-together TV reunion show, suffering from wheezing 
situation comedy set-ups and jokes straight out of the Borscht-belt. 
Simon, once the toast of Broadway, has apparently shifted his sights from 
the Great White Way to the neighborhood multiplex in Branson, Missouri. 
The contrived story, involving the marriage of their kids, provides the 
excuse for a reunion between Oscar Madison and Felix Unger, who haven't 
seen each other in 17 years. The former roommates fly into California 
from their respective homes for the wedding and, quite literally, run 
into one another at the airport. They take off in a rental car for the 
ceremony in San Molina, get lost and have a series of "wacky" adventures 
on the road. 
Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau reprise their roles as Felix the neat 
freak and Oscar the slob. While there is an undeniable chemistry between 
the pair, the impact of their reunion is lessened by the fact that 
they've headlined three films together since 1993: "Grumpy Old Men," 
"Grumpier Old Men" and "Out To Sea." Still, the two veteran actors are 
fun to watch. 
Matthau, whose magnificently rumpled face looks like a big pile of 
laundry with eyes, has a field day as Oscar, the crown prince of the 
curmudgeons. Lemmon, looking pastier than usual, is fine as the ever-
annoying Felix, who still punctuates his chronic whining with occasional 
allergic honks of "Phnah! Phnah!" Despite their bickering, the characters 
have real affection for each other, providing a welcome respite from the 
non-stop barrage of insults that marked their previous three films 
together.
Unfortunately, Matthau and Lemmon's charm isn't enough to compensate for 
Simon's hack script, which wouldn't pass muster even on a UPN sitcom. One 
contrived situation follows another, lathered with enough stale one-
liners to supply a dozen would-be comics on open-mike night at the local 
comedy club. 
If someone drags you to this film and you find yourself as bored as I was,
 try entertaining yourself by counting the product placements. Burger 
King gets one, as does the El Pollo Loco taco joint, but Budget Rent-A-
Car really hits the jackpot. Between script references to their business 
and shots of signs and stickers bearing their company name, I couldn't 
keep count of all the plugs. I did, however, keep track of some of the 
swearing. I came up with four "God-damns," three "shitheads" and two 
"fucks." The inclusion of those particular profanities seemed odd for a 
film aimed at an older audience, but the theater full of seniors appeared 
to have no problem with them, howling like crazy every time the boys let 
rip with a naughty word. 
It's sad that a writer of Neil Simon's stature has grown desperate enough 
to resort to swearing for cheap laughs, but not surprising when you look 
at what else gets passed off as humor in this tepid exercise. One running 
gag involves Oscar and Felix's inability to remember the name of the town 
where the wedding is to be held. At one point, the men actually spend 30 
seconds just free-associating, riffing off variants of the word "San." 
The sequence is so creatively bankrupt that it is simply embarrassing.
One of the oldest maxims of film-going is "Beware of movies that use the 
author's name in the title." "Neil Simon's The Odd Couple II" is no 
exception to the rule. While the production has enough minor pleasures to 
warrant a TV viewing on some lazy Sunday afternoon, it has no business 
playing in a movie theater. Of course, there's a bathroom full of old 
guys who would strongly disagree with every word I've written, and would 
probably whip my "young-whippersnapper" ass to boot. One thing's for sure,
 though. They'll never catch me in a car chase.
