Title
Review for Une affaire de goűt (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Julia Levin
A string of movies emerging from France, including With A Friend Like
Harry, The School of Flesh, and The Taste of Others, represent the "new"
type of French films that American distributors are looking for. 
Partially dark comedies, partially thrillers, they get packaged as
contemporary French noir.  They are also notorious for taking no risks
and being barely skin deep with plot and character.
In A Matter of Taste, Frédéric Delamont (Bernard Giraudeau), an
industrial tycoon apparently at a peak of his success, is obsessed with
two things: food and himself.  At a fancy restaurant, he meets a
temporary waiter named Nicolas, an irreverent young man with the hands
of a pianist and a charming, arrogant smile.  To feed his
self-indulgence, Frédéric hires Nicolas as a personal food taster.  As
we soon discover, he is plotting to get the waiter obsessed with the
same culinary tastes Frédéric has, and, more importantly, to essentially
make Nicolas a living replica of himself.  Nicolas, played by
Jean-Pierre Lorit, best known for his role as a young law student in
Krzysztof Kieslowski's incredible Red, gives his character a touch of
unruly enigma, but that is as far as he can go with the role.
Nicolas finds his new boss an exotic fellow: The businessman is obsessed
with food and is phobic about everything he can't control.  He leads an
empty life, spending most of his time eating lush, exquisitely prepared
culinary masterpieces and lamenting about his childhood -- perhaps real,
but mostly likely invented -- but boring either way.
A Matter of Taste is about obsession and the many different forms it can
take.  However, in this film, the obsessed are far less interesting than
their obsessions.  One of the problems is that the magic chemistry that
is supposed to draw the two men together and change them is painfully
absent.  Frederic and Nicolas don't have much to say to one another, and
aside from their spare, monosyllabic dialogue, the film is full of
homoerotic undertones and creepy suggestions that keep you only mildly
interested in whether something will ever happen between the two.
The doppelganger motif doesn't work here --simply put, the story never
creates the necessary level of suspense or substance.  In addition, they
are ill-chosen players for the thriller genre: Frédéric exhibits no more
energy than the dead fish he is allergic to, and, as the story
progresses, Nicolas's growing dependency syndrome becomes irksome (aside
from being laughably predictable).
It's impossible to call this film seductive or dangerous, or even
sensuous, with the exception of the food tasting scenes.  The thematic
components of the film -- the manipulator vs. the manipulated, rich vs.
poor, victim vs. victimizer -- never develop into anything even remotely
sociologically coherent.  From the beginning, we know what has happened
and who has done it, we are just not sure why.  Is there a symbolic
relationship that unites these two men?  Platonic love?  Sex?  Money? 
Unfortunately, the answer doesn't matter when the characters are as
vacuous as problems they represent.
Director: Bernard Rapp
Producer: Catherine Dussart, Chantal Perrin
Writer: Bernard Rapp, Phillippe Balland
Starring: Bernard Giraudeau, Jean-Pierre Lorit, Florence Thomassin,
Charles Berling, Jean-Pierre Léaud, Artus de Penguern, Laurent
Spielvogel
http://www.pyramidefilms.com/uneaffairedegout/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
A MATTER OF TASTE (Une affaire de gout)
---------------------------------------
Nicholas Riviere (Jean-Pierre Lorit, "Red," "Alice and Martin") is an 
unambitious young man working temporarily as a waiter when he runs into 
Delamont (Bernard Giraudeau, "Water Drops on Burning Rocks," "Ridicule")
a wealthy entrepreneur.  Delamont challenges Nicholas to identify the
ingredients of an amuse bouche, decides he has intelligence in his eyes,
and makes him an overgenerous offer for a strange job - to be his personal
taster in "A Matter of Taste."
Cowriter (with Gilles Taurand, "Time Regained")/director Bernard Rapp
tells his tale in flashbacks from a present day investigation into an
unknown crime.  While there have been many films which investigate the
transference of personality, there have been fewer on the subjugation of it.
Rapp's psychological thriller plays like an inverted version of Joseph 
Losey's "The Servant" as seen through the gorgeous rot of Peter Greenaway's
films.
Although Delamont has an aversion to cheese and fish, it soon becomes
clear that he wants more from Nicholas than to taste his food.  As he
seduces Nicholas with access to his monied lifestyle, his demands on
the man slowly increase.  His offering stipulation that Nicholas quit smoking
segues into Nicholas not eating any foods he dislikes, then more, as 
he tries to recreate Nicholas in his own image.  Delamont's displeasure
is shown harshly, parentally, building an interdependence between the two 
that's like, but not actually, a love affair.
Nicholas' girlfriend Beatrice (Florence Thomassin) provides the audience's
point of view, watching in horror as Nicholas becomes consumed by the
industrialist, trying to figuratively shake some sense into him until
she realizes she literally no longer knows this man.
Giraudeau smoothly creates a cinematic monster, a polished devil of
refinement but no feeling.  Lorit has a more difficult arc to follow, as
the film's one failure is its inability to make Nicholas' seduction
totally believable, but he makes a fine mirror for Giraudeau.
The film's fine production design by Francois Comtet features many
extraordinary gustatory tableaux and the contrasts between Alpine skiing
and desert hermitage.  Cinematography by Gerard de Battista
("Venus Beauty Institute") is strikingly crisp.  Rapp's direction builds
a sickly, sinister suspense.
"A Matter of Taste" is a deliciously insidious thriller.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
