Title
Review for Ideal Husband, An (1999)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Being a recent junior high graduate, I have not yet studied the work
of Oscar Wilde. It is, however, common knowledge that he was one of
the most influential playwrights of the modern era. "An Ideal
Husband", one of his best known productions, has been effectively put
to screen by Oliver Parker, and it features lots of the scathing,
ambiguous dialogue that Wilde is famous for.
The setting is London. The time is the late 1800's. Lord Arthur
Goring(Rupert Everett), a 36-year-old bachelor, is considered the most
eligible single man in London, but he just can't commit himself to one
person, perhaps because of his own selfishness. "To love oneself," he
remarks, "is the beginning of a lifelong romance." However, an old
flame, Laura Cheveley(Julianne Moore), has arrived in town, and things
begin to get interesting.
She decides to blackmail Sir Robert Chiltern(Jeremy Northam), a
high-ranking government official, into supporting a scheme involving
the Suez Canal. If he declines, then she shall go to the press with
the story of how he "stole" his fortune. Sir Robert's wife, Lady
Gertrud(Cate Blanchett) is beginning to get suspicious. Meanwhile, Sir
Robert's sister, Mabel(Minnie Driver) is looking into getting a
husband.
There are a few reasons why "An Ideal Husband" is such wonderful
fun. First and foremost is the job of the remarkable cast. Rupert
Everett and Julianne Moore are the standouts; each one perfect for
their role. Jeremy Northam has his second fine performance after his
outstanding turn in "The Winslow Boy", and Cate Blanchett is back in
period-piece style after her interesting role in "Pushing Tin". Minnie
Driver gives a more low-key performance, but she is dynamic as always.
Oliver Parker, whose debut was 1995's "Othello", makes "An Ideal
Husband" seem expansive rather than stagy. With an amazing cast and
classic source material, it would seem hard to go wrong, but Parker
adds his own touch in the way certain scenes are set up. There's
nothing too original about this production, but the script is fresh
and funny and the film moves along at a quick pace.
"An Ideal Husband" is an ideal summer diversion for those looking for
a breath of fresh air from the blockbuster flicks headed our
way. Miramax is, once again, doing a fine job marketing the film and
they have once again given us a reason for seeing their movies. "An
Ideal Husband" is a period-piece with style, wit and charm.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Walter Frith
I haven't seen such a lavish and exquisitely told Victorian era story
like 'An Ideal Husband' since Martin Scorsese's 'The Age of Innocence'
in 1993.  'An Ideal Husband' has all the admirable qualities of a story
and look similar to an installment of television's 'Masterpiece
Theatre'.  
The rules of society were strict and somewhat highly hypocritical in
many instances back in the days of long gowns and tuxedos for casual
wear.  Everyone in high society seemed upper crust and more trustworthy
than they are perceived today but there was still plenty of blackmail,
adultery, wheeling and dealing and manipulation to be found.
'An Ideal Husband' casts a negative light on the feisty brawl of
politics involving dishonour, blackmail, the manipulation of a fortune
and the will of one man to keep his dignity.  The film also runs a
perfect length of just over 90 minutes and this makes it appeal to those
who find this type of entertainment too highly enlightened for their own
tastes.
Set in England, Jeremy Northam portrays Sir Robert Chiltern.  A short
time before he is to give an denouncing address to the British
Parliament regarding British support to form a canal through Argentina,
he is approached by the underhanded Laura Cheveley (Julianne Moore) who
supports the canal plan and wants Sir Robert to change his mind and
support it also or she will blackmail him with an incriminating letter
that will ruin his reputation and cause his life to come crashing down
like a house of cards.  Among the casualties in this house of cards is
Sir Robert's marriage to his wife Gertrude (Cate Blanchett).
The screenplay is by Oliver Parker based on a play by Oscar Wilde and
the dialogue is impeccably written to showcase the tongues of dignity
found in the era shown.  The film is relatively simple to follow, unlike
many films of its kind which take often needless sub plots and inject
them into a story where it isn't needed.  'An Ideal Husband' also has
the look of a Merchant-Ivory production and the sets, costumes,
cinematography and music score are all to be given an "A" for effort and
successful execution.
Other noteworthy members of the cast are Rupert Everett, Minnie Driver
and John Wood. No one seems out of place and everyone is casted
perfectly and the direction and screenplay adaptation by Oliver Parker
is truly an exercise in subtlety.
The mechanics of the film's overall climax are somewhat docile in nature
but are in keeping with many aspects of its own tone.  This film is the
type of achievement that I always argue keeps the movie industry alive
because the movies always keep tradition in focus.  Film is arguably the
most educational medium if the right movies are selected to show us a
little of the past that for the most part can pave our future.  This
film also draws heavily from the origins of theatre since it is based on
a play and the theatre for many is the true art of dramatic
presentation.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Scott Renshaw
AN IDEAL HUSBAND
(Miramax)
Starring: Jeremy Northam, Cate Blanchett, Rupert Everett, Minnie Driver,
Julianne Moore, John Wood.
Screenplay: Oliver Parker, based on the play by Oscar Wilde.
Producers:  Barnaby Thompson, Uri Fruchtmann and Bruce Davey.
Director: Oliver Parker.
MPAA Rating: PG (mild profanity, adult themes)
Running Time: 96 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     AN IDEAL HUSBAND is so determinedly droll that it's likely to leave
your cheeks aching from a sustained 96 minute smirk.  That shouldn't be a
tremendous shock considering we're talking about a play by Oscar Wilde,
whose penchant for the tres bon mot was matched only by his curious desire
to cobble them together into plots.  He was smart enough to craft his
stories into a crowd-pleasing romantic form, but he was generally less
interested in emotional insight than he was in a witty turn of phrase.  In
the mouths of actors who know how to use them, his epigrams can make you
forget that the narrative you're watching is fairly forgettable.
     There are many such actors in AN IDEAL HUSBAND, enough to give the
tale some devilish fun.  Jeremy Northam essays Sir Robert Chiltern, an
up-and-coming Member of Parliament in 1895 well-known for his integrity;
the ever-radiant Cate Blanchett is his wife Gertrude, who places her
husband on a pedestal of moral rectitude.  There's Julianne Moore as Mrs.
Chevely, who knows a dark secret from Sir Robert's past and expects
political favors for her silence, and Minnie Driver as Sir Robert's
high-spirited younger sister Mabel.  And foremost there is Rupert Everett
as rakish bachelor Lord Arthur Goring, the very portrait of slothful
privilege and the dispenser of Wilde's most cutting social commentary.
     Director Oliver Parker (who also adapted the screenplay) works at
fleshing out the relationships in the story, trying to make the crisis in
the Chilterns' marriage more significant.  It's a noble idea, though the
time isn't particularly well-spent.  Northam broods as he faces his moment
of truth, Blanchett melts in disappointment over dashed illusions, and
both actors attempt to show us deep internal turmoil.  Parker wants us to
feel for them, while I suspect Wilde is more interested in making them
look a bit foolish.  Playing the characters with too much sincerity may be
too "heavy" a reading of the material.
     Fortunately, Parker still has plenty of juicy Wilde-ian dialogue to
distribute.  Much of it goes to Everett's Sir Arthur, who bites into his
commentaries on marriage, politics and deception with relish.  Many actors
have opted to play Wilde with an eyebrow arched into the flight path
passenger jets, as though we all must know they view life itself as a
grand joke.  Everett smartly opts for a refined weariness, the cynicism of
a man who doesn't take much pleasure in his cynicism.  It's a choice that
makes his later romance with Mabel (played with beautiful intelligence by
Driver) feel less like a plot device than it has any right to.  When
Everett and Driver banter, AN IDEAL HUSBAND floats on their appeal.
     It's true that a little droll can go an awfully long way, and that AN
IDEAL HUSBAND hardly offers a riveting portrait of scandal and redemption.
Mostly it's a comedy of manners, one of Wilde's forrays into the
difference between our public and private faces (a subject with which he
was well acquainted).  Though Parker's pacing lags between gags, there is
just enough surprisingly modern satire -- and just enough Rupert Everett
-- to maintain interest. The chuckles may rarely turn into belly laughs,
but then again, that never was Wilde's style.  AN IDEAL HUSBAND is the
work of a writer who preferred his comedy on wry.

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: ***1/2 (out of four)
Miramax / 1:36 / 1999 / PG-13 (brief, out-of-focus nudity, steamy
romantic clinches)
Cast: Rupert Everett; Julianne Moore; Jeremy Northam; Cate Blanchett;
Minnie Driver; John Wood; Peter Vaughn
Director: Oliver Parker
Screenplay: Oliver Parker
Shameful pasts. Secret affairs. Astonishing revelations. Political
intrigue. No, "An Ideal Husband" isn't a depiction of recent turmoil in
our nation's capital - though the title would take on an ironic new
meaning were that the case. Instead, it's a handsome adaptation of the
beloved Oscar Wilde play, and the story, with all of its aforementioned
scandalous components, couldn't render it timelier. Or funnier: Wilde's
penchant for epigrams and one-liners remains despite some necessary
cinematic tinkering on the part of director/writer Oliver Parker.
Parker, who helmed the fiery Laurence Fishburne "Othello" a few years
back, takes liberties here just like he did there. His "Othello" lopped
off about half of the source text and modified the rest in favor of mass
audience appeal, but Wilde purists will be happy to know that no such
sacrilegious bombshells are dropped with "Husband." The biggest changes
involve expanding beyond the original's mere four scenes in terms of
action and setting, modifications which serve its cinematic status while
staying faithful to the genius of Wilde. A series of potentially stuffy
high-society gatherings, both public and personal, are now broken up
with sequences in lush countrysides and conservatories.
Complain about this restructuring if you must, but please speak fondly
of the cast. "An Ideal Husband" lays claim to an A-list of performers in
its featured quintet of roles, and each has delicious things to do and
say - especially Rupert Everett. Somehow snubbed by the Academy for his
savory supporting turn in 1997's "My Best Friend's Wedding," Everett
could see Oscar rebound for his delightfully droll turn as Sir Arthur
Goring, an idle bachelor with little on his to-do list and even less to
say. "I love talking about nothing," he deadpans on the subject of
upper-crust chit-chat in a typically wry bit of Wilde wit. "It's the
only thing I know anything about."
Well, there'll be plenty to discuss soon enough. Devilish debutante Miss
Cheveley (Julianne Moore), Goring's ex-fiancee, surfaces in his
late-1800s London province to discuss marriage while secretly
blackmailing Sir Robert Chiltern (class act Jeremy Northam, making his
dilemma palpable), Goring's best friend and an up-and-coming figure in
parliament, with a skeleton long buried in his closet. Chiltern's loyal
wife (Cate Blanchett) and siren sister (Minnie Driver, never better)
also poke their way into this tremendously tangled character-woven web;
the former finds herself at a crossroads after learning her hubby's
secret, the latter rivals Miss Cheveley for Goring's affections.
"An Ideal Husband" probably sounds more complex than it is. Though
classics aren't usually associated with accessibility, Parker, taking a
cue from his "Othello" work, keeps his multi-layered people and plots
remarkably straight - even when motivation gets a little murky and
certain strands don't quite hit the highs of others. But since this is
mostly an actors' movie, those flaws seem more minute than they already
are. Aside from Everett's show-stealing, there's Aussie Blanchett again
proving chameleonic range after her robust ruler in "Elizabeth" and
Joisey gal in "Pushing Tin" and American Moore flaunting a Gwyneth-class
Brit accent, her devilish mouth curling around every suggestive word.
With Jane Austen's library-to-screen craze gone but not forgotten and
the Bard nearing the end of his "Shakespeare in Love"-induced hot
streak, "Husband"'s sparkling, irresistible and gentle comedy of manners
could be just the art-house draw to give Wilde his due in the mainstream
spotlight. It's not likely that this forecast will need much luck: In a
summer full of lightsabers, mojo and glossy star vehicles, the film
already ranks as a smallish but rewarding breath of fresh air. Throw in
special effects that are 100 percent human, and "An Ideal Husband" makes
for a movie bet that's beyond ideal.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"Here it is at last, the first 150-minute trailer. 'Armageddon' is cut
together like its own highlights. Take almost any 30 seconds at random,
and you'd have a TV ad. The movie is an assault on the eyes, the ears,
the brain, common sense and the human desire to be entertained. No
matter what they're charging to get in, it's worth more to get out."
-Roger Ebert on "Armageddon"

Author
Steve Rhodes
"To love one's self is the beginning of a lifelong romance," Lord Arthur
Goring tells his butler (Peter Vaughan) in AN IDEAL HUSBAND.  Arthur is
played in a dazzling performance by Rupert Everett from MY BEST FRIEND'S
WEDDING.
"Do you always understand what you say?" Arthur's father (John Wood)
asks Arthur later in the story.  "If I listen attentively," he replies.
Writer and director Oliver Parker's richly sardonic AN IDEAL HUSBAND is
a brilliant and biting adaptation of the classic Oscar Wilde play.
Thoroughly entertaining, the film moves from one scene of deliciously
subtle humor to another.  When you're not laughing out loud, you'll be
grinning from ear to ear.
When we meet Arthur, he is starting another hard day in the life of the
rich and famous.  Having his breakfast in bed, he complains of the
pressures before him.  "Busy day today," he tells his butler.
"Distressing little time for sloth or idleness."  Oscar Wilde is a
master of self-deprecating humor and saying what everyone thinks but
wouldn't dare say.
This comedy of manners and misadventures has been adapted before.  In
1969, the BBC, for example, did a fine production starring Jeremy Brett
and Susan Hampshire.  Yet, none of the previous attempts had an ensemble
cast like this one, which is filled with many big name actors and
previous Oscar nominees.
Jeremy Northam, so brilliant in THE WINSLOW BOY, plays Sir Robert
Chiltern, the character in the center of the story's storm.  It seems
that this wealthy Member of Parliament may have obtained his initial
financial nest egg through less than honest means, or so thinks Mrs.
Laura Cheveley, who tries to blackmail him.  As the wonderfully wicked
Mrs. Cheveley, Julianne Moore (BOOGIE NIGHTS) shows evil in every curl
of her devilishly disarming smile.
ELIZABETH's Cate Blanchett plays Lady Gertrud Chiltern, Sir Robert's
naively loyal wife.  Whenever she and Robert's friend Arthur are in
close proximity, small sparks are detectable from a previous, smoldering
relationship of theirs.  Arthur, the film's playboy, was once engaged to
Mrs. Cheveley, albeit only for three weeks.
To complete this complicated love pentagon, GOOD WILL HUNTING's Minnie
Driver plays Robert's sister, Mabel, who also has eyes for Robert, and
vice versa.  Driver demonstrates considerable talent in the movie as the
master of the reaction shot.  When other characters deliver some of
their best lines, she ends up stealing the scene with her facial
responses.
The picture's look is a joy to behold.  The sumptuous mansions are
filmed in the lush tones of dark English oak paneling.  The men, who
dress in tails with cream-colored vests and ties and tall black, top
hats, manage to outshine the women in their finery.
"Morality is simply the attitude that we adopt to those whom we
dislike," Arthur lectures Gertrud.  The entire movie is peppered with
such aphorisms, which puts the audience through a delightful cycle of
laughing, thinking, and then laughing again. AN IDEAL HUSBAND is a treat
for the heart, the mind and the funny bone.
AN IDEAL HUSBAND runs a fast 1:36. It is rated PG-13 for brief
sensuality and distant nudity. Although there isn't anything to offend
anyone, a child would probably have to be at least 11 to be interested.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
First, writer/director Oliver Parker (Othello) hacked his way through
Shakespeare.  Now he's back, fumbling through another revered old dead
white guy, Oscar Wilde.  The film is well-cast and wonderfully acted,
but never really generates much too much excitement.
Based on Wilde's stage play, the film is set in late 1890s England and
focuses on Lord Arthur Goring (Rupert Everett, My Best Friend's
Wedding).  Goring is a wealthy bachelor, in love with himself much more
than any of his female conquests.  His world is shaken up a bit when
Laura Cheveley (Julianne Moore, Cookie's Fortune) comes to town and
throws a wrench into the tightly knit upper crust of London.
Cheveley's visitation coincides with the important vote on an Argentine
canal scheme.  Her goal is to blackmail key swing vote Sir Robert
Chiltern (Jeremy Northam, The Winslow Boy) and protect her sizeable
investment.  Although Chiltern is now happily married to Lady Gertrud
(Cate Blanchett, Elizabeth), his past indiscretions are known to
Cheveley and have him on the ropes.
Chiltern also has a sister named Mabel (Minnie Driver, Good Will
Hunting) that has been chasing after Goring for years.  Only a fool
couldn't see that these two would hook up by the end of the film.  Their
coupling is temporarily delayed by Cheveley's Cheshire-cat smile and
evil extortion plans, which are strangely wrapped up in about 60 minutes
when she disappears, tail between her legs.  The film then takes another
30 minutes to sew up all of the loose ends.  This is far too long an
ending for a film this short and is surely the sign of a troubled
filming and editing room cover-up.
Thankfully it is this short.  Goring's lecherous,
almost-under-his-breath ramblings grow tiresome after Cheveley's
departure, but his bickering with Papa Goring does get better as the
film progresses.  Northam's Chiltern is a slightly whipped (read:
married) version of his superior performance as Robert Morton in The
Winslow Boy.  Husband looks great due to the production and costume
design that brought us Emma and The Governess, and was lushly lensed by
David Johnson (Hilary & Jackie).  (1:36  PG for adult situations)

Author
Murali Krishnan
The title of this film initially appears to refer to Sir Robert
Chiltern (Jeremy Northam), who is a respected member of Parliament. He
is popular and has a bright future, apparantly on the fast track to
higher offices. He is married to the equally respected and upright
Lady Gertrud Chiltern (Cate Blanchett). Sir Chiltern is put in a bind
when the coniving Mrs. Laura Cheveley (Julianne Moore) appears on the
scene. She has uncovered evidence of a past indiscretion by Chiltern,
and threatens to expose it if he does not support a dubious piece of
legislation in which she has a vested interested. He had already taken
a position against it, thinking it a scam, but now he must choose
between saving his reputation and career, or acting in his country's
best interest.
The common link to these three characters is the primary character,
Lord Arthur Goring (Rupert Everett). He is a close friend of both the
Chilterns, and was once engaged to Mrs. Cheveley, and because of the
entangled relationships, he is drawn in to the blackmail scheme. Added
to all this is Sir Chiltern's sister, Mabel (Minnie Driver), who has
been turning down a regular series of marriage proposals because she
desires Lord Goring. Goring is by far the most entertaining character.
He is an avowed bachelor, much to the consternation of his father, the
stuffy Earl of Caversham (John Wood). Goring epitomizes the
self-absorbed bachelor, taking nothing besides himself seriously. He
is utterly vain and dismissive of those things he does not care for.
Like a typical story by Oscar Wilde, this one has plenty of wry
dialog. The humor is derived from mistaken identities and crossed
communication. The situational variety of comedy is initially amusing,
but becomes annoying when it is overused in the climax. However, the
dialog never becomes tiresome, with all the best lines delivered by
Lord Goring.
Recommended. Although the story lacks depth, it is entertaining. The
characters' wrestling with morality and ethics is mostly
uninteresting, but the story is redeemed by its humor. The situation
comedy eventually becomes tedious, but the verbal fencing is
continuosly delightful and engaging.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films/Icon Productions
 Director:  Oliver Parker
 Writer:  Oliver Parker, based on Oscar Wilde's play
 Cast: Rupert Everett, Julianne Moore, Jeremy Northam, Cate
Blanchett, Minnie Driver, John Wood, Lindsay Duncan, Peter
Vaughan, Jeroen Krabbe, Benjamin Pullen, Michael Culkin,
Marsha Fitzalan
    We shouldn't be at all surprised that "An Ideal Husband," a
frothy and witty play with melodramatic undertones written in
1895, could almost take place in our own time.  Oh, the
clothing is certainly different now.  Women nowadays who
want to be taken seriously wear somber colors to work,
leaving the excessive jewelry and brightly-colored clothes to
those not on the fast track, while the raiment was quite the
opposite in 1895.  And men looking for executive posts now
shoulder cell phones and dark grey suits while the upper
classes at the turn of the nineteenth century dressed like
penguins.  But though the apparel ofts proclaims the man, dig
beneath the surface and you'll find the same emotions driving
us vulnerable human beings: greed, envy, lust, and a desire
for power over others.  In his play, Oscar Wilde takes pokes
at the mores of the haute societe but his thrusts are so muted, so
tempered by his gentility and frolicsome repartee, that you
sense that Wilde was enamored of England's betters.  As for
his society's structure, he probably wouldn't have it any other
way.  
   In fact in "An Ideal Husband"--as in Wilde's comic
masterwork, "The Importance of Being Earnest"--you'd
scarcely know that a commercial class and (horrors) a
division of unwashed even existed in England.  We meet
only lords and ladies even in Oliver Parker's filmed version,
which greatly opens the stage play and in fact improves the
show. Where a theater director can best succeed by
punctuating its sophisticated language with its paradoxes,
ironies and all-around wit, director Parker--known for his
glowing command at the helm of "Othello"--makes us privy to
all the exquisitely decorated rooms in the homes of these
aristocrats and the lavish grounds trod by elegant stallions
whose grandeur would pass forever with the invention of the
automobile.
   Where you might expect a satirical work to linger upon the
imperfections of the gentry, "An Ideal Husband" turns this
convention of the genre on its head.  Wilde wants us to
realize that we human beings are just that--human and
flawed--and that any effort to place us upon pedestals could
lead to calamity.  Incorporating most of the bon mots of
the four-act play, Parker--who penned the screenplay as well-
- pares away one major incident involving the theft of a
brooch.  He adds some depth, however, to the youngest
character of the story, focusing on a husband who is
ultimately ideal only because both he and his wife can forgive
and come to terms with an indiscretion.  
   The action is launched when the beautiful but icy Mrs.
Laura Cheveley (Julianne Moore), once engaged to the idler-
playboy Lord Arthur Goring (Rupert Everett), approaches Sir
Robert Chilton (Jeremy Northam) at a fashionable London
party of politicians and diplomats.  She wants Chilton, an
influential member of parliament, to give a speech in support
of an Argentine canal in which she has a financial interest. 
Though Chilton knows the canal to be a swindle, he is
brought up sharply by Mrs. Cheveley's threat: if he refuses to
back the canal, Cheveley will take an incriminating letter to
the press which will prove that Chiltern got his wealth 
through an illegal stock scheme some years earlier.  When
Lord Goring advises Sir Robert to confess his lapse of
judgment to his wife, Lady Gertrude Chiltern (Cate Blanchett),
Chiltern refuses lest his wife--who has kept Chiltern on a
pedestal--leave him.  In a later complication with elements of
farce, Lady Chiltern is herself compromised by a suggestive
letter she has written to Lord Goring.
   Much of the fun of this successful movie adaptation comes
from the character of Lord Goring, who at the age of 36
remains a womanizer fearful of committing himself to
marriage. In that role Rupert Everett--perfect as a gay man,
George, in P.J. Hogan's "My Best Friend's Wedding" but
miscast as Oberon in the recent "A MidsummerNight's Dream"--
comes back into his own.  He is splendid as a sometimes befuddled 
but usually astute man-about-town pressured to get married by his 
bemused father (John Wood) and by Chiltern's young sister, Mabel 
(Minnie Driver).  Driver and Everett function in a subplot as comic mimics 
to the more weighty relationship between Northam and Blanchett,
while the fifth person in this quincunx of quidnuncs, Mrs. Cheveley, plays 
the others off against one another while scarcely revealing her own
emotional vulnerabilities.
   The dialogue is anything but flat, virtually every line both
driving the plot forward and functioning as a key to the
playwright's sense of irony.  Like people today, the horsey set
in fin de siecle England often communicated cautiously,
indirectly, and even falsely, as when Cheveley treacherously
assures Goring, "I hate to stand between a man and his
past."  When in a flashback Baron Arnheim (Jeroen Krabbe)
counsels his then-secretary Chiltern that "information can
make you powerful," you'll think immediately of mischievous
stockbrokers today like Michael Milken, who served a term in
jail for feloniously using inside information to make millions 
   You come away from this movie with a more forgiving
attitude toward your fellow human beings, at least until you
are hurt by tomorrow's treacheries.  Only extremist groups
will be disgusted by Wildean notions of grace and mercy. 
After all, perhaps Cheveley is not so far off the mark in
pronouncing morality as nothing more than "what we adopt
toward people we dislike."  "An Ideal Husband" has an ideal
balance of wit, farce, and melodrama, crisply edited to keep
the action flowing cinematically from manor to estate, from
parliament to the lavish grounds traversed by London society. 

Author
Greg King
AN IDEAL HUSBAND (PG).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Oliver Parker
Stars: Cate Blanchett, Minnie Driver, Rupert Everett, Julianne Moore, 
Jeremy Northam, John Wood, Peter Vaughan, Lindsay Duncan, Jeroen Krebbe,
Michael Culkin
Running time: 97 minutes.
Oscar Wilde's sophisticated wit, genial bon mots and acerbic
one liners shine in Oliver Parker's solid, if somewhat uninspired
screen adaptation of his play An Ideal Husband.  Parker seems more
comfortable with the demands of adapting Wilde's quaintly old
fashioned, Victorian-era drawing room comedy than he did with his
recent version of Shakespeare's Othello (featuring Kenneth Branagh and
Laurence Fishburne).
An Ideal Husband is faithful to Wilde's play and still retains
whiffs of its theatrical origins, but Parker beautifully enervates the
script and the drama.  He has also assembled a solid international
cast, who relish the witty dialogue and deftly bring the urbane
characters to life.
The central plot centres around a scheme to blackmail upright
and rising politician Sir Robert Chiltern (Jeremy Northam, from The
Winslow Boy, etc) into offering his support to a dubious enterprise
during a speech in Parliament.  The scheming Mrs Cheveley (Julianne
Moore) knows the secret behind Sir Robert's wealth and threatens to
expose him if he refuses to co-operate.  Sir Robert is more concerned
about the effect the revelation will have on his devoted but morally
principled wife Gertrude (Aussie actress Cate Blanchett, recently seen
in Pushing Tin.)  In desperation, Sir Robert turns to his friend Lord
Goring (Rupert Everett) for help.  Despite his wealth, Lord Goring is
an idle bachelor who enjoys shirking any sense of responsibility
whatsoever, much to the disgust of his father (John Wood).
All sorts of questions concerning morality, duty, and
responsibilities are raised.  There are plenty of comic mishaps and
misunderstandings along the way before everything is happily resolved.
Everett is beautifully cast as Wilde's witty and debonair alter ego
here, and his suave and sure way with the clever one liners ensures
that the film comes alive whenever he is on screen.  Northam seems
quite comfortable in effete period pieces, and delivers a solid
performance as the troubled Chiltern.  Blanchett delivers a nicely
restrained and understated performance as Chiltern's loyal wife, but
is easily outclassed by Moore's manipulative and scheming Mrs
Cheveley.  Again proving that she is the best American actress doing
British pictures these days, Minnie Driver is superb as Mabel,
Chiltern's flighty younger sister who has a crush on Lord Goring.
The settings and production design are quite exquisite and
lavish, and add to the overall warm atmosphere that pervades the film.
An Ideal Husband is not spectacular as a piece of cinema, but it is
witty and entertaining enough to satisfy audiences.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I was dragged to go see this film by my better half. I do not enjoy
time-period pieces. I am not a particular fan of Minnie Driver or her acute
jawline. British films generally do not "light my fire". Having said all of
that, I quite enjoyed this film, its actors, its setting and Minnie Driver
and her goofy head.
PLOT:
The time is 1895, and society is run on extremely high morals. Men rule the
country and women, well, women want to marry the "perfect" men. One
particular "ideal husband" suddenly finds his career as a politician and
loving marriage in complete jeopardy, when an indiscretion from his past is
set to blackmail by a woman, in exchange for a political favor. His good
friend, who at 36 has yet to encounter a need to get married, attempts to
help him out.
CRITIQUE:
Charming, delightful, comical at times, interesting at others, this film is
drenched in beautiful settings and costumes, witty dialogue, and a great
cast of actors in their top form. The plot itself is not very thick, and
does seem to finish just a little before its time, but for some very strange
reason, kept me interested, kept me listening, and kept me watching. My best
guess is that the solid performances from Julianne Moore and Rupert Everett
were at the crux of my enjoyment, as well as the rest of the consistently
entertaining cast, the moral intricacies of their day, and the well-styled
direction coming from the man behind the film, Oliver Parker. Double-props
go out to him from me, most particularly since I am generally bored stupid
during these kinds of movies, so "good show, young man!". Now while I did
enjoy watching the characters in the film jostle at the slightest
impropriety or lie told by a person, I could not help but notice the lack of
appreciation that today's society had towards any of their "simple" moral
boners.
I guess we have all gotten so used to the immoralities running rampant today
(The President of the United States was getting headjobs under his desk from
an intern, for God's sakes!), that the outrage supplied by the characters in
the film feel quite exaggerated. Then again, perhaps it is time for us to
begin revising our own moral agendas of the day. Then again, perhaps it is
time for me to loosen up and get back to my review of this film, instead of
rambling on about stuff that is of no consequence to this critique, per se.
Arrrumphh.....now where was I? Ah yes, despite my original misconception,
there is no gay content in this film, despite its lead actor being an openly
gay man, and the story being based on an Oscar Wilde play, another gay man.
Now there's another remark that has absolutely nothing to do with my review,
just a fact that I thought might help another sap like me, who would go in
thinking the same. Overall, a harmless little ditty is this film, with some
great performances from all involved, most particularly Julianne Moore as
the Queen Beeyatch, and Rupert Everett as the ultimate slacker bachelor.
It's funny, it's serious, there's romance, there are twists and turns, and
all in all, it is quite pleasant to look at. Fun English times.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Minnie Driver's real name is Amelia Driver. She has dated everyone from John
Cusack to Matt Damon to Josh Brolin to the drummer from the "Foo Fighters".
Up to this point, she's only been humiliatingly dumped in public by Matt
Damon. She stands 5'10".
Rupert Everett turned down the Daniel Day-Lewis role in A ROOM WITH A VIEW.
Juliane Moore's real name is Julie Anne Smith. Her father was a judge in the
Army's Judge Advocate General Corps and her mother was a psychiatric social
worker. She stands 5'5", and was born in Fayetteville, North Carolina.
Actor Jeremy Northam's first American film was the forgettable NET (5/10)
with Sandra Bullock. He was born in Cambridge, England.
Oscar Wilde's full name was Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills Wilde. This play,
AN IDEAL HUSBAND, was also produced as a TV movie in 1969 starring Jeremy
Brett (Not sure if he was gay or not :).
Director Oliver Parker's first and only other film was 1995's OTHELLO with
Larry Fishburne.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

AN IDEAL HUSBAND (director/writer: Oliver Parker; screenwriter: Oliver
Parker/based on the play by Oscar Wilde; cinematographer: David Johnson;
cast: Rupert Everett (Lord Arthur Goring), Julianne Moore (Mrs. Laura
Cheveley), Jeremy Northam (Sir Robert Chiltern), Cate Blanchett (Lady
Gertrude Chiltern), Minnie Driver (Mabel Chiltern), John Wood (Earl of
Caversham), Lindsay Duncan (Lady Markby), Peter Vaughan (Phipps),
Michael Culkin (Oscar Wilde), 1999-UK)
I felt like I was being one-lined to a loving death in this elegant
Oscar Wilde comedy/drama costume play turned movie, and I must confess,
I enjoyed every bit of the intelligence and the wit and the frivality of
it, as this tremendous ensemble cast fired away with a continuous volley
of epigrams. It is a modern play, even though it is one that was written
in the last century for an audience that was more or less reflective of
the characters portrayed on stage. For the elite audience that attended
the play, Oscar Wilde, after mocking the English nobility would, at
least, leave them with a thinly disguised compliment, by telling them no
one can be ideal. The film was put to screen by the manipulative
wizardry of Miramax (Shakespeare in Love, The Wings of the Dove), who
know from the success of some of their recent films quite well how to
popularize an already popular literary work by broadening its emotional
appeal. They gave the audiences what they wanted, a film that has a
romantic heart in it and is not just hilariously flippant, and they
should be commended for improving an imperfect but successful play. It
rarely happens when a commercial venture turns out to critically improve
a work of so called "art," so when it does happen, it should be shouted
from the highest mountain peaks.
Even before the film grandly opens at the party of the ideal husband Sir
Robert Chiltern (Jeremy Northam) and his loving Victorian wife, the
beautiful and the suffragette-minded Lady Gertrude Chiltern (Cate
Blanchett), we will meet all the main players and be introduced to some
of their mannerisms. Then we tune into the real hero of the movie, the
one whom I found it easiest to relate to, the slothful and cynical true
voice of Oscar Wilde for the film, the rakish Lord Goring (Rupert
Everett), who tells his loyal servant Phipps (Peter Vaughan) "To love
oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance." And while he is being
delivered his morning paper, a naked woman is in his bed. He will then
read aloud an item in the paper about the upcoming party, followed by
the title on screen "1895--The London Season, where people are looking
for husbands...or hiding from them." This now takes us seamlessly into
the park, where the shrewd Mrs. Laura Cheveley (Julianne Moore) is in a
carriage with the haughty Lady Markby (Lindsay Duncan) as they come upon
Gertrude, and we immediately see that there is some friction between
Laura and Gertrude, and that Lady Markby feels proud that she can
arrange for her visiting friend from Vienna to be invited to the party
she so badly wanted to attend.
Immediately, at the party, the idyllic love bubble of the Chilterns is
burst by the treacherous Mrs. Cheveley (the former lover of Lord
Goring), who meets with the righteously honest politician on the rise,
Sir Robert, in order to blackmail him into supporting an Argentinean
canal scheme she has invested a great deal of her money in. Sir Robert
has already said in Parliament that he regards that scheme as a
"swindle." She  threatens to reveal a letter he wrote her 18 years ago
that gave inside info on the Suez Canal to an Austrian baron before the
government announced its intentions. Sir Robert, if he doesn't change
his opinion, risks losing his wife if the letter is given to the press
and risks losing his credibility with the public if he supports the
canal. His best friend, Lord Goring, acts as the liaison, trying to
prevent the Chilterns from breaking up. He is also having an innocently
romantic relationship with Sir Robert's sister, Lady Mabel (Minnie
Driver).
Everything is thoroughly enjoyable and agreeable about this wonderfully
delightful work of subtle wit and brilliant dialogue. Rupert Everett
stands out as a sheer delight in a cast that is almost perfect (Julianne
Moore could have been a tad more sinister). Everett's role is one that
he relishes in, as he says of himself, "I love talking about nothing,
it's the only thing I know anything about." Minnie Driver is simply
bubbling over with charm and wit to match his. Their flirtations are one
of dueling wits, with amusing lunges and enough double-entendres to get
through any intellectual armor worn.  It is film laced with political
blackmail, an incriminating letter, mix-up in identities, questions
about friendship and loyalty, money as a means to an end, sex as a
weapon for marriage, the machinations of politics scorned at, a
potential tabloid scandal in the horizon and sanctimonious characters
fighting to avoid being toppled. Even the minor players were perfectly
cast, magnified by the performance of John Wood as Earl of Caversham,
Lord Goring's stuffy father, who is always lecturing him and trying to
get him married.
There are so many witty phrases to revel in, but my favorite one is when
Lord Goring says, "Morality is only for those you don't like."
Writer/director Oliver Parker (Othello) has created a lighthearted film
for all audiences who love the spoken word as if it were a treasure and
who find the intrigues of high society to be invigorating.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jonathan Richards
     Marvelous actors wearing beautiful clothes and speaking the
exquisite dialogue of Oscar Wilde; this may not be a recipe for
perfection, but it's as welcome as a cool lemon squash on a sultry
afternoon.
Oscar Wilde's laconic, intricately-plotted drawing room farce
lifts the garment of faultlessness we demand our lovers and leaders
wear, and tickles the feet of clay that lie exposed.  Set on the eve
of the century we're about to shed, it reminds us that scandal in high
places is timeless ("Scandals used to lend charm and interest to a
man; nowadays, they crush him"), and we'd do well to evaluate things
on balance, not in absolutes.  Sir Robert Chiltern (Jeremy Northam of
"The Winslow Boy") is a rising politician, adored by his wife Gertrud
(Cate Blanchett) and noticed by the Prime Minister.  Into this
paradise comes a lovely serpent, Mrs. Chevely (Julianne Moore), who
has possession of an incriminating letter written years earlier by
Chiltern -- a letter which would reveal the one dishonorable blemish
on his spotless public record.  In return for his support in
Parliament of a dubious Argentine canal project in which she has a
financial interest, she will return the letter.
Observing all this, at the story's center, is Lord Arthur Goring
(Rupert Everett).  Goring is Wilde's alter ego, and as such gets most
of the best lines, from the moment he opens his eyes and grumbles that
it will be a busy day "with distressingly little time for either sloth
or idleness" through such classic observations as "To love oneself is
the beginning of a lifelong romance."  Everett, who is fast becoming
one of the screen's most irresistible presences, sails through this
production with the aplomb of a yacht.  With his sleek good looks, and
his inexaustible range of nuance, he is An Ideal Wilde, and a man for
whom the great Oscar would happily have thrown over his beloved Bosie.
Everett's Oscar could well rate an Oscar.
Oliver Parker, who misfired on Shakespeare's "Othello", has done
much better by this giant of English letters.  Despite a few liberties
of which the master might or might not have approved -- tweakings of
story, and the discreet flash of breast and buttock -- he's managed a
thoroughly enjoyable and generally faithful work of Wildeana.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Oliver Parker.
Cast: Rupert Everett, Jeremy Northam, Julianne Moore, Cate Blanchett, Minnie 
Driver, John Wood, Jeroen Krabbe, Lindsay Duncan, Peter Vaughan.
1999 - 97 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for mild sexual situations).
Reviewed July 6, 1999. 
Period movies set south of 1940 rarely ever interest me. Most of them seem 
very similar, with lots of fancy costumes and characters who always say one 
thing but mean another, or don't even say something to begin with. Some 
certainly work (Martin Scorcese's ravishing 1993 drama, "The Age of 
Innocence" and 1998's Best Picture Oscar winner, "Shakespeare in Love"), but 
most of them end with me more often than not saying to myself, "so what?"
Leave it up to director Oliver Parker's "An Ideal Husband," based loosely on 
famed 19th-century writer Oscar Wilde's play, to prove that all a period film 
needs to jump vibrantly to life is a remarkable cast. This picture sure has 
lucked out with this group of actors, who make up one of the most flawless 
and talented ensembles I've seen at the movies in a long time. Luckily, the 
screenplay, adapted by Parker, has also translated Wilde's token charm and 
wit to the screen successfully, even if the particulars of the story have 
been slightly altered.
Set in England, circa the 1890's, the prominently wealthy politician (Jeremy 
Northam) is paid an unwelcome visit by Lady Cheveley (Julianne Moore), 
visiting for a week from Vienna, who reveals that she has obtained a letter 
that reveals the untruthful way in which he got his large sum of money: he 
once passed on key information to a German count concerning the Suez Canal. 
Not only would this info, if it were to get out, destroy Sir Robert, but it 
would also devastate his lovely wife, Lady Chiltern (Cate Blanchett), who 
believes she is married to a completely honest man. An ultimatum is given by 
Lady Cheveley, however: if he will endorse a highly controversial upcoming 
waterway project in Argentina, she will give him back the letter. Coming to 
his aid is Sir Robert's best friend, Lord Goring (Rupert Everett), a 
self-involved, but alluring 36-year-old man whom has an admirer in Robert's 
younger sister, Mabel (Minnie Driver), and who, secretly, was once engaged to 
the scheming Lady Cheveley. 
The complicated premise of "An Ideal Husband" might have been needlessly 
daunting for such a lightweight comedy, but somehow it never once becomes 
confusing, as we instantly are absorbed into this group of characters' lives 
and relationships. And every character, by the way, is genuinely fascinating 
and likable, even the "bad girl" of the piece, Lady Cheveley. At first 
playing as simply the catalyst that spins the plot into motion, Cheveley 
could have easily become the stock villain in the film, but is eventually 
revealed to possibly have a warmer heart than we first may have anticipated. 
The always-radiant Julianne Moore doesn't miss even the most subtle nuance 
throughout, obviously having a lot of fun with her character. Moore certainly 
had a difficult task of turning Lady Cheveley into someone who wasn't wholly 
despicable, but amazingly, she never is. 
The main character in the film, Lord Goring, who seemingly doesn't have much 
to do with the predicament at hand but somehow becomes more deeply embroiled 
in the conflict than anyone else, is played to the classy, eloquent hilt by 
Rupert Everett, a wonderful talent who deserves more richly textured roles 
like the one he has in this film. Playfully showing off his own infatuation 
for himself, Goring says in the scene in which we first meet him, "To love 
oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance." Even when Goring is saying 
such conceited things, none of the characters can do anything but be swept 
off their feet by him, even though that never is his true intention.
After her Oscar-nominated role in 1998's Elizabeth" (which was the only 
saving grace of that mediocre film) and her truly diverse turn in last 
spring's "Pushing Tin," Cate Blanchett is quickly becoming one of our 
biggest, freshest talents. Her Lady Chiltern clearly cares for her husband 
(also well-played by Northam), but sometimes evidence comes before us that 
questions just what she loves about him. Does she really love the real him, 
or is she enamored more by the thought of his perfect innocence and idealism? 
Aside from the hidden complexities of her character, Blanchett also is given 
ample chance to show offer her comic talents, and is particularly funny, 
especially in a late scene in which she herself must hide something from her 
husband.
Finally, Minnie Driver is glorious as usual, looking more like Minnie Mouse 
than usual. This isn't an insult, believe me, but merely an observation of 
her unique, but certain, beauty. Driver, at first, is asked to do nothing 
more than give admiring glances toward Lord Goring, but instantly comes into 
her own despite this, and is especially given more substantial things to do 
in the last half-hour.
Entertaining is the perfect adjective to describe "An Ideal Husband." Since 
the story and, subsequently, the winning screenplay are cleverly designed and 
written, and the actors demonstrate such a delight in their respective 
performances, the film breaks out of the usual mold of "period movies" to 
become a picture that, more or less, could be set in any decade of any 
century. Aside from there being at least two or three false endings too many 
that left me getting ready to see the end credits only to have another plot 
development form, "An Ideal Husband" is an absolute joy from start to finish. 
In a summer filled with many flashier, bigger, and more brainless films, this 
is one to seek out.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Joy Wyse
Oscar Wilde must have had fun manipulating all the lovers in his original
story on which An Ideal Husband is based.  This is one of those plots that
you usually associate with the French.  But, it is charming and well worth
seeing.
Rupert Everett portrays Lord Arthur Goring, an eligible bachelor
unwilling to settle down to marriage, much to the chagrin of his father.
When Lord Goring comes to the rescue of his good friend, Sir Robert
Chiltern (Northam) the action takes on the ins and outs of a farce.   Mrs.
Laura Chevely (Moore) a former female `friend' of Lord Goring has suddenly
come back into his life.  He is concerned that his loving wife, Lady
Gertrud Chiltern (Blanchett) will discover his indiscretions and he
prevails upon Lord Goring to go along with the attempt to prevent such an
occurrence.   One narrow escape follows another as characters try to
disguise their identities.  
Mable Chiltern (Driver), Sir Robert's sister, is infatuated with Lord
Goring, as are most of the other women in his life, including Lady
Gertrud.  Her presence adds greatly to the fiasco.
Period movies such as this are a delight so watch if only to see the sets,
the costumes, and the lifestyle of the era.  It looks like it would be a
wonderful way to live, until you realize how difficult it would be to
sustain such a way of doing things, not to mention the discomfort of
wearing those constricting clothes.
An Ideal Husband is not a great film, but it is enjoyable and fun.   I'll
probably watch it again when it comes on to free TV.  It deserves a solid
B.

Author
Eugene Novikov
"To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance."
Starring Rupert Everett, Julianne Moore, Jeremy Northam, Cate Blanchett,
Minnie Driver Rated PG-13.
Although Rupert Everett has been acting since the early 80's, he crawled
out of the woodwork just in 1997 with his shoulda-been-Oscar-nominated
turn as Julia Roberts' gay editor in My Best Friend's Wedding. Now, he's
finally gotten his long-deserved leading role in An Ideal Husband,
director Oliver Parker's light n' fluffy adaptation of Oscar Wilde's
play. It's a delightfully good romantic comedy about love, intrigue,
blackmail and of course marriage.
Jeremy Northam, last seen in David Mamet's brilliant The Winslow Boy
(also a period piece) stars as Lord Robert Chiltern, a respected and
wealthy politician whose public life is threatened when he is
blackmailed by an old acquaintance. Chiltern has been preparing a report
to the parliament regarding a certain canal project, and it was his
every intention to condemn it. However, Mrs. Laura Chevely has quite a
tidy sum invested in the project and she threatens to reveal the corrupt
way Chiltern attained his wealth (and has a document to prove it) unless
he speaks favorably of the project.
Lord Arthur Gorring (Everett, the star of the show) is a thirty-six year
old bachelor (unthinkable in the late 19th century) who speaks in
aphorisms and is fond of gems such as "I love to talk about nothing.
It's the only thing I know anything about." He is also Chiltern's good
friend and after Chiltern confides in him, he wants to help. When
Chiltern tells his wife (Cate Blanchett) the truth about his riches she
demands that he leave immediately. Everett then sets up a way for the
husband and wife to get back together: he plans to have both of them in
his house in rooms directly next to each other with neither of them
knowing where the other is. He then plans to talk to Chiltern and have
him say that he regrets what he has done and is deeply apologetic for it
so that his wife can hear it from the next room. The plan backfires when
Gorring's butler mixes up Chevely and Chiltern's wife, sending the
latter away while putting Chevely in the next room, forcing Chiltern to
think that Gorring and Chevely are having an affair.
An Ideal Husband is an entertaining, light-as-a-feather production, as
funny as it is affecting. There is a wicked, knowing charm emanating
from the star-studded cast. Sometimes Parker's movie seems like a
showcase for these actors and actresses, but I didn't mind. If stars can
act well in a film with the intention of exhibiting their talents, then
more power to them.
Indeed, this peculiar comedy owes much to its gloriously gifted roster
of performers. Rupert Everett again deserves Oscar attention; he is
absolutely delightful as London's most eligible bachelor, sly and suave
yet sympathetic at the same time. Jeremy Northam is just as good: even
though he doesn't get too many comedic scenes, his performance is quite
impressive. The roles given to Minnie Driver and Cate Blanchett aren't
particularly showy, but both of them being fantastic actresses, they
make the best of it. But the real gem is Julianne Moore as the sneaky
blackmailer. Enigmatic and often hilarious, an Oscar nomination is in
order for her turn here.
The thematic significance of An Ideal Husband is not constantly apparent
nor is it important to enjoy this picture. I liked it because of its
charm, because of its comedy and because of its performances and
wouldn't dream of complaining about lack of particularly deep substance.
The film has more than enough wit to make up for any such deficiency.
This isn't as good as films come, but it's a welcome antidote to a
summer of mediocre big-budget timewasters. This won't be a doorbuster,
but that's too bad because it has more laughs than Big Daddy and Wild
Wild West combined. Typical Hollywood irony at hand.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
