Title
Review for Sunshine (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Ralph Fiennes finely acting in yet another epic . . .
An epic tale of five generations of (what begins as) a Jewish family in
the heart of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, writer/director Istvan Szabo's
Sunshine allows star Ralph Fiennes to flex his acting muscles as he
plays three separate roles as a hundred years of time rolls endlessly
across the big screen. With its three hour running time, two thoughts
may flow through your heads...
1) if it's so good, why isn't it being held until November?, and
2) if the air conditioner is broken, three hours in a cool theater is
better than a hundred and twelve degrees in the shade . . .
Both thoughts are legit and both make it sound as if Sunshine is an
utter bomb, which it is not. It is, actually, a splendidly acted and
dazzling-to-watch two hours of film, recreating a world that hasn't
existed in almost a century. The problem is that this two hour wonder is
followed by a third, which essentially kills all the fun. But, says the
film student inside, historical epics aren't supposed to be fun!, to
which I reply that I would rather be left wanting to see more, than to
walk away without a positive, spirit enhancing conclusion to the piece
-- which Sunshine tries to deliver and doesn't.
Sunshine is the story of the family Sonnenschein, whose patriarch
Emmanuel (David De Keyser) made his fortune peddling an herbal tonic,
brand-named "Sunshine," from a pack on his back. Once successful and
established, with a factory cranking out his product and its recipe
secreted inside a hidden notebook, Emmanuel takes a wife and raises his
family. Gustave (James Frain) and Ignatz (Fiennes) are his pride and
joys. Valerie (Jennifer Ehle), an orphaned cousin on his wife's side, is
also raised as a sister to the boys. The family is nearly split in two
by political affiliations and the declared love of Ignatz and his
cousin, who marry despite "their" father's wishes. Ignatz, an
incorruptible judge, changes his name to "Sors" for political reasons --
no obvious Jews are allowed government -- and rises higher and higher in
the Empire, until historical events shuffle him off the screen. Gustave
flees to France, to be seen later, and Valerie raises her son Adam
(again, Fiennes), who becomes a champion fencer and a Gold Medal
recipient on the Hungarian Olympic team in Berlin.
To do so, Adam must turn his back on his religion and become a Roman
Catholic. In doing so, he meets his also-to-be-converted wife Hannah
(Molly Parker) and fathers a son, Ivan (again, Fiennes). Then comes The
Big One, where conversion and/or status in the country cannot protect
everyone in the family from doom. All of this, the epic tale of a
family's rise and fall and redemption and survival, is enough.
Once you get past the War (you'll hear a crowd chanting "Stalin! Stalin!
Stalin!") we suggest you pack up and leave, wanting more. If you wish to
sit through the Communist era, prepare to emerge like a balloon that has
deflated. It isn't that Sunshine fails here, it is just that the film
(perhaps all too accurately) portrays a love-less, joy-less, and fully
hypocritical time. Ivan and the remains of his family, including his
grandmother Valerie (Rosemary Harris) a returned uncle Gustave (John
Neville) must survive under Communism. Ivan must deal with his
experience in the camps and can never let the war go; his job is to hunt
down the traitors, first from the war and then the witchhunt of the
Stalinist purges. Important characters in this stage include William
Hurt as Ivan's boss and Deborah Kara Unger as the wife of a connected
party. For Ivan and his family this era, called "The Great Diminishing"
by Szabo is one bad turn after another. Even with a conclusion set in
the post-Communist free era, all that is left for the living is a sense
that they have survived.
And survival is not enough. Ivan's redemption, such as it is, is not
enough -- and I've left out tons of material laying out the bare bones
of the story for you. The first two hours are truly a magnificent
recreation of that time and world . . . and here you should know that I
can trace my family back to a time they were called Wittenbourg and
lived dead center in the middle of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. I may
bring more historical baggage into the theater with me, but this does
not mean I've overinflated my enjoyment of the first two acts. Fiennes'
roles, and Rosemary Harris' later, are both unique and touching. The
staging and production values are equally great. Szabo's original five
hour long script, in Hungarian, has survived both translation and
reduction with the help of noted playwright Israel Horwitz. The film
dearly needs an intermission and, I'm guessing, another half hour to
show if and how Ivan is truly redeemed.
The Commies wrecked it for everybody, I guess . . .
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Sunshine, he would have paid...
Rental level. If you can find it on the big screen at a decent price,
the first two hours are well worth the expenditure of cash.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Later this summer, Jim Carrey will essentially play two different
characters in the same film when he portrays a man with
split-personality disorder in Me Myself & Irene.  In this superb new
epic about the trials and tribulations of a family of Hungarian Jews,
Ralph Fiennes does Carrey one better by tackling three unique (albeit
less comical) roles as he plays a different part in each generation of
the family.
Sunshine is as much a story of Hungary's tumultuous political upheaval
as it is a poignant tale of a family's struggle to keep itself
together.  The film covers the period between 1840 and 1989, when the
Red Curtain finally came crashing down around Eastern Europe, and is
broken into three hour-long sections that each show one generation of
the Sonnenschein family, who have prospered throughout the late 1800s
thanks to a recipe for an herbal tonic called `Taste of Sunshine' (the
film's original title) and a gold watch that is passed down from father
to son in each generation.
In the first story, Fiennes (The End of the Affair) plays Ignatz
Sonnenschein, a loyalist to the Austro-Hungarian Empire that rules his
country.  Against the wishes of his father, Ignatz marries his cousin
Valerie (Jennifer Ehle, Wilde) and shortens his last name to Sors to
avoid anti-Semitism in his attempt to become a powerful judge in
Budapest.  Having already alienated his father by changing the family
name, and his brother Gustave (James Frain, Where the Heart Is) by
simply not sharing his radical political ideas, Ignatz's career
ambitions threaten his relationship with Valerie as well.
Sunshine's second story concentrates on Adam Sors (Fiennes), the younger
son of Ignatz and Valerie.  Adam is a fencer who, like his father, must
deny his roots when he is forced to convert to Catholicism in order to
further his competitive career.  Hungary's national champion, Adam's
dreams of winning a gold medal in the 1936 Berlin Olympics are dashed by
a Nazi radio report that exposes Jews and outlines what jobs they are
not allowed to keep.  Like father, like son  Adam has trouble with the
ladies.  Happily married to Hannah (Molly Parker, Waking the Dead), Adam
has an affair with his sister-in-law Greta (Rachel Weisz, The Mummy).
The film's final chapter features Adam's son Ivan (Fiennes), who was one
of the few Sors to survive the Holocaust.  As a result, he's feels jaded
and guilty, and tries to avenge the past by committing himself to the
new Communist regime.  But the apple doesn't fall far from the tree, and
Ivan soon finds himself having an affair with the sultry wife (Deborah
Unger, The Hurricane) of a high-ranking party official (William Hurt,
One True Thing).
Sunshine comes full circle when Ivan, after being stirred by his grandma
Valerie (Rosemary Harris, My Life So Far  she's also Ehle's real-life
mother), abandons his ties to Communism and changes his name back to
Sonnenschein.  Having lived through the most harrowing experiences of
20th century Europe (both World Wars, the Holocaust and the rise of
Communism), Ivan seems to be the first person in his family who is
prepared to accept the consequences of not hiding his roots.  The final
shot of Ivan walking down a busy street in modern Budapest is
beautifully executed, and a reminder of how much has changed.
Brilliantly directed by István Szabó (Mephisto), who co-wrote the
haunting script with internationally acclaimed playwright Israel
Horovitz, Sunshine is truly the year's first Oscar-quality film.  It's
already won the Best Screenplay trophy at the European Film Awards,
where it also nabbed top honors for Best Actor (Fiennes) and Best
Cinematography (Lajos Koltai, The Legend of 1900) and was nominated for
Best Picture.  Sunshine was also nominated for a mind-boggling fourteen
Genie Awards (the Canadian equivalent of the Oscars), winning the prize
for Best Motion Picture of the year.
3:00 - R for strong sexuality including rape, and for violence, language
and nudity

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     SUNSHINE chronicles four generations of the Hungarian
Sonnenschein family, from around the 1870s to recent history.  Three
generations of sons share a common desire to be accepted Hungarians.
They have more loyalty to the country than to their religion.  Each
finds sooner or later that they can deny their religion, but they
cannot become what they are not.  Each new regime uses the family's
Jewish origins as a weapon against them.
     Emmanuel has two sons, Gustave and Ignatz.  He also adopts as
his daughter his niece Valerie.  To his horror, as his sons age they
become romantically interested in Valerie.  Since he has raised all
of them as his children this has the feel of incest.  And there is
some truth to his fears because they are cousins.  But Ignatz and
Valerie as adults (Ralph Fiennes and Jennifer Ehle) are willing to
ignore Emmanuel's wishes and marry.  And Ignatz has a bright legal
mind.  He is willing to give up his religion, change his name to the
non-Jewish name Sors, and surrender his scruples to advance his
legal career in the military, yet he is always limited by the
Hungarian aristocracy who cannot accept a man born as a Jew.
     Ignatz's son Adam (Fiennes again) makes himself the finest
fencer in Hungary.  Even one generation removed from his Jewish
origins, the Hungarian aristocracy still holds his religion against
him.  In the 1936 Olympics he becomes a Hungarian national hero.
And in his success he feels he is at last free of his origins.  He
is three ways exempt from the new Jewish laws that the Nazis bring
on Hungary.  But he discovers all the barriers he has placed between
himself and his religion are to no avail.
     Adam's son Ivan (a third personality for Fiennes), indignant at
the horrific treatment of his father at the hands of the Fascists,
eagerly joins the Communists to embrace their reforms against the
previous regime.  But he is unwilling to learn from the history of
his own family that political regimes come and go, but the same
prejudices remain with all political systems.
     SUNSHINE was written and directed by Istvan Szabo, director of
MEPHISTO and HANUSSEN.  At just three hours it strikes the viewer
not so much as being long for a movie but as being short to
chronicle a family over so many years.  Sadly, there are few media
for a drama whose natural length is something like five hours.
Szabo is able to give us a textured view of Hungary, occasionally
doing it by giving in to artificial devices, especially camera
filters, to suggest the age of chapters.  The change of filters
jarringly announcing the beginning of a new chapter of his story.  A
different filter still is used where there is documentary footage.
In each generation there is a different personality for Fiennes, but
each makes much the same decision to try to fit in and assimilate.
Each has the same pessimism that he must cover his origins and the
same optimism that it will help.  Each generation rebels, but at
last the similarities in the stories are greater than the
differences.   And over it all is watching Valerie, played by
Jennifer Ehle and later Rosemary Harris, in reality daughter and
mother actors.  The choice of Maurice Jarre to score is well in
keeping with its historical sweep.  Lajos Koltai's camera frequently
beautifully recreates Hungary through the 1930s, until there is much
less beauty in Hungary to film.  Viewers should expect some fairly
explicit depictions of love and just as explicit are the depictions
of hatred.
     As rushed as it is this is a film with a sweep of history, a
personal story within the turmoil.  It is a remarkable document and
one worth seeing.  I give it 9 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +3 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
David Bezanson
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c07dc6534306c06d8825691c0006e12f?OpenDocument
Now that the 20th century is finally over, I guess it's time to start
re-interpreting it.  Hopefully, summarizers of the century will follow
the example of Hungarian director Istvan Svabo and honestly face the
truth, no matter how painful.  (Unfortunately, many intellectuals don't
always seem interested in the truth --- especially about subjects like
communism, which many continue to embrace.)
In Sunshine, Svabo looks back through the last 100 years of his
country's history for meaning, and finds some --- enough to fill a
three-hour, soapy epic about the century's chaos.  The film mostly
works, and is a worthy addition to Svabo's art.
Sunshine begins at the end of the 19th century, focusing on three young
people who take Hungarian surnames and abandon the traditions espoused
by their father, a Jewish entrepeneur named Emmanuel Sonnenschein
("Sunshine" in English).  The ambitious son Ignatz (Fiennes, who also
plays Ignatz' son and grandson) rises to power in the Hungarian
government, then goes down with the monarchy.  His silly, free-spirited
cousin Valerie (Jennifer Ehle) deserts him over his conformity and
allegiance to the regime; his brother (James Frain) turns communist.
After WWI, the focus shifts from this triangle to Ignatz's son Adam
(Fiennes again), who becomes an Olympic champion and public hero after
renouncing Judaism, only to find his father's admonishment not to trust
in political power proved true.  When the Nazis ("philistines" as one
character describes them) overrun Hungary, Adam fails to save his family
from being killed or scattered.  Valerie is almost the only survivor. 
She is played in later life by Rosemary Harris (Ehle's real-life
mother), whose luminous performance is easily the film's best.
Adam's son Ivan (Fiennes once again) is scarred by watching his father's
murder at Auschwitz and, after the war, becomes an official in the
equally brutal and philistine Communist Party.  The Communists are also
anti-Semites (because they hate the wealthy classes) and Ivan finds
himself again imprisoned and dehumanized.  At the end of the film, Ivan
and Valerie remember their family and faith, and Ivan changes his name
back to Sonnenschein, though the name is all he has left.  His house has
been confiscated; the furniture, keepsakes, and cultural artifacts that
decorate the movie are thrown onto a garbage truck.
Sunshine clearly cost some bucks to make, and the result is the most
meticulous recreation of a historical period that I've seen on film. 
The screenplay is not as flawless: some characters are sketchy and
others are unappealing (especially Adam's girlfriend, played by Rachel
Wiesz) --- though to be fair, only Valerie and Ivan live long enough to
reach maturity.  There are some superficial moments; some of the sex
scenes are unpleasant and unrealistic.  But ultimately, the film is
redeemed by its religious core and its powerful use of images and
themes, both good (love, freedom, civilization, family) and evil
(politics, power, ambition, envy).  The film starts off slow but gets
better and better as it goes, building to a powerful, thoughtful
conclusion.
In the film, Svabo clearly draws distinctions between good beliefs and
bad beliefs.  Aware that he has lost his faith and followed the false
gods of political ideals, Ivan asks, "If there never was a God, then why
do we miss Him so much?"  Among the film's many characters, it is
perhaps great-grandfather Emmanuel (played by David de Keyser) who comes
off best, because he remains true to sensible beliefs.
On New Year's Day of 1900, Ignatz predicts that the new century will be
a time of "love, justice, and tolerance."  Lots of people probably still
think the 20th century was a time of greater love, justice and tolerance
(along with modern improvements, walking on the moon, etc.) so it's
probably a good thing that the movie brutally underscores the irony of
Ignatz's prediction.  The 20th century was the most murderous and
"philistine" century in history, in which Europe actually became less
civilized.  It was not a century of improvements but of "breaking all
our inheritance" (as one character says) and throwing it onto garbage
trucks.
At the end of the film and the century, Hungary knows freedom for the
first time in almost a century.  But in a world that is becoming ever
more "philistine" (judging from say, Eminem's new CD), less religious,
and less diverse, will the next century be much better?
Director: Istvan Svabo
Producers: Robt Lantos, Andras Hamori
Screenwriters: Istvan Svabo, Israel Horovitz
Stars: Ralph Fiennes, Rosemary Harris, Jennifer Ehle, Rachel Weisz,
Molly Parker, Miriam Margolyes, Deborah Kara Unger, James Frain, William
Hurt, John Neville
http://www.metrofilms.com/sunshine/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
István Szabó's SUNSHINE is an epic story about three generations of
non-religious Hungarian Jews.  Set against the turbulent backdrop of the
changing twentieth century and spanning three repressive regimes
(monarchy, Nazi and Communist), it stars two-time Academy Award nominee
Ralph Fiennes as son, father and grandfather -- an incredible feat that
he pulls off quite convincingly.
Subtly posing provocative questions about love, religion, family,
discrimination and nationalism, the ambitious and successful film has a
single significant flaw -- at 3 full hours, it is too short.  With a
great cast, Szabó introduces so much material that a 6-hour miniseries
would have been more appropriate.  This however should not dissuade
anyone from seeing this version since it does not suffer from being too
short, rather it just makes us wish it were longer.
"I predict that this will be a century of love, justice and tolerance,"
Ignatz (Fiennes) predicts incorrectly at the start of the twentieth
century.  Ignatz is an ambitious and rather malleable judge who bends
too often to the prevailing winds.  The love of his live is his sister,
Valerie (Jennifer Ehle), with whom he marries and has children,
including Adam (Fiennes).  It's not quite as bad as it seems since they
are actually cousins, but she grew up in their family and he calls her
sister.  Ehle looks so fetching that it is easy to understand the
temptation.
This excessive family love will reappear more than once.  A generation
later Adam tells his sister-in-law, Greta (Rachel Weisz), "We're lucky
-- in this family everyone is in love with everyone else," and he
doesn't mean this in an entirely positive way.
Valerie is a fascinating character in her own right.  She's a free
spirit, who observes, "I want to grow like a wild flower, where it
belongs," when it is suggested that she might want to change countries.
Later in the picture Rosemary Harris (Jennifer Ehle's real-life mother)
gives a wonderfully warm and inviting performance as the older Valerie.
Led by a headstrong Ignatz, the family makes many changes, not the least
of which is changing the family name to something more Hungarian (read
not Jewish).  This helps move his career along.  Later his son, Adam,
converts to Christianity to advance his prospects.  "You made the right
choice -- assimilation is the only way," Adam is congratulated by one of
his well-placed friends.
Adam's son, Ivan (Fiennes), lives through the Nazi era only to discover
that the anti-Semitism is almost as brutal under the Communists.
William Hurt plays a Jew who survives Auschwitz only to become a petty
Communist official not much better than the Nazi ones.
The constant changing of the guard In Hungary is shown through archival
footage into which Fiennes is sometimes placed, giving the movie an
extra dose of realism.
A beautiful film, it has gorgeous cinematography and sumptuous sets,
including lavish interiors of Government buildings and of wood-paneled
coffee houses.
"What was the purpose of this miserable life?" Ignatz's brother, Gustave
(John Neville), asks Valerie on his deathbed.  It's a good question and
naturally doubles back on question of the value of God.  From Ignatz on,
the family motto seems to be that if you don't believe in God, you might
as well pledge allegiance to which ever God is most popular, hence the
conversion from Judaism to Christianity and later to Stalinism, a state
religion.
"If there is no God and there never was a God, why do we miss him so
much?" Ivan asks Valerie.  Another good question.  Perhaps part of the
answer lies in the saying that Adam kept on his desk: "We are afraid to
see clearly and to be seen clearly."  Ultimately the film is about this
wandering in the wilderness of life, trying to avoid seeing what we want
to ignore and being seen for what we are.
SUNSHINE runs 3:00.  It is rated R for sex, violence, language and
nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http:/www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SUNSHINE (Ein Hauch von Sonnenschein) (director/writer: István Szabó;
screenwriter: Israel Horovitz; cinematographer: Lajos Koltai; editors:
Michel Arcand/Dominique Fortin; cast: Ralph Fiennes (Ignatz
Sonnenschein/ Adam Sors/Ivan Sors), Jennifer Ehle (Valerie
Sonnenschein), Rosemary Harris (Valerie Sors), James Frain (Gustave
Sonnenschein), John Neville (Gustave Sors), Rachel Weisz (Greta),
Deborah Kara Unger (Maj. Carole Kovacs), David De Keyser (Emmanuel
Sonnenschein), Miriam Margolyes (Rose Sonnenschein), Molly Parker
(Hannah), Mark Strong (Istvan), William Hurt (Andor Knorr); Runtime:
180; 1999-Hungary)
A very long, sweeping historical study, narrated in a first-person
voice-over by Ivan Sonnenschein, the last surviving member of the
hard-pressed family. The film tells about three generations of an
Hungarian Jewish family whose story picks up at the end of the 19th
century and spans most of the 20th. It is the semiautobiographical saga
of the director István Szabó's life, derived from his original story and
co-scripted by American playwright Israel Horovitz, but according to
Szabó, it also includes other stories he heard about other Jews. The
problem with epics of this grand design, is they could never be dramatic
enough and fall prey to episodic incidents to tell their story. That is
the case here, as the story was leaden and didn't seem to move, as it
plodded along linear lines and political regimes, from Monarchy to
Fascist and finally to Communist regimes. The filmmaking, though
well-intentioned and intelligently presented, was just too dull and
uninspiring to sustain interest in the lesson it is trying to teach
about the mess bigotry and politics makes, even if the lesson is an
important one and shouldn't be ignored. The film was also bereft of any
subtlety, its messages were of the kind that hit you over the head with
a loud thud.
The film begins as the beloved local village barkeep in Hungary, with a
secret formula for making his herbal drink, gets killed when his
distillery explodes. His 12-year-old son leaves the small village for
Budapest with his inheritance from his father, a bound book of the
brew's recipes and his father's gold watch. He uses his family name,
Sunshine, to distill the brew and becomes a very wealthy man. He has two
sons, Gustave (Frain) and Ignatz, and when his brother dies, he adopts
their baby girl Valerie (Jennifer Ehle). Education becomes the key for
these children for social acceptance in the liberal dictatorship of
Austria-Hungary, as the fiery Gustave becomes a medical doctor and a
socialist, who opposes the monarchy; Ignatz a lawyer and then a judge,
who is loyal to the monarchy; while Valerie becomes a photographer, who
has no use for politics but cares about the people and their sufferings.
Ralph Fiennes will play three roles: the son Ignatz, who changes the
family's Jewish name to an Hungarian name, Sors, so that he can advance
his career (his brother and sister follow suit); his son Adam, who
converts to Catholicism so he can assimilate and be part of a military
officers' fencing club that doesn't accept Jews, and he thereby gets the
opportunity to become an Olympic gold medal winner for fencing in the
infamous 1936 Berlin games; and, he will also play Adam's son Ivan, who
survives a concentration camp and joins the communists when they rule
Hungary after the war, but becomes disillusioned with the regime after
he has to betray his superior and mentor (Hurt), who is a Jew, and will
be tortured and executed by the communists after they falsely accuse him
of being a Zionist conspirator, when he is actually a true believer in
communism, an idealist. Ivan leaves the Communist party and is jailed
after the failed 1956 Hungarian Revolution, when the West failed to help
his cause.
There are a few scenes that stand out because they were either so
awkward, or because they had a raw power in them that was not found in
the rest of the film. The worst scene was: During the monarchy period,
as Valerie romantically seduces her brother, who is really her cousin.
The drivel that comes out of that dialogue goes something like this: "I
love you...but not like a sister!" He will marry her and have children,
Istvan (Mark Strong) and Adam, which starts the family curse. She will
later divorce him because he has lost all compassionate feelings and has
fallen in love with the monarchy instead of justice.
The middle period drew the most powerful image in the film, when
Hungarian soldiers have rounded up two thousand Jews as prisoners in a
Nazi death camp, and Adam refuses to say he is a Jew to one hateful
soldier, only uttering that he is an Hungarian and gold medal winner,
while the Hungarian soldier strips him and beats him, and then hangs him
in front of his son and the other Jews watching, as they spray water on
him until his body freezes to death. During the Stalinist period, Ivan
advances to become a prosecutor for the secret police in the Communist
Hungarian regime and has an affair with the attractive blonde major,
Deborah Kara Unger, who is married to a communist goon and is so fearful
in this relationship, that even when she's in the woods, getting banged
against a tree, she still furtively looks over her shoulder, which says
more about the police state in those few glances than Szabó has been
able to convey in three hours.
The point being made, in all the belabored efforts of the filmmaker, is
that political regimes, materialism, and all causes are temporary, and
that religions tend to be divisive. What makes life worth living could
be found only in the arts. Valerie (Jean Harris), as the surviving
grandmother and matriarch of the family in the 1960s is the only one in
the family who survived with dignity, the male members Fiennes played,
all lost their souls and lost track of who they were, trying too hard to
fit in where they didn't belong. The film shows how assimilation can't
work, changing your name can't work, being a good family and trying to
be loyal to an oppressive regime can't work, passivity can't work, there
is nothing that the Jew can do to make those who hate him like him.
Valerie's secret recipe is not found in a book, but in the freedom she
has to see the beautiful things in life that are more important than
possessions and honors, and all things that are so fleeting.
I felt drained after seeing this epic, not from joy, but from weariness
of all the messages I was receiving. When a toast was made by the
Sunshine family to bring in the new century, Fiennes proclaims, "Long
live the 20th century!" He goes on to say, "I predict this will be a
century of love, justice and tolerance." Of course, the century was
anything but that, with the two World Wars, the Holocaust, and the
Communist Iron Curtain over Hungary. This was the only irony found in
the film, a film that just couldn't get its complex view across on what
went went wrong for the Jew in the anti-Semitic world of
Austria-Hungary, without being a drudge.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Classics
 Director: Istvan Szabo
 Writer: Israel Horovitz, Istvan Szabo
 Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Rosemary Harris, Rachel Weisz,
Jennifer Ehle, Molly Parker, Deborah Unger, James Frain,
John Neville, Miriam Margolyes, David DeKeyser, Mark
Strong
   Israel Horovitz--who co-scripted this movie--is perhaps
better known as a playwright than a filmmaker.  "The Primary
English Class," Horovitz's off-Broadway play starring
Diane Keaton, is set in a classroom where a young teacher is
trying to teach basic English to a group of new citizens, not
one of whom speaks the same language as another.  
Misunderstandings develop, though the tone of the entire play
is a comic one, but one point is made loud and clear.  If
you're going to spend your life in an English-speaking
country, learn the language.  That's one form of assimilation,
probably the most important one.  But just how far should we
go to assimilate into our land of choice if its soil becomes
corrupted by the weeds of wickedly extremist politics?  This is
the principal notion behind the three-hour long epic drama,
"Sunshine," which bears an ironic title notwithstanding the
fact that Sunshine is also the family name of the brood
explored under director Istvan Szabo's cinematic microscope.
   "Sunshine" chronicles several generations of the
Sonnenschein (Sunshine) family beginning nominally in 1840
and running right up to the fall of Communism in Hungary in
1989.  The film is an intelligent portrayal of the struggles of
this family--which came into wealth as a result of a delicious
alcoholic beverage made with a secret recipe and carrying
the family name--against a backdrop of political turmoil in the
Eastern European country.  We observe the tribulations of
the Sonnenscheins through the eyes of Ivan, the great-
grandson of the patriarch Emmanuel Sonnenschein, who built
the family fortune.  Emmanuel (David DeKeyser), a religious
Jew, sits at the head of a table embracing his wife Rose
(Miriam Margolyes), his two philosophically distinct sons
Ignatz (Ralph Fiennes) and Gustave (James Frain), their
passionate first cousin Valerie (Jennifer Ehle), and Gustave's
roving wife Greta (Rachel Weisz).  We are quickly taken to
the turn of the century when, at the stroke of midnight,
Emmanuelle toasts what he proclaims a new era of peace,
justice and toleration.  
   "Sunshine" turns on several pivotal moments in the political
lives of the narrator, Ivan, Ivan's father Adam, and Ivan's
grandfather Ignatz--all of whose roles are played by Ralph
Fiennes.  The first of these is the decision by the Austro-
Hungarian emperor's loyal subject Ignatz to advance his
career as a judge by assimilating further into the mainstream
of his native Hungary.  He changes his name from the
Jewish-sounding Sonnenschein to the more Magyar-ish Sors. 
The second is the determination of the judge's son, Ivan, to
participate as a fencer in the 1936 Berlin Olympics--which
requires him to convert to Roman Catholicism and join the
officers' club.  The third is pondered by Adam's son, Ivan. 
Should he continue as a "fully" Hungarian subject, or should
he reverse the clock and reclaim his heritage as a Jew?  
  "Sunshine" would be an involving if somewhat drier film if
politics were the only issue on the table.  What makes the
picture particularly alluring is the way that director Szabo
merges the political with the personal.  He punctuates the
fevered arguments over marriage that threaten to tear great-
grandfather Emmanuel's family apart.  He shows how Ignatz,
his son Adam, and grandson Ivan need virtually to push
women away with a stick, so readily do they throw
themselves upon the handsome and charming men.  He
exhibits the fit thrown by the family matriarch, Rose, when
her son announces his determination to marry first cousin
Valerie.
   Whether you'll be intrigued more by the political or by the
personal would depend on your inclination.  My own pushed
me in the former direction.  I can understand Ignatz's
willingness to change his name to advance his career as a
judge, particularly because the chief judge, who actively
recruits the talented jurist, explains the requirement with
balanced arguments rather than with any form of anti-Semitic
rant.  I suppose I could empathize with Adam's willingness to
go a step further, to convert to Roman Catholicism, for
without this sell-out he could not have advanced his own
determination to be his country's top fencer.  But in a
shocking scene in a Hungarian concentration camp, Adam
makes a literal life-and-death decision which set my survival
wishes agog.  Adam's choice--the most heroic in the story--is
scarcely believable considering the stakes involved and the
ease with which he could extricate himself from a most
uncomfortable situation.
   Photographer Lajos Koltai takes advantage of several
areas of Hungary, including modern Budapest, to order an
appropriately European ambience. He also enjoys the
advantage of file films, especially those taken from the two
world wars to give the project an authentic feel.  The 38-year-
old Ralph Fiennes effectively shucks off the effete roles with
which he's been associated in movies like "Oscar and
Lucinda" and "The English Patient" to more than match his
most prominent guise--as the evil Nazi commandant in
"Schindler's List."  Portraying three characters with
appropriate changes of hair style and costume, Fiennes
comes across forcefully, convincingly, and in one case with
heartbreaking poignancy as conflicted heirs to a family
fortune whose background as Jews cause them so much
unnecessary and irrational pain.  Rosemary Harris also
shines as the older Valerie, imparting wisdom and kindness
to all with the good fortune to be privy to her thoughtfulness.
   For those in the audience not already aware of this truism,
all totalitarianisms, all blinding intolerance, are faulty, whether
they go by the name Communism, Fascism, Nativism, even
nationalism.  We've toasted in the current century echoing
Emmanuelle's hopeful prediction of a hundred-year period of
peace, justice and toleration.  Will the world, now moving
ever more rapidly toward globalization and cooperation, be
one of largely uninterrupted sunshine?  Or will we fall into the
cynical pattern of the last century, so aptly portrayed through
the perceptive eyes and ears of young Ivan Sonnenschein in
this remarkable, epic film?
Rated R.  Running Time: 180 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Alliance Atlantis on April 28, 2000; certificate 15; 
180 minutes; countries of origin Austria/Canada/Germany/Hungary/UK; aspect 
ratio 1.85:1
Directed by István Szabó; produced by Adrás Hámori, Robert Lantos.
Written by Israel Horovitz, István Szabó; based on an original story by 
István Szabó.
Photographed by Lajos Koltai; edited by Michel Arcand, Dominique Fortin.
CAST.....
Ralph Fiennes..... Ignatz Sonnenschein/Adam Sors/Ivan Sors
Rosemary Harris..... Old Valerie
Rachel Weisz..... Greta Sors
Jennifer Ehle..... Young Valerie
Deborah Kara Unger..... Major Carole Kovacs
Molly Parker..... Hannah Wippler
James Frain..... Gustave Sonnenschein
David de Keyser..... Emmanuel Sonnenschein
John Neville..... Gustave Sors
Miriam Margolyes..... Rose Sonnenschein
Too many movies use the words "based on a true story" as an excuse for 
blandness. What they don't realise is that just because a story might be true 
doesn't make it interesting. Then again, sometimes the fact that a tale 
really happened might give it more importance or context. If only that had 
been the case with István Szabó's "Sunshine". The film is a silly fiction, 
but if it had really happened, well, that would have been something.
"Sunshine" follows three generations in a Hungarian family in three different 
times of revolution, dividing its three-hour running time evenly between each 
of its three stories. The first main character is Ignatz Sonnenschein, a 
lawyer in the late 19th Century who allows himself to change his Jewish name 
to Sors for purposes of conformity, marries a girl who had been raised as his 
sister, and finds that his work for the imperial government puts him in 
danger when communists come to power. Next we focus on his son Adam Sors, who 
allows himself to change his religion for purposes of conformity, marries a 
girl he hardly knows, has an affair with his sister-in-law, and finds that 
his heritage puts him in danger when the Nazis seem set to take over Europe. 
Finally comes the tale of Adam's son Ivan, who allows himself to get 
entangled in Stalinist persecutions, has an affair with an important army 
general's wife, and finds himself in danger during the Purges.
The connections are obvious: Each man somehow sells out, dives into 
troublesome romance and then winds up in over his head in a deadly political 
situation. What's more, Ignatz, Adam and Ivan are all played by the same 
actor, Ralph Fiennes. Subtle. The theory that the mistakes and sins of 
fathers can be repeated by their sons was present in the background of the 
"Godfather" and "Jean de Florette" movies, through vital situations and 
interesting characters. "Sunshine" thinks it's some kind of profound parable 
where the drama doesn't need to be fulfilling in itself. The people and 
plights are all just one-dimensional cardboard, existing to prove points. 
Nobody is convincing as a living, breathing person, and so we never care, and 
the point of the film is clear but carries no power.
Much of the movie has the silliness of "Legends of the Fall", without any of 
the gusto that made that movie enjoyable. When I saw it, people in the 
audience were laughing in key moments. Consider the amateurish attempts to 
mix the movie's own footage with old newsreel clips, just by developing bits 
in black and white. Or the exaggerated reaction shots of people rolling their 
eyes. Miriam Margolyes, as Ignatz's mother, breaks down crying so often that 
eventually the woman sitting next to me started doing a countdown whenever 
she appeared onscreen.
But even when the film does work on the level of performances and technical 
beauty, that doesn't change how simple-minded it is. Director Szabó's own 
"Mephisto" (1981) took its title from a fairly obvious parallel -- the one 
between its lead character and the story of "Dr. Faustus" -- but the content 
of the film didn't rely on it, and introduced it up front and kept it as a 
side-issue. "Sunshine" spends 180 minutes reiterating the same message, one 
that we've heard before and could be reminded of in a single line.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Laura Clifford
An alcoholic elixer known as "A Taste of Sunshine" brings wealth and
social standing to the Jewish family Sonnenschein (German for sunshine)
under the helm of Emmanuelle (David De Keyser, "Yentl").  Ralph Fiennes
plays his son Ignatz as well as two subsequent generations as the family
is buffetted through almost a century of turbulent Hungarian history.
Director Istvan Szabo ("Mephisto") cowrote this epic with famed playwright
Israel Horovitz ("Growing Up Jewish") which takes its family through
the end of a monarchy, the subsequent decline into fascism (and the
Holocaust) and the reactionary institution of communism.  Ignatz makes
his father proud by studying law and becoming a judge loyal to the crown,
while his brother Gustave (James Frain, "Where the Heart Is") becomes
a doctor of more liberal politics.  Then there's Valerie (Jennifer Ehle,
daughter of Rosemary Harris who takes on the role as the character ages),
the orphaned daughter of Emmanuel's brother whom Emmanuel adopts and raises
as his own.  The sexual spark between Valerie and Ignatz causes grief
to their parents while making Gustave jealous, but it will not be denied
and the two marry.  However, Valerie's political leanings are aligned with
Gustave's and eventually she leaves one brother for the other.
Ignatz also changes his family name to the more Hungarian (and less
Jewish) Sors (which means destiny) at the suggestion of the chief justice
and Valerie and Gustave follow suit, much to their parents' sadness.
Valerie and Ignatz's son Adam (Fiennes again) lives a life of priviledge
and becomes a national hero as a fencing champion, even winning Olympic
Gold.  He too has women problems as his sister-in-law Greta (Rachel Weisz,
"The Mummy") bullies him into an affair ('We're a lucky family - everyone
loves everybody else,' Adam comments wryly.).  When the Nazi regime rises and
rules governing Jewishness are heard on the radio, the Sonnenscheins/Sors
family qualify for special standing due to war medals and that Olympic gold,
but the family still ends up in the death camps, which only Adam's son
Ivan (Fiennes) and his grandmother Valerie (Harris by this point) survive.
Ivan becomes a pawn of the communist movement, although he has a good man,
Andor Knorr, as a mentor.  Like his father and grandfather before him,
Ivan has a messy love life, becoming embroiled in an affair with the wife
(Deborah Kara Unger, "The Game") of a high ranking official.  When the
communist party begins to turn in upon itslef and Knorr is targetted, Ivan
is forced to condemn his old friend.
The story is always interesting, yet is harmed by its willingness to stoop to
soap opera level.  Even more serious of a flaw is that each generation
played by Fiennes is essentially a weak, comprised man overpowered by the
women who love him.  The three hour film seems too short in that scenes
are abbreviated while we barrel into the next one in order to cram all
the events in.  The film plays like a six hour miniseries that's been
editted for theatrical release.
There are some standout performances, chiefly Jennifer Ehle ("Wilde," 
"Bedrooms and Hallways") who resembles a young Meryl Streep in both looks
and talent.  Her strong character is never compromised as she searches
for truth and beauty in life.  Rosemary Harris picks up the reins admirably,
but the film suffers when Ehle leaves the screen.  (A far less smooth 
transition is achieved when John Neville ("The Adventures of Baron von
Munchausen") takes over for Frain, whom he resembles not in the slightest).
Also exceptional is David De Keyser as Emmanuel, the good father whose 
children perplex and try him while also filling him with pride.  Miriam 
Margolyes ("The Age of Innocence") gives another great turn as his embittered 
wife Rose who loves her own sons over her niece and resents a similar cousin 
who once tempted her own husband.  Fiennes himself is solid, creating three 
distinct characters whose bloodlines demand they still resemble each other, but 
his performance is passionless.  William Hurt stands out as the decent Knorr,
remaining honorable as he's besmirched by his own party.  Rachel Weisz is
appropriately hiss-worthy as Adam's selfish lover while Molly Parker ("Kissed")
is bland as his wife.  Kara Unger is good as a woman whose sexual appetites
override her sense.
The film looks stunning, with cinematography by Lajos Koltai ("Mother")
utilizing a marvelous color scheme.  The first hour of the film is bathed
in golds and ambers, reflecting the "Taste of Sunshine" upon which the 
family is based, as well as nostalgia for a lost age.  The subsequent two
hours begin with the blinding whites of the fencing sport, which evolves into 
the reds of Communism and sickly greens of institutionism - the three colors 
of the oft-seen Hungarian flag.  Koltai also makes great use of his Budapest
locations and leaves the audience with some memorable images, such as
Valerie sitting in a courtyard filled with yellow flowers or Adam, left
hanging from a tree in a Nazi death camp encased in ice.
Ralph Fiennes stars as father, son and grandson in the multi-generation drama
by veteran Hungarian filmmaker Istvan Szabo ("Mephisto," "Colonel Redl") in the
epic family film, "Sunshine." The story is told by grandson Ivan Sonnenschein
(which translates to the "Sunshine" of the title) and begins the tale of how
Great-great-grandfather Emmanuelle built his fortune using a secret family
recipe for a marvelous elixir called "A Taste of Sunshine." However, his sons
Ignatz (Fiennes) and Gustav (James Frain) refuse to follow in his footsteps and
seek more intellectual pursuits - Ignatz becomes a judge, while Gustav pursued
a career in medicine.
The family fable focuses on the ambitious Ignatz Sonnenschein as he abandons
his Jewish heritage in favor of advancing himself in the Hungarian Empire's
judicial system. His father is aghast when Ignatz changes his name to the more 
Christian sounding Sors and announces his amorous intentions for his cousin 
(almost a sister) Valerie. Ignatz's loyalty is to his emperor, not to his 
family, and he forsakes his Jewish past for personal advancement. His 
conservatism backfires, though, as the Europe is thrust into the throes of The 
Great War and beyond.  When Communism rears its ugly head, Ignatz falls from 
grace with the ruling regime and becomes a mere pawn in his country's 
political upheaval.
As Ignatz fades from the picture, his son, Adam (Fiennes), develops into an
outstanding athlete. He continues his father's denial of their Jewish faith,
converting to Catholicism in order to compete on the restricted national
fencing team. When he wins the gold medal at the 1936 Munich Olympics, his 
future in the again conservative regime seems assured. Then, with the rise of 
the Nazis to power in Europe, anti-Semitism rages and the Jewish Laws are 
issued. Adam steadfastly maintains that his exemptions - converted Catholic 
and national hero - protect him and his family from the fate awaiting Europe's 
Jews. In shock, Adam and his son, Ivan, are shipped to a concentration camp 
where Adam's demands that he is exempt and should be released end, literally, 
in his chilling death.
Ivan (Fiennes) survives the camp and, as a young man, becomes a police
investigator and embraces the Communist Cause as the savior for the survivors
of the Holocaust and Hitler's deadly fascism. But, changing masters does not
create the freedom that Ivan expected as the communist leaders, under the 
thumb of Josef Stalin, reprise the same brutal repression as Hitler's henchmen. 
Ivan, through the influences of his old grandma (Valerie, played in later 
years by Rosemary Harris) and aging uncle Gustav (John Neville), embraces his 
Hebrew past and rejects, even subverts, the communist oppression of the 
Hungarian people.  The final straw for the young man is when he is ordered to 
interrogate and expose his friend and mentor, Andor Korr (William Hurt), 
bringing the family tale full circle.
"Sunshine" is an ambitious film that spans decades, with the concentration on
Fiennes's several lives. The political and personal lives of each Sonnenschein
lad are influenced by the whims of history as one regime replace another, each
with a promise of a better life for its citizens. The promise is never kept,
though, and the people are mere duckpins in the political game as conservative
regime replaces liberal, then communist replaces fascist, ad infinitum. The
political scope of the film is impressive in it span of time and detail. The
upheavals that occur through Hungary's history are depicted with accuracy,
starting with the decaying opulence of the Austria-Hungarian Empire of Franz
Josef.
When World War One is thrust upon the countries of Europe, the political fabric
is torn asunder and traditional ways are destroyed forever. Chaos takes control
as followers of the left and right vie with each other to take control.
Communism takes command of Russia, while the rise of the Nazis grips Germany
and, eventually, the rest of the continent. Hungary sways first in one
direction, then the other, as the left and right struggle to take over the
government. This strife is shown in parallel as each of the Sonnenschein boys
makes his mark on their individual generations, trying to garner favor from the
powers that be.
While Ralph Fiennes is the nominal star of the film, it is really an ensemble
effort with some outstanding performances. Fiennes puts a unique spin on each
of his characters and does an impressive job of making each one different. It's 
a big creative challenge that the actor handles well enough, but there is a
flatness that permeates all three perfs. More impressive is the pair of
performances by the actresses who portray Valerie as, first, a young lady, and
later, an old woman. Jennifer Ehle is cast as Valerie the younger who becomes
the lover and wife of Ignatz. Ehle outshines Fiennes (and everyone else) in
every scene she is in, coming across as smart, independent, confident and
capable. Rosemary Harris, Ehle's real-life mother, plays Valerie in her
twilight years and carries forth the strengths developed by the younger Val. 
These two ladies are the best things in "Sunshine."
The rest of the large cast provides the requisite depth to their respective
roles, but are all so briefly presented that there isn't much time to develop
each character. Of the others, William Hurt stands out as the honest and
trusting Andor. He believes that his country is finally ready to care for its
people, only to have his ideals smashed by the brutal oligarchy of the
communists. His downfall also reps a significant turning point for Ivan.
There is depth in the screenplay by Szabo and Hungarian playwright Israel
Horowitz and they have no trouble in filling the film's 180 minute run time
with its three interlocking tales. But, 3 hours is a big investment of time 
for a moviegoer and Fiennes does not give a compelling enough performance to 
warrant the time for most. It's not the type of film I can "recommend" but I 
don't regret seeing it, either. It's an enigma.
Tech credits are first rate with Lajos Koltai providing the lush photography
that helps carry the sought after period feel. Costume, by Pedro Moreno, and
set design, by Attila Kovacs, recreate, nicely, the flow of Hungarian history 
over the last century. The score, by Maurice Jarre, suits the mood of the film.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Ralph Fiennes finely acting in yet another epic . . .
An epic tale of five generations of (what begins as) a Jewish family in
the heart of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, writer/director Istvan Szabo's
Sunshine allows star Ralph Fiennes to flex his acting muscles as he
plays three separate roles as a hundred years of time rolls endlessly
across the big screen. With its three hour running time, two thoughts
may flow through your heads...
1) if it's so good, why isn't it being held until November?, and
2) if the air conditioner is broken, three hours in a cool theater is
better than a hundred and twelve degrees in the shade . . .
Both thoughts are legit and both make it sound as if Sunshine is an
utter bomb, which it is not. It is, actually, a splendidly acted and
dazzling-to-watch two hours of film, recreating a world that hasn't
existed in almost a century. The problem is that this two hour wonder is
followed by a third, which essentially kills all the fun. But, says the
film student inside, historical epics aren't supposed to be fun!, to
which I reply that I would rather be left wanting to see more, than to
walk away without a positive, spirit enhancing conclusion to the piece
-- which Sunshine tries to deliver and doesn't.
Sunshine is the story of the family Sonnenschein, whose patriarch
Emmanuel (David De Keyser) made his fortune peddling an herbal tonic,
brand-named "Sunshine," from a pack on his back. Once successful and
established, with a factory cranking out his product and its recipe
secreted inside a hidden notebook, Emmanuel takes a wife and raises his
family. Gustave (James Frain) and Ignatz (Fiennes) are his pride and
joys. Valerie (Jennifer Ehle), an orphaned cousin on his wife's side, is
also raised as a sister to the boys. The family is nearly split in two
by political affiliations and the declared love of Ignatz and his
cousin, who marry despite "their" father's wishes. Ignatz, an
incorruptible judge, changes his name to "Sors" for political reasons --
no obvious Jews are allowed government -- and rises higher and higher in
the Empire, until historical events shuffle him off the screen. Gustave
flees to France, to be seen later, and Valerie raises her son Adam
(again, Fiennes), who becomes a champion fencer and a Gold Medal
recipient on the Hungarian Olympic team in Berlin.
To do so, Adam must turn his back on his religion and become a Roman
Catholic. In doing so, he meets his also-to-be-converted wife Hannah
(Molly Parker) and fathers a son, Ivan (again, Fiennes). Then comes The
Big One, where conversion and/or status in the country cannot protect
everyone in the family from doom. All of this, the epic tale of a
family's rise and fall and redemption and survival, is enough.
Once you get past the War (you'll hear a crowd chanting "Stalin! Stalin!
Stalin!") we suggest you pack up and leave, wanting more. If you wish to
sit through the Communist era, prepare to emerge like a balloon that has
deflated. It isn't that Sunshine fails here, it is just that the film
(perhaps all too accurately) portrays a love-less, joy-less, and fully
hypocritical time. Ivan and the remains of his family, including his
grandmother Valerie (Rosemary Harris) a returned uncle Gustave (John
Neville) must survive under Communism. Ivan must deal with his
experience in the camps and can never let the war go; his job is to hunt
down the traitors, first from the war and then the witchhunt of the
Stalinist purges. Important characters in this stage include William
Hurt as Ivan's boss and Deborah Kara Unger as the wife of a connected
party. For Ivan and his family this era, called "The Great Diminishing"
by Szabo is one bad turn after another. Even with a conclusion set in
the post-Communist free era, all that is left for the living is a sense
that they have survived.
And survival is not enough. Ivan's redemption, such as it is, is not
enough -- and I've left out tons of material laying out the bare bones
of the story for you. The first two hours are truly a magnificent
recreation of that time and world . . . and here you should know that I
can trace my family back to a time they were called Wittenbourg and
lived dead center in the middle of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. I may
bring more historical baggage into the theater with me, but this does
not mean I've overinflated my enjoyment of the first two acts. Fiennes'
roles, and Rosemary Harris' later, are both unique and touching. The
staging and production values are equally great. Szabo's original five
hour long script, in Hungarian, has survived both translation and
reduction with the help of noted playwright Israel Horwitz. The film
dearly needs an intermission and, I'm guessing, another half hour to
show if and how Ivan is truly redeemed.
The Commies wrecked it for everybody, I guess . . .
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Sunshine, he would have paid...
Rental level. If you can find it on the big screen at a decent price,
the first two hours are well worth the expenditure of cash.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
 Hungarian director Istvan Szabos' epic, three-hour saga
chronicles the rise and fall of three tumultuous generations of a
troubled Hungarian Jewish family. Their name is Sonnenschein, which
means sunshine in German; the title also refers to a delicious herbal
tonic that the family brews.  Ralph Fiennes plays three roles: the
patriarch, Ignatz Sonnenschein, who marries his cousin and begins the
process of assimilation by changing the family name to Sors; his son,
Adam, who converts to Roman Catholicism, primarily to get into
Budapest's best fencing club, and becomes an Anti-Semitic snob,
slashing his way to Olympics victory; and Adam's son, cynical Ivan
Sors, who joins the Communist secret police after W.W.II.  The
sweeping story by Israel Horovitz begins in 1840 and extends through
the fall of Communism, encompassing more than 100 years - like
Bertolucci's "1900" and Visconti's "Leopard." Its theme is how all
governments - Monarchy, Fascism or Communism - are corrupt, and how
the choices we make - for better or worse - determine our future.  In
a unique casting twist, Jennifer Ehle plays Valerie, the woman whom
Ignatz loves, and, as she ages, Ms. Ehle's real-life mother, acclaimed
actress Rosemary Harris, continues the same character about whom a
grandson says, "She was the only one of us who had the gift of
breathing freely." Recently, mother and daughter were both Best
Actress Tony-Award competitors; Ms. Ehle won for "The Real Thing." On
the Granger Movie Gauge of to 10, "Sunshine" is a thoughtful,
ambitious, elegant 8 - but, because of its length, it's better suited
as a three-part TV miniseries on an adult-oriented channel that could
accommodate the graphic brutality of one torture scene in a
concentration camp, along with the sexual content and nudity.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Note: While this review does not have spoilers, I
do discuss much of the film's plot. I suggest that
those who like to enter a film with an open mind view
the film before reading this review. However, reading
this review will not spoil the film.
That the sun rises daily is itself a miracle, one of
many that most people take for granted. As many
viewers inferred from the recent `American Beauty',
life is only worth living when one can take time to
appreciate the small things, like the miracle of
sunshine. Istvan Szabo's `Sunshine' is a film that
earns the cliché `an epic of intimate proportions,'
because it is a big, bold, sweeping three-hour triumph
that is, at heart, about the smaller things in life,
and the ways in which these things shape our destiny. 
`Sunshine' is a film of dazzling richness; the fully
developed story of 3 pivotal generations in the
Sonnenschein (which translates as `sunshine') family
of 20th century Hungary. Szabo's vision is ambitious,
as he tries to tell the story of a century, a country,
a family and their plight for assimilation in a world
that may not accept them for what they are. The
Sonnenschein family is Jewish, and one of the film's
major themes involves the way in which the family
slowly breaks away from their ancient heritage. 
Ralph Fiennes ambitiously and successfully plays three
members of the Sonnenschein family in different time
periods. The family patriarch is Emmanuel (David de
Keyser), who, in the late 1800's, creates a successful
business by peddling the family treasure, `Sunshine
Tonic'. He marries the temperamental Rose (Miriam
Margolyes) and raises two daringly different young
boys, Ignatz (Ralph Fiennes) and Gustave (James
Frain), and his orphaned niece, Valerie (Jennifer
Ehle). 
As young adults, Ignatz, a government official who
fervently supports the Emperor, and Valerie, a
beautiful photographer, begin a forbidden, incestuous
affair. Gustave, a wild Communist revolutionary,
disapproves of his brother's actions, both politically
and sexually. According to the film's press notes, the
Germans and Jews were each highly assimilated, and did
not regard themselves as a separate group. Therefore,
it is all the more disconcerting that in order to
become a judge, Ignatz must, with his siblings, change
the family name to the Hungarian-sounding Sors. When
telling her parents of the name change, Valerie
promises to never abandon her Jewish faith. Easy for
her to say 
At the beginning of the twentieth century, Adam Sors
(Ralph Fiennes, in his second role), the younger son
of Ignatz and Valerie, emerges as a world-class
fencer. Taught by his brother Istvan (Mark Strong),
Adam becomes the top fencer in his club, and aims to
be an Olympian. However, times being the way they are,
Adam has little chance of fulfilling his goals if he
continues as a Jew. Because his life's motivation is
to succeed as an athlete, he converts to Catholicism,
breaking ties with his family's strong Jewish
background. At the conversion, he meets Hannah (Molly
Parker), a woman who is also desperately trying to fit
in to the ever-changing society. Adam becomes an
Olympian, winning the gold for his country. But even
that cannot shield him from the upcoming war, and its
effects. 
The first 120 minutes of `Sunshine' is some of the
best filmmaking I have seen this century, combining
remarkable, intricate elements of romance and
political intrigue that blend together seamlessly. But
the third act, the story of Ivan Sors, who turns to
Communism in order to avenge the gruesome effects of
the Holocaust (which are shown in one particularly
wrenching scene), is noticeably weak (until the final
minutes, in which Szabo's vision becomes clear). 
`Sunshine' is remarkable because director Istvan Szabo
uses the powers of cinema to their fullest extent. The
film is a welcome reminder of how any filmmaker with a
strong vision can tell a compelling story under the
constraints of a low budget. `Sunshine' pays close
attention to period detail, transporting the viewer
through the twentieth century with keen
characterizations that pack a real punch. 
Flawed as it is, `Sunshine' is a life-affirming tale
of family ties; grandly intimate filmmaking that can
only be categorized as `epic'. A unique combination of
flamboyance and detail, featuring a dazzling display
of acting prowess by the incomparable Ralph Fiennes,
Istvan Szabo's `Sunshine' is a film event not to be
missed. 
