Title
Review for Strange Days (1995)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Angela Bassett, Juliette Lewis, Tom Sizemore,
      Michael Wincott, Vincent D'Onofrio, William Fichner,
      Brigitte Bako, Josef Sommer, Glenn Plummer
Director: Kathryn Bigelow
Producers: James Cameron and Steven-Charles Jaffe
Screenplay: James Cameron and Jay Cocks based on a story by
            James Cameron
Cinematography: Matthew Leonetti
Music: Graeme Revell
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     December 30, 1999:  the penultimate day of the penultimate year of
the century (the 20th century doesn't officially end until the close of
2000).  In Los Angeles, the "biggest party of all time" is already
underway.  Crime is flowing as freely through the streets as champagne
at the high-class galas.  Ex-cop Lenny Nero (Ralph Fiennes) is in his
element:  a world where his former colleagues are too busy with serious
matters, like the roadside shooting of rapper/black activist Jeriko One
(Glenn Plummer), to harass small-time dealers like him.  What Nero
sells, however, isn't traditional dope, although it's just as addictive
and arguably more dangerous.  He's the magic man, not the candy man,
and his bag of goodies contains disks full of memories and
experiences.  Once plugged into the appropriate player, one disk allows
the user to re-live its contents, which could be something as innocent
as taking a shower, something as raunchy as participating in an orgy,
or something as grotesque as committing a murder.
     This is the premise of James Cameron's script for STRANGE DAYS,
the technologically slick action/thriller directed by his ex-wife,
Kathryn Bigelow (POINT BREAK).  Where TOTAL RECALL underused a similar
concept, STRANGE DAYS takes the subject matter and runs with it.  The
picture does not attempt to mix, mingle, or confuse fantasy and
reality.  Instead, it uses these ideas as a launching pad for a murder
mystery conspiracy that involves a car chase, shoot-outs, and a
fight-to-the- death climax--all the things expected from this sort of
motion picture.
     One of the most fascinating elements of STRANGE DAYS is the
subculture that has developed around Superconductor Quantum
Interference Device (SQUID) users.  Even though it's illegal to buy or
own these machines, their availability has created a thriving black
market for disks to run in them.  There's big money involved for those
who deal in memories, and for anyone willing to allow a part of their
life to be recorded.  Oddly, though, for all the dollars being traded,
no one seems to be getting rich.  Lenny has a run-down apartment and
always wears the same ratty wardrobe.  His street contact is in even
worse shape.  Only his friend Mason (Angela Bassett), who won't use a
SQUID, appears to have a financial foundation, and she's far from
wealthy.
     Only five years into the future, LA is a poverty-stricken city
seething with racial tension that STRANGE DAYS brings bubbling to the
surface.  This film can be seen as a two-pronged cautionary tale:  what
happens when drugs become the only escape from a grim reality, and what
could occur if attempts aren't made to heal the racial fissure.  A
Rodney King-inspired scene with LA cops beating an unarmed black woman,
and the riot that follows, underscores the volatility of the situation
in 1999--and it's not that different from recent history.  STRANGE DAYS
may be a dark fantasy, but its subtext never strays far from a reality
we can all understand.
     If the premise is the most fascinating element of the film, and
what draws the viewer in, Bigelow's tight pacing keeps the audience
involved.  The most recent two-and-one-half-hour film to move this
quickly was PULP FICTION.  Since there's no let up, viewing STRANGE
DAYS becomes an exhausting undertaking, and the unrelenting tone
doesn't allow a moment's relief.  Combined with the sensory overload
created by a throbbing soundtrack and stylish cinematography, this
makes for an intense movie-going experience.
     Perhaps the greatest assets of STRANGE DAYS are its lead
performers.  Ralph Fiennes (SCHINDLER'S LIST, QUIZ SHOW) continues to
impress with his range and ability.  After roles as a vicious Nazi and
erudite quiz show contestant, he returns to the screen as a seedy
techno-drug dealer "calmly backstroking along in the big toilet bowl of
life."  Angela Bassett plays the latest--and best-acted--female action
hero to emerge from Cameron's pen (following in the footsteps of
Sigourney Weaver in ALIENS and Linda Hamilton in the two TERMINATOR
flicks).  The supporting cast, which includes Tom Sizemore (DEVIL IN A
BLUE DRESS), a slimy Michael Wincott (THE THREE MUSKETEERS), and
Vincent D'Onofrio (HOUSEHOLD SAINTS), is solid.  Even Juliette Lewis'
spacy, one-dimensional performance doesn't damage the film--Bigelow
uses the actress to her best, albeit limited, ability.
     While STRANGE DAYS is accomplished in choreographed action,
character development, pacing, and visual effects, it displays serious
flaws as a murder mystery.  Not only is the killer's identity
telegraphed far too early, but one of the worst cliches of the genre is
reproduced here:  while holding the good guy at gun point, the bad guy
describes his entire plan.  Even the slight twist Cameron employs isn't
enough to camouflage this contrivance.  Overall, however, STRANGE DAYS
is a thriller first and a mystery second.  It's big, explosive
entertainment and, although not directed by Cameron, is very much in
the vein we've come to expect from him.  STRANGE DAYS may not be the
best movie to hit screens during the Fall, but it's likely to be the
brashest.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     We are now into computer movies.  Suddenly, chips and virtual
reality have hit Hollywood.  We can expect more of the same and even
wilder films involving more than the present state of the art; the
state of a screenwriter's imagination.
     STRANGE DAYS hinges on a chip (they call it a "clip") which
records what a person is seeing, or thinking, or experiencing.  This is
caught on a digital contraption known as "the wire."  Put it on your
head and you experience what the person did.  Want to know what it is
like to be a woman?  A man puts the wire on his head and instantly
experiences what one woman did, saw, experienced.  Anything goes and it
happens, where else, but in Los Angeles on December 31, 1999,
incorrectly called the end of the Millennium.  (The Millenium ends
12/21/2000.)
     Lenny Nero (Ralph Fiennes, quite unrecognizable) is the most
prolific seller of these clips.  As he tells his customers, "This is
not TV; this is real life you will be experiencing."  And he has clips
of every sort from sex to murder.  This is the drug that has replaced
the old heroin.
     This would all be fine for those into this new genre but the film
gets bogged down in murder and the story gets wilder and wilder.  The
sound track, from beginning to end, is the loudest, most annoying noise
of any film I can think of.
     Helping Lenny in one way or another are MACE (Angela Bassett) who
is a friend.  She drives an armor-proof limousine as she chauffeurs the
wealthy and powerful around town.  MACE, in her way, loves Lenny but
Lenny loves Faith (Juliette Lewis) who no longer loves him.  Faith
dances at night clubs and does a mean wiggle; she never looked that
good before.  Max (Tom Sizemore) is an ex-cop, a friend of Lenny.  But
stirring them around in this film leads only to eventual boredom.  How
about waiting for the videotape?

Author
Christopher Null
     I've never really given much thought to what the turn of the
millennium is going to bring.  Will it be a new beginning for society
and the world?  Or will it bring on the apocalypse foretold by
Revelations?
     STRANGE DAYS continuously plays these two possibilities off of
each other, and in L.A., on December 31, 1999, it seems either one is
equally likely.  Ralph Fiennes plays Lenny Nero, a bottom-feeder ex-cop
who peddles "clips," full-sensory pieces of memory from real people's
lives.  These clips are played on "the wire," a device which delivers
experiences directly into the brain.  The very illegal wire is also the
source of a whole slew of problems, including the murder of one Jeriko
One, a very influential rap star, and the subsequent stalking of Faith
(Juliette Lewis), Nero's ex-girlfriend, for whom he still pines.
     As it turns out, this Jeriko has been heralded as the next
Messiah, and the circumstances of his murder stand to cause riots of
unprecedented horror.  When a clip containing the identity of Jeriko's
killers falls into Nero's hands, it's anybody's guess who he can
trust.
     The greatest part of STRANGE DAYS is easily the first-person
photography that is used whenever a clip is played--so the audience
gets to see everything as if they're part of the action.  This is
remarkably effective, and as it gets more and more gruesome later in
the film, the technology's dangers are almost palpable.
     Fiennes is terrific, as is Angela Bassett, who plays his best
friend, Mace.  Nero's insecurity is truly refreshing in this day and
age of indestructible action heroes, and although his frequent
confessions to Mace wear thin after two or three of them, he still does
plenty with the role to make the character real:  he is selling bits of
people's lives but doesn't have one of his own.
     Sadly, STRANGE DAYS is no bed of roses.  Example: here's what I
learned about the future.  In 1999, playing really, really bad rap
music is almost enough to earn you sainthood.  In 1999, no one wears
much in the way of clothes, especially female rock singers.  In 1999,
the music pretty much sucks, too.  And everyone gets beat up.  A lot.
And no one seems to mind.
     While the film is intriguing all the way through, it never really
gels together.  Director Kathryn Bigelow does some admirable work, but
the result is a BLADE RUNNER meets CLOCKWORK ORANGE meets Rodney King,
and some strange hybrid results that makes STRANGE DAYS feel like two
movies playing at once.  It's a troubling problem that is fortunately
balanced by the style of the feature, but the end result is an
interesting little film that's just, well, "strange."
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Soh Kam Hung
`Strange Days' chronicles the last two days of 1999 in Los Angeles.  As
the locals gear up for the new millenium, Lenny Nero (Ralph Fiennes)
goes about his business of peddling erotic memory clips.  He pines for
his ex-girlfriend, Faith (Juliette Lewis), not noticing that another
friend, Mace (Angela Bassett) really cares for him.
This film features good performances, impressive film-making technique
and breath-taking crowd scenes.  Director Kathryn Bigelow knows her
stuff and does not hesitate to use it.
But as a whole, this is an unsatisfying movie.  The problem is that the
writers, James Cameron and Jay Cocks, were too ambitious, aiming for
a film with social relevance, thrills, and drama.  Not that ambitious
film-making should be discouraged; just that when it fails to achieve
its goals, it fails badly and obviously.  The film just ends up preachy,
unexciting and uninvolving.
--
Soh Kam Hung  +61 3 9253-6467  h.soh@trl.telstra.com.au  
Network Analysis Section, Telstra Research Laboratories
Box 249 Rosebank MDC, Clayton, Victoria 3169, Australia

Author
Bryant Frazer
Directed by Kathryn Bigelow
Written by James Cameron and Jay Cocks
Starring Ralph Fiennes, Angela Bassett, and Juliette Lewis
     There's a lot of sex in STRANGE DAYS.  A lot of sex, and a lot of
violence.  Director Kathryn Bigelow and her screenwriter cronies James
Cameron and Jay Cocks understand well that the sleekest new technology
is immediately turned to the seediest purposes.  Their protagonist,
L.A.  ex-cop Lenny Nero (Ralph Fiennes), understands it too, and he's
the consummate salesperson for virtual sleaze, circa 1999.  When Nero
watches a potential client "jack in"--a contraband silver rig on top of
the mark's head wires the contents of a mini CD recorded with the full
sensory experience of another person directly into his brain--he sports
the sharp grin of a guy who loves the junk he's dealing as much as the
junkies do.  After the client's spent a few quality moments feeling
himself up through his business suit, Nero cuts off his feed.  "You
were just an 18-year-old girl taking a shower," he tells the client.
And, of course, there's more where that came from.
     The filmmakers also understand that good help is hard to find.
After he's just played back a pornographic disc of a half-hearted
lesbian encounter--from the point of view of one of the women,
naturally--Nero coaches one of the two performers from the clip. "You
should move your eyes a lot slower," he explains.  "Like you're making
love with your eyes." The girl stares back at him silent and
uncomprehending, her eyes a complete blank.  Nero's a lost romantic in
the age of sensory overload.
     The minidisc system is called SQUID, a charming acronym for
Superconducting Quantum Interference Device.  That's just another way to
say The Movies, for which SQUID is sort of a doublespeak stand-in.  Nero
is the director, who lives vicariously through the exploits of
criminals and neo-porn stars as his own life moves in ever contracting
circles.  Among the clips in highest demand are the ones recorded in the
most extreme of circumstances, like the botched robbery sequence that
opens the film.  The scene is one long take from a criminal's p.o.v.,
and the event doesn't end happily, which pisses Nero off.  Nero doesn't
deal in "blackjack clips"--that's snuff clips, the ones where some
poor sucker winds up dead before it's over.
     The clips that Nero loves best, the ones he keeps in a shoebox
back at his house, are home movies, full-sensory snippets from his life
with Faith (Juliette Lewis), the girl who used to love him but now
sings in a nightclub for sleazy music mogul Philo Gant (Michael
Wincott).  This shady circle of friends also includes a flunky named Max
(Tom Sizemore), a tough cab driver named Mace (Angela Bassett) and a
prostitute named Iris (Brigitte Bako).  When Iris comes running to Nero,
begging frantically for help, he shrugs her off.  But the next day,
when a blackjack disc of a particularly traumatic murder is anonymously
delivered to him, Nero starts to wonder what Iris had to tell him that
was so important, and whether he might be next in line.
     What a kick--STRANGE DAYS is an action movie with real
characters and uncommonly skillful actors.  Ralph Fiennes as Nero is a
real tragic hero, one who's fallen from grace with his former employer
(the L.A.P.D.) and his former lover.  Fiennes is s o damn likable in the
role--he gives the scuzzball a fuzzy surface.  Angela Bassett's
ass-kicking turn as Mace, the only woman who's willing to stand by Nero
through and through, is actually a secondary role, but she brings it
straight to the fore and rein forces the star status she won in WHAT'S
LOVE GOT TO DO WITH IT? Juliette Lewis gets to stretch out just a
little, even though she's once again typecast as a sexpot for scumbags
(can't she talk to her agent about this?).  The supporting cast, which
includes t he chameleon-like Vincent D'Onofrio as a rogue cop, is
excellent as well.
     In very literal ways, STRANGE DAYS is a movie about sensory
overload.  If you see the movie in a house wired with digital sound and
a big screen, it will undoubtedly get your blood flowing.  Tellingly, in
this age of bright lights and big sound, one character from the film is
knocked into a coma when his SQUID unit is wired to overamp the signals
to his brain.  Moreover, the interaction of people wearing the devices
and crossing their own experiences with the playback amounts to a
conceptual tour de force, with one experience informing another,
brutality overlapping terror, and pleasure licking the heels of
sadism.  The single most punishing moment of STRANGE DAYS owes a
specific debt to Michael Powell's definitive treatment of voyeuristic
pleasure, PEEPING TOM (1960), and I could see couples huddling closer
together and others slouching lower in their seats as a true high-tech
perversion played itself out on-screen.  STRANGE DAYS isn't always an
easy or pleasant film, and in the age of the easygoing bullet-laden
blockbuster, it's sobering to see a movie where representations of
violence are, well, violent.
     More to the point, Kathryn Bigelow cements her reputation as a
stops-out action director who encourages audiences to keep their brains
engaged as she steps on the pedal.  I'm not a big fan of her ex-husband
Cameron's movies (they include ALIENS and TRUE LIES), but it's hard to
explain how his admittedly exhilarating approach to an action scene
differs from Bigelow's similarly expert tactics, which also work
wonders.  Maybe it's her background as an artist that shapes these
quick cuts into a montage that makes sense, or her intellectual
fascination with the first-person point of view that shapes the SQUID
sequences.  You don't have to be intellectually aware of how good she is
at all of this to appreciate the sheer rush of the fast action, but the
experience is heightened by her sure control of thematic concerns.  And
at any rate, this is miles ahead of her previous POINT BREAK.
     The special effects are so well done that they're nearly
unnoticeable, and aside from a couple of fireworks in the night sky
over L.A., I can hardly remember what the digital effects shots were.
The throbbing soundtrack, featuring the music of bands like Tricky and
PJ Harvey (who might actually still be current in 1999), is a savvy,
welcome switch from SF movies with pop soundtracks comprised
exclusively of 70s retreads or bad techno.  Despite a fairly contrived
screenplay, STRANGE DAYS is altogether hip, slick, and wicked.  What
you get out of it it is probably proportionate to how much credence
you're willing to give it, and it seems that most folks will love it or
hate it.
     When the end credits started rolling, the crowd at STRANGE DAYS
was fractured in a way I haven't seen in a long time.  There was
spontaneous applause--that much you expect--but then the clapping hands
were overwhelmed by a loud chorus of hisses.  Couples left the theater
engaged in heated arguments, and larger groups stood in the lobby
afterward, flashing back to the movie's most violent moments.  One point
of contention is the ending, and that's definitely a cop-out.  Any $40
million production has to be mediated by the aesthetic needs of a mass
audience, but the tidy 15-minute denouement here is so at odds with the
controlled chaos that brews for the first couple of hours that it
leaves a bad taste.
     All that having been said, what's up on-screen is still quite an
experience.  It is rare that a Hollywood blockbuster can encourage
debate in a movie-going audience, and rarer still that there might be
something truly disturbing lurking under a high-gloss surface, but
there is substance in STRANGE DAYS.  Nero is the vessel for the
knowledge it imparts, which has to do with sorting out desire, regret,
and nostalgia and learning to make the best of this world.  Like Nero,
who has to learn to give up his aluminum-coated memories of what once
was to live in the here and now, STRANGE DAYS struggles to come to
terms with the relationship of memory to reality, the future to the
present, and what could be to what is.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
It is the last day of 1999 in a Los Angeles teetering on the
brink of civil war.  Lenny (Fiennes) is a ex-cop gone to seed and
pedalling "clips" --- full sensory experiences recorded on and
played back from disk.  As the year 2000 approaches and Lenny
hustles, he finds himself threatened by unknown forces somehow
connected with his ex-girlfriend, musician Faith (Lewis).  Aided
by bodyguard/driver Mace (Bassett) and scuzzy plainclothes cop
Max (Sizemore), he trys to solve the mystery.
The vilification that "Strange Days" was subjected to by
critics is difficult to explain.  It is not a film without
problems, but it still packs a mighty punch and its recent
release of video gives hope that this tough and dense film might
find its audience.
Possibly critics were primed by names on the production
staff.  Although Bigelow is widely regarded as a very talented
director, she has produced some astoundingly bad movies.
(Examples : the silly "Blue Steel" and the even sillier "Point
Break".)  SF-movie guru Cameron as producer and writer raises
other problems.  As a science-fiction film-maker, he makes good
action films.  "Aliens" and "Terminator 2" are, at their heart,
action films with SF elements being largely replaceable or
extraneous to the plot.  Strangely enough both Bigelow and
Cameron emerge out with flying colours.  Although some motifs are
purloined from other films (notably "Bladerunner", "T2" and "City
of Lost Children"), Bigelow's direction is inventive and deft,
capturing a millennial LA in a bright staccato stream of images.
Even on video this wall of images and sound is overwhelming, like
the city careering towards a new age.  Cameron's script is
intermittently clever.  It is perhaps arguable whether the SF
elements are irreplaceable but the story itself is comfortable
with them and exploits them, confirming its SF nature.
Thankfully it also avoids being the stream of wisecracks and
stunts that passes for many scripts nowadays.
Acting is generally of a high standard.  Bassett is fabulous
as the hardened Mace, and Fiennes is great as the charming but
decaying Lenny.  If anyone was looking to cast a William Gibson's
"Neuromancer", these two _are_ Molly Millions and Case.
There are also some painful issues dealt with in "Strange
Days", not all immediately apparent.  Is a race or class war
necessary to solve inequality?  Do lives have to be sacrificed to
save the living?  (There are two answers to that, one which we
would want to be true and one we fear is true.)  Images and the
media are pervasive and untrustworthy.  Lenny's flashbacks look
like movies.  He treats clips of Faith as memories rather than
symbols of memories.  Images are constantly seen in reflections
and mirrors, pictures that look the same but are reversed.
Conversely, there are some problems.  The film suffers from
"Cameron bloat": the inability to tell a film in a reasonable
amount of time.  (See "Abyss" et al.)  The first hour of the film
is busy rather than complex, failing to really start the story
until halfway.  The subplot concerning Faith (Juliette Lewis
playing the same characters she does in everything these days) is
fairly tenuously connected to the rest of the movie.  The
eventual logic of the plot and character motivation is fairly
suspect too, although to be fair this is apparent largely in
hindsight.  Also puzzling is the film's ambivalent attitude to
the LAPD, perhaps a reflection of everyone's ambivalence to law
enforcement.  This can be seen in a central event in the film, a
re-enactment of the Rodney King beating, and how it differs from
its realworld analog in circumstance and eventual resolution.
Also a few small cliches and stupidities show up in the climax
literally in the last ten minutes, but this and the previous
point cannot be discussed further without spoilers.
Nonetheless, "Strange Days" is recommended strongly as a
ambitious and successful SF piece.  Hopefully in years to come it
will achieve greater recognition.  For those concerned by such
things, it contains significant amounts of sex, nudity and
disturbing (but not graphic) violence.  [****/mustsee] and dive
bombing on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]

Author
Daniel Simon 
     I won free tickets to the new film STRANGE DAYS, so I went to see
it on its opening night.  When a movie company knows it has a good film
on its hands--except it's a film whose appeal may not transfer so well
through previews and posters, they use such ticket give-aways to spawn
the advertising they need: word-of-mouth.  As I believe in
free-enterprising moves like that, and the economic strength of
educated consumerism, I want to take my part in this, and not take
something for nothing.  The following is my public, honest appraisal of
STRANGE DAYS.
     See the film.  This cinematic venture from the makers of several
past blockbusters is fresh, stimulating, and well-made on every level.
STRANGE DAYS is set only hours before the turn of the millennium, in a
ravaged, chaotic Los Angeles--a virtual police state, which is
exaggerated but provoking.  A virtual reality technology originally
developed for police surveillance has developed into an illegal "drug"
of sorts, called "playback" or "the wire": Human experiences can be
recorded and played back, "straight from the cerebral cortex," with
almost the same intensity in which they are experienced.
     But now you might be turning away; I know what you must be
thinking.  After the great Summer of Cyber-Films, in which computer
wizardry has paraded in lieu of substantive entertainment, it may be
hard to imagine such a fantastic technological premise (perfected
virtual reality--only four years from now ...) not being fecklessly
exploited.  But that's simply not the case with STRANGE DAYS.  The way
the futuristic hardware adds to the film's artistry is reminiscent of
BLADE RUNNER.  The "wire-tripping" concept never serves to cover for
any deficiencies in the film.  On the contrary, it is treated so
straightforwardly that it adds greater dimension to the
characterizations and gives us new and real avenues of human
possibilities to explore.  This film establishes a strong sense of
realism in its futuristic concepts, then creatively builds on them.
     Especially considering our obsession (and angst) with all which
our unique, precipitous technological age portends--particularly how
easily marketable it proves to be, STRANGE DAYS was a film idea begging
to be compromised: to be written with slick style and little craft,
cast with a more appeasing lead, marketed with one-liners and
cyber-gloss.  But, following writer James Cameron's talented lead,
director Kathryn Bigelow and her collaborators have walked the straight
and narrow; it is clear they cared about movie-making.
     Still, at a cursory glance, some may dismiss the film, saying,
"This is all familiar territory."  But again, the unconventional merits
of this film may not be communicated well along all the conventional
channels.  Its originality cannot be found in its striking visuals or
in its mere semblance of high-concept, but rather in the film's total
of skillfully-woven elements.  STRANGE DAYS works because of its
integration.  And nothing here comes across as heavy-handed, even
including an all-too-obvious scene invoking the Rodney King beating.
This is not "safe," but focused, filmmaking.
     Of all cinematic elements, modern film plots are generally the
weakest.  As you "debrief" a film experience on the way home, with a
friend or in your own head, character analysis or special effects
usually command more psychic indulgence than plot.  But the
surprisingly good mystery plot of this movie was foremost on my mind.
I could tell you how it involves a slain rapper/social figure, a
psychotic sex killer who sends his "blackjack" recordings to the hero,
a music producer who clearly knows more than we do, and malevolent
rogue cops whose number might be just two--or a hundred.  What is
important, though, is the coherence of the plot's turns, questions,
surprises, character motivations, and accidents: an uncontrived story
which unfolds to a compelling denouement.  And the tempo throughout
could not be better.
     Ralph Fiennes is interestingly cast as Lenny Nero, a "successful"
product of his times.  As a dealer in black market "wire-tripping," he
drives a new Mercedes, but wears fake Rolexes to bribe his way out of
jams.  But he always seems to be running on empty, in business and in
relationships.  He exploits his friendship with Mace (Angela Bassett),
hustling the clients of her limousine service.  He intrudes on his past
girlfriend Faith (Juliette Lewis), with whom he is trying to sustain a
dead relationship through "playback" of the past.  Fiennes, who we've
seen in SCHINDLER'S LIST and QUIZ SHOW, is a wonderful natural actor.
Here he takes a well-written part and gives it "real guy" appeal.  We
want to see more of him.
     Juliette Lewis, as the ex-girlfriend, is very good, so deeply "in
character"--as always--that you wonder about the real-life
actress--whether she needs a vacation to a solitary locale to find the
real her.  Darkly convivial actor Tom Sizemore (True Romance) is
effective as Nero's best friend.  And only slightly over-the-top is
Michael Wincott as the dark, "wire-tripping" record mogul, whose
capricious, rasping rants bring to mind the similar dark, powerful
whacko he played in THE CROW.  (I liked him best as Kent the juvenile
junkie in TALK RADIO.)
     But it is perhaps Angela Bassett's performance as Nero's friend
Mace that deserves the most credit--not because it is any more
convincing, but because it meets the unusually high challenges of a
very complicated role.  As Mace - a security professional--she is
superior to Nero in both moral strength and hand-to-hand combat.  Few
actresses are believable defeating men in fist-fight scenes, but Bassett
is.  And she handles a gun in the no-nonsense fashion of a Marine.  She
does all this while lending an emotional and distinctly feminine
presence to the screen.  In the film's most empathetic character, she
is remarkably able to juxtapose toughness with sensitivity in the role
of a woman desperately trying to preserve a very bright, decent spirit
in a culture which requires self-alienation for better survival--a
world in which the wearing vigilance to see the other guy coming first
has stunted every individual's ability for spiritual growth.
     I should point out that this is a movie for mature audiences.  It
contains every element for which R ratings are given.  The fact that
undeveloped mentalities will view this film and be negatively
influenced may even provide hours of worry to religious conservatives
with nothing better to do.  But taking a different tack: I am someone
who loves the films of the '40's and '50's for a beautiful, "untouched
by the world" quality that the characters sometimes possess; STRANGE
DAYS is utterly bereft of that quality.  Presented to us is a raw and
animalistic techno-culture, which I sensed as disturbingly prescient.
But in this film's gestalt, there is plenty of creative energy to ride,
enough to make it a positive and highly stimulating experience.  You
just may want to offset some minor subconscious "impurities" that the
film's jaded mood is bound to affect by a pastoral outing or a reading
from classical Liberalism.
     When you put all of its elements together, STRANGE DAYS contains a
blend of enough originality and energy to be one of the most memorable
films of the year.  One of these elements is the very last scene, which
will surprise some viewers.  Without giving too much away: it is a
refreshing turn that defies a particular stale, but all-pervasive,
convention.  We've seen this convention defied before, but rarely so
with no compromises, no window dressing or conciliatory
character-modifications to make it more acceptable.  At the conclusions
of our Hollywood movies--movies carefully plotted on demographic
marketing maps to produce myriad satisfaction--how often can you note
that the ending had more integrity than even the rest of the film, that
the film deserved it?

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The best science fiction film of the 1980s was the first 2/3 of
the film BRAINSTORM.  This was an excellent look at how one invention
could transform humanity.  The invention was the means to record a
person's thoughts and sensory input and to play it back for someone
else so the second person has exactly the same experience.  The last
third of BRAINSTORM shows the signs of rapid rewriting of the script
after one of the major actors died.  In the world of the film resulting
transformation of society could have been the subject of twenty
excellent sequels without ever covering the same topic twice.  For a
while watching STRANGE DAYS I thought I was seeing the first of those
sequels and it was great.  But the feeling just did not last.
     Lenny Nero (played by Ralph Fiennes) traffics in contraband
experience, recorded on little CD-ROMs and capable of being played
back.  If you want the experience of making love to a beautiful woman
or of committing a violent crime, you can buy it from Lenny and play it
back as often as you like, repeating it over and over.  If you have no
legs and miss the experience of running on the beach, as long as some
human can have the experience, you can also.  As Lenny says, "This
isn't 'television, only better'"  This is the real thing.  The only
problem is the technology and materials are illegal.  People record
their experiences and sell them to Lenny who sells them to other
people.  Lenny has a bag full of contraband experiences (not unlike the
handkerchief full of souls in "The Devil and Daniel Webster").  He
plies his trade in the netherworld of a disintegrating Los Angeles.  So
what do writers James Cameron and Jay Cocks do with the idea?  One of
these little experience CD-ROMs has a recording of an experience that
some people would like hushed up and others would want to make public.
Full stop on the ideas.  Now we have high-energy chases, sex scenes,
martial arts fights, gunplay, shocking revelations, rock music
performances, smashing windshields, graphic rapes, betrayals, murders,
cover-ups, and a totally daffy ending with several progressively
sillier climaxes.  Not surprisingly Los Angeles is much like today,
only worse, in the last days of the second-to-last year of this
century.  (Yes, the second-to-last.  Cameron and Cox seem to think that
in spite of the fact that the first millennium started with the year 1
and the second one started with the year 1001, for some reason we will
start the third one in the year 2000.  We won't.)
     Ralph Fiennes and Tom Sizemore are fairly good as low-life heroes,
and what is cyberpunk without its low-life heroes?  Angela Bassett is
not quite up to a role that calls for her to have both the natural
wisdom of a Solomon and the martial arts skills of a Chuck Norris.  It
isn't her fault, but the script falls just short of implying she can
walk on water.  Juliette Lewis show more flesh than acting talent as an
old girlfriend of Lenny's.
     The style of the film is fast-paced and will certainly be hard for
some audiences to follow, at least in the earlier, more interesting
parts of the film.  The editing is fast, but not always skillful.
Occasionally it borders on the confusing, but this is supposed to be a
bewildering future.  Katheryn Bigelow directs it with some of the same
style she used in TV's WILD PALMS.  That film was three hours and
seemed longer; this one is nearly two-and-a-half hours and seems just
as long.
     This is a film that builds something intriguing and interesting
and then spoils it all in the last hour and fifty minutes.  The real
problem is that STRANGE DAYS tries to be an action film, a martial arts
film, a film about race, and a science fiction film while using a plot
that with minor substitutions would be a cable-bait mystery.  I wonder
if the nearness of the time-setting of this film will get 20th Century
Fox thinking about the fact they soon need a new name for their studio.
Then again, with disappointments like this one, maybe they won't.  In
spite of a great start, this one gets a high -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
At one point I thought it might get a +3.

Author
Allan Toombs
THE TIME: It's the end of 1999, just under 4 years in the future and a few
days before the end of the century. Producer James Cameron really has
produced a realistic projection of the millenial celebrations and the
fevered craziness that goes along with it. From the opening sequence with a
radio call-in christian squawking about 'the last days' to the climactic
'2K' party, the atmosphere is right. This movie makes you feel the weird
buzz of the century passing into a new millenium. The only feeling that'll
come close will be the real thing, which gets nearer every day.
THE PLACE: Los Angeles, the wrong side of the tracks; now coming from
Britain I don't know what it's like in the sleazier districts of LA but
that's where this film is based, there isn't much of the suburbs and
mall-culture on display, I guess you'd call it the street. Prostitutes,
bar-flies, pushers; society's flotsam clinging onto that one last dream,
none more so than the film's protagonist - Lenny Nero.
THE HARDWARE: It's called Playback or doing The Wire, officially the acronym
is SQUID, sub-quantum something but all you really need to know is it can
record human experience. No attempt is made to truly provide a technical
explanation for the Playback devices, it's deus-ex-machina take it or leave
it, indeed whatever leap in current research is posited it can fit 20
minutes of 'being there' onto an ordinary Sony Mini-Disc. Stronger than
Crack. An electronic drug made real. 
THE CRIMES: Somebody has murdered Jeriko One, controversial rapper and
firebrand activist for the black community. Glen Plummer plays this
character cross between Snoop Doggy Dog and Louis Farrakhan with conviction.
The rap and the rhetoric are just right.
        Unrelated to this, there is a brutal rape where the Playback
technology is employed with sick inventiness. I'm tempted to condemn
Cameron's sadistic narrative here but I can't, the scene is filmed with
terrifying clarity by Director Kathryn Bigelow, I have to trust her
judgement that the footage included is necessary to establish the prescence
of a sick-killer in the plot. Certainly I felt repulsed and disgusted by the
act and it's voyeurism; nuff said.
THE MAN: Ralph Fiennes is absolutely convincing as Lenny Nero, Playback
dealer, a shameless pimp for little silver discs of people's lives. He's
strung out, making an easy living with a hot, contraband product but unable
to get his life together. He's still in love with his ex-girlfriend Faith,
but she now despises him, a love made no easier by his shoe-box full of
recordings of their moments together. He is pitiably addicted to a Playback
past.
        You may remember that in my review of JOHNNY MNEMONIC
(http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/johnnym.htm) I criticised the
reversal of the classic Gibson 'screwed-up man/strong woman' formula. Well
here it is executed perfectly by James Cameron's skillfull storyline. Making
this film more Cyberpunk than the definate article itself. Which brings me
round to Lornette 'Mace' Mason.
THE WOMAN: Angela Bassett is as beautiful and hard as ebony in the role of
Mace. She's a black woman holding down a job driving businessmen round LA
1999's wreck-strewn streets. Lenny is supposed to be a friend; he was good
to her kids the day the LAPD arrested their father. Where Nero is effusive
and spontaneous, she's a woman of reality, a mother and a survivor. Maybe
once he got her set up in the security car line but now he's a leech bumming
one too many free-rides.
        Angela Bassett is a wonderful new talent in a great part. She's
stunningly cool under pressure yet pulls off all the fight scenes with a
sharp grace and calculating intelligence. With her hair in thin braids she's
as sassy as a younger Whoopi Goldberg, as physical as Grace Jones but with
warmth and humanity. A pity Ms.Bassett had to wear a dumb 'hooker' dress as
a subertuge for the film's climax because she looks truly amazing in a
cleancut 'designer chauffeur suit' that is totally in-character. A star.
THE ISSUES: At this movies heart are concerns about emotional truth,
delusion and race. Cameron has obviously been thinking long and hard about
the Rodney King beating and LA's riots. The key question is 'What have we to
celebrate if armed police are necessary for a public celebration?'.
Certainly it's hard to imagine how the millenium parties will take place
without incident in an America which is 'browning' rapidly yet clinging to a
white 'apple-pie' vision of life.
        Lenny Nero is that rare thing a white-guy who's at home in the
racial mix of the inner-city. Yet he's blind to Macey's unselfish devotion.
Instead of seeing her love he sits in a squalid pad fast-forwarding a tape
of Faith making love to him in a beach hut. Fiennes plays a fool dazzled by
the smoke and mirrors of a new technology. Like the men in SEX, LIES &
VIDEOTAPE or FLATLINERS he's getting off on a recording and not confronting
the truth that it's just a more-detailed, personalised form of pornography.
THE VERDICT: This is a James Cameron hollywood blockbuster first and
foremost. High on action, adventure and adrenaline. Cameron knows just how
to work a storyline chock full of twists and surprises. Added to this
Kathryn Bigelow brings a sharp focus, quick-cut sophisticated direction that
avoids cliche then uses it to just the right effect. I was left exhausted by
the sheer pace and relentless punch of STRANGE DAYS. It's just a
hairs-breadth on the right side of OTT but then this is a *BIG* movie
dealing with the big issues of today. It takes the personal, the political,
the sexual, the spiritual and makes them all hang on one split-second
bullet. Maybe this is the last big action movie; I can't see how more is
possible without lapsing into the tongue-in-cheek of TRUE LIES or Bond.
However it deserves support for it's bravery in tackling drugs and race head
on. Movie of the year, so far.
"Tonight we're going to party like it's 1999"
 mailto:toombs@cityscape.co.uk
http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/atoombs.html
 Allan Toombs

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Angela Bassett, Juliette Lewis, Tom Sizemore,
Director: Kathryn Bigelow Screenplay: James Cameron and Jay Cocks based
on a story by James Cameron
It is the eve of the coming century, the 31st December 1999. Humans have
developed the technology to record memories (I know, take it with a
grain of salt). Lenny (Fiennes) an ex-cop, now street hustler, supplies
these 'stolen dreams' in the black market. He becomes involved in the
schemes of a psychopathic rapist who is recording 'black jacks' (death
experiences) of his victim, and needs to stay alive to see the New Year.
This movie only gets from weird to worse, with nothing to slow it's
descent into utter ridiculousness. The plot promises unexpected twists
and turns, but produces only a convoluted mess.
Whenever Lenny is in a jam he tries to trade his rouleaux watch to the
villains to save himself a beating. What a wimpy ex-cop? He constantly
relies on his best friend (Basset), ex-housewife turned body guard, to
come and save his arse. I was so annoyed at Fienne's anti-hero,
wimpiness, that I thought that perhaps he should have played the
housewife, and let Basset play the lead.
This is an uneven offering from Cameron, who is normally very precise
with his characters and plot. Perhaps he should have directed the movie
himself, after all it was his idea to begin with.

Author
Will FitzHugh
Squid Alert!  Squid Alert!  Kathryn Bigelow's new one comes out of
the box like countless science fiction novels.  Experiences can be
recorded 'right from the cerebral cortex' and then played back
to give the viewer the more or less complete experience (unless
you open your eyes and get 'double vision').  Ralph Fiennes
plays Lenny, a dealer in these taped lives.  Hey, that was pretty
good.  I should write copy for promos, 'He's Lenny, a dealer in
taped lives'.  Brrrr.
What I meant to say is that I've following Kathryn Bigelow's career
since the beginning.  I was beginning to think she peaked with 
'Near Dark', a movie about a Winnebago full of vampires.  Things
started to look grim after that.  'Blue Steel' was pathetic with
Jamie Lee Curtis horribly miscast as a tough cop.  'Point Break'
livened things up a bit and was actually pretty good for a movie
starring Patrick 'Duh' Swayze and Keanu 'Huh' Reeves.  She did
a part of 'Wild Palms' and the Oliver Stone influence seems to have
worn off a bit.
The recorded experiences, like the disastrous robbery that opens the
movie, are jerky, kinetic and scary on the big screen (if you get real
close, 19" diagonal is pretty big).  Especially the one with Juliette
Lewis rollerblading and coming on to me, I mean Lenny.  It's the near
future, see, and New Years Eve, 1999, finds the streets of L.A. full of
gangstas, whores and big fat cars.  More people than you'd expect wear
wigs because that's how you hide the recording headgear (or 'squids').
Never trust anyone with fucked-up hair in this movie.
Oh, right, the plot.  Actually, never mind.  Suffice it to say that it
gets a bit confusing but it looks good.  Angela Bassett saves Lenny's
scrawny ass more than once.  Most of the action takes place in crowds
at clubs, warehouses and parties.  The world threatens to go down the tubes
at the end and there's a handful of twisted psychopaths to pick from
as Lenny tries to save his beloved Faith (symbolism, I guess).  For this
movie to come true the Rams have to move back to L.A., the LAPD have to
remain violent and unstable, and black and white people have to refuse to
live in peace and harmony for another five years.  Um, 1 out of 3, is my
guess.  Would have been if 2 out of 3 if Bob Dole had become president.

Author
GL Schmitt
        According to Max Peltier (Tom Sizemore) an ex-cop unable 
to live on his disability pension; by the end of the millennium 
there is nothing new left.  Everything has been tried, at least 
once--even new flavours for chewing gum!
        When released, in 1995, "Strange Days" was not a new 
flavour gum, but it is still chewable.  Any opinion more 
forceful than that must involve personal taste.  "Strange Days" 
is, however, a piece of chewing gum with an interesting history. 
        One might suggest that stories involved with gaining 
entrance to an alternate reality go back at least as far as 
Lewis Carroll's "Alice in Wonderland"--if not Shakespeare's 
"A Midsummer Night's Dream" or "The Tempest".
        The technology for creating alternate realities became 
more accessible to the masses in the 1500's with Johann 
Gutenberg's printing press, and even more so in the late 
nineteenth century with Alexander Graham Bell's telephone, 
as well as Thomas Edison's phonograph and motion picture camera.  
        So, the concept of gaining entrance to an alternate 
virtual reality is not exactly novel.
        Using an alternate virtual reality to manipulate some 
one else to do your bidding, is one.  The disciplines of 
advertising, propaganda, and brainwashing fall into this 
category, with "The Manchurian Candidate" a classic example.  
        The largely unnoticed film version of the 1951 Robert A. 
Heinlein Sci-Fi novel "The Puppet Masters" (though originally an 
expression of 1950's anti-Communistic paranoia) showed a mirror 
version.  In it, extra terrestrial parasites overrode their human 
host's nervous system to gain control of the body, rather than 
manipulating the host's mind.
        The other branch of this idea involves the conscious 
choice to self inflict an alternate virtual reality; such as 
answering the telephone, turning on the television, or going to 
the movies.  
        Personally, my first encounter with this whole concept, 
was in the Sci-Fi novel "The Big Ball of Wax" [1954] by (Edward) 
Shepherd Mead who is best known for the novel [1952] which formed 
the basis of the Tony Winning Musical "How to Succeed in Business 
Without Really Trying", filmed in 1967.
        In "The Big Ball of Wax" an advertising executive 
investigates why a certain 'religious' cult does not consume 
a conspicuous amount of his clients' products, only to discover 
that they have developed an alternate virtual reality projector 
which allows the cult's adherents to gobble up sufficient tasteless, 
minimum requirement nutrients, then sit back and vicariously enjoy 
a twelve course meal appreciated by the ersatz taste buds 
of a gourmet's trained palate.  The satire is derived from 
the advertising executive's attempts to secure a profit 
from this device.
        Philip K. Dick used this theme several times in his 
writings, especially in "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep" 
[1966] filmed in 1981 as "Blade Runner".  The experimental 
android 'Rachel' is _given_ artificial memories to cushion 
her from the harshness of her proscribed life expectancy. 
[A fact left as obvious in Ridley Scott's director's cut, 
but obliterated in the Hollywoodized ending of the original 
theatrical release--the one with Harrison Ford's almost 
continuous voice-over.]
        In Dick's "We Can Remember It For You Wholesale" [1966] 
filmed in 1990 as "Total Recall", an artificially implanted 
memory of a trip to Mars 'accidentally' reactivates suppressed 
memories of a real Martian excursion.  This film--excessive 
violence and flaws aside--demonstrates how a person is 
the accumulation of his memories; one who will be true to himself, 
only if his memories are true.
        Both as a curiosity, and as a flawed film, "Brainstorm" 
filmed in 1983 joined with "Strange Days" in recognizing the 
voyeurism inherent in this concept.  But, writer Bruce Joel Rubin's 
predilection for examining the phenomena of after-life experience 
[See: Ghost, 1990; Jacob's Ladder, 1991] sent this film, 
quite literally, along a dead end.  
        Also, film star, Natalie Wood's drowning death, before 
principal photography ended, caused extensive rewriting, which in 
turn contributed to the somewhat choppy continuity of "Brainstorm".
        "Strange Days" is the first film, of which I am aware, 
to use this self-inflicted full sensory, virtual reality concept, 
while consciously acknowledging the addictiveness of indulging 
in it.   As a consequence, this technology necessarily becomes 
the product of an underground.  A 'drug' for sleazy 'pushers'.  
        Previously, "The Puppet Masters" showed hosts, reclaimed 
from their parasitic masters, suffering from withdrawal symptoms.
        Also, "Strange Days" identifies the person recording the 
virtual reality 'clip' as sharing all their responses and emotions, 
even to suffering from the recorder-person's own physical
limitations.  In this case, colour blindness.
        Another film, "Dreamscape", not only connected the 
technologically enhanced watcher with the one watched that closely, 
but even allowed them to interact 'physically' with real world 
consequences. 
        "Dreamscape" was  filmed in 1984 with Dennis Quaid, 
Max von Sydrow and Kate Capshaw.
        Of course, the ultimate _extreme_ of using technological
enhancement to reshape reality must go to 1956's "Forbidden Planet"
with Walter Pidgeon, Anne Francis, and Leslie Nielsen.
        Seen, ranked with these other films and novels, 
"Strange Days" is not only a atmospheric crime mystery, set in 
the near future.  "Strange Days" is both another step along 
a developing Sci-Fi theme, as well as one which is coming more 
uncomfortably close to reality than any of its originators 
could ever have imagined.  
        "Strange days" may be a previously used flavour 
of chewing gum, but it represents one of the tastier morsels 
employing this Sci-Fi theme.
RELATED FILM AND NOVEL SUGGESTIONS:
***********************************
"Forbidden Planet"  Walter Pidgeon, Anne Francis, and Leslie Nielsen. 
                    (SFX-for 1956, Sci-Fi, Mystery, Drama)
(Novel}-Novelization of film, author unknown.
        Film based on William Shakespeare's 'The Tempest'
(Novel}-'The Big Ball of Wax'-(Edward) Shepherd Mead (Not Filmed)
