Title
Review for Nadja (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
As vampire films go, this is nothing new, and it lacks the styling that have
made the genre famous in the movies the past 20 years. But as a new style,
this is a different film, more like watching the old Bela Lugosi classic
than anything else.
The thing which makes it comparable to that early standard, is its tonality,
and near black and white filming, which adds an eery intent to the who
thing, in serious playing around with shadows, and movements, something that
we take for granted nowadays in any kind of film, and even consider boring
by most standards.
Nadja, like the original it seems to copy, is slow, and the accent is on the
movement and the acting of each particular person, rather than the vampire
story film, where we know that the vampire has to be done away with.
But unlike the religious doodaas that usually permeate those films, this one
does not touch that area, and instead concentrates on the relationships that
Nadja has, and can, or can not maintain, and her desire to control her
urges, so she can have a longer relationship.
I suppose that the best thing in this film is the directing and the shooting
style.... you would be surprised how a well  designed pose, makes the
actor/actress look better and stronger. But all in all, this is not a very
strong film, though it has that quality that reminds me of the style that
used to be around the Warhols and such.
The film is a bit on the nightmarish's/trippy/weird side, but this is its
strength.  It makes sure that nothing is like
any other vampire film.  It spends time with its main character and her
feelings, towards someone, or in general. And if forces us to come to like
this person, whose need is different than others.
In the midst of all this is a crazy looking and acting Van Helsing, the
ultimate commentary on the heroic stance that has been the trademark for
that character. In this case he is almost satirical and a lunatic. The film
does not glorify him, and makes him  look crazy and off the wall, as someone
that has little respect for relationships, specially those that last into
other ages, and generations.  All of a sudden, this doctor is no different
a vampire than those he wants to destroy... he is on a mission that recalls
the same urges as the vampires he chases.  While this is not exactly new,
Peter Fonda's drugged out style stands out, as either out of place, or a
very clever move by the directing and writing crews.
Not a great film, but one that might be interesting for those that enjoy
vampire films... no morals here.. just a story.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Elina Lowensohn, Martin Donovan, Galaxy Craze, Peter Fonda,
      Jared Harris, Suzy Amis, Karl Geary
Director: Michael Almereyda
Producers: Mary Sweeney and Amy Hobby
Screenplay: Michael Almereyda
Cinematography: Jim DeNault
Music: Simon Fisher Turner
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     Hip.  Cool.  New Wave.  Chic.  These are only some of the
adjectives applicable to Michael Almereyda's new take on the vampire
legend.  Of course, one other term springs to mind, but it isn't nearly
as complimentary.  Pretentious.  There are times when NADJA becomes too
full of itself, as if the writer/director is attempting to prove that
he's more than just a film maker; he's an *artist*.
     Hal Hartley regular Elina Lowensohn is the title character, and her
erotic, exotic portrayal of a female vampire may be the best on-screen
presentation of the undead since that of Bela Lugosi.  Cloaked and
cowled in black with flawless skin and well-defined eyebrows,
Lowensohn's Nadja is a startling creature, and the camera clearly loves
her.  Her European accent is also perfect for the role.  (How important
was Lugosi's to his Dracula?)
     NADJA opens in modern-day Manhattan, where there are apparently all
sorts of vampires and zombies roaming around.  One such is the venerable
Dracula (although he doesn't last more than ten minutes into the film),
while others include his daughter Nadja and her twin brother Edgar
(Jared Harris).  Dr. Van Helsing (Peter Fonda), a nutcase vampire-killer
acting like an aging hippie who dropped too much acid during the '60s,
has driven a stake through Dracula's heart and is now after the kids.
Helping him in his quest is his nephew (or is it son?), Jim (Martin
Donovan, another Hartley favorite), whose wife Lucy (Galaxy Craze) has
fallen under Nadja's spell.
     One pleasant aspect of NADJA is that very little is played
straight.  Much of the film is done tongue in cheek, and there are a
number of sly, satirical references to the legendary Dracula story.
Visually, allusions vary from NOSFERATU to PLAN NINE FROM OUTER SPACE.
Almereyda is clearly having fun with his material.  His vision of Van
Helsing as a borderline maniac is clever, and a number of double
entendres (including one about being "born again") are worth a hearty
chuckle.
     Filmed in sterling black-and-white interspersed with Pixelvision
sequences (created using a Fisher Price toy camera), NADJA is
occasionally exquisite.  There are scenes of stunning beauty and fevered
chaos, with eerie music playing to their accompaniment.  Unfortunately,
Almereyda doesn't restrain his artsy visual inclinations, and his weird
style becomes self-indulgent.  Used too often, even the best tricks grow
tiresome.  NADJA is a prime example of this.  And when the plot dries up
an hour into the proceedings, the director apparently thinks that canny
cinematography can keep things going to the end.  It doesn't work, and
NADJA struggles to reach the final credits.  Smoke and mirrors only work
when the audience can't see through them, but, in this picture, they're
painfully obvious.
     David Lynch's involvement in something this bizarre should surprise
no one.  In addition to his executive producer credit, Lynch has a cameo
as a morgue attendant.  Although he never steps behind the camera, the
man who made ERASERHEAD and BLUE VELVET is full of praise for Almereyda,
which is expected considering NADJA's offbeat style.  But where Lynch's
films always possessed an edge, NADJA doesn't have much to recommend it
beyond atmosphere, occasional playfulness, and Lowensohn.  As vampire
movies go, this one lacks bite.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     NADJA seems to want to be a serious art film and at the same time
a spoof of the vampire film.  The result is a film that is occasionally
amusing but more often just drags.  The story borrows a great deal from
Lambert Hillyer's 1936 film DRACULA'S DAUGHTER and NADJA moves only
fast enough to be an actual retelling of that story and not one iota
faster.  It is filmed in black and white with three levels of clarity.
There are sharp clear scenes, blurry scenes, and a few Pixelvision
scenes.  The blurry and Pixel shots initially seem to be subjective
from the vampire's point of view, but it is not long before there are
shots with gratuitous blur that clearly are not from anybody's point of
view.  They are just blurry for the sheer joy of using the camera
effect.  Some of the dialogue is also there for the effect.  How else
can one explain lines like "Love is voluntary.  Love is like rabies"?
     Elina Lowensohn plays the the title role of Nadja, the daughter of
Dracula unliving in New York City.  Dracula is also in town, but there
he is staked by a rather Bohemian Van Helsing (Peter Fonda).  This
vampire hunter wears his hair well below his shoulders and goes
everywhere walking a bicycle.  The death of her famous father comes as
a release to Nadja who has been hoping to be free of his domination in
order to lead a more normal life.
     The film is not without a sense of some style.  Lowensohn is
impressive looking in a hood and cape in much the same way that Gloria
Holden was in the original.  Almereyda used her previously in his
ANOTHER GIRL, ANOTHER PLANET and she does have an exotic look.  But her
delivery of lines is rather disaffected and lifeless, ironically just
what this vampire does not need.   Suzy Amis, who played the title role
in THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO and THE USUAL SUSPECTS plays a nurse who is
caring for Nadja's brother and who will eventually be caught up in
Nadja's predations.
     When the film drags, it is of some interest just to see how the
original was mapped to the new film.  The Irving Pichel role of Sandor
is back, but here he is called Renfield, though his function is more
that of Sandor in 1936 film than that of Renfield in the 1930 DRACULA.
Another victim is called Lucy (played by an actress named Galaxy Craze,
believe it or not), again as an allusion to the 1930 film.  A policeman
in the original is replaced by David Lynch to not nearly so comic an
effect.  Lynch is also executive producer as well as having the even
more ambiguous title of "presenter."
     Perhaps the film shows the most style when the setting moves to
Transylvania.  Almereyda's use of locations in New York to give the
impression of Rumania is more clever than convincing, almost as if they
were improvisational.
     While it is nice to see an occasional horror film making the art
house circuit, this story of the undead just needs more life in the
long middle section of the film.  I give it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
