Title
Review for Ruby Cairo (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
     Anyone who doesn't understand the meaning of the phrase "the
triumph of style over substance" should take a look at DECEPTION,
although I shudder at the thought of labelling this a triumph of
anything.  It's a very empty tale of treachery and lies that rarely
makes sense and engages the audience's interest even less frequently.
     The story begins with Bessie Faro (Andie MacDowell) learning that
her husband John (Viggo Mortensen) has been killed in a plane crash in
Veracruz.  Horrified and heartbroken, she flies to the funeral and
discovers that her husband had amassed a huge fortune hidden away in
numerous bank accounts around the world.  Armed with a bunch of
baseball cards that hold the key to gaining access to the accounts,
Bessie personally makes stops at each bank to withdraw all the money.
During the course of her travels, she encounters Dr. Fergus Lamb (Liam
Neeson), whose "Feed the World" campaign activities somehow tied in
with her late husband.  Money missing from Berlin and Athens leads to
the inevitable question: is John Faro really dead?
     Miramax Films releases two sorts of movies: independent and/or
foreign films which generally attract a select audience (many of these
are quite good), and pictures that have sat undistributed on the shelf
for a while (many of these are quite bad).  DECEPTION is in the latter
category, having been untouched since post-production was completed
early this year.  Its quality is consistent with the sort of movie
released on an "off" weekend with little publicity in a small number of
theaters.  One wonders why Miramax bothered.
     The plot is a real hack job.  It rarely makes any sense, and when
it does, we almost wish it didn't.  The foundation of the story--that
baseball cards hold the secrets to John's clandestine fortune--is so
contrived and difficult to accept that it undermines the rest of
DECEPTION--not that there's much else to undermine.
     Lovers of the thriller/mystery genre waiting for sneaky plot
twists will be disappointed.  DECEPTION's storyline is straight as an
arrow, with no deviations from the expected.  Perhaps that's supposed
to be the big surprise--that everything is played out predictably.
Somehow, I doubt it.
     There is an attempt at a love story between Fergus and Bessie, but
it's easy to miss.  Neither character is well-developed and their
scenes together lack chemistry or heat.  MacDowell and Neeson have
created non- entities, but they can hardly be blamed.  With a script as
thin as this one, it's impossible to see either of them trying for more
than a paycheck.
     DECEPTION can boast one positive attribute:  it has a number of
pretty shots from different locales.  Filmed on-location in Los
Angeles, Veracruz, Berlin, Athens, and Cairo, the movie occasionally
seems more like a travelogue than a thriller, although that's as much
due to the lack of suspense as the pretty shots of the Egyptian
pyramids.
     Better films than this have been released direct-to-video.  The
only reason DECEPTION received a theatrical run is because of the
relative high profile of its main performers.  Never fear, however--it
won't be around for long.  Movie houses will quickly abandon it for the
sequels to SISTER ACT and WAYNE'S WORLD.  However, anyone unwittingly
lured into this by the stylish print ad campaign promising an exciting,
exotic thriller will quickly learn exactly what is meant by the title.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the last decade quality of Hollywood films declined, and
that phenomenon didn't manifest itself solely in the realms
of the finished products. Even the promotional trailers were
getting worse with time, and movie advertising became as bad
as the movies themselves. One of the rare films that should
pride itself with exceptional state-of-the-art trailer is
RUBY CAIRO, 1993 adventure thriller directed by Graeme
Clifford.
The heroine of this film is Bessie Faro (played by Andie
MacDowell), mother of three children and wife of Johnny Faro
(played by Viggo Mortensen), owner of air cargo company.
Bessie's idyllic life starts to fall apart when she gets a
word about her husband dying in air crash and the company
going bankrupt. In Vera Cruz she finds that her husband
actually stashed large sums of money on various off-shore
accounts. Using her husband's baseball cards as the only
clue she starts travelling across the world trying to
retrieve those funds. However, in some cases someone is
always one step ahead, emptying those accounts. The trail
leads Bessie to Cairo, where she would receive assistance by
Fergus Larb (played by Liam Neeson), humanitarian pilot who
would lead her to the unexpected discovery.
The trailer for RUBY CAIRO is a masterpiece of movie
advertising because it suggests an exciting and interesting
thriller set in exotic locations. In reality, RUBY CAIRO is
mostly disorganised mess of a movie, with contrived and not
very believable plot and mostly disinterested cast members,
especially Liam Neeson in tragically undeveloped role. Among
many other things, the subplot involving baseball cards is
going to be incomprehensible for most of the audience that
lives outside USA. On the other hand, Graeme Clifford tries
to compensate inadequacies of the content with style. The
movie features truly impressive shots of exotic Egyptian
locations, and the musical score by John Barry would remind
viewers of Bond movies, especially THE SPY WHO LOVED ME.
However, apart from providing some interesting information
about multi-cultural nature of modern Egypt, RUBY CAIRO
mostly fails to arouse viewers' attention and it is quite
understandable why it sank to oblivion almost immediately
after its production.
Review written on September 20th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
