Title
Review for Champion (1949)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Champion" is the film that made Kirk Douglas a movie star.
With his intense, expressive personality and his physique,
he was perfectly cast as a middleweight boxer who wants
to have it all: fame, fortune, respect, and whatever lady
catches his eye.
"Champion" takes Douglas' character from humble beginnings
to a boxing championship.  At first, he is paired with
his brother (Arthur Kennedy), who is lame and must walk
with a cane.  Douglas is forced by an angrily protective father
to marry Ruth Roman, whom he deserts to try his luck as a boxer.
As Douglas' boxing career takes off, his character changes,
and he becomes selfish and grasping.  His wife, his manager,
several girlfriends, and finally even his brother are discarded
by him as he reaches for success.
Much is made of Douglas's character turn.  Perhaps I am
judging by the moral standards of a different era, but to me,
the worst thing he does is abandon his wife, and that comes
early in the film.  I don't think that he owes complete
loyalty to a manager who takes a quarter of his earnings
and helps fix fights against him, nor loyalty to women who
are using him, or are wed to someone else.  Certainly he is
a louse, but his character comes across more sympathetically
than the script's interpretation.  This may be partly due to
the compelling performance by Douglas.
Another minor complaint are the boxing scenes.  The drama
and brutality of boxing comes across, but the boxers lack
any defensive skills.  The bouts are typically one man
pummeling the other.  Of course, this is done for dramatic
purposes, and is a weakness common to every boxing film
I have seen, especially the "Rocky" series.  But that
doesn't make it less annoying.
Still, "Champion" is an excellent film.  The pace never slows,
the dialogue is crisp and to the point, and Douglas' character
is deep and fully explored.  One scene has the badly-battered
Douglas on the canvas, his face bloodied and grimaced, but
he is determined to get up and defeat his opponent.  His
motivation is not to keep the champion belt, but to silence
the ringside announcers who have already counted him out.
This one scene perfectly defines his character.
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
