Title
Review for Jackpot (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Go for it," and "Be all you can be" are the
signature slogans of the free-spirited,
capitalistic, ambitious folks; but don't dismiss
as party-poopers the guys who say "Don't
give up your day job."  In "Jackpot," a fellow
who never really had much of a day job
(unless you count selling some overpriced
gallon jugs of carpet cleaner) decides to hit
the road in pursuit of the American Dream. 
Since Mark Polish, who wrote the screenplay
and Michael Polish who directed the film have
more in common with playwrights like Edward
Albee and Arthur Miller than with the go-getters who appear on
early-morning TV, they take a decidedly pessimistic view of a
scheme by one Sunny Holiday (Jon Gries) while at the same
time providing us in the audience with a sympathetic view of a
man who even believes he has a good chance to hit the numbers
in the lottery.
   Starting out from somewhere in the central
or western reaches of the U.S., Sunny plans to hit roadside
karaoke bars, enter the
competitions, and win the hundred bucks or
so in each case by swaying the judges with
his personality, his country-western looks,
his day beard and ten-gallon at, and a voice that falls short of
matching eorge Jones's.  As he delivers his semi-mellifluous
pitches to the pre-recorded sounds of some of the well-known
country-and-western ballads, he learns something about himself
while city-slickers in the audience get to eavesdrop on the
karaoke circuit with which they may be only marginally familiar.
Making plans with his buddy and manager, Lester Irving (Garrett
Morris), Sunny--who despite his name is not too
bright--abandons his ticked-off wife Bobbi (Daryl Hannah) and his
one-year old daughter for a nine-months' tour that doesn't get
him where he wants to go but allows him to meet and have a
roll-in-the-hay or two with some of the blondes who regularly
patronize or work the circuit of song.
   Jackpot, Nevada--which is the ultimate destination of Sunny
and Les--is apparently not just the Nashville of the karaoke beat
but the obvious, metaphoric (and ironic) goal of pursuers of the
American Dream.  A road-and-buddy movie, the Polish brothers'
feature is a road-and-buddy movie, deliberately paced (in other
words, not the kind of tale that's likely to be mistaken for Rob
Cohen's "The Fast and the Furious."  By holding to a lingering 
gait, the Polish brothers get a chance to show what really counts
in this sort of story--the details: the nervous tics by Sunny's
brother Tracy (Anthony Edwards) whose confidence in the singer
never palls; the assortment of gestures by Sunny's manager Les,
who alternately chews him out and regularly puts their heads
together in prayer before each performance; the small, flashing
eyes of Bobbi, who is positively appalled by her man's desertion
and stunned by the one-dollar lottery ticket he mails to her
religiously every month as child support--sincerely believing he
has a chance to hit the jackpot.
   The meandering story is an acquired taste
but a welcome antidote to the Michael Bay-
Jerry Bruckheimer noisemakers, the
explosions taking place not on the island of Oahu but solely
within Sunny and Les's heads.  We sit and wonder what it
would take to get some sense into Mr. Holiday's head, something
to counterbalance the outpouring of optimism that has made
America the country that it is while at the same destroying many
a person's soul.
   Whether or not you'll dig the story, the movie is an important
technical breakthrough as photographer M. David Mullen makes
first use of a digital video format that shoots 24
frames per second to give the picture at least the clarity of
high-definition TV.  You could easily tell the difference between
the look provided by the new technology and, say, the
cinema-verite appearance of Alan Cumming and Jennifer Jason
Leigh's digital video recording of "The Anniversary Party."  In fact
we hear that George Lucas is currently shooting the second
installment of "Star Wars" with this camera.  
   "Jackpot" has all the quirkiness of the Polish brothers' debut
film, "Twin Falls Idaho," which featured Jon Gries and Garret
Morris as well, a poignant and oddball tale about a pair of
Siamese twins, one of whom falls in love with a hooker.  
Rated R.  Running time: 96 minutes. 
(C)2001, Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
JACKPOT, the second picture by the Polish brothers, director and co-writer
Michael Polish and co-writer Mark Polish, tackles the world of competitive
karaoke singing.  Their first film, TWIN FALLS IDAHO, a love story with
co-joined twins, was one of a kind.  But people will, undoubtedly, compare their
latest film with last year's hopeless DUETS, another family affair, featuring
father Bruce Paltrow as the director and daughter Gwyneth Paltrow as the star. 
The surprise is that the disappointing DUETS is the livelier of the two.  Even
without the DUETS comparison, however, the gloomy JACKPOT has all of the fizz of
a soda left open overnight.
When we meet Sunny Holiday (Jon Gries) and his manager Lester Irving (Garrett
Morris), they are on a 43-city tour in an old, shocking pink land yacht. 
Looking like they haven't got a nickel to their name, they brag to a reporter
that Sunny has made a fortune.  How much exactly?  Well, "thousands."  Lester
always gets his fifteen percent, which one night means that his total earnings
amount to the lid on the blender that Sunny wins.  Grizzled veterans of the
karaoke wars, they both sport scraggly beards and cheap clothing.  About the
only thing that separates them in physical appearance is that Sunny is a middle
aged white guy, while Lester is an older black man.  Lester is fond of asking
the good Lord's help before Sunny heads to the stage for the evening's battle. 
In other long, uninteresting scenes, Lester offers Sunny lots of unsolicited
advice on how to be successful.  "Sleeping in a car doesn't guarantee you'll
become a star," is one of the aphorisms that Lester comes up with.  Lester is
clearly someone who never takes his own advice.
The movie features some known actors in cameo performances.  Daryl Hannah plays
Sunny's wife, Bobbi.  In repetitive flashbacks, she keeps expressing her strong
displeasure with his "fantasy tour."  Anthony Edwards shows up, and that's about
it.  The best piece of work comes from Peggy Lipton ("The Mod Squad") as a woman
who has a one-night stand with Sunny.
It's never clear what kind of movie JACKPOT wants to be.  Among the stranger
subplots are one involving soap scamming and another about a Lolita-like
seductress named Tangerine (Camellia Clouse), who only wants Sunny "to sign her
yearbook."  Tangi, as she likes to be called, looks to be a 16-year-old going on
13.  Dressed in frilly and revealing clothes, she lures Sunny into a pink
bedroom that looks like it should belong to her younger sister.  What happens
or, more precisely, what doesn't quite happen there is either funny or creepy,
but it's not clear which.  JACKPOT is like that scene.  It's not clear how to
take it, and with its lack of energy, we end up not caring.
JACKPOT runs 1:35.  It is rated R for language and sexuality and would be
acceptable for most teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 17, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas and the AMC
theaters.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
