Title
Review for Lola Montčs (1955)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael Har-even
Director: Max Ophuls
Cast: Martine Carol, Peter Ustinov, Oskar Werner, Anton Walbrook
Released on 1955, 140 minutes.
     LOLA MONTES tells the story of a woman who had many lovers all
around Europe and ended up in an American circus selling her memories
and kisses to the masses.  The film is a mixture of the circus act
presenting her life and of flashbacks from the past.
     This film is very demanding for the spectator.  The mixture of the
present and the past, the unique style of Max Ophuls and the usage of
cinemascope demand our full attention.  I shall try to clarify some
aspects of this film without revealing important details.  In fact, the
film has no ordinary plot.  The film consists of several events from the
life of LOLA MONTES.  Who is Lola Montes?
     She is the woman who had more than 42 lovers, the woman who was
admired by every man in Europe and had love affairs with Wagner and
Liszt.  She was the perfect "femme fatal," the woman who symbolized
love, the woman who had caused scandals all over Europe and ended up in
the circus.  When Lola was asked about herself, she said that all the
things told about her are not true, she was just a woman who did
whatever she wanted to do.  Why are men attracted to Lola?
     she is not very beautiful, she is a mediocre dancer and she has no
unique qualities but Lola can do whatever she desires to do.  She
chooses whom will fall in love with her and when the affair should be
terminated.  In fact, one might suspect that Lola had many lovers in
searching for true love.  Her search is more important than all the
conventions and all the rules in the world and as a result no obstacle
seems to bother her.
     When Lola finds a new lover, we admire her individuality.  When
Lola is making a scandal, we admire her for doing what we are afraid to
do.  When Lola realizes love, we admire her for fulfilling our dreams.
When Lola joins the circus, we are not just feeling sorry for her but
rather pity ourselves for failing to fulfill our own desires.  Why did
Lola stop her search?  Why did she join the circus?
     Lola is a true romantic hero, in the best tradition of the great
romantic literature.  When I am using the term "romantic," I am not
referring to the misleading and abused connotation given to this word
in this century.  I think that a romantic hero is a person who doesn't
believe in fate and tries to fulfill all his desires in any cost.  The
problem is that the fight is tedious and actually life itself is
tedious.  In the end, Lola became tidy and joined the circus.  She was
defeated by the naturalistic world, by the conventions and by the mass
of people.  Her final tragedy is that she is literally like in prison.
She doesn't have enough strength to make her attempt to be free
successful.  The irony, of course, is that her prisoner is her last
lover.
     The naturalistic end of the film should raise many questions.  Is
LOLA MONTES a romantic film or a naturalistic film?  Did Lola stop to be
the perfect romantic hero?  Does true love exist?  Is romanticism as a
life style possible?
     The great qualities of LOLA MONTES are not just the ideas stated
so far.  The aesthetic style of Ophuls is very unique.  His originality
could be easily compared to that of Renoir, Welles or Bunuel.  I could
describe in great details his detached way of cinematography, the
significance of the decor and his focusing on the exterior of the event
and not on the interior.  The best thing to do, however, is to go and
see the film for yourself.  LOLA MONTES is one of those rare gems which
could be distincted from most of the films you have ever seen.  To see
LOLA MONTES is to realize that cinema can be the greatest form of art.
