Title
Review for Switchblade Sisters (1975)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David N. Butterworth
Prophetic words from Maggie (Joanne Nail) as she's bundled aboard the paddy
wagon in the final scene of SWITCHBLADE SISTERS.
Who would have imagined that, twenty-one years later, Jack Hill's 1975 cult
classic about a sexy street gang would have been given a second lease on
life.  And yet with our newly crowned prince of pulp Quentin Tarantino
behind the reissue, the question is less "why?" and more "what next?"  The
answer won't be long in coming since SWITCHBLADE SISTERS is just one of a
handful of cheapie exploitation films being re-released by Tarantino's
Rolling Thunder distribution company.
The meanest thing one can say about SWITCHBLADE SISTERS is that it plays
like a Tarantino movie--all swagger and little substance, with the lousiest
acting since Tarantino started putting himself in front of the camera.  But
this isn't Masterpiece Theater--SWITCHBLADE SISTERS  might contain awful
performances and awful dialogue but it's awfully good fun.  Of course it
helps if you're more in the mood for Russ Meyer than Merchant-Ivory.
Robbie Lee plays Lace, the leader of the Dagger Debs.  Lee looks and acts
like Pia Zadora, and it's easy to see why her career has nose-dived into
Smurftastic voice parts for Saturday morning cartoons.
In the opening scene, Lace and the rest of the Debs--Patch, Donut, Bunny et
al.--ridicule and rough up a slimy bill collector.  It's a nicely done role
reversal with the lone man in the elevator finally the object of some
menacing harrassment.  Although certainly no homage to feminism,
SWITCHBLADE SISTERS is refreshing in its entertaining depiction of men as
victims of leather-clad teen girls and in its sparing reliance on T&A.
Early in the film, the Debs congregate at the Burger Palace where Lace
encounters a stranger, Maggie, occupying her usual booth.  A fight breaks
out and Maggie, a feisty, hotpants-sporting gutter cat, impresses Lace
enough to be asked to join the gang--"people just stomp on you if you don't
have any muscle behind you."  However, the cops arrive and throw them all
in the slammer, including Maggie.  It's not until after a skirmish with the
very un-P.C. butch dyke prison warden Mom Smackley (Kate Murtagh, in a
scene destined to become a camp classic) that Lace and Maggie become
friends, and Maggie agrees to join the Debs.
The Debs live and fight in a world dominated by all-boy gangs who run their
high school's protection rackets, prostitution rings, and drug sales.  The
male gang members are a sight to see--there haven't been this many gold
lame' jackets, huge pointy collars, flared jeans, and shiny nylon shirts
since WELCOME BACK, KOTTER.
A new gang threatens to take over, led by Crabs (played with buffoon-laced
dementia by the Jim Carrey-esque Chase Newhart; perhaps Tarantino should
have considered a remake with Carrey and Zadora?).  Add some intra-gang
powerplays, new alliances with female African-American Maoist guerillas,
shady switches of sexual allegiance, and a new name for the Debs...  It all
adds up to plenty of rumbles.
As logic goes, this film quickly runs out of steam.  But as a crude, camp,
fashion-conscious throwback to the mid-'70s, SWITCHBLADE SISTERS is a gas.

Author
Michael Dequina
In recent years, the exploitation film--cheap, sensationalist
no-budget offerings filled with violence, sex, nudity, and horrific
acting--have been relegated to direct-to-video status.  The resurfacing of
Jack Hill's 1975 Switchblade Sisters, reissued by Quentin Tarantino's
Rolling Thunder division of Miramax, shows that this genre's true home is on
the big screen, where its hilarious, immensely enjoyable camp charms can be
shared with an audience.
The basic premise of Switchblade Sisters is a power struggle within
the girl gang the Dagger Debs between leader Lace (Robbie Lee, whose squeaky
Lori Petty voice and ferocious line delivery make an interesting
contradiction) and newcomer Maggie (Joanne Nail).  But to leave it at that
would to discount the surprisingly inspired plotting by screenwriter F.X.
Maier, who weaves a complex web of gang wars both between gangs and within
them; in fact, one-eyed Dagger Deb Patch's (Monica Gayle) psychological
manipulation of Lace more than recalls Iago's scheming in Othello.  This is
not so say, however, that the exploitation staples aren't in abundance, and
they are: there are the requisite violent action scenes, including a rousing
street gunfight, a roller rink shootout, and a killer closing knife fight;
there more than a share of hilarious, quotable lines (my fave being "If you
go, it's gonna turn out bad!"; and the acting is as uproariously
over-the-top as can be imagined.  The opening half hour, in which the Debs
are arrested and spend time in jail with an abusive lesbian guard, is so
hilarious, so trashy, and so utterly enjoyable that it truly must be seen to
be believed.
Unlike recent howlfests such as Judge Dredd and, most notably,
Showgirls, the filmmakers are very self-aware, knowing they are making fun
trash.  Director Hill keeps his tongue firmly in cheek, tossing in throwaway
bits, such as a guy who suddenly drops his head onto a table, that show he's
far from playing it with a straight face.  The free rein he gives to his
thespians is not a sloppy move, but a deliberate, defendable choice--the
actors are, after all, playing histrionic teens (though the actresses look
well into their 20s, the actors over 30).  Camp sensibility aside, Hill is
also an efficient filmmaker, keeping the action moving and telling the
complicated story clearly and swiftly.  Switchblade Sisters is rather short,
but it certainly doesn't feel that way (but not necessarily slow) once it's
over because so much was compacted into a mere 90 minutes.  It is also
important to note that while this is an "exploitation" film, Hill shows an
unexpected restraint, leaving the most violent or "naughty" bits to the
imagination.  The fact that the film still satisfies as "exploitation" is
another testament to Hill's skill.
A number of people won't understand the appeal of Switchblade
Sisters, but those with a healthy appetite for fun, campy, exploitative
trash are sure to get their money's worth.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/

Author
James Berardinelli
     Once upon a time, Quentin Tarantino was a hot writer/director.  His 
first and second films, RESERVOIR DOGS and PULP FICTION, wowed audiences 
worldwide, and made him a "can't-miss" commodity.  Then, for some 
reason, he decided to concentrate on acting.  Problem:  he can't act.  
That didn't stop him, so movie-goers have been forced to endure 
Tarantino mugging for the camera in such titles as DESTINY TURNS ON THE 
RADIO, FOUR ROOMS, FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, and DESPERADO.  Not content with 
writing, directing, and acting, Tarantino decided that he wanted to get 
into the film releasing business.  So was born Rolling Thunder, a 
Miramax imprint.  The first film released under this label was CHUNGKING 
EXPRESS, a sublimely thoughtful (if somewhat confusing) import.  No such 
praise can be heaped upon SWITCHBLADE SISTERS, Rolling Thunder entry #2.  
A 1975 exploitation dud, this is the kind of movie Cinemax screens late 
at night.  It's not just bad, it's execrable.  If this is the kind of 
flick that Tarantino enjoyed while working at the video store, it's 
amazing that RESERVOIR DOGS turned out so well.
     The plot of SWITCHBLADE SISTERS, such as it is, involves gang wars 
and in-fighting between the girls of the Dagger Debs (who are renamed 
the Jezebels mid-way through the film).  These Switchblade Sisters have 
at least three problems:  a rival gang leader (with the unforgettable 
name of Crabs) who wants them dead, a traitor in their midst, and a pair 
of cops (or, in the language of the day, pigs) who are waiting to bust 
them.  The two lead Jezebels, Lace (Robbie Lee) and Maggie (Joanne 
Nail), are fighting over the same guy, Silver Daggers stud-leader, Dom 
(Asher Brauner), who knocks up one of them and forces himself on the 
other.  Strangely, however, when Dom gets blown away by a blast from 
Crabs' gun, both Lace and Maggie want to waste Crabs, instead of shaking 
his hand.  
     Leather and lace.  Studded boots and bell bottoms.  An electro-
disco score.  Roller skating rinks.  Afros.  SWITCHBLADE SISTERS reeks 
of the worst excesses of the '70s.  Calling it dated is an 
understatement.  This is the kind of film that '90s movies delight in 
parodying.  There's a certain campy value to a production like this 
(especially twenty years later), but only for about the first thirty 
minutes.  Then things get repetitive and dull.  This movie is too 
lifeless and amateurish to be enjoyable for long.  If you want good, 
well-made, high-energy camp, check out any of Russ Meyer's films.  Meyer 
(FASTER, PUSSYCAT!  KILL! KILL!) made good bad stuff.  Director Jack 
Hill (who was also responsible for THE SWINGING CHEERLEADERS) 
specialized in bad bad movies.
     This is one of those rare movies where every member of the cast 
turns in an unbearably bad performance.  There isn't anything remotely 
competent about any of the actors.  The only one I recognized was Asher 
Brauner -- I think he was in a soap opera during the late '70s.  Robbie 
Lee has a helium voice that is reminiscent of fingernails scraping 
across a blackboard.  Joanne Nail looks like she could have been one of 
CHARLIE'S ANGELS (according to the production notes, she turned down the 
opportunity).  All the actors literally snarl every line of dialogue.  
Then again, if I had to say the kind of inane lines they're given, I 
might be in a snarling mood, too.
     One of the most laughable aspects of this film is that all the 
characters are supposed to be high school students, but the oldest 
actors are pushing 30.  I guess some of them got held back a few times.  
There's a classic catfight where the Dagger Debs do battle with a nasty 
prison matron.  During the tussle, we get a pretty good look at a 
stuntman in a wig.  Maybe this scene inspired a similar moment in Keenan 
Ivory Wayans' I'M GONNA GIT YOU SUCKA.  And, of course, there's also the 
gratuitous topless scene, when one of the girls gets her shirt ripped 
off.
     I won't completely dismiss this as celluloid tripe.  For those who 
are inexplicably infatuated with the '70s, SWITCHBLADE SISTERS gives a 
glimpse of a different aspect of the era's pop culture than what is 
typically portrayed through nostalgia-tinged lenses.  It's cheap, 
tawdry, and practically unwatchable, but some viewers will undoubtedly 
enjoy it -- after all, Tarantino can't be the only SWITCHBLADE SISTERS 
fan, can he?  For my money, I'd prefer sitting through just about 
anything else currently playing in theaters -- even THE CABLE GUY.  
SWITCHBLADE SISTERS doesn't cut it on any level.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
