Title
Review for Man with the Golden Gun, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andy Phillips
Let me begin by saying that this is easily the worst movie in the entire
official (and even unofficial) James Bond series. It is so full of
self-parody and silly characters that you would almost believe you were
watching a spoof.
An omen of what is to come is provided by the pre-credits sequence, a dull
affair featuring a confrontation between a man (it's difficult to give a
better description since no mention of him is made elsewhere in the movie)
and the assassin of the title. A song with woefully terrible lyrics
follows, and the rest of the movie is even worse.
The plot might have been a pleasant change from the usual rule-the-world
so often found in the James Bond movies of the 70s, but here we get a
confused mismash about a fabled assassin, Francisco Scaramanga
(Christopher Lee, putting in a performance which is one of the rare saving
graces of this movie) who someone has apparently payed one million dollars
to in order to remove Roger Moore's 007. There is also a flimsy connection
with the energy crisis and a missing solar cell with 95% efficiency. It's
as much of a mess as it sounds.
Bond is "helped" in his task by Mary Goodnight (Ekland), whose character
couldn't possibly be any closer to the stereotypical bimbo. During the
course of the movie she gets locked in both a closet and a car trunk,
blunders around a control room accidentally setting off a laser and serves
no purpose in enhancing the plot whatsoever. Maud Adams (later to star in
Octopussy) is a much more stronger and useful character, but she hardly
features in the movie. Scaramanga's lackey is a dwarf called Nik-Nak,
who rather fittingly is also possibly the silliest henchman in the series,
serving up annoyance and weak dialogue in equal measures.
Worse still is an almost total lack of action throughout the whole movie.
There is but one fight sequence about fifteen minutes in (not counting a
ludicrous scene where two teenage girls beat up several dozen trained
martial artists -- another misguided attempt at humour). The solitary
car chase might have been a highlight, but the "action" is interrupted
on a frequent basis by a redneck sheriff (J.W. Pepper, played by Clifton 
James of Live and Let Die "fame") yelling stupid comments out of the
passenger window. He is easily the most irritating character in a James
Bond movie. Even his presence could have been made bearable by one of
the most impressive car stunts in cinematic history, a 360 degree
twisting loop jump over a broken bridge -- could have been, except
somebody got the idea to dub a mocking whistle tone over the final
print. On top of that debacle, the whole end of the film is an
anticlimatic sequence in Scaramanga's "funhouse".
The only good thing that came out of this movie was that the producers had
to make the next film in the series (the infinitely superior "The Spy who
loved Me") a great film in order for the Bond franchise to survive.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Roger Moore, Christopher Lee, Britt Ekland, Maud Adams, 
      Soon Taik Oh, Herve Villechaize, Clifton James, Bernard Lee, 
      Desmond Llewelyn, Lois Maxwell
Director: Guy Hamilton
Producers: Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and Tom Mankiewicz based on the novel by 
      Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Ted Moore and Oswald Morris
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Few will argue that THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN is the silliest of 
all the James Bond motion pictures (CASINO ROYALE excepted).  From the 
return appearance of Sheriff J.W. Pepper (Clifton Davis) to the 
ridiculous martial arts fight where two schoolgirls best dozens (while 
Bond stands by and looks amused), this 007 adventure consistently skirts 
self-parody.  Yet, after the dreariness of LIVE AND LET DIE, the upbeat 
change-of-pace is refreshing.  And, while million-dollar-a-shot hitman 
Scaramanga (Christopher Lee) isn't a typical Bond villain, he's closer 
than anyone from the previous film.  
     This is Roger Moore's second outing as Bond (and the ninth film in 
the series), and, while he still hasn't fully grown into the role (that 
doesn't happen until THE SPY WHO LOVED ME), he's more comfortable here 
than in LIVE AND LET DIE, showing signs of a unique characterization.  
All the regular supporting players are back:  the humorless M (Bernard 
Lee), the crusty Q (Desmond Llewelyn), and the ever-faithful Moneypenny 
(Lois Maxwell, starting to look a little too old to engage in playful 
sex jokes with Bond).
     THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN has two parallel plots that eventually 
dovetail into one.  The main story deals with Bond's attempts to find 
ace hitman Scaramanga before the elusive assassin fires a bullet with 
"007" on it.  Meanwhile, Scaramanga and the British government are both 
in pursuit of a vital component for a solar energy converter.  Hundreds 
of millions of dollars are at stake, since whoever builds this converter 
will have carte blanche where solar power is concerned. (Remember that 
this movie was released in the midst of the '70s energy crisis, when a 
worldwide push for alternative energy methods was underway.)
     Christopher Lee, the consummate bad guy from Hammer's horror films 
(he was always the monster opposite Peter Cushing's protagonist), 
infuses Scaramanga with a sinister demeanor.  In fact, although THE MAN 
WITH THE GOLDEN GUN is overflowing with campiness, Lee never 
participates. Scaramanga is played straight:  an egotistical hermit who 
kills for sport and harbors a secret admiration for 007.
     There are two Bond girls:  Britt Ekland as Mary Goodnight, 007's 
inept assistant, and Maud Adams as Andrea, Scaramanga's mistress.  Herve 
Villechaize ("The plane!  The plane!") is on hand as Nick Nack, right-
hand man to Scaramanga.  Soon Taik Oh is Hip, Bond's local contact (this 
film's Felix Leiter role).  Clifton James makes an encore appearance as 
the buffoon J.W. Pepper, this time vacationing in the Far East.  He 
joins Bond in one of the film's best sequences, a spectacular car chase 
that ends with Scaramanga literally flying away.
     Rarely does THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN take anything seriously.  
Mary Goodnight is as clumsy as they come.  Pepper and Nick Nack are 
cartoonish.  There are more jokes-per-minute than in any other Bond 
film.  Even John Barry's score is less earnest than usual, and the 
opening song is ridiculous.  Regardless, and despite an unnecessarily 
protracted denouement that had me wondering if the film was ever going 
to end, THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN is still fun.  It's about as far 
from Ian Fleming's vision of the superspy as the filmed interpretations 
have ever gotten, but for those who expect light, totally-unbelievable 
escapism, this movie does its part.  Yes, it's a weak entry in the 
series, but there's enough good, totally silly stuff here to keep it 
from the absolute bottom.  THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN certainly isn't 
worth $1 million, but it's fine for the price of a video rental.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This entry in the James Bond series is down in the cellar with 
A VIEW TO A KILL and ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE. 
The villain is boring, his only claim to fame being a third nipple 
(which Bond calls "an interesting anatomical titbit") and his golden 
gun (first owned by Oral Roberts), the climax is overly bland, 
consisting of a shootout in a fun house, and the murderous henchmen 
is played by Tattoo from "Fantasy Island," who gives Bond's knees a 
real pummeling, I'll tell you that.What can you say about a James 
Bond movie so uninspired that the writers had to bring back the 
annoying Sheriff Pepper character from LIVE AND LET DIE for 
comic relief?
        Roger Moore makes his second appearance as 007 here, 
heading off to Thailand to trace a golden bullet that arrived at Secret 
Service headquarters with his name on it. Bond traces the bullet to its 
manufacturer, then to its sender's lover (the same woman who played 
Octopussy nine years later in FOR YOUR EYES ONLY... I mean 
OCTOPUSSY) and finally to the sender himself, the man with the 
golden nipple, who is out to kill Bond.
        After that, there's the customary scene with Bond trapped in 
the villain's exotic hidden lair and the villain shares his plans to take 
over the world. In this case, the lair is an island off the coast of China 
and the plans are only to convert the world to solar power. But those 
environmentalists can get pretty violent for their cause. How many 
newspaper headlines have we all read about people who have been 
brutally murdered for not recycling aluminum cans? That of course 
leads to the climax and then about fifteen minutes of anticlimax.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Francisco Scaramanga, played with crisp efficiency by Christopher
Lee, is an ex-KGB agent who went independent over a decade ago.  Today
he does million dollar hits, and for some reason he has a contract for
killing James Bond.  Or does he?
     Although there are no known pictures of Scaramanga, his body's
three nipples are well known.  (This makes impersonating him unusually
easy -- one fake breast, and voila).  His golden gun with its golden,
custom sized bullets is his trademark.  The gun itself is a beautiful
piece of weaponry that can be assembled on the spot from its slick,
smoothly rounded pieces.
     Roger Moore, in his second outing as James Bond in 1974's THE MAN
WITH THE GOLDEN GUN, gets his footing after a disappointing and shaky
start in his first attempt playing everyone's favorite secret agent in
LIVE AND LET DIE.  Moore, clearly comfortable with his part this time,
executes with precision albeit not with Connery's flair and charisma.
Still, Moore is believable this time as Bond, something George Lazenby
never was.
     The story is set in and near the beautiful Hong Kong harbor.  The
film, especially in its nighttime sequences, handsomely photographed by
Ted Moore and Oswald Morris, continues the Bond tradition of taking us
to beautiful and exotic foreign locals.  The movie's loveliest scene
occurs when Bond pilots a small seaplane through the rocky coast and
narrow inlets of a series of tiny islands near the Chinese mainland.
     Ah, the Bond women.  He has them queued up for him in this one.
The Bond films progressively push the limits of almost displaying
nudity without ever showing it clearly.  This time, for example, a
woman skinny-dips in a pool, and we can almost make out her body.  But
the Bond films prize their family-friendly ratings so technically we
don't exactly see her.  As Bond says to Scaramanga, "We all get our
jollies one way or another."  Bond films titillate, but only within
carefully controlled bounds.
     Britt Ekland plays Mary Goodnight, Bond's lovely, brave, but
sometimes not too bright fellow agent.  "I like a girl in a bikini, no
concealed weapons," Scaramanga gives as one of his techniques for
protecting himself.  In the case of Ekland, there are other reasons why
a bikini uniform is a particularly desirable clothing choice.  Maud
Adams, seen a decade later as Octopussy, plays Andrea Anders,
Scaramanga's girlfriend and, of course, another of Bond's lovers.
     I could do without Bond's image as he smokes foot long cigars.
Perhaps that was considered sexy in the 1970s.  And maybe there are
those who still think so today
     The offensive and racist southern Sheriff J.W. Pepper (Clifton
James) from the last movie appears again, this time as a tourist.  An
Ugly American, he spews racial epithets at the local Chinese that will
have you wanting to cover your ears in shame.  The nicest thing he is
says is that they could get to work faster if they'd get out of those
silly pajamas.  One hopes that this character will not appear again.
     In contrast to the poorly choreographed fight sequences in many of
the earlier Bond films, this one has a perfectly executed and quite
funny one set at the villain's martial arts school.
     The film's obligatory car chase cum demolition derby is a carbon
copy of a hundred other pictures.  Only the great Bond theme music
makes it anything special.  The previous film, LIVE AND LET DIE, for
example, had the same chase, better executed.
     Two of the story's shoot-outs occur in a funhouse-style shooting
gallery that looks like they were lifted straight out of an episode of
the television series, "The Avengers."  But given that they borrowed
the idea, it's good to see that they stole from the best.
     This time it's the other side that has the best gadget -- a wing
with a jet engine that can be attached to a car to turn it into an
airplane.
     So what is Scaramanga's nefarious plan?  Nothing less than a
monopoly on solar energy, which we are told will upset the world's oil
sheiks.  Most of the story however is a simple series of chase scenes.
We learn almost nothing about the grand strategy until the last twenty
minutes of the picture so that it feels almost tacked on.  The result
is an entertaining film but not a very substantial one.
     THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN GUN runs 2:00.  It is rated PG for sexual
innuendo and violence and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, said it was an okay movie and better
than the previous one with Roger Moore.  He then went on to say that
recommends it and that his favorite part is Bond's duel with
Scaramanga.
