Title
Review for Fatherland (1994/I) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As in many a mystery, the journalist is handed a picture by a
mysterious stranger.  In the old photo is a group of unknown people
brought together during a key moment in WWII.  What has happened to
these people since, and what is the relevance of this photograph?
Although this outline is standard issue, the circumstances surrounding
it are not.
     The book "Fatherland" is a taut thriller and author Robert
Harris's first novel.  I read this engrossing tale on vacation a few
years back and thought at the time that a wonderful motion picture
could be made from it.  Although the script by Ron Hutchinson and
Stanley Weiser borrows liberally from the novel, usually reliable
director Christopher Menaul ("Prime Suspect 1" and FEAST OF JULY)
manages to excise much of the suspense.  Most of the key events from
the novel are there, but in the 1994 film FATHERLAND they are laid
before the viewer devoid of much of the energy and emotion present in
the novel.
     The story is set in the mid-1960s in a Europe renamed Germania and
controlled by Adolf Hitler.  Hitler has essentially won the war with a
stalemated peace even if the US never signed a treaty, and the war on
the Eastern front with Russia drags on ad infinitum.  The US, led by
President Joseph P. Kennedy, has begun to make some peace overtones to
Germania.  For the first time since before the war, Germania is letting
American journalists into the country since Germania is celebrating
Hitler's 75th birthday.  All, however, is not well in the National
Socialists' world.  The knowledge of the Holocaust is limited to a few
high-ranking Germans.
     Into this carefully contrived calm comes a murder of a high
ranking member of the SS.  With the body found in a lake, an SS police
officer, Major Xavier March, is sent to investigate.  According to his
dossier, the dead man turns out to have been an architect of "the
Jewish resettlement program" and even designed certain new efficiencies
in the program.  (The Germans and the world believe that the Jews were
resettled to the Eastern front.  With the war with Russia dragging on
forever, who could check the story's accuracy anyway.)
     Rutger Hauer, who specializes of late in over-the-top
performances, is remarkably subtle this time as Major Xavier March.
March is one of the few good Nazis, an officer whose bulky uniform
seems to hang on him heavily and awkwardly now.  The Major is a veteran
detective member of the SS, who has grown tired of the Nazis.  When his
son gives the Nazi youth pledge to Hitler at mealtime, March suggests
they say grace instead like they used to.
     His son, Dili, is a well scrubbed and naive member of the Hitler
youth movement. Rory Jennings plays Dili as an automaton who shows
little emotion at times when any human being would have had to be
significantly affected.
     The simple murder gets more complicated when General Globus (John
Shrapnel), the head of the Gestapo, is found to have been at the scene.
Soon a cover-up is afoot, and March is taken off the case.
     Miranda Richarson plays an American journalist named Charlie
Maguire, who was originally born in Germany but who left as a little
girl.  She is passed the mysterious and incriminating photos by a
stranger, along with a cryptic note to see someone to find out more
about the picture's background.
     In delicious bit of casting against type, Jean Marsh shows up
briefly as a creepy old German actress who blames her lack of success
in America on those Jews who run the studios.
     The book spent more time on the detective work whereas the movie
devotes too much time to establishing Hauer's "good" Nazi credentials.
And while the book kept the reader on the edge of the chair, the
movie's laconic pacing and unhurried staging robs the story of its
threatening immediacy.  The movie makes everything too predictable, but
the book had the gift of making the obvious surprising.
     A gripping and lucid book is thus transformed into a confusing and
slow movie that is populated with a remarkably tame group of Nazis with
little visible anger.  Even the Gestapo, with the exception of their
sinister hats, don't seem to be a particularly bad lot.  New York City
cops are usually portrayed as more vicious by the movies.  Still, the
fascinating underlying plot and Hauer's moving performance ultimately
save the picture, but just barely.
     FATHERLAND runs 1:48.  It is rated PG-13 for brief nudity, some
violence and a few pictures of concentration camp victims.  The film
would be fine for kids age 12 and up.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Almost half a century after World War Two, there are still
many voices, especially in some countries of Eastern Europe,
who lament the outcome of that global conflict. For them,
the wrong side has lost and the world would have been much
better place if it happened otherwise. For others, Hitler's
victory in WW2 is a matter of pure speculation, and Sci-Fi
novels from the alternative history sub-genre used that
concept very often (most notably in 1962 novel THE MAN IN
THE HIGH CASTLE by Philip K. Dick). However, first such
novel to reach the mainstream audience was Robert Harris'
FATHERLAND, bestseller who later served as basis for 1994
HBO movie, directed by Christopher Menaul.
The plot of this film is set in the alternative 1964, in a
world where Hitler managed to successfully finish conquest
of Europe, while USA was too busy making war with Japan. The
result is Germania, grand Nazi empire that controls the
entire Old Continent, with 75-year old Adolf Hitler still at
its helm. After the decades of cold war and still frustrated
with the inability to finish the bitter guerrilla war with
the remnants of Soviet Union, Hitler's regime wants to
improve relations with the other superpower, USA, led by
anti-Semitic and pro-German President Joseph Kennedy. The
summit in Berlin is set, and among many invited journalists
is Charlie Maguire (played by Miranda Richardson). She would
stumble on Xavier March (Rutger Hauer), SS officer who is
investigating the mysterious death of former Nazi official.
The murder is somewhat connected with the "Jewish question"
conference that took place during the war, and almost all
participants are dying. While trying to find the motive for
the killings, March and Maguire become targets of Gestapo.
The entire concept of alternative history is really
fascinating. On one hand, the created worlds are so
different from the world we live in, and on the other hand,
they are in the same time closer and more recognisable than
fantastic worlds of distant galaxies or distant futures. The
world of FATHERLAND, although some may question its
plausibility (most of the today's historians are almost
unanimous in their opinion that Hitler could never win WW2,
at least not in the way indicated in the film), is very
realistic one. The most intriguing idea is to show the most
evil and universally despised political system in the world
- German Nazism - slowly evolving into its "gentler and
kinder" form, in a manner very similar to the path Soviet
Union took from Stalin to Gorbachev era.
Unfortunately, like many good novels, FATHERLAND suffered a
terrible fate in its version as feature film. Instead of
putting an effort to show the fascinating and intriguing
details of Robert Harris' world, screenplay by Ron
Hutchinson and Stanley Weiser concentrated almost
exclusively on the lame, predictable and boring crime
investigation. Such subplots, as the example of much better
GORKY PARK shows us, simply don't work in totalitarian
settings, as long as the all-powerful government is one of
culprits. And with Nazi Germany, even in its "reformed"
version, that is definitely the case. Things are even made
worse with the poorly drawn characters, and actors who don't
put much effort in playing, which is especially the case
with Rutger Hauer. Terrible scripting culminates with hardly
believable, unoriginal finale and corny epilogue that would
have to establish the parallels between the fall of
alternative Nazism and our world's Communism.
It would be unfair to say that FATHERLAND doesn't have its
good sides. Director Menaul put some real effort in
portraying some interesting details while portraying Robert
Harris' world (like the posters of "Die Beatles" band). The
locations and some of the artifacts from Communist era
Czehoslovakia provided good hints how would latter dazy
Third Reich would look like. Unfortunately, all those
details are catching our attention only in the first part of
the film. The rest is one great disappointment - one of the
most tragic examples of great movies ideas being wasted in
mediocre screen effort.
