Title
Review for Peril from the Planet Mongo (1966) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Rick Pali
Released in 1966 for TV, this film is a re-editing of a 12 part serial
called Flash Gordon Conquers the Universe. I'm in a bit of confusion over
the serial's original release date. The film itself claims 1936 while the
Internet Movie Database says 1940. Regardless, you get the idea.
This is one in a series of Flash Gordon serials starring Larry 'Buster'
Crabbe, also of Buck Rogers and Tarzan fame. This time, Ming the Merciless
is back and he still has his sights on conquering the Earth. He's got a new
secret weapon in the form of a metal that burns with the heat of the sun
when exposed to oxygen. He's had his scientists make 'projectiles' out of
them so he can burn the Earth to ashes at the first sign of resistance.
Ming's decided to test them on Arboria to teach Prince Barin a lesson. Once
the metal starts burning, there's no way to stop it. The projectiles have
been fired and they're on their way, with only Flash to stop them...
Let me tell you, I was very much looking forward to seeing this film and I
was not disappointed. I've seen clips of the Flash Gordon serials and still
clearly remember the spaceships with the sparks and smoke flying out the
back. And the sound! I don't know where they got it, but it's unmistakable
and I don't think I'll ever forget it.
It's not that this film has a brilliant plot, characterisation, and
terrific acting. That's not it at all. I bet that it wasn't even so hot, in
those areas, for its own time, but looking at this film is looking at
history. Much like Star Trek today, the Flash Gordon of sixty years ago is
what some people expected the future to be like. Watch it with your 1990s
eyes, and of course it's funny. But look at it as an entertainment slanted
vision of the future of the 1930s, compare it to our visions, and it's
fascinating. Both the differences and the similarities are interesting.
This was done before World War Two and it really shows. That conflict
completely redefined the art of war, and those changes are not reflected
here. You don't expect mounted warriors, or astronauts fighting with
swords. Some of the uniforms look straight from World War One or even the
Crimean War. But you really can't expect them to have known what was
coming. Heck, at least they've got ray-guns. And the shooting effect was
done by scratching the beam into the film itself!
And look at Dale Arden (Carol Hughes). Is there any doubt that she's along
for the ride to keep the men and boys watching? She doesn't do much more
than get taken prisoner by Ming, but her short dress leaves no doubt that
she's got wonderful legs. I'll sheepishly admit that I was mad at Ming for
making her change into less revealing clothes when he kidnapped her. Some
things never change, I guess.
As you might expect, the physics are all over the place. Most people in the
spaceships aren't even sitting, nevermind belted in. Given inertia, that's
not really reasonable. Mongo is another planet, but the spaceships are
never shown in space. Ming's scientists are working in a vacuum, with these
really funky helmets...but with bare hands. At least there's an airlock.
But picking this film apart for mistakes in the science and other errors,
completely misses the point. This film is sixty years old and is a prime
example of not only very early science fiction, but a type of moviemaking
that just doesn't exist any more: the serial. It's been edited into a
single film, but the cliff-hanger breaks are still recognisable.
If you're the type that can't even watch a black and white film simply
because it's not colour, steer very clear. But if you're a more seasoned,
wide-ranging viewer, see one of the Flash Gordon serials if you get the
chance. It's the grandfather of your beloved Star Wars and Star Trek.
