Title
Review for Badkonake sefid (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE WHITE BALLOON (BADKONAKE SEFID) is one of those simple movies
about the heart warming adventures of a couple of kids.  It is an
Iranian film about the preparations for the coming Persian New Year.
The movie is told in almost real time and starts one and a half hours
before the beginning of the New Year when the people in Teheran are in
a frenzy making sure that everything is ready.  Excitement is in the
air.
     As the story starts, a girl about 6, Razieh (Aida Mohammadkhani),
her brother about 10, Ali (Mohsen Kafili), and their mother (Fereshteh
Sadr Orfani) are busy with their preparations for the New Year.
Apparently it is important to have a goldfish, and although the
family's goldfish are so popular that people come to buy them, Razieh
whines incessantly with her scratchy voice that their goldfish are "too
skinny", and they must go to the market to get some fat ones.
     It was at this point in the show that my guilt began.  How could I
not be liking a show that was trying so hard?  Clearly director Jafar
Panahi was doing his best to craft a sweet little slice of life piece,
and here he had gotten himself a girl that has no screen presence and
more over was about as much fun to listen to as someone scraping their
fingers down a blackboard.  Her voice is terrible, and she scowls in
most of her scenes.  Playing a role of the little girl that everyone
wished would go away, she could do, but here so was supposed to be the
charming lead character.  Aida Mohammadkhani plays Razieh as a very
unsympathetic character.  Oh well, I though, the mother is sweet and
the brother is not too bad, perhaps the only flaw, albeit a large one,
will be the miscast lead.
     Her older brother is voiced by Mohsen Kalifi, but is never seen.
Soon I was to find another aspect of the story as infuriating as Aida
Mohammadkhani's performance, namely the show's sound by Said Ahmadl and
Mojtaba Mortazavi.  Rarely is it that the sound becomes a big
detraction, but it is in THE WHITE BALLOON.  Striving for authenticity,
I guess, the director has background sounds frequently drowning out the
actors.  Now, loud music is one thing, but the audience has to endure a
cacophony of obnoxious traffic noises, radio talk shows blasting out
from hidden boom boxes, and most irritatingly of all, off screen
people, especially the unseen older brother inside the house, yelling
at other people.  It made me want to escape the theater and go sit in
some peaceful spot to give my ears a rest.  Just when the background
noise would subside, Razieh would start her whining again.  Not a
pleasant time.
     The story goes on and features a snake charmer, lost money, and
other small adventures.  The script by Abbas Kiarostami is minimalist
and is need of a rewrite.  We are left with a story that works or
doesn't solely based on the intrinsic charm of the lead character.
     So what is good about the show?  Mohsen Kafili and Fereshteh Sadr
Orfani deliver nice performances.  The music, when it is there, is
quite pleasant.  Most of all, I give the producer (Kurosh Mazkouri) a
lot of credit for attempting such a sweet little tale.  It is too bad
the execution is so flawed.
     As a critic, there is nothing worse than having to give a thumbs
down to something that you want desperately to like, but can not.  It
is oh so much easier to err on the side of grade inflation.  Giving
movies thumbs down has the potential for generating a plethora of
complaining letters ranging from polite disagreements to diatribes.  If
you overpraise a movie, all you get is silence.  When I confessed that
I did not like FOREST GUMP, BURNT BY THE SUN, and THE BIRDCAGE, I got a
wide range of letters, but most people claimed it proved how stupid I
was not to have liked the movie since they and the rest of known world
liked it, end of argument.  As Somerset Maugham said, "People ask you
for criticism, but they only want praise."
     THE WHITE BALLOON runs 1:25, but feels a lot longer.  It is in
Farsi with English subtitles.  It has no MPAA rating, but would
probably be G.  The show would be fine for kids of all ages, but I
suspect most will be as bored with it as I was.  I can not recommend
this attempt at a sweet little tale, but I give the film * 1/2 for
trying hard and for a couple of decent performances by the mother and
the younger brother.  Actually, I fear that I getting too softhearted,
and * 1/2 may be too generous.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WHITE BALLOON, THE (director: Jafar Panahi; cast: Aida Mohammadkhani,
Moshen Kalifi, Fereshteh Sadr Orfani, Anna Bourkowska, Aliasghar Samadi,
Mohammad Shahani, Mohammad Bahktiari, 1995-Iran)
This is a simple, childlike, non-political Iranian, neo-realism film,
told from the vantage point of a 7-year-old girl (Aida), who desires a
fat goldfish in the shop, which costs 100 tomans, instead of the skinny
ones she has at home, for the New Year celebration, which comes on the
first day of spring. Goldfish, for the Iranian celebrants, are symbols
of life.
What is truly amazing about this masterly done film, is how gracefully
it uses real time to take you into the countdown for the New Year, that
is marked off by repeated radio reminders.
Meanwhile, a small radius of Tehran that is familiar to the girl but not
really known to her, is seen through her wide-open eyes as she walks
home from shopping with her mother (Sadr). She is constantly watched by
her mother, but is childishly curious about the shops and the group of
men who hang-out around the snake charmers, a place she is forbidden to
go to. When they arrive home, we are not invited inside their home, as
if we were intruders, but we see their courtyard, and we get a pretty
good idea how this middle-class family lives.
Her mother is upset with her because she did not follow her closely
while shopping and because she can't stop talking and whining about the
chubby goldfish she wants to buy, begging her  to give her the money to
buy the goldfish. At home, we meet her older brother (Mohsen), who
returns from an errand for his father, who is not seen because he is
showering, but we hear him get angry at Moshen for bringing him soap
instead of shampoo.
The brother thinks she is crazy to want the goldfish, he tells her, "You
can see two movies for that amount of money." But she is not dissuaded
and manages to bribe her brother by giving him her blue balloon, and he
talks his mother into giving him a 500- toman note to purchase the fish,
if he brings back the change. When he returns with the banknote, he is
surprised as Aida grabs the money and rushes out to purchase the fish,
going against her mother's wishes to be out alone in the streets of
Tehran.
She re-meets the snake charmers, and her curiousity can't resist
watching them. They cheat her out of her money, but she manages to get
the money back from them. By this time, we are sucked into accepting the
importance the money and goldfish has for the girl, it is not unlike our
Christmas time desire to please our children with gifts, whether or not
the gifts are worth it or not, they have an intrinsic value above their
real worth, and we feel so happy when we see the joy in their eyes when
they receive their gifts. The brilliance of the film, is that the story
that unfolds is about the little girl's adventure with the shop owners
and the strangers in the street she is not supposed to talk to but does,
and how caught up in it we get because it is so human a story; it is
something that is universally understood, that we forget that we are
talking about Iran, the country that we demonized, our arch enemy; and,
if the film can be criticized, it is for glossing over any of the
numerous wrongs in their society that could be criticized but are not.
Though, I think, that might be unfair to say, since the movie should be
judged for its own sake and not for any outside political reasons.
She, once again, loses the banknote, it falls down a street grating and
she can't get it out. Thusly, we meet a tailor, who is arguing with a
customer, and from the girl's anxious eyes we see how gigantic and aloof
adults can be to a child, especially when she can't wait to tell him
about the lost money that fell down the grating, but he doesn't listen
to her. It is interesting to see how different he can be when another
adult, an older woman, talks to the tailor in behalf of the little girl.
The remainder of the film is about her attempt to recover the money,
with her brother, now, by her side.
Finally, an Afghan balloon seller is recruited to help recover the
banknote. He helps them accomplish the task, but when this is done, the
girl and her brother run off gleefully to their home to celebrate the
New Year, and the busy street starts to empty out as everyone is rushing
home. The final shot, as the film ends, is of the Afghan boy, smiling
just seconds ago, now saddened, alone with just one white balloon that
he did not sell, and we realize that this film ends with our impression
of him on our minds, and the little girl's adventure seems to be just
one little story told; and, now, we can easily forget about her, but the
Afghan's plight, his loneliness remains etched in our mind, as it
affects the sensiblities we have about family life and makes us reflect
what it is to be a foreigner in a country where family life is so
cherished, and it leaves us thinking not about any of the celebrants,
but about what is going to happen to him, how will he celebrate the New
Year! This is a great final shot of the white balloon in the air, that
is not contrived or pretentious, but is genuinely a heartfelt and
memorable moment of the film, topping off a very human film, that might
surprise a lot of people that it was made in modern Iran.
THE WHITE BALLOON is a masterpiece in its simplicity, and the way its
tale of  the human condition is so easily related without demeaning the
people involved; and, how childhood is explored, pointing out how a
child tries to grow up when faced with adversity, are unmatched in most
Hollywood films. If I had to compare it to any film that I have seen, I
think of De Sica's THE BICYCLE THIEF and see some of the same values
about life in both films.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Aida Mohammadkhani, Moshen Kalifi, Fereshteh Sadr Orfani, 
      Anna Bourkowska, Mohammad Shahani
Director: Jafar Panahi
Screenplay: Abbas Kiarostami
Cinematography: Farzad Jowdat
U.S. Distributor: October Films
In Farsi with subtitles
     Iranian films are not big in the United States.  After just a few 
months of limited release, THE WHITE BALLOON has already made more money 
in this country than any previous Iranian picture, including last year's 
THROUGH THE OLIVE TREES, which was made by international film icon Abbas 
Kiarostami and distributed by Miramax.  THE WHITE BALLOON, written by 
Kiarostami and directed by one of his proteges, Jafar Panahi, has the 
characteristic slow, stately tone that dominates Iranian efforts, but, 
at least in terms of its minimalist narrative, it's reminiscent of 
Vittorio De Sica's Italian classic, THE BICYCLE THIEF.  
     THE WHITE BALLOON is told in real time through the eyes of its 
seven year old, female protagonist, the feisty Razieh (Aida 
Mohammadkhani).  Our impressions of other characters are filtered 
through Razieh, so we see them as she does, whether they're strange, 
frightening, indifferent, or helpful.  All the facets of humanity are 
represented, from a generous-but-ineffectual old woman to a sinister 
soldier who tells lies to gain the young girl's confidence.  
     It's New Year's Day in Tehran, and, in ninety minutes, all the 
shops will close for a week-long holiday.  Before that happens, Razieh 
desperately wants to buy a plump, white goldfish with elaborate fins.  
She has her heart set on this prize and refuses to give up even when her 
mother says "no."  So, with the help of her brother (Moshen Kalifi), she 
eventually wears down all resistance, and, armed with her mother's last 
500 tomans bill, heads into the marketplace on her own.  Between home 
and the fish store, however, she loses the money down a street grate, 
where the metal bars keep it within sight, but out of reach.
     Like THE BICYCLE THIEF, THE WHITE BALLOON proves that movies don't 
have to be plot-heavy to succeed.  This film is strangely compelling 
even though nothing much happens, and that's primarily because Razieh is 
such an endearing character.  Portrayed in a perfectly-nuanced, 
unaffected manner by Aida Mohammadkhani, Razieh is one of the most 
impressive screen children since the protagonist of CROWS.  
Mohammadkhani, with only a little help from her supporting actors, makes 
this picture.
     In addition to its account of a girl's fist venture into the adult 
world on her own, THE WHITE BALLOON gives Western viewers a rare glimpse 
into the real Iran.  Here, freed of political shading, we meet the 
genuine inhabitants of Tehran, and, unsurprisingly, find that they're 
not all that different from us.  THE WHITE BALLOON certainly isn't 
everyone's kind of film, but those with the patience to sit through all 
eighty-five minutes will uncover a sublime, unconventionally engrossing 
story.
     A controversy that has nothing to do with the film's content has 
metamorphosed around THE WHITE BALLOON.  Following a U.S. congressional 
bill funding covert action against the current government of Iran, that 
country attempted to withdraw the film from contention for a best 
foreign film Oscar nomination.  Subsequently, when THE WHITE BALLOON 
began its limited U.S. run, Iran denied the director, Jafar Panahi, 
permission to leave the country to participate in a publicity tour.  
Nevertheless, even though Panahi has been forbidden to travel to the 
United States, he is well represented by his first feature, which speaks 
as eloquently as anything he would likely say.
