Title
Review for Fish in the Bathtub, A (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Without intending to, "A Fish in the Bathtub" serves as an
effective counter-programmer to the upcoming Tom Cruise/Nicole Kidman
thriller, "Eyes Wide Shut," by proving that marrieds don't necessarily need
star appeal or magazine-cover looks to attract an appreciative audience.
        Don't go expecting anything as controversial as the late Stanley
Kubrick's swan song, however.  Joan Micklin Silver's comedy (she made
"Crossing Delancey") is light.  Very light.  Unlike most things this summer
it doesn't feature aliens or car crashes or steamy sex scenes, and there's
nothing particularly new or significant or eye-popping in its storyline.
But in a lot of ways that's what makes "A Fish in the Bathtub" so enjoyable.
        About that storyline (in 25 words or less): after nearly 40 years
of marriage, Sam and Molly have a worse fight than usual and Molly walks
out, leaving Sam to contemplate his lot in life.
        Sam and Molly are played by Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara who, like
Cruise and Kidman, are a real-life married couple.  Not surprisingly, the
two actors have an effortless, easy-going chemistry and charm that provides
the film with its rich core.  While some may argue that Stiller's character
isn't much different from his Mr. Costanza on TV's "Seinfeld"--stubborn,
loudmouthed, and insensitive--the veteran actor gives Sam a vulnerable,
sympathetic depth despite his bristly exterior.  Equally convincing, Meara
plays Molly not as an innocent victim but as a co-contributor to the
couple's problems, one who gives as good as she gets.
        The fish in question is a large carp that Sam purchases from one of
the Chinese-owned businesses that now occupy the previously Jewish
neighborhood of Sam's old lingerie store.  In a silly but nice touch, the
fish becomes Sam's closest companion during the marital discord.  It's easy
to be amused when visualizing Jerry Stiller shouting out the film's cute
(but unspoken) tagline: "the fish stays...the marriage goes!"
        "A Fish in the Bathtub" is populated by a plethora of supporting
actors who form the family and friends who are all affected by Sam and
Molly's disharmony.  While some of the performances are competent
(especially Jane Adams as the bickering couple's unmarried daughter
Ruthie), a surprisingly large number recall improv night at the local
amateur dramatics society.  It might be that Silver has used this minor
film as a springboard to test out some new talent but unfortunately many of
her choices--including Sam and Molly's married realtor son, the blonde
client he's attracted to, and his best friend who knows it--don't pass the
test.
