Title
Review for Tregua, La (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A current movie, Marlene Gorris's "Mrs. Dalloway"--which is
based on a novel by Virginia Woolf--depicts a shellshocked
soldier returning from World War I who takes his own life.  It's
not at all unusual for veterans who have been to the front to
return home with emotional difficulties.  Imagine, then, what
it's like to survive the Holocaust, being incarcerated in a labor
camp or, even more momentous, a Nazi death camp like
Auschwitz.  After being worked for sixteen hours a day, living
on one bowl of watery soup and perhaps a piece of bread,
witnessing fellow inmates tortured and hanged, shot, or
gassed, you're more than likely to lose your spirit, your very
soul.  "The Truce," a movie equally somber and humorous,
focuses on one such survivor named Primo who is liberated
from Auschwitz in April 1945 by Russian soldiers and faces
an uphill struggle to regain his spirit.  Based on the book of
the same name by the chemist Primo Levi, an Italian Jew
who, like Rupert Graves's shellshocked character in "Mrs
Dalloway" took his own life, director Franceso Rosi's film
traces the revitalizing of Primo's senses, principally his erotic
feelings, in a relatively high-budget movie which was begun in
1987.  Though no American or British characters are
depicted, this Italian-French-German-Swiss co-production is
principally in the English language, while shards of Russian,
Italian, and Greek dialogue remain untranslated.
   The biographical narrative, fully dramatized rather than in a
documentary format, deals with the months immediately
following the liberation of scores of inmates in Poland's
Auschwitz concentration camp by Russians in April 1945. 
While the movie opens upon a violent battle scene as the
Russian troops approach the camp, the remainder of the film
is more of a meditation by Primo, his reactions to the
adventures he undertakes as a refugee eager to return from
Poland to his home in Turin, Italy.  Perhaps the most
surprising aspect of the movie is its glorification, indeed its
deification of the Russian soldiers and civilians alike.  As
Primo was not a Communist sympathizer or in any way a shill
for Soviet ideology, this veneration provides a bold contrast to
Mark Jonathan Harris's views in his 1997 documentary "The
Long Way Home."  "The Long Way Home," produced by
Moriah Films in affiliation with the Simon Wiesenthal Center,
chronicles the odious procedures to which these refugees
were subjected from the end of the war in 1945 to the
establishment of a Jewish homeland in Israel in 1948.  Unlike
Franceso Rosi, who directed "The Truce," Harris observes
that the American troops who liberated the prisoners of the
Dachau concentration camp near Munich looked at the
inmates with disgust, even throwing up at the sights and
smells they encountered.  There, the homeless and solitary
Jewish refugees were rounded up into barbed-wire camps not
unlike those they faced from the Nazis, while government
higher-ups even kept military guards outside to prevent the
Jews from "scattering" and "creating anarchy."  Even worse,
in the Lithuanian town of Vilna, five who tried to return to their
homes were murdered, a note stuffed into one pocked which
read, "This will be the fate of the surviving Jews."  Even in
Britain, Labour Party Foreign Secretary Nye Bevin once raged
that the "Jews are a pestilence."  
   No such problems for the survivors in Primo Levi's memory. 
Jews and non-Jews alike, they are picked up by Russian
trucks of the Red Army and sent into Cracow and
resettlement camps of Katowice, spending a good deal of
time wandering through Russian towns in a roundabout
journey that would take them to their homelands.  
   One refugee center features a beautiful, blond Russian
woman who takes a fancy to Primo (John Turturro), amused
by the refugee's open-faced shyness and inability to put his
feelings and thoughts into words.  A chemist by trade, Primo
is put to work classifying the medicines that arrive daily at the
camp, and through the alluring woman who invites him to a
small party in the home of the supervising doctor, he begins
to regain his sexual feeling.  Primo's rehabilitation is aided by
his relationship with his best friend,Cesare (Massimo Ghini),
who sees the humor amid the darkness and while not
verbalizing his philosophy, makes clear to Primo that laughter,
not the chemist's drugs, is the best medicine. Primo is
likewise charmed and occasionally humiliated by a boisterous
companion known simply as "The Greek" (Rade Serbedzija),
an opportunist and bon vivant who makes the best of his
situation by selling clothing and even managing a makeshift
Russian brothel.  In only one case do the local citizens turn
away from the refugees, when they discover that the mostly
Jewish exiles have recently been liberated from Auschwitz. 
Otherwise, these people are treated virtually like conquering
heroes by the people they meet, most poignantly by an
offering of beer and food by an Austrian woman who had
once written to Hitler advising him not to start a war.  (The
letter did not reach Der Fuhrer, but the SS got their hands on
it and burned down her shop.)
   From time to time the film bursts forth in unadulterated
bliss, particularly when focused on a raucous night of
entertainment. Hundreds of Soviets cheer in the audience, as 
performers burst forth in song and a cocky Russian does a
respectable imitation of Fred Astaire, sword waving about, to
the music of Irving Berlin's "Cheek to Cheek."  Filmed in
Ukraine using Italian and Ukrainian crews, "The Truce"
features a pulsating soundtrack of largely European hits like
"Chardash" and "Hungarian Dance" and "Moskva Majskaja." 
John Turturro's toned-down performance is contrasted with
the vivacious presentation by the large ensemble, allowing us
to watch the hero's transformation from a near-zombie to a
life-affirming human being.
   Since the movie is more a reflection on life by its principal
subject than a plot-driven story, it moves along at a pace as
meandering as the train which takes Prime to Italy not by the
logical southern route through Odessa but by a northward
detour into Russian, Polish and German cities.  Yet the story
moves along inexorably as Rosi traces the movement of the
train on a map of the area, stopping here and there to
reinforce Primo's conviction that the joys of life outnumber its
miseries.   

Author
James Berardinelli
Italy/France/Switzerland, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 5/1/98 (limited)
Running Length: 2:05
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, nudity, sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: John Turturro, Massimo Ghini, Stefano Dionisi, Rade Serbedzija, 
      Agnieszka Wagner 
Director: Francesco Rosi
Producers: Guido De Laurentiis, Leo Pescarolo
Screenplay: Tonino Guerra, Sandro Petraglia, Stefano Ruli, and 
      Francesco Rosi based on the autobiography by Primo Levi
Cinematography: Pasqualino De Santis, Marco Pontecorvo
Music: Luis Enriquez Bacalov
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     When it comes to stories about the Holocaust and Hitler's final 
solution, most movies end with the liberation of the concentration 
camps, allowing the viewer to (wrongfully) assume that the arrival of 
freedom represented the end of the ordeal for those who were imprisoned.  
The truth, as depicted in Francesco Rosi's THE TRUCE, was far more 
complex.  Many of the Jews freed by the Allied advance were a long way 
from home (if they even had a home), and, considering the poor state of 
transportation in Europe at the time, the refugees' journey became an 
arduous exercise in hunger, frustration, and loss.  However, while 
Rosi's film deserves recognition for highlighting a forgotten aspect of 
the Jewish post-Holocaust experience, there are serious flaws in his 
approach.  A far more powerful and better balanced depiction of this 
subject can be found in the 1997 non-fiction effort, THE LONG WAY HOME, 
which captured the Best Documentary Oscar.  
     THE LONG WAY HOME shows the horror and disgust with which the 
rescuers viewed the Holocaust victims.  Allied soldiers recoiled in 
revulsion at what they found behind the walls of Dachau and Auschwitz.  
Yet in THE TRUCE, the men of the Red Army are presented heroically -- 
saviors come to free the mistreated and undertrodden.  This almost-
worshipful attitude occasionally makes THE TRUCE seem more like a piece 
of pro-Soviet propaganda than a legitimate dramatic exploration of what 
happened when the Jews were set free.  
     The film opens with the liberation of Auschwitz in early 1945.  
Among the surviving Jews is Primo Levi (John Turturro), a native of 
Turin who has been awaiting his end in the Polish death camp.  As the 
gates come crashing down, Primo puts the mixed feelings of his fellow 
prisoners into words:  "Face-to-face with freedom, we felt lost."  Soon, 
Primo, along with hundreds of other refugees, is on a long, circuitous 
journey by foot and by train back to his native Italy.  Along the way, 
Primo meets other wanderers, including a larger-than-life Greek (played 
by Rade Serbedzija, of BEFORE THE RAIN and THE SAINT) and a pretty 
Russian nurse (Agnieszka Wagner).  His spirits rise and fall like the 
crash of waves as he remembers the events that led to his internment, 
considers the uncertainty of the future, and dreams of finally reaching 
Turin.  Despair has settled deep in his soul, however, as revealed when 
he makes the statement, "God cannot exist if Auschwitz exists."  And, 
while the movie ends on a positive note, Levi's life did not -- unable 
to cope with what he had experienced, he eventually killed himself.
     While THE TRUCE tells a story that is occasionally compelling and 
disturbing, the film feels like it has been sanitized.  In trying to 
inject some lighthearted humor into a tale that is inherently deeply 
tragic, director Francesco Rosi reduces THE TRUCE to a series of 
loosely-connected, semi-comic episodes.  Inexplicably, supporting 
characters keep turning up at different points on Primo's journey to 
offer support and encouragement.  (Serbedzija's Greek and Wagner's 
Galina both make more than one appearance.)  And, although famine and 
disease are rampant, no one actually dies.  On the whole, Primo's 
journey seems more like a trek through a land of adventure rather than a 
shuffle down the road of despair.  There are inconveniences, but no 
major obstacles, and the great men of the Red Army are always on hand to 
offer aid and support.
     Whenever THE TRUCE works, it does so largely due to the moving, 
introverted performance of John Turturro.  The actor presents Primo as a 
sad, deeply thoughtful man who questions everything around him, 
including why his life was spared when so many others died.  Other than 
Turturro, however, no one in the cast leaves much of an impression.  
Massimo Ghini is okay as Primo's glib friend, but Serbedzija comes 
across as an over-the-top clown and Wagner is never given an opportunity 
to develop her character into anything more substantial than a token 
prostitute with a good heart.  
     THE TRUCE is not an innately bad film, but Rosi makes some ill-
advised choices in the way he chooses to present the story.  Those who 
have not seen THE LONG WAY HOME will probably react more positively to 
this effort than those who have.  When viewed in the light of the 
documentary, THE TRUCE does not fare well.  Not only is the tone off, 
but the narrative seems shallow and erratic.  Turturro's performance 
partly redeems the proceedings, but even he cannot elevate THE TRUCE to 
the high level at which this material deserves to be presented.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TRUCE, THE (Tregua, La) (director/writer: Francesco Rosi;
screenwriters:Tonino Guerra/ Sandro Petraglia/based on the book "The
Reawakening," by Primo Levi; cinematographer: Pasqualino De Santis/Marco
Pontecorvo; cast: John Turturro (Primo Levi), Massimo Ghini (Cesare),
Rade Serbedzija (The Greek), Stefano Dionisi (Daniele), Teco Celio
(Colonel Rovi), Agnieszka Wagner (Galina), Roberto Citran (Unverdorben),
1996-Italy)
A slow, meandering train ride back from the dead, for the Jews liberated
by the Russians from the concentration camp of Auschwitz, Poland,
towards the end of WW11, April of 1945, marks this morosely dramatic
English-languagefilm directed by the 75-year-old noted Marxist and
politically orientated Francesco Rosi (Salvatore Giuliano, Three
Brothers). It was filmed in the Ukraine, supposedly in the same places
the then 29-year-old  Primo Levi was detained at. John Turturro is Primo
Levi, the nativeTurin chemist and author of many books on his
confinement, including this autobiographical look at his observations on
survival and what it means to be liberated, and it also offers his
lifelong take on what the dignity of man means to him.
The film should be like a meditation, as the introspective Primo wants
to get it out of his system what it meant to be a Jewish prisoner and
how it was unbearable to come out of that camp and think that you could
still be human. Turturro plays the tragic role with an understandable
quietude (his voice barely rises above a whisper) and with an emotional
understatement, conveying a deep sadness in his gestures and deep
reflections, showing how difficult it is for him to see the light of day
again without feeling atrophied and lost. He is the reason for any
success the film has. Unfortunately, the rest of the film, as worthy an
effort as it is, about a subject matter that merits to be told again and
again, as its Holocaust tale can't be told enough to the world for its
message to sink in and should be told in a multitude of ways;
nevertheless, as compelling as the film was at times, it also shot
itself in the foot by trying to tell a conventional story while the more
powerful and personal tale of Primo Levi was somewhat sacrificed by
these very typical Hollywood episodic scenes of how the other characters
reacted to their liberation and with Rosi's added attempt to attain some
comic relief from these diverse characters being poorly accomplished.
He, thusly, diminished the power of the concentration camp story. The
meditations of Primo Levi and soberness of the story were the thing to
shoot for here, and all one has to do is read Primo's book and see how
much more gripping those images were there when read than the screen
images that tended to be tedious and somewhat diverting after awhile.
The film significantly begins as mounted Soviet cavalrymen appear on a
hill outside of the camp, where the buildings are left burning from the
battle just fought, as the fleeing SS guards leave the bewildered
Holocaust prisoners behind, who are left looking up in awe at their
liberators.
When in Cracow, waiting to get a train home while placed in the transit
camps by the Russians, Primo is allowed to wander in and out of the camp
and he meets in town a hustler and pleasure-seeker, known by the
sobriquet of 'The Greek (Rade),' who steers the frightened and unworldly
Italian youngster to places of food, and gets him to carry his heavy
duffel bag and sell clothes for him as payment for his expertise in
getting along. The Greek soon abandons him, admonishing him for being
hopeless, as he leaves him with this advise: "Before you can forage for
food, you need shoes on your feet."  Primo is left with a strange sort
of respect and admiration for him, while also resenting him for leaving
him in such a manner.
The Russians are portrayed in a somewhat enigmatic light, positive for
their role as liberators and providers of food and shelter, but are also
ridiculed for their rigid ways and for being a nation that is used to
slavery as a normal way of life and thinks nothing of the misery of
others; but, who for the most part, at least, in this film, they are
shown to have no bias against the survivors for being Jews. There is
only one incident where the Poles in a marketplace, shun away from Primo
because he is a Jew from Auschwitz, that is when he is trying to sell
them a shirt.
The Russians continally round the survivors up cattle-like and put them
on trucks without telling them what is going on, but the survivors feel
relieved when the Russians are sent to the front and they are left in
the transit camps only with the civilians. The survivors just can't wait
for the war to be over and for them to get on the train and go home.
Luckily for Primo, he gets to work in a hospital as a doctor (labeling
the medicines) and when there, he develops a crush on a luscious blonde
nurse (Wagner), but is too tongue-tied to tell this sometime prostitute
with a heart of gold how he feels about her.
Music is the universal language of healing, and when the Russians put on
a musical show for their victory celebration, with one of their soldiers
militarily dancing like Fred Astaire to the Irving Berlin tune 'Cheek to
Cheek,' it brings joy to the survivors en masse, as they begin to dance
with each other.
Primo, in proud defiance, wears his concentration camp coat with the
Jewish star on it, as if it was a badge of honor, wanting to show others
who he is and let them sort out for themselves what to think of him. He
becomes an onlooker, observing the destruction left in the wake of the
Nazi terror through-out Europe, as the train is finally there for them
and it follows the map shown on screen, across Poland and Russia and
when derailed, the refugees trod on by foot until they catch another
train, as it heads back down through Austria and Germany before Primo
returns at last to Turin.
A tubercular camp survivor (Dionisi), who is guilt-ridden why he
survived and his family and friends got wiped out by the Nazis in
Venice, feels relieved to toss the starving German slave-prisoners he
sees on the road a piece of bread, as these members of the 'Master Race'
grovel at his feet for it.
Primo meets up with 'The Greek' again, while he is passing through
Russia. 'The Greek' somehow is running a bordello there. In Austria an
old lady who wrote a letter to Hitler to end the war, but the SS
responded by burning her house to the ground and her husband left her,
gives him time to reflect on what the outside world is like, as she
offers him and his friend Cesare (Massimo) some drinks and food. Cesare
keeps reminding Primo, don't be so glum, it is laughter that is the cure
all for this misery we have undergone.
In a very sensitive scene, he meets a guilt-ridden woman camp survivor,
who did God knows what to survive in the camp, who Primo has a brief
affair with and becomes human again.
Perhaps, the most moving scene in the film or the phoniest (which is my
take on it), take your choice, is his return to Germany, where he makes
eye contact with a Nazi soldier in the Munich train station, but the
haughty soldier does not know why he is being stared at, but then Primo
opens up his concentration camp jacket and the soldier sees the Jewish
yellow star and without a word being said on either side, he bows down
as if asking forgiveness. But for the ungodly, non-religious, and
non-Communist Primo, who was arrested as a Partisan freedom fighter and
not because he was a Jew (he concedes that before the war he wasn't even
aware of being Jewish), it is not forgiveness that he wishes to grant
but that the Holocaust be something that is viewed as so horrible an
event that it won't ever be forgotten by mankind. For Primo Levi, "God
cannot exist if Auschwitz exists."
As for the film's title, Rosi explained, "Life is a truce between the
moment we're born and the moment we die." This holds true with Primo
Levi's belief that war is continuous. The spiritual awakening for Levi
is what came about on his circuitous route home, where he found a reason
to live again.
The Truce ends on a near-note of normalcy, in which one finds Primo back
at home by his desk, as if this nightmare never happened. But in his
last look at us, we realize that he can't ever return to the way things
were before, the price of survival has too high of a price tag on it for
him to believe in normalcy again.
I just couldn't help feeling that this earnest attempt at capturing the
mood of that horrific event, lacked whatever it takes to make this a
first-rate film. The story was there from Primo Levi's book, the right
actor played him, but most of the other decisions Rosi made in the
filming of the story, failed to bring it to life and make it convincing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
