Title
Review for Clueless (1995)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "You want to practice parking?" asks quasi-stepbrother Josh.
Befuddled teenager Cher explains to him, "What's the point?  Everywhere
you go has valet."
     In last year's broadly written and hilarious comedy CLUELESS,
Alicia Silverstone (who will be batgirl in BATGIRL AND ROBIN next year)
plays clueless teenager Cher Horowitz.  Paul Stephen Rudd (Dave Paris
from this year's ROMEO AND JULIET) plays Josh.  Josh, you see, is
Cher's father Mel's (Dan Hedaya) son from a previous marriage.
     Successful comedies push the limits of good taste and by that
metric, this movie delivers.  Mona May's costumes for CLUELESS should
have gotten an Academy Award nomination.  Each of the students is out
to make his or her own fashion, and inexplicable statements they are.
Since the kids go to an exclusive Beverly Hills high school, their
parents range from superrich to megarich.  With wealth like this, the
shopping mall becomes every student's Mecca.  In this environment,
being clueless is easily understandable and arguably inevitable.
     One of my responsibilities as a reviewer is to warn my readers
about films.  My warning on this one would be do not give up on it.
After watching a few minutes of it, your mouth may be hanging open.
"This is terrible," you may thinking to yourself.  Before you pop the
tape out of the VCR and return it to the rental store, hang in there a
bit and you may become as enchanted with CLUELESS as was I.  With a
properly open mind, you can see why the critics gave the film such rave
reviews when it opened.  I skipped it at the time figuring the film was
another dumb teenager flick.  Big mistake.
     As you watch the show and laugh at the priceless dialog by writer
and director Amy Heckerling (from the LOOK WHO'S TALKING series), the
story line may sound familiar.  If it does, you are not imagining
things.  CLUELESS is a remake of Jane Austen's "Emma," but set in a
different time and place.  After seeing this film, you may want to
check out this year's EMMA if you missed it in the theaters.
     Just to set the record straight, poor Cher has not lived a perfect
life.  Her mother died years ago during a fluke in an otherwise normal
liposuction operation.  Affluence does have its dangers.
     Cher's specialties are playing matchmaker for her friends and
making them over.  Her best buddy is Dionne (Stacey Dash).  She
explains that, "Dionne and I were both named after famous singers of
the past, who now do infomercials."  Gosh, and I have always been proud
that I was named after Saint Stephen.  Clearly, theirs is a much higher
claim to fame.
     Alicia Silverstone gives a flawless performance as a ditzy rich
girl.  Her beguiling smile and energy is so infectious that it is
impossible not to like her.  Certainly, the camera is in love with her.
I suspect there are few actors who could have carried off this part
without lapsing into cliches and slapstick.  She manages to take absurd
material and make it seem somehow plausible.
     If the classroom scenes appear to be lifted from FAST TIMES AT
RIDGEMONT HIGH, this should come as no surprise since that film was
directed by Amy Heckerling too.  Derivative though they may be, they
are fresh here.  There is a great scene of Cher and Dionne walking down
the hall talking to each other on their cell phones until run into each
other.
     After gorgeous Cher makes over homely Tai (Brittany Murphy), Cher
can not understand why she can not get the number one boy in high
school, Elton (Jeremy Sisto), to like Tai.  For some reason, her plans
go awry, and Elton starts making eyes for Cher.  Cher, you see, does
not believe in high school boys since, "Searching for a boy in high
school is like searching for meaning in a Pauly Shore movie."
     Eventually, Cher does find a high school lad worth pursuing.  She
turns all of her wily charms on the new and superhandsome student
Christian (Justin Walker).  Although Christian becomes her friend, he
rejects her sexually.  Nonplused, she remarks, "I don't get it.  Did my
hair get flat?  Did I run into a spot of bad lighting?"
     CLUELESS has a witty script with one great line after another and
has an exquisitely charming performance by Silverstone.  What more can
you ask for in a comedy?
     CLUELESS runs a fast 1:37.  It is rated PG-13.  There is no sex or
nudity, but there is a little profanity.  Regrettably there is some
teenage drinking and dope smoking.  Although I wish they had not
included the couple of unnecessary drug and drinking scenes, I still
think the show should be fine for teenagers.  As for younger kids,
parents should use their own judgment.  The show is fun and good
spirited.  I recommend it to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Oh, how the mighty have fallen.  Amy Heckerling, director of the
now-classic FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH, after free-falling through
LOOK WHO'S TALKING and its (first) sequel, has turned in an
unquestionably dismal look at the wealthy teen's life in the mid-90's.
     But this ain't no 90210.  Starring Alicia Silverstone and a gaggle
of talentless teen actors and actresses, the title of CLUELESS is
perfect Truth in Advertising.  Told as a "This is my life" from rich
kid Cher (Silverstone), the film follows the socialite through her
daily ritual--schmoozing for better grades, applying makeup, leading on
boys, and generally being a snob (but proud of it).  Flat jokes abound;
the laughs are *at* the cast, not with them.
     I don't know that I was expecting a lot from Silverstone.  With
her track record, CLUELESS is actually one of the better entries.  Of
course, this role isn't much of a stretch for Aerosmith's moll.  With
dialogue like "You know ... stuff!" Silverstone really seems to find
herself at home.  Maybe I just didn't get it because I'm not a
17-year-old girl living in Beverly Hills.
     There's simply not much else to be said about CLUELESS.  My
prevailing thought during the film was "How long have I actually been
watching this hideous movie?"  The answer?  Forever and ever.  Even
traditionally classic comedians like Wallace Shawn and Julie Brown
(plus about 50 pounds) are given dull parts and little screen time.  A
more unnecessary film hasn't been made this year.
     Maybe I would have liked it better if it had been in focus.  Well,
probably not.

Author
James Meek
     If you're going to cannibalize, cannibalize the classics.
     CLUELESS, Amy Heckerling's latest cinematic postcard from the
sunny lands of adolescence, borrows the skeletons of plot and character
from Jane Austen's classic novel EMMA.  While the sympathetic irony of
the story remains the same, however, Heckerling utilizes movies'
kinetic energy, rather than novels' layered detail, in her portrayal of
the rituals of society's upper crust.  Heckerling made a savvy choice.
CLUELESS is her best movie since FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH, almost
making up for three LOOK WHO'S TALKING movies.
     In CLUELESS, Heckerling eschews the verisimilitude of EMMA, or
even of FAST TIMES.  Her characters inhabit the same pop-culture high
school world as those in HEATHERS.  Where HEATHERS mocked the
black-hearted, back-stabbing, Mr. Hyde faces of adolescence, however,
CLUELESS focuses on the Dr. Jeckyll half of teenage life.  The kids in
CLUELESS form cliques, but their edges blur.  Most people turn out to
have more depth than they reveal on first consideration.  There's a
gratifying casualness about things like homosexuality and ethnicity;
characters are ultimately accepted for the things they do rather than
what they happen to be.
     Alicia Silverstone stars as Cher, and I feel obligated to extend
an apology to her: I was convinced that she couldn't carry a ninety
minute comedy to save her soul.  Sexy poses depend on the talent of the
artist behind the camera; comic, sexy performances require a capable
actress in front of the camera with whom a director can work.
Silverstone may have been able to set adolescent male hormones ablaze
with her blonde vixen performances in Aerosmith videos, but I really
didn't think she could do more than pout pretty and smirk on cue.
     When we first meet Cher, she's high school royalty, a wealthy,
beautiful young woman with social advantages by the fistful.  She and
her friend Dionne manage to romantically pair off two of their
teachers, thereby improving their own grades by improving the teachers'
moods.  Inspired by these good deeds, Cher decides to use her
popularity to help a new girl become one of the school's elite,
attempting to arrange an advantageous match with one of the available
popular males.  This quest, and her own quest to find a suitable
boyfriend, prove more difficult, and Cher slowly learns to empathize
with others--both locally and globally, as the motto goes.
     Silverstone makes a potentially vacuous character charming, smart,
and sexy, delivering a performance that stands (in fashionable satin
shoes) on the shoulders--and in the shadow--of comic giants like Judy
Holliday and Carole Lombard.  Silverstone's real talent lies in the
physicality of her performance.  She's comfortable both performing
slapstick and looking sexy, combining the two smoothly when the scene
demands.  She works her lips around her dialogue with glee, adding
comic fillips to her delivery and raising the certainty that, when she
does kiss someone, it's going to be some kiss.  It is.
     The best part of CLUELESS, however, is the dialogue around which
Silverstone stretches her lips.  Heckerling wisely avoids attempting to
document cutting-edge teen slang, which would have been unavoidably out
of date by the time the movie was released.  Instead, she concocts a
convincing argot containing elements of hip-hop, advertising jargon,
colorful turns of phrase, gleanings from the dictionary and thesaurus,
and other fragments of pop vernacular.  The language works because it's
taken for granted, rather than used as a punchline.  When Cher refers
to Josh, her ex-stepbrother hanging around her father's house, as a
"Kato," it's slipped into the middle of a sentence, not drawing any
particular attention to itself.
     It's a joy to just listen to the characters speak; they use
language as a playground, and an opportunity to demonstrate creativity
and intelligence.  Specific terms occasionally get explained--a "Monet"
is someone who, "like the paintings," looks good from far away, but is
a mess from up close; "jeepin'" is having sex in a car--but the
cumulative effect is a delirious delight.  Characters aren't
necessarily saying much of anything, but they're well spoken.  When
Josh asks Cher if she knows what she's talking about after she refers
to "Ren and Stimpy" as "way existential," she replies, "No--do I sound
like I do?"
     CLUELESS is smarter by half than most "teen comedies," lighter on
its feet and much less self-important than, say, the teen oeuvre of
John Hughes.  Heckerling found the right ingredients to throw in a
blender, frappe, and serve as a refreshing summer confection.  It's
gaudy and pink, but there are real strawberries and cranberry juice in
there to add a little nutritional value.

Author
Eric Grossman
     There really isn't much to say about CLUELESS except that its
title pretty much explains it all.  Alicia Silverstone plays Cher,
Beverly Hills High's most popular "betty."  Cher realizes that her life
is without meaning and she tries to find fulfillment by using her
popularity to help others.  She takes the new girl in town, Tai
(Brittany Murphy), under her wing and helps her avoid falling in with
the "loadies" (stoners) and gives her a makeover so she won't be a
"monet" (a girl who looks fine from far away but is really a mess up
close).  She also gets her two teachers to "hang" with each other so
that they will raise her grades.  In addition to of this altruism, Cher
has classes to attend, driving tests to take, and shopping malls to
frequent.
     Amy Heckerling wrote and directed this movie so I guess we have to
give her the lion's share of credit for the movie's great contributions
to the English language (although some of it is like so 1980's you know)
as well as the film's completely inane plot.  Unlike FAST TIMES AT
RIDGEMONT HIGH, (which was also directed by Heckerling but written by
Cameron Crowe) CLUELESS is devoid of any sense of underlying truth.
The situations feel about as real as a bad sit-com and the characters,
except for Silverstone and Paul Rudd who plays her ex-step brother
Josh, are about as dimensional as a piece of cardboard.  This movie is
a satire of an already satirical image of rich brats from Beverly Hills
and one gets the feeling that Heckerling researched her script by
watching BEVERLY HILLS: 90210.
     While I was watching this movie, I was fortunate enough, or
unfortunate enough, to have a running commentary by a group of young
high school girls sitting behind me.  Although I didn't really care for
the film, save a few good lines of dialogue such as Cher's dad telling
her date to bring her home safely because he has "a .45 [pistol] and a
shovel," the vociferous high school barometers sitting behind me
seemed to enjoy CLUELESS quite a bit.  However, one girl did complain
that Silverstone's thighs were fat and the girl next to her thought the
actress was too flat chested.   Everyone's a critic these days.

Author
Chuck Dowling
     I hate to be blunt, but CLUELESS stinks.  It's a really bad movie
on so many levels.  Think of CLUELESS as a FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH
for the 90s for two reasons: they were both directed by Amy Heckerling
and they both stink.  In a movie season so devoid of comedy, CLUELESS
is not what we need, not now and not ever.
     CLUELESS stars Alicia Silverstone as a pouty rich girl that no one
watching this film should identify with or care about.  (By the way
Alicia, you've got that pouting expression down pat, move on.)  She and
her rich friends go through terrible troubles in this film such as
hoping this guy likes me and wondering what to wear.  Oooooo.  Also,
these kids talk like juvinile Dennis Miller clones without the humor.
I'm 20 years old.  I graduated high school and even spent some time in
college and no one I ever came across could use every word in the
dictionary in a sentence.  So, we are supposed to believe that these
brain dead, drinking, dope smoking, immature idiots who don't know
their left from their right have time between shopping and grooming and
partying and exercise routines to sit down and read the American
Heritage Dictionary cover to cover??  Now that might be funny if they
were using the words wrong, but in every occasion they are absolutely
right.  I want anyone who talks like this or knows anyone who talks
like this to drop me a line.
     Back to the movie, CLUELESS is just awful.  Have I said that?
Well, I can't stress it enough.  The worst thing for a comedy to be is
unfunny, which is what CLUELESS is.  There is a laugh here and there,
but I think I was laughing at things that weren't meant to be funny.
And someone tell me if this film is supposed to be satire, because to
me, there needs to be a normal character in this film to point out the
satire.  Stay far, far away from CLUELESS.

Author
Janet Miller
     I took my teenage daughter to a film last night that I really had
misgivings about.  I had heard that CLUELESS was an okay film but not
anything great.  Still, Elizabeth wanted to go and mother-daughter
bonding and all that.
     So, imagine my surprise when I enjoyed the movie as much as she
did.  Yes, we aren't talking CITIZEN KANE here and there were no
explosions that I can remember, but I found CLUELESS a warm and very
funny movie.
     The heroine, Cher is young, very pretty, and basically a good kid
with perhaps a somewhat warped sense of what is important in life, but
then again how many teens have their entire act together when they are
in high school.
     She was usually nice to other people, lectured on not using drugs
in school, and was still a virgin since she was saving herself for
someone special.  After all, you can see how particular she was about
shoes and they only go on your feet.
     What else I noticed, is that the people in the film were mostly
good people.  So often in films like this, the parents are dumb and
Cher's dad is busy, but he still keeps track of her grades and praises
her when she does well.  We also see him catch on to a budding romance
before either of the two party's do.
     A lot has been made of the language of the film as a combination
of phony valley talk and "large" words.  The language may not reflect
real kid speak, but it was cute and wasn't offensive.  And anything
that encourages kids to improve their vocabulary can't be all bad.
Most kids in upper level English classes are being taught vocabulary
words that will show up on the SATs so I didn't find Cher's usage
strange at all.  My daughter has been known to talk like that and she's
just starting high school.
     Anyway, I thought the movie was fun, my daughter and I had a good
time and I would recommend it for teens and parents with a sense of
humor.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: wide release 7/19/95 
Running Length: 1:38 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Double entendres, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
Cast: Alicia Silverstone, Paul Rudd, Stacey Dash, Brittany Murphy, 
      Dan Hedaya, Wallace Shawn, Twink Kaplan 
Director: Amy Heckerling 
Producers: Scott Rudin and Robert Lawrence 
Screenplay: Amy Heckerling 
Cinematography: Bill Pope 
Music: David Kitay 
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures 
     As appealing as Alicia Silverstone is (and she possesses that 
ethereal "star quality" which is sadly lacking in many of today's up-
and-coming performers), her presence can't rescue this aptly-titled 
movie.  Part pop satire and part teen comedy, CLUELESS shows its 
unevenness early, runs out of steam about midway through, then sputters 
to a conclusion that takes an eternity to arrive at.  Like THE BRADY 
BUNCH MOVIE, this film contains some amusing moments, but not enough to 
justify a feature-length running time.  Charm this thin doesn't take 
long to wear off. 
     Silverstone (THE CRUSH) leads the cast as ultra-Valley girl Cher -- 
a 16-year old with a very rich daddy (Dan Hedaya, best known as Carla's 
ex on CHEERS) who uses a computer to assist with her wardrobe selection 
and would rather argue with her teachers for better grades than do 
assignments to earn them.  Cher loves to talk, as is amply demonstrated 
by a series of endless voice-overs that occur throughout the film.  Her 
best friend, Dionne (Stacey Dash), is equally as superficial, so it's 
not hard to understand why the two get along so well.  CLUELESS looks at 
a number of Cher's "escapades":  her attempts to turn a sweet-but-uncool 
schoolmate (Brittany Murphy) into the epitome of popularity, her 
matchmaking between two teachers (Twink Kaplan and respected character 
actor Wallace Shawn), and her search for true love.  Essentially, 
nothing much happens -- the film is an excuse to plunge into the life of 
a caricature that Silverstone makes more appealing than one might 
reasonably expect. 
     Much of the humor is sophomoric.  Moments of inventive comedy (such 
as an unexpected ride on the freeway) are far between.  Writer/director 
Amy Heckerling creates a tone so light that it borders on vapid.  On the 
other hand, some of the dialogue is clever, and there are a few 
memorable lines.  Ren and Stimpy are described as "way existential".  In 
the spirit of political correctness, female virgins are called 
"hymenally challenged".  And Cher likens her hopeless quest for a high 
school boyfriend to "searching for meaning in a Pauly Shore movie." 
     Overall, though, that's all CLUELESS amounts to:  a group of 
modestly amusing, satirical vignettes tied together by one-liners.  The 
picture doesn't offer any big laughs, and there's never any character 
identification -- Heckerling's FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH, a top-level 
teen picture, worked in large part because the protagonists seemed real.  
In that case, Cameron Crowe's script aimed for fun and feeling.  Here, 
the latter is sacrificed for the former, and the result doesn't leave 
much of an impression.  In part because the film is so inoffensive (no 
sex, nudity, or violence), it has no edge.  CLUELESS is the cinematic 
equivalent of cotton candy:  certainly not unpleasant, but unsatisfying 
despite the sweet taste. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Anthony E. Wright
     This ain't Shakespeare, but CLUELESS has several audiences in
mind.  Teenagers and those who still identify with them should enjoy
and perhaps even identify with some of the characters.  Outsiders to
teenage and/or California culture will feel "as if" they are on an
anthropological exploration.  Jane Austen fans will enjoy the clever
update of their favorite author's novel EMMA.  CLUELESS is a silly, fun
movie.  Yet those looking for social satire should stick to the book.
     Alicia Silverstone, 18, known primarily for Aerosmith videos,
plays the lead role, Cher Horowitz, with glee and a glint of mischief.
She's a Beverly Hills high school babe, rich and popular, good yet
shallow.  There's none of the awkwardness that defines teenage life,
only supreme confidence.  Yet the characterizations of cliques, petty
disputes, and obsessions ring true, and will resonate with anybody who
is still (god help them) in the throws of adolescence.  (Cher amusingly
praises how considerate her best friend Dionne and her boyfriend are to
each other--"when nobody is looking.") This movie also has the one
necessity for a teen-cult film: Great lines.
     In fact, this might qualify as one long "Saturday Night Live"
sketch (a good one, though), with the reliance on such
caricature-making lines, from "As if!" to the desire to be a "Betty" or
a "Baldwin." However, while this give-and-take has some wonderful
moments, the real power of this film is the cumulative effect.  Those
who might mock Valley-Speak with an occasional "Omigawd!" should
beware that *the entire movie* is spoken in such parlance.  Writing the
dialogue for this movie was probably as hard for the Bronx-raised Amy
Heckerling as speaking in Klingon ... yet by the end I believe in it as
a form of communication.  Even the most cyncial adults should enjoy
this celebration(?) of California teenage culture.  The directing is
savvy, from a hysterical L.A. freeway scene, which lets us experience
firsthand how a learner's permit driver reacts to a tractor-trailer
behind her, to the idea of a phone being transformed into the 2001
obelisk, complete with """""Thus Spracht Zarathrustha.
     Critics looking to pan a teenage film normally rely on the
"Where's the plot?" crutch.  That's usually a good call, but here, the
writers have Jane Austen as a defense.  The movie takes virtually every
plot device from EMMA, to the point of even calling one character,
Elton, by the same name.  Austen fans will enjoy how clever this
adaptation is done: paintings become photographs, balls become raves,
live-in family friends become ex-stepbrothers, and fireplaces become,
well, electric fireplaces.
     Perhaps the social satire that this films offers is that perhaps,
as Jane Austen chronicles, we as a culture were always this ditzy, this
shallow, this clueless.  This is all the social commentary there is,
except for the obligatory making fun of the extremes of Beverly Hills
high school's inhabitants, with their constant nosejobs and cellular
phones to talk to each other in the hall.  This film could have had the
potential to contain strong Heathers-like satire, but it stayed at a
satisfying uber-Beverly Hills 90210 level.  No message, but a fun and
goofy summer movie.

Author
Brian Koller
Amy Heckerling has done it again.  The writer/director of
"Look Who's Talking" did an even better job with this movie.
Both films are comedies, but the characters aren't caricatures.
Both films have a genuine warmth that is hard to find in films of
any era.
Cher (Alicia Silverstone) is a teenager much more interested
in fashion and status than anything else.  Still, she dotes
on her lawyer father, and comes up with endless one-liners,
giving the impression that she is not as clueless as she appears.
Cher's step-brother law student Josh (Paul Rudd) moves in to 
assist his step-father.  Josh and Cher get on each other's
nerves, but underlying their relationship is a sexual tension.
Her best friend is Dionne, a cheerful socialite who has a
love/hate relationship with boyfriend Murray (Donald Adeoson Faison,
who gives a fine performance).  They all go to a posh
high school, where Cher meets new kid Tai (Brittany Murphy).
Cher adopts Tai, training her to have the same shallow aspirations
as herself.
Tai connects with druggie skateboarder Travis (Breckin Meyer)
but as Travis has low status, Cher steers Tai to Elton
(Jeremy Sisto) who only has eyes for Cher.  Elton and Cher
misunderstand the other's intentions, and when Elton makes a pass
at Cher, she flees the car, promptly meeting a robber.
Stranded, Cher is forced to call Josh to rescue her.
Cher's report card has low grades, but she manipulates the 
teachers into improving them.  The sarcastic debate teacher
won't budge, however, so Cher sets him up with environmentalist
teacher Miss Geist.  After the debate teacher begins giving easy
grades, all the schoolkids give Cher a standing ovation during
lunch.  Upon seeing the report card grades, Cher's father declares
that he "could not be more proud of her than if she had
actually deserved them".
Cher falls for new kid in school Christian (Justin Walker)
and throws herself at him.  When he fails to make a pass,
Cher asks herself, "Did my hair get flat?"  But Christian is
clearly gay, something Cher should have realized when he
made her watch "Spartacus".
Things continue to go wrong for Cher.  She fails her
driving test when she hits a parked car and nearly kills
a biker.  She learns she can't negotiate a failed driver's 
test.  Tai and Josh are hitting it off, and Tai becomes
more popular at school, triggering rare jealousy in
Cher and making her finally question her values.
As Cher attempts a character transformation, her real purpose
may be to entice Josh, who falls for her.  Tai ends up with
Travis, who has given up drugs, while Dionne and Murray
have reconciled.  With the debate teacher marrying
Miss Geist, it is a warm and happy ending all around.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Rory Mackay
In Brief: An awful lot better than I thought it would be. Definitely
designed to appeal to an elite taste, but it's well written, well performed
and quite charming nonetheless.
Just the other week I reviewed ROMY AND MICHELLE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION, and
this week it's CLUELESS. You might well worry about the fact I've been
watching too many "chick flicks", but the main reason is it's cheaper to
watch and review videos that my sister has hired than it is to pay for my
own ones! So, that's my reasoning. :-) To be honest, I didn't think
CLUELESS sounded particularly interesting, and I wasn't expecting a great
deal from it.
I was actually pleasantly surprised with what I saw. This could easily have
been a feature film version of the dreaded CLARISSA EXPLAINS IT ALL -- a
rather excruciating US 'sitcom', for those of you blissfully ignorant,
about an annoying all-American teen girl stereotype. One first glance the
two looked startlingly similar. CLUELESS is aboutyup, an all-American teen
girl stereotype, living in Beverly Hills. But, mercifully, the film is a
full hundred-percent less irritating and stilted than the aforementioned
series, and actually quite well-written and acted.
But like I said, it was treading near potentially dangerous territory.
Films about airhead American teenagers who have a lot more money than
brains have become something of a cliché, based on some sort of parody of
American teenagers in general. It was a novelty when this whole sub-genre
began (a lot inspired by BILL AND TED, perhaps?) but as with all things
cinematic, over-use tends to generate boredom. Luckily Clueless is a cut
above the rest, largely due to clever, sharp scripting with just the right
degree of self-indulgence to draw you into the story.
That said, it's not a film that'll appeal to everyone. It's obviously
targeted at teenage girls (my seventeen year old sister loves it), and I
don't suppose anyone over twenty-five will get much out of the film. I'm
not a girl, but I am a teenager, so I guess I fall into part of that
demographic! And I did, as I said, rather enjoy the film. I've certainly
been exposed to far worse in my time.
Alicia Silverstone does a marvellous job breathing charm and wit into a
potentially unsympathetic role, and she's a joy to watch. Other standout
performances include that of Dan Hedaya as Cher's grumpy father, who's a
delight to watch (Cher: "Daddy, this is my new friend Tai" Daddy: "Get out
my chair!") and veteran character actor Wallace Shawn as Cher's lovelorn
teacher. 
The last twenty minutes or so get a bit too bogged-down by focussing too
much Cher's love-life, forsaking the happy-go-lucky wit of the film's first
hour or so, but it still remains an enjoyable, well-performed and rather
endearing diversion. Worth a look, though - not to be ageist or anything -
it'll probably appeal more to the younger generation.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For more Film and TV Reviews check out my site!
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Bungalow/4960
Written and (c) by Rory B Mackay - Emissary@goplay.com

Author
Joan Ellis
     Thanks to a bright young cast and a stylish production, CLUELESS
jumps off the screen with improbable gaiety.  Director/writer Amy
Heckerling has managed to make good fun with the spoiled young rich of
Bronson Alcott High School in Beverly Hills. Alicia Silverstone strides
through this unpromising landscape with an engagingly upbeat,
unselfconscious performance as Cher, a kind-hearted teenager who
computerizes her wardrobe.
     She is a 16-year-old ray of light offering momentary reprieve from
the current deluge of movies devoted to the dark side of adolescence,
in a self- punishing diet of crime, drugs, sex, and shock.  If she
drives her own white Jeep Wrangler and uses a cellular phone the way
other teenagers have used lipstick and the old family car, it is
endearing rather than repulsive.  Why?
     Because the core of the story is rooted in protective affection--a
steady, permanent stream of it between father and daughter. Such
familial love seems alien. Conditioned by screen violence, we watch
CLUELESS with one eye cocked for some inevitable ax to fall, for the
comeuppance to be delivered.  When the suspicion finally dissolves, a
kind of frothy bubble bath of appreciation envelops the audience. It's
O.K. to laugh after all.
     Cher (Alicia Silverstone) lives in a world where the abundance of
money fuels a comical culture of plenty. The refrigerator is full of
trays of impeccably ready sandwich makings, and a day can be summed up
by "I broke in my purple clogs."  Phone numbers are "digits," houses
are outlandish pretensions, gas fireplaces are ignited with electronic
zappers--and all of it is wrapped in enthusiasm.
     Cher floats through all this as a one-woman band of good
intentions, which take the form of makeovers for the needy, matchmaking
for the lonely, and caretaking for her widowed father (Dan Hedaya).
Even that's a switch.  Although Dad is a driven litigator, he is home,
preparing an important case that only partly hides his affectionate
concern for his goofy daughter.
     This dad knows his daughter will negotiate perfectly the Cadillac
culture that surrounds her, and, after a while, we know he's right.
Expensive toys and tastes are mere incidentals to Cher and her friends.
Whatever drugs or alcohol they allow themselves is reserved for
parties. It's almost a replay of the pecking order politics of the 50s,
without the meanness of spirit that infects our time.
     Lurking in the background with handsome cuddliness is the solution
to Cher's distaste for high school boys: budding lawyer Josh (Paul
Rudd) is falling in love with the eccentric goofball who is his
step-sister. Josh waits patiently for Cher to get serious, and when he
realizes that, within her own parameters, she already is, he's a
goner.
     We don't spend a second worrying about Cher's past or future.
Wondering what she will do next is as challenging as this movie gets.
What she does next is usually very funny. Watch out, Grunge: here comes
the return of Mod.
For all Ellis reviews, see http://movie.infocom.net (which has a search engine)
or send any email to: movie@telecomp.com
Feel free to reuse as long as source acknowledged.
Please send information regarding reuse to 'nebbadoon@telecomp.com'
