Title
Review for Another Woman (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
   Two unfortunate trends have reared their ugly heads in Woody Allen's
recent movies: the first is a shift away from comedy, Allen's forte, and
toward drama, and the second is Allen's reluctance to appear on-screen. 
ANOTHER WOMAN suffers from both of these problems.
   Told through flashbacks, dreams, and first person narration, ANOTHER
WOMAN is a somber and humorless psychological character study of a 50-year
old woman.  Gena Rowlands plays the cerebral and emotionally reserved
philosophy professor undergoing a mid-life crisis.  In the film, she has
rented an apartment so she can work undisturbed on a new book.  The
apartment turns out to be adjacent to a psychiatrist's office, and through
a vent she can overhear his therapy sessions.  As Rowlands tries to write
her book, she becomes infatuated with eavesdropping on one of her
neighbor's depressed patients, played by ... you guessed it ... Mia
Farrow.  Listening to Farrow's emotional problems leads Rowlands to
question her own life: her marriages, her childhood, her cold personality,
and so forth.  In short, she has a major mid-life crisis.
   Rowlands gives a solid performance and is convincing as a woman
incapable of expressing either warmth or passion, but, unfortunately, her
character is not very likeable.  Rowlands appears in nearly every frame of
ANOTHER WOMAN, and in not one of these frames do you ever really care
about her.  If Allen wants us to invest our emotions in this character, he
needs to expose her charismatic side in addition to her repressed side.
   The movie has a fine (and sizeable) supporting cast--including Martha
Plimpton, David Ogden Stiers, and the late John Houseman in his final
role.  Betty Buckley instills a refreshing breath of life into the film
during her one minute cameo appearance.  However, Gene Hackman gives the
most engaging performance in the film (as Rowlands' unsuccessful suitor),
but his screen time is limited to only two scenes.  Allen keeps the movie
focussed exclusively on Rowlands and does not develop any of the other
characters; their sole purpose is to motivate Rowlands' introspective
reevaluation of her life.
   Although ANOTHER WOMAN is well-crafted and never boring, I had to ask
myself during the film: "Is this all there is?"  Allen's psychological
character study of this confused woman does not seem especially
enlightening or insightful.  Perhaps you have to be a 50-year-old in a
mid-life crisis to fully appreciate ANOTHER WOMAN.  Then again, you didn't
have to wake up 200 years into the future to appreciate SLEEPER.  Although
ANOTHER WOMAN may be Allen's most successful attempt at pure drama to
date, I can recommend it only to die hard fans who take pride in having
seen every film he has ever made.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        In the Woody Allen canon, there's a trilogy of straight drama 
films Woody doesn't appear in -- INTERIORS, SEPTEMBER and 
ANOTHER WOMAN. This is the only success of the three, an 
unpleasant, uncompromising movie that exposes a seemingly 
successful woman's life as a complete sham. It was during the '80s 
that Woody appeared to be questioning the value of life and the 
nature of happiness, and ANOTHER WOMAN is the culmination of 
those explorations of angst in rich white folks.
        The female Woody doppelganger this time is played by Gena 
Rowlands, a no-nonsense woman who just turned 50 and seems to 
have everything in life. She's the head of a university philosophy 
department, is married to a successful man (Ian Holm), has a friendly 
relationship with her teenage step-daughter (ex-GOONIE Martha 
Plimpton) and has a collection of well-to-do friends. Everything is 
nice and stable until she moves into a cross-town apartment to write 
her new book in complete isolation.
        There's a vent in the wall that allows her to hear every word 
that's said in the next apartment, which turns out to be the office of a 
psychiatrist. Rowlands covers the vent up at first but can't resist the 
beautiful opportunity for aural voyeurism, and listens in on Mia 
Farrow's session everyday. Mia is neurotic and suicidal and opens up 
new thoughts in Rowlands' mind. Over a progression of 
contemporary scenes and flashbacks, we find out Rowlands has been 
deceiving herself about all the relationships in her life.
        We see how Rowlands has imposed her own immense 
standards on her brother, Plimpton and her old best friend. We see 
her father (John Houseman), who's had a full life but now has 
nothing but regret. We see the relationship she passed up with the 
one man (Gene Hackman, in a smaller role than you'd expect with his 
star power) who really did passionately love her. We see that she and 
Holm don't have a close relationship and that she regards all of her 
supposed friends with contempt. She's a bitter, bitter woman.
        As you can tell, ANOTHER WOMAN isn't the feel-good 
movie of the summer. It's the kind of intense drama that sometimes 
turns even the staunchest Woody Allen fans against him. Here, 
though, it's also filled with the kind of believability and emotion that 
makes it more relevant than INTERIORS and SEPTEMBER, which 
mostly seemed like a bunch of people whining about nothing. You 
won't laugh during ANOTHER WOMAN, but you will think, you will 
feel and, at least once, you will probably identify.
        But will you be able to get your hands on a copy of this 
movie? It took me more than a year of casual searching in video 
stores to track down a copy of ANOTHER WOMAN. It is the most 
obscure Woody movie out there right now, more so than even 
WHAT'S UP, TIGER LILY? Now that I've finally rented one of the 
few copies, I can honestly say this movie is worth searching for, 
especially for anyone who's seen the "funny" Woody Allen movies 
and wonders what he's capable of in the way of drama.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!
