Title
Review for Winchester '73 (1950)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Winchester '73" is a Western drama starring James Stewart.
It was directed by Anthony Mann, the first of eight films
that they would work on together.  "Winchester '73" was
important to Stewart's career because the film increased
his range: he showed that he was credible in tough guy roles.
"Winchester '73" has an excellent supporting cast that
nearly steals the film from Stewart.  Will Geer (aka Grandpa
Walton) plays patriachical sheriff Wyatt Earp.  Geer had
a great character actor's voice.  Another novel casting
is Rock Hudson as an Indian chief, and actually it is one
of his better performances.  Shelly Winters does fine as
the leading lady who keeps her cool despite getting into
constant trouble.  Dan Duryea plays a creepy bad guy (what
else?) with his usual panache.  Millard Mitchell gives a
great performance as a level-headed indian trader.  Finally,
Stephen McNally is excellent as the rough killer 
Dutch Henry Brown.
The plot has Stewart tracking McNally to kill him, to revenge
his father's murder.  They finally meet at a contest to
win a prize rifle (the title character).  Stewart wins
the rifle, but it is stolen by McNally.  The gun goes through
many hands, with Stewart and McNally chasing each other and
the gun.  Whoever owns the gun considers it to be his
greatest posession, but ironically soon meets a violent
death.  Being the rifle's true owner, as well as the top-billed
star, Stewart is immune to the rifle's curse.
The script has surprising depth.  Even the most minor
supporting actors get good lines.  Brown has two criminal 
sidekicks that are cynical and critical of Brown.  Duryea
has two criminal sidekicks who delight in shoot-outs with
the law as much as he does.  Look fast for Tony Curtis,
who only has a couple lines.  It would have been easy and
simplistic to limit the story to Stewart and Brown, but
the addition of so many excellent character actors
really broadens the movie.
"Winchester '73" may not be Stewart's best Western, since he
co-starred with John Wayne in "The Man who Shot Liberty Valance".
But I prefer it to "Destry Rides Again" and "Bend of the River".
There is much dramatic tension throughout.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
