Title
Review for Clara Hakedosha (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Daniel Saunders
      There hasn't been a wakeup call this powerful since Trainspotting.
Saint Clara is a stunning, supercharged Israeli film about the
apocalypse and the world of young people. Let me write about my
reactions from the beginning.
      I went to see this at Cinecenta, my city's sole remaining
alternative movie theatre, and it was a real adventure. I didn't know
hardly anything about it. The theatre was darkened, and these
backwards hebrew characters come up on the screen. If you were watching
my face you would have seen a look somewhere between bemusement and
apprehension ("What have I got myself in for?"). The title comes up,
wiping from the right to the left.  Then the movie begins. You would
have seen my expression change to puzzlement, then amusement, then
slack-jawed admiration.
      It starts with a long backwards tracking shot down a highschool
corridor. Two boys, one with a shaven head and the other with long dirty
blond hair are running to class in slow motion, banging their bags on
the lockers they pass. There's some amazing music on the soundtrack -
rock and roll with what sounds like seagull cries overlaying it. In
class, the teacher, a bespectacled inneffectual looking man, and the
principal, who looks more like a mobster named Vito, are berating the
class for a "conspiracy": every single student got 100% on the recent
math test. These two frustrated staff members are determined to find an
answer. Through a series of hilarious interrogations, one of the movies
themes is revealed: the school as battleground, a la "If...". The real
answer is that one student, a shy Russian girl named Clara, can foretell
the future, and discover which questions out of the 1000 question book
will be asked.
      From that starting point, the movie moves off in many unexpected
and wonderful directions. Much of it is about the two boys at the
beginning, the skinhead and Tikken, two *extremely* troubled youths.
They take pills, smash lots of things, and burn the school's mascot, a
wooden statue of Israeli's woman President. Yet they turn out to be the
main characters. Meanwhile things are getting complicated for Clara,
with Tikken's father asking her for lottery numbers and the principal
trying to recruit her to be on their side.
      Anyways, as someone once said, writing about film is like dancing
about architecture. This is one movie you just have to see. There are
countless unforgetable images, amazing juvenile performances, and too
many effortlessly stylish and surrealistic touches to even begin to
mention here. There isn't a single character who isn't fascinating, not
a single moment where the creator's imagination flags. And the
soundtrack just has to be heard to be believed. Do what you have to to
see this movie.
-- 
Daniel Saunders, roving movie critic of no fixed address
"If god had meant us to look inward, maybe she or he  would have given
us completely swivelling eyeballs.  I think it's pretty easy to spend
far too much time thinking about yourself." Robyn Hitchcock 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It's 1999 and all is not well at the Golda Meir School.  Some
trouble maker has found out the answers to the questions on the big
quiz and has given them to every kid in the class.  The principal
(Yigal Naor), who dresses like a Mafia don, and the teacher (Joe El
Dror) are mad at the students.  They are angry at the class's cheating,
but they are even angrier that the class is so stupid.  Every pupil has
answered every question correctly and derived the answers in exactly
the same way.
     After thinking about it, the principal decides this constitutes a
revolt.  The kids are trying to break the system, but he will break the
students first.  Through hardball interrogations right out of Kafka, he
eventually solves the mystery.  It seems that Clara, hence the film's
name SAINT CLARA (CLARA HAKDOSHA), can see the future.
     I saw SAINT CLARA at San Jose's Cinequest film festival.  The
Israelis loved the film, having given it their "Israeli Oscar" for best
picture for 1996.
     Lucy Dubinchik, in an enchanting performance, plays Clara.  Clara
is a thirteen-year-old Russian emigrant, whose omniscient powers were
passed down from her Uncle Elvis.  It seems that she will keep the
power until she falls in love.  Tikel (Halil Elohev) is already in love
with her so he could be the one to break the spell.  Then again, the
principal, when he is not reminiscing about his imaginary affair with
Edith Piaf, also seems to be falling for Clara.  With her looks, anyone
in the film is a candidate to go for her.
     The film is set in an ugly, out-of-the-way, industrial city.
Their school is infested with graffiti, and one of the kids is a
skinhead who carries a baseball bat.  I thought this whole urban tough
kid part was unnecessary and detracted from the rest of the story.  I
could have done without the vandalism scene and the one where the
skinhead hits another kid with the bat.
     The film has lots of subplots and far too many of them are blind
alleys where the screenwriter (Pavel Kohout) never should have taken
us.  Nevertheless, the heart of the story is charming and full of
imagination and surprises.  In one of the best scenes, Tikel's dad
(Menashe Noy) talks Clara into telling him the six lottery numbers.
The result is somewhat predictable, but still hilarious.
     If you've ever wondered what seismographers do in the wee hours
while waiting for the needles to move, this show reveals the secret.
It also tells you what pattern an earthquake makes on the seismograph.
     Overall, a cute show with a perfect ending.  The film even has the
most innocent and romantic teen kiss that I have seen in a movie in
over a decade.
     SAINT CLARA runs just 1:24.  The film is in Hebrew and Russian
with easy to follow English subtitles.  It is not rated, but might get
an R for the little violence plus the fact that the kids take colored
pills.  It is a harmless picture that would be suitable for any
teenager.  I recommend it to you.  I give the film ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
