Title
Review for Opposite of Sex, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Dennis Schwartz
OPPOSITE OF SEX, THE (director: Don Roos; cast: Christina Ricci, Martin
Donovan, Lisa Kudrow, Lyle Lovett, Ivan Sergei, Johnny Galecki, William
Scott Lee, 1998)
Roos's first feature film as director, is a snappy, satirical and hip
sitcom that is not a sitcom, but is a semi-comedy. It stars Ricci, as a
bitchy 16-year-old, without any noticeable positive qualities, who
begins the film by warning those who don't like her voice-overs,  they
will be out of luck. She narrates by filling in all the gaps in the
story, emphasizing her point of view.
Ricci has run away from the Louisiana mother she despises after her
step-father dies, and she chooses to live with her half-brother
(Donovan), who is gay and lives with his lover (Ivan). Donovan's true
love has died of AIDS and he has inherited his lover's wealthy home.
Ricci proceeds to steal Ivan from Donovan by seducing him and telling
him that she is pregnant with his child. Ivan even states, that he is
now a bisexual not a homosexual. She runs away with Ivan and steals
10,000 dollars from Donovan, plus the ashes from his deceased lover.
Lisa is the embittered, acid tongued, single sister of Donovan's dead
lover. She works as a teacher in the same school as Donovan. In fact,
she has a crush on him but to her dismay she introduced him to her
brother.
Lovette is the low-key sheriff who woos Lucia. Galecki is the comically,
body-pierced gay, former student at the high school Donovan teaches at,
who falsely accuses him of making sexual advances. But he really pines
for Ivan. Lee is the crazed Christian fundamentalist, who was born with
one testicle, and is Ricci's lover and the real father of the child.
This film tells you how smart it thinks it is - that it is so cleverly
written, that it can say anything about anyone and get away with it.
What remained constantly grating throughout the film, was Ricci's snide
voice-over comments that were politically incorrect: insulting gays and
holding a negative view of sex. She dresses in tartish, campy outfits,
and is always smoking a cigarette, adding to the film's theme of being
opposite to what is expected of a teen. Ricci succeeds in her role of
getting the audience to dislike her. But when you contrast the
personalities of  the men compared to the women, the men leads are bland
and affable, while the women all have verve and fuller depth to their
characters.
How one rates this film, depends on what one is looking for. If it is
laughs one is after, there are plenty of them. If it is a well-developed
film, not a one -gag movie, then one might be disappointed in the film,
as it tended to make one grow weary of its plot and put off by its
overly clever voice-over. If it is acting one is looking for, then one
can appreciate Lisa's role, as she finds it within herself to convey in
an honest way how an intelligent but frightened and lonely woman
behaves. If one is looking for some deep meaning, then one will be
pleased by Lovett's reflective statement to lisa, "that sex isn't just
for recreation or procreation, but for concentration - that when making
love, the experience allows one to relate wholly with someone else so
that one can forget their loneliness." Lovett goes on to say, "if  his
lover walks into a crowded room, he is the one he wants her to notice."
For me, the film was a mixed bag of emotions. Since I am not partial to
sitcom style movies, no matter how conventional or unconvential they may
seem to be, I found myself swaying back and forth, liking some parts of
the film and resenting other parts, and just like everything about the
film, I was ultimately left in a paradoxical mood.
Dennis Schwartz: " OZUS Movie Reviews"
ozus@sover.net http://www.sover.net/~ozus
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Actress Christina Ricci closes a door on her life in Don Roos'
brilliant new film, "The Opposite of Sex."  Gone forever are the days of
Wednesday Addams and "That Darn Cat"; here, Ricci delivers a performance
that is strong, confident, memorable, and more adult than we have any
right to expect from an actress her age.  (The end credits actually carry
a message assuring the audience that "no minors engaged in any sexual
activities" during the filming of the movie.)
        To say that sixteen year-old Dedee, the character Ricci plays, is
a bad seed would be a gross understatement.  She's sassy, mean, tough,
and so resentful of her parents that she hurls stones and obscenities at
the coffin during her stepfather's funeral.  She chain-smokes, has no real
friends, and is so fond of the physical aspects of life that when she
suddenly finds herself pregnant, it's anybody's guess who the father is.
        Hating the atmosphere at home, Dedee flees to the house of her rich
gay brother Bill (Martin Donovan), a man she has seen exactly once in her
life.  Putting on her most pathetic-looking face, the manipulative Dedee
tearfully asks to stay for a few weeks.  Bill, taken in by her charm and
apparant helplessness, caves in at once.  The poor guy doesn't realise
he's making the biggest mistake of his life.
        All goes well until Dedee takes a liking to Bill's boyfriend Matt
(Ivan Sergei).  The two forge an uneasy friendship, with the homophobic
Dedee trying to convince Matt that he'd enjoy sex with a woman if he'd
only try it.  She offers him her body, and eventually Matt succumbs...
which gives Dedee the opportunity to name Matt as the father of her child.
Matt, who isn't exactly the sharpest stick in the bunch, believes her
completely.
        All this takes place in the first few minutes of the film; the
rest of the movie depicts Bill and his friend Lucia (Lisa Kudrow) chasing
Matt and Dedee across North America as her pregnancy develops.  Along the
way the characters will fall in and out of love with each other, commit
numerous felonies, and wonder what the hell they're doing.  As well they
should.
        That capsule summary may make the film sound like nothing more than
an empty-headed teen-comedy, but the film is much more than this; it's
closer to "Taxi Driver" than "Cannonball Run."  Roos, who also wrote
"Single White Female," presents us with equal parts film-noir and
in-your-face comedy.  This is a staggeringly funny movie, driven by a
fierce intelligence.  And though it's an undeniably dark and twisted ride,
it contains the highest joke-to-scene ratio of any film since "Clerks."
The movie's split-personality is a big part of its charm.
        The film is narrated by Dedee, who constantly reminds us that we're
not supposed to like her.  She knows she's a bitch and couldn't care less.
"I don't have a heart of gold and I don't grow one later," she warns in
the opening voice-over, and it's true.  But amazingly, Dedee never feels
like a caricature or stereotype.  Ricci plays the role with all her heart,
giving us a memorable character that manages to grow and change over the
course of the movie despite her best efforts not to.  Dedee will never be
Mother Teresa, and that's fine, but neither is she a one-note heroine/
villain.  The life Ricci brings to the part has to be seen to be believed.
There's already talk of an Oscar nomination for her, and I couldn't agree
more.
        Ricci is obviously getting the most attention of the film's cast,
but she's not the only one doing admirable work.  Just try not to smile at
the amiable Carl (Lyle Lovett), a shy policeman who only has eyes for
Lucia... who in turn only has eyes for Bill... who's still in love with
Matt... who ran off with Dedee... who feels alone.  Moments like this are
exactly why the film works so well: it knows that love isn't always a wonderful
thing.  It frequently hurts, disappoints, offends, and frustrates.  Carl is
easy to love; Lovett's portrayl conveys the sense of longing we've all felt,
wanting someone who doesn't know we exist.  Lisa Kudrow also manages to
charm as Lucia, the former ugly-duckling who only wants to be loved... but
would sooner die than admit it to anyone.
        This is admittedly not a film that has much use for political
correctness; it will offend as many as it thrills (indeed, it already has).
But if you're not afraid of a movie that shows no fear, get to a theater
immediately.  This is by far the best film I've seen this year.
Copyright (c) 1998 by Joe Barlow.  This review may be freely distributed as
long as ABSOLUTELY NO CHANGES are made and this disclaimer remains attached.
It may not reproduced for profit without the written consent of the author.
If you have comments or questions, please send them to: jbarlow at earthling
dot net (substituting the appropriate symbols, to discourage spam).

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Don Roos
Cast:  Christina Ricci, Martin Donovan, Lisa Kudrow, Lyle Lovett, Johnny
Galecki, Ivan Sergei, Colin Ferguson
Screenplay:  Don Roos
Producers:  Michael Besman, David Kirkpatrick
Runtime:  105 min.
US Distribution:  Sony Pictures Entertainment
Rated R:  strong language, sex
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
The Opposite of Sex features a lot of loveless intercourse between
various people of various sexes.  It also features an array of crimes
and acts of violence, including murder, robbery, breaking and entering,
and battery.  I've seen most of this material before in many different
films, but it all feels fresh and original in this particular movie. 
That might be because writer/director Doug Roos has taken such an
intensely cynical angle on his material that even the narrator herself
knows how cliched all of this stuff could be.
Of course, it helps that Christina Ricci is the narrator.  Ricci is a
talented young actress, and there's not a woman out there whose voice
oozes more cynicism than hers.  In fact, she's so sarcastic so much of
the time that I wonder if she's capable of sincerity.  I don't think she
has yet had to play a role that forced her to show a normal set of
emotions, and The Opposite of Sex is no exception:  here, she plays
sixteen year-old DeDee, a girl who goes to destroy the life of her
half-brother just to score a few bucks, and maybe pick up a boyfriend
along the way.
The half-brother, Bill (Martin Donovan), is a gay high school English
teacher;  with him lives his boyfriend, the dumb-but-pretty Matt (Ivan
Sergei).  When DeDee comes to visit, she immediately destroys the
household -- she convinces Matt that he's not gay, and from that point
they regularly engage in sex.  She then informs Matt that she's
pregnant, and convinces him to run off with her and leave Bill.  Then,
Bill goes searching for them, and finds . . . wow, what a complicated
story this is.  I didn't think much about it as I was watching the film,
but Roos has written a series of events that best be described as
unpredictable.  
It's always entertaining to watch these events unfold, and the
entertainment value of the film is helped along nicely by DeDee's
mean-spirited narration.  She plays jokes on us, and points out the
obvious, and makes fun of us just when we're suppose to care about
what's happening.  The film is uproariously funny; perhaps the funniest
sequence is a series of shots in which we see Bill looking very
depressed after he finds that Matt has left him.  DeDee's voice soon
comes in, and then she tells us that it's silly for us to feel the way
we do, and that the scenes we're seeing are nothing but manipulation of
the audience.
I kind of felt that Roos did this just to cover up the fairly routine
story, but I resolved my worries knowing that it really doesn't matter. 
The story is interesting enough, and that he adds this kind of rare
humor and wit to the material is truly refreshing.  He even nears the
boundaries of film in a scene or two -- there's a scene towards the end
that turns out to be a joke, and while I'm not sure that this is within
the Rules of Cinema, I sure enjoyed watching it.  
But wit can only go so far without a little bit of emotional resonance,
and Roos easily manages that by giving us an assortment of interesting
and colorful characters.  Ricci is, as I said, terrific, and, as her
character points out, DeDee kind of grows on us by the end, even if she
is an acidic bitch.  Donovan is superb -- he layers his character with
verbal and physical subtleties, and is ultimately very convincing in the
role.  Sergei is adequate as the profoundly dumb boyfriend, while Johnny
Galecki has fun going over-the-top as Matt's secret boyfriend.  Most
interesting is Lisa Kudrow, who plays Lucia, a stiff friend of Bill's. 
Lucia is adamantly opposed to sex, but that's mostly because she's never
had it.  Kudrow is fascinating here, and paints a colorful portrait of
the most interesting character in the film.
But what is this film about?  Well, I think Roos has some interesting
things to say about the human need for sex.  I'm not going to pretend
that my hypotheses are even close to what he was thinking, but The
Opposite of Sex had me fascinated all through its running time, and then
beyond that.  It's rousing to watch a film that is both hilarious and
provocative at the same time; sadly, a good sense of humor and a good
sense of intelligence rarely go together in today's comedies.  So, my
final words to you are simple:  see The Opposite of Sex if you want a
little substance to back up the laughs.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Christina Ricci, Martin Donovan, Lisa Kudrow, Lyle Lovett, Ivan
Sergei, Johnny Galecki
Director: Don Roos
Producers: Michael Besman, David Kirkpatrick
Screenplay: Don Roos
What is the opposite of sex, no sex? The truth is this movie is filled
with sexual issues, and no one's getting more action than a 16 y.o.
delinquent, Dedee Truit (Christina Ricci). This girl is voracious and
not easily satisfied. She manages to seduce Bill's (her half-brother)
young, hunky, gay lover, Matt (Ivan Sergei). This must be a play on some
woman's fantasy about accomplishing the seemingly impossible feat 
unless they were bisexual to begin with. Ricci's Dedee, is brash, bold
and very in your face. A tart if you must label her and showing the
characteristic signs of a vamp. Sad to see one so young and able, so
very wasted on wantonness.
In contrast, Lucia (Lisa Kudrow) the sister of Bill's (Martin Donovan)
dead lover is the exact opposite of everything Dedee stands for. Lucia
is cold, prim and proper and hasn't had any sex at all. A pen-ultimate
virgin if you must label her something and very bitter. Her charming
younger brother landed the man she had always wanted  Bill, and then
died of AIDS. This is a unique performance from Lisa Kudrow, that is a
welcome breath of fresh air from her usual, ditzy FRIENDS persona.
In general this movie is all about sex, the ins and outs, the good the
bad and different sorts. There's promiscuous teen sex, a middle aged gay
man seeking companionship and a stable relationship, the younger gay man
that is swept away with having a good time and good looks. A very
lonely, middle-aged, single woman that is always looking and never
getting any. The police officer (Lyle Lovett) with a sick wife, that
isn't getting any either. Teen pregnancy, murder, fraud, theft,
blackmail and what you have for yourself is something of a PULP FICTION,
where the adrenaline has been switched with sex hormones.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: The Opposite of Sex
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Australian theatrical release date: August 13, 1998
Somewhere in the backbone of the American film industry lies some deep,
dark and cynical social studies of sensitive and standoffish themes.
The fact that the independent production In the Company of Men has
probably been the only one of these nitty-gritty films in the last year
proves that these atypical themes are definitely not typical material to
encounter.  Although any Hollywood hack can conjurer up offensive and/or
execrating films (see Dumb and Dumber and the upcoming There's Something
About Mary, if you don't believe me), there's something special that
separates antagonistic flair from goofball comedy.  Damn Neil LaBute
(director of In the Company of Men) for doing it so well, and damn Don
Ross for failing to achieve true cinematic quality in The Opposite of
Sex.
16 year old Dedee Truitt (Christina Ricci) warns us early on in the
film: "I don't have a heart of gold, and I don't grow one later on."
After the death of her stepfather she runs away from her troubled life
in Louisiana, and visits her gay half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan).
Whilst there she seduces his boyfriend Matt (Ivan Sergei) and proclaims
that she is pregnant, and that Matt is the father.  When the two flee
the city, the film gets some breathing space to develop a few other
characters.  We find Bill to be a wise and considerate man, as well as
being introduced to his bratty best friend Lucia (Lisa Kudrow), the town
sheriff (Lyle Lovett) and one of Matt's previous lovers (Johnny
Galecki).  It's a pity that none of them, except Ricci's exuberant
Dedee, are particularly interesting.
One of the most striking elements of Don Ross' directing style in this
film is its narration.  Last years Gattaca was ample proof of how
effective narration from a main character can be, often adding multiple
dimensions to a film.  But it can also be a slack way of putting the
pieces together - it's much more difficult to visually depict key scenes
than it is to simply describe them, and I couldn't help but feel that
Ross had taken the easy way out on numerous occasions.
However, one great thing about The Opposite of Sex is the uneasy
relationship that develops between the viewer and the character of
Dedee.  We don't really care for her because she is so nasty, but at the
same time we want nothing bad to happen to her, as she is so valuable to
the film.
Don't ask me how Christina Ricci went from The Addams Family and Casper
to The Ice Storm and The Opposite of Sex, but she has transformed
herself into a robust young actress with remarkable talent and ability.
Ricci is terrific in her role, and would certainly contend as one of the
best female leads so far this year had she been given more screen time.
Ivan Sergei has also come along way since his rather dismal performance
in John Woo's Once a Thief, but he is a often unconvincing at times.
Lisa Kudrow is the first out of the Friends bunch to prove that she can
act well, but Ross seems uncertain as to whether her character is a
comedy relief or a dramatic influence.
As a nitty-gritty "we offend you and we're proud of it" film, The
Opposite of Sex succeeds only mildly well.  It's not as controversial or
vitalizing as it intends to be, as many scenes are comprised of sloppy
film making rather than a competent portrayal of important social
themes.  It may not be typical material to encounter and it may be
produced from the shadows of an alive industry, but this film fails to
give the kind of adequate emotional feel and kooky black comedy that its
material desperately deserves.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Don Roos
Starring: Christina Ricci, Martin Donovan, Lisa Kudrow, Ivan Sergei, Lyle
Lovett, Johnny Galecki, Colin Ferguson
Love.  Sex.  Motherhood.  Matrimony.  Obsession.  These, along with others,
are just some of the American ideals that are given a good skewering in
"The Opposite of Sex," a film that is as hilarious as it is blunt about
life, and is as edgy as it is trashy.  We have here a refreshing, amazingly
acted, and sometimes even romantic comedy that holds more outrageous twists
and selish and/or shallow characters than the entire run of "Melrose Place"
ever will, and makes itself extremely entertaining thanks to a fresh format
and a plot that just never stops becoming more and more weird.
The key to the whole film is that at some point, all of the characters
becomes selfish in one way or another, all because of ideals they hold
higher than anything else.  They bullshit themselves about things that
don't matter as much, and the one character who doesn't bullshit is the
film's protagonist, Deedee Truitt, a 16-year-old bottle-blond Lousiana
trailer park scumbucket who just happens to be the composite of every smart
blond from any film matched with every single femme fatale to ever grace
the screen.  Two catches: she's played to perfection by Christina Ricci,
who is finally coming into her own as a serious actress by destroying her
childhood movie career (and sucessfully); and she's our friendly narrator
for the entire duration of the film.
The film is just jam-packed with plot, so here's a quick run-down: Deedee
runs away from home with her one-testicled Christian-as-hell boyfriend
following the death of her tryannical stepfather, and ends up ditching him
so she can stay with her wealthy half-brother, Bill (Martin Donovan), an
openly gay school teacher.  She soon seduces his young dim live-in lover,
Matt (Ivan Sergei), who allegedly impregnates her after a couple romps in
the sack, and upon Bill's discovery of their tryst, the two hike off with
$10000 of Bill's.  That's only in the first fifteen minutes.
I won't reveal much more, but I will reveal some of the important
characters in the story, the most notable being Lucia (a non-dim Lisa
Kudrow), a bitter shrew who's opposed to sex and is friends with Bill
because her brother, Tom, was Bill's boyfriend for years until his
sorta-recent death, leaving the two in different forms of mourning.  Also
on the character list is Carl (Lyle Lovett), the lonely local sheriff who's
forced to investigate Bill because of molestation charges brought on by a
gay ex-pupil of his, Jason (Johnny Galecki), yet another weird character in
the film who's funniest moment comes towards the beginning when his pelvic
skwirming is explained as a "new piercing."
As the 100 minutes of the film fly by, covering everything from a sloppy
stakeout to even a murder and a birth, this film completely trashes every
ideal that its characters bring up, all skewered by our lovely narrator,
Deedee, who's cynicism is so seductive that some scenes I almost prayed for
her to come in with obnoxious commentary...and she did.  Two characters
will be discovering they are finally in love and Deedee will suddenly come
onto the soundtrack and say "Yuck."  Just what we were thinking.  Deedee
gives the film the exact feel it is going for, that of our reaction to
people's bullshit actions at that point in our lives when everything seems
phony.  Like Holden Caulfield, Deedee is convinced that everyone is not
being true to themselves, and that they are the only ones in the entire
world who are actually not lying to everyone else, even when she's twisting
people's arms and screwing people over.  She's just being true to her
nature, after all.
Nevertheless, the characters in this film who are not Deedee are for the
most part likable, especially Bill, the poor guy who's career and basically
entire life are trampled over by the results of Deedee's actions, but who
still retains his dignity and respect.  And the film even boils down and
finds depth in the character of Lucia, who's at first just a bitch with a
whole bunch of great one-liners up her sleeve, but then discovers
everything she didn't know in the first place by finding love with the last
person in the cast you'd think would be a suitable mate.
It even deepens Deedee, who's unswerving for the basically the entire film,
and comes out of it as the one character who doesn't discover something
about themselves after all the shit has come down.  She comes off as a lot
like Linda Fiorentino in "The Last Seduction," and is played with the same
amount of talent by Ricci, who has finally come across as one of the best
younger actresses around, and one of the few, like Jodie Foster, to make
smart career moves by starring in risky movies.  Her character, who says in
the beginning "I don't have a heart of gold, and I don't grow one later,"
is almost the tragic character of the film, the one who spoils everything
yet learns nothing.  Yet by the end, we're still not sure if we want her to
grow a heart or not.  Would it spoil the movie or wouldn't it?
The film was written and directed by Don Roos, writer of such chick flicks
as "Single White Female" and "Boys on the Side," but who has finally struck
gold with "The Opposite of Sex," his directorial debut.  It has all the
edginess and hilarity it needs to suceed, and never comes across as cheap
or bitchy.  His direction is also extremely competent, and he proves
himself a great director of good actors, getting amazing performances from
everyone, most especially Donovan and Kudrow, the latter who proves she so
much more than the ultimate vapid actress.  Even Lyle Lovett's apparent
woodiness in acting actually works with his character, who ultimately comes
off as sweet.  But it's really Ricci's picture, and she embodies her with
so much flare that she's impossible to hate or root against, mostly thanks
to her narration, which is exactly what we want to hear when things are
happening in this film even if they aren't always the human.  And weirdly
enough, the best thing about this film is that it does eventually allow
humanity to seep in without corrupting its integrity.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE OPPOSITE OF SEX ** 2/3 .Written and directed by Don Roos. Photography,
Hubert Taczanowski. Editing, David Codron. Production design, Michael
Clausen. Costumes, Peter Mitchell. Music, Mason Daring. Producers, David
Kirkpatrick, Michael Besman. Executive producers, Jim Lotti, Steve Danton,
Cast: Christina Ricci (Dedee Truitt), Martin Donovan (Bill Truitt), Lisa
Kudrow (Lucia), Lyle Lovett (Carl Tippett), Johnny Galecki (Jason), Ivan
Sergei (Matt Mateo), William Scott Lee (Randy). A Sony Classics release.
100 minutes. Rated R. At the Art theater.
A quick poll about what the opposite of sex is produced the following
replies: "That's a dumb question" (3); "Excessive food" (1); " A PG rating
(1); "Running out of Viagra" (1); "No sex" (10), "Celibacy" (1).
The film opens with a small bang. Dedee's stepfather is being buried. He
may or may not have abused her as she later declares, but then Dedee has a
lot of imagination. A teen nymphette-rebel-with-probable-cause, she paces
around the graveside, smoking, and practically kicking the coffin into the
hole. This must mean that she didn't like the man. She clearly does not
like her life, her mother and perhaps herself. A troubled girl.
Post-burial she runs away --to what looks like a small Indiana town but is
a suburb of South Bend--, to stay with her long-time-no-see much older
half-brother Bill. He is a dedicated schoolteacher and seems to be a nice
sort. His lover Tom had died of AIDS and left Bill plenty of money and an
upscale house. He also seems to have inherited the late Tom's sister Lucia.
Rather nervous, insecure, sexually repressed,  and apparently Bill's best
friend, she's a protector of sorts who hovers around the man. Bill's
current lover is a handsome, likable, twenty-something Mattt. Neither man
evinces any gay mannerisms.
Dedee is 16, going at the same time on 30 and on 12. Like the combination
brat, tramp and "agent provocateur" that she is, she sets out to take out
her dysfunctionality on the Indiana Three. She thinks  highly of herself as
a philosopher-sociologist-shrink,  and talks a lot, a big lot. In spasmodic
ways, she also narrates the film. It's an old device but used here with
much originality. Dedee comments  to the audience about everything, acts
like the eye of God, like someone who has already seen the finished movie
The Opposite Sex, can tell us about it and about herself, pass judgments,
tell us what we are expecting but won't get, tell us what she's going to
tell us.
Dedee is a very fast talker. Her language is foul and trashy. She seems to
be savoring all her filthy words, rolling them around her mouth and putting
them in capitals. That kid is a mix of precocious wisdom and infantilism,
lies and truths, skepticism and cynicism, particles of sophistication and
big chunks of false sophistication.
She can be, and mostly is, unbearably irritating, but then that's part of
the script's strategy. Her foul language would disqualify her from being a
snake oil saleswoman, but she gets other  kinds of results. The first major
thing she does in Indiana is to come on blatantly to Matt, verbally and
physically (but the audience is shown no nudity). In a flash she convinces
Matt that he is, or can be a heterosexual, that in his affair with Bill
"you are basically [verb deleted] your father." She seduces him pronto. The
new couple takes off for California, and takes along ten thousand dollars
stolen from Bill as well as the precious urn in which he kept Tom's ashes.
Her seduction agenda. we learn later, is caused by Dedee's being pregnant
by, most likely, one of her Louisiana lovers, teen-ager Randy, famous for
having only one testicle.
This is just the beginning. If you want to pigeonhole the movie, is a sort
of black comedy/farce. Outrageous complications follow in all directions,
include flashbacks, home movies, everything and everybody.
There's local  sheriff Carl played by the bizarre, improbable Lyle Lovett.
He is a widower and sweet on Lucia. When the latter reproaches him "Your
wife was dying and you [verb deleted] her nurse," Carl missing no beat
replies "If Nancy didn't mind..." Bill gets blackmailed, then falsely
defamed by his former student Jason. The town is most receptive to anti-gay
feelings. and a scandal follows in the local media.
Bill and Lucia set out after Dedee-Matt who become Dedee-Randy when the
latter materializes from the sticks of Louisiana. Carl follows Bill and
Lucia. Add to this fights, guns firing, a motorcycle purchase, other
madnesses and non sequiturs. Add to that an incredible trip to Canada as,
by car, somehow (but how?) A follows B who follows C who has gone there
with D, and where E magically pops up, and where the entire cast is
reunited in a cabin in the woods!
The script  overdoes its wish to be topical, current and trendy. Trying too
hard to be original, it overloads the plot, overkills its gimmicks,
characters, absurdism. Admittedly, there are moments of comedy and farce,
but too many of them get drowned in much humor that thinks it is humor but
is not. Instead of Marx Brothers crazy-funny absurdism, we get
crazy-showy, uncensored absurdism, at full throttle. The would-be
avant-garde continuity, including time and space, is a mess.
Is the film worth seeing? Yes, for specialized audiences that are into the
off-beat. It 's an experiment whose originality is interesting, even if it
is too smug, self-conscious, frenetic and patchy. Screenwriter and now
first-time director Don Roos must know the tricks of Pirandello, Brecht and
the French New Wave, but has gone overboard. And we  still don't know what
the opposite of sex is.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I've never tried Communism, but I know I wouldn't like it," the
brainless hunk, Matt Mateo (Ivan Sergei), tells Dedee, the teenage
seductress who wants him to try sex with her.  "Or grits," he adds
after he thinks for a moment longer.
     Dedee, the 16-year-old, seductive protagonist of the acerbic
comedy, THE OPPOSITE OF SEX, has been coming on to Matt.  Even though
Matt is the live-in gay lover of her half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan
from HOLLOW REED), Dedee wants him to have his first heterosexual
experience with her, so she tries everything to entice him, including
dropping her halter top to display her rather large sexual assets.
     As Dedee Truitt, Christina Ricci from THE ICE STORM plays a role
that is tailor-made for her sarcastic brand of humor.  With
in-your-face cleavage, short skirts, heavy make-up and platform shoes,
she's a catty Lolita on steroids.  Derided as "the human tabloid" for
her proclivity for sleeping around, she is also the movie's sardonic,
take-charge narrator.  ("This is the part where I take the gun.  Duh,
this is, like, important.")  As the narrator, Dedee manipulates the
story by offering alternative versions and different perspectives on
the story, which further enlivens an already exuberant picture.
     Writer and director Don Roos's irreverent script can and should be
compared favorably to Warren Beatty's BULWORTH.  Happy to offend any
group without worrying about retribution, this very funny picture
dishes out one guffaw after another with many of the best lines being
so raunchy as to be unprintable.
     As Lucia, the sister of Bill's dead lover, Tom, Lisa Kudrow from
ROMY AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION is made to look like a spinster
aunt with her brunette hair pulled back harshly behind her head.  She
and Ricci share equally in the script's best dialog snippets.
     "I'm bisexual," Matt announces after he finds he has impregnated
Dedee.  "Puh-lease!" replies an angry Lucia, who is quite protective of
Bill.  "I went to a Bar Mitzvah once.  That doesn't mean I'm Jewish."
     "This is how we do it on the Planet Maturia," Lucia lectures the
clueless and immature Matt in another scene.  "We have much to teach
you."
     The good-hearted story has Dedee and Matt disappearing.  Bill, a
teacher who has been falsely accused of molesting one of his former
pupils, joins forces with Lucia in chasing after them.  Among the many
subplots is one involving the stolen ashes of Lucia's brother, to whom
Dedee always refers mockingly as "Tom, the dead guy."
     Lyle Lovett plays the good old boy, Sheriff Carl Tippett, who
eventually beds Lucia.  "What's the point of sleeping with you, Lucia,
if it doesn't get your attention," he complains when she starts
ignoring him.
     The press kit offers widely varying interpretations of the film's
provocative title, but Dedee offers the most intriguing explanation.
"Sex always ends in, like, kids or disease or relationships."  She says
that this is just the opposite of what she wants.
     THE OPPOSITE OF SEX runs 1:40.  It is rated R for profanity and
sexuality and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Of all the movie titles with the S-E-X word, this one may
well be the most bewildering.  It's like saying, "What's the
opposite of 'mirror?'"  According to the lead character, Dedee,
the opposite of sex is lasting, committed and loving
relationships.  Now, then, lasting relationships may be
furthered by sexual intimacy, so the terms are hardly
diametrical.  Despite the awkward label given to this Sony
Pictures Classics release, the movie is for the most part
involving, summoning up a number of laughs at the
particularly shrewish dialogue while at other times the cast
members seem to think they're in a live sitcom waiting for the
chuckles to come before proceeding to the next line.
   For those who say that sixteen-year-olds are too innocent
to enter into any form of sex, Dedee Truitt (Christina Ricci)
provides a rebuttal.  Street-wise well beyond her years, this
small but endowed young woman can not only match the
vocabulary of a drunken sailor; she can come up with quite a
few witty, caustic, prescient remarks.  Movie cognoscenti will
find her particularly amusing when she discusses the nature
of film, which she does now and then as the narrator of the
piece.  When she has had it up to her bosom with her
mother's torments, for example, she packs her bag, includes
her gun and makes sure to tell the audience to mark that well:
it's an example of foreshadowing.
   Her story: the tough, seemingly invulnerable, promiscuous
Dedee heads from her Louisiana home to Indiana to crash
the pad of her uncle Bill (Martin Donovan), a gay high-school
teacher living with the handsome Matt (Ivan Sergei).  With a
complete disregard for political correctness she seduces Matt
by implying that his homosexuality is abnormal, accusing him
of prejudice if he does not sleep with her.  When Dedee
announces her pregnancy, naming Matt as the father, Bill
feels betrayed by his apparently bi-sexual partner, who leaves
for L.A. with his white-trash girlfriend.  Meanwhile Bill is
accused by a former boyfriend, Jason (Johnny Galecki) of
molestation when Jason was a student at the high school,
Bill's job is in jeopardy, and he is out $10,000 which Dedde
has stolen.
   Writer-director Don Roos is best known for his script to
"Single White Female," so we can expect him to write strong
roles for women.  True to form, the women in this picture far
outshine the men in barbs and Lisa Kudrow proves the most
amusing as Bill's best friend, Lucia.  Lucia, sexually
repressed, has convinced herself that physical intimacy is, if
not disgusting, just plain wet and greasy. The 28-year-old
virgin's views are about to invert.  Her features resembling the
outer skin of a prune, she walks through the movie
disapproving of anything and everything, as bitter as Dedee
but substituting criticism for Dedee's Betty-Davis wit.  
   The film tries to offend various groups in its projected
audience, but the barbs about homosexuality are too well
known by now to wound and while Roos does not cop out by
finding a heart of gold within Dedee's breast, his final
celebration of home and hearth undercuts the acerbity.  Rated
R.  Running Time: 105 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
James Brundage
Written and Directed by Don Roos (Single White Female)
Starring Cristiana Ricci (The Adams Family), Martin Donovan (The Portrait of
a Lady), Lisa Kudrow (Romy and Michelle's High School Reunion), Lyle Lovett
(Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas), Ivan Sergei (John Woo's Once a Thief)
Deedee Truitt (Ricci) is a narcissist. She's a sex-addicted, nyphomanical
user and abuser. She's blaring, she offensive, she's witty, she's brilliant.
She packs a gun while pregnant and swears every other word. And, like all
anti-heroes, you love her by the end of the movie.
She's not going to grow a heart of gold (or so she says) and she's not going
to change her ways. She goes around stealing ashes from urns, seducing gay
men, running off with one-balled hicks from Louisiana, and basically living
her life without consequences. Then, of course, she gets pregnant and
reality begins to set in quickly.
Basically, her realization of reality comes around basically like this:
1) Stepfather dies. She leaves Louisiana with Randy, the one-balled hick,
and keeps on running to Illinois, where she holes up with her homosexual
half-brother and his lover, Matt. Matt and the half-brother are locked in a
relationship based upon sex, which Matt readily admits but the half brother
will not (his previous boyfriend died of AIDS).
2) Deedee seduces Matt. In a crazy world where anything can happen, anything
does, with her working her unique charms to bed a homosexual.
What follows is a politically incorrect story of her learning that life
isn't so easy. It's a wake up call: a rude one. The movie, for liberals like
me, is both riotously funny and blatantly offensive. But in the strange
world of film it was just the dark comedy I was looking for.
It offers an insight that no politically correct movie can. It doesn't worry
about what you think about her, or what you think about it. This, as anyone
who reads my reviews knows, constitutes my very favorite thing: ARTISTIC
BOLDNESS.
Yes. A movie this flagrantly offensive is not only art but quite intelligent
art at that. Instead of worrying, like everyone else does, about wording
their answers to the questions of life in a kind way, The Opposite of Sex
doesn't care.
The strange thing is, by the end of the movie, you will.

Author
Jerry Saravia
I described Christina Ricci's face as cherub-like in "Buffalo '66," and nothing can be further from the truth than in "The Opposite of Sex," a delectable comedy-drama where she plays a tramp with a heart of lust. Ricci has a beautiful, fascinating face that speaks volumes of lustlike, uninhibited qualities - she would have been ideal as Lolita. 
Ricci plays Deedee, a sixteen-year-old tramp who just moved in with her half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan), a gay teacher in Indiana. He lives with the spinster-like Lucia (Lisa Kudrow), sister of Bill's former lover who died of AIDS, who takes an immediate dislike to Deedee. Bill's new boyfriend is the muscular, dim-witted, bare-chested Matt (Ivan Sergei). Deedee sees a new catch for her net and proceeds to seduce and bed Matt, who is almost too willing. This results in Deedee getting pregnant, taking most of Bill's savings, and running off with Matt to L.A. Bill and Lucia proceed to find them, and it all involves endless plot complications and twists. 
"The Opposite of Sex" begins as a satire, and winds itself topsy-turvy as a road movie about the importance of family and relationships. I didn't mind the winding, but the satire is the best and most clever part of the film. There's something playful about writer-director Don Roos's sly take on family life, the media, and how a gay man perceives the madness in (a) Deedee conquering his male lover, (b) putting up with the aggravating Lucia, and (c) accusations of sexual crimes at his school by a former student, Jason (Johnny Galecki), Matt's other lover. 
The satirical elements are not maintained, however, when the road movie takes over the second-half of the picture resulting in a "Something Wild" ride through twists and surprises. There's also the introduction of a bland sheriff (played by none other than Lyle Lovett) who holds a torch for Lucia, and a Louisiana redneck kid - they both bring the film to a halt whenever they appear. And the conclusive Canadian border sequences hardly mirror the originality of the first half of the movie. 
"The Opposite of Sex" is told from the point-of-view of Deedee, and we hear her self-aware narration as she comments on the facts of the story. My favorite quips were regarding plot devices: "A gun. This is foreshadowing. Duh." Even funnier are her comments on gays: "Only gays love houses like this," or when she refers to Billy and his friends as "losers." She constantly reminds us we are watching a movie and foretells all the clichés that take place, though the movie never really transcends them. 
There are quite a few problems with "The Opposite of Sex" in terms of its theme and exploration of sex and relationships. For one, Deedee is an unredeeming brat and tramp rolled into one, who even holds Bill's dead lover's ashes in a ziploc bag as collateral - there is no way she would ever have a heart of gold. The movie tries to say that sex (and sexual orientation) is all that matters in a relationship, and there is no existing foundation for love. Then it switches gears, particularly Deedee's motives, and says that family is all that matters. The happy ending not only reverses its theme but succumbs to a development in Deedee's character that is hardly believable. 
As good as Ricci is, Deedee is still portrayed as a vixen with no inner life. We learn precious little about her or her past except that she destroys other people's lives. Others fare better in sharply written roles such as Martin Donovan playing the blank-faced Bill. He plays his role perfectly and is used to better effect here than in any of the recent Hal Hartley films. Lisa Kudrow is the major surprise: her facetious one-liners and double takes are intoxicating and proves there is life beyond her Phoebe character in "Friends." 
There are enough wildly comedic parts and choice dialogue bits to qualify "The Opposite of Sex" as mild entertainment. I kept thinking of a similar road movie/satire called "Flirting with Disaster," which stayed true to its themes with no cop-outs or false endings. "The Opposite of Sex" flirts with coming close to that movie's greatness, but never adheres to its own convictions. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Alex Fung
THE OPPOSITE OF SEX (Sony Pictures Classics - 1998)
Starring Christina Ricci, Martin Donovan, Lisa Kudrow, Lyle Lovett,
  Johnny Galecki, William Lee Scott, Ivan Sergei
Screenplay by Don Roos
Produced by David Kirkpatrick, Michael Besman
Directed by Don Roos
Running time: 105 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Several months ago, I received a note from one of my movie sage
   friends advising me to keep an eye out for Don Roos' feature film
   debut, THE OPPOSITE OF SEX.  "It's your type of film," he cryptically
   advised without elaborating further, leaving me to wonder exactly
   what this comment implied about the film, and moreover, about my
   perceived tastes in general.  As the film completed its festival
   circuit and began to roll out in limited release, I solicited further
   opinions from trusted friends in New York and Los Angeles, who all
   agreed it was a worthwhile watch.
   So I found myself settling expectantly into a theatre seat at a
   recent screening of the film, and it didn't take long -- oh, about
   five minutes -- for me to see their point: I relished the wicked
   black comedy that opened THE OPPOSITE OF SEX, which sees our lead
   character preparing for a somber funeral appearance by tweaking at
   her nipples through the fabric of her dress, followed by paying her
   final respects to the deceased by tossing her lit cigarette, rocks,
   and everything else on hand at the lowered casket.
   Our lead character is Dedee Truitt (a blonde Christina Ricci), the
   most deliciously vile antiheroine in an American film since Laura
   Dern's title character in Alexander Payne's CITIZEN RUTH.  This
   cheerfully nasty sixteen-year old doubles as both protagonist and
   self-conscious narrator (her knowing voice-overs freely admit she's
   aware that she's in a movie), and after trashing her late
   stepfather's funeral, Dedee runs away from her Louisiana home to
   impose herself on her estranged, much-older half-brother Bill (Martin
   Donovan), who leads an unassuming life as a schoolteacher.  Bill,
   who's the sort of low-key person that checks rude washroom graffiti
   for grammatical errors, is openly gay (or "homo", as Dedee puts it),
   and lives with a handsome young man named Matt (Ivan Sergei) in a
   spacious house left by Bill's previous companion, Tom (or "the dead
   guy", as Dedee puts it -- yup, she's a little sweetheart), who passed
   away from AIDS.  Tom's spinster sister, Lucia (Lisa Kudrow), who
   obviously carries a torch for Bill, teaches at the same school and
   frequently drops in on the proceedings.  Surely enough, Dedee soon
   wreaks havoc in this sleepy Indiana suburb by bullying the
   simple-minded Matt into bedding her, announcing her pregnancy, and
   promptly absconding with Bill's life savings, Matt, and Tom's ashes,
   sending Bill and Lucia in hot pursuit.
   Mr. Roos, a veteran screenwriter whose credits feature strong female
   characters in films such as SINGLE WHITE FEMALE (Bridget Fonda and
   Jennifer Jason Leigh), LOVE FIELD (Michelle Pfeiffer's
   Oscar-nominated turn), and BOYS ON THE SIDE (Drew Barrymore, Whoopi
   Goldberg and Mary-Louis Parker), predictably has a sure hand with his
   fascinating female characters in his directorial debut, but the
   film's sketchier male characters are much less interesting.  Dedee is
   a wonderfully awful creature -- the film suffers during the often
   too-long periods when she's offscreen -- and Lucia is imbued with an
   observant, lashing tongue and a semblance of actual character
   complexity; none of the men are nearly as compelling.
   The great strength of THE OPPOSITE OF SEX are the terrific nasty
   one-liners which freely zing back and forth, mostly from the mouths
   of its two major female characters, although everybody gets into the
   act to some degree.  The film's screenplay doesn't play it safe; it
   offends with utter abandon, and many of the barbs are such
   perfectly-timed, wicked little gems that one gets the feeling that
   Mr. Roos has been accumulating these clever rejoinders and memorable
   witticisms for just the opportune occasion.  Many of the lines are
   so funny that it comes as a bit of a shame that the film's plot isn't
   as sharp, particularly the final third which lacks the flair and bite
   of the opening reels and builds to a conclusion which seems unearned.
   The film is at its best during its opening half, unspooling as an
   acerbic, pitch black comic romp.
   Gleefully rotten, unapologetically rude and self-absorbed, moonfaced
   Ms. Ricci has already assembled a sizable list of similarly sarcastic
   characters in her filmography, and she's perfectly cast here in the
   showy role of bitchy sexpot Dedee.  Also impressive is Ms. Kudrow,
   who continues to emerge as an interesting actress and demonstrates
   great comic timing in a more deadpan role.  Her feature film
   performances over the past few years has been consistently more
   unique and skilled than any of her FRIENDS castmates.
   One of the more interesting aspects of THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is its
   propensity to deconstruct itself via Dedee's cynical, mocking
   narration.  "If you think I'm just plucky and scrappy and all I need
   is love, you're in over your head," she warns at the outset.  It's an
   odd narrative approach which, while occasionally grating, is often
   refreshing.  Consider her voice-over accompanying the film's
   obligatory Sad Montage, which invariably takes place at about the
   midpoint of a given movie, and in this case features a forlorn Bill
   mournfully brooding, stopping only to wistfully sniff at his lover's
   T-shirt.  Traditionally hokey stuff, to be sure -- but as Dedee
   points out, it's better than showing Bill paying his bills.

Author
Michael Dequina
The Opposite of Sex (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
Screenwriter Don Roos (_Single_White_Female_) makes a wickedly
entertaining directorial debut with this wild, unflinching, and
aggressively un-P.C. black comedy.  An all-grown-up Christina Ricci plays
16-year-old hellion Dedee Truitt, who immediately up-ends a number of lives
after leaving her mother's home in Louisiana and shacking up with her gay
half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan) in Indiana.  In no time, Dedee seduces
Bill's young stud Matt (Ivan Sergei), gets knocked up, and takes off with
Matt to California with the ashes of Bill's dead lover in tow (make that
held hostage).  When Bill, Tom's busybody sister Lucia (Lisa Kudrow), and
town sheriff Carl (Lyle Lovett) follow their tracks, things get even
crazier...
...but never lighter.  Credit Roos for maintaining a scathing, pitch-black
tone from first frame to last.  There are times when events and characters
threaten to soften up, and just when you think the film begins to grow a
heart, it chews it up and spits it right back at you.  This is perfectly
exemplified by Dedee's tart, self-aware voiceover narration, which she uses
to add the audience to her victims: she identifies and savages all manner
of cinematic conventions and cliches only to use them as tools of
manipulation.  But meanness is just unpleasant if it isn't funny, and
Roos's script is full of delicious zingers that not only bite but draw
blood.  A lot of these are capably dished out by the better-than-ever
Ricci; however, the best lines come from the film's real star--and biggest
surprise: Kudrow, whose Oscar-caliber work shows she can do more than play
a ditz.  The incessantly nagging bitch that is Lucia is not only the
funniest in an ensemble of original, indelible, and well-played characters,
and she quite handily takes over and walks off with the movie.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Christina Ricci was always a little weird. I mean, you'd have 
to be to play a convincing Wednesday Addams and hang out with 
Casper the Friendly Ghost. But in the past year, most of her movies 
have seen a turn from sitcom remake queen to a messed-up whore. 
Last year's THE ICE STORM saw her seducing a junior-high kid, but that 
was just the beginning. THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is one of the most twisted, 
amoral films of the year, and also one of the best.
        Ricci plays a teenager whose home life gets so bad that she 
heads to Indiana to live with a gay half-brother (Martin Donovan) who 
teaches high school. Life isn't so great for the brother, either. His lover 
has just died of AIDS and, worse yet, his ex-lover's sister is Phoebe 
from "Friends," and she won't go away. Actually, Kudrow has for once 
chosen a role with brains. She's been ditzy funny in ROMY AND 
MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION and MOTHER, but here she rattles off 
some of the most intelligent one-liners in the film.
        Clever one-liners are the backbone of THE OPPOSITE OF SEX, as 
is the cocky narration from Ricci. Rarely does the "Yeah, I know this 
is a movie" approach work, but when Ricci's character advances the 
story like someone who has seen hundreds of conventional movies and 
wants to keep her biography from being anything but, it's a new and 
witty approach. And, more importantly, it fits with a movie about 
unstable, abnormal people.
        As Ricci comes to visit Donovan, her brother has a new 
boyfriend in the overly handsome Ivan Sergei. She makes some 
smalltalk about "homos" and what-not before deciding Sergei is only 
gay because he's never had a real woman and, as all Internet perverts 
know, Christina Ricci is definitely a real woman. It doesn't take much 
prodding before Sergei decides to forsake the out-hole for the in-hole 
and join the heterosexual team.
        That's about the time Sergei realizes the biggest drawback of 
the straight life -- having your girlfriend tell you she's pregnant. Yes, 
Ricci is with child and Donovan is pissed, kicking them out of the 
house. So they swipe $10,000 of his money and head to L.A. while an 
ex-boyfriend (Johnny Galecki, David from "Roseanne") demands to 
know where Sergei is. When Donovan doesn't help him out, he tells 
the cops that the teacher molested him in high school.
        THE OPPOSITE OF SEX continues in true Springeresque fashion 
through one crazy plot development after another. Most of them are 
guaranteed to offend at least one audience member, although this 
product of writer-director Don Roos' imagination always manages to 
be elegantly sleazy. There are only a few ways to successfully approach 
horrendous storylines (blackmailing your half-brother by holding his 
dead lover's ashes hostage, Lyle Lovett as a love interest, etc.) but this 
movie does it well, and kept me laughing throughout.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Christina Ricci, Martin Donovan, Lisa Kudrow, Lyle Lovett, 
      Ivan Sergei, Johnny Galecki
Director: Don Roos
Producers: Michael Besman, David Kirkpatrick
Screenplay: Don Roos
Cinematography: Hubert Taczanowski
Music: Mason Daring
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     The turning point in Christina Ricci's career came when she chose 
to appear in Ang Lee's THE ICE STORM.  Since then, nothing has been the 
same for the up-and-coming performer.  Before the 1997 feature, Ricci 
had turned up in host of bland, family-oriented features (THE ADDAMS 
FAMILY, CASPER, NOW & THEN, GOLD DIGGERS) as an innocent young girl.  
Although the films were often easy to dismiss, the actress' consistently 
fine performances were not.  Finally, with THE ICE STORM, Ricci was 
given a role of import in a film of substance.  Her portrayal of a 
sexually voracious teenager who sleeps with boys of her age (and 
younger) is riveting, and it ignited a phase in Ricci's career that has 
had her playing a drug-addled artist (FEAR AND LOATHING IN LAS VEGAS), 
an alluring hostage-turned-girlfriend (BUFFALO 66), and a promiscuous 
young woman who uses her sexuality as a weapon (THE OPPOSITE OF SEX).  
     Ricci's performance is only one reason why Don Roos' THE OPPOSITE 
OF SEX is a success.  This is perhaps the most audacious film of the 
year to date (at least among mainstream releases), filling the slot left 
vacant by 1997's IN THE COMPANY OF MEN.  THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is the kind 
of daring feature that doesn't open every Friday at the local multiplex; 
its frank, sometimes politically incorrect approach towards the act and 
politics of sex is refreshing.  And, in addition to dealing with 
intrinsically provocative material, first-time director Roos uses the 
unique approach of satirizing the conventions of road pictures and 
dysfunctional family dramas to tell his story.  In particular, he has a 
lot of fun with the voice-over.  The glib narrator, Deedee Truitt 
(Ricci), is aware that she's speaking to a movie audience, and, as a 
result, can't resist the opportunity to have some fun at the viewer's 
expense.  In her opening monologue, she informs us that "things get very 
complicated very quick, and you're going to have trouble getting through 
it without me talking," then, in case we mistake her for a cute-but-
misunderstood 16-year old, she warns us that "I don't have a heart of 
gold and I don't grow one later."  When a gun makes a brief appearance, 
she tells us not to forget about it.  ("Duh.  It's foreshadowing.")  At 
another time, she "shows" scenes of things that don't really happen, 
then laughs at our gullibility for believing them. 
     Although Deedee is the narrator and, consequently, has the largest 
speaking part, she's not the film's central character.  That role 
belongs to her half-brother, Bill (Martin Donovan), "the definition of a 
softy."  Bill, a gay high school teacher, has been leading a peaceful 
existence until his pregnant sister runs away from home and comes to him 
for shelter.  Unablet to refuse anyone anything, he lets Deedee stay, 
and she repays his kindness by seducing his live-in lover, Matt (Ivan 
Sergei), who, after his fling with Deedee, decides that he's not really 
a homosexual  he's a bisexual.  Another constant presence in Bill's 
life is the always-miserable Lucia (Lisa Kudrow), the sister of his dead 
true love.  Then there are Jason (Johnny Galecki), who falsely tells the 
police that Bill molested him, and Sheriff Carl Tippett (Lyle Lovett), 
the genial cop who investigates the boy's claims. 
     As comedies go, THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is one of 1998's most 
consistently funny.  Of course, humor is subjective, and I'm known for 
being a little warped in that area, so Roos' flamboyant, out-on-a-limb 
approach is perfect for someone like me.  The dialogue is crisp and 
distinctive, occasionally invoking the spirit of something written by 
Kevin Smith (CLERKS, CHASING AMY).  However, it's obvious to Roos (and 
to us) that this kind of slick, unconventional style can have trouble 
sustaining a feature-length movie.  No matter how outrageous the tone, 
it grows tiresome after a while, so the writer/director changes gears 
during the second half.  Although THE OPPOSITE OF SEX never completely 
loses its satirical, self-mocking edge, the final 50 minutes are more 
serious than what precedes them, and the humor is leavened by a couple 
of earnest, surprisingly-effective messages.  One particularly 
intriguing concept is Carl's assertion that maybe sex isn't for 
recreation or procreation, but for concentration  that when a man and 
woman sleep together, the experience attunes them to each other.  This 
is in contrast with Deedee's largely-negative view of sex.  For her, 
it's a burden that leads to such undesirable results as "kids, or 
disease, or relationships."  
     While Ricci's performance in THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is the standout, 
it's not the most surprising example of acting, at least when one 
considers her previous critical acclaim.  Instead, that distinction goes 
to Lisa Kudrow, who abandons the ditzy image she has refined on 
television (FRIENDS, MAD ABOUT YOU) and in movies (MOTHER, ROMY & 
MICHELLE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION) in favor of a well-rounded portrayal of 
a bitter, lonely woman.  Lucia proves that Kudrow has a rarely-displayed 
range.  So, with Ricci and Kudrow leading the way, the women in THE 
OPPOSITE OF SEX are far more interesting than the men.  Martin Donovan 
underplays Bill as smart, affable, and bland.  Ivan Sergei plays Matt as 
dumb, affable, and bland.  And Lyle Lovett portrays Carl as strange, 
affable, and bland.
     The tag line for THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is:  "You'll laugh, you'll 
cry, you'll be offended."  While that's perhaps overstating the movie's 
impact, it's not completely off-base.  The film manages to mix a portion 
of successful drama into its primarily-comic foundation, and 
conservative movie-goers will likely be turned off by the no-punches 
pulled, occasionally raunchy look at sex.  However, with its memorable 
dialogue, solid performances, and idiosyncratic style, THE OPPOSITE OF 
SEX is sure to be appreciated by those who aren't frightened away by the 
cinematic equivalent of hot chili.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Chris Loar
The posters advertising THE OPPOSITE OF SEX declare "You'll Laugh. You'll   
Cry. You'll Be Offended."  Frankly, this misrepresentation is probably   
the most offensive thing about this film, which poses as a cynical   
portrait of an unscrupulous teen on the run while striking a tone no more   
jaded than your average Disney picture.  I don't mind light feel-good   
fare, but there's something cloying about this tease -- I like sentiment   
to advertise itself as such, rather than hiding behind an ink cloud of   
fashionable detachment.  That said, OPPOSITE is entertaining enough:  it   
features a nice turn by Christina Ricci (who's transformed herself from a   
hilariously ironic Wednesday Addams into a hilariously ironic late-teen   
vamp -- sort of a low-calorie version of Linda Fiorentino's Wendy Kroy)   
and a slight but clever script by director Don Roos.
As the film opens, Ricci's character, Dedee Truitt, sets the tone by   
spitting on her stepfather's grave -- at the funeral, no less -- and   
things go generally downhill from there.  Dedee runs away from her   
Louisiana home and her crazed mother, planning to crash with her   
half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan, as noble and injured as ever).  Bill   
teaches high school and lives comfortably from the money he's inherited   
from his long-time companion Tom; noble and generous to a fault, he gives   
Dedee the run of the house.  He comes to regret this move in short order,   
since Dedee's first act as houseguest is to seduce Bill's lover, Matt   
(Ivan Sergei) -- and, when she turns up pregnant, to take off for   
California, dragging with her Matt, Tom's ashes, and $10,000 in cash.   
 Bill's troubles are compounded when another of the prodigious Matt's   
lovers, Jason (Johnny Galecki) tells the police and the press that Bill's   
sexually assaulted him.  Suspended from work and heartbroken, Bill takes   
off for California to find Matt and Dedee, with Tom's sister Lucia (Lisa   
Kudrow) in tow, and with Sheriff Carl Tippett (Lyle Lovett) in hot   
pursuit.
All this may sound like standard comic fare, and sure enough, it is.   
 What we have here is a more or less formulaic film posing as a quirky   
independent feature; it dresses itself up in faux cynicism, and leans on   
some amusing self-referential voice-overs to distinguish itself.  It   
shouldn't have bothered; what value is there to be found is almost buried   
beneath the gimmicks and tricks.  Its primary virtue is, in fact,   
something so simple as a first-rate cast.  Ricci, as I've said, is all   
grown up now, but her character isn't; she's still a kid inside a grownup   
persona, and Ricci delivers that nuance perfectly.  This is also the best   
work we've seen from Lisa Kudrow; with a few tweaks to her FRIENDS   
persona, the ditz is gone, replaced by a somewhat twitchy, uptight   
schoolmarm.  And Donovan and Lovett, though sorely underused and slightly   
miscast, are as appealing as ever.
It's sad to see this talent working so hard on such an unworthy project.   
 It's not just that it isn't terribly original; I could live with that.   
 It's also that it feels sloppy and tacked-together; that it offers up   
silly stereotypes of gay men, then apologizes for them with preachy   
asides; that it hauls in flat, wooden characters to tie up subplots that   
had no business there in the first place.
So perhaps it's not the film's fundamental inoffensiveness that bothers   
me.  It's rather that the film is too obviously and casually offensive,   
all to no purpose.  Offense can be interesting; I'm a believer in   
throwing rocks at sacred cows.  But this film can't muster up the energy   
to  really upset anybody; telling us that teens are sometimes angry and   
often display a cynicism they haven't really earned isn't exactly news.   
 And where it is offensive, it's unintentional and to no effect, giving   
us rather tired portraits of queened-out gay men and bitter, frigid   
women.  So and watch Ricci blossom, Kudrow mature, and Sergei stand   
around looking pretty.  But don't expect a satisfying story; you'll be   
courting disappointment.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE OPPOSITE OF SEX
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Christina Ricci, Martin Donovan, Lisa Kudrow, Ivan Sergei, Lyle
Lovett, Johnny Galecki, William Scott Lee.
Screenplay:  Don Roos.
Producers:  David Kirkpatrick and Michael Besman.
Director:  Don Roos.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  100 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE OPPOSITE OF SEX may actually be too limiting a title for
screenwriter Don Roos' tart-tongued directorial debut.  After winding its
way through relationship comedy, road picture grit and a dozen genre stops 
in between, it turns out to be the opposite of nearly everything it first
appears to be, including:
     1) The opposite of sincerely-narrated coming-of-age drama.  Long-time
readers know of my disdain for voice-over narration as a substitute for
effective film storytelling.  THE OPPOSITE OF SEX opens with a warning
from Dedee Truitt (Christina Ricci), the 16-year-old vixen at the center
of the story:  "If you're one of those people who don't like movies where
some person you can't see talks the whole time and covers up the holes in
the plot...then you're out of luck."  Like most of Dedee's comments, that
one isn't particularly trustworthy.  The narration provides crucial and
often hilarious peeks into the troubled character, who runs away from home
to stay with her gay half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan), then proceeds to
seduce his lover Matt (Ivan Sergei), steal $10,000 of his money and hit
the road again with Matt in tow.  Roos turns Dedee's bitchy,
politically-incorrect narration into an effective tool for understanding
characters and subverting expectations, enough to make me soften my
absolutist anti-narration stance.  That's not to say that the film is all
about caustic indifference.  In fact, it's...
     2) The opposite of cynical.  Roos has little interest in wallowing in
indie-pic nihilism.  Despite the multitude of quirky touches, THE OPPOSITE
OF SEX is a surprisingly human story of people for whom sex is either
frightening, or manipulative, or a substitute for something more
substantial.  Ricci plays deftly both with and against Dedee's bile-filled
dialogue, giving her a sympathetic edge as she journeys towards some
measure of maturity.  Even better is Lisa Kudrow, cast brilliantly against
type as Lucia, the deeply-repressed sister of Bill's deceased lover.
Playing a character so profoundly disappointed by life that everything and
everyone similarly disappoints her, she moves and speaks like a
perpetually constricted sphincter muscle.  It's a brutally funny and quite
touching performance, one of the year's best.  It also makes it clear that
THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is...
     3) The opposite of a "guy movie."  Photos of a scantily-clad Ricci on
the promotional posters notwithstanding, THE OPPOSITE OF SEX is only
moderately successful at getting inside the male head.  For some reason,
Roos (SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, BOYS ON THE SIDE) has generally written much
more compelling female characters than male characters through his career.
That's true again here, where Ricci and Kudrow steal the show from their
male co-stars in less-developed roles.  Erstwhile "Roseanne" co-star
Johnny Galecki, as a body-pierced, mincing youth infatuated with Matt, is
less a character than gay comic relief; William Scott Lee offers yet
another Christian character who's ignorant and violent.  Even Lyle Lovett,
as the gentle sheriff with a crush on Lucia, is given too little shading
for the important role he ultimately plays.  Only Martin Donovan, always
adept at fleshing out minimalist characterizations with piercing glances,
emerges fully-formed.  Roos covers up several weaknesses with his sharp
dialogue, but he can't hide the sketchy male roles, nor the fact that THE
OPPOSITE OF SEX is...
    4) The opposite of flashy independent film-making.  Every once in a
while, Roos gets overtly cinematic on us -- a slow pan after a gunshot is
heard, a sentimental montage of Bill after Matt leaves.  Otherwise, THE
OPPOSITE OF SEX might as well be a stage play, a collection of static
medium compositions of characters in conversation.  Fortunately, those
conversations are full of quotable lines and keen insights into the way we
use and abuse sex, and vice-versa.  Don't expect dumb comedy, gratuitous
titillation or cheap sentimentality from THE OPPOSITE OF SEX.  You're
going to get the opposite of all that.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Actress Christina Ricci closes a door on her life in Dan Roos'
brilliant new film, "The Opposite of Sex."  Gone forever are the days of
Wednesday Addams and "That Darn Cat"; here, Ricci delivers a performance
that is strong, confident, memorable... and more adult than we have any
right to expect from an actress her age.  (The end credits actually carry
a message assuring that "No minors engaged in any sexual activities during
the filming of this movie.")
        To say that sixteen year-old Dedee, the character Ricci plays, is
a bad seed would be a gross understatement.  She's sassy, mean, tough,
and so resentful of her parents that she hurls stones and obscenities at
the coffin during her stepfather's funeral.  She chain-smokes, has no real
friends, and is so fond of the physical aspects of life that when she
suddenly finds herself pregnant, any number of boys/men could be the father.
        Hating the atmosphere at home, Dedee flees to the house of her rich
gay brother, a man she has seen exactly once in her life.  Putting on her
most pathetic-looking face, the manipulative Dedee weepily asks to stay.
Her brother Bill (Martin Donovan), taken in by her charm and apparant
helplessness, caves in at once.  Poor Bill doesn't realise that he's making
the biggest mistake of his life.
        All goes well until the restless Dedee takes a liking to Bill's
boyfriend Matt (Ivan Sergei).  The two forge an uneasy friendship, with
the homophobic Dedee trying to convince Matt that he'd enjoy sex with a
woman if he'd only try it.  Dedee offers him her body, and eventually
Matt sucuumbs... giving Dedee the opportunity to name Matt as the father
of her child.  Matt, who isn't exactly the sharpest stick in the bunch,
believes her completely.
        All this takes place in the first few minutes of the film; the
rest of the movie depicts Bill and his friend Lucia (Lisa Kudrow) chasing
Matt and Dedee across North America as her pregnancy develops.  Along the
way the characters will fall in and out of love with each other, commit
felonies, and wonder what the hell they're doing.  As well they should.
        That capsule summary may make the film sound like nothing more than
an empty-headed teen-comedy, but the film is more than this-- much more.
It's closer to "Taxi Driver" than "Cannonball Run."  Roos presents us with a
movie as heavy on satire as darkness.  This is a staggeringly funny film,
but an underlying intelligence runs through it, thanks to the outstanding
screenplay.  It's an undeniably dark and twisted ride... yet it also
contains the highest joke-to-scene ratio of any movie since "Clerks."  The
movie's split-personality is a big part of its charm.
        The film is narrated by Dedee, and she constantly reminds us that
we shouldn't like her.  She knows she's a bitch and couldn't care less.
"I don't have a heart of gold, and I don't grow one by the end of the movie,
okay?" she warns in the opening voice-over, and it's true.  But amazingly,
Dedee never feels like a caricature or stereotype.  Ricci plays the role
with all her heart, giving us a memorable character that manages to grow
and change over the course of the movie despite her best efforts not to.
Dedee will never be Mother Teresa, and that's fine, but neither is she a
one-note heroine/villain.  The life Ricci brings to the role has to be
seen to be believed.  There's already talk of an Oscar nomination for her,
and I couldn't agree more.
        Ricci is obviously getting the most attention of the film's cast,
but she's not the only one doing admirable work.  Just try not to smile at
the amiable Carl (Lyle Lovett), a shy policeman who only has eyes for
Lucia... who in turn only has eyes for Bill... who's still in love with
Matt... who ran off with Dedee... who feels alone.  Moments like these are
exactly why the film works so well: love is not always a wonderful thing.
It frequently hurts, disappoints, offends, and frustrates.  Carl is easy to
love; Lovett's portrayl conveys the sense of longing we've all felt,
wanting someone who doesn't know we exist.  "Real" moments like this are
what make the movie soar.
        This is admittedly not a film that has much use for political
correctness; it will offend as many as it thrills (indeed, it already has).
But if you're not bothered by a movie that challenges you, get to a theater
immediately.  This is by far the best film I've seen this year.
This review was originally written: July 6, 1998
Copyright (c) 1998 by Joe Barlow.  This review may be freely distributed as
long as ABSOLUTELY NO CHANGES are made and this disclaimer remains attached.
It may not reproduced for profit without the written consent of the author.
If you have comments or questions, please send them to: jbarlow at earthling
dot net (substituting the appropriate symbols, to discourage spam).

Author
Michael Redman
Life is weird. The longer I'm around the more I think that statement is a
given. Even if you lead what could pass as a "normal" existence, the little
oddnesses seep in and it's inevitable that occasionally the ground disappears
completely. If you live on the edge, at times it's like being in the Twilight Zone.
On the outside Bill (Martin Donovan) is your typical high school teacher in a
small peaceful Indiana town. When he catches a student writing graffiti about
him on a restroom wall, he corrects the grammar. His eccentricity is that he
is gay. Tom, his lover died a year before, leaving him with a batch of money
and a nice house.
Bill's personal Rod Serling episode begins when his 16 year-old half-sister
DeeDee (Christina Ricci) runs away from her Louisiana home and comes to visit.
Lil sis is not a nice girl. As she explains in her introductory voice-over, "I
don't have a heart of gold and I don't grow one later."
DeeDee's first order of business is to seduce Bill's current live-in Matt
(Ivan Sergei) convincing him that not to have sex with her would be an act of
discrimination. Matt's about as bright as the average box of rocks and falls
for the line. Afterwards he announces that he's bi-sexual. Tom's sister Lucia
(Lisa Kudrow) -- pronounced "Losha" -- insists that he's mistaken, "I went to
a Bar Mitzvah once. That doesn't make me Jewish."
DeeDee says in another voice-over "things get complicated very quick," and
she's right on target. In short order she announces that she's pregnant and
Matt's the father. They steal $10,000 and Tom's ashes from her brother and
take off for LA. Matt's jilted ex-lover Jason shows up and publicly falsely
accuses Bill of molesting him when he was a student. There's a trip to Canada
with Bill trying to find Matt and Lucia chasing him and Sheriff Carl Tippett
(Lyle Lovett) chasing her. There's a killing and police involvement. Every few
minutes something new and unexpected happens.
The story is truly complicated but miraculously easy to follow.
Writer/director Don Roos has crafted a fine film with a fascinating plot and
believable albeit offbeat scenes but the strength is the characters. He has
atoned for his screenplay of the atrocious remake of "Diabolique".
Many of the characters are unlikable in the traditional sense, but the
audience learns to appreciate them dispite, or perhaps because of, their
failings. Even DeeDee, the little girl old beyond her years who uses sex and
her ample endowments as weapons, grows on you.
All of the actors fill their roles well. Ricci is exceptional. With this,
"Fear And Loathing In Las Vegas" and "Icestorm" under her belt, she has left
her "Addams Family" and "Casper" roles far behind. Surprisingly another
standout is "Friend's" Kudrow. Her sexually-repressed bitter
old-woman-before-her-time is the opposite of her television role and she has
the best lines in the film.
The film is decidedly anti-politically correct. DeeDee's observations on the
gay lifestyle are none too kind. She refers to her brother's former partner as
"Bill The Dead Guy". When her white trash former boyfriend berates her for
hanging out with "homersexuals" and turning away from the path of God, she
asks "So when I was giving you a [slang term for sexual contact illegal in
some states] in the backseat, that was the stairway to heaven?"
Sheriff Carl (who has a thing for Lucia)'s observations on sex are especially
interesting. He says that sex isn't for procreation or recreation, but rather
for concentration. When two people are together, they pay attention to only
each other. At one point he asks Lucia "What's the point of sleeping with you
if it doesn't get your attention?"
The biggest risk in the film is the voice-over. If it had failed, it would
have pulled the entire movie down with it. DeeDee's lines are smartly written
and delivered as she talks to the audience about the film. When a gun is
shown, she tells us to pay attention to it, "Duh. It's foreshadowing."
DeeDee warns that "sex always ends in kids or disease or, like, you know,
relationships. Maybe some of those are not always bad things.
(Michael Redman has written this column for, like, you know, about 23 years
and he thinks that the opposite of sex might be, like, you know, boredom.)
[This appeared in the 7/16/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Joy Wyse
It is usually difficult for child stars to prove that they can play
grown-up roles.  There is no doubt that Christina Ricci has made the
transition.  She is a wonderful slut!
How times have changed.  There was a day when young girls prepared for a
date by pinching their cheeks to give them a touch of blush.  Christina
pinches her nipples!
Without a doubt, Christina doesn't care for anyone but herself, but she
makes every male think that he is special to her allowing her to "use"
them in various ways.  
When her stepfather dies, the sixteen year-old Christina leaves home to
live with her half-brother [Martin Donovan] whose gay lover has recently
died, leaving him financially independent.  Christina manages to seduce
his new lover, and then convinces him that he is the father of her
expected child.   
Lisa Kudrow, as the sister of the dead lover, does not like Christina,
and makes no attempt to hide her feelings.  In a very unglamorous role,
she turns in an excellent portrayal of a woman with   deep feelings, who
needs to be loved.  Luckily for her, Lyle Lovett comes along.  But as a
local sheriff, he's there for other reasons as well.
This is a memorable movie.  It does a good job of portraying the world of
a gay man in today's society.  It'll make you laugh as well as cry.   
This is definitely not a movie for everyone, but if you like it...you'll
love it.  I give it a firm B.
I'd watch it again on TV, but some of the scenes will probably be cut out.

Author
Matt Williams
At first glance, The Opposite of Sex may seem to be merely a standard
dysfunctional-family comedy.  However, with a handful of excellent
performances and a very witty screenplay make this one rise above the
crowd.
DeDee Truitt (Christina Ricci) is the film's narrator, and isn't ashamed
of the fact that she's not a very nice person.  At the age of sixteen,
after her stepfather's death, she runs away from home to move in with
her half-brother Bill (Martin Donovan).  She's uninvited, but DeDee
always gets what she wants...one way or another.
Bill is a gay high school teacher, rich from the inheritance of a former
lover.  His current boyfriend is Matt Mateo (Ivan Sergei), a brainless
dolt whom DeDee immediately tries to seduce.  Within days, Bill's entire
life is reduced to shambles.
Among the people who get caught in DeDee's wake are Lucia (Lisa Kudrow),
the bitter sister of Bill's dead former lover, and Carl (Lyle Lovett),
the kindly local sheriff who always seems to be in the right place at
the right time.
But the black twisted heart of the story is DeDee.  Her sharp and witty
narration is worth the price of admission alone.  She knows she's in a
movie and tweaks filmmaking conventions in a way other
"self-referential" films (such as Scream) never dared.  Her choice
comments are biting and cruel, but hilarious.
Christina Ricci has finally found a role she can sink her teeth into.
She has finally risen out of her mediocre phase in films such as Casper
or That Darn Cat, and here shows the talent that was evident in the
Addams Family films.
She's backed up by a talented supporting cast.  Surprisingly, the
strongest secondary character her is the against-type Lisa Kudrow. Only
Martin Donovan falters a bit, but that is because his gay character is
the straight man in the film.
Screenwriter Don Roos makes his directorial debut with this film, which
also happens to feature his best script.  He takes a few chances with
his direction, and, for the most part, they are successful.
The Opposite of Sex is not a fall-down funny comedy, but it's full of
moments which will bring a wicked little smile to your face.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases
