Title
Review for Manhattan Murder Mystery (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Sridhar Prasad
    One of the craziest movies ever filmed, Woody Allen's MANHATTAN 
MURDER MYSTERY is the director's response to the scandals that plagued 
him at the time of its release.  The film, which was shot while Allen 
was in his personal problems, is ironically enough one of the loosest, 
freshest, and looniest films Allen has ever made.  It is not an artistic 
triumph, or a groundbreaking effort by an accomplished director.  It 
isn't even a heavily decorated film, worthy of several honors.  It is, 
however, a hilarious comedy that works 90% of the time, and has enough 
to get the viewer through the other 10%.
Larry and Carol Lipton (Allen and Keaton) are a couple living in 
Manhattan, who one night happen to have a drink with the neighbors next 
door, Paul and Lillian House (Adler and Lynn Cohen).  The next day, the 
Liptons come back from the opera to see that Lillian House has had a 
heart attack, and died.  They are in slight grief, until Carol starts 
noticing that Paul is too "perky" for a widower.  She and family friend 
Ted (Alda), who happens to be a recent divorcee that is also in love 
with Carol, start investigating the life of Paul House, with Larry 
growing increasingly scared of his wife.  Soon after, Carol draws writer 
Marcia Fox (Huston), a client of book editor Larry into the mix as well. 
 The whole thing ends in a preposterous ending, with crazy plot twist 
after plot twist.
The film is quite erratic.  It works best when it sticks to the 
basic story of these people, who are absolutely neurotic, and their 
fascination with this elderly man, who seems to be very, very nice.  
When it doesn't work is when Allen feels the need to be serious and 
explore human relationships.  Sure, the flirting between Ted, Carol, 
Larry, and Marcia is funny, but does it have to go to the point where 
couples have to break up?  Whatever happened to comedy?  One wishes that 
Allen wasn't so serious, in that he wouldn't have to make something so 
refreshingly light seem so serious when Carol threatens to leave Larry 
for good.  Allen could have stopped at the painfully funny scenes of the 
couple yelling at each other over their flirtations.
The comedic sequences, which comprises the vast majority of the 
film, are downright hysterical.  There are so many funny scenes in this 
movie I can't even count them all.  It's written beautifully, with Allen 
providing enough lines in all the conversations that are just too much.  
This is a very talky film, but so much of it is hilarious that I don't 
really care.  Everything unfolds quite nicely until the end, when 
Allen's relationships begin to falter.  Until that, this is a funny, 
light, sometimes morbid piece that truly does work.  What pushes it 
along are the performances, all of which are exquisite.  Keaton is 
marvelous, and a tad more neurotic than the bumbling Allen, who plays 
the role he has defined again.  Alda is truly hysterical, and Huston 
shows up with just enough exotic panache to add even more insanity to 
this piece.  These are four incredibly screwed up people, people that 
are just too much. 
In the end, the whole thing is a little too much.  It's got a little 
too much preposterous insanity, especially with the ridiculously staged 
ending, which is nevertheless damned funny, as is the film.  Is it 
erratic and uneven?  Yeah, probably.  But it's still got so many comedic 
touches that I couldn't help but smile.  It's a light farcical spoof on 
sleuth movies, and it works so much that the end can be forgiven, as can 
Allen's serious touches.  Ignore that stuff, and you have a very 
entertaining, very amusing film for all ages, something Woody Allen 
hadn't produced in a while.  For all its eccentricities, MANHATTAN 
MURDER MYSTERY gave me a smile from ear to ear.

Author
David Dalgleish
"We could be living next door to a murderer."
The first few minutes of MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY are as familiar and 
pleasing as the opening notes of a favourite song.  The 
black-and-white opening credits.  New York.  Jazz.  Upper-class 
neurotic intellectuals.  One-liners.  Allusions to classic movies.  We 
have entered Woody Allen territory.
Allen, because he knows this material so well, establishes the 
situation, the tone, the characters of MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY, in a 
few brief, economical scenes, then moves us swiftly into the plot: 
Larry and Carol (Allen, Diane Keaton) meet an elderly couple who live 
on the same floor of their apartment building, and then the wife dies 
of a heart attack the next day.  Or does she?  Carol thinks the 
husband (Jerry Adler) doesn't look sufficiently upset by his wife's 
death; she snoops, and is soon fabricating a complicated theory 
explaining how and why the husband may have killed his wife. 
Larry doesn't buy it.  He sees the neighbour as a harmless fellow, 
who gets his kicks from showing off his stamp collection; he's not the 
murdering kind, and Larry thinks Carol has seen DOUBLE INDEMNITY one 
time too many.  Besides, while she thinks the possibility of living 
next door to a murderer is the most exciting thing that's ever 
happened to them, and a welcome break from their "dull routine," Larry 
is quite happy with his routine, and if the neighbour is a killer, he 
doesn't want to know about it, much less investigate.  So Carol, 
enduring Larry's barrage of fretful complaints, enlists their mutual 
friend Ted (Alan Alda) to join the investigation, and later Marcia 
(Anjelica Huston) also becomes involved (a plan she suggests involving 
tape recorders and a phone call leads to the film's biggest laugh).
That this is funny is no surprise.  Allen can write great dialogue in 
his sleep.  Larry, trapped in an elevator: "Don't tell me to 
relax--I'm a world-renowned claustrophobic."  Larry, talking to Carol 
about Ted: "Take away his elevator shoes, his fake suntan, and his 
capped teeth, and what do you have?"  Carol: "You."  The chemistry 
between Allen, Keaton, and Alda is terrific; Keaton and Alda have 
worked with Allen before, and this is apparent in the effortless way 
they inhabit their roles.  They are so (seemingly) artless that many 
scenes seem half-improvised.  Allen has great fun putting his habitual 
persona in the thick of a murder mystery: his paranoia and anxiety are 
played up to good effect, as he offers a running commentary of fear 
and doubt throughout each escapade.
What is surprising is how effective the mystery is.   By the midway 
point, I was hooked; the plot had gone places I didn't think it would 
go, and I was eager to know how it would all turn out.  The use of 
handheld camera and long takes are vital: when Carol sneaks into the 
neighbour's apartment, this visual style gives the film an edgy, 
pseudo-documentary feel that makes the scene surprisingly tense.
The suspense and humour are neatly woven together.  Allen seamlessly 
merges these two disparate moods by having the characters themselves 
treat the possible murder as little more than a joke: they see it as a 
welcome source of excitement, and gather in trendy, upscale 
restaurants to discuss what might have happened, lifting ideas from 
movies and books.  It is a game, a fiction.  Murder is not real to 
these comfortable Manhattanites, even if it should happen next door.  
This allows Allen to have a lot of fun with some dark subject matter, 
without being too frivolous.
This blend of wit and morbidity is the most original element here, 
and Allen deftly, convincingly handles the transition from innocuous 
amateur sleuthing to something more sinister.  Otherwise, he doesn't 
really do anything new--there are no great revelations, there is no 
pushing of the boundaries.  He simply does what he usually does: sees 
with a keen eye the way human beings behave, and turns his 
observations into something funny, fast-paced, engrossing.  It may be 
routine for Woody Allen, but it's not dull.

Author
Rob Slater
     I just got back from a special screening of Woody Allen's new
movie MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY sponsored by the Jewish Federation.  I
apologize for the unpolished nature of my review, it is late and I am
tired, but it is a very hectic week at work this week and I felt that
if I did not get something out ASAP I would let it slide.
     MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY stars Woody Allan, Alan Alda, Diane
Keaton, and Angelica Huston and is a movie about a couple who lives in
an apartment in midtown Manhattan and suspects that their neighbor
murdered his wife.
     In my opinion, this was one of Woody's best films.  Where he got
the time to make such a witty movie with all that was taking place in
his life in the past year is a real Manhattan Mystery, but nonetheless,
this is one of his most enjoyable films.
     For once, the character that Woody played is the best one in the
film.  His one-liners had me and the rest of the audience laughing
throughout the entire film.  In fact when I see my parents this
weekend, I am going to have to take them because I missed many of the
jokes.
     That is not to say that this film is a mindless comedy.  As usual,
Woody has done a wonderful job developing his characters.  The plot
also flows quite well.
     This film reminds me of some of his earlier works when, IMHO, his
movies were a lot more fun.  To be sure, Woody's characters have some
minor psychological problems (needless to say all of the major
characters visit a shrink), but unlike some of Woody's recent movies,
he does not belabor the point.  While it certainly helps to be a New
York Jew to enjoy this movie, it is not a prerequisite.
     MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY opens this Friday at a theater near you.
I strongly encourage you to see it.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This film marked a comeback of sorts for Woody Allen 
(who's planning a sequel to this movie with Soon-Yi, entitled 
INDIANA INCEST INCIDENT), a solid comedy piece with a dash 
of suspense. The murder mystery begins one night as Woody 
and his wife (Diane Keaton) return from dinner to find their nice 
old neighbor's wife is dead. What's strange is the night before, 
Woody and Diane had dinner over at their place and she seemed 
fine then.
        That's all it takes for Diane to contemplate conspiracy. 
And late that night, when she hears footsteps in the hall of their 
apartment complex, from a person who gets on the elevator. Oooh, 
he must have just killed someone. Woody, meanwhile, is his usual 
uptight, neurotic self, spouting his trademark one-liners. Since 
Woody won't help her out, Diane starts investigating the murder 
with their yuppie friend Alan Alda (just back from a war in Korea). 
This makes Woody kind of mad (you'd be mad too if your name was 
"Woody"), but instead of punching out Alda (as well someone 
should), Woody decides to start investigating the murder with his 
wife for fun.
        Sure, it's not much on paper (especially this paper), but 
trust me, MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY is a good movie. 
Yeah, I know that's what I said about PORKY'S VI and 
OVERWEIGHT TEENAGE SLUMBER PARTY , but this time I'm 
right.
And two brief, bonus reviews of Allen films...
(too short to post separately)
Annie Hall (1977) ****
        This is pretty much the best Woody Allen movie you'll ever 
see. This is the one where he plays the neurotic Jew who has 
troubles with women... yeah, this and about thirty other movies of 
his, but he's just as entertaining as ever here, as a stand-up comic 
who reflects on his life and relationship problems. It's mostly an 
episodic excuse for Woody's trademark one-liners, and I'll be 
damned if the whole movie isn't hilarious.
        Some of the more memorable sequences include Woody 
explaining the source of his nervousness (growing up in a house 
built under the Coney Island roller coaster), Woody being hounded 
by a couple Bronx fans and Woody's marathon viewings of Holocast 
documentaries. Along the way, he meets first Diane Keaton and 
then Shelley Duvall. I personally think the thought of Woody Allen 
and Olive Oyl having sex is inherrently funny, even if Woody's post-
coital comment "I think I'm starting to get the feeling back in my 
jaw" is more than disgusting.
Zelig (1983) ***
        Yes, I admit I only watched this movie so I'd have a "Z" 
review to close out the book with, but upon watching ZELIG, I found 
it was a clever, funny movie. It comes to us from Woody Allen, who 
plays Leonard Zelig, an enigmatic man of the 1920's who was a 
human chameleon, changing races and personalities to match the 
people he was around. Mia Farrow (believe you Mia) is the 
psychiatrist convinced she can cure him. The two start out with a 
professional relationship and move on to a physical one, until he 
runs off with her adopted Korean daughter (one more Soon-Yi joke 
won't kill you).
        ZELIG is told as a black-and-white documentary, with 
Allen mixing old newsreel footage with fake interviews. It's more a 
novelty movie than anything, but Allen still manages to work in a 
few of his trademark one-liners. For instance, during an early 
session with Farrow, he assumes the persona of a doctor, saying, 
"I have to leave now. I teach a course in advanced masturbation at 
the community college and if I don't get there on time, they start 
without me." That's Woody for you.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Jon A Webb
     This is a solid Woody Allen film, not unlike some of his earlier
comedies (ANNIE HALL and PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM come to mind, though this
is more realistic).  Woody and Diane Keaton are a bored middle-aged
couple, drifting towards divorce, when Keaton gets interested in
the--to her--strange actions of a neighbor.  She decides that a murder
has occurred, and that she will solve it.  Woody, of course,
disbelieves everything and worries incessantly.
     Angelica Huston and Alan Alda also play significant roles, and do
it well.  Given Allen's recent problems, it's apparent that his friends
rallied to help him make this film, which must have been a relief from
the trial and the accusations in the press.
     You can really see Allen reaching to reconnect with his
traditional audience her.  He does his nervous variations on
Chaplin-esque moves, like constantly rearranging his cards while
playing poker.  The scene in the elevator is a classic.
     The movie includes the jerky hand-held camera style he explored in
HUSBANDS AND WIVES but it is not so annoying here.  There's only one
scene where the effect is really noticeable, and even there it is not
so bad as to make one dizzy, as in his last film.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Woody Allen, Diane Keaton, Alan Alda, Anjelica Houston
     OK, I like New York.  Unless you're from the city, or have ever lived
in it, you probably hate it.  But, as the opening song of Manhattan Murder
Mystery states, Woody Allen happens to like New York.  Because he likes New
York so much, almost every movie that has him in it, including, although it
isn't quite revealed until the end, Antz completely takes place in the Big
Apple.  A couple, Manhattan and Manhattan Murder Mystery, have even taken
their titles from it.
     Woody Allen fans shoot me here, but I've never seen Manhattan.  Going
from Manhattan Murder Mystery, though, you might wonder if he's playing to
the stereotypes.  Playing to the stereotypes is my only complain in this
bizarre mystery about a next-door neighbor's plans to murder his wife.  It
takes the easy punches at New Yorkers.  But, hey, with a place that has as
many people in need of electroshock as New York does, can we blame him?
     Manhattan Murder Mystery follows a couple (Woody Allen and Diane
Keaton, seen before in Annie Hall) whose kid has left for college and are
now living their lives out on the Upper West Side.  They go to Rangers games
and the theatre and the opera.  They hang out with their divorced friends,
plan their dreams of resturaunts, and go to work.  Oh, yeah, and this couple
suspects their next door neighbor of murdering his wife.
     Although Allen is trepidatious about confronting a murder at first, the
bland urban lives of Allen, his wife, his wife's friend (Alda), and the
writer Allen edits (Houston), get caught up in the Manhattan murder mystery
offered before them.  It is a chance for a bunch of paranoid urbanites to
have fun: a rare oppertunity.
     Going to Jersey for late-night discussions on how to nab the killer,
sneaking into apartments, faking phone conversations.  All of this is in the
mix for the four bland individuals given a chance to be psychotic little
children for a change.  It is all a game to these four.  There really isn't
a concern about morals, only about having fun.
     Also thrown into the mix is an interesting arangement.  Woody Allen
suspects that Diane Keaton is in love with Alan Alda.  She, in turn,
suspects that good old posterchild for neurotics Woody is in love with
Angelica Houston.  And, of course, they're trying to set up Houston and Alda
at the same time.
     Besides Woody Allen's unique touch, Manhattan Murder Mystery is a
fairly normal and mainstream film.  What bothered most critics, but will
never bother me, is Woody Allen's diatribe of neurosis.  As always, the
compound insanity that he delivers, the one liners that insult himself and
New York, and other things that convince you that you may not be the
craziest person in the world make the film entertaining.
     As far as acting goes, its as solid as you'd expect from such a
powerful cast.  When it comes to directing, it's what you'd expect from
Woody Allen: conservative.  He takes his camera and will shoot an entire
scene with only one shot.
     The script is suprisingly postmodern: it contains wonderful bits of
Woody Allen self-reference.  For instance, the title Manhattan Murder
Mystery alludes to the film Manhattan, and you have the wonderfully
brilliant scene in which Diane Keaton decrys wearing a tie with a skirt: the
very look that became chic in 1977 with her role in Annie Hall.
     Do not expect interesting plot twists.  You will not get them.  Do not
expect high art, you won't get it either.  Instead, expect a film that will
delight and entertain anyone who hates, or happens to love, New York.  What
a hoot!

Author
James Berardinelli
     What happens when a bored wife thinks her kindly old neighbor
commits a murder?  Woody Allen attempts to answer the question in his
latest cinematic endeavor, MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY.
     Carol Lipton (Diane Keaton) and her husband Larry (Woody Allen)
are caught in a routine, commonplace marriage - until Carol turns into
Nancy Drew following the death of a neighbor.  It all seems like a
open-and- shut case of a heart attack, and the police aren't thinking
foul play, but Carol becomes suspicious when the widower of the dead
woman (Jerry Adler) doesn't mourn "enough" ("What should he do", asks
Larry, "walk down the street sobbing?").  With the help of Ted (Alan
Alda), a close friend who encourages her sleuthing, she begins to
assemble "clues" to fit her pet theory of a murder.  But the evidence
is weak, and Larry becomes concerned that his wife is obsessed with a
macabre fantasy.  He tries to be the voice of reason, but when no one
listens to him, he ends up playing along.
     Part of the fun of MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY is guessing whether or
not Lillian House was murdered, as Carol believes, or simply died of a
heart attack.  In a sense, that's the mystery of the film, and Woody
Allen brings across the solution with his characteristic mix of madcap
comedy and on-target realism.
     In 1979, director Allen made MANHATTAN, a movie that many critics
and fans consider to be his greatest effort.  Between then and now,
Diane Keaton has been absent from Allen's films, and her return in
MURDER MYSTERY is a welcome change from helium-voiced Mia Farrow.  Ms.
Keaton is a breezy, energetic personality, and it's hard to imagine
anyone else doing nearly as much with the character of Carol (even
though this part was originally conceived with Farrow in mind, and
wasn't re-written following the cast change).  One need only look at
the Allen/Keaton and Allen/Farrow collaborations to determine which
pairing worked better, and MURDER MYSTERY merely reinforces this
conclusion.
     Some claim that to have seen one Woody Allen picture is to have
seen them all.  To say that not only vastly oversimplifies things, but
does a great injustice to the individuality of each of Allen's
projects.  Sure, there are a number of themes that he returns to like a
comfortable chair, and the character he plays rarely varies from a
basic neurotic type (no one would accuse Allen of having great range as
an actor), but each of his films - even those that fail (take SHADOWS
AND FOG, for instance) - offers something fresh and unique.
     HUSBANDS AND WIVES, Allen's previous picture, is a drama with
humorous elements.  MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY is closer to a
straightforward comedy, providing more laughs than anything Allen has
done in a long while (he claims to have "indulged" himself with this
movie).  Combined with numerous one-liners, almost all of which work,
are several instances of well-timed and well-executed physical humor.
Allen pushes all the buttons from wit to slapstick, and rarely comes up
empty.
     If there's a serious side to MURDER MYSTERY, it's only to be
expected.  After all, the director has a reputation to maintain, and
the movie's principal subject - death - isn't usually a laugh-a-minute
riot.  Allen also takes a look at love, as the twenty-year marriage of
Carol and Larry is put under the microscope.
     Film buffs will find the usual number of references to look for,
although these are perhaps more explicit than in many Allen movies, and
include DOUBLE INDEMNITY, REAR WINDOW, and THE LADY FROM SHANGHI.
There certainly may be others, as Allen has a habit of putting more
into his films than anyone can hope to get in one sitting.
     A word has to be said about the annoying cinematography of Carlo
Di Palma, who returns after causing audiences motion-sickness with his
wobbly, hand-held camerawork in HUSBANDS AND WIVES.  While the
intention is obviously to draw the viewer into the film, it actually
has the opposite effect; the camera cannot compensate the way the human
eye can.  Admittedly, this method seems less distracting here than in
the previous film, although this could be a case of greater exposure
breeding immunity.
     Woody Allen is rarely a big commercial draw, and whether his
off-screen antics will boost his box-office take remains to be seen,
but MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY may be his most accessible film since
HANNAH AND HER SISTERS.  This movie is still pure Allen, but the humor
is broad-based, and the "quirkiness" often associated with the director
is kept to a minimum.  Frankly, it's been years since I've enjoyed
Woody Allen this much.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Diane Keaton, Woody Allen, Alan Alda, Anjelica Huston.
Screenplay:  Woody Allen and Marshall Brickman.
Director:  Woody Allen.
     Reviewing a Woody Allen film is a lot like reviewing a sushi
restaurant.  You have to keep in mind that a significant portion of
your audience is going to tune out because sushi just isn't their
taste.  Whether it's good sushi or bad sushi becomes irrelevant; the
fact that it's sushi is all that matters.
     At the risk of hammering this particular metaphor into the ground,
MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY is good sushi.  Not great, but good.  While it
lacks the emotional scope that made HANNAH AND HER SISTERS and
MANHATTAN such great films, MANATTAN MURDER MYSTERY is by any standard
a thoroughly enjoyable entertainment.  It's easily Allen's funniest
film since HANNAH, and perhaps since ANNIE HALL.
     Larry (Woody Allen) and his wife Carol (Diane Keaton) are a
married couple who, after twenty plus years, have settled into a rather
mundane routine.  She reluctantly goes to hockey games with him, he in
turn grudgingly joins her at the opera.  It's always business as usual
with little spark, until an elderly neighbor in their apartment
building is found dead of an apparent heart attack.  Carol becomes
suspicious when the woman's husband (Jerry Adler) acts a bit too
nonchalant, and begins to uncover clues which she believes point to
foul play.  Larry is convince Carol is imagining things, causing her to
turn to a recently divorced friend, Ted (Alan Alda), for comfort.
Larry, meanwhile, is flattered by the attentions of a writer (Anjelica
Huston), and frustrated by Carol's insistence that she crack the case.
     MURDER MYSTERY sets up a parallel between Carol's investigation
and the search for some remaining zing in her marriage.  Larry is a man
who wants little more than a good night's sleep; Carol wants something
more before it's too late.  When Ted, who has had a longtime crush on
Carol, shares her enthusiasm for the chase, she begins to think about
what could be.  These moments, when MURDER MYSTERY focuses on
relationships, seem to be the weak points.  This is a surprise given
Allen's talent for examining relationships, but his heart here seems
more squarely in the comedy.
     Those who remember the classic physical comedy of SLEEPER and
EVERYTHING YOU ALWAYS WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT SEX will be thrilled by
Allen's return to his roots.  Certainly, the moments are more sublime
than those early films, but it's the same old Woody with the flare for
choreographed ineptitude.  He has some great moments bumbling through
the suspected neighbor's apartment, and a priceless sequence when he
loses complete control of a cassette tape.  Nearly as deft is Diane
Keaton, reteamed with Allen for the first time in nearly fifteen
years.  Keaton, for now infamous reasons, replaced Mia Farrow in the
role, and it's hard to visualize Farrow as Carol.  Over the years
Farrow had become more and more like some parody of a female Woody
Allen, and her manner of perpetually whining would have been completely
inappropriate for the confident and focused Carol.  Keaton is an
engaging and intelligent screen presence, too often relegated in recent
years to window dressing roles like Steve Martin's wife in the recent
remake of FATHER OF THE BRIDE.  It's a pleasure to see her in a
well-written role, and investing it with real energy.
     Technical credits, typical for an Allen film, are first rate.  The
cinematography by Carol DiPalma is handsome as usual; the jittery
verite camera style, which was used to stomach-churning excess in
HUSBANDS AND WIVES, is thankfully toned-down.  And as usual, there is
the score of jazz classics, most notable "Sing Sing Sing" used to
highlight the chase scenes.
     The scenes which highlight Allen and Keaton together crackle with
the comic intensity that characterized their 70's pairing; in fact,
those scenes are so funny and so lively that the moments when they're
not on screen together suffer by comparison.  There are a few dead
spots in MURDER MYSTERY, mostly those featuring an excessively deadpan
Alda, but they are far outnumbered by the laughs.  MANHATTAN MURDER
MYSTERY is diverting, intelligent comedy that kept a smile on my face
for nearly two hours.
