Title
Review for Into the West (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Miramax is marketing INTO THE WEST as a "family film," and while
it's admirable to do so, I'm not sure it's the best idea.  On the one
hand, the deliberate pace appeared to lose the children in the audience
when I saw the film.  On the other, adults without children tend to
stay away from "family films," and that would be a shame.  INTO THE
WEST is a charming, wise and gentle film that shows enough confidence
to build slowly to a satisfying climax.
     INTO THE WEST is the story of two Irish youngsters,
twelve-year-old Tito Reilley (Ruaidhri Conroy) and his eight-year-old
brother Ossie (Ciaran Fitzgerald).  Raised among the nomadic
Travellers, the boys are brought to Dublin by their widowed Papa
(Gabriel Byrne), a hard drinker dealing with his wife's death by
removing himself from his past.  On the day they arrive in Dublin,
there is another new arrival:  a fantastic white stallion called Tir na
nOg (Gaelic for "land of eternal youth") who attaches himself to
Ossie.  When authorities discover the horse in the Reilley's flat, they
remove it and sell it off to a nasty horse breeder (John Kavanagh) who
turns Tir na nOg into a champion show jumper.  The two boys, however,
have other ideas, and decide to free the horse, becoming fugitives in
the process.
     I spent the first half hour or so of INTO THE WEST a bit edgy and
uninvolved, but it slowly began to occur to me that there might be an
intentional reason.  The scenes set in Dublin are dark and
claustrophobic, but as the action spreads into the Irish countryside
the film takes on a lyrical majesty.  INTO THE WEST juxtaposes the
mundane modernism represented by the city with the mythical wonder of
the Old Ireland, shown as both the boys and Papa travel into the
untamed West.  It's a theme similar to the one director Mike Newell
explored in his last film, 1992's ENCHANTED APRIL:  the lifting of
spirit caused by removing oneself from the city.  While INTO THE WEST
is not quite as successful overall, there is still a quiet grace to the
visual narrative, thanks to cinematographer Tom Sigel's beautiful
photography of hills and coastlines.
     The performances are not quite as engaging as the look of the
film.  Gabriel Byrne, as the dour and laconic Papa, doesn't carry off
his emotional scenes particularly well.  David Kelley is crusty but
basically cliche as the boys Old World grandfather, and Ellen Barkin,
Byrne's real-life wife, has a bland role as a Traveller who helps Papa
search for the boys.  Fortunately, the two young newcomers who carry
the film are better.  Ruaidhri Conroy is sharp and good-natured as the
protective older brother, if at times a bit affected.  Ciaran
Fitzgerald, however, is a scene-stealing charmer with great comic
sensibility.  The two are just right as brothers, and their scenes
together are light and well-directed.
     If Jim Sheridan's script is a bit thin, it's because the story is
secondary to the feel of the film.  The villainous horse breeder and
his police-officer henchman are perfunctory characters; the story might
have been done just as well without them.  I also thought the portrayal
of the Travellers was underdeveloped, but I'll admit that's because
I've studied Celtic folklore and wanted to see more.  Still, I never
really minded the lack of depth because the mystical tone seemed right
on.
     I noted earlier that INTO THE WEST was less successful as afilm
for children, and that assessment comes simply from listening.  If
you've ever seen a movie with an audience comprised largely of
children, you know that you get a minute-by-minute account of what they
think about it.  One girl said to her mother, "I don't know what he's
saying;" it seems the Irish accents were a problem.  An older boy said
simply, "Nothing's happening."  While hardly a scientific test, these
and other comment seemed to suggest that young ones without long
attention spans might be less than enthralled.
     INTO THE WEST may be, as my young audience-mate noted, a film
where "nothing's happening."  It's not a rollicking adventure, or a
HOME ALONE-style comedy.  However, for anyone with a taste for rich
atmosphere spiced with a touch of magic might be pleasantly surprised.

Author
Max Hoffmann
(Not in release yet, I saw the world premiere at Sundance Film  Festival
in Utah, and had the privilege of meeting Gabriel Byrne in person at the
reception.  He looks ten years younger in person.)
     A definite "must see" if you have kids, this film is everything
that the annoying Mark Lester vehicles of the early 70's were not.  From
an adult perspective, the film is flawed by too many irons in the fire
that go cool by the time it climaxes.  Ellen Barkin has a throw-away
role as the female, non-love interest, though she does a lot with the
scant material thrown her way.  Nothing is done with the evident
chemistry between her and real-life husband Byrne.
SYNOPSIS: Byrne plays a pathetic, yet appealing alcoholic father with
two young sons.  Grieved over his wife's death, he rejected his gypsy
ways (part of the "travellers" ... Ireland's itinerant tinkerers) to
settle down in the squalor of Dublin's slums.  Byrne's father appears
with a mysterious white stallion, whom the boys immediately adopt.
Heart tugging humor over the boys' attempts to keep the horse "hidden"
in their one bedroom apartment.  Long arm of the law steps in to dispose
of the horse.   Discovering the horse's new owner/home (they see it in
jumping competition on TV) the young lads decide to kidnap/rescue the
horse and escape "into the west," into a mythical kingdom their
grandfather has told them about.
From there, the film moves in unexpected directions, as the horse takes
on mythic, spiritual qualities, becoming a catalyst to help Byrne
reclaim his lost heritage, and aiding the boys in reconciling 
themselves with their mother's death.
STRENGTHS: Newell has drawn superb performances from the two boys, who
take up about 80% of the film's screen time.  Their acting is so sincere
and un-self-conscious that you suspect "invisible" cameras were employed.
Ireland has a lot to teach Hollywood when it comes to child actors!  As
an adult you may be able to get more "into the film" by drawing
parallels to a reclaimed "child within."  It is overall a taught, well
defined script, balanced by a beautiful musical score with lots of
Celtic harp, and *magnificent* photography.  The film will help promote
some of the richness of Celtic culture to a broad, international
audience.  The film also demonstrates the decent "family entertainment"
isn't dead on the American film scene.  It is a breath of fresh air
compared to insubstantial tripe like "Home Alone 2"
KNOCKS: some of the violence, though brief, may be too intense for
younger children.  (6 and under) It appears as if the writer/director
got so entranced with the kids' escape from an unloving adult world,
that they simply forgot some untied knots involving the manic villain, and
Byrne as the father attempting to redeem himself.  You may have to
suppress a few laughs in the films climax in which some clumsy visuals
are employed to help us "see" what the children see.
RECOMMENDATION: although the film has sweeping, magnificent
cinematography (you will want your next vacation in Ireland) not much
would be lost by waiting for the video, or viewing it on an airplane,
where it will no doubt soon appear.  If you have children in your
family, it is a "must see" film, and your enjoyment would be augmented
by a child's enthusiastic reaction.  American film critics will probably
not be fair to this film, due to the flaws mentioned above.  I predict a
short run in theatres stateside.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Gabriel Byrne, Ciaran Fitzgerald, Ruaidhri Conroy, 
           David Kelly, Ellen Barkin, Colm Meaney
Director:  Mike Newell
Producers:  Jonathan Cavendish and Tim Palmer
Screenplay:  Jim Sheridan based on a story by Tom Sigel
Music:  various
Released by Miramax Films
     In the run-down projects of Dublin lives Papa Riley (Gabriel
Byrne), a widower, and his two young sons, Ossie (Ciaran Fitzgerald)
and Tito (Ruaidhri Conroy).  Their life is pretty bleak until the
arrival of the boys' grandfather (David Kelly) with a glorious white
stallion by the name of Tir na nOg, a figure out of Irish legends, who
takes an instant liking to Ossie and Tito.  Events conspire, however,
to separate the horse from the children, as he is impounded by corrupt
police officers and sold to a wealthy businessman.  Never fear,
though--Ossie and Tito to the rescue.  They steal back Tir na nOg and,
with father and police in pursuit, head westward.
     INTO THE WEST is probably the first-ever Western to take place in
Ireland.  Actually, it isn't a Western per se, but more of a modern-day
fairy tale.  Certainly, a great deal of what happens is beyond the
realm of reality and requires a willing suspension of disbelief.
Director Mike Newell perhaps put it best when he said, "There are
certain things that happen in the film that cannot happen unless the
world is a very odd, mysterious, and unreal sort of place."
     Gabriel Byrne, in a fine performance as a grief-embittered
widower, plays a member of a gypsy-like group of nomads called the
travelers.  In 1985, with the death of his wife Mary in childbirth, he
rejected the band and headed for the civilized world, where he ended up
eking out an existence and spending far too much time in Dublin's
bars.  While much of INTO THE WEST focuses on the adventures of the
children, Papa Riley's redemption is not ignored.
     In typical fairy tale fashion, there's a clear delineation between
who the audience is supposed to sympathize with and who they aren't.
At the end, the good guys are rewarded and the bad guys get their
comeuppance, so those who don't like happy endings might be galled by
INTO THE WEST's final moments.  Then again,  Newell isn't known for
doing downbeat projects.
     The juxtaposition of reality and fantasy somehow doesn't gel
perfectly.  The blending of the two is not seamless, and this sometimes
makes the story's progression feel forced and unnatural.  Also, for
most of the movie, I was wondering if there was a point to all of
this.  Ultimately, there is--and a very telling one at that--but you
have to wait the entire picture to discover it.
     The two young actors who play Tito and Ossie are excellent with
expressions and actions, but young Ciaran Fitzgerald has trouble
delivering believable dialogue.  Occasionally, his lines seem stilted
and learned, rather than spontaneous.
     There are a couple of highly-memorable scenes in INTO THE WEST,
the best of which involve Tir na nOg in unusual surroundings.  Seeing
the horse prance around the inner corridors and elevator of the
high-rise building where the children live is highly entertaining, but
not nearly as much as watching him in a movie theater while his two
young friends enjoy BACK TO THE FUTURE 3.
     INTO THE WEST has its heart in the right place, even if frequently
defies logic.  The movie is not nearly as endearing as Newell's
previous film, ENCHANTED APRIL, nor is it as poignant as screenwriter
Jim Sheridan's MY LEFT FOOT, but it has its moments, and is definitely
suitable for all but the youngest of children.  Like THE SECRET GARDEN,
it has moments to captivate adults as well, even if it lacks some of
the emotional depth and serene beauty of that film.  This is a nice
family adventure--certainly not a great movie, but a solid one.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
