Title
Review for Singin' in the Rain (1952)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN (1952)
Rated G; running time 103 minutes
Genre: Musical
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0045152
Written by:Betty Comden, Adolph Green
Directed by: Stanley Donen, Gene Kelly
Music by: Nacio Herb Brown, Lennie Hayton
Choreography by: Gene Kelly
Cast: Gene Kelly, Donald O'Connor, Debbie Reynolds, Jean Hagen,
Millard Mitchell, Cyd Charisse, Rita Moreno
DVD standard features (region 1): "Pan And Scan" (non-widescreen);
theatrical trailer; scene access.  Languages & Subtitles: English,
French, Spanish
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamssinginrain.html
On the back cover of the DVD box for SINGIN' IN THE RAIN, movie critic
Roger Ebert is quoted as calling the movie "The greatest Hollywood
musical ever made!".
I can diggit, Rog, but from my seat, it comes in a close second.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The 1920s were a time of Flappers, and "The Charleston" - and silent
movies.  And Don Lockwood (Gene Kelly) and his leading lady, Lina Lamont
(Jean Hagen), were huge silent movie stars.  Don, at first a struggling
musician along with his buddy Cosmo Brown (Donald O'Connor), enjoyed the
benefits of stardom - even when his adoring fans got to be a bit too
much for him, and when Lina foolishly believed the media hype that she
and Don had a lil' sum'n sum'n goin' on.  Luckily for him, he met and
fell for Kathy Selden (Debbie Reynolds), a feisty chorus girl with big
dreams of the New York stage.
The 20s were also a time of tremendous upheaval: for the movies, it was
a time when "Talkies" came along to change the world.  Producer R.F.
Simpson (Millard Mitchell) initially played off the importance of the
newfangled technology, thinking it was just a passing fad.  Soon,
though, the brass at Monumental Pictures realized that they'd best jump
on the bandwagon, and remake their latest flick, "The Dueling Cavalier",
into a musical Talkie of their own.
Only one problem: contrary to her beliefs, Lina can't sing, can't dance,
and when she talks, her voice could curdle milk.
The Upshot:
Yes, I *know* Everyone Loves Singin'.  Yes, I *know* it sits high on the
American Film Institute's ranking of Rilly Good Flicks.  And yes, I most
def have lots of respect and admiration for the makers of SINGIN' IN THE
RAIN; my Torrid Love for Gene Kelly (first developed in the vivid
imagination of my youth, while watching Kelly musicals before Sunday
School) is a torch I carry to this day.  But I still call this one
second-best, for two nitpicky, but irritating, reasons: the relative
weakness of Debbie Reynolds as Kelly's paramour - as my girl Lina
might've said, "I kaaaan't staaan' 'er!" - and the lack of much to do
for Kelly's sidekick, Donald O'Connor.
Believe me when I say that those two flaws hardly marred the excellent
work that is "Rain".  My minor dislike for Reynolds, and her Kathy
Selden character, is more a personal Issue than a real show-stopping
disdain.  Except for Kathy's original spunk when first confronted with
movie star Don Lockwood, there just didn't seem to be much there worthy
of Don's pursuit; frankly, I wouldn't have given her a second thought.
Of course, my Strong Chick perspective comes some almost 50 years after
this movie was released, so take my attitude with a grain of salt.
However, my problem with Cosmo Brown, stands.  I liked his spotlight in
the "Make 'Em Laugh" number, but even then, that character reminded me
too much of a milder version of Jim Carrey.  In fairness, though, that
may be because I've had too much exposure to Carrey's antics; well
before Carrey showed on the scene, I used to think that Cosmo was Danny
Kaye's little brother.  And I love me some Danny Kaye.  Hmmm...is there
an antidote for overexposure to Ham?
I have nothing but praise for the rest, though.  Gene Kelly, of course,
can Do No Wrong by me [well, he didn't have the best singing voice, but
oh, that body.  Uh.]; here, as usual, he danced divinely, and though his
acting wouldn't be mistaken as Shakepearean, he had a charm that more
than made up for any thespian shortcomings he might've had.  Jean Hagen
was ghettofabulous as the skreetchy, but fun, Lina Lamont - a true diva
if ever I saw one.  In checking Hagen's IMDB listing, I see there are a
few movies of hers that I need to check out.  She didn't seem to get the
wide attention she deserved, after "Rain"; that's just not right.  Also
excellent in supporting roles were Millard Mitchell as the marvelously
henpecked R. F. Simpson ("I was confused!") and Cyd "Legs" Charisse as
the femme fatale dancer who spoke volumes without saying a word.  And in
only her fourth feature film, living legend (and deserving of a Latina
Factor all her own) Rita Moreno's bit part as Lina's bud Zelda is a
small taste of what was to come for her (can you tell I'm excited about
having just bought WEST SIDE STORY on DVD?)
What was that that "Andy Hardy" would always say?  "Hey kids, let's put
on a show!"
The Numbers:
The heart of any musical, especially one made during the 40s and 50s, is
its musical numbers [duh!].  And SINGIN' IN THE RAIN is chock full 'o
good ones:
  "Make 'Em Laugh"
   Donald O'Connor's showcase; funny, and his run-up-the-wall
   bit, made my jaw drop the first time I saw it.
  "You Were Meant For Me"
   Ok, so it's your standard mushy Boy Meets Girl number which
   sweetly clues the audience in that yes, Don is falling for
   Kathy [though *why*, I'll never know].  And oh, that voice.
   But oh, that bod!  Uh.
  "Moses Supposes"
   As far as partners go, I liked Kelly and Frank Sinatra in
   ANCHOR'S AWEIGH better, but this number has its own charms;
   and, thanks to the DVD, I finally caught that quick
   "eeneymeenymineyMoses" riff Kelly does under the curtain, ha!
   And call me Easy, but every time they do that "A" at the end,
   I cheer.  Hey, it's a Thing.
  "Good Morning To You"
   Nothing very special about this number, which has one of the
   weakest segues in the whole movie ["it's not March 23rd, it's
   the 24th; good morning!" ugh]. But I reckon I liked it well
   enough: I kept "rewinding" the DVD back to that track - which
   actually segues very well into...
  "Singin' In The Rain"
   Anything I say about this magnificent, classic number, will be
   woefully insufficient.  Suffice it to say that that's one lucky
   umbrella.  And the struttin' fella ain't half bad.
  "Broadway Melody"
   Clocked in at 14 minutes, this number is the great capper "Rain"
   deserves.  A story-within-the-story, I can't decide what I
   liked most about this number: Kelly of course, the very leggy
   Cyd Charisse, or the coin-flipping mobsters [man, did I think
   they were Coolness Personified when I was 8!].  Ah, who'm I
   kiddin'; I liked it all.  As my Brit friends would say,
   bloody brilliant!
Betty Comden and Adolph Green's screenplay may have been the backbone of
"Rain", but Nacio Herb Brown and Lennie Hayton's music, and Gene Kelly's
fantastic choreography, were its heart and soul.
DVD Thingies:
As with the A CHRISTMAS STORY DVD, the "Rain" disc (understandably)
offered little by way of DVD goodies.  The lack of widescreen option was
disappointing, of course; and the differentiation between "closed
captioning" and "subtitles", without any indication of what the
differences were, was needlessly confusing.  But as I said about A
CHRISTMAS STORY, I'd watch this movie against a brick wall if I had to,
it's *that* good.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I've watched SINGIN' IN THE RAIN in bits n' pieces on TV over the years,
but seeing it on DVD was the first time I've ever watched it all the way
through.  I'm glad, because I couldn't appreciate the depth of the story
when I first watched it as a kid, the way I do now.  "Depth?  In a
*musical*?", you ask?  Yep, depth.  Beneath the fluffy love story and
the Any Excuse To Sing And Dance of your standard movie musical, lies
lessons on (mis)perceptions and adaptability to change.  Weird, how I
hadn't noticed that before.
Or, maybe it's not even all that Deep.  Maybe it *is* just Any Excuse To
Sing And Dance.  Hey, in a world increasingly hostile, cynical, and full
of pain, maybe we *need* to Sing And Dance every once in awhile.  I can
diggit.
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN (rating: greenlight):
What I wouldn't give to have been that umbrella.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Reviewed by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"Singin' in the Rain" (1952) **** (out of four)
Directed by Stanley Donen and Gene Kelly
Written by Betty Comden and Adolph Green 
Starring Gene Kelly, Donald O'Connor, Debbie Reynolds,
Jean Hagen, and Rita Moreno 
Very rarely does a movie have it all. It's almost
impossible to find a film (or anything for that
matter) 
that contains a perfect mixture of whatever elements
it attempts to combine. Whenever one of these gems is
released, word of mouth travels quickly and you've got
yourself a classic. The perfect film must attract all
types seeking all styles of film genre; Singin' in the
Rain is the perfect film. With the best choreography I
have ever seen, the most pleasant songs I've ever
heard in a movie, a sweet romance that is simple and
believable, a pair of
laugh-‘til-you-can't-see-straight performers, a
flawless plot structure, an amazingly creative set
design, bright colorful photography, the unmatchable
wit and charm of a consummate Hollywood hero, and a
bearably brief (but not too brief) running time,
Singin' in the Rain is the ideal model for a complete
picture. It's not missing anything, because 
it has everything.
What I love about this movie is that despite being
known as primarily a-song-and-dance production, the
plot is actually as interesting as the main
attraction. Unlike other pictures that create some
lame 
excuses to have a variety of characters tap dance on
tables, this movie actually makes sense. And also
unlike other movies which try to hard to create a
decent plot and thus widen the gaps between musical
numbers, Singin' in the Rain is as balanced as can be.
There was never a point where I grew tired of the
dialogue and prayed for the music to start up again or
a point where I prayed for the music to end and the
dialogue to proceed, it felt like the director built
the movie customarily for me and my desires (And the
fact that this movie was made almost half a century
ago and still is a joy to watch just shows that
quality can survive for an eternity).
 The film begins with Don Lockwood (Gene Kelly) and
Lina Lamont (Jean Hagen), two famous silent movie
stars thriving in the 1920's with the same amount of
popularity as a Backstreet Boy in our present time.
But there careers are endangered when technology in
filmmaking has advanced and the two actors are forced
to face the ultimate test:  having to star in one of
the first talking pictures ever.  Both actors
eventually progress on different paths; Lockwood has
an innate knack for carrying a film, talking or not.
Lamont, on the other hand, an annoying, selfish,
pompous brat with an unusually high pitched voice that
would kill her career if heard on film, has a little
more difficulty with the transition in cinema. When
the two actors make a disastrous film that bombs at a
test screening, changes definitely must be made before
a wide theatrical release. At the last moment,
Lockwood and friends decide to meticulously edit the
film by making it into a musical with Lamont's voice
replaced by his non-celebrity girlfriend's Kathy
Selden(Debbie Reyolds). But how will Lamont respond
when she hears about this change?
The acting in Singin' in the Rain is first rate. Gene
Kelly is excellent as the big-time movie star who 
just wants to be treated like an average Joe. And
because of his character's desire and mannerisms, it
is quite easy to relate to him. Donald O'Connor steals
the show as Cosmo Brown, friend and co-worker of Don
Lockwood. Providing comic relief, O'Connor completes
his job with a huge smile on his face the whole time.
Delivering one liners with the same dexterity as a
Marx Brother (when responding to the command `Call me
a cab,' Cosmo quickly responds: `OK, you're a cab'),
every time he is on the screen, even without any
lines, he is the center of attention - and every time
he's not present, you wonder where he is. Cosmo has
got to be one of the most likeable characters in any
movie. Jean Hagen is also extraordinary in a
villainous role that is both funny and evil at the
same time. One noteworthy scene places Lina Lamont at
the hands of a speech teacher with hilarious
consequences a la Pygmalion.
Even if you haven't seen the movie, you know the
songs. You've watched the main characters in A
Clockwork Orange or North By Northwest imitate Gene
Kelly's famous `Singin' in the Rain' bit and you've
probably uncontrollably whistled the tune at the sight
of a raindrop. I know I have. Other ballads accompany
the titular song that are equally `whistle worthy.'
`Make ‘Em Laugh,' `All I Do Is Dream of You' `Good
Morning,' and `Moses' are all unforgettable. The only
major complaint in this category is that you may have
some of these songs stuck in your head for an
unbearably long 
amount of time.
Most of the songs are supplemented by unbelievable
dancing. It is the dancing that makes these tunes 
look even better then they already are. The
choreography is stunning, period. The three main 
characters, Gene Kelly, Donald O'Connor, and Debbie
Reynolds each show their amazing talents with
extremely fast feet gliding accurately synchronized
with the person dancing alongside of them. Kelly is a
natural at what he did; when he accomplished the most
difficult moves, it seemed like he had not trouble at
all. O'Connor is just as good as his co-star and
during his hilarious `Make ‘Em Laugh' solo, watching
this slapstick performance in which he runs up walls
and dances with inanimate objects, you'll have a huge
smile plastered on your face guaranteed. Reynolds also
shows she can work right next to these two virtuosos
during the `Good Morning' segment. Never missing a
step, she gets brownie points for accomplishing the
routine in high heels. But nothing compares to Gene
Kelly's renowned `Singin' in the Rain' performance. As
he swings his umbrella and stomps in puddles, you know
exactly how he feels the whole time – he's in love,
who cares about the weather?
I'd dance and sing in the rain for Singin' in the
Rain. Each time I see it, I am forced into happiness.
Any movie that does this has to be perfect. Otherwise
what other reason is there to see a movie?

Author
Max Scheinin
For me, there are certain moments that define what the movies are about.
Apu finding his son in Satyajit Ray's The World Of Apu. The two wedding
scenes in The Godfather. The discovery of Mother in Psycho and the final
scene in Vertigo. The airport scene in Casablanca. The scene in which
Charlie Chaplin is sent to jail in Modern Times. The Cary Grant
impersonation from Some Like It Hot. The burning of Rosebud in Citizen
Kane. The Dagobah scenes in The Empire Strikes Back. The waterfall jump in
The Fugitive. The Poignant ending of The Wizard Of Oz. The final shot in
Jaws. Singing In The Rain in Singin' In The Rain.
 For me Singin' In The Rain is everything a movie should be: funny,
satisfying, well-acted, great music ( lots of it ), real characters, very
real predicaments, and a ( more than ) satisfying conclusion. It's hard to
imagine a better film. I recently read a review of the film that neatly
sums up my feelings for it: "No matter how many times you see it you'll
want to see it a thousand times more". The film is a work of art. There is
no pleasure as reliable as watching Donald O'Connor performing 'Make 'Em
Laugh'. 
My favorite part of the film is the premeire of The Dueling Cavilier. It's
a laugthable movie , the voices go out of sync at the screening and nothing
could be worse. The audience is constantly laugthing at the screen. As the
audience members file out, depressed, one man says loudly "That was the
worst picture ever made".  "I liked it" replies the star, Lina Lamont,
happily.
Of course there is the scene in which we are treated to, perhaps the film's
best number, Good Morning. That is the movie's most optimistic scene.
Debbie Reynolds sings. Gene Kelley sings. Donald O' Connor sings. The scene
sings. 
The last shot is similar to the last shots of The Wizard Of Oz and Alice In
Wonderland; at least it preaches the same message ( I've always felt that
those scenes are a tad arrogant; spend 2 hours convincing a kid it's real,
and then take it back ). In this case it's a terrific conclusion. The film
is a masterpiece, and it's comforting to think that this strip of celluloid
that will never be forgotten. 
Spending two hours with these characters is a bliss-out. You leave content
and happy, knowing you have seen not only the best musical ever, but one of
the best movies ever.
[A Note: Do yourself a favor and rent the 50th anniversery edition. Don't
turn it off when the film is done; it is followed by some great interviews.]
Visit Max And Micah's movie page at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html 

Author
Brian Koller
"Singin' in the Rain" is generally considered to be
the best Hollywood musical ever.  It may well be,
as I have seen no other musical that comes close.
Perhaps the difference between this film and others
is that it is not only a musical.  If you remove
all the musical and dance numbers, you are still
left with an outstanding comedy.  In fact, it may
be the best comedy ever, unless "Dr. Strangelove"
qualifies.
The story has Gene Kelly and Jean Hagen playing
fictional silent movie stars for Monumental Pictures.
It is 1927, and "The Jazz Singer" has made silent
features obsolete.  Monumental must transition to
talkies.  One of many problems is that Hagen can't
sing, and her shrieking voice must be dubbed by
Kelly's love interest, Debbie Reynolds.  Hagen
despises Reynolds, since she has plans for Kelly
herself.  Kelly's best friend is musician Donald
O'Connor, and his studio boss is Millard Mitchell.
O'Connor wasted much of the prime of his career
making films with Francis, the talking mule.  While
I suppose that both Universal and O'Connor had bills
to pay, "Singin' in the Rain" demonstrates his
prodigious talent.  "Make 'em Laugh" in particular
is a marvel, although Kelly must be given due credit
for the choreography.
Debbie Reynolds was in her teens when this film was
made, and she radiates with energy.  Kelly is perfect
as always, and Hagen gives a career performance as
stupid prima donna Lina Lamont.
While it may be heresy to criticize such an
outstanding film, the first two thirds of the film
is even better than the last third.  The film's
momentum is disturbed by a lengthy dance sequence
that includes mysterious femme fatale Cyd Charisse.
One ballet scene has her wearing a dress that trails
on for 25 feet, lifted by a wind machine.  You've
heard of gratuitous sex or violence; perhaps this is
gratuitous Art, and it has little to do with the
rest of the film.
But trivial flaws cannot prevent "Singin' in the
Rain" from being among the best films ever made,
as well as the best musical ever and one of the best
comedies.  Particularly great are the scenes with
Kelly and Hagen in their first talky: the transition
from pantomime to dialogue is both hilarious and
revealing.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Frank Maloney
     SINGIN' IN THE RAIN is film directed by Gene Kelly and Stanley
Donen and produced by Arthur Freed.  It was written by Adolph Green and
Betty Comden, based on a song by Freed and Nacio Herb Brown.  The film
stars Gene Kelly, Donald O'Connor, Debbie Reynolds, and Jean Hagen.
Choreography is by Kelly and Donen, the songs by Freed.  It was first
released on April 10, 1952.
     SINGIN' IN THE RAIN is simply the best movie musical ever made.  It
has started a Fortieth Anniversary revival run with a brand new 35mm
print.  You must see it.  It is like seeing it for the first time with
the brilliant, jewel-like Technicolor fresh and glowing, the print free
of scratches, up on the big screen, and Gene Kelly breaking your heart
with the pure innocent joy of his dance in the rain.
     If ever the word classic applied to a musical number, it applies to
the "Singin' in the Rain" number.  It starts off with a happy adult man
and ends with a little boy splashing in the flooded street and then
skipping off with not a care, free even of his umbrella.  Not only is
there a physical joy to watching Kelly dance in the rain, but it is a
revelation when you can distance yourself enough to watch the narrative
strength of the choreography, the detailed climb from adultness to
childishness.  If that cop hadn't shown up, Kelly would still be dancing
there; it's one number you want never to end, but when it does you are
as transformed as the dancer/singer.
     The song, according to one story, was inspired when Arthur Freed,
who had just graduated from Broadway High School in Seattle and opened
his own music store on Pine Street, watched a man one gloomy, rainy
Seattle afternoon outside his shop "just singing and dancing in the
rain."  He wrote the song with Nasio Herb Brown for one of the first big
movie musicals, THE HOLLYWOOD REVUE (MGM, 1929).  It has also been used
in LITTLE NELLIE KELLY (1940) and A CLOCKWORK ORANGE (1971).
     Freed, later a top producer of musicals (THE WIZARD OF OZ, MEET ME
IN ST. LOUIS), hired Green and Comden (ON THE TOWN) to build a movie
around his song, now a standard.  It took them a month to nail down the
unifying concept: showcasing Brown and Freed songs against the
background they were written in, namely, Hollywood's transition to the
talkies.  The script was finished in April, 1951, Freed having selected
"Fit as a Fiddle," "You Were Meant for Me," "Good Mornin'," and nine
others.  Kelly created the fifteen-minute Broadway Melody ballet and
agreed to star in and co-direct.  Production closed Nov 21, 1951.  It
cost $2,540,800 to make ($620,996 over budget).  It previewed at the De
Anza Theater, Riverside, California, on December 21, to a rave audience.
It premiered at Grauman's Egyptian Theater instead of the more
prestigious Grauman's Chinese Theater, where the opening and closing
scenes were shot.  Apparently, the studio was not terribly supportive of
the film.  It turned out to be the tenth most popular film of 1952,
grossing $7,665,000.  However, it was received only two Oscar
nominations and won neither.
     Some other trivia about it: Green and Comden had originally seen it
as a vehicle for Howard Keel as a bit player in silent movies who
becomes a singing cowboy star.  This, of course, survives in the
stuntman sequence.  The song "Make 'em Laugh" was plagiarized from Cole
Porter's "Be a Clown," used in the Freed musical THE PIRATE.  Donen has
acknowledged that was "100 per cent plagiarism."
     A lot of you know that Jean Hagen, the screechy-voiced bimbo,
dubbed Debbie Reynolds, who is supposed to be dubbing Jean Hagen.  One
of the things I noticed this time around was how impressed I was by
Hagen's performance.  She was nominated for an Oscar for the role and
deservedly so.  It is easy to dismiss the part because she does such a
good job of making us dislike the character.
     Gene Kelly had a bad head cold during the filming of the Singin' in
the Rain sequence and was afraid, terrified, of developing pneumonia
during the two day shoot.  I noticed his voice was a little hoarse when
he says goodnight to Reynolds at the beginning of the sequence, but
otherwise one would never guess.
     The uncredited cameos include silent comedian Snub Pollard, "Our
Gang" kids Baby Patsy, Dale Odell, Roberta Williams, and Gerald
Carpenter, and 1930s star Mae Clark (of grapefruit fame).
     (A lot the above information I cribbed from William Arnold in the
Seattle P-I.)
     This Fortieth Anniversary tour is a rare opportunity to see one of
the great films of world cinema as it was meant to be seen.  In 1988 a
poll of world film critics placed SINGIN' IN THE RAIN fifth among the
world's best 100 films--CITIZEN KANE ranked ahead of it, but CASABLANCA
came in ninth.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Contemporary Hollywood producers are often accused for the
damage they do to the reputation of American and world
cinema heritage by misusing old, classic movies as nothing
more than basis for cheap, empty and soulless remakes.
However, the misuse of the cinema heritage isn't the new
phenomenon; even some very talented authors and true artists
give a new, sometimes even twisted, perception of the old
films. The most notorious example is Stanley Kubrick in his
CLOCKWORK ORANGE - a single scene in this film was enough to
give totally different spin to one of the most beloved films
of all times - 1952 musical SINGIN' IN THE RAIN.
And that is really sad, because SINGIN' IN THE RAIN isn't
just one of the classics of Old Hollywood. It is also one
very fine example of a genre that is almost banished from
the big studios of today - musicals. Author of this review
used to adore that genre, especially the spectacular MGM
musicals made in 1940s and 1950s; in his earlier years, they
showed the magical, fairytale universes that used to created
the same sense of wonder like Lucas and his saga about a
galaxies far away. But things changed - in 1970s and 1980s
Hollywood found new ways to attract and entertain mass
audience, ways that required less talent and creativity than
those necessary for musicals. That was the reason why the
genre of musicals became obsolete and, unlike western,
didn't find a way to adapt to new realities. But that sad
fact was a blessing for the musicals of the Old Hollywood -
because they never had to compete with the newer musicals,
they kept their reputation as the best films of the genre.
And that also helped them to keep their reputation among
both the nostalgic audience and art-loving filmophiles.
SINGIN' IN THE RAIN, arguably the best of the genre and
often referred as one of the best films in the history, was
actually conceived as a way for MGM to re-use some of its
old material. Scriptwriters Betty Comden and Adolph Green
based the plot on the MGM-owned songs. Since many of them
were used in the first sound ("talking") pictures of late
1920s and early 1930s, the plot was set in Hollywood during
those years. The film starts in 1927 during the premiere of
"Royal Rascal", new period adventure by Monumental Pictures,
starring swashbuckling hero Don Lockwood (played by Gene
Kelly) and blonde bombshell Lana Lamont (played by Jane
Hagen). Studio had spread the rumours of Lockwood and Lamont
being romantically involved both on and off screen. Dan
actually can't stand Lana (which have some problems
distinguishing studio propaganda from reality), and instead
falls in love with a girl he meets on a street, aspiring
young actress Kathy Selden (played by Debbie Reynolds). His
problems with women are dwarfed by the problems of the
studio, suddenly faced with the "talking" movies phenomenon.
Silent era techniques are obsolete and the new film
"Duelling Cavalier" is bound for disaster, mostly because
the leading lady, Lana Lamont, has a voice that doesn't
match her physical beauty. Dan's old friend and trusted
partner, Cosmo Brown (played by Donald O'Connor) comes with
a brilliant idea - new movie is going to be turned into
musical, and Kathy is going to dub Lana's voice.
For some critics, the weakest element of many musicals is
the plot, often just a cheap excuse for connecting various
song and dance numbers. The script of SINGIN' IN THE RAIN
was made with such intentions, but the plot of this movie
actually works even without those scenes, turning this movie
into entertaining, very funny and at times even satirical
comedy. The film is even funnier for those who are more
familiar with the Hollywood history, with lot of references
to real life personalities, situations, rituals and, last
but not least, very accurate portrayal of the difficulties
experienced by Hollywood during the period when the movie
industry had to adapt to the use of sound. The movie
contains even some scenes that could be seen as a way for
Gene Kelly, its leading star, to spoof his own role in THREE
MUSKETEERS, 1948 swashbuckling classic.
However, the most recognisable element of SINGIN' IN THE
RAIN are the song and dance numbers. They were directed by
Stanley Donen and Gene Kelly, all of them in their artistic
prime and able to use huge MGM resources in order to create
spectacular, memorable scenes. Almost all of them are
superb, perfectly staged and some of them became essential
part of modern popular culture. Some of them are elaborate
and spectacular, like Gene Kelly's Broadway fantasy
featuring Cyd Charrise, although some would argue that it
looks somewhat out of place in this film. Another scene,
seduction of Kathy in an abandoned studio, is a triumph of
simplicity. Some are comical, like cartoon-like farce by
Donald O'Connor when he sings "Make Them Lough". But the
most important, most influential and most remembered of them
all is, of course, a scene featuring Gene Kelly singing and
dancing in the rain. When we take into account that Gene
Kelly was actually ill when he made those scenes, we must
really appreciate his talent and dedication.
The acting in the film was, of course, shadowed by the
dancing and singing, but that doesn't mean that people
involved didn't use their talents. Gene Kelly is extremely
charming and funny, same as Donald O'Connor as his comic
sidekick. Debbie Reynolds, who played a version of herself
in the film, being an aspiring young actress in real life as
well as in a movie, is simply adorable in her role and has a
very good chemistry with Kelly. Thankless job of a movie's
only villain, and rather unimpressive one, was superbly done
by Jean Hagen who earned the supporting role "Oscar"
nomination in the process. Hagen also dubbed Debbie Reynolds
in some scenes of the film, quite the opposite of the
characters in the movie. It is rather ironic, since the
script of SINGIN' IN THE RAIN satirically explored the
conflict between on-screen and off-screen life reality.
Made in the time when Hollywood was able to produce great
art and even satirically look at itself, SINGIN' IN THE RAIN
is one of those timeless classics that still have appeal to
the audience, even those younger generations that never
experienced the true power of musicals.
