Title
Review for Loving Jezebel (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
Nerdish-looking Theodurus Melville (Hill Harper) is an awkward and 
childishly obnoxious Don Juan.  His idea of a come-on is to tell a woman 
that he thought of her face instead of the Mona Lisa's during his 
college history class.  He likes to run after women, almost slobbering 
as he asks them on dates.  And when he gets them into bed, he is so 
unskillful that you wonder what any of them see in him.
Writer and director Kwyn Bader's LOVING JEZEBEL is the second film this 
month about a black comedian who pursues a long string of women.  Tim 
Meadows, as Leon Phelps in THE LADIES MAN, was sweet, smooth and 
eminently likeable.  In contrast, Theodurus is such a born loser that he 
seems constantly in danger of tying his shoelaces together.  The 
unrealistic story never convinces us that so many women would be 
attracted to him.  And with its non-stop use of voice-over, the movie 
wants badly to be taken as a poignant coming of age story as well as a 
comedy.  It succeeds at neither.
Typical of the unreality of the plot is the character of Frances (Nicole 
Ari Parker).  She swears that she is a virgin who doesn't drink, which, 
of course, is a double lie.  When Theodurus goes to her dorm room to 
pick her up for their first date, this shunner of sexuality comes to the 
door in her underwear.  She then proceeds to do a reverse strip, 
fondling herself in the process.  Maybe some directors could have gotten 
great comedic mileage out of this scene but not Bader.  The whole 
episode just feels strange and is devoid of humor.  
"Just once," Frances coos at the beginning of her long night of sex with 
Theodurus.  "You're not going to make me do it again."  But the movie 
keeps making us see these same clumsily and unconvincingly staged scenes 
over and over again.  LOVING JEZEBEL is the sort of film that should 
make people appreciate THE LADIES MAN more.  It was certainly a lot more 
fun.
LOVING JEZEBEL runs 1:25.  It is rated R for language and sexuality and 
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
    Freud once threw up his arms in frustration and said,
"What do women want?"  The most incisive answer usually
given by people who know women or at least have seen
hundreds of romances on the screen is that women want
men who can make them laugh.  This is valid.  What Kwyn
Bader may be adding to that in his quirky little fluff of a
comedy, "Loving Jezebel," is, surprisingly enough, that
women want men who love women.  Bader does not, of
course, mean that a woman wants her man to be looking at
every pretty sight that passes in the street, but there is a
difference between an egotistical Lothario and a basically
healthy guy who genuinely likes, repeat, genuinely likes, the
opposite sex.
    The idiosyncratic but otherwise normal fellow in this film,
Theodorus Melville (Hill Harper), turned out OK despite his
having an irritating mom, Alice (Phylicia Rashad) who often
does her best to convert her vigorous son into a mixed-up
dude with an unresolved Oedipal conflict.  In the one scene
that can give audience members the willies, she asks the
young man not to go out on a date but to stay home with her-
-as she sits beside him on the sofa and holds his hand.
    The women he dates are, like the mom, all eccentric, but
not a one is really irritating.  This is part of what raises
"Loving Jezebel" well above yet another 20-something sitcom
with a plodding narration.  Bader opens the movie toward the
end of the story as the delightfully confused and paradoxically
focussed Theo races grabs a coat and almost literally flies
out the back door just a few paces ahead of a gun-toting
man, Gabe Parks (David Moscow), whose wife Samantha
(Laurel Holloman) has been seeing Theo behind Gabe's
back.  To explain the background of his plight, Theo, with
heavy use of narration, takes us back to his kindergarten
class where he is smitten for the first time with a girl who
soon ditches him for another man.  As he moves up the
grades to Brooklyn's wonderful school, Poly Prep (my alma
mater) and then to Columbia College, Theo has unusual
flings with a plethora of women who all sense that the man
genuinely loves their gender, causing troubles as well with
the men he befriends throughout his school years.  Yet all the
women are using him as an interim boy friend (oh, the
delights of being used), including one with a fetish for stuffed
Winnies the Pooh (Elisa Donovan); the cultured Trinidadian,
Mona (Sandrine Holt)' and nicest of all the unhappily married
poet, Samantha (Laurel Holloman)--who is the only one in
Theo's life who genuinely loves him.
   Kwyn Bader, using his own screenplay, has created a work
that will remind any moviegoer of Woody Allen and Spike
Lee, as his central character exhibits both the anxieties of Mr.
Allen (as in "Small Time Crooks") and the congenial
assertiveness of Spike Lee in the role of Mars in that
director's funky 1986 film "She's Gotta Have It."  One of the
whimsical scenes has Theo chasing after Frances (Nicole Ari
Parker) on the college campus--which mimicking Mars's plea
to a girl, "Please baby, please baby, please baby."
    The breeziness of the relationships is matched by some
sharp writing, as when Samantha counsels Theo, "You loved
all these women--except maybe the one with the Winnie
dolls," sewing up her case by telling Theo that "You loved
that elusive part that allows them to follow their passions, the
part that wants understanding and tenderness."  This is a
surprisingly refreshing comedy.
Rated R.  Running time: 85 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Susan Granger
    Hill Harper ("Beloved," "HavPlenty") oozes with charm in this diverting, amiable romantic comedy about a man who has spent a lifetime loving other men's women. Quite simply, he's attracted to Jezebels - i.e.: women who engage in amorous activities with men other than their declared mates. "Your problem is that you only want what you can't have," his buddy tells him - to which he replies, "Then why does God always put her in my path?"  Bookended by irate gun-toting husband sequences, writer-director Kwyn Bader has structured a flashback story exploring how hapless Theodorus Melville (Hill Harper) survived a domineering mother (Phyllis Rashad) and became a hopeless romantic, appealing to that elusive, risk-taking element in a woman that yearns for excitement. "I don't care whether a woman is black, brown, yellow, green or the poster child for vanilla," he maintains. The strongest part of the narrative occurs when he's 17, losing his virginity to his best friend's gir!
l-friend, noting: "It was, by far, the most impressive 30 seconds of my childhood." From there, it's on to college, where he almost gets killed for loving the wrong girls. Then his innocence is lost when he discovers that even a soul-touching love cannot last. Which eventually leads him to self-awareness and the one woman, a poet, who loves him back (Laurel Hollomon) and her jealous husband (David Moscow).  Like Spike Lee and Woody Allen, Kwyn Baker finds fun in the foibles, angst and anxiety of the amorous male, but he sticks with the bland and harmless, almost to a fault, reducing many appealingly vulnerable scenes to sit-com "dance with destiny" cliches. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Loving Jezebel" is a light-hearted, genial 5. Charismatic Hill Harper is a superstar waiting to happen.
