Title
Review for Bean (1997)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Tim Voon
Cast : Rowan Atkinson - Mr. Bean,  Larry Drake, Johnny Galecki,
Richard Gant, Andy Lawrence, Peter MacNicol, Sandra Oh, Pamela Reed,
Tricia Vessey, Harris Yulin. Directed by Mel Smith. Written by Richard
Curtis (I), Robin Driscol.
Bean fans, he's here! Billed as the 'Ultimate Disaster Movie', when in
truth this is the 'Pen-Ultimate Disaster Movie.' Move over Twister,
Volcano and up-coming Titanic, make-way for Bean - the man who can
generate laughs with the cataclysmic propensity of Hiroshima.
Yes, it was funny. Watch out U.S.A. here comes the infestation known
as Bean. He's ugly and mean, pays little respect to customs, or
hygiene. Beware this lean, mean, fighting machine known as Bean,
coming your way October.
Watch the Bean reduce a 50 million painting of The Whistler's Mother'
into a caricature of 'Hagar', and hear his insightful thoughts on the
painting after. He makes Tom Cruise look like an amateur, when it
comes to a 'Mission Impossible' break-in, with only the use of a skate
board, laxatives, eggs and underwear. Witness the life-saving
techniques of Bean as he removes bullets from downed cops, and the
'Bean-Defibrillator Method' of arousing coma victims; and at the end
of the day watch him warm the hearts of his audience, as he brings a
broken family together again.
Comment: Bean is his name. Disaster is his game. Hear him roar!

Author
Steve Kong
Mr. Bean is an internationally known character, but like all
internationally known things he's not as well known here in the US. Sure,
he has been shown on PBS from time to time, but for most of us, who's Mr.
Bean? Mr. Bean is a clumsy bumbling soft mumbling man. The hilarious Rowan
Atkinson portrays him.
In Bean, Mr. Bean (Rowan Atkinson) is a guard of some sort, though I could
be wrong because the position is unspecified, at the London National Art
Gallery. When a rich man in the US donates enough money to buy back the
Whistler's Mother from the London National Art Gallery, the US Grierson
Gallery requests that an expert accompany it to introduce it to the public.
What the Gallery gets is Mr. Bean. The curator of the Gallery (Peter
MacNicol) unknowingly volunteers to host Mr. Bean at his house, to the
dismay of his family and wife (Pamela Reed).
Rowan Atkinson is a great physical comedian who is funny but not annoying
(as with the case of Jim Carrey). The comedy bits in Bean are hilarious and
most of them had me laughing out loud. The problem was that there was too
much quiet time between the bits. Taking a TV show that's based on short
skits and stretching that out to a 90 minute feature film is a tough thing
to do. Though Bean comes close to pulling it off it fails in two ways.
The first is that there are, like I said, too many quiet moments between
the comedy bits. These expository moments put the movie into the real world
setting and this leads to the second reason why Bean fails. The Mr. Bean
character is a character that lives best in his own world. The things that
he does do not live too well in the real world, and by taking the Mr. Bean
character and sticking him in the real world, it takes a lot away from the
comedy. The most apparent place where the comedy just feels awful because
it's set in the real world is the hospital scene. If that had been done in
Mr. Bean's world, it would have been hilarious, but as it is in the film,
there is a kind of uneasy that follows the scene.
But, don't get me wrong, Bean is a funny funny movie that in parts almost
had me in tears laughing. These scenes include Bean in the restroom, Bean
at the park, and Bean with a turkey. Rowan Atkinson is perfect as Mr. Bean.
I would recommend seeing Bean during a matinee showing, it is good silly
fun that is somewhat flawed.

Author
Matt Petras
        Mr. Bean, a bumbling security guard from England is sent to LA
to help with the grandiose homecoming of a masterpiece American
painting. The first two words should have said enough to let you know
what occurs during Bean's trip to LA, but if they didn't look out
because you are in for a rather interesting if not odd ride. Heck
depending on your humor you might end up laughing through the whole
flick. Either way look out America Bean is coming. 
        Well, what can really be said about this movie, there is very
little discernible plot. That much is not hard to grapple with for it
is a slapstick comedy.  It achieves that goal rather admirably, but
because it is that, the plot is just screaming for help. The whole
premise that the movie is based on is to say the least flawed.  The
movie had its funny moments but there was no real story line other
than something that could be thought up on a whim and carried through
and in many causes ad-libbed as you went. Don't go into this movie
expecting and theatrical masterpiece. But if this form of humor floats
your boat then you will truly enjoy this movie, even if you don't like
slapstick style humor you will end up laughing because something's are
just so stupid. The movie goes out and accomplishes what it aims, or
so it seems. 
        Now when you look at the acting in this movie you have to
think about two things, first was there any real acting and how hard
is it to act in the slapstick manner. Well, there was no real acting
in this movie but some of the slapstick wasn't the easiest I am sure.
I have to concede that Mr. Atkinson's acting in this movie is well
done. Although the role isn't too demanding the slapstick is. I think
that the character could have had a bit more dialogue, it would have
added quite a bit to the overall effect of the movie. Now the rest of
the actors in the movie, bad acting and poor casting. I think that the
role opposite Bean could have been better, just seemed wrong for the
movie. A different actor might have done a better job of it but I wont
presume that wasn't what was trying to be achieved. 
        One thing that I must say, simply to get if off my chest is
that I think transferring a sitcom to TV usually produces rather
disastrous results. TV shows should do just that stay on TV, it will
probably save some producers from getting ulcers. I can only think of
a couple examples of TV going to the big screen effectively, the best
known of those would have to be Star Trek. Bean seriously fails to
accomplish anything close to what that series gone movie achieved. Now
another thing that I have to state again is this movie has narrowed
its target audience fairly tightly. The form of humor in this movie
will not be liked by most people, these people will think like I did
that this movie is stupid and pointless. But if you like the TV show
you might actually like this movie. But to be on the safe side I am
opting to recommend you save your money and not go to see this movie.
There are many movies that are truly worth seeing unlike this one. 


Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) A faithful follower of the British TV series, I was
eager to see BEAN. Rowan Atkinson, as Mr. Bean, is the only comic these
days who does great nonverbal comedy. Seeing him in a feature-length
film was going to be a treat. 
His TV show is presented in half-hour pieces, split into 2 or 3
seven-minute sketches. Each sketch, then, is about as long as a Looney
Tunes cartoon, and just as silly. 
In BEAN, there are still identifiable sketches, and each is about the
same length as in the show, maybe shorter. Some of them are great. Many
of them are recycled from his TV show. One thing's certain, there aren't
enough of them. 
These sketches fit within Mr. Bean's latest adventure: a night guard at
a museum, Bean is selected to be the museum's liaison in a deal to sell
Whistler's Mother to an American gallery. He is chosen not for his
knowledge of Whistler, but because the job will get him out of the
British museum's hair for three months. 
On the show, the sketches are always tightly packed with Atkinson's
gags. However, in the movie, a lot of time is spent between sketches on
the "required" structure of a movie - plot, characters, conflict, etc.
Those gaps are what makes BEAN an average movie instead of a hilarious
star vehicle. 
The problem with the gaps is not just the absence of Atkinson; it is the
presence of a token plot and shallow characters that requires the
attention to shift from silly abandon to forced concern. Any comic
momentum Atkinson builds is halted when the movie cuts to his American
host's (Peter MacNicol) wife (Pamela Reed) threatening divorce. 
I have seen interviews with Smith who says the movie structure was a
necessary evil. I think he's wrong. Too many directors take the
traditional structure of a movie as a necessity. I sometimes complain
that a movie has "too much plot, not enough action." This time, it's
"too much plot, not enough Rowan." 
A good example of a movie that shunned plot in favor of comedy is LIAR
LIAR. In that movie, a wisp of a plot and a clever idea gives Jim Carrey
a good 60 minutes of comic material. The story in BEAN seems solid
enough to have given Smith and Atkinson the same opportunity, but they
were too careful, too concerned with the plot. 
Smith even said he had to cut some of Rowan's sketches that didn't fit
well with the story. What Smith didn't realize is that if BEAN will be
remembered, it won't be for the story, it will be for Atkinson's
performance. Cutting Atkinson in favor of the story was a bad case of
misordered priorities.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, PG-13, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
starring: Rowan Atkinson (Mr. Bean), Peter MacNicol (David Langley), Pamela
Reed (Alison Langley), Harris Yulin (George Grierson); written by Richard
Curtis, Robin Driscoll; produced by Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner; directed by Mel
Smith.
Seen Monday, November 17, 1997 at 7:20 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas
(Oneida, N.Y.), theater #4, by myself for free (press pass). [Theater rating:
**1/2: fuzzy, dark picture, slightly uncomfortable seats, average sound.]
The problem with making a motion picture related to some kind of cult
following is that it usually doesn't adapt well to the mainstream. And it's
not that "Bean" fails because of this principle (although that has a lot to
do with it), it's just not a very funny, nor entertaining film to begin with.
Rowan Atkinson stars as Mr. Bean, the title character whose British
television series has been acclaimed by audiences around the world. The
premise to the show is simple: a slow-witted, almost mute man wanders around,
oblivious to world around him, and in the process creates for zany comedy.
What makes the show so good is the fact this simple concept makes for some of
the funniest comedy without becoming too lowbrow. It was really just a matter
of time before this was applied to a feature film and this is the net result.
Unfortunately, where the TV series works, the film fails. Bean's antics
don't work here  because, unlike the cartoony nature of the show, the film
establishes a relatively serious setting, therefore the character doesn't
keep with the atmosphere at all. 
Bean is about to be fired from his job as a security guard at a London art
museum, but the head of the board of directors won't let him go (for reasons
not well explained). When a Los Angeles art museum buys their most valued
painting (an American impressionist portrait they've had for years), they
decide to send Bean as their representative as either some kind of obscene
gesture to the Americans, or to show the head of the board what an idiot he
is, or both.
What ensues is a cross between a generic fish-out-of-water comedy, recycled
gags from the show that don't work out of their context, and ideas the show
probably threw away. Example of the first: Bean seeing an armed guard at the
airport and pretending he has a gun. A wild chase scene occurs and when they
tell him to "take out the weapon and place it on the floor," he does this
using his hand in the shape of a gun and is still arrested. Example of the
second: Bean trying to cheer up a sick kid on a plane and ends up popping a
vomit-filled bag over someone's head. Example of the third: Bean making silly
faces and doing a Dirty Harry impersonation for his passport photo. These
might sound funny on paper, but what actually shows up on the screen seems
pretty lame. There's just such a rigid contrast between Bean's eccentricity
and the realistic world around him, the jokes don't mesh will.
The film is virtually without plot, except a sub-plot involving the L.A.
museum's curator, David Langley (MacNicol), who invites Bean to stay with him
even though his wife Alison (Reed) decides to take the kids and leave five
minutes after Bean arrives. In fact, most of the film is MacNicol's, as the
story revolves around his character's attempt to make sure the unveiling of
the painting and the accompanying ceremony go smoothly. 
Of course Bean is a klutz and an idiot and ends up ruining the priceless
work of art. The scenes depicting this and showing his attempts to fix it are
set up through cliches and unbelievable plot devices. Bean's appeal lies in
his stupidity, therefore the scenes of him going to great lengths to restore
the painting seem all wrong. Some funny things do happen in the process, but
not nearly enough to make up for the mediocre screenplay.
But it is the last act that really kills the film. It plays like one of
those "serious" episodes of a sit-com, and what's worse is it's done in
questionable taste. Once again, Bean is mistaken for a doctor and somehow
ends up in a few scenes that seem very serious, but look like poor parodies
of "ER." The ending itself should be a ripping satire, but is just another
fish-out-of-water gag.
It's disappointing "Bean" is the empty comedy it is. This is just another
case of a good premise ruined by commercialism.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     BEAN, featuring the antics of slapstick comedian Rowan Atkinson,
opened first in Germany and Portugal, where it was a big hit.  Atkinson
with his almost mute acting shtick grunts a lot in the movie but speaks
very little, probably no more than a hundred words in the entire
picture.  His style of comedy lives or dies based upon how funny you
find his exaggerated physical humor.
     Atkinson became famous in Britain and elsewhere with his
"Blackadder" television series.  American audience may know him best as
the tongue-tied priest in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.
     Although his fans may find BEAN well worth their time, others may
find this 1:30 film about 1:27 too long.  There is probably enough
humorous material in BEAN for a "Saturday Night Live" skit, but as a
full-length movie it does little more than provide an opportunity to
get to know your watch better.  The dull and relatively ugly
cinematography by Francis Kenny does not help break the film's tedium.
     Rowan Atkinson plays a guard named Mr. Bean who works at the
National Gallery of Art in London.  When the board, who views him as
the worst employee they've ever had, is unable to fire him, they pawn
him off as an art expert to the Grierson Gallery in Los Angeles.  The
Grierson Gallery, thanks to a generous donation, has purchased
"Whistler's Mother."  "Dr." Bean is supposed to speak at the picture's
unveiling.
     Burt Reynolds, in one of his many throw-away roles, plays the
museum's benefactor, General Newton.  "I don't know the difference
between a Picasso and a car crash," he admits.
     The curator of the Grierson Gallery, David Langley (Peter
MacNicol), takes the crude Dr. Bean to stay with his family.  After his
wife, Alison (Pamela Reed), meets this guy with spastic lips, bug eyes,
and the ability to destroy precious objects in nanoseconds, she leaves
town and takes the kids.
     Alison is the smartest one in the film and the only one who had
the good sense to walk out.  Let me give you a flavor of the brand of
humor which the movie relishes.  We have Bean with a cigarette lighter
up his nose one time and tissue stuck up it another.  He bursts a full
barf bag over one of his fellow plane passengers.  He makes obscene
gestures at strangers from his car.  And mainly he makes several
variations of the classic funny face in which one contorts every facial
feature.
     "Stay here and do nothing," advises David as his cure for the
disaster prone Bean.  "If you do nothing, nothing can go wrong."  Bean,
of course, ignores this advice.  So we get more grunting and grimacing.
     At the end, when David is finally able to end his troubles, and
mine, by putting Bean on a plane back to Britain, David has one parting
thought.  "You could come back and visit anytime in the fairly distant
future," he says.  I agree -- very distant.
     BEAN runs 1:30, but feels much longer.  The movie is rated PG-13
for sexual humor.  The movie would be acceptable for kids 10 and up.
We considered taking our 8 year old, but wisely rejected that idea.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
British Comedy has somewhat of a cult following in America. Like Trekkies
(and I hope that I don't have to explain what those are), extreme fans of
British Comedy are very devote enthusiasts when it comes to their choice of
"quality television". But whether you're more likely to recognize names such
as John Cleese and Rowan Atkinson (who plays Mr. Bean) or Jean-Claude Van
Damme and Chuck Norris, BEAN the movie is sure to disappoint.
The problem is that BEAN is likely to attract, at least for the most part,
only die hard fans of the brainless British buffoon. Yet it is this same
group who will likely find the movie so sadly disappointing. For one, some of
the gags in the film are taken directly from the TV show! But is seeing Mr.
Bean with a turkey stuck on his head any funnier when it takes place in L.A.
as opposed to the United Kingdom? Not really. For another, even the "fresh"
material falls so far short of the Mr. Bean that people have come to know and
love, that it won't really matter.
Those who are unfamiliar with Mr. Bean may enjoy the film more than those
expecting a 90-minute interpretation, but BEAN doesn't ignite any of the
charm that the television series has. The wonderful doofiness that this
character possesses is nearly lost in a big screen adaption.
BEAN does have a fairly short running time, even for a comedy. But this fact
does not prevent the movie from seeming to drag a tad too long. And when they
try to cram a serious plot twist in near the end, the tone of the movie
prevents the audience from really caring. In fact, it's merely a distracting
obstacle in the plot that serves the story nil. But then again, how else are
you going to fit in those "oh-so-funny" hospital bits?
Ok, so I laughed a few times. And like so many other movies, there were some
funny scenes that made me wish I could recommend this film. But there just
isn't enough here to get a recommendation out of me. If you really want to
savor Mr. Bean, you'd be much better off buying the available videos that
contain episodes from the TV series. And with the price of movie admissions
going up more and more, even your wallet might be grateful!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    BEAN is bad, maybe unwatchable, as Rowan Atkinson's beloved Brit is
shoehorned into a pedestrian, poorly executed plot involving a famous
painting, a Los Angeles art gallery, and a classic case of mistaken
identity.  (You Know Who is believed to be... an art expert.)  The "Bean
bits"-- tampering with an amusement ride, pretending to have a firearm
in an airport, drying the front of his trousers with a restroom blow-
dryer, etc.-- arrive at infrequent intervals and too often consist en-
tirely of reaction shots.  Instead of just pointing the camera at Bean
and letting him do his thing, the filmmakers shift the focus to the
supporting stars and, by in large, that's a mistake.  (Okay, it *is*
pretty funny when Peter MacNicol's art curator goes nuts, after Mr. Bean
has his way with Whistler's Mother.) Worse is how Bean's scenes always
seem rushed.  He never gets to do more than three minutes of anything,
if that.  Even his most-elaborate routine-- a nighttime, commando-style
raid on the museum-- flies by at about four times the pace that it
should.  With Harris Yulin, Pamela Reed, and in a late and largely use-
less cameo, Burt Reynolds.

Author
Scott Renshaw
      Rowan Atkinson is the most gifted and versatile comic performer in
the English-speaking world, and I only qualify the statement that much for
fear of appearing more cosmopolitan than I am.  No one is as equally deft
at delivering withering insults (see the various incarnations of his
"Black Adder" character) and performing priceless, wordless physical
comedy (see the television episodes of "Mr. Bean").  As both a jokester
and a classic clown, he is unrivaled.  That most Americans know him best
-- if at all -- as FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL's malapropping priest is a
problem in serious need of correction.
     I'm not sure the film version of BEAN is going to do it.  Atkinson's
Mr. Bean is a marvelous comic creation -- a gangly, goggle-eyed maladroit
with the mischievous self-absorption of an adolescent and the one-size-too
small brown suit to match.  In the vignettes which comprise Bean's
television adventures (seen in America on HBO and public television), plot
is never permitted to intrude on the pursuit of a hilarious bit of
pantomime.  Launched from a simple situation into wild flights of humor,
Bean's actions _are_ the plot of a "Mr. Bean" episode.
     BEAN the movie makes the critical error of jamming Bean into the same
tired, conventional premise which as served as the vehicle for a hundred
unconventional comedians.  To wit:  Bean, an inept employee at London's
National Gallery, is shipped to the States by superiors who are only too
glad to be rid of him.  David Langley (Peter MacNicol), the curator of a
prestigious Los Angeles gallery, is expecting a brilliant scholar to
preside over the unveiling of "Whistler's Mother."  He is not expecting
the man who promptly begins wrecking his home, his family life and his
job.  Can you say "fish out of water?"
     Atkinson deserves better.  When he's allowed to do his thing, he is a
genius.  There are a few brilliant Bean moments in BEAN:  the opening
sequence which finds him shaving every exposed surface on his head; a
super-charged ride on an amusement park motion simulator; Bean pushing a
draped painting through a hallway as though it were a gurney.  The
situations set up by Richard Curtis and Robin Driscoll aren't really the
problem in BEAN.  It's director Mel Smith who misses the point that "Mr.
Bean" isn't about other people reacting to Bean's absurd antics; it's
about Bean responding to his own absurd antics.  MacNicol, Harris Yulin
and the rest of the supporting players are asked to play straight men to
Atkinson, who doesn't need them.  He's a one-man comedy team.
     In one sense, I'm being a bit more harsh than BEAN deserves, because
it's still more entertaining than most Hollywood comedies.  Atkinson is
too energetic a performer to allow BEAN to drift into unwatchability,
making for a film which will provide audiences with plenty of satisfying
laughs.  But I can't help cringing at all the miscalculations that went
into BEAN, most notably the sentimental message which becomes
unnecessarily obtrusive.  After speaking fewer than a dozen words through
most of the film, Bean cuts loose with a heart-felt speech which proves he
has learned a valuable lesson on his trip to America.  Mr. Bean growing as
a character?  Stuff and nonsense.  I'd much rather that the makers of BEAN
learned the lesson and produce a BEAN film deserving of the name, one
which doesn't suffer from forced attempts at creating a feature length
narrative.  Let Bean wreak his merry havoc.  Let his beloved Teddy have
more than a token cameo appearance.  Let Rowan Atkinson show the world
that he's one of the funniest men alive.  Everyone will be happier when he
does.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Bean (1997) ** out of ***** - Cast: Rowan Atkinson, Peter MacNichol, Burt
Reynolds, Harris Yulin, Pamela Reed, Larry Drake. Written by: Richard Curtis
and Robin Driscoll. Directed by: Mel Smith. Running Time: 90 minutes.
You would think that this film's dismal failure would be due to American
filmmakers getting hold of a brilliant British comedy and "Americanizing"
it. You'd be wrong, since full blame can be placed on the very folks who
wrote and created the series: Rowan Atkinson, Robin Driscoll, and Richard
Curtis. Should you ever happen to meet those chaps, do me a favor. Grab them
by the hair and yell really loudly in their ear, "WHAT WERE YOU THINKING?!
HAVE YOU EVER HEARD THE PHRASE 'IF IT AIN'T BROKE DON'T FIX IT'?!" Then walk
away.
The film concerns Mr. Bean (Atkinson) and his visit to America while
escorting the painting of "Whistler's Mother" to an American buyer (played
by Burt Reynolds, in the type of bit part that his success in "Boogie
NIghts" should hopefully do away with). Now how or why Mr. Bean is sent on
this trip makes no sense, and I can't even describe how the film explains
it. The point is that Mr. Bean comes to America and causes wacky trouble.
Problems problems problems, where to begin? First, the score music from the
TV show has been completely replaced by score that is either at times one
note away from the score from "Beetlejuice" or one note away from the score
from "Rob Roy". Then, the song choices are totally uninspired. "Good
Vibrations"? "I Love L.A."? Wow, don't put any thought into that guys. Also,
Bean makes WAY too much noise in the film. The character doesn't speak much,
but in the series you really only heard the laughter of the audience, and
maybe the occasional murmur from Mr. Bean. Each episode was like a Chaplin
silent movie. In the film, Bean is constantly moaning, grunting, whining,
etc. It's annoying, and just plain wrong for the character. The main problem
though is that it's just not funny. With each episode of the series there
would be dozens of really great laughs crammed into less than 30 minutes.
Multiply that running time by three however, and the laughs steadily
decrease. They even have the gaul to REPEAT jokes from the series. Sad, and
creatively lazy.
As a series, "Mr. Bean" only ran for about 13 episodes or so. Why on earth
did Atkinson and the gang decide it was time to completely rework
everything? 13 half-hour episodes certainly hadn't exhausted all possible
situations. All I can say positively for the film at this point is that it's
almost appropriate for all ages, if it wasn't for a couple of scenes where
it appears as though Mr. Bean is having sex with things. And even that isn't
a very positive statement. Please guys, go back to England and go back to
television so you'll make me laugh again. [PG-13]
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Michael Redman
British comic actor Rowan Atkinson is a hit in England with his weekly "Mr.
Bean" television series and now his film hits the United States. Never before
has there been such a vicious retaliation for the American Revolution.
Bean is a guard in London's National Art Gallery where he is despised by the
board of directors but immune from dismissal. To get rid of him, they send the
bumbling grunting mumbler to LA under the guise of an art expert to oversee
the installation of "Whistler's Mother". (You'd think that with all the
authorities in the film that someone would know that the title of the painting
is the mouthful "Arrangement in Black and Gray: The Artist's Mother".)
That's about as much of a plot as we get. Bean is a combination of Pee Wee
Herman and Jim Carrey with a little "Being There" tossed in. As bad as that
sounds, it's even worse.
Most of the so-called comedy is based on making fun of the socially and
possibly mentally inept. The result is cringing in embarrassment for what's on
the screen rather than laughter.
The rest of the humor involves body orifices and what goes into and comes out
of them. Bean stuffs a cigarette lighter up his nose and shoots peanuts from
it. He leaves tissue hanging from it, sneezes on a painting and makes more
noise with it than you want to hear. As a bonus we get urine, vomit  and
laxative jokes. Twelve-year-old boys will love it
Supposedly the movie is very popular in Europe. It's possible. After all there
are those stories about Jerry Lewis and France.
[This appeared in the 11/26/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 11/7/97 (wide)
Running Length: 1:30
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Sexual innuendo, off-color comedy)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Rowan Atkinson, Peter MacNicol, Pamela Reed, Tricia Vessey, 
      Andrew Lawrence, Harris Yulin, Sandra Oh, Tom McGowan, 
      Burt Reynolds, Larry Drake
Director: Mel Smith
Producers: Peter Bennett-Jones, Eric Fellner, Tim Bevan
Screenplay: Richard Curtis and Robin Driscoll
Cinematography: Francis Kenny
Music: Howard Goodall
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     To viewers of Comedy Central and PBS, Rowan Atkinson is a familiar 
face.  The British comedian, who is recognized around the world as one 
of today's funniest people, has starred in three popular "Brit-coms":  
NOT THE NINE O'CLOCK NEWS, BLACK ADDER, and MR. BEAN.  It is the latter 
program, which became one of the highest-rated shows in Britain, that 
earned Atkinson international fame.  Nevertheless, because the series is 
aimed at a niche market in the United States, Atkinson is still best 
known in this country for his roles in FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL (as 
the blundering priest who utters the benediction, "In the name of the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spigot") and THE TALL GUY (as the 
egotistical star of the stage show).  With BEAN, Gramercy Pictures (and 
its parent company, Polygram) hopes to change that.
     While BEAN branches out from the format developed for the 
television series, it remains faithful to the concepts and constructs 
that led to its success.  Part of the reason for this is the involvement 
of screenwriters Richard Curtis and Robin Driscoll, who collaborated on 
most of the TV episodes.  Director Mel Smith, who previously helmed THE 
TALL GUY, has known Atkinson and Curtis since 1979 when all three worked 
together on NOT THE NINE O'CLOCK NEWS.  Meanwhile, Atkinson plays Mr. 
Bean exactly as he did on television:  a mean-spirited, self-serving, 
infantile caricature with an endless capacity for causing disasters.  
Viewers of vintage films will recognize a little of Charlie Chaplin in 
Atkinson's portrayal.  Younger fans will inevitably compare him to '90s 
pop icon Jim Carrey.  Both Carrey and Atkinson share a fondness for 
screwball, physical comedy and possess the ability to contort their 
features into seemingly-impossible expressions, although Atkinson's 
apparently-reserved demeanor makes him seem funnier than Carrey.  
     There are three main changes from the television series.  The first 
is a shift in location from England to Los Angeles.  The second is 
giving the normally-silent title character a few more lines than usual.  
By his standards, Bean is positively loquacious here, making a speech, 
and, at one point, even being told to "be quiet."  The third, which is a 
mistake, is attempting to develop the supporting characters beyond their 
natural roles as victims of Mr. Bean's blundering.  It doesn't work.  
Those individuals, like the plot itself, are throwaways.  
     BEAN begins by giving Mr. Bean a job -- he holds an unspecified 
position at the London National Art Gallery.  ("I sit in a corner and 
look at paintings" is how he describes it.)  In order to get rid of him, 
the board of directors decides to send him on a mission to America.  The 
California-based Grierson Gallery has just purchased the painting 
"Whistler's Mother" and is looking for a noted art historian to be 
present at the grand unveiling.  When they write requesting an expert 
from the London Art Gallery, however, they don't expect to be visited by 
the seven plagues -- all in the form of one man.  And, while Bean wreaks 
havoc all over Los Angeles, no one is more affected than David Langley 
(Peter MacNicol), the Grierson Gallery's curator.  In only a few days, 
his wife, Alison (Pamela Reed), and two children have moved out, his 
house is a disaster area, and his job is on the line.  And that's before 
Mr. Bean gets his hands on "Whistler's Mother."
     Although BEAN contains a fair share of bathroom humor, flatulence 
jokes, and assorted gags featuring bodily fluids, not everything is 
lowbrow, and this is an aspect that differentiates it from the likes of 
ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE.  The script contains instances of dry wit, 
such as detailing the merchandising plans of the Grierson Gallery for 
"Whistler's Mother" (it's reminiscent of the MY DINNER WITH ANDRE action 
figures from WAITING FOR GUFFMAN), and some biting dialogue (Bean's 
description of the painting's subject:  "a hideous old bat who looks 
like she's got a cactus lodged up her backside").  
     This storyline is basically just a setup for a series of variably 
funny comedy skits.  The episodic nature of the narrative leads to some 
hilarious sequences and a few dull patches.  Overall, things seem a 
little stretched out, making it clear that a 30-minute TV slot is a 
better length for Mr. Bean than a 90-minute feature film.  By the end of 
BEAN, the talented Atkinson begins to wear out his welcome, and the rest 
of the cast -- a predominantly lifeless group of actors -- offers little 
support.  Despite several side-splitting scenes (Bean's bathroom antics, 
Bean in an amusement park, Bean stuffing a turkey, Bean examining 
"Whistler's Mother"), the comedy in the film is too uneven to justify 
the length.  Thanks to Atkinson, BEAN is a pleasant diversion, but it's 
far from the comic masterpiece sought after by BEAN aficionados and 
novices alike.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Ben Hoffman
Rowan Atkinson who has the title role in BEAN was supposed to have
been an electrical engineer but somewhere along the way he had more
of the slapstick comedian in him, the silent stars type, and in 1970
made his debut as a performer.   Despite being around since then,
and despite being famous in England as well as having been in the
films FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, NEVER SAY NEVER
AGAIN, THE TALL GUY and THE WITCHES, he is not as well-known
 in the States except for cable TV.    BEAN will change all that.
Bean is silent.  The only sounds to come out of his mouth are weird
grunts.  The other actors, plagued by BEAN, do not remain silent.
How could they?   Bean's job as a guard in an art gallery requires
that he just sit in a chair.  Unfortunately, that is too much of a
chore so the alternative is to fire him.   However, Bean has a
friend, a benefactor to the museum, whom the Board of Directors would
not want to offend.   One of the board members conceives the idea of
getting rid of bean, at least for a while, by commissioning him to
deliver a $50 million painting (Whistler's Mother) to a new gallery
in the United States.   Further, he is passed off as an art expert.
Needless to add, the painting does not quite make it to its owner in
its original.
Atkinson pulls out all the comic stops in BEAN.  Falling off a chair
in the art gallery, making himself in a unique manner some real
instant coffee for breakfast as he is late to work, and shaving with
an electric razor his whole face including his tongue are
hysterically funny.   A most difficult trick is to sustain that kind
of humor throughout an entire film.  At that, the film is not
entirely successful despite other antics that pop up throughout the
movie.     However, it is still great fun.
Others in the cast include the art historian of the U.S. gallery
(Peter MacNichol), his wife (Pamela Reed) and their daughter
(Tricia Vessey) and son (Andrew  J Lawrence).   It is in their home
that BEAN stays during his Los Angeles visit.  Not since THE MAN 
WHO CAME TO DINNER was a family so harassed and made
 furious by their guest who was only trying to help.

Author
Brian Koller
"Bean" is a comedy based upon the British television series
"Mr. Bean", which is familiar to American viewers due to runs
on PBS stations.  Rowan Atkinson is Bean, sort of a British
version of Pee Wee Herman, who makes goofy faces, mumbles
when it is a possible alternative to speaking, and conducts
experiments with people or physical objects around him
that usually end in disaster.
Bean is employed by a British museum.  He is regarded as
a useless and is relegated to sitting in a chair in a
corner, where he can do harm as long as he remains there.
To be rid of him, even temporarily, he is sent to 
a Los Angeles museum to preside over the ceremony of
that museum acquiring a priceless work of art.
Unlucky museum curator Peter MacNicol draws the assignment
of hosting Bean during his visit.  Out of his element, Bean 
gets into increasing trouble.  His inability to socially
interact with others alienates MacNicol's family, which
promptly moves out.  MacNicol soon has even worse fears
of unemployment and imprisonment, all due to Bean's
eccentric and destructive antics.
The movie is different from the series.  In the series, people
regard Bean as mostly normal.  In the movie, Bean, the exact 
same character, is regarded as bizarre, alien, and dangerous, 
and not merely eccentric.  This interesing tack would leave
us feeling sorry for Bean, if his behaviour would only deserve
such sympathy.  But heavens, he practically needs to be
institutionalized!
Although "Bean" is by no means a bad movie, it does have some
problems.  I can accept Bean's character, but not MacNicol's
bonding to this obvious destructive idiot who seems bent
on destroying his life.  I don't understand how Bean could
be left alone in a room with a priceless painting.  And Bean,
who is demonstrated to be incompetent in the first half of
the film, performs complex and heroic actions in the second
half that he seems nowhere capable of in the first half.
I don't like the character of MacNichol's daughter (Tricia Vessey).
What a brat!  Burt Reynolds has a cameo as a General.  His
character has some stupid lines, and he constantly has a smirk 
on his face (perhaps he is thinking of his paycheck for probably
one day's work).
Still, if you a fan of the "Mr. Bean" show, you will probably
enjoy the movie.  You may alternately laugh and groan as
Bean gets into trouble.  At ninety minutes, the film is the
proper length and doesn't drag often.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BEAN (1997)(Not star-rated). Directed by Mel Smith.Written by Richard
Curtis and Robin Driscoll, based on a character devised by Rowan Atkinson
and Curtis. Photography, Francis Kenny. Editing,Christopher Blunden.
Production design, Peter Larkin. Music, Howard Goodall.Produced by Peter
Bennett-Jones, Eric Fellner and Tim Bevan. Cast: Rowan Atkinson (Mr. Bean),
Sir John Mills (Chairman), Harris Yulin (George Grierson), Peter MacNicol
(David Langley), Pamela Reed (Alison Langley),Burt Reynolds (General
Newton), Larry Drake, et al .A Gramercy release. 92 min. PG-13.
Many of us are admirers, fans and  devotees of Rowan Atkinson on TV. Having
seen the feature "Mr.Bean" I must confess my utter disappointment. "Bean"
is one thing, "Mr. Bean" another. The feature may amuse -- even tickle to
tears -- audiences unfamiliar with Atkinson's TV gems, but for those
gleeful veterans who follow the inspired weekly "Mr. Bean" episodes there's
just no comparison.
American audiences were introduced to Atkinson's mad, sardonic "Blackadder"
series (made for the BBC) some years ago. The combination of very verbal,
acerbic, irreverent and insulting humor, with zany, mock history, physical
farce, was and is unique. Then, doing a 180 degree turn, the amazing
Atkinson became the weird,bumbling (that's an understatement) "Mr. Bean."
The only way to explain him is that, as he seems to get beamed down to
earth, he is really both human and extra-terrestrial. His monumental,
farcical ineptness is expressed in almost entirely speechless sketches,
with superbly funny mumblings, sounds and noises.
Both "Blackadder" and "Mr. Bean" were written by Atkinson and Richard
Curtis, who had They had collaborated before. Curtis was also the
scriptwriter of the feature "Four Weddings and a Funeral" in which Atkinson
has the small, hilarious part as the bumbling clergyman officiating at a
marriage. He also wrote the successful feature "The Tall Guy," starring
Jeff Goldblum (and Atkinson in the supporting cast), directed by comic
actor-writer Mel Smith. So there is a lot of talent in the movie "Bean."
But the picture also confirms that transforming wildly comic and original
TV episodes into features is a bad idea, at least for those who follow the
television items religiously. It has seldom worked, except for Monty
Python.
In "Bean" Atkinson is a security  guard, "the worst employee in the Royal
National Gallery's history." About to be fired, he is rescued (for
arbitrary reasons) by the Chairman of the Board. Simultaneously, the
Gallery has been requested to send to Los Angeles a renowned British
scholar to speak at the inauguration of the "best American painting,"
"Whistler's Mother," just purchased from the French Musee d'Orsay. The
Brits decide (illogically) to dispatch Bean, then give him  a sabbatical,
so as to get rid of him temporarily.
>From the moment Bean steps onto his plane to the film's finale, Atkinson
grunts and  mugs and clowns and grimaces and contorts from top to bottom.
The Atkinson TV aficionados find that the overwhelming majority of
shenanigans are bad, broad and forced. The gags include airplane vomit
bags, urine, laxatives, spit, sneezing stuff, a turkey's rear end, a 2
way-mirror, drunks, more bathroom things, body parts and the like. The last
section's hospital gags -- a delicate genre to start with--are weak. At the
end, Bean's mistaking the giving the finger for a friendly salute, uses it
copiously. Not very funny. Nor is the blindness of the museum people who do
not notice Bean's madness and imposture.
For those who appreciate the punch and vigor of TV's episodes, "Bean" feels
tedious,overlong and synthetic. I counted few good gags, such as Bean
pretending that the painting he is moving is a table on wheels. Or when
Bean -- here exceptionally given a few spoken lines --improvises a short
speech about "Whistler's Mother." Or when he tells Burt Reynolds,the
haughty, millionaire, retired general who purchased the painting:
"Delighted to meet you, Sir." and the General replies "Of course you are."
I saw this film with a smallish audience of more young children than
adults. The kids whooped it up regularly; the adults rarely. I am told that
at a large Saturday night show many grownups were in stitches.I might have
been too, if exposed to the novelty and originality of Bean for the first
time. Do catch "Mr. Bean" and "Blackadder" on PBS or on video.You'll
understand why the movie lets down the Atkinsonphiles.
