Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
24

Author
Chris Webb
Cast: Ralph Fiennes (Count Laszlo Almasy), Kristin Scott Thomas 
(Katherine Clifton), Juliette Binoche (Hana), Naveen Andrews (Kip), 
Willem Dafoe (Caravaggio).
Directed and written by Anthony Minghella
Based on the novel by Michael Ondaatje
        There is a ten minute intermission in "The English Patient" that 
if you are not careful, you might sleep through.  I saw this movie in the 
theaters in January, and about midway through, I had to take a break from 
Anthony Minghella's successful tribute to Oscar snobbery.  "The English 
Patient" is a mediocre movie at best, with a broken plot, uninspired 
acting, and an adaptation that would make Shakespeare cringe.
        I did not enjoy "The English Patient," and I find it hard to 
believe that most critics were so swept away by this transparent 
over-the-top movie.  This film follows the story of Count Laszlo Almasy 
(Fiennes) after some sort of debilitating accident which rendered him 
skinless and near death.  It is an as-told-to account to nurse Hana 
(Binoche) who is so enthralled by him that she whisks him away to an 
abandoned mansion, deserting her army effortlessly.
        This was supposed to be a love story, but between whom?  In Hana, 
we see a compassion for Almasy, but there exists no spark there.  We hear 
of Almasy's lusty affair with Katherine Clifton (Scott Thomas), but there is 
not much love portrayed on the screen.  But then there is the romance 
between Hana and Indian bomb-defuser Kip (Andrews).  However, after 
sorting out the which-is-which and who-is-who, we are left with a 
trifling unromantic tale of deceit and treachory that should not be 
endearing as many think it is.  There is no prominent love story here. 
        Ralph Fiennes has thrived on portraying dispassionate men in 
"Quiz Show" and "Schindler's List," but in "The English Patient" he takes 
his lack of passion to a height where it seems as though he could care 
less about the script.  He speaks more like a book-on-tape, and being in 
bed shrowded in makeup does not a good actor make.  By the time you see 
his most poignant scene, where he screams in anguish before being a 
traitor to his country, his performance has already desended into 
monotony.  The character is arrogant, and Minghella tries to show us 
this, but embarrassingly mimics Shakespearean rhetoric failingly 
instead.  
        Scott Thomas is more of a mantlepiece who goes with the flow and 
does little to show that she can act.  Her range rises a bit above the 
flatline throughout.  As she lays dying, she sounds the same as when she 
is at what is supposed to be her most passionate.  Binoche won best 
supporting actress for her part, and she was the most transparent of 
all.  Play a game while watching, and call it, "Can you tell she's about 
to cry?"  It was not a great part for this talented actress, but she 
reaped rewards nonetheless.  If we are going to find a great performance, 
we look to Naveen Andrews, who portrays the quiet anxiety which someone 
with his job might have.  He is understated and powerful at the same 
time, saving "The English Patient" from complete failure.
        Willem Dafoe's character does not belong, and it is unclear as to 
why he is there, except that he's mad that some of his fingers are 
missing.  At this point, who really cares anyway?  
        I wanted to like "The English Patient," but I know many who did.  
Personally, I think that this movie was a waste of time and that if one 
truly looks for grand scale romantic drama, "Casablanca" is the way to 
go.  

Author
Phil Curtolo
Lengthy and lousy are two words to describe the boring drama The
English Patient. Great acting, music and cinematography were nice, but
too many dull sub-plots and characters made the film hard to follow.
Ralph Fiennes (Strange Days, Schindler's List) gives a gripping
performance as Count Laszlo Almasy, a victim of amnesia and horrible
burns after World War II in Italy. The story revolves around his past,
in flashback form, making it even more confusing.
Anyway, he is taken in by Hana (Juliette Binoche, The Horseman on the
Roof), a boring war-torn nurse. She was never really made into anything,
until she met an Indian towards the end, developing yet another
sub-plot.
Count Almasy begins to remember what happened to him as it is explained
by a stranger (Willem Dafoe, Basquiat). His love (Kirstin Scott Thomas,
Mission Impossible) was severely injured in a plane crash, and
eventually died in a cave. He returned to find her dead and was
heart-broken. So he flew her dead body somewhere, but was shot down from
the ground.
Don't get the wrong idea, it may sound good and the trailer may be
tempting, but good is the last thing this film is. Maybe if it were an
hour less, it may have been tolerable, but 2 hours and 40 minutes of
talking is too much to handle.
The only redeeming qualities about this film are the fine acting of
Fiennes and Dafoe and the beautiful desert cinematography. Other than
these, The English Patient is full of worthless scenes of boredom and
wastes entirely too much film.
Grade: D, ** out of *****

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When a book like Michael Ondaatje's "The English Patient" wins
awards and then goes on to become a major motion picture, it raises the
old question of should you read the book before you check out the film.
This assumes, of course, that you haven't already read the novel before
the studios decide it is movie material.
     Into the press screening yesterday most of the critics had their
copies tucked under their arms like fundamentalist Christians and their
Bibles.  In theory I'd like to read the book in advance, but I rarely
do.  In the case of THE ENGLISH PATIENT I am glad I didn't.  Because I
didn't, I had no idea where the movie was going, but I did know that I
was entranced by the voyage it was taking me on, and I was happy not to
know its mysteries in advance.  During this review, I will do, as I
always do, and tell you none of the key twists and certainly less than
the trailers and most professional reviewers will.
     Some movies evoke a single word, and THE ENGLISH PATIENT is one.
The word here is enigma.  Each of the characters start as enigmas not
only to the audience, but to themselves.  The film is a shared journey
as they seek meaning and healing for each is a troubled soul.  By the
end of the film, the mysteries are resolved, the characters have stolen
your heart, and two great romances have blossomed.  This is
considerable more than the sum of three normal films.
     The show takes place simultaneously in North Africa at the start
of World War II and in Italy as the war is drawing to a close.  The
characters in these stories are linked only by a man known merely as
"The English Patient."
     After a plane crash in North Africa and a rescue by local
tribesmen, a horribly burnt man is sent to Italy where he is taken
under the wing of a Canadian nurse named Hana (Juliette Binoche).  "My
organs are packing up.  I'm a bit of toast," he warns Hana.  She takes
The English Patient from the ambulance convoy to an abandoned monastery
where she spends time reading to him and caring for him.  When a thief
who works for the army, Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe), shows up asking for
shelter, The English Patient explains to him that Hana's problem is she
thinks she is a jinx.  "I think anybody she loves starts to die on
her."
     Back in North Africa, Katharine Clifton (Kristin Scott Thomas from
MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, RICHARD III, and FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL) is
arriving.  Her husband Geoffrey (Colin Firth) and other members of the
Royal Geographical Society are there to produce aerial maps for the
British Air Force.  The tuxedoed geographers view this as an thrilling
romp.  "Welcome to the International Sand Club," says Geoffrey to his
wife upon her arrival.  With them is Hungarian Count Laszlo Almasy
(Ralph Fiennes from SCHINDLER'S LIST), and Katharine greets him with
the put-down, "I wanted to meet the man who could write such a long
paper with so few adjectives."
     Soon the Count and she are dancing, and with a single intensive
stare he seduces her on the dance floor.  She reciprocates in an
extremely erotic scene where there stay as far apart as teenagers at a
church dance.  The mark of great actors is what they can do with just
their eyes.  By that benchmark, Fiennes and Thomas are two of the best.
Both of them are playing against the type with whom you associate them.
Fiennes is far from a Nazi, and Thomas isn't playing her usual
wallflower role.  Both are convincing as mysterious and sensuous
romantics and adulterers.  Although there is nothing wrong with
Geoffrey, I predict the women in the audience will be secretly cheering
Katherine on in her affair with the Count.
     As the mark of a good author, Ondaatje, and the highly literate
screenplay by Anthony Minghella, can keep adding characters without
making any of them superficial and without confusing the audience.  In
this show, that has the scope, feel, and look of LAWRENCE OF ARABIA,
even more characters are introduced.  The monastery's guest list adds
an Indian bomb expert, Kip (Naveen Andrews) and his Sargent Hardy
(Kevin Whately - Sargent Lewis from TV's "Inspector Morse").  We even
have Juergen Prochnow as a German Officer, but he makes no visit to the
monastery.
     The desert is a star of the film as much as the actors, and it is
just as perplexing.  Portrayed as a beautiful but easily angered beast
that is ready to engulf those who venture into it.
     The intimate cinematography by John Seale (GORILLAS IN THE MIST
and WITNESS) is a shoe-in for an Academy Award nomination as is
Fiennes's performance.  I could write the whole review on the
cinematography, but let me just dwell on a couple of highlights.  The
rose-hued scenes of the desert in the morning and evening glow and by
light of the campfires at night is stunning, and the aerial sequences
are breathtaking.  Seale's camera is perhaps best as it caresses the
actors in the close-ups.
     The editing by Walter Murch (THE GODFATHER PART III and APOCALYPSE
NOW) is also award caliber.  He creates many scenes of precious beauty.
Watch for example how as Katharine's palms gently caressing her car
window in North Africa, it slowly dissolves into The English Patient
sick and dying in Italy.  It is as if her hand was on his face across
time and continents.
     Gabriel Yared's music is dreamy, romantic, and majestic with lots
of harps solos, violins, and staccato piano.
     All of the acting is incredible, but none is on par with Fiennes.
His intensity is almost that of a James Wood, and yet he hardly speaks.
Katherine complains to the Count that, "You speak so many bloody
languages, and you never want to talk."  My personal favorite in the
film is Kristin Scott Thomas who brings intelligence and a subtle
sensuality to her part.
     Director Anthony Minghella (TRULY MADLY DEEPLY) has crafted a
masterpiece with THE ENGLISH PATIENT.  This is an absorbing and moving
cinematic experience with a single flaw.  Eventually, it does end.
     THE ENGLISH PATIENT runs 2:42 which is just the right length.
Very few films need to be longer than two hours, but this one does.  It
is true epic.  The film is rated R for some war violence, some sex,
some nudity, and a little bad language.  It is a great and absorbing
picture and fine for teenagers.  I loved this show.  I came in with
high expectations, and they were exceeded.  I give the film my highest
recommendation and award it a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Kristin Scott Thomas, Juliette Binoche, Willem
Dafoe, Colin Firth, Naveen Andrews, Julian Wadham, Kevin Whately,
Juergen Prochnow Director: Anthony Minghella Producer: Saul Zaentz
Screenplay: Anthony Minghella based
on the novel by Michael Ondaatje Cinematography: John Seale Music:
Gabriel Yared
This movie gave me a neck ache, a backache, a bum ache and a headache. I
took two toilet breaks, waded through two litres of coke (to help me
stay awake) before it finally ended.
I spent 162 minutes of precious time to find out that the 'English
Patient', (Fiennes) was a count who was an adulterer, a traitor and a
murderer; all as a result of his fooling around. He ends up scar-faced
and unrecognisable so we are meant to feel sorry for him.
I don't buy it, but everybody around me did (especially the women all of
whom were snivelling with sympathy).
Perhaps I'm being too hard on him, after all he is a dying man. How
about the 'English woman' (Scott Thomas) who is involved, perhaps she is
of good character and somebody worth saving; but alas, she is a wealthy
snob, who has a loyal, caring husband and I'm beginning to feel sorry
for her already.
The only person that I had any sympathy for in the entire movie was the
husband who was cheated on. Perhaps he shouldn't have crashed the plane,
but sealed the 'English patient' and the 'English woman' up in that
lovely cave to give their romance some time to chill.
This movie is undoubtedly the con artist film of 1996. It conned the
audiences, the critics and the Academy Awards, all of whom failed to see
that it is nothing more than a glamorised story of two uninteresting,
English aristocrats.
The scenery and cinematography is undoubtedly spectacular, and the lull
of the soundtrack will reduce you to tears.
Comment: Get rid of Fiennes and Scott Thomas, bring in Garbo and
Valentino. Then perhaps the screen will start to sizzle.

Author
Marianne Luban
Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Kristin Scott Thomas, Juliette Binoche,
      Willem Dafoe, Colin Firth, Naveen Andrews, Julian Wadham,
      Kevin Whately, Jurgen Prochnow
Director: Anthony Minghella
Screenplay: Anthony Minghella based on the novel by Michael Ondaatje
Music: Gabriel Yared
Miramax
        David Lean, I think, would have liked "The English Patient".  It 
has all the earmarks of one of his films--exotic scenery, convoluted 
plot, lush music, British accents and enough length to numb ones 
backside without actually making one long for the credits.
        Amid flashbacks that take the viewer from a bombed-out monastery
in WWII Italy to a desert expedition, we have Canadian nurse, Hannah, 
played with a sort of reckless intensity by Juliette Binoche, tending 
her moribund patient, who may be even more mysterious than he 
immediately appears.  Sometimes, bed-ridden Ralph Fiennes (who bears a 
disturbing resemblance to Boris Karloff as "The Mummy") speaks like an 
authentic Briton, yet, at other times, his accent is evocative 
of...well, his "Schindler's List" character.  Perhaps he needed Martin 
Landau to give him lessons in a Hungarian lilt, because Fiennes, while 
convincing as a dying mass of scar tissue, does not quite persuade us 
that he is a Count from Budapest.
        In fact, Ralph Fiennes, undoubtedly a fine actor, is the main 
problem I had with "The English Patient".  I must admit I loved 
everything else about this movie and was only mildly annoyed by the 
rather corny, contrived dialogue.  This film really is "Lawrence of 
Arabia" meets "Casablanca" and contains all that is stirring, even 
haunting, about pictures that were made before 1950.  It is a true 
Romance--albeit without a proper hero.  David Lean, that shrewd 
cast-master, would not have put Ralph Fiennes in this role.  He would 
have had the good sense to find someone with the wistful charm and 
mesmerizing authority of a young Peter O'Toole.  I, personally, would 
have begged Jeremy Northam of "Emma" to play the patient (I doubt he 
would have required much cajoling).  Now THAT is a man to die for, 
someone whose eyes alone would explain the admirable Kristin Scott 
Thomas falling in love with him at first sight.  Ralph Fiennes, for all 
his histrionic merits, is just too much of a stretch--even more than 
Daniel Day Lewis.  The rest of the cast is practically perfect, but this 
is an old-fashioned picture that cries out for an old-fashioned 
heart-throb hero.  Had "The English Patient" been a different Britisher, 
this film would have made out at the box office like the annual incomes 
of whole group-practice of surgeons.

Author
Bryant Frazer
THE ENGLISH PATIENT opens with one of the film's many
touchstone images -- somebody is touching brush to paper,
drawing seemingly inscrutable lines with some precision. We
wonder whether this is some unfamiliar language, but as the
credits progress, the image takes on the shape of a human
figure, swimming. The image, we will later learn, has been
copied from the ancient paintings on the wall of a desert
cave.
The cave of swimmers, as it is known, is discovered by a
geographic expedition engaged in mapping out the Sahara
Desert for the British government. The next day, those
explorers will be taking refuge against a huge windstorm that
fills the air with sand. Two lovers-to-be are holed up in a
truck that strains against the ferocious clamor outside. One
of them, inspired by the danger, begins to tell the other
stories about the wind -- the Aajej, the Ghibli, and the
Simoon, a wind so terrible that a nation declared war on it.
The winds are harbingers for these characters, like the
waters that sweep a swimming man downstream no matter how he
struggles against the current. Nations at war conjure up a
ferocious storm, tearing lovers apart and bringing others
caroming together at odd angles. THE ENGLISH PATIENT is the
kind of movie that makes you want to interpret everything you
see, that makes you keenly aware that everything can have
meaning.
Director Anthony Minghella (TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY) has freely
adapted Michael Ondaatje's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel into
a flavorful melange, weaving through time from 1944 Italy to
late 1930s Egypt and back again before tracing careful steps
tying the two stories together. In the one tale,
French-Canadian nurse Hana (Juliette Binoche, radiant as
ever) deserts her Red Cross convoy to care for a badly burned
man identified only as "English patient" -- he was rescued by
Bedouin tribesmen after Nazi gunners shot his plane out of
the air over the Sahara. This patient is essentially a corpse
waiting to lose consciousness, but he retains some shred of
good humor; under interrogation over his nationality, he
cracks, "I'm a bit of toast, my friend -- butter me and slip
a poached egg on top."
Nationality matters a great deal as World War II winds down,
and being revealed as a German would be the worst fate to
befall a patient in an Italian hospital circa 1944, even one
so badly scarred as this. We soon learn that he's not English
at all; he's the Hungarian Count Laszlo de Almasy (Ralph
Fiennes), and he was a cartographer in the employ of the
British government. It's the tale leading up to that
beautifully rendered but ill-fated flight over the Sahara
which constitutes the second, arguably more compelling, story
of THE ENGLISH PATIENT.
It's an absolute pleasure to follow these characters through
the film's 160-minute length. Minghella is a confident
director surrounded by expert performers, and he's created a
swooning, full-tilt epic of desire, betrayal, war-tattered
lives, and landscapes shaped like a woman's body. Navigating
a world littered with bombs and mines, these characters
nurture passions that will reverberate across borders and
echo through time. Chief among these is the wickedly
intellectual affair between Almasy and Katherine Clifton
(Kristin Scott Thomas), the wife of another member of his
expedition.
Meanwhile (at least in terms of screen time), Hana is falling
in love, not with her patient, but with Kip (Naveen Andrews)
a Sikh bomb disposal expert who enters her life by shooing
her away from the monastery's piano -- he fears the Germans
have mined it, and he's right. Kip sets up camp nearby, and
helps Hana care for her patient. He tries to read Rudyard
Kipling aloud to the patient, and the two of them get into an
argument over the prose. "Your eye is too impatient," the
patient scolds him. "Think about the speed of his pen."
Later, Kip will lure Hana to his bedroom with a trail of
snail-shell lamps, and will send her on a rope-and-pulleys
tour of a frescoed church. Such shamelessly romantic conceits
are the stuff that makes this film go, and mostly it just
goes beautifully.
Scott Thomas's performance has been singled out for special
praise, but in truth they are all remarkable, from Fiennes'
handsomely tormented lead to Willem Dafoe's mysterious,
thumbless Caravaggio. John Seale's cinematography is mostly
stunning, although the sameness of the orange tones gets to
be a little much in such a lengthy outing. Film editor Walter
Murch (instrumental in the editing and sound design of
APOCALYPSE NOW) doubtless deserves special praise for his
world-class technique -- Minghella acknowledges that the
film's mostly seamless feat of flitting over and over again
from setting to setting was largely conceived and achieved in
the cutting room. Murch's instinctive cutting style is a big
part of what makes THE ENGLISH PATIENT so convincing. In the
final scenes, as Binoche hitches a ride to Florence on the
back of a truck, we cross-cut from a shot of that biplane,
once again in the sky over the Sahara, to a shot of Binoche's
face, reaching some kind of resolution at last, to a shot of
trees on the roadside, filtering and flickering the sunlight
as we ride past, and finally to the sun itself, blazing pure
white on the cinema screen (the credits roll over this in
black). I can't explain exactly what such a sequence means --
but if I could, it wouldn't be pure cinema. It is.
The big-screen tricks Minghella brings to bear on this story
aren't exactly high-concept, but they work like a charm --
the biplane flight that opens and closes the film is
impossibly romantic and surreal (to ironic effect), Fred
Astaire sings "Cheek to Cheek" on the soundtrack (to
devastating effect), and a crucial plane crash in the latter
reels is almost frighteningly effective -- you feel like the
audience at one of the first demonstrations of moving
pictures, who reportedly leapt out of their seats with fear
as a locomotive apparently bore down upon them. If anything,
THE ENGLISH PATIENT has too many ideas and too much
portentous symbology for its own good -- a common affliction
of movies that try to pack too many signs and metaphors from
source novels into their own text. For its flaws, and despite
a patch during the third act where it seems to lose its way,
THE ENGLISH PATIENT is one bold melodrama. From beginning to
end, it's gasping for air and striving for greatness. It
never quite reaches that summit, but it's an intoxicating
view all the same.

Author
Craig Good
If a better movie comes out this year, I'd sure like to see it.
"The English Patient" is a gripping, complex, emotional and surprizing
movie.  It is in many ways (all of them good) a very old-fashioned
film, and yet it is fresh and lacking even a hint of cliche. Every time
I tried to predict what a character was going to do, or which character
was going to fall in love with whom, I was wrong. And I'm rarely so
happy to be proven wrong so many times in one day.
This is, in a way, a difficult movie to review. On the one hand it
could leave me gasping for appropriate adjectives. On the other, I'd
hate to spoil even one moment of discovery for those going to see it.
Forgive me if I write in generalities.
The script is truly a thing of beauty. Each character is a living,
breathing individual. I was particularly fascinated with Ralph Fienes'
character: I spent the movie not knowing if I should admire him, hate
him or pity him. At the end I realized that he had too many dimensions
to allow such pidgeon-holing. Calling this simply a "love story" would
be like calling a computer an adding machine. It deals with attraction,
lust, obsession, betrayal, self-destruction, honor, revenge, mercy,
anger, art and pity. Oh, forget it. I can't make a complete list, nor
should I try. As David Lynch said, "If you can talk about it you aren't
using cinema".
Everything about the production is finely crafted. The cinematography
of Italy and Tunesia is gorgeous. The music is perfect. The audio mix
is the kind of genius you expect with Walter Murch on the project. It
is clearly evident that everybody working on the film knew they had
something here which was special; in which they could take pride. This
is the kind of movie wich makes me glad that movies were invented. It's
ample balm for the summer bombs we sat through.
If we don't hear the title "The English Patient" a *lot* at Oscar time,
the Academy should be dropped in the desert and abandoned.

Author
Christopher Null
     Just so you know, "patient" refers to a man with a medical
condition, not the ability to sit through a film that flirts with a
three hour running time.
     You think I'm kidding, but I'm *serious* -- THE ENGLISH PATIENT has
got to be the longest romance movie I've ever seen.  Well, OUT OF AFRICA
was awfully long, too, but that doesn't make it okay!  (Like your mother
might say, "If Meryl Streep jumped off a cliff, would you do it too?")
     Okay, I'm being melodramatic, but my three hours in the front row
(not by choice) didn't do my neck a bit of good, and if this review
seems a bit grumpy, I refuse to be held responsible.
     THE ENGLISH PATIENT is a grand tale of love and loss set during the
backdrop of the African theatre of WWII.  Told using a structure that
busts Hollywood's Three Acts wide open, we follow a man we eventually
come to know as The Count (Ralph Fiennes), whose plane has been shot
down near the start of the war.  Horribly disfigured in the resulting
fire and an apparent amnesiac, the Count finds himself in the hands of
Hana (Juliette Binoche), a Canadian nurse.  While the war plays out,
with Hana and the Count holed up in an abandoned monastery, so does the
truth about the Count's past -- an intrigue-filled tale of adventure,
love, and tragedy.
     Fiennes is spectacular is the mystery man, and Kristin Scott Thomas
(who plays the Count's flashback love interest) shows that, when she
dyes her hair blonde, she can seriously burn up the screen.  Also look
for Willem Dafoe in one of his most earnest and accessible roles to
date.  Serious praises are deserved by the film's art director and
editor, and I'll be absolutely shocked if THE ENGLISH PATIENT doesn't
take home a Best Makeup Design Oscar.
     The only problem with the film, besides severe butt-ache, is a
number of holes in writer/director Anthony Minghella's (TRULY MADLY
DEEPLY) screenplay.  You'd think that with that extra hour, he could
fill these holes up, but I guess not.
     No matter.  THE ENGLISH PATIENT is still a solid story and an
exquisitely-produced film.  There's always enough going on to hold the
viewer's eye, or even get you to shed a tear or two.  Just be forewarned
that the best films always have sad endings.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Martin Rich
So much has been written about 'The English Patient' - about its twelve 
Oscar nominations and about the interest that it has generated in 
America and about its relationship with Michael Ondaatje's novel, that 
it's hard to see it without huge expectations.  It is a film on a grand 
scale: its length, and the music, and the huge desert landscapes remind 
us of that, and the principal performances which are grand in their own 
right.
More importantly, the story is strong enough to support such a grand 
interpretation.  There are two intertwined stories, one in Italy during 
the second world war and one in North Africa a few years earlier.  They 
are linked by the English patient - Ralph Fiennes - who in the later 
story has suffered horrific injuries and apparently total amnesia.
In fact the patient isn't English at all - and we much later discover 
that he has every reason to feel bitterness at the English.  But this 
blurring of national identities is important to the film.  Both he and 
the French-Canadian nurse - Juliette Binoche - who cares for him in the 
wartime scenes, are individuals, nomadic and stateless, and are somehow 
united by their individuality.  It's a powerful portrayal of people who 
don't fit into conventional categories, and the characters in the film 
are stronger for their individuality.
The pre-war scenes centre around an affair between the patient and a 
young, recently-married, British woman - Kristin Scott Thomas.  There 
is a poignant remark about leaving different nations behind and trying 
to build something finer - just as the impending war makes this 
impossible.  In some ways that remark seems like a metaphor for 
twentieth century history.  Certainly the film has a lot to say about 
how the characters' patterns of friendship and trust shift as history 
passes.
Exceptional performances include both the principal actresses: Juliette 
Binoche conveys the most extraordinary range of emotions, and Kristin 
Scott Thomas shifts perfectly from the colonial wife to the flirtatious 
mistress.  But Naveen Andrews' performance as the Sikh bomb disposal 
expert, Kip, also deserves mention, especially in a particularly tense 
scene where he tries to defuse a bomb just as tanks are about to pass 
to celebrate the allied victory.
This is cinema for grown-ups, cinema which really works because it 
leaves points for the audience to interpret, and because it works at 
many levels.  Superficially it is an old-fashioned film, with much 
flying in biplanes and many heroic deeds by dashing men in uniform.  
But this is really a mere allusion to such films, and the way that 'The 
English Patient' addresses colonialism is very contemporary.
Look on it purely as a romance and you might be disappointed.  But look 
more deeply at the portrayal of the people, and their dependence on one 
another, and of the cruelty that's sometimes inflicted in the cause of 
patriotism, and this is one of the most memorable and moving films that 
I have seen.
-- 
Martin Rich  Phone(0171) 477 8627  Fax(0171) 477 8628
Lecturer in Information Management, City University Business School     
Frobisher Crescent, Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB, UK  M.G.Rich@city.ac.uk
http://www.city.ac.uk/martin

Author
Richard Matich
   A RETRO REVIEW BY: RICHARD MATICH
 I was in the local puplic library near my home. The
librarian [an older woman] and I were disscusing the
films we had liked in 1996. I said that this movie, The
English Patient, was both beutiful, epic, and told in a
very different way than the standard "flicks" sold by
the greedy studios. She said that she thought it to be
a bore. A Bore?! I, to this day, can't believe that a
woman would not find this great and romantic story at
least half as compelling as a man like me [a hardnosed
critic] would. Director Anthony Minghella took what was
a very long and "difficult" novel and made sense of it
for the screen. It is wrapped in lush tan hues with
grand desert and skyscapes by cinematographer John
Seale. If thats not enough, veteran sound and film
editor Walter Murch [Apocolypse Now, American Graffiti,
and The GodFather Part II] took to chopping the complex
story into a "non-linear" format. He and his team then
did the hard job of  making every little noise clean
and clear instead of just trying to split audience's
ear drums the way some movie sound is done these days.
Decible levels in movie houses have risen sharply [some
would say dangerously] in recent years. Ralph Fiennes
plays a pilot who is shot down and badly burned. He is
then cared for by a nurse played by Juliette Binoche.
Her life is in turmoil because she keeps losing to
early death every person she has loved dearly. Miss
Binoche makes an audience care for her gentle nurse
while she makes her nurse the most giving person in
almost all of film history. That brings the audience a
very complex and pleasing performance. She stays behind
from her convoy of medical team and patients to care
for this English patient. This mystery man, who keeps
bringing up his own past haunted by tragic loss.
Kristen Scott Thomas has the role of the woman that
ignites a passionate, tored affair with this Englishman
before his burns. Thomas has a screen presence
harkening back to the old studio glamour days of the
30's and 40's, when the studios wanted women to be
"overly stunning" so as to sell a picture to house
wives, secretaries, etc. She does not quite have the
power to keep viewers under her spell the way Garbo or
Crawford did in their heyday, yet she is still very
close. The film has you wanting to know more secrets
right up to the now famous tragic end. Ladies grab your
Kleenex, because The English Patient might just leave
you in tears. Unless you happen to work at the library!
"Promiss me you'll come back for me.-Thomas. "I
promiss. I'll come back for you. I promiss. I'll never
leave you."- The English Patient.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Cross LAWRENCE OF ARABIA with CASABLANCA and, say, THE BRIDGES OF
MADISON COUNTRY and you get this tedious, big-scale bodice-ripper about
a man (Ralph Finnes), a married woman (Kristin Scott Thomas), and their
adventurous romance in North Africa during World War II.  Director
Anthony Minghella (TRULY MADLY DEEPLY) adapts the prize-winning novel
that, in film form, begs the question:  how do you treat a movie fairly
that's so obviously overlong?  Especially one that's told in flashback,
meaning that the audience has way too much time to figure out what
happens before it happens.  There are *some* surprises to keep you
awake: an exciting sandstorm, a tense bomb-defusing sequence, and a very
cool airplane crash.  Ms. Thomas gives a passionate, bare-all (and I
mean, bare *all*) performance that miraculously resonates through the
entire almost-three-hour running time.  (Believing the early attraction
between her and Ralph Finnes is another matter.  But, hey, they do
generate some steam!)
     At the packed screening that I saw, butts were growing numb by the
second hour.  A steady stream of survivors knocked knees and sent beer
bottles barreling as they bee-lined for the lobby, or the bathroom, or
the nearest store selling No-Doze.  Oh, sure, there's probably a lean
masterpiece in here, somewhere.  A two-hour quickie that retains the
epic scope, exotic flavor, and big, boo-hoo pay-off.  (Or, perhaps, a
four-hour version with easy-to-follow time shifts and characters who
don't disappear five minutes after we meet them.) Bottom line, THE
ENGLISH PATIENT is a long sit.  The viewer has too much time to think
about other stuff, such as, say, why Willem Dafoe's character doesn't
have anything to do, or if Ralph Finnes might make a good Indiana Jones,
or how the filmmakers kept a straight face while recording those swel-
ling, smothering strings?
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, R, 160 minutes [2 hours, 40 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Ralph Fiennes (Count Laszlo de Almasy), Kristin Scott-Thomas
(Katherine Clifton), Juliette Binoche (Hana), Willem Dafoe (Caravaggio -
"Moose"), produced by Saul Zaentz, written and directed by Anthony Minghella,
based on the novel by Michael Ondaatje.
I walked into "The English Patient" expecting to see "an epic story of love
and war," and unfortunately, that's exactly what I got. This is one of the
most disguised films I've ever seen; a melodramatic soap opera pretending to
be a moving and touching film of grand proportions. It has very little charm,
characters without depth, and a very formulated, predictable, and boring
story.
Ralph Fiennes stars as Count Laszlo de Almasy, who is some kind of British
military intelligence officer fighting in World War II. As the film opens, he
is shot down in his biplane and burned very badly. He is taken in by a MASH
unit and later moved to a deserted house way out in the Italian countryside
where a nurse named Hana (Binoche) takes care of him and listens to his long
story of how he got to where he is now. 
One of the film's biggest flaws is present immediately, as it takes a long
time for this little amount of action to occur. It also feels the need to use
every overly dramatic and sappy device possible. Hana's entire character
allows for countless cliches: she has a heart of gold kisses wounded
soldiers; her friend is killed five seconds after she says "I love you" to
her; she actually says aloud why she cares for her patients. Even the fact
that Almasy's disfigured face is constantly shown is a bit melodramatic. We
feel sorry for him because of his appearance, not because of his character.
What makes for good love stories is characterization of the lovers, their
chemistry, and their situation. This film establishes none of these, instead
it just depicts a passionate affair we're supposed to care about. Through
constant flashbacks we learn Almasy was part of an Allied military troupe,
and from the moment Katherine (Scott-Thomas) (his friend's wife) appears, it
is obvious they will fall for each other. But there is no substance to their
so-called relationship. The dialogue is too poetic and overly romantic, and
therefore completely unbelievable because people don't talk so eloquently, so
Shakesperian-esque in reality.
The actual storytelling is very choppy: it skips back and forth between the
present and the past just as something starts to become interesting. And then
when Almasy's relationship seemed to be the driving force for the film, it is
nearly forgotten as the focus shifts to the nurse and her romantic encounter
with an Indian bomb defuser, and then to a Canadian spy named Caravaggio -
"Moose" (Dafoe). Some of the individual scenes showing the characters'
stories are interesting, but nothing comes together as a whole. 
Usually it is the action/adventure movies that contain the most unbelievable
events, but melodrama often does the same thing. Katherine and her husband
are involved in a plane crash, but miraculously only Katherine survives. Then
there is the typical scene where Almasy drags her to a cave (in the middle of
the desert) and promises to return with help. He survives a three-day walk
through the burning desert to an embassy of some sort, but is arrested when
he is considered insane. He then proceeds to single-handedly escape his
shackles, jumps off a speeding train, and then is able to find the exact same
cave. And I thought "Indiana Jones" was a bit over the top!
I walked out of "The English Patient" very frustrated and disappointed. The
film does have a good sense of style and production, but its plot is
shamefully exploitative and its storytelling is jumbled. I can usually detect
subtle-but-powerful emotions and plot devices, but I didn't see anything
remotely profound here.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     An international group of archeologists is engaged in making maps
in the previously uncharted desert in Egypt.  The leader is Almasy
(Ralph Fiennes), a Hungarian, and his explorer partner, Peter Madox
(Julian Wadham.)  Also prominent is a  newly married English couple,
the Clintons.  Husband Geoffrey (Colin Firth) is interested in
aviation;  his wife Katharine (Kristin Scott Thomas) is an outspoken
fearless  woman, well educated as well as being a painter.
     Without having planned it, Almasy and Katharine suddenly fall in
love, hopelessly and erotically.  When World War II breaks out, this
international group of friends and co- workers find they are now also
nationalists; more so than friends.  Add to this that Geoffrey
discovers his wife is being unfaithful with Almasy,
     The movie moves back and forth in time.  Hana, a French-Canadian
nurse suddenly loses a close friend when that nurse steps on a land
mine.   Hana is filled with a feeling that  anyone she touches is
getting the kiss of death.  As the convoy of wounded moves along she
decides she will devote her life to a badly burned soldier, to make
what are surely his last days as comfortable as possible.  When the
convoy passes a bombed-out monastery, she has them unload the patient
(henceforth referred to as The English Patient as they do not know his
name) and has him taken to the monastery and settled into a bed she had
just cleaned..
     Here the film ask the viewer to make judgments.  The patient's
only possession is a Greek history book with some personal letters,
photos,  drawings and maps in the book.   Hana reads to him and what
she reads jogs his memory which we see in flashbacks that give the
viewer an idea of who The English Patient is (or may be) and what he
had experienced, including a plane crash that resulted in  burns over
all of his face and body.
    There is more.  There is Kim, (Naveen Andrews) young and handsome,
a Sikh bomb-defusing expert, There is Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe) who has
had his fingers cut off for refusing to give the Germans any
information.    All of these people and their stories are woven into
the film as each plays a role with the others in a tense, dramatic film
that will make you think long after you have left the theater.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Audiences are in favor of love stories told in the traditional Hollywood
manner: sweeping locales, breathtaking scenery, crisp dialogue, and, more
importantly, romantic chemistry between two gorgeous Hollywood stars. We have
been privy to sweeping love stories such as "Sense and Sensibility," which was
much admired by Hollywood and the Academy Awards, as was "Titanic." In 1996, it
was "The English Patient," a flawed yet superbly acted romantic tragedy told
mostly in flashbacks, and set prior to World War II. It's "Brief Encounter"
crossed with "Lawrence of Arabia" (funny that they were both directed by David
Lean). It has romance to spare but, in terms of tragic love, it doesn't have
much weight.
"The English Patient" is the Hungarian Count Almasy (Ralph Fiennes), who is on
an expedition with a group of cartographers in the blazingly hot desert of
North Africa. It is there that he meets and falls in love with Katherine
Clifton (Kristin Scott Thomas), the noble, beautiful wife of one of the
cartographers. When Katherine's husband leaves for another expedition, the two
embark on a passionate love affair, instigated by their bonding in a sandstorm.
Count Almasy is the narrator of the film, telling his story in a deathbed after
being horribly burned in a plane crash. He's cared for by his nurse, Hana
(Juliette Binoche), who decides to stay in a nearly decrepit castle with this
"english patient." The present storyline is set during the last days of World
War II, but the Count remains haunted by Katharine's death and by the intrusion
of a wandering thief, Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe) - he recognizes the Count and
suffers a physical handicap as well. 
"The English Patient" is a beautifully mounted film told in the typical
Hollywood style - the opening shot of the contours of the desert layered
against a plane flying overhead is an extraordinary moment to behold. The movie
has all the right ingredients of an old-fashioned Hollywood romance yet it
somehow manages to trivialize the crucial romance...between Almasy and
Katherine. Their relationship leaves you out in the cold because
writer-director Anthony Minghella ("Truly, Madly, Deeply") truncates too many
scenes between them. The strong passionate romance is only suggested and,
therefore, it misses at becoming an affair we can become involved in and its
eventual tragic repercussions.        That leaves room for the other supporting
characters such as the always grinning Hana, who is completely devoted to
Almasy, and falls in love with an Indian soldier, Kip (Naveen Andrews). There's
also the thief and morphine addict, Caravaggio, who has a personal vendetta
against our scarred hero. This is a character who becomes secondary and trivial
when comparing to the overwhelming love stories the movie wants to tell.
Caravaggio keeps intruding the narrative.
The relationship between Hana and Kip is sweet and invigorating, and it
climaxes with Ella Fitzgerald singing "Cheek to Cheek" on the soundtrack.
There's also a moment that is quite intoxicating - it is when Hana observes a
bare-chested Kip washing his long, flowing black hair. She is aroused by it,
and it is a moment that is as breathtaking as you can imagine - a moment to
stop time. There are several scenes like that especially when Hana and Kip
elevate themselves with a harness to look at an enormous painting using flares
in the darkness. These are precisely the moments missing in the
Almasy-Katherine affair.
The love affair between Almasy and Katharine is handled with just as much
discretion but it feels wrongfully neglected. The chemistry between Ralph
Fiennes and Kristin Scott Thomas crackles with excitement yet the affair is not
equally handled as scorchingly - Ralph Fiennes's performance is fine but he
projects a cold, detached mood that deemphasizes the love story. As Almasy
reminisces in his final days about her, it becomes just that - a reminiscence
lacking in substance. We see how much they love each other but we never really
see how they become in love with another. It is really only the love affair
between Hana and Kip that makes us feel the passion and commitment between two
lovers. The late, great director David Lean, who made some of the most
enlightening romances of the last thirty years, showed you the passion and the
tragic loss of love in its entirety.
"The English Patient" is an exquisite film, and it is beautifully acted by all
the principal actors. It certainly makes you see the tragic consequences of
their love affair, but it doesn't invite you to share them. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Brian Koller
"The English Patient" dominated the 1997 Academy Awards,
nearly sweeping the important technical awards (Best Picture,
Best Director, Best Cinematography, Best Score, Best Costumes,
Best Editing).  The film had a host of acting nominations
(Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Supporting Actress) but
no awards, perhaps because the cast was not famous enough.
Impressed by the honors disposed by the Academy, a flood
of people rushed to the video store to rent "The English
Patient", having ignored it while it played in theaters.
They were confronted with a slow-moving art film nearly
three hours in length.  Lots of great cinematography,
a heavy dose of romance, an unfamiliar (except Willem Dafoe)
cast, and a definite lack of action and stock characters.
I was a little disappointed by "The English Patient"
as well.  John Seale's cinematography is excellent, and
the script is intelligent and appropriately sparse.
But while it is a very good film, it is not outstanding.
The film is slowly paced and drags at times.  The half
of the story featuring nurse Juliette Binoche is not as
interesting as the half featuring pre-patient Ralph Fiennes.
Also (this complaint is really petty) the burn victim
is a dead ringer for the shape-shifter character on
"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine".
"The English Patient" has two storylines, one set in
1945 Italy, the other in 1938-1944 Africa.  The first
story has Binoche playing a vibrant nurse who believes
that she is cursed: everyone that she loves dies.
She falls for seriously burned Fiennes, and has him
taken to a deserted monastery.  They are soon visited
by threatening refugee Dafoe, who suspects that Fiennes
is a traitor, and Naveen Andrews, an Indian bomb squad
specialist who serves as love interest for Binoche.
The story of Fiennes' jaded but impassioned character is
told in intermittent flashbacks.  He works for the British,
making maps of Africa just prior to World War II.  Lovely
Kristin Scott Thomas, wife of one of Fiennes' friends,
joins the expedition.  Thomas and Fiennes are thrown together
by events, and they have a torrid affair.  Her husband
(Colin Firth) suspects.
"The English Patient" is beautifully filmed, but not
emotionally moving.  The tearjerker ending is a little
contrived, and falls just short.  There is one heckuva
plane crash, however.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Eugene Xia
A piece of rough brown paper fills the screen.  
A brush gently traces an abstract figure of an 
ancient swimmer.  The brown canvas gradually 
transforms into a blurred image of the ancient 
Sahara that suggests a feminine body and surmises 
infinity.  The swimmer fades into a bi-plane 
that along with Wagner-like music soars above 
the desert and, true to Wagnerian form, bursts 
into a blazing fire.
Like so many epic poems, The English Patient 
begins its story in the middle.  From this point, 
it relates two love stories, one in the past and 
one in the future.  The one in the past is 
constructed in the tradition of a grand romantic 
tragedy.  It is a story of forbidden love:  Two 
people driven and compelled by passion to do 
something the ordinary people would never do.  While 
the events of that story happened only a few years 
ago, the setting suggests that it might as well 
have happened thousands of years ago.  The remote 
desert serves as a vast theater upon which a grand 
tragedy unfolds as similar events must have occurred 
and repeated again and again for countless many times.
As a perfect theater, the desert remains the same for 
eons leaving no trace of the drama that once unfolded 
upon it.
It is a cosmic story.  The two main characters were 
carefully and deliberately constructed out of 
their respected space and time--remote, grand and 
mythical.  Unlike the people around them, they were 
the only ones who truly lived in and belonged to the 
desert, and totally oblivious to the contemporary 
events unfolding around them.  They understood the 
desert and its intricate language and the desert 
embraced them.  They never said much to each other, 
but the desert spoke for them and declared their love--
the sand storm and the stars it obliterated, 
Herodotus and his story of Gyges and the rain of 
blood on the English coast, a place and time even 
more remote than the desert.  They lived in the time 
and the cave of the swimmers.
In an ancient monastery of Italy, another love 
story unfolds--not grand and cosmic, but an 
intimate one of plums, gardens and olive oil.  In 
contrast to the desert which obliterates everything, 
here all is green and steeped in history.  In this 
story, Count Almasy is like an ancient relic both 
physically and psychologically.  Structurally, all 
this serves to push the first story further back 
in time.  Ultimately, this too is a story of doomed 
love, but in a very human way.
The four lead actors did a fine job, but not outstanding.
In a film of this nature, a competent performance is all 
that is required.  Fiennes and Thomas come out far 
better than Andrews and Binoche but this is because 
Fiennes and Thomas had roles that are far better written.  
Binoche's character had a few cliches such as "Everyone 
I loved is dead" and in general suffers from talking a 
bit too much.  Andrews' character is not well developed.
The true star of the film is the desert and the desert 
speaks with the most solemn voice.  There was a scene 
in which a few characters exchanged a few comic lines.  
Then suddenly, came this overwhelming echo of a Muslim 
prayer.  Before seeing this film, I always thought 
these prayers a bit quaint.
Toward the end, we return to the desert with Almasy as his
plane takes off while Hana and Kathrine's voices merge 
into one, declaring they being the real country, and we 
remember the image of the infinite Sahara at the beginning
that resembles a feminine body.

Author
John Bauer
Accepting his Oscar as producer of this year's Best Picture winner, Saul
Zaentz remarked that his cup runneth over.  One could almost say the same
about his much-prized film.  Rarely is the screen so overflowing with potent
imagery, symbolism, ideas and metaphors, complex and literate storytelling,
all possessed of an intelligence that invites -- even demands -- constant
scrutiny, an acuity of perception and observation that must somehow yield the
truth.  In short, the antithesis of all things Hollywood.  Yet this surfeit
of signals is made to serve a rather pale and thinly realized love story
whose emotional impact is as dry as a desert wind.
Ralph Fiennes is the title character, an amnesiac burn victim whose gradual
return to memory, and particularly the memory of love, is the ostensible
focus of the film.  But despite the use of numerous flashbacks to help put
the pieces of this personal puzzle together, we never learn enough about the
man to feel much empathy for him.  His emotional life before the story begins
is an essential clue that remains withheld.  The same can easily be said for
every other character in the film, of which there are too many.
Juliette Binoche's nurse comes as close as this film gets to an emotional
heart.  At least we learn early on that she is scarred by the deaths of those
close to her, and so we understand why she is eager to escape the company of
her comrades in order to seek refuge in the convalescence of a mysterious,
disfigured, dying stranger.  Even this information is imparted so quickly and
in such cursory fashion, however, that it verges on the comical.
With so many characters enjoying so little screen time, the film's 160
minutes can be taxing.  Yet there is something so captivating about the
sensibility behind the camera that I couldn't help but feel that greatness
was in the air.  Hints of it were everywhere -- in a man who hates ownership
but wants desperately to possess his lover; in ancient cave paintings of
swimmers copied casually by a modern-day swimmer in the Sahara; in the way
the shifting sands of time obliterate everything more completely than a world
war.  There is enough latent meaning to supply college film students with
paper topics for years.  But ultimately the emotional truths writer-director
Anthony Minghella was grasping for were never revealed.
In the end, I was left with the impression that I had witnessed quite an
oxymoron:  a haunting bore.  Bore is perhaps too strong a word.  But after
drinking in the rich production values, the cup remains only slightly over
half-full.
April 22, 1997 

Author
Michael Dequina
all movies graded out of four stars (****)
The English Patient (R) ****
        All across the country critics and sell-out crowdshave been going
ga-ga over Anthony Minghella's adaptation of Michael Ondaatje's complex
WWII-set novel, and it's easy to see why.  This highly passionate and moving
drama centers on a severely burned, amnesiac pilot (Ralph Fiennes), who,
through, a series of flashbacks, puts together the pieces of his past, in
particular his intense love affair with a married woman (Kristin Scott
Thomas).  This love story plays against one blossoming between the pilot's
French Canadian nurse (Juliette Binoche) and an Indian bomb and mine defuser
(Naveen Andrews).  The film last a little over 160 minutes and takes its
time answering its own narrative questions, but one is completely captivated
throughout the entire film, thanks in no small part to the excellent
performances, the sizzling chemistry between Fiennes and Scott Thomas, and
the all-consuming passion and conviction of its story.  This very impressive
achievement for all involved is sure to be an Oscar contender next March.
Jingle All the Way (PG) ** 1/2
        If it weren't for the credits "A Brian Levant Film" and "Directed by
Brian Levant," one would be certain that the director behind this family
comedy was Home Alone's Chris Columbus, for its wall-to-wall slapstick sure
bears the Columbus stamp (he actually only produced).  If you know what I'm
talking about, then you know all you really need to know about this tale of
two stressed-out fathers (Arnold Schwarzenegger and a scene-stealing Sinbad)
trying to find the hottest action figure of the season, Turbo Man, on
Christmas Eve to give to their respective sons.  The first hour is what you
would expect from a Columbus production, with cartoony fights, lots of stuff
being knocked down and tripped over, and ceaseless mugging (which, needless
to say, is _not_ Schwarzenegger's strong suit).  What keeps this kidpleaser
from being completely tired is the surprising special effects-laden final
act.  No point in blowing the specifics, but this film's closing twenty
minutes or so are more funny and entertaining than the hour which precedes
it.  Only a must-see for Arnold fanatics and fans of that broad,
oh-so-Columbus-y brand of slapstick.
Shine (PG-13) *** 1/2
        Scott Hicks's film of the life story of Australian pianist David
Helfgott is inspiring, memorable cinema--the kind of film that Oscar voters
go ga-ga for.  We follow David (played as a child by Alex Rafalowicz, then
as an adolescent by Noah Taylor) as he gains early fame for his remarkable
talent and then, while studying at London's Royal College, suffer a
debiliatating mental breakdown--thanks in no small part to the stress put on
him by his domineering father (Armin Mueller-Stahl).  Years pass, and
40-something David (now played by Geoffrey Rush) is a mumbling mental case
prone to public nudity and grabbing women's breasts.  But slowly, surely,
with the help of friends and the love of a woman (Lynn Redgrave), he finds
his way back to the piano and the glory that came with it.
        Shine is at its best in its first half, focusing on the fascinating
and heartbreaking relationship between father and son--brought to vivid life
by Taylor and Mueller-Stahl, who is so painfully real as a man who obviously
loves his son immensely yet just can't express it the right way.  The second
half is highly involving and inspiring, but without the captivating
Mueller-Stahl and the compelling father-son dynamic at the forefront, it
can't quite match the emotional power of the opening.  Even the ending
doesn't pack the punch one would expect, but Hicks should be commended for
that, for the light close is in line with his admirable eschewing of overt
melodramatics.  Like The Crying Game back in 1992, Shine should be "the
little indie that could"; with a passionate groundswell of support, it will
undoubtedly be a major award contender in March.
The War at Home (R) * 1/2
        Director-star Emilio Estevez's Vietnam vet drama is a mess, pure and
simple.  In this adaptation of James Duff's play Homefront (Duff also wrote
the screenplay), Estevez plays an embittered vet who comes home to his
family in 1972 Texas; his tensions with the family form the center of the
film.  Kathy Bates is fabulous as Estevez's histrionic nag of a mother, and
Martin Sheen and Kimberly Williams also shine as Estevez's father and
sister.  The root of the film's troubles?  Estevez himself, both in front of
and behind the camera.  As an actor, Estevez doesn't have the range to pull
off the emotional fluctuations of the character; the fact that he is also
not the warmest presence onscreen makes it hard to care about his central
character.  The even greater problems lie in his direction.  The tone of the
piece is completely confused; most of the scenes of familial tension and
arguing play as farce, and at the drop of a hat the music changes, people
start yelling and crying, and everything is played in earnest.  Sometimes
the tones overlap--in one dramatic moment, an upset Bates yells at and slaps
Estevez, and suddenly Sheen brings up the subject of stolen peanut
brittle--and the audience isn't sure exactly how to feel, whether to cry or
laugh.  In the end, I don't know if anyone will know exactly what emotional
reaction Estevez was going after; I sure didn't.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Ivana Redwine
Starring: Ralph Fiennes, Juliette Binoche, Willem Dafoe, Kristin Scott 
Thomas, Naveen Andrews, Colin Firth, Julian Wadham, Juergen Prochnow, 
Kevin Whately, Clive Merrison, Nino Castelnuovo, Hichem Rostom. 
Directed by Anthony Minghella. Screenplay: Anthony Minghella, based on 
a novel by Michael Ondaatje. MPAA Rating: R (Sexuality, Violence, 
Language). Running Time:162 Minutes.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers.
A brilliant, if rather loose, adaptation of Michael Ondaatje's popular 
prizewinning novel, THE ENGLISH PATIENT is an intellectually intense 
and psychologically complex film that conveys the haunting power of 
memory. A great screen romance in the tradition of CASABLANCA and DR. 
ZHIVAGO, the film is also a tragedy and a fascinating mystery. 
Moreover, THE ENGLISH PATIENT takes on such subjects as the horror of  
war and the power of love.
The film is set in the late 1930s and early 1940s against the backdrop 
of World War II. Most of the earlier events take place in the North 
African desert, while the later part of the story is set in an 
abandoned ruined monastery a few miles from Florence, Italy. However, 
a nonlinear narrative structure is employed throughout, giving the 
film a dreamlike, enigmatic quality. 
The film begins and ends with a sequence of images of a man and a 
woman  in a two-seat biplane flying over sand dunes. A little later, 
the plane is shot down and explodes into flames. Everything about the 
plane and its occupants is a mystery that the film unravels slowly. 
The mystery is maintained throughout the film; what happened to the 
plane and its occupants is not completely revealed until the end. 
The title THE ENGLISH PATIENT refers to the man in the plane who,  
after being rescued in the North African desert by a nomadic tribe, 
ends up in the caravan of a field hospital. Since he has been burned 
beyond recognition and he claims to be unable to remember anything, 
his identity cannot be established any further than a guess at his 
nationality based upon the sounds of his speech. 
During the waning days of the war, a young Canadian nurse named Hana 
(Juliette Binoche) takes pity on the man and leaves her unit so she 
can stay with him at an isolated bombed-out monastery in Tuscany where 
he can die in peace. It is at the monastery that the film begins its 
extensive use of flashbacks. The patient is given morphine by Hana for 
the intense pain from his burns, and he drifts in and out of 
consciousness. It emerges that the patient is actually a Hungarian 
count named Laszlo Almasy (Ralph Fiennes), who begins to reminisce 
about a torrid, adulterous affair in prewar North Africa with an  
Englishwoman named Katherine Clifton (Kristin Scott Thomas). With his 
body broken and its pain numbed by morphine, his memory of Katherine 
is the only thing that still has vibrant life for him. These 
flashbacks are presented in a manner that is both emotionally and 
cinematically extremely vivid to emphasize the indelible nature of 
this love. 
We eventually learn that Almasy's affair with Katherine unleashed a 
tragic chain of events that rippled through his own life and the lives 
of others. A man named Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe), whose thumbs were 
cut off by the Nazis, comes to the monastery to kill Almasy because he 
believes Almasy partially responsible for the mutilation of his 
hands. But after hearing Almasy's story, Caravaggio cannot bring 
himself to kill him. Thus the film is not only about the price that 
Almasy pays for passion, it is also about forgiveness.
Hana, Almasy, and Caravaggio are joined at the monastery by Kip 
(Naveen Andrews), a young Sikh from India who is an expert at 
deactivating mines and bombs. A sweet love develops between Kip and 
the nurse, serving as a counterpoint to the shady affair between 
Almasy and Katherine.
There are many good performances in this film, but I thought that the 
strongest belonged to Ralph Fiennes and Kristin Scott Thomas. Not only 
was their acting superb, but they had the chemistry of a great screen 
couple.
Ralph Fiennes gives an extraordinary performance as Count Laszlo 
Almasy. He portrays a man whose intellectual veneer cannot completely 
mask his heart's capacity for passion. What was remarkable to me was 
how Fiennes was able to convey such a wide spectrum of emotion using 
his eyes and voice when he was wearing a mask of scars.
Kristin Scott Thomas as Katherine Clifton is a self-confident femme 
fatale. Her intelligence and spirit are as much a part of her sex 
appeal as the way she looks. She is brave enough to take on the 
dangers of the desert, but she also betrays her husband with 
sang-froid. 
Juliette Binoche's wonderfully expressive face is her greatest asset 
in this role, bringing to life the angelic compassion, child-like joy, 
and the spectrum of other emotions--including despair--that Hana 
experiences. 
Naveen Andrews does a good job of portraying Kip. Like Almasy, he is a 
man whose cool surface covers his inner capacity for emotion. By day 
he defuses bombs with cool deliberation; by night he is Hana's ardent 
lover. 
Dafoe's Carvaggio is a dangerous and mysterious man who masks his 
anger with a strange charm. Yet, Caravaggio is not an entirely 
convincing character in the movie. I think this is because he is 
reduced to little more than a sketch in the screenplay, rather than 
because of Dafoe's acting. 
Colin Firth is quite good as Katherine's husband, Geoffrey Clifton. 
He is an affable fellow; yet when he realizes that he has become a 
cuckold, his face reflects a quiet fury.
Those who have read Ondaatje's novel should be forewarned that the 
story told in the movie differs in many ways, both large and small. 
The biggest difference is that the film expands the love story between 
the Count and Katherine, while drastically curtailing the roles of the 
other characters. In particular, the role of Kip is much smaller in 
the film than in the novel.
Although the movie is not faithful to the book from a literary point 
of view, it does find a cinematic equivalent to the poetic qualities 
of the novel: The story makes a breathtaking transition to the more 
visually assertive medium of film. I loved the way the wonderfully 
cinematic imagery worked in concert with the evocative story. From the 
opening sequence, this film is visually stunning. The plane flies over 
gracefully undulating sand dunes that resemble the curves of the human 
body; this visually sets the scene and foreshadows the story in a way 
that words alone never could. The flight over the desert sequence that 
begins and ends the film is dazzling; it is one of the most 
emotionally powerful sequences I've ever seen. And the equivalent of 
the novel's complexity is found in the film's visual density, with 
images echoing other images. For example, when Hana's lover Kip 
designs a device with pulleys that lift Hana up to view the frescos of 
the monastery by the light of flares, the opening sequence of lovers 
in flight is echoed.
Also, this film, like the novel, often juxtaposes both horror and 
lyrical beauty. One sequence where this worked particularly well was 
when Almasy and Katherine were caught in the sandstorm. Katherine 
watches the sandstorm on the horizon hovering like a shroud of fog--an 
image that is both gorgeous and ominous. She is oblivious to the 
danger until Almasy warns her and rushes her into the vehicle where 
they wait out the storm. While they are in the vehicle, the imminent 
danger brings down their emotional armor and they bond.
This is a superbly crafted and hard-hitting film that is 
intellectually and emotionally demanding, but I think that it is well 
worth the effort. Every aspect of this film is exemplary. The 
writer-director Anthony Minghella has created a masterpiece. This film 
is not light entertainment, but if you are up for a serious film, 
movies just don't get much better than this. 

Author
Rob Martin
I ask that you excuse what will most likely amount to blasphemy in
today's obsequious atmosphere of applause and adulation for the recent
motion picture, "The English Patient".  I resisted the urge to see this
so-called masterpiece, but I yielded to such a convincing temptress and
allowed myself to blow eight dollars on what amounted to be a piece of
crap.
Yes, my friends, "The English Patient" is, in almost all aspects, a
veritable pile of dung.  But before you come with thundering horses and
nooses made ready for a quick, do-good-for-society hanging, allow me to
defend my assertion.  I promise my evidence to be convincing and
irrefutable.
Premise A - The characters were neither credible, nor entertaining.
Now, had it been an intriguing story, I would perhaps have remembered
their names.  So, I allude to them through generalities of their
placement in the film.  The English patient himself, that scarred and
crippled body with the interesting lattice-work of burn scars across his
face (which, by the way, proved to be the most memorable part of the
movie), laid on a mattress within a church, plagued by a love-sick,
annoying nurse, and a conniving, vengeful former colleague played by
Willem Dafoe.  He remembers little or nothing, save for every song that's
ever been written.  Oh sure, that's likely.  I can't even remember my
name, but I remember all eighteen stanzas to "Doo-a-Ditty"?
And then we have his former self, the pre-burn victim.  A man who loved a
woman so much he would sell British maps to the Nazis in order to
retrieve her inevitably dead body out of a cave somewhere in the desert,
but after she decided to end the affair and return to her unhappy
marriage, he got drunk and made a fool of himself.  I haven't seen a more
overdone cliche like that since I went to Vegas to see a hundred
bushy-sideburned faux Elvises.
As he breathes his gin-soaked breath upon that spot on her neck he
desperately wanted to own, even though he hated ownership the most, he
embarked on a tirade of her leaving him and then, in a voice notably
sober, declares he wants a dance.  Lock him up in a drunk tank with the
rest of the finished actors - Ralph Fiennes did a better acting job in
"Strange Days".
We mustn't forget, either, the love of his life, some woman whose name
begins with a K.  The strong woman, loyal wife, artistic and passionate -
only to betray not only her husband but their secret mission to some man
who, through his lack of preparation, had her buried in a sandstorm and
forced her to drink radiator water.  But put them in a bedroom and all
that matters is how many shirts have to be torn before dancing the
horizontal mambo.  What woman hops in bed with a guy the first chance she
gets after he almost kills her?  My God, I almost get in a traffic
accident with a woman and the Acme chastity belt is on for a month.
And she hates sewing, yet wears a thimble (I wrote symbol first, how
interesting) around her neck her whole life because she's "always loved
him."  Ha!  That couple were the two biggest dichotomies to hit the
screen since Beavis and Butthead.
Premise B - The parallelisms and allusions were blatantly obvious,
contrived, and cliched.
Take for example, the pre-burn victim and K.  He hates ownership, but
makes a bid on the hollow of her neck.  She refuses to sew, but wears a
thimble about her throat.  They love each other, yet betray their
feelings and run from each other.  A=A, B=B, try being a little less
obvious, please.
A side note here, as it won't fit anywhere else.  Quote:  "The heart is
an organ of fire."  What??  I've heard better poetical metaphors from Dr.
Seuss!  Who the hell wrote this crap anyway?
To continue, we then have the two love stories, one between pre-burn
victim and K., and the nurse and the Arab.  Pre-burn victim is alone, K.
is married.  Nurse is alone, Arab has his partner whom he loves. 
Pre-burn victim has night of passionate love with K.  Nurse has night of
passionate love with Arab.  Pre-burn victim gets shut out when K. puts an
end to it and returns to her husband.  Nurse gets literally shut out of
the barn after Arab's partner is killed.  Pre-burn victim makes ultimate
sacrifice (betray his country by giving maps to Nazis) to rejoin his
love.  Nurse makes ultimate sacrifice (euthanizes English Patient) to
rejoin her love.  To whomever wrote this:  Man loves woman, loses woman,
makes ultimate sacrifice to regain woman.  It's been done!  And it's been
done so many times it's definitely not worth putting two absolutely
identical stories into the same movie.  Christ, what has become of art?
I end this premise with the ugliest, most contrived allusion I've ever
seen.  The book, the compilation of Herodotus, the father of history. 
Pre-burn victim finds his history in a history book.  I'm sorry, but
that's even more obvious than what a woman thinks of me after she's
thrown a drink into my face.
Premise C - The climax of the movie contained a monstrous time continuity
break.
Thanks go to my father for pointing out the blatant time continuity break
within the supposed climax (if a movie like this can actually have a
climax other than to roll credits and provide much-needed relief to the
audience).  The love story between pre-burn victim and K. begins at the
beginning of the war, around 1939, before the Nazis had invaded Egypt and
the surrounding deserts.  Time passes between that, and pre-burn victim
offers over the maps to the Nazis to get them through the deserts,
probably around 1940.  Pre-burn victim retrieves the dead body of his
lover, and is then shot down by enemy fire, burns in the crash, and then
reappears in 1945 or so, FIVE YEARS LATER!  There are three theories
here, two of which, through simple logic, can be eliminated and the
third, owing to simple screenwriting carelessness, must be the case.
K. could have died in 1940 and laid in the cave for five years before
pre-burn victim returns.  Well, her body looked remarkably well-preserved
for five years of death - not even Oil of Olay can accomplish that, even
in the dry heat of the desert.  (Don't forget the moisture inherent in
caves).  Or, pre-burn victim, but now burn victim, thus the English
Patient, was in the care of Arab nomads for five years.  No offense to
the nomad culture, but I doubt their medical facilities are that far
advanced.  So, we return to screenwriter carelessness, which essentially
is the cause of the whole lackluster quality of this motion picture.
Premise D - It wasn't even entertaining.
While many movies cannot be termed "art", they can definitely be
entertaining.  Unfortunately, "The English Patient" was neither.  By
using two hours to tell two identical stories and an hour of useless
cinematographic flim-flam, the producers of this movie spent millions of
dollars to make a Jack Kevorkian medical tool.  For example, at the end
of the movie, truck driving away, shot of sun, then tree, then sun, then
tree, all into a blur - useless!  Means nothing!  The bomb scene, with
the Arab.  Useless!  The jeep being blown up by a mine - useless!  The
egg and omelet scene - useless!  And on and on and on.  In 1984, "Out of
Africa" ran for three hours and every second counted.  Now, in 1997, "The
English Patient" ran for three hours, and two hours and fifty-eight
minutes meant diddley.
Conclusion -  "The English Patient" deserves neither an Oscar, nor even a
nomination.
I hope I've provided a convincing case why "The English Patient" deserves
a spot next to Pauly Shores' "Bio-Dome" on the Blockbuster Video shelves.
 But, of course, somehow this entire country has been brainwashed and it
will be a shoo-in for Best Picture.  What a shame.  From an art form that
brought us "Citizen Kane", "Casablanca", and "Out of Africa", we again
return to mindless, bleached drivel that is supposed to be, by my count
of the good reviews it received, one of the best love stories ever told. 
Nonsense.  Use the celluloid from "The English Patient" to control the
crowds at this year's Oscars - that's all it'll ever be good for.
Permission is granted to rebroadcast, reprint, and redistribute in any
and all mediums, provided that the rebroadcast, reprint, or
redistribution includes all text including title and by-line.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     A biplane flies over the North African desert, the pilot alert,
the passenger, a beautiful woman draped sensuously over the side of the
cockpit.  The plane flies too close to a German position below and they
fire at invader overhead.  The plane bursts into flames.  The pilot
tries to pull out the woman in front of him but ends up being badly
burned himself as the plane crashes.  Some passing Arabs rescue the
badly-burned man and take him to a hospital.  The man cannot tell the
medics what his name is or how he came to be flying over the desert.
The story advances in two lines, one of the disfigured patient (played
by Ralph Fiennes) and his relationship with Hana (Juliette Binoche), a
Canadian nurse who more or less adopts the dying man. Hana is a little
shell-shocked herself as anybody that she grows to care about dies or
is killed soon after. Feeling almost cursed she forms a close
attachment to the scarred patient who is apparently dying anyway. Hana
transports the patient to an abandoned farmhouse near Leghorn/Livorno
and begins tending him full- time.  Soon they are joined a the
farmhouse by Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe) who takes a strange interest in
the scarred man and at times seems to know something of the patient's
past.  They are joined by two more residents, bomb disposal experts.
     The flashback story starts in 1938 before the war and leads up to
the plane crash.  The man who will be the patient is Count Laszlo
Almasy, a handsome young man in the employ of the British government.
Based in Cairo, Almasy is taking part in a project to map the uncharted
regions of the North African desert.  He makes friends with Geoffrey
and Katherine Clifton (Colin Firth and Kristin Scott Thomas).  Together
they discover in the desert a cave with paintings of great
archeological significance.  This throws Laszlo and Katherine together
frequently and though they try hard to ignore each other, but there is
a sexual tension between them and they will inevitably be drawn
together.  The film is based on the novel by Michael Ondaatje, who was
born in Sri Lanka and educated in England, but lives in Canada.
Anthony Minghella wrote and directed this adaptation.
     Ralph Fiennes gives a cool and controlled performance as he always
seems to do.  As in his other films he cuts a dashing figure but
underplays rather than overplaying.  Even in scenes that should call
for deep emotion, his performances are muted and controlled.  He lets
the viewer read emotion into his actions and but for the exception of a
few scenes, that is true for most of the cast of THE ENGLISH PATIENT.
Kristen Scott Thomas is radiant in the desert but uninvolving, more an
icon and an image than a fully developed character.  She seems more
willing to bare her body than her emotions.  Though she has more screen
time than Binoche, I suspect, she never exhibits a personality that
goes much beyond bland.  Binoche is sort of the ideal nurse, but we see
little of what makes her fixate on this one patient.  Still we are able
to react with her in ways we cannot with the other three leads.
     John Seale photographs the story, using pleasant aerial
photography and sprawling views of the desert. There is an effective
scene of a sandstorm.  Minghella takes the image of the Swimming Man,
from the cave found in the desert, and uses it as an image repeatedly
as if it has for him specific meaning.  In fact he opens the film with
the image of the Swimming Man.  He must be seeing Almasy as being in
some way the Swimming Man.  It is a mysterious visual image to make as
important as it is in the visuals.  Its meaning remains a matter of
conjecture for the audience.  For the most part Minghella places
emotional barriers between the characters and the audience, all but
Binoche.  For the most part these figures remain as untouchable and
unemotional as the swimming figures on the cave wall.  Then
surprisingly toward the end of the film Minghella does give us one very
tense, almost melodramatic, scene.  It seem almost a throwaway and out
of place.
     THE ENGLISH PATIENT is a truly adult love story, generally well-
crafted if a little uninvolving.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Miramax)
Starring:  Ralph Fiennes, Juliette Binoche, William Dafoe, Kristin Scott
Thomas, Naveen Andrews, Colin Firth.
Screenplay:  Anthony Minghella.
Producer:  Saul Zaentz.
Director:  Anthony Minghella.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, profanity, violence)
Running Time:  160 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Michael Ondaatje's Booker Prize-winning novel _The English Patient_
looked to be a remarkably difficult work to translate to the screen.  A
tale of intertwined lives which weaves its way through several time
periods with a lyrical, dream-like prose style, it is the kind of
narrative which could turn into a catastrophic failure as much in the
hands of a too-reverential film-maker as a completely oblivious one.  So
Anthony Minghella decided to build his own narrative around what he saw as
the crux of _The English Patient_, and in so doing he has created a
magnificent love story which gives "old-fashioned" a good name.  Though
miles removed from Ondaatje's psychological drama, Minghella's THE ENGLISH
PATIENT stands on its own as a powerful sweeping romance..
     THE ENGLISH PATIENT opens near the end of World War II, with a
Canadian nurse named Hana (Juliette Binoche) who has grown weary of losing
friends and lovers.  When her medical unit is moving through  Italy, Hana
decides to stay behind in an abandoned monastery with one patient, a badly
burned man who can't remember his name and is known only as "the English
patient (Ralph Fiennes).  His identity is of interest, however, to David
Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe), a maimed former Allied agent who believes the
English patient was the Axis spy who gave him up.  Meanwhile, in flashback
we see the patient's memories of himself as the Hungarian count Laszlo de
Almasy, a cartographer exploring the North African desert who meets
Katherine Clifton (Kristin Scott Thomas), the wife of one of his
colleagues.  The two begin an affair which brings Almasy to life, but is
destined to leave him in that makeshift Italian hospital bed.
     Anthony Minghella's resume has thus far consisted of supernatural
romance (TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY) and blue collar romance (MR. WONDERFUL),
but THE ENGLISH PATIENT is a romance with the kind of sweep you associate
with films made, and not merely set, in the 1940s.  Ralph Fiennes turns in
a wonderfully economical performance as Almasy, a reserved man who begins
with the minimalist philosophy that "a thing is a thing" but becomes
utterly intoxicated by the first real passion in his life.  Fiennes is
exceptional behind layers of prosthetics (created by Jim Henson's Creature
Shop), and makes Almasy's later witty resignation entirely consistent with
the man he becomes in the scenes set years earlier.  Kristin Scott Thomas
matches his work with a radiant sensuality, turning the smart, perceptive
Katherine a deserving object of any man's fixation.  Thomas and Fiennes
share the kind of beautiful but intense chemistry movies seem reluctant
to show us in 1996, perhaps afraid that a cynical modern audience will not
be able to take such deeply felt emotions seriously.  It is not every
writer who would risk dialogue like "Every night I cut out my heart, but
in the morning it was full again;" it is not every director who would
stage the defining moment in a relationship -- a scene in which Almasy and
Katherine share a dance to, appropriately enough, "Where or When" -- with
virtually no dialogue, the attraction conveyed through a soul-piercing
gaze by Fiennes.
     Those familiar with the novel may have noticed the conspicuous
absence of Kip Singh, a Sikh bomb defuser who shares an odd affair with
Hana.  Both the character (portrayed by Naveen Andrews) and the
relationship appear in THE ENGLISH PATIENT, but their role is greatly
reduced in Minghella's account, as is that of Caravaggio.  Minghella tries
to link the two love stories in his film, but that may be the one place he
is less than successful -- he has focused his story so decidedly on Almasy
and Katherine that the peripheral characters are sometimes more
distracting than complementary.  It is to Minghella's credit, however,
that he has clarified a number of points in his streamlined narrative,
creating a uniquely powerful story, less intricate and internalized than
Ondaatje's novel but just as involving.
     The quality which may make THE ENGLISH PATIENT so singularly
effective is its refusal to fit into neatly-defined categories of romantic
film-making.  It is emotional, yet it is suspenseful and full of action;
it is intensely personal, yet played against a historical and geographical
backdrop filmed with bronzed grandeur by John Seale; it has moments of
utter seriousness, then subverts a tender moment with an throwaway bit of
comedy where Katherine bangs her head on a girder.  As risky as it might
be to throw around comparisons with classics, THE ENGLISH PATIENT is the
kind of combination of humor, detailed characterization, passion and
politics which recalls CASABLANCA.  Almasy and Katherine may share an
on-screen consummation which cinema could not attempt 50 years ago, but in
most other ways the central love story of THE ENGLISH PATIENT warrants
consideration among the great tragic pairings.  Minghella's risky
adaptation has paid off gloriously, proving they _can_ make 'em like they
used to.

Author
Walter Frith
'The English Patient' is a most lavish and exquisitely filmed epic set
just before and during World War II.  Producer Saul Zaentz who has won two
Academy Awards for his development of 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'
(1975) and 'Amadeus' (1984) brings us this romantic saga that packs a
peculiar power in spite of its dramatic shortcomings.  A member of the
Royal Geographical Society (Ralph Fiennes) has crashed his plane in the
Sahara Desert and is aided by Arabs and a Canadian nurse (Juliette
Binoche).  He is treated for his injuries by her as Allied forces are
travelling through Italy and a Canadian spy, code named "moose" (Willem
Dafoe) arrives on the scene and suspects Fiennes is a member of the German
army.  There is a spark of romantic hint between Binoche and Fiennes which
puts him in mind of a past affair prior to the outbreak of the war with a
married woman (Kristin Scott Thomas).  The story travels back and fourth
from the present to the past told in flashbacks through Fiennes' thoughts.
 This film is based on the novel by Canadian author Michael Ondaatje and
is adapted for the screen by writer and director Anthony Minghella who
combines breathtaking photography by John Seale and rather low key but
interesting performances by this first rate cast.  Its running time of 161
minutes is rather absorbing beyond what it should be and the picture sags
rather badly in its midsection but it is redeemed by a satisfying
conclusion which is both moving and somewhat tragic depending on your
point of view.  Actor Ralph Fiennes is truly a compelling leading man and
proved his acting ability to audiences world wide by turning in a
superlative performance three years ago in 'Schindler's List' as a bone
chilling Nazi commander which brought him an Oscar nomination as Best
Supporting Actor for which he should have won.  'The English Patient' is
more for film buffs than for general audiences and is an intelligent and
literate story told with sensitivity and compassion.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 11/15/96 (limited); 11/22/96 (wide)
Running Length: 2:40
MPAA Classification: R (Sex, nudity, violence, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Kristin Scott Thomas, Juliette Binoche, 
      Willem Dafoe, Colin Firth, Naveen Andrews, Julian Wadham, 
      Kevin Whately, Juergen Prochnow
Director: Anthony Minghella
Producer: Saul Zaentz
Screenplay: Anthony Minghella based on the novel by Michael Ondaatje
Cinematography: John Seale
Music: Gabriel Yared
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     For those who have forgotten the depth of romance and passion that 
the movies are capable of conveying, Anthony Minghella's THE ENGLISH 
PATIENT can remedy the situation.  This is one of the year's most 
unabashed and powerful love stories, using flawless performances, 
intelligent dialogue, crisp camera work, and loaded glances to attain a 
level of eroticism and emotional connection that many similar films 
miss.  
     Is THE ENGLISH PATIENT melodramatic?  Of course, but it's the sort 
of finely-honed melodrama that embraces viewers rather than smothering 
them.  And the movie never resorts to cheap, manipulative tactics.  This 
well-crafted story, brought to the screen with great care by British 
playwright and director Anthony Minghella (TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY) and 
based on the prize-winning novel by Michael Ondaatje, serves up the love 
of Almasy (Ralph Fiennes) and Katharine (Kristin Scott Thomas) in a way 
that is simultaneously epic and intimate.
     THE ENGLISH PATIENT has an elliptical structure, beginning with the 
same scene that it ends with.  In between, it moves several years into 
the future, and even further into the past.  The opening sequence, which 
takes place during World War II, shows a British plane being shot down 
over the North African desert.  The pilot, a Hungarian count named 
Laszlo Almasy, is badly burned in the ensuing crash.  Years later, in 
1944 Italy, we meet him again.  Although his outward injuries have 
healed, leaving his features scarred beyond recognition, he is dying.  
He has also supposedly lost his memory.  Hana (Juliette Binoche), the 
Canadian nurse who cares for him, takes him to an isolated, abandoned 
church to allow him to die in peace.  There, injecting him with morphine 
and reading to him from his beloved volume of Herodotus, Hana seeks to 
seeks to stimulate his memories.  Meanwhile, others arrive at the church 
-- a mysterious, crippled war veteran named Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe), 
who has a hidden agenda, and a pair of bomb experts, the British Sgt. 
Hardy (Kevin Whately) and his Sikh superior, Kip (Naveen Andrews), who 
becomes Hana's lover.
     Eventually, through dreams and waking flashbacks, Almasy's memories 
come flooding back, although Caravaggio asserts that he hasn't really 
forgotten anything -- he just wants to forget.  The story then flip-
flops between the present and a period during the late-'30s and early-
'40s, when Almasy is part of a British map-making effort surveying the 
Sahara.  It's then that he meets Katharine Clifton, the wife of a good-
natured pilot (Colin Firth) who is helping with the project.  Almasy and 
Katharine fall for each other, and the stage is set for a classic 
exploration of love and betrayal set against the dangerous background of 
Nazi aggression. 
     The one flaw in THE ENGLISH PATIENT is related to an aspect of the 
structure.  The "modern-day" scenes with Almasy awaiting death aren't as 
nearly as involving as the flashback sequences.  The relationship 
between Hana and Kip lacks the intensity of the central romance, 
primarily because neither of them is a fully-realized character.  As a 
result, the scenes that take place in this time frame, some of which are 
quite lengthy, can be seen as unwanted interruptions.
     As is necessary for a movie of this tone and style, the acting is 
strong.  Ralph Fiennes gives us an Almasy who seems loosely based on 
CASABLANCA's Rick -- strong and silent until the right woman releases 
all of his pent-up passion.  Fiennes is the kind of actor who likes 
challenging himself with each new role (he has essayed vastly different 
personalities in SCHINDLER'S LIST, QUIZ SHOW, and STRANGE DAYS), and his 
work in THE ENGLISH PATIENT represents a continuation of that trend.  
Kristen Scott Thomas (FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL), sporting faux blonde 
hair, is luminous as Katharine, effortlessly conveying to the audience 
the energy and zest for life that Almasy finds irresistible.  Together, 
these two are hotter than the desert heat that simmers around them.  
     Juliette Binoche (BLUE) is delightful as Hana, although her 
character is frustratingly ill-developed.  Willem Dafoe (TOM AND VIV), 
the only American in the cast, plays the kind of mysterious role he has 
become accustomed to (primarily because he does it so well).  Solid 
supporting performances are turned in by Naveen Andrews as Kip, Colin 
Firth (PRIDE AND PREJUDICE), as Katharine's husband, and Julian Wadham 
(THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE) as Almasy's best friend, Madox.
     THE ENGLISH PATIENT is the sort of intelligent, epic love story 
that seems so rare these days.  There's something about this film that 
lingers long after the end credits have rolled -- a desire to re-
experience all the feelings generated by the movie, perhaps.  One of the 
reasons for THE ENGLISH PATIENT's power is that it strikes universal 
chords.  This motion picture is yet another example of how the patience 
of movie-goers, after being sorely tried during the first eight mediocre 
months of 1996, is being rewarded by a surge of excellent end-of-the-
year releases.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
