Title
Review for Big Top Pee-wee (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Peter van der Linden
SYNOPSIS:
     WINGS OF DESIRE is a recent film in which an angel falls in love with a
circus trapeze artist.  BIG TOP PEE-WEE is a recent film in which  Pee-Wee
Herman falls in love with a circus trapeze artist.  The two films have many
other surprising similarities in common, as this review makes clear.  Neither
film, in this reviewer's opinion, lives up to its potential.  
ASIDE:
     The credits for BIG TOP PEE-WEE listed a "Key Gizmo Man."  Is this an
established job on a film set?  What does he do?
REVIEW:
     Cinema today has occasionally been compared to religion: moving pictures
are essentially icons or likenesses taken on faith, requiring some suspension
of belief in the nature of everyday reality, and perhaps needing additional
imagination on the part of observers to fill in the lacunae of the presented
visions.  For this reason many film critics find particular interest in films
which touch on spiritual matters.
     One film which I saw recently seemed to center upon the "rite of passage"
of a spiritual being, and his earthy fascination with an aerial artiste, a
trapeze performer in a circus.  The opening moments of the film are moody and
powerful, as it becomes apparent that only small children can truly perceive
the nature or even presence of the protagonist, himself happiest when flying or
leaving the constraints of this mortal coil to appear far overhead.  But will
his infatuation with a circus showgirl prove to be a meretricious liason,
resolving her into his Nemesis?  Is a consideration of this eternal question
perhaps the "Angst" which eats out the soul, of which Fassbinder so fearfully
cautioned us?
     As enigmatic as Resnais's L'ANNEE DERNIERE A MARIENBAD (the French
translation is tantalizingly imprecise as to whether "derniere" is "last" in
the sense of "final" or rather "previous"), this film can perhaps best be
interpreted as an endorsement of Wittgenstein's fundamental philosophy (later
repudiated) that the correspondence between elementary propositions and real
facts (Wittgenstein's "Sachverhalt") can only be inaccurately pictured in
language, but not stated, for this would require an extra linguistic medium for
expression.  Hence, Wittgenstein erroneously reasoned, all philosophy attempts
to say the unsayable, and true to the consequences of this belief he gave up
his professorship and became a porter in an English hospital.  If only the film
director had followed this example!
     Others, more charitable, would suggest that a more accurate simile for
this cinematic woman-inspired evolution of the child-visible free-spirit would
be Bogart's definitive transformation of Charlie Allnutt (Bogart's only Oscar
was awarded for this portrayal) from intrepid but uncaring observer into
involved hero of courage, perseverance and devotion in THE AFRICAN QUEEN.  The
brooding concentration as an idiosyncratic hero follows an elegiac path, from a
world beyond conventional experience into the physical confinements of the
human condition, works on a plethora of levels and effortlessly conveys a deep
but ultimately unsatisfying sense of fantasy-fulfilment which mars both of
these films.
     Echoing Brecht's famous theory of alienation, the scene which worked best
for me was the one in which the earthbound lover slowly twirled the vertical
rope on which the aerial object of his affections was posing.  Bertolt Brecht
strongly believed in avoiding the creation of illusion, so that the audience
was not emotionally manipulated but remained capable of intelligent appraisal.
Shunning past transparencies, the hero of this film is now definitely
earthbound, while the heroine glides easily over his head in a clever, but not
wholly unanticipated, inversion of their prior stations; both have given up
much, but the union of both together achieves more.  Brecht's thesis, on this
occasion, is vindicated, ironically enough by the garish showmanship of a
circus act.
     Bazin (founder of the seminal CAHIERS DU CINEMA) held that a film-maker
should be considered in the light of thematic consistency, and development
throughout his work.  On these terms, this film can only be regarded as a
disappointing regression from previously promising, though inconsistent,
earlier works.  I'd like to end these pensees with a real kick-ass power
metaphor, but it's Saturday night and my intellect is throbbing in a way that
nothing short of a few swift bevies with the bitchin' babes at the local
brewhouse will allay.  Also it's my turn to argue whether "Being and
Nothingness" is a correct translation of Sartre's "Etre et le Neant," so I
gotta scoot.  Later, dudes.

Author
Lawrence E. Evans
     "Pee-Wee Herman had a farm, E I E I O," Pee-Wee now lives on a farm, and
takes care of several animals, including a talking pig named Vance.  He is
engaged to the local school teacher, a pretty virginal blonde who loves egg
salad.  When the circus lands in Pee-Wee's back yard, he is quickly adopted
by the circus people.  Pee-Wee falls in love with the beautiful Trapeze Girl
and has to decide between the school teacher and her.
     Being a big Pee-Wee fan, I've been anxiously waiting for the release of
his new movie.  Unfortunately, I was disappointed, maybe I expected so much
more.  The first 30 to 40 minutes of the film is by far the best; these are
scenes where Pee-Wee deals his everyday life: the farm, the farm animals, the
townfolks, his fiancee, etc.  The scenes work because the focus is on Pee-Wee;
it's when the film breaks away to the circus people and their problems that it
loses interest.
     Pee-Wee's comedies always seems to work when he surrounds himself with
characters sillier and more absurd than himself, in doing this, we the audience
can relate to him and discover our own peculiarities.  In BIG TOP PEE-WEE, he
breaks away from this formula too much and as a result the audience looses
interest.  Kris Kristofferson (sic) plays his scenes so straight that Pee-Wee
has trouble playing off him; it doesn't appear to be any chemistry between
Pee-Wee and the other characters.  In PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE, every character
was so absurd and exaggerated that Pee-Wee seemed normal.
     The ending of "Big Top Pee-Wee" bothered me the most.  It appeared that the
editor left out about 15 minutes of story.  The entire film builds up to the
big night of the circus, and nothing happens, the film ends without a climax.
I would have loved to have seen Pee-Wee caught up in several circus acts, it
would have been the opportunity for some great "slapstick."
     On a scale from #1 to #10, (#1 being "a piece of shit" and #10 being
"absolutely fantsatic"), I give it a #7.  I must admit being a big fan of
Pee-Wee, I'm biased; however, I did expect the film to be as good or better than
his first film, PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE.
------------------------------------------------------------ LEE ---------------
