Title
Review for Mosura (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I was in Tokyo in October of 1996 and found myself walking by the
offices of the Toho Corporation.  I was delighted to see a two-foot-
high sculpture of Gojira (whom we gringos call Godzilla).  Who else but
Toho would erect a statue to commemorate a movie monster?  However,
Gojira (and kaiju films in general) have done well for Toho.  ("Kaiju"
is Japanese for "monster" and kaiju films are their own genre in
Japan.)
     Continuing my walk, nearby I saw a beautiful poster for the
upcoming film MOSURA.  Aficionados will recall that Gojira II is now
dead and Gojira III is just getting his first set of fins and his
earliest puffs of breath are already powerful enough to fry doughnuts.
So while he grows to full-size we are getting a hiatus on Gojira films
and Toho is returning to its second favorite monster, the good-guy
monster Mosura (a.k.a. Mothra).  The poster showed a giant Mosura
behind the Earth against a background of space.  I would have loved to
get a copy of that poster and even more I wanted to see the film, but
I knew I had to be patient.  It took a few years for the film to be
released on DVD and videocassette.  It is now available and not at all
what I or probably anyone else expected from Toho.  It is a
frequently-charming fantasy aimed at younger children.  Unfortunately
it has a plot that even adults might have trouble following.
     While Gojira has been a creature belonging to the realm of science
fiction, the Toho people have always seemed to imply that Mosura
belongs to worlds of magic and fantasy.  She never seemed like a
prehistoric animal and she is controlled by two fairy-like women.  But
the fantasy element of Mosura was never explored as it is with this new
MOSURA.  While science fiction and fantasy seem to sit uneasily with
each other, it should be remembered that it is not unusual for American
films to mix the science-fictional Frankenstein monster with the purely
supernatural Dracula and the Wolf Man.
     The story is about two young children, Tykee and his younger
sister Wakaba.  Their father is important in a company logging a
Japanese forest and incidentally displacing many innocent, dewy-eyed
animals.  In the course of clearing the forest they find a rock shrine
which fans will recognize as being in the shape of the circular symbol
for Mosura.  They remove a small medallion embedded in the stone,
unwittingly opening a passage to a fairyland beneath.  The father gives
the medallion to Wakaba, unaware that an evil fairy Belvera, riding a
squirrel-sized flying dragon, will reclaim it and use it to release
DesGhidorah.  DesGhidorah is a somewhat cuter version of Toho monster
Ghidorah.  Sixty-five million years ago, DesGhidorah came from space
and killed off the dinosaurs by sucking the life from the planet Earth.
Belvera releases DesGhidorah from the Earth to repeat his misdeeds.
     Defending Earth we have two good fairies Moll and Lara.  They have
the power to call on the Mosuras.  Mosuras are giant moths bigger than
airliners and the caterpillars that grow into them.  There is also a
small Mosura only a foot across.  Most of these creatures have appeared
in previous Toho films but, perhaps to play well with a younger
audience, they have been softened here.  Mosura is much more plush and
cuddly looking than she has ever looked in the past.  DesGhidorah's
faces (did I mention that DesGhidorah has three heads?) are rounded and
shortened to look less frightening than Ghidorah of previous films.
Even the music is softened from the usual brassy marches.  This film's
score is inspired more than usual by John Williams and less by John
Philip Sousa.
     One wonders how this story fits in with other kaiju films from
Toho.  Why does nobody recognize Mosura from previous bouts with the
Japan Defense Forces?  Does nobody notice that DesGhidorah looks a lot
like Ghidorah?  Similarly, a problem particularly of late in Toho films
is their propensity to have just about anything happen without an
explanation.  If Mosura is to have a new power you just see Mosura
using it without benefit of logic or explanation.  If a new kind of
creature is to be introduced, it is just there.  Suddenly there are
tiny Mosuras around.  The problem is that if anything can happen, there
is much less interest value in the story.  Even fantasy needs some
rules.
     Mosura is in some ways a poor choice for a hero monster.  Gojira
expresses emotions--even Radon (Rodan) expresses emotion.  Mosura has
two eyes like bicycle reflector disks and a mouth like the business end
of an alligator clip.  This makes the giant moth forever enigmatic.
She is even more so for being a moth.  The real face of Mosura is that
of her soul-mate.  Her soul-mate is has been a single creature with two
bodies.  These are the two tiny "Cosmos" or "Peanuts."  Two fairies
that dress identically, sing and even speak in unison, and are
indistinguishable from each other.  They have a mystical control over
Mosura never explained.  In the new Mosura the Cosmos are two fairies
who for the first time look different, dress differently, and one,
Moll, dominates the other Lora, they still sing in unison, however, and
with three songs they seem to sing entirely too much.
     There are really two reasons to see MOSURA.  You may be genuine
fan of kaiju films with or without Gojira.  Or you may want to see what
Toho can do with color and with form when they are at their best.  In
either case you will find the unexpected in this film.  MOSURA is not
really a good film, but there are moments that are well worth seeing.
And the kids might like the rest of the film.  I give it a 5 on the 0
to 10 scale and a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Incidentally, MOSURA is the first part of a trilogy of films.
Rumor has it that MOSURA 3 is this best of the trilogy, but it has yet
to be released in this country.  MOSURA 2 is available.  The plot has
Belvera again trying to destroy the Earth by releasing a rather
uninteresting monster from ancient Mu.  Visually it has fewer scenes of
striking beauty.  There are a few, but not many.  The best scene is an
ancient fortress rising from the sea.  But overall MOSURA 2 is a
disappointment after the few enough virtues of MOSURA.  Again the
monster is a symbol of what happens when you do not take care of
nature.  Mosura is a giant Mother Nature.  There are again lots of
things happening without explanation so there is no reason ever to fear
for Mosura.  The writers will always invent some reason why Mosura will
survive and win.  The film is a definite step down from MOSURA.
