Title
Review for Experiment Perilous (1944)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
EXPERIMENT PERILOUS (1944) Directed by Jacques Tourneur.
Screenplay by Warren Duff from a novel by Margaret Carpenter.
Photography by Tony Gaudio. Sets by Darrel Silvera & Claude
Carpenter. Music by Roy Webb. Produced by Warren Duff for RKO.
Cast: Hedy Lamarr, George Brent, Paul Lukas, Albert Dekker,
Carl Esmond, Olive Blakeney, George N. Neise, Margaret
Wycherly, et al. 91 minutes.
A mix of thrills, psychology and pathology. In 1903, Doctor
George Brent meets a friendly older lady in train. She tells
him that she is going to visit her brother Lukas and his
lovely young wife Lamarr. In New York Brent hears that his
train companion suddenly died. He meets Lamarr-Lukas, gets
suspicious of Lukas's treatment of his wife and his trying to
pass her for crazy. A mixup in bags reveals the diary of the
deceased lady, confirms Brent's doubts. He tries to save
Lamarr, whom he now loves.
Semi-oddly, Lukas had married the young girl knowing she was
not in love with him. Before this, he improbably took her to
Europe to educate her and place her in social whirl. Now, in
New York he becomes obsessed with jealousy for Lamarr and a
young writer who is openly crazy about her, kills the young
man and would do the same to Brent and Lamarr were it not for
Brent's sleuthing.
Albert Dekker, as Brent's bohemian artist pal, and other
supporting roles, are well played. The film is solidly
directed by Jacques Tourneur who graduated from B movies (most
of them much admired today) to A features with this picture.
The movie is nicely atmospheric, with fine, moody photography
and production design, as well as a good "haunted place" music
score It is none too convincing however. The execution is
superior to the plot, which  includes improbabilities and 
holes.
Paul Lukas, who played, sometimes with commendable reserve,
sometimes with obvious dramatics, both heroes and sinister
types, is over-villainous here. Hedy Lamarr, as gorgeous an
actress as ever graced the silver screen, was never very
talented, had very limited expressions. The casting of Lamarr
with relatively inexpressive George Brent (who, however, was
talented, likable and did well in his many roles) is peculiar.
The result is that Lukas overplays, Lamarr underplays but
Brent is just right. This neo-gothic drama reminds one many
movie melodramas, in particular "Gaslight", made in England in
1939 and remade in the U.S. in 1944.  (Edwin Jahiel)
