Title
Review for Phenomenon (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Michael Redman
In this unlikely combination of "It's A Wonderful Life" and "The 
Twilight Zone", John Travolta is Gomer Pyle turned super smart.
George Malley (Travolta) is celebrating his 37th birthday in a quiet 
little backwater in northern California by getting wasted with his 
buddies in the local bar. Wandering outside and looking up into the 
heavens, he is blasted with a white light from the sky (Shazam!) that 
knocks him off his feet and leaves him unconscious in the middle of the 
highway.
When he comes to and makes his way back inside the tavern, of course no 
one believes him. They catch on that something is different during the 
next few days as good ole boy George becomes a chess wiz, learns 
Portuguese in 20 minutes, invents a super-grow fertilizer, sets out to 
read virtually every book in the library and moves objects with his 
mind.
The townsfolk begin to fear the changed auto mechanic and he is shunned 
by everyone except his closest friends the town doctor (Robert Duvall) 
and Nate (an extremely likable Forest Whitaker). George's only bright 
spot in his social life is that his secret love, divorcee Lace (Kyra 
Sedgwick) is becoming more interested albeit still reluctant to jump 
back into the pond.
The first half of the film is enticing although remarkably laid-back 
(read "slow"), but then it drifts off into a dozen different directions 
-- none of which are very interesting or well explored. The military are 
after George because he has broken a secret code. George wants to help 
mankind with his new knowledge, but the scientists at the university 
ignore him. Doc is concerned about George's health. Lace may or may not 
want to become involved. There are a number of philosophical questions 
about knowledge. What's the meaning of the good life? 
When the reason for George's sudden increase in intelligence is 
revealed, I felt cheated. Although it was unclear what, up until that 
point, the movie had hints of talking about something greater than man. 
Then it becomes mundane and maudlin. Heading towards the end, the film 
begins to feel like a cheap tear-jerker with beautiful scenery.
First rate acting from the principals, but something feels strange about 
each of them. We are so used to Hollywood mega-productions that when 
something like this comes around, it's difficult to tell if the people 
seem weird because they're realistic or because they _are_ weird.
[This originally appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, 
Indiana, 7/18/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Michael Dequina
In the summers of 1990 and 1994, two offbeat, quieter films managed
to become major word-of-mouth sleeper hits amid the loud, frenetic action
blockbusters--Ghost and Forrest Gump, respectively.  This year, comparable
sleeper status may possibly come to Phenomenon, a slight but agreeable blend
of comedy, drama, and whimsy.
John Travolta plays George Malley, a simple-minded, goofball auto
mechanic who, after seeing a bright light on his 37th birthday, develops not
only vast intelligence but the ability to move objects with his mind.
Naturally, George's new abilities cause a stir in the Northern California
town he calls home, attracting the attention of Berkeley scientists.
However, there is one person he can't seem to get to pay him enough
attention--chair maker and single mom Lace (Kyra Sedgwick), the Jenny to his
Forrest, if you will.
A lot of Phenomenon resembles another recent Buena Vista release
that dealt with supernatural powers, Powder.  But one of the big reasons why
this new film is as enjoyable and fun as the other was unwatchable and
ridiculous is its healthy sense of humor.  A great move on screenwriter
Gerald diPego's part was to keep George's change a mere physical one, not
also a personality change.  George may become a genius, but he is still a
goofball, as shocked as anyone else at his power.  Since he remains just an
average guy in spirit, George becomes a much more convincing and likable
character than the straightfaced albino "saint" that is Powder.  Vignettes
in which George uses his powers to help others, such as where he tries to
find a lost boy and another moment where he tries to fix his lonely Diana
Ross-loving best friend (Forest Whitaker) up, are funny and cutesy without
being overly cloying.
But that is not to say that there are not moments when director Jon
Turteltaub (While You Were Sleeping) lays on the sap a bit too heavily.  By
far the worst part of the film is an interminable "foreplay" scene in which
Lace gives George a haircut and shave while the easy listening sound of
Aaron Neville fills the soundtrack; the moment is so blatantly designed to
be touching and sweet that it left me wanting to gag.  In fact, Phenomenon's
calculated manipulative tendencies are what keeps it from falling short of
the level of a Gump.  When the tale takes the obligatory melodramatic turn
in the third act, virtually all of the offbeat humor vanishes, and I found
myself not caring as much about the story as I did earlier.
Still, Travolta's effortless charm and charisma kept me emotionally
involved in the picture.  He is one of those stars who is instantly likable
from frame one, and he is put to ideal use here--funny, sweet, with a good
sense of self-aware humor.  It's hard to imagine anyone other than Travolta
(except, perhaps, Tom Hanks) in the role; he's such a perfect fit.  The
supporting cast, including Sedgwick, Whitaker, and Robert Duvall, make the
most of their small but pivotal roles.  Star Trek's Brent Spiner is
particularly memorable in a hilarious bit where he (as an FBI researcher)
attempts to test George's IQ.
Phenomenon is not as satisfying or enjoyable as a Ghost or a Gump,
but it certainly has its charms, and that may very well be enough to insure
its place among the top box office grossers of the summer.

Author
David N. Butterworth
In "Phenomenon," John Travolta stars as George Malley, a big-hearted,
small-town auto mechanic who goes from everyman to einstein overnight.
This ersatz drama strives for depth and meaning but instead drips like corn
syrup.
There's a birthday party for George at the local watering hole.  All his
best friends are there.  During a chess game, George steps outside for some
air.  It's late.  He's alone.  He's had a few to drink.  There's a blinding
flash, a starburst, some celestial bolt of energy.  George is knocked flat
on his back.  When he comes to he wanders back into the bar.  Checkmate!
George's first miracle.  From thereon, George acquires an insatiable
appetite for knowledge.  Suddenly he's a 2-3 books a day man.  By the end
of the film he's a 4-5 books a day freakshow.  He can perform telekinetic
party tricks with pens and pencils and other paraphenalia.  He can break
mirrors, predict earthquakes, and feel other people's pain, but he can no
longer sleep at night.  George's newfound skill set unbalances the
equilibrium of the sleepy market town.  He alientates his friends with his
cosmic powers.  They're scared of what he can do, but they're much more
interested in what the UFO looked like than in his brilliant new ideas and
inventions.  Naturally enough, George is soon picked up by the FBI which
considers him a security risk.  They want to poke him and prod him, have
him crack codes and name as many mammals as he can in sixty seconds (he
does so alphabetically, which I suspect most people can).  A Berkeley man
is also interested.
George might be able to unravel high-speed morse patterns but he can't
decipher women.  Lace (Kyra Sedgwick) is a case in point.  It's clear she
has some humongous bug up her butt.  About men, generally.  About her
husband, specifically, who walked out on her.  Sure, she has every right to
spurn George's advances.  Once or twice, maybe, or even a dozen times.  But
after about fifty or so you wonder if they had to make a **movie** about
it!
Sedgwick is pensive and furrowed and a little bit dour.  Hers is
essentially a non-part; we learn more about Lace's kids than we do about
her.  She makes artistically-challenged chairs but that's about it.
Travolta's George tries to win her over with that irresistible teddy bear
grin of his: "I'd love to get my hands on your carburetor" he tells her.
Yes, he actually says that.
Travolta is as darling as ever; Forest Whitaker (as George's pig-farming
friend Nate, who carries a torch for Diana Ross) and Robert Duval (the
town's crusty general practitioner) are typically solid in support;
Sedgwick, as discussed, is wasted.
"Phenomenon" is occasionally cute and mostly inoffensive but its soundtrack
is truly grating.  Not so much Thomas Newman's high fructose score, but
more the preponderance of "hit" songs that conveniently punctuate the
visuals just when the movie starts to drag.  Peter Gabriel's "I Have the
Touch," for example.  Duh!  Another bonehead ballad underscores a
haircutting sequence that's about as close to "Ghost" as you're gonna get,
with scissors and shaving cream standing in for potter's wheel and wet
clay.
Billed as a feel-good movie, "Phenomenon" coddles the viewer for near on
two hours with picturesque scenes of rolling farmland, heartfelt human
situations, poignancy, expectation and hope.  It observes for long periods
of time without muscling in on anything.  It bides its time.  Then,
finally, it beats you about the face and neck with its message about the
human spirit in some revelatory denouement that is at once flagrant and
unnecessary.
Cut the songs, beef up Sedgwick's role, don't sit the fence between fantasy
and reality, and you've got yourself a better movie already.  Failing that
re-edit, "Phenomenon" should be avoided by anyone with an intolerance to
saccharine.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This crowd-pleasing melodrama is built around a nifty premise:
popular George Malley (John Travolta), a small-town auto mechanic of
average intelligence, undergoes a change on the night of his 37th
birthday.  He becomes smarter, devouring whole books in the evening
because he doesn't want to sleep.  He begin inventing things, like a
manure-fueled motor that gets 90 miles to the gallon.  He even acquires
such mysterious metaphysical talents as telekinesis and the ability to
predict when an earthquake is coming.  Poor George.  He's probably the
sweetest guy in his small Northern California town and, yet, he's just
as baffled as his doctor (Robert Duvall), his best friend (Forrest
Whitaker), and the divorcee-with-kids (Myra Sedgwick) that he dotes
upon.
     No extrasensory perception is required to predict how the rest of
the movie plays out.  PHENOMENON is designed to go down easy, with no
sharp edges and nothing bitter about the taste.  You know the drill:
warm humor, smiling people, loud musical cues, and all of those
oh-so-quaint, sun-baked surroundings.  The whole thing is about 90%
predictable and that's exactly how the director, Jon Turtletaub (WHILE
YOU WERE SLEEPING), wants it.  He may not be another Spielberg-- a
critical omission, here, is any genuine sense of wonder-- but he does
know how to take a coolly calculated story and turn it into a satisfying
and seemingly spontaneous product.  (Sci-fi fans, however, may be
disappointed to find that Turtletaub is much more interested in the
story's romantic implications than the scientific.)
     Unfortunately, what develops into an honest and rather wholesome
movie is all but negated in the last half-hour.  PHENOMENON turns ugly
somewhere around the ninety-minute mark.  The plot begins taking odd,
manipulative turns and, by the time that we've been subjected to yet
another pop song-scored montage, the story is clearly, though slowly,
spiraling out of control.  These "extra" dramatics are hideous, entirely
unnecessary, *and* suggest that neither the director nor the writer had
any idea about how to end this movie.  (The filmmakers should've quit
while they were ahead.) There is enough emotion at the very end, though,
to satisfy the movie's intended audience.  They'll cry, leave, and be
none the wiser. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  John Travolta, Kyra Sedgwick, Forest Whitaker, Robert Duvall.
Screenplay:  Gerald DiPego.
Director:  Jon Turtletaub.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
Opens Wednesday, July 3 in wide release.
     Jon Turtletaub has a quality as a director which seems to be fairly
uncommon lately:  patience.  He had surprise successes with his last two
films, 1993's COOL RUNNINGS and last year's WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, and
generally those successes were attributed to the Disney underdog formula
and Sandra Bullock's rising star, respectively.  While those factors
certainly played a significant role, I also believe that audiences
appreciated a style which told simple stories simply.  Turtletaub's
direction gave you the impression that he felt he was doing his job best
if he stood back, allowed his narrative to unfold, and didn't draw
attention to himself.  That is a refreshing perspective in an era of music
video auteurs, but apparently it also can be taken a bit too far.
PHENOMENON finds Turtletaub bringing his leisurely manner to a story
which, somewhere along the line, needed a bit more energy.
     PHENOMENON stars John Travolta as George Malley, a simple auto
mechanic in the small Northern California town of Harmon.  On his 37th
birthday, as he is leaving a party at a bar, George receives a rather
unexpected gift:  a flash of light from the sky which literally knocks him
off his feet.  When he rouses himself, he finds that he is a changed man.
He devours book at the rate of three a day, begins experiments in
agriculture and engineering and finds he is able to move objects with a
thought.  The town doctor (Robert Duvall) is unable to explain the
phenomenon, and George's abilities begin to inspire fear and concern in
the people of Harmon.  Only George's best friend Nate (Forest Whitaker)
and a woman named Lace (Kyra Sedgwick) seem able to accept the amazing
abilities which have made George a threat in the eyes of many.
     I had feared that PHENOMENON would be yet another tiresome spin on
"benevolent stranger among us" tales like E.T., STARMAN and last year's
odious POWDER.  The latter was an example of the worst kind, the kind of
film whose sole purpose seems to be to make us feel better about ourselves
for being so much more understanding than the oppressive, narrow-minded
cowards in the film.  There are whispers of that theme in PHENOMENON, but
screenwriter Gerald DiPego's story is much more focused on George's
reaction to the changes in himself than on the reaction of others to those
changes.  John Travolta turns in a strong, textured performance as George,
a man whose mind has become so active that it risks overwhelming him.  He
is like a man who has awakened one morning to find that he now thinks in a
different language; every attempt to communicate with the people who once
were his friends becomes a frustrating ordeal.
     The moments when PHENOMENON does begin to feel like a "benevolent
stranger" film are rare, but they are also rather telling.  There are evil
government types in PHENOMENON who want to study George or use him to
gather foreign intelligence, there is an evil doctor (Richard Kiley) who
wants to cut up George's brain while he is still using it, and there is a
scene where a mob starts to turn on George, but Turtletaub only makes a
nodding acknowledgment of these conventions.  The villainous Feds and
scientists are only bit players, not really serving to drive the
narrative, and the "mob" is more like a rather insistent group of
autograph-seekers.  Turtletaub seems uncomfortable with such dramatic
devices, and his sense of restraint is admirable.  The problem is that he
and DiPego really don't provide much in place of those devices to generate
conflict.
     A love story between George and Lace eventually occupies a lot of
time, and it is carefully developed, with Sedgwick playing an abandoned
mother of two trying to recover her faith in men.  It's a perfectly sweet
romance, but it underscores the lack of passion in PHENOMENON; the big
moment between George and Lace has her washing and cutting his hair.  A
film like PHENOMENON demands more moments of catharsis, opportunities to
feel deeply for the plight of the hero.  Turtletaub banks on the rosy glow
of Phedon Papamichael's cinematography, Thomas Newman's jaunty score and
the fine performances of his cast (including a lovably eccentric Forest
Whitaker) to generate the good will needed to carry PHENOMENON across the
finish line.  They carry it remarkably far, but as PHENOMENON neared the
two hour mark, I began to wish Turtletaub had gone for a bit less serenity
and a bit more urgency.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PHENOMENON * 1/2 . Directed by John Turteltaub. Writen by Gerald 
DiPego. Phtography, Phedon Papamichael. Editing, Bruce Green. 
Production design, Garreth Stover. Music, Thomas Newman. Cast: John 
Travolta (George) Kyra Sedgwick (Lace) Forest Whitaker(Nate), Robert 
Duvall (Doc), et al. Released by Buena Vista. 124 min. Rated PG. 
In a cute, cute, grungily picturesque small town in the North of 
(you've guessed it, it's California again), people live in friendship 
and celebrate the 37th birthday of George Malley (Travolta, who is 
42). Here you ask: Did you say George Bailey, Jimmy Stewart's name in 
Frank Capra's "It's a Wonderful Life"? Not quite but close.
George is a good man and a fine auto mechanic whose best pal is Nate 
(Whitaker). He is secretly in love with divorcee Lace (Sedgwick) who 
has two cute kids and (once bitten) does not wish to complicate her 
life.
On the night of his birthday, a mysterious light in the sky hits 
George. It must be the Bolt of Knowledge. Before you can spell 
"miracle" George, the common man. is transformed into a genius such as 
the world has never seen. He reads books by the ton, understands just 
about everything, learns foreign languages in minutes, has the gift of 
telekinesis, can beat anyone at chess, senses coming earthquakes, 
fixes organic and super-efficient fertilizer from common products, and 
more.  
In short he is a polymath of extraordinary, superhuman proportions. 
But while otherwise George remains his old, warm and friendly self, 
his new power begins to disturb others. Except  his pal Nate, the 
kindly doctor (Duvall) - the most educated and sophisticated person in 
town, Lace's children (kids are wiser than adults) and eventually, 
after a slow, sweet courtship, Lace herself. 
There is a disturbing subtext of anti-intellectualism here. Or perhaps 
there is not. Hard to tell as the movie's myth seems uncertain as to 
where it wants to go, though surely it alludes biblically to the 
dangers of knowledge, clearly so when George and the kids take turns 
biting into an apple.  
As George is about to go to the University at Berkeley and speak to 
all sorts of savants, and awkward plot device has the FBI close in on 
him as someone who knows classified information. More troubles follow 
at the same as happiness of an ordinary kind comes, thanks to loving 
Lace. (She gives him what is supposed to be the most erotic, shampoo 
and haircut in movies, but is, in reality, a tedious timewaster for 
us). 
As troubles proceed, so does the sentimentality that steadily rises to 
95 percent humidity tearjerker levels. The film, slow and a bit dull 
at first, remains slow and becomes very dull. This mega-intelligence 
of George's could have led the movie into any number of serious, funny 
or brainy directions. Instead, it opts for a peculiar solution that 
leaves everyone dissatisfied. I will not reveal it, in case you do see 
the film because of 
Travolta who is very good, a warm, unpretentious, lovable being. 
Duvall is,as usual, perfect. Whitaker is merely a necessary presence, 
as is Sedgwick. The photography, heavy on the lyrical, is good. The 
score is terrible, generic stuff of the connect-the-dots school.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Travolta, Kyra Sedgwick, Forest Whitaker, Robert Duvall, 
      Jeffrey DeMunn, Richard Kiley, Brent Spiner
Director: Jon Turteltaub
Producers: Barbara Boyle and Michael Taylor
Screenplay: Gerald DiPego
Cinematography: Phedon Papamichael
Music: Thomas Newman
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     Presumably, PHENOMENON's film makers are aiming for the same 
audience that made 1994's FORREST GUMP a mega-hit.  Unfortunately, this 
movie doesn't have half of FORREST's intelligence, and, opening opposite 
INDEPENDENCE DAY, PHENOMENON is likely to capture only a small fraction 
of GUMP's box-office tally.  It's just as well.  Although the current 
slate of releases cries out for something out of the action realm, a 
poorly written entry like PHENOMENON isn't the answer.  Put simply, this 
movie is dumb.
     The promise of the premise is never realized.  It's Happy Birthday 
#37 for George Malley (John Travolta), an average guy living in an 
average Midwestern town.  George's friends, including his business 
partner, Nate (Forest Whitaker), and the local doctor (Robert Duvall), 
take him out for a drink.  Later that night, as George wanders around 
outside, he sees a mysterious light in the sky.  He's momentarily 
knocked senseless, and, after he comes around, strange things begin 
happening.  He beats the doc at chess, starts reading two to three books 
per day, learns foreign languages, and spends all night toying with new 
ideas and inventions instead of sleeping.  He develops telekinetic 
powers and can predict earthquakes.  It's only a matter of time before 
the government takes notice, but George is more concerned with catching 
the eye of the woman he has fallen for, a single mother named Lace (Kyra 
Sedgwick), who has recently moved into a nearby farm with her two young 
children.
     Although John Travolta, taking a breather from playing two-bit 
gangsters and psycho criminals, imbues George with affability, the 
script for PHENOMENON is abysmal in every way.  It's divided into two 
clearly-delineated sections.  In the first, which is light, airy, and 
poorly-focused, we see George explore his new powers, express his 
undying affection for Lace, and help out anyone who needs his aid.  In 
the second, which is maudlin and manipulative, George becomes the FBI's 
target, learns the true nature of his abilities, and must make some 
decisions about the rest of his life.  PHENOMENON goes from a feel-good 
story to a tear-jerker by using a plot contrivance that makes the "brain 
cloud" of JOE VERSUS THE VOLCANO seem reasonable by comparison.  
     A few potentially-interesting subjects are introduced, but little 
is done with them beyond what's necessary to advance the plot.  After 
knowledge of George's powers becomes widespread, his friends and 
neighbors begin to approach him with uncertainty and fear.  Although he 
tries to reassure everyone that he's still the same, George's 
differences make him a pariah.  And, once the media learns of the story, 
they are tenacious in their pursuit of it.  Eventually, these aspects of 
the film have formulaic outcomes, but they are at least briefly thought-
provoking -- something that most of PHENOMENON isn't.  This is the kind 
of movie that resolves conflicts by having Robert Duvall (doing his best 
to imitate Al Pacino) and John Travolta make speeches.
     I don't know if either writer Gerald DiPego or director Jon 
Turteltaub (WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING) is a member of the Church of 
Scientology (Travolta certainly is), but PHENOMENON's screenplay is 
loaded with the kind of doctrine that Scientologists preach.  And, while 
suspension of disbelief is mandated for this sort of modern-day fable, 
PHENOMENON demands too much.  The silliness and general lack of respect 
for the audience's intelligence exceeds reasonable levels.  And, when it 
comes to manipulation to get the tears flowing, Turtletaub's handling of 
events is heavy-handed.  With so many better examples of mindless 
entertainment floating around, it would be phenomenal if PHENOMENON 
achieves a significant box-office impact.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Sheri K. Goh
If you're a fan of happy-happy-joy-joy flicks of the working-class kind,
and you watched FORREST GUMP fifty-three times while making your
catch-phrase "stupid is as stupid does," then PHENOMENON is a movie
you'll definitely enjoy. George Malley reprises the role of the lovable
common guy, except this one walks out into the night on his birthday,
stares at the sky and the brain explodes into activity, and his life is
never the same again.
John Travolta plays George Malley, a mechanic whose idea of wooing his
lady love, Lace (Kyra Sedgwick), a really bad chair maker, is to buy the
chairs she makes, just so she will make more chairs and keep coming back
to the stand outside his garage where they are put for sale. He even
gives them to his best friend, as he has so many chairs he doesn't know
what to do with them. *gush* After he gets zapped by the light in the
sky his brain is so energised he reads two or three books a day, learns
Portuguese in 20 minutes, predicts earthquakes and experiments with
solar energy.
His long-time doctor (Robert Duvall) and conscience of the town tries to
goad him for a medical checkup, as all this brain activity is so (duh)
unusual, but of course George refuses till its too late. The ending is
quire predictable once you realise why hes suddenly become so smart.
The plot kind of falls apart from that point onwards.
Apart from being thoroughly impossible in a realistic setting, it
fails because the characters take far too long to get going. Most of the
film is spent in trying to wow us with the new-found prowess of Georges
brain. Also, why Lace is such an absolute wet blanket remains a mystery.
It is also never quite explained how someones accelerated brain
activity occurs so suddenly, and even gives him the power to zap a dozen
wooden beams off the side of a tree. HOW??!! They never tell us!
Travolta's role as a SNAG (sensitive New Age guy) is a mark of how
versatile an actor he is, and that his success as a Ah Beng exterminator
in PULP FICTION wasn't just a one-off comeback. It is a shame,
however, that he does not get to exhibit much of an acting range in this
soppy tear-jerker. Also, Robert Duvall spends most of his time looking
rather perturbed, as he ponders the mysteries of George's brain and acts
as his surrogate father. Very two-dimensional characters here.
But, as the trend goes in movies nowadays (cf. A TIME TO KILL,
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, FORREST GUMP) the issue of prejudicing 
those who are different from us is addressed. Rather than accepting 
George's change, the townsfolk are crude and critical - they make up 
stories about how he had probably seen a UFO and maybe the aliens 
altered his brain, as well as media-bashing the insensitive press. Makes 
a point, thought rather un-subtly.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
Christopher Null
     John Travolta is one hell of a hairy man.  More than any other movie
I've seen him in, PHENOMENON features more of Travolta's bodily fur than
anything else you're likely to come by.
     The trailers have been barraging us with this simplest of plots for
months.  George Malley (Travolta) is a simple man in a small town on the
eve of his 37th year, and on his birthday he sees a mysterious light in the
sky which knocks him down and, faster than you can say "plot device," turns
him into a supergenius.  He comes complete with telekinetic powers, limited
mind-reading ability, earthquake sensor, giant veggie-growing ability,
speed reading, cruise control, and automatic transmission.
     Because he is such an intellectual stud, he gains the love and fear of
various people in the town.  Among the lovers are Lace (Kyra Sedgwick),
buddy Nate (Forest Whitaker), and local doctor "Doc" (Robert Duvall).
Among the fearers are the type of hick yahoos that are omnipresent in
movies about simple men in small towns.
     The film absolutely reeks of being a "pleasant" picture....  Long,
drawn-out photography.  Dogs, kittens, rabbits, and flowers everywhere.
Precocious children.  Really bad pop music.  Your occasional FBI agent.
You know, cute stuff.  From the director of (vomit) WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING, what else would you expect?
     Not that I mean to detract from the charms of PHENOMENON, because it
isn't by any stretch a terrible film.  Instead, it's just... *there.*  It
just goes on and on and never does much of anything.  It's predictable to a
scene and not very original, but at least the movie isn't insulting.  The
performances and direction are all fine, and there are some funny moments.
Basically, it's "pleasant."
     As far as the social message of this film, I really couldn't begin to
say.  Most of the time it's a running Public Service Announcement for
reading.  The rest of the time it gives off something of a "don't be afraid
of smart people" theme.  You'd think in two hours they'd come up with
better than that.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After seeing a bright flash of light in the heavens, George Malley
(John Travolta) turns from an average auto mechanic to an innovative
horticulturist.  Although there are shades of CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE
THIRD KIND, PHENOMENON is mainly FORREST GUMP-lite.
     Other than a ridiculous FBI subplot, the film spends most of its
time with a hero whose chief passion is growing extra large tomatoes
and wooing the new woman in town, Lace Pennamin (Kyra Sedgwick).  As
you can tell, I was extremely disappointed by this show which managed
to bore me silly no matter how well intentioned the plot and how
earnest the acting.
     On George's 37th birthday, he sees the light in the sky and after
that his life is changed forever.  He becomes fluent in Portuguese in
20 minutes just by reading a book.  He turns into an instant chess
expert.  He can predict earthquakes.  He can even do telekinesis and
break mirrors as well.  He does everything but leap over tall buildings
with a single bound.
     What does he do with this gift?  Mainly he applies it to ways to
grow bigger vegetables.  Now, in the real world, this would certainly
be a worthy endeavor as schools from Texas A & M to The University of
California at Davis would attest.  As stimulating movie making, it left
my entire family bored, fidgeting in our seats, and checking our
watches.
     The script by Gerald Di Pego has lines that includes George's come
on to Lace of, "I'd like to get my hands on your carburetor," and
Lace's refusal to George of, "Your idle's too fast."  My main fault
with the dialog is not so much that it is trite as it is tedious.  The
direction by Jon Turteltaub (3 NINJAS and COOL RUNNINGS) has a glacial
pace.
     Although the normally excellent Forest Whitaker as George's friend
Nate Pope is not given much to do in the show, the only bad acting is
Sedgwick's.  Sedgwick has a highly limited acting range.  She is always
aloof and distant.  If she has ever given a decent performance, I have
not seen it, and I have had the poor fortune to have viewed her in many
a picture.
     Travolta clearly had great fun making this film.  He is bursting
with joy.  Although he does not demonstrate particularly strong acting,
his enthusiasm for the role radiates good vibes.  If the show were not
so dull, his portrayal would have made the film into a classic feel
good movie.
     The gem of the show and the best piece of acting is done by Robert
Duvall as the local town doc.  When he gets angry in a bar, it is the
only scene in the show that had genuine emotion.  The rest of the
actors operate only on an ethereal plane.  The movie is never involving
and is content to be nothing more than a paean to the sweetness of a
man blessed with a magical gift.  I will give it this.  Phedon
Papamichael's warm and glowing cinematography is lovely.
     PHENOMENON runs quite long at 2:03.  Tighter editing by Bruce
Green could have improved the show dramatically.  The show is rated PG,
but I think PG-13 would have been much more appropriate.  There are a
plethora of cuss words, and none are necessary.  Although the F word is
not used, most of the others are.  Do we really have to have Jesus
Christ used as a frequent expletive in a PG show?  There is no sex,
nudity, or violence.  I would caution parents not to take kids under
say 10.  We took Jeffrey (age 7) since it was rated PG.  He was bored
stiff as little happened for long periods of time, and he rated it
"so-so."  I liked some of the acting, but can not recommend it either.
I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     George Malley (played by John Travolta) is someone who just gets
by in life.  He is a good auto mechanic and a decent gardener, but not
a whole lot more and he has few friends.  He would like to win the
favor of a single mother of two children, Lace Pennamin (Kyra
Sedgewick), but she is just as determined not to become involved with
him.  On the night of his 37th birthday he is looking at the sky and
sees a bright flash of light that knocks him over.  Suddenly the
relationships of things become much more clear to him.  He is able to
play a winning game of chess for the first time.  He finds that the
Spanish he was trying to learn is suddenly very easy for him, he can
read two or three books a day--whatever he tries is easy for him.  Soon
he discovers he has the power to feel the waves that foretell the
coming of earthquakes and can even will objects to move.  The one thing
that he cannot do is win over Lace, the woman he loves.  The more he
tries to win her over the more stubborn and bewildered she becomes.
George has two constant friends.  Nate Pope (Forest Whitaker) is a
similarly lonely friend whose lot, George tries to improve.  The other
is a local physician (Robert Duvall) who is like a foster father for
George.  With some of the strange new abilities and his innocent genius
he has he is able to win over friends.  He makes himself a hero, at
least temporarily, but soon he finds that his new powers also breed a
certain suspicion. To make matters worse he decodes a cryptic signal he
hears on short-wave and responds with his own messages in the same
code.  This only brings him to the attention of the government who take
him into custody to study his strange skills.  In spite of his best
efforts he finds himself becoming more and more of a freak in his own
town.
     John Travolta carries out his role sufficient charm, though not as
much as the script really calls for him to have. But for some minor
descents into frustration and neurosis, he remains a simple, pleasant
and likable genius. He is getting a little old for boyish, winning
roles.  Kyra Sedgewick is also likable but brings even less of an edge
to her role than does Travolta.  Travolta's unflagging devotion to this
woman should presumably be endearing, but apart from a minor physical
attractiveness there is little in her role that makes her seem so worth
the effort.  Robert Duvall is along playing a physician who is almost
like a father to the Travolta character.  He seems to be there often as
only a sounding board and a script device.  Duvall is too good of an
actor not to give a good performance but there is little new for him to
do.
     What carries PHENOMENON is the subject of human intelligence and
writer Gerald DiPego's idea of what a big increase in IQ brings to a
small man in a small town.  George's ingenuity and his ideas of small
projects and experiments are enjoyable, but toward the end of the film
the point of what is going on becomes muddled.  George seems to pop in
and out of adjustment in ways that are not nearly as interesting as the
well-developed Charly Gordon in Daniel Keyes's FLOWERS FOR ALGERNON.
That novel set the standard to measure stories of intelligence increase
by and this story comes a poor second.  (Of course, the film version
CHARLY also misses the potential of the story badly and tries too hard
to be a 1960s mod film.  A faithful adaptation of the novel might be a
much bigger service to the viewer than this film had even the potential
to be.)
     This is a story not without its interesting moments, but it needed
less of a fuzzy edge and less of an admiration for good sweet old
George Malley.  I would give this film a flat +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Vince Deehan
Directed by John Turteltaub
Written by Gerald DiPego
Cast: John Travolta, Kyra Sedgwick, Forest Whitaker and Robert Duvall
PHENOMENON tells the story of a regular guy, George Malley (John Travolta)
who sees a blinding light on the night of his 37th birthday and becomes a
changed man. Previously George has been not especially intelligent, but 
after seeing the light he finds that he has an unquenchable thirst for 
knowledge and finds that concepts and ideas that would have been far beyond his
understanding are now very simple to comprehend.  He starts to learn about
science, begins elaborate experiments with solar energy, discovers new fuels,
learns Portuguese and still his brain craves more knowledge !
George's best friend, the lonely Nate (Forest Whitaker) is overwhelmed at the
changes he sees in his friend.  Indeed, the whole town soon starts to become
very wary of George when he almost miraculously finds a missing child, predicts
an earthquake and alarmingly breaks a mirror without touching it.  When George
breaks a secret code that the military have been using, he invokes the might
of the authorities who arrest him and treat him with great suspicion.
Eventually the true reason for George's incredible new-found intelligence is
revealed, and it turns out to be quite unexpected.  Throughout all of this,
George tries to gain the affections of Lace (played by Kyra Sedgwick), who
lives alone with her two young children. Lace eventually gives in to George's
advances, not least when she sees how much her kids take to him.
Many the reviews I've read for this film say that the film suddenly takes a
turn for the worst in the final half hour.  Whilst watching the
film I was constantly anticipating this moment (a pitfall of reading too many
reviews beforehand !). When this moment never seemed to come, for me at least,
I was greatly relieved. I would guess that the explanation for George's new
genius would be where some people started to feel cheated.  There did seem
to be a perceptible change of mood in the cinema when this moment came, but
it was only because it was so unexpected and it took a while to adjust to
what we had been watching in light of this new information.  I had feared a
much worse scenario, and I was quite relieved when things turned out the way
they did !
This is definitely a feel-good movie, much in the same way that John
Turteltaub's previous film, WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING was.  There are a couple
of points where the film teeters horribly close to overt sentimentality, but
in general the tone of the film is so good natured that you forgive these
lapses !  We all know when we are being manipulated by films, but a good film
makes you really feel for its characters so that you don't feel that your
being taken for a ride. You want to see where these people are headed and you
want to share their sadness and joy as their story unfolds.  The only scene
where I found myself cringing in my seat was the scene where Lace cuts
George's hair and gives him a shave while the soundtrack cranks up the volume
for a love song by Aaron Neville.  This was horribly misjudged, in my
opinion, and just plain embarrassing to watch.  It was like they had inserted a
music video into the middle of this lovely film.  You suddenly realise that
you are watching a film and all sense of reality goes up in smoke, albeit
only for the duration of the scene. Still, only a minor fault in a great film.
The impressive cast all give great performances in this film.  Nothing showy
or elaborate, but gentle, natural performances that have you believing in the
characters.  These aren't the performances Oscars are made of, but they ought
to be.  John Travolta is wonderful, and has the audience in the palm of his
hands from the first moment he appears.  He is well supported by Forest
Whitaker and Robert Duvall.  Kyra Sedgwick is excellent as Lace, and delivers
a wonderful performance as a single mum who is trying to give her kids a solid
upbringing and is clearly frightened, at first, of getting involved with
George Malley simply because she doesn't want to her kids to be hurt again if
things didn't work out.
All in all, PHENOMENON is a great film that made me feel good to be alive. 
Now that's a great compliment.
Review written on Tuesday September 10th 1996
