Title
Review for Heavy Metal (1981)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Afterburner
        I've only seen HEAVY METAL (1981) twice:  Once on cable back in
1982, and again last night after renting the video on a whim.  I've
discovered that I liked the movie a lot better when I was a pubescent teen
back in 1982.
        Oh, don't get me wrong.  There's still a lot to like about HEAVY
METAL.  But hormonally-charged teen males tend to gloss over subtleties
like plot and story when someone waves a pair of naked 36-D breasts in
their face, even if the breasts are animated.  It was an older, wiser, more
sedate Afterburner that watched HEAVY METAL again last night, and I spotted
some flaws that eluded me the first time through.
        The plot, such as it is, involves the Loc-Nar.  The Loc-Nar is a
glowing green orb of varying size that also happens to be the embodiment of
all that is evil in the universe.  Through a series of animated vignettes,
we learn the story of the Loc-Nar as it tells its twisted history to a
terrified young girl.  We see a cabbie in a futuristic New York get
involved in a plan to steal the Loc-Nar; we see a 18-year old nerd
transported to another dimension and transformed into a muscle-bound hero
try to stop an evil plan involving the Loc-Nar; we see a B-17 pilot menaced
by the skeletons of his dead crew as a consequence of the Loc-Nar.  These
stories and more are told as the movie progresses.
        The problem with HEAVY METAL stems from the fact that the makers of
the movie wanted to get a lot of folks associated with the magazine
involved.  So there are 8 or 10 different vignettes, all representing
different stories which have appeared in the magazine over the years.
Which means that each story has about 10 minutes to explain itself for
those not familiar with the magazine, and then resolve its conflict.  For
some segments ("Soft Landing," "Grimaldi"), this isn't a problem because
the segment is just a set-up for other segments.  But other segments seem
incredibly rushed.  You can almost feel the characters thinking "I've got
to get this over with QUICK before the next vignette!"  The vignette that
suffers the least from this problem is the "B-17" vignette, and it's
frequently cited by fans as the best vignette in the movie.
        The attempt to involve as many people as possible also produces the
problem that not all of the vignettes fit the over-arching plot.  Each
vignette is supposedly a story of the Loc-Nar spreading its evil.  But in
the "DEN" vignette, its plans are thwarted by the hero.  And in the "So
Beautiful & So Dangerous" vignette, it doesn't even appear.  Nor does there
seem to be any connection to the spreading of evil (or the thwarting
thereof) in this vignette.
        I don't think I'll be ruining the movie for anyone by revealing
that the Loc-Nar is eventually killed.  But this is also somewhat confusing
in that the Loc-Nar seems to commit suicide by telling the young girl a
story of Taarna, who (in the story) kills one of its incarnations.  It
seems that the Loc-Nar dies because Taarna kills it.  But Taarna only kills
it in the story.  And yet it dies anyway in the "real world."
        As mentioned, these are all points I missed the first time I saw
the movie.  The good points I remembered are still there, though:  The
soundtrack rocks, and is a great cross-section of the rock-n-roll scene of
the late '70s/early '80s.  (It even contains a song from my all-time
favorite band, Blue Öyster Cult.)  And the stories, while brief, do tend to
convey that sense of "otherness" that sets apart the great SF/Fantasy from
the merely good.  And there's naked, animated 36-D breasts aplenty,
although this might appeal only to a limited audience.
        In short, then, HEAVY METAL is entertaining, but with some serious
flaws.  Recommended for the SF/Fantasy video festivals at the Frat House,
or for popcorn fun on a lazy Saturday night.

Author
Chad Polenz
** (out of 4 = fair)
1981, R, 90 minutes [1 hour, 30 minutes]
[animated - fantasy]
Starring the voices of: Richard Romanus (Harry Canyon), Susan Roman (Girl,
Satellite), John Candy (Den, Desk Sergeant, Dan, Robot), Harold Ramis (Zeks),
produced by Ivan Reitman, written by Dan Goldberg, Len Blum, directed by
Gerald Potterman, based on characters and stories created by Cornelius Cole,
Richard Corben, Juan Gimenez, Angus McKie, Dan O'Bannon, Thomas Warkentin,
Berni Wrightson.
The fantasy genre often deals with mythological themes like the ultimate
battle between good and evil, but it hardly ever presents them in relatable
terms. "Heavy Metal" is an anthology of about a half dozen stories all
somehow connected by a symbol of "the ultimate evil in the universe," but
it's too strange and poorly assembled to appreciate. 
The evil symbol is a green orb that talks in a menacing voice, speaking in
allegories and villainous cliches - oooh scary. The orb is somehow bounced
around the universe and through time and affects the people it interacts
with. 
The first story takes place on Earth in the 21st century. A girl who knows
too much is hunted by evil goons who want the orb so they can control the
world. Harry Canyon (Romanus), a taxi driver rescues the girl, has a one
night stand with her, and then finds himself tangled up in the mess. At first
this story seemed pretty interesting, but like all the other short tales,
this one is over just as it showed potential.
One of the next tales is of Den (Candy), a geeky kid from Earth who finds
himself on another planet, with the body of Hercules fighting against two
evil cults. The animators must never have seen what a real woman looks like,
because the women are usually naked and have double D breasts and 12-inch
waists, and of course they all succumb to the men's desires. Now I know why
they call it fantasy!
The next four tales involve an intergalactic murder and a naked goddess of
some sort. They all seem to be excerpts from larger stories, so when we drop
in on them, it's nearly impossible to tell what's going on. The actual events
and dialogue are just too surrealistic to comprehend and there doesn't seem
to be a point to anything.
None of the stories are deep enough to make us care about the characters,
there is absolutely no back story behind any of the tales and thus they are
too strange and at times just plain boring. If they want to make a moving
story about the battle between good and evil why not make it just one whole,
straight story?
"Heavy Metal" started out well but became too weird and stupid for its own
good. The actual production of the film is poor: many scenes are colored in
an extremely flat manner giving no three dimensional illusion; the line art
is also ugly, flat, unrealistic, and disproportioned; even the sound quality
is low. Art is in the eye of the beholder, but there is a difference between
good and bad movies and this is not a good one. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Lewis Butler
Well, it's been fifteen years, and the near mythical HEAVY METAL is
finally out on video tape, and will be out on Laserdisc next month.
HEAVY METAL was never legally released on video, and the film has been tied
up in some sort of littigation almost since it's release, if not before.
I'm not up on the legal details,but I seem to recall it had something to do
with the soundtrack.
Anyway, its scarcity elevated the film to a cult status that was probably
undeserved.  The film, enjoyable as it was, and is, is very much a product
of the 70's, and it's age shows.  The film (a group of vignettes, tied very
loosely together) is uneven, though the animation is well done throughout.
People who haven't seen the film in 15 years might find they are
disappointed, though it's not so bad that it won't be enjoyable.  Still,
you might leave the theater thinking, That was >IT
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL: ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme> 
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data
