Title
Review for Bugsy (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Frank Maloney
     BUGSY is a film by Barry Levinson.  It was written by James Toback.
It stars Warren Beatty, Annette Bening, Harvey Keitel, Ben Kingsley,
Elliott Gould, Joe Mantegna.  Rated R for language and violence.
     BUGSY is the film biography of Benjamin "Bugsy" Siegel, a Jewish
gangster, a psychopathic killer, and the "inventor" of Las Vegas.
Siegel has been recently portrayed in THE MARRYING MAN and MOBSTERS and,
perhaps as Hollywood's resident mobster in the Forties, exercises a
powerful charm of the movie makers of today.  Certainly, James Toback's
funny, alarming, and insightful script loves Siegel, makes us want to
love him, even while fully informing us from time to time, lest we
forget, that he really was totally bugsy, out of his mind, a very scary
guy.  Maybe, it's only because Siegel's been dead for almost 35 years
that it's safe to see him as an American dreamer and visionary.
     First and foremost, the screen belongs to Warren Beatty, who has
seemed to me to be a mostly underappreciated treasure by the movie-going
public.  Instead of focusing on his famous romances, the public could
spend the time more instructively studying his subtle mastery in movies
like McCABE AND MRS. MILLER, SHAMPOO, and BONNIE AND CLYDE, as well as
his behind-the-camera talents in the wonderful REDS, inter alia.  And
here Beatty gives the fullest, most unreserved demonstration of his
formidable powers the camera has ever recorded.
     And Annette Bening as Virginia Hill, the starlet and gun moll
Siegel fell madly in love with, may be the only female actor of her
generation who could hold her own against Beatty's Siegel, as indeed
Hill was the only one who could defy the gangster.  Some critics are
comparing her to Barbara Stanwyck as the very type of the
tough-Forties-sexy dame; maybe, but I think Bening head and shoulders
above anything Stanwyck ever did.  She's every bit as volcanic and
unpredictable as her lover, proud, inpatient, no-bull-shit, and
glamorous, in way movie women seldom are these days.
     BUGSY is overflowing in excellent character performances, too.
Harvey Keitel as Mickey Cohen and Joe Mantegna as George Raft are
Siegel's friends, allies, and go-fers, supporters who can't stop their
friend's inevitable burn-out.  Ben Kingsley is the syndicate boss Meyer
Lansky, cold and concerned.  The late rock promoter Bill Graham is
unexpectedly good as Lucky Luciano.  And Elliott Gould, looking
positively fat, is the slow-witted stool pigeon Harry Greenberg.  This
is a rich diet for any movie.
     And it is all served served up so handsomely.  Lyndol, who loves
the Forties cars, was agog at the Continentals and 4-door Cadillac
convertible, the Packards and Lincolns.  Production designer Dennis
Gassner, costume designer Albert Wolsky, and cinematographer Allen
Daviau (E.T., AVALON) were used by Barry Levinson to create a Forties
Hollywood that looks new, deco-ish, slightly raw, glaring, color-soaked
exteriors and dark domestic interiors.
     Levinson himself deserves high praise for the way he's handled all
the disparate elements of his film to create a complex portrait of a man
who would easy to dismiss as a mere monster.  We see Siegel's darkness
(without understanding it), but we also see his romantic obsessions, his
attractiveness to men and women, a gangster and murderer, who stop in
the middle of a vicious beating to correct his ruffled appearance, who
was addicted to facials and cucumber-slices-on-the-eyes, who was more
interested in love and creation than in money.  His partners and
superiors in the Organization dismiss him as Bugsy, but never to his
face.
     You know, I think you ought to see BUGSY and the cost be hanged.
This is a great motion picture.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Barry Levinson is a director who concentrates on putting myth onto
film.  Most commonly he mythologizes about his roots in Baltimore.  He tells
stories about his family and friends when he was growing up.  Perhaps his
best myth to date is the fantasy-sports story THE NATURAL.  In GOOD MORNING,
VIETNAM his mythical hero was the irreverent disk jockey who bucks the
system.  Perhaps it is not surprising that he would eventually turn to
making films about one of America's two great mythical figures, the cowboy
and the gangster.  However, while cowboy films are on the skids, gangster
films are on the upswing, so he picked a well-known gangster, Benjamin
"Bugsy" Siegel.  (In fact, this film ties in with MOBSTERS earlier this year
in which Siegel was one of the four title characters.  Also, Siegel is
assumed by many to have been the real murderer of Bo Greenberg.  BILLY
BATHGATE begins showing Dutch Schultz committing the crime.  Lucky Luciano
has been a character in all three films; the three gangster films are all
intertwined.)  Levinson chose to tell the story of the ten years from 1937
to 1947, when Siegel was a major crime figure on the West Coast.
     When BUGSY opens, Siegel (played by Warren Beatty) is being sent to Los
Angeles on a twelve-day errand.  Siegel is anxious to get together with
boyhood friend George Raft (played by Joe Mantegna).  Siegel is flush with
easy money and decides to stay in California and buy himself the California
lifestyle.  He does this quite literally.  Being told that a house belonged
to famous opera singer Lawrence Tibbet, it takes Siegel less than five
minutes to more or less force his way in and buy the house from Tibbet.  Two
things capture Bugsy's imagination.  One is a minor actress, Virginia Hill
(played by Annette Bening), and the other is a patch of barren desert where
gambling is legal--it is called Las Vegas.  Siegel decides to master each.
     Beatty plays Siegel as a man of mercurial temperament.  One moment he
can be charming, the next he can be in a murderous rage.  Many of his ideas
are totally off the wall.  He discovers that one of his lovers is married to
a personal friend of Mussolini.  He decides he wants to parlay this into a
plot to murder Mussolini because he does not like what Mussolini stands for.
On the other hand, his plan for a casino and landing strip at Las Vegas was
visionary.
     This is very much Beatty's show.  Bening's Virginia Hill is very much
like Bening's character in THE GRIFTERS.  Harvey Keitel and Joe Mantegna--
both good actors--get seen without much opportunity to act.  On the other
hand, Elliot Gould, usually not such a fine actor, takes a small part as a
forlorn gangster and nearly steals the whole film.  Remarkably, even a great
actor like Ben Kingsley (as Meyer Lansky) comes off wooden and uninteresting
compared to Gould.
     This film has been getting a lot of attention, probably in no small
part due to the look of the set direction and the photography.  The film is
not afraid to show a steamy love scene as just two shadows on a screen.  The
photography catches the neon nights of Los Angeles's center or the foggy
nights of its suburbs.  The film has a well-done if somewhat subdued score
from Ennio Morricone.  Several of his themes are reminiscent of his
UNTOUCHABLES score.  Levinson's direction, however, does not sustain the
mood.  There is, for example, a rather silly scene of Siegel trying to run a
birthday party for his young daughter while having a meeting with the
syndicate in his living room.  It only serves to damage the atmosphere.
     Overall, in spite of several good reports, I have to say that BUGSY is
just a stylish gangster film that generally tells a true story, though some
of its facts are wrong.  I rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     It is clear that somebody somewhere along the line really did some
research on Siegel.  The story as we see it is basically correct, though
there are numerous factual errors.  The major flaw is in how Virginia Hill
is portrayed.  She is supposed to be an actress.  In fact, she was an
Alabama girl who came to Chicago to be a cooch dancer for the 1934 World's
Fair.  After that her occupation seemed to be mistress.  She was handed
around by several well-known gangsters including Frank Nitti, Frank
Costello, and of course, Joey Adonis and Bugsy Siegel, with whom she finally
settled down.  The newspapers labeled her "the Queen of the Mob."  She
wasn't the queen, but she did run errands for the syndicate.  No reference I
can find indicates she ever was an actress.  I know that the New York Times
never listed her in the credits of a film, since her name does not appear in
their directory.
     Siegel did not have a plot to kill Mussolini.  He did travel to Italy
to try to sell Il Duce an experimental explosive which turned out not to
work.  He had to return Mussolini's investment of $40,000.  While there he
met Hermann Goering and Joseph Goebbels.  It is an underworld legend that he
took a dislike to them and started hatching a plot to murder them.  (I found
this story in two different references--honest!)
     Harry "Big Greenie" Greenberg did not go to Los Angeles to ask Siegel's
help.  He went for a place to hide out.  The syndicate found out Big Greenie
was in California and asked Bugsy to arrange his death.  Not content just to
arrange, Siegel took two other men and killed Greenie himself.  They shot
him as he was returning home one day.
     The idea of Bugsy staying in California was that of the syndicate, not
Bugsy himself on a twelve-day trip.  The story of buying the Tibbet house
was fun, but probably untrue, since Bugsy only rented the house.
     The Flamingo did not open on Christmas Day 1946, but the day after.
The turnout was poor, but there were people coming and gambling.  Further,
Bugsy was not killed for several months and by then the casino was starting
to show a profit.  Virginia Hill was probably not bright enough to hide her
embezzling from Siegel.  And even if she was, she was depositing the money
by shuttling frequently to Europe and personally making the deposits.  It
seems unthinkable that Bugsy would not have known and, in fact, planned the
operation.  Virginia was in Europe, not at the Flamingo, June 20, 1947, when
Bugsy was shot.  Bugsy was not alone, however; a friend with whom he had
dinner was present.  The film implies that Hill committed suicide in Austria
as a result of Siegel's death.  Actually, it was nineteen years, several
lovers, and a husband later.

Author
John Locke (John Locke)
     As it happened, I saw BUGSY the day after seeing THE ROCKETEER on
laser disc.  (The disc envelope quotes Siskel & Ebert: "Two thumbs up!"
I suspect both thumbs belong to Gene.  Either that, or Roger was extra
tickled by his performance on THE ROCKETEER's "test your 1930s IQ"
stuff.)  The two films have superficial similarities.  They're period
pieces set in the same era.  They also suffer from the same overall
defect of yawn-daring pacing broken up unredeeming thrills.  But at
least THE ROCKETEER isn't pretending to be film art.
     BUGSY ends with a tribute to kitsch, but the film itself is laced
with bad poetry.  Worst of all is the "death of Bugsy" scene.  Bullets
come flying through the window.  Zing!  Bugsy takes it right through the
pump.  Then we get a series of errant, albeit artistically profound
shots.  One takes out the cosmic chimney on the Flamingo Hotel model.
Another blasts a hole through the screen playing Bugsy's lousy screen
test.  A third hits Virginia Hill's photo, shattering the glass.  P.U.
     Tearing a page from the book of amazing coincidences, Bugsy admits
to his wife he wants a divorce as WWII has ended.  Outside the
celebrants are going crazy.  The problem with the scene, besides its
obvious cheap juxtaposition, is that it gets the order backwards.  We
find out Bugsy is ruining his wife's life, then we find out he's ruining
V-J day for her.  It mutes the effect of her sorrow.
     Perhaps the worst scene, though, was the one in which the mob
chieftains pay a visit while Bugsy is fixing his daughter's birthday
cake.  He bounces back and forth between his blood family and his crime
family.  The blood family quietly abandons hope and goes off to sulk.
The problem is first their overreaction to a minor disturbance.  Second,
it's the screwed up pacing of the scene which prevents you from
evaluating their reactions realistically.  He only seems to be with the
crime boys for a few minutes, but when we see the wife and kids it seems
like hours are wiling away.  The wife and kids are just puppets of the
scene's requirement to illustrate Bugsy's neglect of his family.
     The character of Virginia Hill is a major problem.  What is she?
She seems to be appalled by Bugsy's humiliation of Jack Dregna (stealing
a famous scene from DELIVERANCE he is made to "oink like a pig").  But
a minute later we find that she has gotten a giant sexual charge out of
it.  The film flatters her at every turn, so are we supposed to admire
her strength in tolerating Bugsy's psychopathic temper?  Or is she a
psychopath, too?  Later she is a virtual witness to Bugsy's murder of a
mob informant that she has some affection for.  She apparently keeps
quiet about it, because when she remarks on it much later, it sounds
like it has never been brought up before.  Her silence in the face of
evil is not admirable--she should have left Bugsy, at least--but the
film struggles to keep her a sympathetic character by concentrating on
her love and her loyalty to Bugsy, as if that was enough to define her.
We buy into it, of course, and so when Bugsy is tipped off that Virginia
has embezzled two million dollars, we know they are wrong.  We can see
that the purebred paranoia of these thugs is going to break up a great
romance, against all justice.  But then when we find out she did swipe
the money and, even more unsettling, that she lied quite convincingly to
Bugsy (and to us), the rug is pulled out from under her entire
character.  Was she ever more than an opportunist?  What we bought into
now looks more problematic.  Yet the film, falsely, maintains the
fiction, the touching parting scenes in which she says she embezzled the
money for the both of them.  Uh-huh.
     Bugsy, apparently, is to be admired as a guy that gets things done.
If that means cracking a few heads, so be it.  We know that timid people
never get anywhere.  The carrot the film dangles before us is the
Flamingo Hotel, being built in the Nevada desert by Bugsy's raw vision
and a few carpenters.  But there's no story there.  We see Bugsy's
superior judgement at work.  The impractical architect does not even
realize the pool will be shaded until Bugsy straightens him out.  But
then the pool is moved in the actual construction and another problem is
created.  You have to wonder whether Bugsy looked at the design, said
"move the pool," and never looked at the design again.  It's a fake
predicament though more dramatic than attributing the cost overruns to
the price of lumber.  When the hotel opens we get another fake
predicament.  No guests show up.  It's a bad piece of scripting.  Our
worst fears are perfectly, conveniently realized.  Like Bugsy wouldn't
have paid a crowd of extras to mug for the press.  In the end, we're
shown the contemporary Las Vegas skyline and told how much the Flamingo
is now worth.  The confirmation of Bugsy's brilliant vision.  This must
be pretty thrilling for the Sinatra worshippers.  Is anyone under the
age of sixty supposed to give a damn?
