Title
Review for Love and Music (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
It is interesting to watch a concert where the real stars are not the rock
bands, but the music itself.
And so is STAMPING GROUND, a gathering of music in Holland, which I believe
took place several years in a row, and featured some of the better known
bands of the time.  What makes this concert interesting is that it does not
stick with the 'hits' or the well known pieces of music by each band, and
several musicians discuss their bitterness  towards the business because it
is afraid of losing the money, when  most musicians are less afraid to play
anything they like.... Grace Slick goes so far as to even indict American
audiences for their sheep mentality. It makes you wonder why this film was
never really pushed in America, but did so well in Europe. Country Joe
McDonald explains that it is nice to go to a place where you can play
anything, and you're still appreciated, which is what the real sense of the
music is about -- in America some music impresarios would have castrated
him.
In keeping with that tone, we get to see a scorching opening set jam by
Santana, the kind we don't see anymore on any stage at
all, firing up an audience like it really should.  It sets the tone for the
quality of music in this film, although sadly enough, the age has hurt it a
little.  It would be nice to find this relic re-recorded onto a Video Disk,
and the music Remixed for superior quality.  The other various musicians
found are Al Stewart doing a solo performance, the late T-Rex ( Marc
Bolan ), Country Joe, Dr. John doing his funky kind of thing in those  days,
Canned Heat playing a couple of extended songs ( no hits this time says the
lead singer, and he proceeds to do an excellent blues song ), Family, a well
known European art rock band that produced many satisfying albums.  It's a
Beautiful Day, doing  a couple of sets, one of them a bombastic version of
I'M SO TIRED, whereupon the skies break with a dose of rain, and David
Laflamme continues pounding the violin.... and towards the end Pink Floyd
doing A SAUCERFULL OF SECRETS.
All in all, this film is very nice based strictly on the merits of the
feeling and intensity of the musics of the various musicians, who for once
sound like they really sounded on stage, rather than the glorified hit
making bands that they never were, specially the Jefferson Airplane, a band
known for its lack of discipline on stage, although they always manage to
blend the individualities
into good material.
I LIKE THIS FILM. IT DOESN'T HAVE THE EXPLOSIVENESS OF WOODSTOCK, BUT IT HAS
A SPECIAL MUSIC FEELING WHICH ALL MUSICIANS, and us all should appreciate
and love.
