Title
Review for Omen, The (1976)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

OMEN, THE (director: Richard Donner; screenwriter: David Seltzer;
cinematographer: Gilbert Taylor; editor: Stuart Baird; cast: Gregory
Peck (Robert Thorn), Lee Remick (Katherine Thorn), David Warner
(Jennings), Billie Whitelaw (Mrs. Baylock), Harvey Stephens (Damien),
Patrick Troughton (Father Brennan), Martin Benson (Father Spiletto),
Holly Palance (Young Nanny), Leo McKern (Father Bugenhagen, The
Exorcist), 1976)
Following on the heels of "The Exorcist", "The Omen" is another
box-office success, one of many commercial horror thrillers spawned in
the 1970s, and much better critically than most others. It is even a
more satisfying film than The Exorcist. What makes this film so
captivating, is how it relies on narrative and not special effects to
build on tension.
It's June the 6th, in Rome, at 6 a.m. (notice how that reveals the
configuration of 666, the number of Satan in John's Revelations), when
an American diplomat, Robert Thorn (Peck), learns from Father Spiletto
that his child has died at birth and he is given the unethical
proposition of switching babys, not going through an adoption procedure
because his wife Kathy (Lee) wants her own child. A baby becomes
available because at the same time of his child's delivery, another
woman without any relatives, gave birth to a healthy child, but she
dies. Robert accepts this switch, believing it would crush his wife to
learn of their child's death. But, he doesn't tell her of his good deed.
This adorable cherub turns out to be none other than the Antichrist.
There must be a moral here about accepting someone else's baby from a
priest without playing by the rules. Or maybe, by taking the Bible
literally, that can become a problem. Because the film will play on the
biblical induced fears found in the book of Revelations, whose
prophesies tell how Armageddon will take place through the rise of the
Antichrist from the hands of a politician.
How this film gets to hold its head higher than most of the other films
of this nature, is because the acting is first-class, the telling of the
story is tight, and the criss-crossing between London, Rome, and
Jerusalem, is suspenseful. The film is in constant motion, so it is made
difficult to stop and think, and reflect how much hokum there is in the
story.
Bizarre happenings start to take place in the Thorn's new home in
London, as Robert has been appointed the ambassador to Great Britain.
His first nanny (Palance-Jack's daughter) hangs herself at Damien's
(Harvey) five year old birthday party, after a black rottweiler (I've
never been partial to that breed), who is a dog sent from hell, appears
at the party. The dog acknowledges Damien as a friend and goes back into
the woods, but will reappear whenever Damien needs protection.
A photographer from the papparazzi, named Jennings (Warner), gets a
picture of the suicide, and will become fascinated with the ambassador,
taking many other photos of him and his family.
There follows a string of bizarre events concerning Damien. Damien is at
the zoo, as giraffes flee from him and baboons attack the car he is in
with his mother. And, oh yes, there's a strange hiring of the new nanny,
Mrs. Baylock (Billie). She looks as if she came straight out of hell, in
fact, it later is revealed that she is an apostate from hell, here to
help bring Damien into the devil's fold. In one scene, she warns Kathy
not to bring Damien to the Episcopal church, he's too young to
understand those rituals. But the Thorns get prickly about what she
said, and sure enough, when their limo gets near the church, Damien
tries to scratch his mother's eyes out.
The next bizarre twist comes by way of a Father Brennan, who acts as if
he had a nervous breakdown. He tries to communicate with the stubborn
ambassador about how the child they have is Satan, but unfortunately his
way of communicating, is by ranting that he saw the child at birth and
knows what a monster he is. That is something no parent wants to hear
about their baby. So, I can't really blame the very prudish and
politically sensible Thorn for not believing the priest. But, when he is
told by the priest that his wife is in danger, he meets the priest in
the park and is told to go to a certain area in Jerusalem and get the
excorcist there to tell him how to kill his Antichrist son. Naturally,
Robert tells the priest to take a powder. But in next morning's
newspaper he reads of how the priest was found dead, transfixed by a
lightning rod that came from the nearby church. This gets Thorn's
attention, at last.
The ambassador becomes very worried, helped by Jennings, who notices
something strange in all the photos he has taken of the Thorns, and then
the ambassador becomes even more troubled by the news that his wife's
fall, induced by Damien and Mrs. Baylock, requires hospitalization, as
she loses the baby he didn't realize he was having until Father Brennan
told him about it. All this leaves the ambassador befuddled, looking
only as Gregory Peck can look, when things that are supposed to make
sense don't.
With the aid of Jennings, Thorn goes to Rome to locate the hospital
records and the mother of his adopted baby, and also to see Father
Spiletto again. And after a few shocks here, he goes to Jerusalem and
finally tracks down the exorcist (McKern) Father Brennan told him to
see. While in Jerusalem, there are a few more shocks, and the story
excitedly swings back to London. Here, a few more shocks develop. The
film succeeds because it knows how to tell a suspenseful story and not
rely on green vomit for its shocks, like The Exorcist resorted to, as
The Omen manages to have its shocks look sensible and seem convincing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Donner
Writer: David Seltzer
Starring: Gregory Peck, Lee Remick, David Warner, Billie Whitelaw, Harvey
Stephens, Patrick Troughton, Martin Benson, Holly Palance, Leo McKern
"The Omen" is a scary enough for anyone who has every read anything out of
the bible and was suddenly worried that it may come true someday.  It's
especially aimed at those who take everything that the bible says
literally, especially the book of Revelations, which predicts exactly how
armageddom will take place, including the rise of the antichrist, the son
of the devil (if you didn't already know that).  Apparently screenwriter
David Seltzer and director Richard Donner were influenced by these passages
when they were a kid and decided, hey, let's make a horror flick out of
them.
And so here's "The Omen," a horror film that's the first in a trilogy
(actually, there's four, but few count the fourth one, as it was a TV movie
that had little to do with the first three) about the rise and fall of
Damien, the antichrist.  And surprisingly enough, this first one is a very
effective little picture, filled with just the right amount of melodrama
and enough frights, chills, and little bits of intrigue to make it an
extremely watchable and even creepy film.
"The Omen" opens on June 6 in Rome (the date and locale are actually
important) where we meet Robert Thorn (Gregory Peck), the US Ambassador to
Italy who rushes to the local hospital to witness his wife, Katherine (Lee
Remick), give birth.  However, she has a stillborn, and while under, the
priest there makes a deal with him: they switch his dead child with an
orphan child just born there as well.  He accepts, and little Damien
(played by the eerily adorable Harvey Stephens...who never made another
film before or after this one) comes home with them.
Five years pass, and just when everything is going right, Damien's nanny
(Holly Palance, daughter of Jack) commits a dramatic suicide, which becomes
the first in a series of murders that occur throughout the film.  Upon
getting a new nanny (Billy Whitelaw) without much trouble, things turn
really weird, as Robert is hounded by a raving priest (Patrick Troughton)
who warns him about Damien, and begins to get friendly tips from a local
member of the papparazzi, Jennings (David Warner), that proves that
something is indeed afowl.
Evenly paced, this film starts out with little scares and overly-dramatic
scenes, like one where they try to take Damien to church for the first time
(uh oh!), and then moves on to introducing more and more elements into the
storyline.  The film begins to really take off as Robert is made more and
more aware of the terrible threat he has on his hands.  It seems that every
layer that is pulled back on the story unearths even more vital danger, and
the film becomes a rollar coaster ride of suspense, just because of how
much knowledge is unearthed.
The director Richard Donner constantly keeps things moving, and gives many
of the sequences an extremely dramatic feel, especially several of the
murder sequences (of which there are a number of), which wreak of slow-mo
shots, quick editing, and Jerry Goldsmith's Oscar-winning score, which
features angelic choirs underscoring the satanic overtones on the screen
and builds up the right amount of adrenalin and shock value for the
audience.  Yes, they're overdone, but it works just right for this film,
which is basically an overdone version of the nastier parts of the Holy
Scriptures.
Essentially, this is an intelligent film.  It knows that many of the
audience members are probably aquainted with the inner workings of the
bible, and how much of Revelations is used to scare us from sinning, and it
knows exactly how to prey on this general fear.  It reads several of the
passages, and deciphers them literally, often pointing out that many of the
things that Revelations talks of has probably already happened.  For anyone
who is either a regular churchgoer or was forced to go (like me), this is
especially scary because if Christians actually believe what they worship,
this is something that could really happen.
For others, it's just a really fun horror film, filled with joyously
manipulative undertones of Christian fear that we may or may not believe
in.  But even if we're not scared by it all and just feel cheated by it, we
can always recognize the underlying intelligence this film has, in that the
character Damien is unaware of his evil powers, at least in this
installment of the "Omen" trilogy.  If the trilogy had expanded on some of
the ideas that were postulated by this film, it could have come off as a
cross between a slasher film and a reverse version of Martin Scorsese's
"The Last Temptation of Christ," which postulated that Jesus may have been
just a man who found out he had a terrible burden.  What if Damien is the
same way?  What if he's generally evil, like the way Jesus was generally
good, but he discovers that he's going to bring about the end of the world
and people are trying to kill him left and right?  Now there's an idea for
a movie.  But as far as this film is concerned, it's entertaining and scary
enough to pass for now.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
