Title
Review for Bao gio cho den thang muoi (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A young woman, living with her in-laws, tries to conceal the fact that her
soldier husband was killed in the (Vietnam) war.  She has the local
schoolmaster write counterfeit letters to the family (presumably from her
husband), thereby concealing the news of his death.  The schoolmaster begins to
fall in love with her, and complications develop.
Vietnam (English subtitles), black and white, 1984, 90 minutes.
Director/Writer:  Dang Nhat Minh
     A young woman journeys to the front, presumably to visit her husband.
Instead she learns that he has been dead for nearly a year.  She decides to
conceal the news from her in-laws, with whom she lives.
     To carry out the deception (the precise motivation for which is not made
clear in the film), the woman enlists the aid of the village school teacher,
who writes counterfeit letters to the family in the name of her dead husband.
The letters, though phony, have a strong emotional impact on her, and make her
long for her husband.
     Meanwhile, the school teacher is slowly falling in love with her, and she
starts to have feelings (though restrained) for him.  Their association, in the
small village they are living in, results in gossip and problems when the local
(Communist) Party officials investigate.  As a result of the Party
investigation, numerous complications arise, and the story continues from
there.
     This film is clearly a melodrama, as it deals primarily with the topics of
grief, family association, and passion.  It could be considered to be a soap
opera, as it centers on the suffering of a young woman (a very common theme in
modern soap operas), though it takes a very restrained approach to the emotions
of the subjects.  Certainly restraint is not very common in modern soap operas!
     Technically, the film has some rather bothersome flaws.  At times the
editing is very choppy.  Also, there is a lot of dialogue that is not subtitled
(which, of course, makes it more difficult to understand if you don't speak
Vietnamese).  Finally, the photography is grainy at times.
     Making a recommendation on this film is difficult.  In evaluating a
melodrama, the issue of emotional development and/or attachment arises.  Do you
"feel" for the characters?  Does the story hold your interest?
     I didn't "feel" much for the characters, though I found the story to be,
overall, reasonably interesting.  The deception aspect was interesting; however
it was treated as an assumption of the story.  Instead, the story centered on
the (less interesting aspects, in my view) grief and restrained passion between
the two main characters.  Fans of melodrama may find the film to be of
interest.
Remark: this film is in limited distribution as part of "The Vietnam Film
Project," a touring exhibition organized by the UCLA Film and Television
Archive, with assistance from The Asia Society (New York) and the East-West
Center (Hawaii).
Reviewer:  Thomas E. Billings, Department of Statistics
           University of California, Berkeley
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
