Title
Review for Manchurian Candidate, The (1962)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jude Wanniski
Continuing with the "movie list," here is number nine of the 
ten films that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite 
films. They are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest 
influence on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are 
favorites that I enjoy watching over and over again, which you 
can tell as you read each entry. Try to think of your own 
experiences with films and how they influenced the course of 
your life. It makes life more interesting to be aware, as you 
live it, to know how things such as books and films and magazine 
articles alter your path in significant ways. Sometime last year 
the Sunday NYTimes "Arts and Leisure" section had a piece on how 
difficult it is to think of a movie that may have changed 
history. The only movie they could think of was a silent film by 
D.W. Griffith, Birth of a Nation, which had a scene about the 
KuKluxKlan that the author believes changed national thinking 
about the KKK. How silly. Each of the ten films listed here 
changed my history, and if I had not seen them, I would not have 
helped change history in the ways that I have. Films don't move 
masses. They move individuals who move masses.
 9. "The Manchurian Candidate" (1962) I'd been a lefty in my 
political tastes from as far back as I could remember. In my 
first presidential vote, 1960, I cast my ballot for JFK over 
the hated Richard Nixon. In 1962, I was a reporter for the Las 
Vegas Review-Journal and had my first disillusionment with 
"liberals." At the same time, my editor, Robert L. Brown, 
persuaded me that I was being unjust in my evaluation of Nixon,
and my Ox-Bow incident experience forced me to swallow hard and 
read Nixon's Six Crises. Then, along came The Manchurian 
Candidate with Frank Sinatra, Laurence Harvey, and Angela 
Lansbury, about how the COMMUNISTS were able to scheme in ways 
that could actually capture the American presidency. The movie 
hit me at a vulnerable moment and may have helped push me toward 
an eventual vote for Nixon in 1968. Thirty-five years later, I'm 
skeptical about genuine conspiracy theories that come from the 
left or the right, although I do appreciate their potential. 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Author
Brian Koller
"The Manchurian Candidate" stars Laurence Harvey
as Raymond Shaw, who returns from the Korean War
a hero and a Medal of Honor awardee.  Major Marco
(Frank Sinatra) remembers Shaw differently, however,
in a recurring nightmare as a killer brainwashed
by Russian and Chinese brass.  Harvey's mother
is Angela Lansbury, a calculating Communist Agent
and wife of blustering Senator Iselin (James Gregory).
If Shaw is an assassin controlled by communists,
who is his target, and can Marco stop him?
At first viewing, "The Manchurian Candidate" is a tense
drama.  Subsequent viewings transform the film into a
black comedy, with Shaw and his Senator stepfather the
most humorous characters.  Shaw is stolid but bewildered,
almost sympathetic in his contempt for everything,
while the alcoholic, idiotic Senator gives a great
performance as Lansbury's shameless puppet.
"The Manchurian Candidate" is not without minor flaws.
The audience must accept two enormous coincidences:
Shaw overhears a bartender advise a game of solitaire
with Marco arriving as a witness, and Jocie arriving
at the costume party wearing the Queen of Diamonds.
Lansbury is only three years older than Harvey, who
plays her son.  And Janet Leigh's character falls over
herself picking up Sinatra, despite his inability to
light a cigarette, his distance, and his getting arrested.
These flaws aren't important compared to the film's
strengths.  "The Manchurian Candidate" never compromises
in its attack on right-wing demagoguery, and Shaw's
willingness to kill without remorse is chilling.
Lansbury may be the worst mother in screen history.
Sinatra's fight with Henry Silva is a memorable brawl,
complete with eye gouging and rib kicking.  And
the dream sequences with the laconic soldiers
and cynical communists are mesmerizing.
When John F. Kennedy was assassinated a year after
"The Manchurian Candidate" was released, the film was
shelved by Sinatra, and was unavailable for the next
two decades.  The film's cynical, satirical, and
conspirational attitude toward politics and assassination
had become unacceptable.  Seen today, however, the
film's viewpoints appear as valid and relevant as ever.
The British Academy Awards awarded "The Manchurian Candidate"
Best Film of 1962.  Their American counterparts were not
as receptive, but Lansbury was nominated for Best Actress,
and Ferris Webster was nominated for film editing.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Regis M. Donovan
We are introduced to the members of a Korean War US Army unit,
including the remarkably unpopular Sgt. Raymond Shaw (Laurence
Harvey).  Then, Shaw's patrol is ambushed in Korean territory, loaded
onto what appear to be Soviet helicopters, and flown off into the
darkness.  Coming back after 3 days missing in action, Shaw is hailed
as a hero for saving his patrol; he receives the Medal of Honor.  When
he returns to the US, he is met by a celebration organized by his
manipulative machavellian mother as a publicity stunt for her husband,
the buffoon-like McCarthy-caricature Senator John Iselin.
This is the beginning of "The Manchurian Candidate", a political
thriller that doubles, in places, as a political satire.  Directed by
John Frankenheimer and starring Harvey, Frank Sinatra, Angela
Lansbury, and James Gregory.
After they return to the US, members of the patrol, including the
commander, Ben Marco (Sinatra), begin to have similar dreams: the
entire unit sits in what shifts between a women's horticulture
lesson to uniformed Soviet and Chinese officers and civilians
discussing brainwashing.  Marco eventually begins to suspect that
these are repressed memories, not dreams.
Marco -- when not falling in love, marrying, or having bizarre
conversations with Janet Leigh -- gradually remembers more of the
brainwashing as he investigates the mystery and discovers that Shaw
has been trained as a killer: triggered by his operators, never
remembering what he has done, unable to stop himself from carrying out
the orders he's been given.
The film wallows in paranoia, with Shaw being manipulated from all
sides, Iselin Red-baiting with drunken bombastic McCarthy-style rants
at his wife's instruction while she schemes, Shaw working to unravel
the mystery...  all while the plot builds to a crescendo of intrigue.
Harvey gives an admirable performance as Shaw, manipulated from all
sides; Sinatra is good as Marco.  And Angela Lansbury is outstanding
as the smothering, scheming puppet-master mother, pulling strings in
everyone around her -- a role that garnered her a Best Supporting
Actress nomination.
Released during the heyday of the Cold War (the same year as the Cuban
Missile Crisis, in fact) and unavailable for the next 25 years, the
film is a bit dated; in spite of this, the film is still a solid,
entertaining experience.
Rating: 8 out of 10 Queens of Diamonds

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
John Frankenheimer's The Manchurian Candidate was released just 13 months
before President Kennedy was assassinated. The film, which was not instantly
touted as a masterpiece, was yanked from theatres out of respect for
Kennedy, especially since Lee Harvey Oswald was rumored to have watched
Candidate before heading off to the book depository.
When it was re-released 25 years later, Candidate was widely hailed as one
of the greatest political thrillers ever, as well as being
head-and-shoulders better than any of the other slop out there at the time
(1987 was the year Mannequin, Dirty Dancing, and Throw Momma From the Train
were up for Oscars. and  the year Cher won). The American Film
Institute recently placed the picture at 67 on its list of the Top 100
Greatest American Movies.
It's easy to understand why filmgoers didn't immediately embrace Candidate,
which was one of the first films to take on McCarthyism. The US was hip-deep
in the Cold War, so viewers were probably a little shaken by a film that had
the audacity to be this cynical and border this close to political satire.
Since Oscar loves controversy, Candidate was, for the most part, ignored at
the 1963 ceremony, which was hosted by the film's star, Frank Sinatra.
Editor Ferris Webster and co-star Angela Lansbury netted the film's only two
nominations, and neither won. Of course, the competition was stiff in The
Year of the Epic (Best Picture nominees included Lawrence of Arabia, To Kill
a Mockingbird, The Music Man, Mutiny on the Bounty, and the Saving Private
Ryan of its time, The Longest Day).
After a brief prologue that establishes a group of American soldiers
fighting for freedom in 1952 Korea, Candidate quickly treats viewers to one
of the greatest scenes in the history of cinema. The men, led by Bennett
Marco (Sinatra), have been tricked by their translator, Chunjin (Henry Silva
from Ghost Dog), and led to Manchuria, where each has been brainwashed by a
Communist group called The Pavlov Institute.
The scene, which is most likely what led to Webster's editing nomination,
begins in what appears to be a ladies' garden club party in the Spring Lake
Hotel in New Jersey. A sign reads "Fun With Hydrangeas" as the camera pans
across the room, showing Marco and his soldiers as bored onlookers to a
gardening demonstration led by a fragile old woman. As the camera works its
way in a circular clockwise motion, we see a room full of elderly women
dressed in pretty floral dresses. But when the camera comes full circle (it'
s all done in one shot), things have drastically changed.
Although Marco's troops remain in their seats, their surroundings are now
completely different. Giant photos of Stalin and Chairman Mao hang on the
wall; the elderly speaker has been replaced with a burly Asian man named Dr.
Yen Lo (Khigh Dhiegh); his audience has transformed from gardening hobbyists
to Chinese, Korean, and Soviet bigwigs; and the hydrangea lecture has become
a demonstration of hypnotism (the soldiers only think they're in Jersey).
Dr. Lo displays the overwhelming success he has achieved with Marco's men,
choosing Raymond Shaw (Laurence Harvey) to participate in a disturbing
experiment. Lo has Shaw explain that he's never killed a man before, but
then instructs the soldier to execute two of his war buddies. Shaw does so
without question.
The rest of the film takes place two years later, where Marco has been
reassigned to Army Intelligence in Washington and Shaw has returned home a
war hero and winner of the Congressional Medal of Honor for wiping out an
entire company of Chinese infantry (or so the brainwashing story goes). He's
greeted at the airport by his mother (Lansbury) and stepfather (James
Gregory, Ulysses S. Grant from Wild Wild West), a Republican Senator with
his eye on the 1956 Presidential Election. Shaw's return home is a carefully
orchestrated public relations coup for Senator Iselin, although we quickly
learn that his better half is, as Bob Dylan sang in "Maggie's Farm," the
brains behind Pa.
While Marco has nightmares about the Spring Lake Hotel and the Pavlov
Institute, Shaw is still a hypnotized killer who kick-starts his dark side
whenever he sees a certain playing card. He's a pawn in a political game
being played by someone very close to him. Marco knows something is afoul,
but will he be able to deprogram his friend before he completes his final
mission? Is Marco also a brainwashed killing machine? He has a very strange
conversation on a train with a character played by Janet Leigh. None of it
makes any sense, which leads viewers to believe it's all a secret subliminal
code. Don't expect answers to all of these questions because you won't get
them.
While Sinatra logs his best performance here since The Man With the Golden
Arm, Lansbury steals the show as Shaw's mother from hell. Harvey, who was
nominated for Best Actor (for Room at the Top) the year before Candidate was
released, does well as the slightly robotic killer. There are a ton of great
smaller roles, too, like John McGiver from The Patty Duke Show, who plays a
Senator who Shaw's father accuses of being a Communist.
Frankenheimer's direction, from the opening credits to the edge-of-your-seat
Hitchcockian finale, has never been better as he peppers the film with
American flags, eagles, and various images of Abraham Lincoln (no doubt
foreshadowing the closing scene --- ironically, the director drove Bobby
Kennedy to the California hotel where he was assassinated in 1968). There's
a terrific fight sequence between Sinatra and Silva, and an excellent scene
in which the director uses a television set to portray a scene from several
different angles.
Frankenheimer, who is now 71 and has recently directed both Reindeer Games
and Ronin (and is, allegedly, the father of Pearl Harbor director Michael
Bay), crafted one of the finest Cold War thrillers ever made. It ranks right
up there with Fail Safe as films that ended up being a lot more frightening
than the actual Cold War itself.
Candidate was based on Richard Condon's novel of the same name (he also
wrote Prizzi's Honor) and adapted by George Axelrod (Breakfast at Tiffany'
s). The screenplay is full of great lines, from the funny (Shaw on his
mother: "It's a terrible thing to hate your mother. But I didn't always hate
her. When I was a child, I only kind of disliked her"), to the bizarre
(Leigh: "I was one of the original Chinese workmen who laid the track on
this stretch"), to the amazingly racist (Sinatra: "I can see that Chinese
cat standing there and smiling like Fu Manchu").
