Title
Review for You Seng (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
Unlike many films that come out in America, Chinese films ( mainland or
otherwise ) have to be careful with their politics and their attitudes
towards their opinions.
If they can not come up with a political film that speaks mountains of
views, say something like Zhang Yimou's TO LIVE, then they spend their time
updating old stories with modern twists.
TEMPTATIONS OF A MONK is this kind of film. It's difficult to decipher,
though, if this film is an attack on an old fashioned, ineffective system of
politics, or just a simple story of a man, who failed in life and  decided
to become a monk, and his past keeps trying to show up and  get him back to
his old life.
Fortunately, in this film, the new attitude, that is, the old past is dead,
survives, even if it takes an old man to do it for the younger one, in what
is a very ironic twist of fate and story, but a rather satisfying one.
The thought that this film adds to the mix, is that not every old person is
stuck on the past. In fact, some elders are also hipper than the younger
ones, who have chivalric ideas and lifestyles, where ego and tradition  tend
to live. Though the old man is stuck on this as well, at least his hermetic
style, presumably, adds a more civil understanding of the life any
individual ought to take. The old man makes the point that the social scheme
( sort of, anyway ) is a trap for everyone except the person itself.
This is a really good film, given that the exposition of the situation is
odd, and perhaps unusual. But we do find that one samurai, failed in his
attempt to save his master and as he feels failed he has to leave the place
where he lives or he will live forever in shame. He figures that he will add
his services somewhere else. However, he finds an isolated space, where an
older man lives, and they strike up a friendship. From this point on, the
samurai begins tackling his past. And it comes to him in all sort of manners
and fashions, until, towards the end, it comes in the form of a sexual
encounter with a woman he used to love very much. And
it is here that the old man interferes.
One may think of this as inhuman, or not correct, but as an allegory, it is
excellent. Just about everything had failed to get the old samurai back,
except a woman. And it takes the religious minded person to show the new
monk that the social trappings of sex can be maniacal, and  downright ugly.
The film ends here, in another peaceful outdoor setting, without making any
more statements.
Making up your mind, in this film is not easy. Perhaps I see more into it.
But it is a nice film, that speaks bundles, and these statements are very
subtle. But one thing is for sure. There certainly is more than one voice
saying, in China, these days that the past needs to be buried and that a new
life is needed. And this may be the under current that undoes the Communist
hold in China.

Author
James Meek
Cast: Wu Hsin-kuo, Joan Chen, Zhang Fengyi, Michael Lee, Lisa Lu 
Director: Clara Law 
Producer: Teddy Robin Kwan 
Screenplay: Eddie Fong Ling-Ching and Lilian Lee 
Cinematography: Andrew Lesnie 
Music: Tats Lau 
U.S. Distributor: Northern Arts Entertainment 
In Chinese with subtitles 
     With its grand, colorful pageantry and cast of characters unable to 
provoke an emotional response from the audience, TEMPTATION OF A MONK is 
a curious mix of the good, the bad, and the ugly.  Containing ample 
portions of sex and graphic violence, this picture serves up 
exploitation fare for an upscale, art-house audience.  
     The plot, which is occasionally difficult to follow (undoubtedly 
due to East/West cultural differences), tells a story from the early 
years of China's Tang dynasty (circa 626 AD).  General Shi (Wu Hsin-kuo) 
is a fiercely-loyal, greatly-feared battle commander whose prince, one 
of three sons vying for the Emperor's throne, is incompetent.  When an 
offer comes from rival general Huo Da (Zhang Fengyi, from FAREWELL MY 
CONCUBINE) for a bloodless coup if Shi will command his troops to offer 
no resistance, the stage is set for betrayal.  The takeover turns out to 
be bloody and Shi's troops (not to mention his prince) are slaughtered.  
Distraught, the general abandons his chance for glory in the new regime, 
turns his back on a princess who loves him (Joan Chen), and flees to an 
out-of-the-way monastery, where he shaves his head and accepts the 10 
Buddhist prohibitions.   
     There are three exceptionally energetic battle scenes in TEMPTATION 
OF A MONK, but the sequences linking them are by turns slow, confusing, 
and disjointed.  The chief problem seems to be that actor Wu Hsin-kuo 
plays the main character in such a detached fashion that it's difficult 
to see beneath the mask of self-pity.  There's nothing in Shi for the 
audience to connect with, and he comes across as exceptionally shallow.  
The same is true of the villain, Huo Da, and the love interest, Princess 
Scarlet.  The only character with a real personality is the 100-year old 
Abbot of the monastery where Shi seeks refuge.  Played with good cheer 
and a wry wit by Michael Lee, this man has words for the moment and 
wisdom for the centuries. 
     Like many recent Chinese exports, TEMPTATION OF A MONK attempts to 
weave an individual story into a larger, historical backdrop.  However, 
unlike FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE and TO LIVE, Clara Law's feature doesn't 
get the personal story right.  The director does a good job with the 
epic portion, but when it comes to developing Shi's tale, things don't 
always work.  This is supposed to be an examination of how battle can 
convert a warrior into a seeker of peace and truth, but the violent 
climax nullifies much of what TEMPTATION is trying to say.  In the end, 
the film offers evidence that ambitious stories of this sort need a 
strong, identifiable protagonist -- something TEMPTATION OF A MONK too 
obviously lacks. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
