Title
Review for Eve's Bayou (1997)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "The summer I killed my father, I was 10 years old," begins the
shocking voiceover to EVE'S BAYOU.  With a creepy calm, Tamara Tunie as
the adult voice of Eve Batiste, sets a serious tone for the story.
With the ending murder foretold from the opening moment, one expects
first-time writer and director Kasi Lemmons to slowly ratchet up the
tension until the deadly event.
     The only surprise in the film is its genre.  After sketching the
outline of a thriller, Lemmons fills in the boxes with a feel-good
sitcom.  With the packed theater at the screening laughing on cue, the
movie felt exactly like an insubstantial television comedy with the
audience supplying the laugh track.  Typical jokes include the one
about the kid who picks up a dead snake that isn't dead afterall --
they're mildly funny, but you've seen them all before.
     Samuel L. Jackson plays a likable rogue of a father named Louis
Batiste.  With a big smile, he can always be counted on to be the
healer in the family, that is, when he isn't on his nightly rounds.  He
is the local doctor in this all-black community, and he provides his
pretty female patients with more than just medicine.
     At a party, 10-year-old Eve, played with a beautiful smile but not
much more by Jurnee Smollett, catches her daddy having sex in the barn
with a married woman, but not his wife.  He tries to grin his way out
of being caught by making up a story for Eve.  Although preposterous,
Eve believes it at first.
     As Louis's crazy sister, Mozelle Batiste Delacroix, Debbi Morgan
gets the most outlandish part in the film.  Mozelle is a grade B
fortune teller.  When she predicts that one of the Batiste kids will
die, their mother keeps them grounded.  Only the joyous event of
someone else's kid getting run over by a bus, sets the Batiste children
free.  As they whoop and holler, they are reminded that someone has
died.
     Similarly, the writer tries periodically to remind the audience of
the ominous events yet to come.  Don't laugh too hard; a murder will
soon be at hand.
     Some of the light touches in the show are nice.  Eve likes to
quote Romeo and Juliet, which appeals to Shakespearean buffs.  Poor
Mozelle is upstaged by someone with a genuine gift for prognostication,
and who would like to snuff out cheap fakes like Mozelle.
     "Sometimes I think there's no point at all, and that's the point,"
Mozelle tells Eve.  Notwithstanding its strikingly dramatic beginning
and ending, EVE'S BAYOU, like a typical sitcom, has no point either.
     EVE'S BAYOU runs 1:49.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, violence
and profanity.  This fairly mild film would be fine for teenagers.

Author
Mike Rice
The Plot:  A respected black doctor is loved by his
family in early sixties rural Louisiana.
The reason for the film: Its always for money, but
this one is to fleece money from blacks.  Its a black
film with a black cast.
Instead of constantly churning out ghetto films and
rappers in the hood films, Hollywood has decided to
create a number of black film genres.  The trouble
is, the budgets aren't as big as white mainstream pictures.
Eve's Bayou is in this category.  An indy film for discerning
black audiences?  Don't you believe it.  This film is stupid.
Its biggest mistake is leaving the telling of the story to the black
doctor's children. The doctor, played by Samuel L Jackson, is a
womanizer and both his children know it.  The MD has a sister
in law whose three husbands have all died.  These details are
mainly just strewn about the screenplay at odd times.  Dianhan
Carroll plays a character role as a voodoo mistress.   A "maybe"
case of incest is tossed into the mix toward the end.  And finally
there is a jealousy inflamed murder and a posthumous "explanation"
of the incest, as the camera begins to dolly out and the sun begins
to set.  Its nice scenery and nice dresses for all the 
members of the doctor's house.  I think the intention was to create
a normal story of upper middle class family life, only with blacks
this time.  It was too slow and relied too much on flashbacks for
its dramatic scenes.  
Oh, and one curious thing.  Every woman living in the doctor's
household had pierced ears but not one wore earrings in the film.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        Eve's Bayou is not a confusing film, but it is a deeply complex one.  
First-time writer/director Kasi Lemmons tells the story of a well-to-do
African American family in Louisiana.  The film opens with a short
narration from the main character, Eve:  she reflects back to the summer
of 1962 during which, she states calmly, she killed her father.  Eve
(Jurnee Smollett) is ten years old in 1962.   She has a sister, Cisely
(Meagan Good), a brother, Poe (Smollett).  Her father, Louis (Samuel L.
Jackson) is a local doctor, and her mother, Roz (Lynn Whitfield),
apparently likes to spend his money.
        It's difficult, if not impossible, to classify a film like this.  Most
of it works like a family drama, but it often shifts almost completely
into a supernatural thriller.   There are supporting characters that are
frequently unnerving.  Mozelle Batiste (Debbi Morgan), for instance, is
Eve's aunt and Louis' brother.  She is described by her family as mildly
insane, and her profession deals with psychic counseling and sometimes
even voodoo magic.  Although she isn't presented as a threatening
character, there is something about her presence that makes the audience
and the characters onscreen somewhat wary.
        In fact, most of the characters have this dubious quality that makes us
skeptical of their goodness.  Louis, throughout most of the film, is the
prime suspect for causing a general uneasiness among the family.  Early
on, Eve accidentally witnesses a moment of infidelity between Louis and
a family friend, Matty Mereaux.  From this point on, each time Louis
smiles and tries to console his family, we observe him through squinted
eyes, wondering what he has planned on the backburner.
        Looking back on what I've written thus far, it almost seems that I'm
describing the plot of a thriller starring a bunch of one-note
characters.  This couldn't be further from the truth, for this is one of
the most colorful groups of characters to grace the screen in a long
while.  The performances, too, are of pure skill and only help the ease
with which the audience can absorb the film.  Jurnee Smollett, in the
lead role as the young Eve, turns in an excellent performance.  Her
naivete and innocence is so clearly conveyed that, regardless of any
immature or downright mean actions she might commit, she is always a
sympathetic character.  
        Possibly even more layered is Meagan Good, who, as the 14 year-old
Cisely, is often disturbing in her role.  Both Lynn Whitfield and Samuel
L. Jackson are extremely effective as the parents, and even though they
aren't the main characters, their performances and the skillful
narrative allow us to understand them in all of their complexity without
a lot of expositional dialogue.  
        With a film like this, it is difficult to explain the setup without
giving away crucial turns in the story.  One of the fundamental elements
that I liked so much about it is the way Lemmons slowly weaves her
story--the smooth, calculated manor in which she allows the audience to
understand the same things that Eve, in her delicate innocence, strives
to understand herself.  There are times when Eve sees things that she
shouldn't see and, in that effect, she does not understand them.  The
audience, too, does not quite grasp everything in chronological order. 
This storytelling technique is extremely effective.
        It is clear that Lemmons worked hard on this film.  Much of the imagery
and the set locations are breathtaking, and often shocking in the
context of the film.  Eve's Bayou is a probing and disturbing
picture--it provides a dramatic story that is both unique and
involving.  It's the kind of film so multi-dimensional that one can
watch it three or four times and still come out of each viewing having
noticed something new in the story.  If Kasi Lemmons is just getting
warmed up, then I'm already preparing myself for her next film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The year is supposedly 1962, though there is a timelessness to the
narrative.  Eve Batiste (played by Jurnee Smollett) narrates the story
and begins by saying this is the year that she killed her father.  That
statement hangs over the entire film and gives what seems to be a
series of random remembered incidents a direction, though the viewer is
unsure how figuratively or literally she means she killed her father.
Eve lives on the bayou in the town of Eve's Bayou.  Her father, Louis
(Samuel L. Jackson) is the attractive town doctor who has a tendency to
fool around with his more attractive female patients, cheating on his
wife Roz (Lin Whitfield).  Also in the family are Eve's older sister
Cisely (Meagan Good), her young brother Poo, and Louis's sister Mozelle
Batiste Delacroix (Debbie Morgan).  Louis gives Eve the impression that
he prefers his oldest daughter over her, and Eve feels the sting of
that rejection as well as feeling a little bit left out. One evening
Eve catches her father making love to the wife of a friend and this
starts things changing in the family.  Eve does not want to believe
what she has seen but is only half willing to accept her sister
Cisely's fabricated explanation that it was all innocent.  And the
matter remains in both sisters' minds. Writer/director Kasi Lemmons
makes this one of several stories unfolding at the same time.  Aunt
Mozelle is a seer with psychic abilities to see into the lives of
others, but cannot use her powers to help herself: she has outlived
multiple husbands and blames herself for their deaths.
     The film at no time ties itself to any current events outside of
the community of Eve's Bayou, Louisiana. For that matter, in spite of a
black cast of characters, the subject of race is totally absent.
Virtually the same story could have been told in the white or the
Chinese community, for example, with only minor alterations. One such
modification might have to involve the acceptance of voodoo in this
story.  This is a world in which fortune tellers and psychics are
authentic.  The acceptance of magic is not the main thrust of the film
but it adds to the texture.  An old voodoo priestess seems to be half
sham, yet her magic appears to work. She is nicely played by Diahann
Carroll in a real departure from her squeaky clean image back when she
was one of the first female black leads in a TV show.
     It pretty much goes without saying that Lemmons would get a good
performance from the likes of Carroll and Jackson.  These are well-
established actors who will give good performances as second nature.
It is perhaps a different talent to get good performances from
children.  Getting an acceptable and by-the- numbers performance from
them is not difficult but getting a performance with some depth is a
lot harder, because children frequently are overconfident in front of a
camera and do not know how to control a performance.  As the lead
Smollett has to carry the film without reducing it to a children's
film, and her performance is fully up to adult standards.  She
apparently understands acting and that makes a real difference to the
film.  Meagan Good as the somewhat enigmatic older sister does not have
as much to do, but also gives a very solid performance.  Amy Vincent's
cinematography includes at least a few very effective images and adds
greatly to flavor of the film.
     EVE'S BAYOU is a rich and emotional look at one small community
and is not a bad debut writing and directing effort by Kasi Lemmons.  I
give it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a 2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Jurnee Smolett, Meagan Good, Samuel L. Jackson, Lynn Whitfield, Lisa
Nicole Carson, and Debbi Morgan
"Memory is a selection of images, some elusive, others printed indelibly on
the brain.  The summer I killed my father, I was ten years old."  This
shocking opening line not only sets the tone but starts the galloping pace of
the psychological thriller Eve's Bayou.  It is the kind of line taught in
writing school, a line that can sustain an entire story with its cool malice.
Eve's Bayou is a film shocking in methods and motives.
In methods, it creates a movie that has bone-chilling characters, moments at
which you jump, and yet has characters that make you emotional putty in
writer-director Kasi Lemmons' hands.  In effortlessly sidesteps cliches
involving taboo subjects such as incest.
In motives, Eve's Bayou is one of those rare movies that has characters about
whom you can care... no matter what they have done or profess to do.  Going
far beyond just a tiny bit of moral ambiguity, all of the residents of Eve's
Bayou live in a realm of gray.  It makes you realize perfectly that life can
at the same time be utterly chilling and incredibly dramatic.
The story of Eve's Bayou deals with the descendents of a slave named Eve and
Jean-Paul Batiste, who inhabit an incredibly nice home on the Louisiana bayou.
 The Batiste family is a powder keg waiting to explode.  It has a philandering
father (Samuel L. Jackson), a psychic aunt (Debbi Morgan), and three children
under fifteen.  The mother is overprotective and knows of her husbands
infidelities.  The aunt is cursed that each man she marries will die.
After a party, Eve Batiste (the middle child, who voices the opening line as
an adult) catches her father with a local flirt named Mattie Mereaux (Lisa
Nicole Carson).  To a 10 year old, this is a destroying moment.  Her innocence
is shattered in that very moment.  She begins to become curious about what
other secrets lie in the bayou, swimming on the surface of the water like
snakes ready to strike.
Curiosity killed the cat, but it is not Eve who suffers for it.  Instead, it
eventually is her father.  How this comes about you will have to watch the
movie yourself to discover.
The greatness of this film comes in its ability to be almost all things at
once.  Encompassed inside its borders are tinges of comedy, doses of drama,
and an abundance of thrills.  Like Eyes Wide Shut, its thrills come from the
intellectual level.  They are not, in any way, shape, or form, visceral.  As
the mystery unravels itself, you are drawn more and more into the characters
and the temperature of the room seems to continually decrease.
Needless to say, this is not your everyday expectation for a thriller.
Kasi Lemmons, a first time director, handles everything on her set with an
adept hand.  Although my pick still would go with Atom Egoyan for The Sweet
Hereafter for Best Director in 1997, Lemmons was passed over for a nomination.
 Jurnee Smollett, playing 10-year-old Eve, acts as if she were born and raised
in front of the camera.  Her facial expressions are perfectly under control,
the timbre of her voice hers to command.  Not since Jodie Foster in Taxi
Driver have I seen a child do so well in such an ambiguous role.
The one major disappointment in Eve's Bayou comes in the form of Samuel L.
Jackson, who looks a little too happy-go-lucky for the part.  His smile is a
little to wide, his eyes a little too bright.  Despite the fact that he spends
half the movie screwing women other than his wife its hard to really hate him.
 Then again, perhaps that is the way the director wanted it.
A film is a selection of images, some elusive, others printed indelibly upon
the brain.  Eve's Bayou will never leave once it is there.
MovieKritic2000: Reviews for the Generation of a New Millenium
http://www.geocities.com/moviekritic2000/
Help support MK2K, become a member of http://www.epinions.com/.  It's free and
you can post opinions on books, movies, music, travel, software, and just
about anything else under the sun.
To subscribe, email MK2K-subscribe@listbot.com
To email the critic, email MK2K@usa.net


Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Lynn Whitfield, Jurnee Smollett, Meagan Good, 
      Debbi Morgan, Diahann Carroll, Vondie Curtis Hall, Jake Smollett, 
      Lisa Nicole Carson
Director: Kasi Lemmons
Producers: Caldecot Chubb & Samuel L. Jackson 
Screenplay: Kasi Lemmons 
Cinematography: Amy Vincent
Music: Terence Blanchard
U.S. Distributor: Trimark Pictures
     The bayous of Louisiana are a strange and wonderful place -- a 
world unto their own, overflowing with a wealth of story and thematic 
possibilities.  Whether it's the heated mystery of THE BIG EASY, the 
nonstop action of HARD TARGET, or the gory scares of CANDYMAN, the cajun 
state has attracted projects in search of a setting like no other in 
North America.  It is here, amidst the darkly beautiful swamps, that 
first-time director Kasi Lemmons has set EVE'S BAYOU, a fascinating tale 
of guilt, consequences, and voodoo.
     One of the most important rules of writing -- whether it's 
screenwriting, article writing, or book writing -- is to start with a 
compelling first line.  EVE'S BAYOU takes that lesson to heart, opening 
with this refrain:  "Memory is a selection of images.  Some elusive, 
others printed indelibly on the brain.  The summer I killed my father, I 
was ten years old…"  The moment the narrator speaks these words, our 
curiosity is piqued, and, for the next 100 minutes, our attention is 
engaged as we ponder their significance.  The next time they are 
uttered, in the film's closing frames, they have acquired new meaning.
     Beginning with this preamble, EVE'S BAYOU takes us to the Tennessee 
Williams country of the deep south and introduces us to the rarest of 
motion picture institutions:  an affluent black family.  (Judging by the 
movies, most blacks live in inner city ghettos.)  Ultimately, however, 
this film is not about skin color, but about the deeply-rooted bonds 
that join women together, which not even the most tragic of mistakes can 
obliterate.  The setting -- a small town in Louisiana during the 1950s -
- serves its purpose, but the themes broached by the writer/director are 
anything but parochial in nature.
     The focus of the film is on the five-member Batiste family.  
There's Louis (Samuel L. Jackson), a prominent and respected doctor; Roz 
(Lynn Whitfield), the beautiful, elegant mother of a son and two 
daughters; and their children -- 14-year old Cisely (Meagan Good), 10-
year old Eve (Jurnee Smollett), and 9-year old Poe (Jake Smollett).  
Members of the extended family, particularly Louis' mother (Ethel Ayler) 
and sister, Mozelle (Debbi Morgan), are never far away.  On the surface, 
Louis is the perfect husband and father, but he doesn't pay much 
attention to his marriage vows.  His wife, who knows of his 
indiscretions, conveniently looks the other way, but, when his daughter 
Eve catches him in the act, the issue becomes a festering sore in the 
family's stability.  The situation is further exacerbated when Cisely's 
near-worshipful affection for her father threatens to cross a forbidden 
barrier and when a voodoo priestess (Diahann Carroll) predicts disaster.  
"Look to your children," she cryptically intones to a frantic Roz.  
     EVE'S BAYOU deals frankly with the consequences of actions -- 
there's no moralizing or condescending to the audience.  Louis pays both 
an emotional and a tangible price for his many affairs.  Cisely's 
clouding of the truth has its own unfortunate result.  And an ill-
considered yet passionate decision on Eve's part has devastating 
ramifications.  The film also makes a point of showing that everything 
is not as it seems, especially in the tangled web of family 
relationships.  Lemmons applies the technique of the unreliable narrator 
to several sequences to illustrate how a slight change in perception can 
alter the impact of a scene.  On two occasions, she presents events from 
varying viewpoints to demonstrate that minor differences can lead to a 
vastly different interpretation.
     The strongest element of EVE'S BAYOU is the character interaction.  
Every member of the family (except young Poe) is developed into a unique 
individual, and all of the relationships are well-defined.  The changes 
that occur are perfectly reasonable.  What family doesn't go through an 
upheaval when secrets come into the open?  The low-key plot, with its 
elements of voodoo and spiritual sight, allows us to the opportunity to 
get to know the Batistes.  Lemmons' fine writing is complimented by a 
series of strong performances.  Samuel L. Jackson, whose involvement was 
critical to getting EVE'S BAYOU made, is as solid as ever in a role that 
requires a less-flamboyant portrayal than we have become accustomed to.  
Lynn Whitfield radiates cool beauty while Debbi Morgan emanates sensual 
heat.  Jurnee Smollett and Meagan Good, the young actors playing Eve and 
Cisely, are both believable as sisters with close ties and hidden 
jealousies.  Smollett captures the essence of a 10-year old without ever 
seeming too cute or precocious.
     If there's a weakness in EVE'S BAYOU, it's that the setting isn't 
used as effectively as it could be.  Placing the film in and around the 
swamps of Louisiana affords a rich opportunity for atmosphere that isn't 
utilized.  Several throwaway shots of reeds and water establish the 
location, but do little to imbue the bayou with a life of its own.  
Also, Lemmons' occasional use of collages of black-and-white images 
seems a little too artsy.  Thankfully, the voiceover is confined to the 
beginning and end, and the writer/director obeys one of the most 
important tenants of film making:  show, don't tell.  
     A subtle picture that treads a delicate line between drama and 
psychological thriller, EVE'S BAYOU is refreshing in that doesn't 
attempt to replicate Hollywood's ideal "black" film (either a bawdy sex 
comedy or an urban drama).  Rather than perpetuating racial stereotypes, 
EVE'S BAYOU defies them, creating several well-rounded characters and 
placing them in a deceptively complex story that builds to a forceful 
conclusion.  It's a movie like no other on the market today, and 
deserves to find its audience.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I wanted to like EVE'S BAYOU even more than I did, for many of the
same reasons I suspect some critics have been overly effusive in their
praise.  After all, here was a film with an African-American cast in which
race was largely irrelevant to the story.  Here was a film directed by an
African-American woman, adding some much-needed pigment and estrogen to a
club even more conspicuously male than it is conspicuously white.  Here
was a first time film-maker, and a pretty decent one at that, adding the
"excitement of discovery" factor.  And here was a film which was actually
_about_ something.
     Kasi Lemmons' writing and directing debut certainly deserves better
than to be singled out for the race either of Lemmons or her cast.  It's a
contemplative period piece set in the Louisiana bayou of the 1960s, where
the upper-middle class Batiste family lives on the same land several 
generations have lived before.  Father Louis (Samuel L. Jackson), a genial
physician, services the community in many ways, some of them in opposition
to his marital vows; mother Roz (Lynn Whitfield) tries to ignore Louis's
indiscretions while caring for their three children.  It becomes difficult
for 10-year-old Eve (Jurnee Smollett) and her teenage sister Cicely
(Meagan Good) to ignore them, however, especially when Eve catches her
father in the act with one of his mistresses.  As Eve becomes more and
more aware of Louis's darker side, she begins to contemplate dark acts
which could change the family forever.
     Far from being a simple domestic drama, EVE'S BAYOU delves into the
complex subjects of memory and perception.  Events are constantly being
revisited and re-evaluated, in scenes crafted by Lemmons with a seductive
ambiguity.  In the film's finest moment, Eve's Aunt Mozelle (Debbi Morgan)
recalls a painful moment as a reflection in a mirror, moving from observer
to participant in a few short steps.  A psychic counselor haunted by the
untimely death of three husbands, Mozelle also becomes the focal point for
a subtle juxtaposition of past and future.  Though able to see the future
clearly enough, Mozelle finds herself able to interpret the past only as
the product of a "curse."  It's a lyrical and thought-provoking film
Lemmons has fashioned, in which the interpretation of events becomes ever
more challenging.
     Lemmons does such a fine job of introducing ideas and creating images
that the more fundamental failings of EVE'S BAYOU become all the more
disappointing.  The narrative grabs at bits and pieces of atmosphere --
period art direction, voodoo curses, French dialects -- without ever
really settling into a convincing sense of place.  Plot threads like
Mozelle's romance with a drifter artist (Lemmons' husband Vondie Curtis
Hall) are forced into five minute chunks, leaving the story feeling
slightly fragmented.  As for the much-lauded acting...well, Morgan is
certainly solid as the solemn Mozelle.  Other performances are far more
sporadic, from a nondescript Lynn Whitfield to a bug-eyed Diahann Carroll
as a cackling voodoo priestess.
     Make no mistake, EVE'S BAYOU is a good film:  deeply felt,
consistently intriguing and often visually striking.  It's also a
wonderful thing that a female African-American first-time film-maker has
done such impressive work.  Even adding those things together doesn't make
EVE'S BAYOU a great film, however.  Certainly I'll be looking forward to
Lemmon's next project, when that raw talent as a director and passion as a
story-teller join forces with a bit more focus and discipline.  Then it
might be time to start talking about Lemmons as an A-list director,
irrespective of race, or gender, or how many films she has made.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 8 November 1997 with Linda at the SONY Lincoln Square for
$21.50--two teletickets for Linda's birthday. 
*Eve's Bayou* is one of the best movies I have seen this year. It is
difficult to classify this movie. Set in the early 1960s in the Louisiana
Bayou, it follows the lives in an established family of the area, their
daily travails and their secrets. 

The Batistes are descended from a
former slave turned landowner--the original Eve Ba tiste. Among them are
the doctor, Louis (Samuel Jackson), his wife Roz (Lynn Whitfield), his
sister Mozelle (Debbie Morgan), and his three children--Cisely, Eve, and
Poe (played by Meagan Good, Jurnee Smollett, and Jake Smollett,
respectively). With Diahann Carroll as Elzora, the local voodoo lady. 
In Anna Karenina, Tolstoy said "All happy families are alike, but an
unhappy family is unhappy after its own fashion." One thing unhappy
families all do have in common is an aware ness of why they are disturbed.
The Batistes suffer this cognizance as well. Louis spends a lot of time
away from his wife and children, philandering with many women on and off
his medical rounds. He even fools around right under his wife's nose, in
the c arriage house during a party they are throwing, while the whole
family is just yards away. Eve, however, is aware of a lot of these
things, and when she tries to bring these items to light, her mother and
sister work to keep her quiet. 
The movie's publicity is pegged to the better known stars, Jackson and
Whitfield, but it is Debbi Morgan as Mozelle and young Jurnee Smollett who
make the most memorable impressions as the aunt/niece duo who share many
moments together and the gift of psychic foresight. Debbie Morgan, by the
way, might be new to movies, but is highly recognizable to anyone watching
soap operas since 1983 (ex-Angela, *All My Children/Loving/The City*; 
Ellen, *Port Charles*). It's great to see her getting the sort of role
she deserves on th e silver screen. 
The movie shifts from deadly serious to lighthearted in an adept
manner--for example while 10-year-old Eve bears the horrible truths of her
father's affairs, it is during the time when their mother keeps them
cooped up in the house all s ummer because of a premonition. Like most
children, they live moment to moment and act like any kids would under
such conditions, even though larger secrets and pressures are upon them. 
*Eve's Bayou* also features some wonderful visual effects along with depth
of character. Go see it. You will not be disappointed. 

Directed by Kasi
Lemmons.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Sean Lee
The summer she killed her father, Eve was 10 years old – or at least, that's
what Eve believes as she laconically states in the opening and closing of
Eve's Bayou. The audience, however, gets the feeling that the truth is far
more complex. To dissect Kasi Lemmons' gorgeous directorial debut through
the validation of its presumed truths would be irreverent to the rich
tapestry woven by Lemmons. However, as the film is oft-times enigmatic in
its lyric, a thoughtful examination of the role of truth in Eve's Bayou may
lend a hand at elucidating Lemmons' intentions. Eve's Bayou is about ‘the
selection of images' and the awareness that reality may elude the images we
select as truths.
In the opening shot of Eve's Bayou, the film starts in black and white and
turns to color as Eve's voice-over ends and the film's story begins. The
black and white sequence corresponds to Eve's telling of the Baptistes' and
her own past. As Eve's narrative ends and the film turns to color, the
audience is left with the question of who is now telling the story. Are we
seeing Eve's recollection of her own ‘selection of images' or are we
watching the events being objectively told by Lemmons? In a film where there
are different sides to every story, the question of reliable narration plays
a role in how we come to understand it. As expected, the answer to who is
telling the story in Eve's Bayou is also ambiguous. There are some scenes,
though few, where Eve is not present, which would indicate that Eve may not
be telling the story, or at least in the capacity of sole narrator. On the
other hand, Eve possesses to some degree Mozelle's clairvoyance and the
possibility that Eve's mother telling her what Eve didn't know is also quite
possible.
Our best indication, then, may lie in the opening scene. There are two items
in particular that I find interesting in the sequence. One is the image of
Eve – not the one played by Jurnee Smollett, but the very first Eve Baptiste
as told in the opening narrative. She is standing at the edge of the bayou
looking into her reflection in the water, right before the camera pans into
color. The other item of interest is the transition into color itself, and
the fact that it is achieved not by a fade or dissolve or traditional cut,
but through what seems to be a matte with black and white on one side of a
tree trunk and color on the other. This invisible cut reinforces the
continuity of location while at the same time clearly indicating a temporal
change. Complemented by the image of the first Eve Baptiste gazing into the
water as it changes to color offers explanation to who is telling the story
of Eve's Bayou. It is neither completely a pastiche of recollections of
Louis Baptiste's daughter, nor is the story told entirely through the
objective eye of the director. The story of Eve's Bayou is told through the
Bayou itself and this is implied by the double-entendre of the bayou's name.
Which Eve is the Eve of Eve's Bayou? Both women gaze into the bayou and in
its reflection find a piece of the Baptiste story.
Reflections play an important role in Eve's Bayou. Not only does the movie
begin with a reflection of Eve, but the movie ends with the reflection of
the descendants of Eve reflected in the Bayou. Though the use of mirrors as
a symbol of duality has been discussed in film analyses to the point of
becoming a cinematic cliché, I feel I must discuss Kasi Lemmons' extensive
use of mirrors in Eve's Bayou because reflections play an important role in
a movie whose verisimilitude lies below the surface. Take, for instance, the
scene where Eve tells Cisely that she saw their father with Mrs. Mereaux.
While Eve is describing her father's indiscretion, we see Cisely both facing
Eve and reflected in the mirror as she desperately tries to make sense of
what she is hearing. Through the use of the mirror, Lemmons presents the
dichotomy between the Cisely who wants to believe that her father is
faithful and the Cisely that believes Eve. We find that Cisely is unable to
decide how to view her father – perhaps she sees him as a womanizer, as she
tells Eve later that she believed her all along; or, she may believe that
her mother doesn't really love her father, and forgivingly views him as
feeling unloved. This indeed is the confusion that will foreshadow the
tragic miscommunication that occurs near the end of the film.
So what really happens the night Cisely goes down to comfort his father? Was
it Cisely who kisses his father not as a daughter but as a woman, or was it
Louis, who kisses his daughter not as a father but as a lover? Just as our
preceding examination of the story's narration yielded not some absolute
answer, but a variegate one, we can be assured that Lemmons will not be so
conspicuous as to offer an easy explanation to the night's events. On the
other hand, Eve's Bayou is not cinema verite, and there is no presumption
that the truth needs to be presented explicitly. Nonetheless, I feel Lemmons
suggests, again through the use of mirrors, that perhaps Louis'
interpretation of events as written in his letter to Mozelle is correct. In
the scene, when Cisely sits on her father's lap and leans over to kiss him,
we see part of her body reflected in the mirror while Louis is not. Had the
mirror reflected them both, we might have said that both were willing
partners in the act and the mirror reflected the duality between
father/daughter and secret lovers. Lemmons, however, deliberately cuts off
the reflection in this scene so that only Cisely is reflected to show that
it is Cisely, who in an attempt to substitute for her mother's absent love,
expresses love in a way that crosses acceptable boundaries.
Returning to the ideas posed in the introduction, is there anything in Eve's
Bayou that can be construed as absolute and with the efficiency and
confidence of Eve's opening narrative? There is, and it is none other than
Eve's words that open and close the film. `The summer I killed my father I
was ten years old.' Lemmons makes this lucid in the scene where Eve meets
Mr. Mereaux in the market. At first, Eve asks Mr. Mereaux about Mrs.
Mereaux, but goes no further. She asks where the apples are and there is a
shot of her walking up to the apple cart, stopping in front of the cart and
pondering the apples, and then turning around to intimate to Mr. Mereaux her
father's affair with Mrs. Mereaux. Through the reference to the biblical
Eve, Lemmons conspicuously makes the argument that it is indeed Eve who
kills her father. The apples, which are metonymic with temptation, drive Eve
to sin against her father. Yet even in this observation, Lemmons is able to
create some ambiguity, for even though she talks to Mr. Mereaux right after
looking at the apples, she also summons the powers of Elzora in the same
scene. Was it Elzora or Mr. Mereaux who kills Louis Baptiste? If Eve was the
catalyst for her father's death, could not Elzora carry out Eve's wishes
through Mr. Mereaux? This is a thoughtful question posed by Lemmons and our
interpretation likely depends on whether we are romantically or
pragmatically inclined.
Eve's Bayou is not a film with simply stated truths; even when we seem to
find an answer, Lemmons turns the answer to a question. Eve seems to be
narrating the movie, or is she? Louis takes advantage of his daughter's
adoration, or does he? Through Lemmons' inspired use of her camera, we may
glean a few explanations for ourselves so that we may feel some comfort in
our ability to comprehend. Certainly I have tried to do so in writing this
essay. At the same time, however, I would allude to Peter Weir's Picnic at
Hanging Rock as a reminder that some ideas are ultimately ineffable and the
search for definitive truth is made both in vain and vanity. Eve's Bayou
transcends the need for simple answers as Lemmons carefully leaves its
meaning open to interpretation. Life is not of black and white, and the
story of Eve's Bayou lies within the immutable grays that romance our
subjective interpretations of truth.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
If you wandered into this movie ten minutes late without
knowing a thing about it, you might swear it was either a
sequel to Tennessee Williams' "A Streetcar Named Desire" or
August Wilson's "The Piano Lesson Part II: the 1960s."  How
surprised you'd be to find out that this lyrical Southern Gothic
feast trimmed with the precise amount of mysticism and
framed by some glorious photography of the primitive-looking
Louisiana swamps is a first-time directorial effort.  Kasi
Lemmons, who wrote and directed "Eve's Bayou," has
immersed herself in the mind of a ten-year old girl named Eve
Batiste, through whose eyes this adult tale is seen.  This old-
fashioned, multi-generational story which received a screening
at Colorado's Telluride Film Festival focuses on a prosperous
Black Louisiana family and is not only told from a woman's
point of view: its entire vista unfolds as a story dominated by
its women.  Yet its racial and gender crossover potential is
great, given the solid, realistic acting of its well-known all-
Black cast and the effective merging of voodoo, romance,
cultural values, and panorama.  Perhaps "Eve's Bayou" is
underscored more by what it is not than by what it embraces. 
It is, happily enough, not another inner-city, macho 'hood
story of drugs and gangster activity, nor is it yet another racial
diatribe or a feel-good buddy movie about Blacks and Whites
teaming up against real enemies.
   Little Eve (played by the remarkably expressive, ten-year-
old Jurnee Smollettt) begins her voiceover narration with a
poetic statement that sets the tone for the movie: "Memory is
a selection of images, some elusive, others printed indelibly
on the brain.  The summer I killed my father, I was 10 years
old."  Put yourself in the place of this child, one who could be
of any race, as she observes events surrounding the family
mansion, and understand how she might overreact to some
and, at other times, do what she can to save the integrity and
even the very lives of members of her household.  At a lavish
party given by her parents, her face turns enraged with
jealousy as she observes her dad, Louis Batiste (Samuel L.
Jackson), dancing with her 14-year-old sister Cisely (Meagan
Good) while effectively ignoring her.  Moments later, asleep in
the barn which serves as a wine cellar, she awakens from a
dark corner only to notice her father engaged in sexual
activity with Matty Mereaux (Lisa Nicole Carson), who is
married to a New Orleans teacher, Lenny (Roger Guenveur
Smith).  Eagerly telling her sister what she has watched, she
is told to forget what she observed as she was mistaken: her
father was simply telling a joke and Matty was leaning into
him with laughter.
   Much of "Eve's Bayou" deals with the thin line between
truth and illusion, between reality and the arcane.  In this
regard Mozelle Batiste Delacroix (Debbi Morgan) becomes the
story's center.  Mozelle, who has psychic powers and has
been married three times to men who have all died as though
afflicted with her curse, is able to hold her clients' palms and
capture images of people her patrons are anxious to find. 
Each of Mozelle's visions is effectively photographed as
surreal, black-and-white images, in one case of the missing
wife of a client who is in the arms of another man, in another
a young man in Detroit whom she sees shooting up drugs. 
So seriously does Mozelle's sister Cisely take her powers that
when Mozelle foresees a child struck fatally by a vehicle,
Cisely refuses to allow her daughters to go outside.
   Writer-director Kasi Lemmons affixes resonance to her story
by situating it in a historical context.  Some generations back,
a slave named Eve saved the life of her master.  In return,
she is given her freedom and presents her former owner with
sixteen children.  These are some of the descendants of that
union: the ten-year-old is named for that slave.
   "Eve's Bayou," then, represents some of the most
significant images affixed in the mind of its title character,
understandably enough centering on moments of sexuality
involving her dad.  At one point, a seminal event (so to speak)
occurs in which her father either attempts to seduce his
fourteen-year-old daughter or, paradoxically enough, takes
aggressive steps to stop the young woman from seducing
him.  Jurnee Smollett rivets as Eve with exceptional
performances from Debbi Morgan as the clairvoyant Mozelle
and, in a smaller role, the legendary Diahann Carroll as a
witch-like competitor of Mozelle whose evil eye is blamed for
the movie's tragic end.  Rated R.  Running Time: 109
minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten
