Title
Review for Sammy and Rosie Get Laid (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[Note:  a previous review of SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID had a few errors.  Hanif
Kureishi was the scriptwriter, not the director (and note the corrected
spelling).  Rosie was played by Frances Barber, not Claire Bloom.  The father's
name was Rafi, not Arif. -ecl]
     Stephen Frears has directed a film that made it as a solid directorial
success to his credit.  He directed MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE for British
television.  It was picked up for international release and became one of
the more successful art-house releases of the year, in spite of minor
protests from the Pakistani community.  The film shows Pakistanis in Britain
and the portrayal included positive and negative characterizations.
Frears's second international release is SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID.  As might
be imagined, there was something of a stir over the title.  The MPAA refused
to register the film under that title.  Finally SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID was
released without an MPAA rating.  Well, was SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID worth
the bruhaha?  Not as far as I am concerned.
     Rafi (played by Shashi Kapoor) was a high official in the Pakistani
government who has come to London to live with his son and daughter-in-law:
Sammy and Rosie.  Their marriage is falling apart; each is taking other
lovers as often as possible.  All of the couple's friends seem to be
interested in sex and little else.  Rafi is shocked to see open lesbian
relations among the friends.  But then what right does Rafi have to be
shocked?  While he was in office in Pakistan he ordered brutal tortures
vividly described in detail.  There is a race riot going on outside.  Claire
Bloom has a small part as Rafi's once and current lover.  Her part is,
however, important in that she is the only person in the film who
demonstrates any value as a human being.
     This was not my cup of bile.  Rate it a -1, taking into account its
artistic pretensions.  For entertainment value, it is not up to the stag
films its title is reminiscent of.

Author
K. Prasad
[Cross-posted from soc.culture.indian]
     SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID is the new movie from Hanif Kaureshi, the maker of
MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE.  Like that movie, it is a social commentary on
present-day London seen through the eyes of Pakistani immigrants.  
     Sammy (played by Ayub Khan Din) and Rosie (played by Claire Bloom) are a
somewhat unhappily married couple who are nevertheless very much in love with
each other.  They are visited by Arif (Sashi Kapoor, now about 60 pounds
overweight), who has been powerful in the Pakistani government, but is now
running away from enemies.  The movie, without giving the story away, is about
the time he spends in London.  
     The movie is powerful, fast-moving, and disturbing.  The somewhat
dramatised pictures of adultery, poverty, and social upheaval leave  the viewer
constantly off-balance.  The contrasts between Arif's self-righteousness and
Rosie's ultra-liberalism, and their interplay with Sammy's philandering
indifference to politics are interesting.  The movie does not stereotype,
though.  The other characters are just as interesting -- the sophisticated
slum-dweller Danny, the pair of lesbian women, one presumably Pakistani and the
other black, and Alice, the proper Englishwoman who has waited for Arif for
several decades.  
     The movie's title is controversial and misleading.  It is far more serious
than it sounds, and in fact, at several points, I thought the audience chuckled
unnecessarily due to false expectations of a somewhat more humorous screenplay.
It is much more expensively produced than MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE and I thought
somewhat less effective, perhaps because it attempted more.  It is less a
picture of the life of Pakistani immigrants in London than of the English
underclass.  It is perhaps too gimmicky and too full of action -- I wished I
had more time to think about what the movie was saying during the movie.
However, Kaureshi has succeeded in making the viewpoint of the Indian
subcontinent hip and interesting and must surely be counted as belonging to an
important genre of 80's film makers.

Author
Eric Townsend
Directed by Stephen Frears, written by Hanif Kureishi, produced by
Tim Bevan and Sarah Radclyffe.
Starring: Shashi Kapoor, Frances Barber, Claire Bloom, Ayub Khan Din,
Roland Gift and Wendy Gazelle.
     Okay, to review this movie without giving any spoilers will be kind of
tough, so we'll start this whole thing off with a short history of the title of
this film, and the problems caused by it.
     The Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) not only rates movies, it
also passes 'taste' type judgements on film titles.  Nearly every American
movie theater's distributor belongs to the MPAA.  The MPAA didn't like the
title SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID--'salacious' was their word--and told theatres
that they could not use the title.  The main function of the MPAA is to rate
movies and stop duplication of titles and plots, along with protecting
copyrights.  They do have a history of stopping titles from distribution, but
they refuse to name any titles they have done this with.  Any distribution
company that belongs to the MPAA is contract bound to *not* release any titles
that the MPAA does not approve.
     What this means: Cinecom (the film's distributor) belongs to the MPAA, and
could not use the full title in advertising the film.  So they one-upped the
MPAA and released the film without an official title.  Advertising of the film
was up to *individual theatres* and the medium they used for advertising.  The
official movie logo is something like:
                   aSammy
                   n
                   dRosie
                   Get Laid
written inside a ticket stub that has its lower half burnt off.  (One of the
promotional themes is "While London burns, Sammy and Rosie get laid.")  It is
up to individual distributors and advertisers to decide how much of the words
"Get Laid" gets burnt off.  This has been an effective compromise, but it is
*still* CENSORSHIP.  The MPAA would have probably had a field day with the
working title of the movie: THE FUCK.  Flame off, review on.
     SAMMY AND ROSIE is a frenetic, fast-paced film set in modern London, scene
of vicious riots.  Sammy and Rosie are a social conscious, liberal young couple
living in the heart of the action and ignoring most of the whole thing.  The
film follows the problems of Sammy's relationships with his wife Rosie, his
American girlfriend, Rosie's boyfriend and Sammy's father Rafi--a [Pakistani]
government official in hiding.
     The film portrays both sides of each major character's *story*.  We see
both sides of Sammy, Rosie, Rafi and even of Rosie's 'social consciousness', two
of her minority lesbian friends.  (Can you say polar political/social
stereotype?)  This view from both sides makes the characters, the plot, the
whole movie very personally moving.  No judgement is made of Sammy's father
Rafi; instead we are show evidence for and against supposed crimes that he
committed while helping India through a revolution against the British.
     While seeming to be a political movie--it has its editorializing moments,
but they are thankfully brief--it is a social movie, about people and how
people deal with other people.  We aren't told about Sammy and Rosie's open
marriage; we are shown it in action and get to see them work out problems within
the relationship.
     The visual imagery of the film is jarringly fast and quick cut, with
little time to absorb details.  The characters are shown against a fast-moving,
complex background composed of riots in London, incredibly liberal (by modern
American standards) groups of people existing, a ragamuffin caravan of
wandering musicians/artists and sex.  Sex is an important part of Sammy and
Rosie, almost as much as the conversation.
     The conversation.  Viewers not adept at following thick British and Indian
accents may have to watch lips move to pick up all the lines.  No one character
steals the show with dialog (unlike BROADCAST NEWS); each character has hir
share of snappy patter and quick lines.  The problem is, again, the thick
accents.  It took a second showing before I deciphered a line by Rafi to his
mistress of twenty years earlier: "For me, England is hot buttered toast on a
fork in front of an open fire ...  and cunty fingers."
J. Eric Townsend ->uunet!nuchat!flatline!erict smail:511Parker#2,Hstn,Tx,77007
