Title
Review for Far From Home: The Adventures of Yellow Dog (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
John Walker
My form of "rating": I don't think I expected it on leaving the
     theater, but I've found that the characters in this film keep on
     coming back to me.
In brief: In an odd way, FAR FROM HOME is an "atmosphere" film, a film
     of character exposition as distinct from character development.
     If it's the sort of atmosphere you want to get into, try to see it
     on the big screen.
     In some sense, there isn't any story.  "Plot" is not what FAR FROM
HOME is all about.
     To the extent it can be plotted, it's simple: Kid (14 or so) finds
dog (or vice versa, depending on your point of view).  On boat trip,
kid and dog are washed overboard in storm; they land on wilderness
shore in British Columbia.  The family has to cope with the uncertainty
and a search.  Kid and dog have got to try to survive and get out.
     One of the things I dislike about my present situation is that if
I see a film I want to write about, I know it will usually take a week
or two to get the free time to do so.  I suppose I should be glad that
I get anything writ at all, but it's annoying in a case like
this--where the film won't be around much longer, and where people
don't seem to recognize its central value.
     The reviews I've heard have been in the faint-praise department:
FAR FROM HOME is supposedly a nice little flick, one where you can wait
till it comes out on video.  The problem is that people who would like
FAR FROM HOME may lose a lot on the small screen--and maybe never
notice what they're missing.
     "Little" films frequently translate well to the small screen.  In
a circumscribed medium, a circumscribed universe can draw us in.  And
yes, in some sense, this might be called a "little" film.  But "quiet"
is more accurate.  As far as characters go, there's only a handful of
speaking roles.  There are four family members, a walk-on or two, and
only two non-family-members of any significance.
     But the setting of FAR FROM HOME and the challenges faced are as
essential as the precision of its focus.  And the setting is large.
Angus (Jesse Bradford), his parents (Bruce Davison and Mimi Rogers),
and his kid brother, Silas, live in a farmhouse somewhere in the
Pacific Northwest.  The woods come up to open fields around the house.
The scenery is of wildness and countryside.  It's consistently
splendid, by the way.  The wilderness is a co-star of sorts.
     And we all know there is going to be an adventure in the deep
woods.  The trailers, the posters, the promos all announce it.  Words
like "contemplative" or "atmospheric" *don't* leap out at us--maybe
not even after seeing the film.
     But if you're looking for "adventure" in the standard sense, this
ain't it.  You won't get one tidy obstacle followed by another--where
each challenge is a real or potential turning point for the plot, all
leading to a climactic struggle.  Also, you won't get character
development--where the obstacle or struggle forces some change on the
hero or those around him.
     Someone with better writing background than I have will have to
fill in the terms, but there are two different kinds of "action" at
issue here.  One is an action or event that determines a story line:
change such a "pivot point" or "breakpoint", and we'd have a different
story.  The other kind of action is just action: doing what's necessary
to work out the consequences of the pivotal action or event.
     As far as pivot points, there are only really two: kid and dog get
together; kid and dog get washed up on wilderness shore.  Then
everything works forward with how they and everyone else deal with it.
     Before Angus and Yellow Dog find one another, the action is
minutiae: Angus leads his kid brother and a friend of his brother on a
race through the woods trying to catch a rabbit.  After Angus and
Yellow Dog meet, the action is still more action that advances the
action without changing it much.  Yellow Dog messes things up; Yellow
Dog gets Mom to like him.  The boat trip and storm are the most
condensed pivotal actions, and even they are predominantly minutiae:
Angus getting coffee for Dad, Yellow Dog sliding on tilting deck.
Afterwards, almost everything is minutiae--only it's life-or-death
minutiae.
     Hmm...  If "action" means only pivotal action to you, have I made
this sound dull enough?!  Are you thinking maybe the characters must
have been colorful enough to command my involvement?
     Well, if you're thinking of histrionics, forget it.
     If nothing "happens", it should also be noted that no one "does"
anything.  No one grabs control and drives the story down a new path.
No one rebels; even when someone takes an action that may complicate
things, it's because it was the sensible thing to do at the time.
     Moreover, we don't get speeches.  These are not people who explain
themselves.  No soul-searching, no traumatic self-disclosure, no
railing at fate, no "emoting" at all.  Only occasionally (in the woods
scenes) is there a voice over, where we hear what Angus is thinking so
we can understand why he takes a course of action.  And then it's just
the sort of thing he might have said aloud if they were other people
around--the same sort of thing he's also said aloud to Yellow Dog.
     Angus and his family hold the perfectly ordinary conversations
that ordinary people hold.  These are just nice people I would more
likely expect to meet than to see in a movie.  Watching the beginning,
my first question was whether this was based on a real-life story,
where they kept pretty close to a book or something that one of the
participants had written.
     So, we have a movie where nothing happens, where nothing is done,
and nothing is said.  This is a movie?
     In fact, the film is continually active and looks on the surface
reasonably North American.  The scenes change, there's activity going
on all the time.  In the second sense of action--working out what
happens after a breakpoint--FAR FROM HOME is *all* action.  It never
drags; it never wastes time.
     But there's almost something more like some Japanese and Swedish
films.  Everything is communicated by implication, by indirection.
Particularly with Angus, again and again we simply see his face as he
surveys a situation.  No dialogue, no attempt to stretch for dramatic
facial expression; he's just thinking, sizing things up.  Then he will
move.  And almost invariably, we will know why without being "told".
     In fact, writer/director Phillip Borsos seems very deliberately to
want us never to have the usual expostulations.  In one scene with the
parents, when the search seems to be going nowhere, the mother walks to
the bathroom; as she opens the door, we see the father and it's evident
he's been crying.  Both of then abruptly change.  It's as if the door
has been slammed shut again.  They both know what's going on, they
don't deny it.  They hold each other for a moment, and talk about what
to do.  But any emoting takes place off screen; we are not meant to see
it or hear it.
     In fact, I'd like to have the time to look at the role of the most
silent character of all--Yellow Dog.  He is, in some sense, the most
pivotal character of all, next to nature, the wilderness.  But this
review will be late enough (and long enough!), as it is.  Suffice it to
say, his presence in the plot should underscore any ideas about the
quietness of the speaking roles.
     Thinking particularly of the repeated camera shots of Angus sizing
things up, I'm reminded that a number of foreign directors have been
fascinated with the traditional American western.  At first, joining
the two stereotypes seems unlikely--the western, presumably all
action and shoot-em-up; the foreign "art" film, all atmosphere and
implication.
     But the hero, the "strong, silent type", is an intersection of the
two.  Sizing things up is something he does all the time.  Apparently
he's impassive, unemotional, but *we* the audience write in the
emotions, the color and tone taking place behind the face.  *We*
measure the possible costs of his decision; *we* ponder what
implications something will have for the future.
     We base our judgements on shared myths and expectations about the
hero and his role; but we also bring our personal twist to it.  In some
sense, the relatively expressionless face contains *all* the emotions;
*we* choose which one(s) to select out for this scene or that event.
The viewer of an action film can be doing as much interpretation as the
viewer of any apparently obscure art film.  In the western, the
interpretation may be more instinctive and less conscious, but it's
interpretation nonetheless.  The two types of film differ in the kind
of action on screen; they're similar in the kind of viewer involvement.
     So it is with Angus and FAR FROM HOME.  Take the rabbit chase in
the first few minutes of the film.  Note: Hunting a rabbit on the
*run*?!  With a slingshot?!  In second growth?!  That's not a game one
is apt to win.  What does it say about someone willing to play it?  And
to take his kid brother and friend along as a learning experience?
     Here, though, the rabbit finally freezes; Angus has a free shot.
Thoughtful, he aims at the rabbit.  Nothing is said, but *we* know why
he acts the way he does.  Further, we know what he doesn't--that the
context of his decisions about such things is going to change
radically.  That's what the ads and the previews and the posters have
told us.  That's why we're here; that's what we're here to see.
     Angus in some sense, has done nothing, taken no decisions that
affect the plot.  *We* have done a lot, all in the space of a few
minutes.  We've gotten to know a fair amount about this kid; we've
gotten the opportunity to put his present state in the context of what
we know lies ahead for him.  And the most important points on screen
have been wordless and expressionless.  If we've gone down any blind
paths in our interpretation, we can blame only ourselves, not the
characters.
     Practically everything in FAR FROM HOME will be like that.
     The question, then, is do we want to spend the time inside the
world of Angus and his family?
     I'm afraid we now live in a world where the popular image is that
an unexpressed emotion is a lie.  You're not truly sad or cheerful or
whatnot unless you ram it down the throat of everyone within attacking
distance.  Everything must be explained to people; they in turn, must
reflect it all back or suffer having it explained and analyzed still
further.
     In some respects, they remind me of the way I've described my
family and town: Where I come from, the men don't wear jewelry; then
again, where I come from, the women don't wear jewelry, either.
     I don't think the parents ever verbally state anything about their
love for each other or the two kids; but everything they do, and how
they do it, does.  They sound "modern" and middle-class in their ways
of discussing whether Angus can keep Yellow Dog, but they evoke images
going back to farm families and poor people in small towns.  In fact, I
had one small problem in dealing with Davison and Rogers.  All the
images I have of such parents involve either older people, or people
apparently somewhat poor.  (Instinctively, I guess I expect Aunty Em!)
     Angus's father and mother just seemed a tad young and
sophisticated.  (Am I the only one who always felt his parents to be so
old?!)
     The kid brother, Silas, however, gave me no such problem.  He
walks just this side of the line between seven-year-old and continual
irritation.  (To the extent there's a difference!)  He may run around
in a rain coat/cape playing super hero, but he knows when to cool it.
     The important thing, though, is that many 14-year-olds would find
any seven-year-old a major pain; he'd be their cross to bear.  Well,
Silas's not a pain, and Angus just lets him trot along.  Silas doesn't
tell us so much about himself as about *Angus*.
     And Bradford brings off his role as Angus effortlessly.  I am no
expert on acting; and as I've said, the style of film demands that we
the audience write much into the action.  Having said that, I have to
say that Bradford makes it easy to write an enormous range of emotions
into Angus.  Bradford projects Angus as sensible and good-humored
before the woods, as level-headed and resourceful once in the crunch.
He gives us a tenacity that is not a matter of big emotional drive so
much as that giving up or breaking down is simply not part of his
character.
     I should also note that Bradford does well on the subtler
shadings.  (True, it's a film that is *all* subtle shadings.)  The
particular subtler shading I'm thinking of forces me to warn you that
yes, the filmmakers have condescended to the demand for lust and the
gratuitous sex scene!
     FAR FROM HOME has its own *vamp*!  Sultry!  Sophisticated!
Seductive!  Exerting all her feminine wiles to snare the innocent hero
for her own!
     As a charming aside to the main action, there's a girl from school
who has a crush on Angus.  The same age apparently, she also points up
the fact that Angus may be far beyond his peers in resourcefulness and
other virtues, but he still has some learning to do in other
departments!  FAR FROM HOME is *not* a "coming-of-age" flick!  Her two
brief scenes add an element of very quiet humor, and a reminder that
the great wide world is waiting outside the boundaries of the woods.
     As one of the only two significant non-family figures, she also
acts as a counterpoint to the head of the search effort.  On the
surface, he seems almost cold--concerned about wind and fuel while
Angus's parents are concerned about Angus.
     But it's as if Borsos wanted to give a small message: even the
apparently unsympathetic character is on our side.  He's just normally
businesslike and cool.  Underneath, there is no question about his
concern or commitment.  In one scene, the words are important, as he
reassures Angus's mother that he would never give up the search.  But,
as in a western, the words are brief and to the point.  When a
character like this does explain himself, he does so in terms of what
he will *do*.  That's enough.
     And is that economy of speech merely cinematic?  In my own
experience, it's something like what we'd see in real life.  We
interact with people in the course of work, chores, idle conversation
and whatnot.  We *infer* what's going on inside.  This is still a
dominant mode of conversation for many people.  Depending on the
context, a raised eyebrow can be the same as a guffaw or the same as a
rebuke.
     Perhaps it is better for feelings to be discussed
explicitly--particularly when dealing with people from disparate
     backgrounds, or psychologically traumatic events.  But people from
the same family or background can do pretty well with things being
implicit.  Sentences don't have to be completed, points don't have to
be spelled out.  They're known.
     Such a "language" can be used as a form of deceit, of denying
unpleasant truths.  But so can false openness.  For Angus's family, the
reliance on implicits and ordinary conversation is a language of love
and truthfulness.
     They communicate through action as much as--or even more
than--words.  At a point where the stereotypical western and the
stereotypical art film overlap, their communication, their speech, is
silent.
     So, does that family, that kid, and that world sound like
something you would want to be part of?  Something that you'd want to
be acquainted with?
     If it does, then you have to be part of it in the same way you're
part of similar worlds in real-life.  Most people don't verbally assign
labels to themselves as to their personalities and attitudes.  We see
it in how they do things.  (And even with those who do label
themselves, we have to check the label against the actions.)  We have
to *look* at each other--and *carefully*.
     For longer than I wish to think about, I've been living in
Washington, D.C.  And as Leadbelly sang years ago, it's a boozhwah
town.  I think I *like* the intelligentsia and others in the upper
middle classes, but frankly, I don't share their experience.  I
understand them in the sense of being able to predict their behavior,
and I pay the rent by analyzing and reporting and writing on things of
interest to them.  I am arguably *more* one of them than many!  Still,
they've never seemed very sane to me.  Terms like "frivolous" and
"self-absorbed" come to mind.
     Unfortunately for me, their views are apparently more typical of
"serious" filmgoers than mine are.  I can see something that speaks to
me in lots of films, but very few that seem really to describe my
family and the people I grew up with.
     FAR FROM HOME is one such film.  These people in the Pacific
Northwest don't seem as scruffy as the folks I recall from home.  And
they're really nice folks, which isn't true for everyone.  But I don't
consider that a weakness of the film.  Decent, sane people are worth a
film now and then, aren't they!?
     Add to that, FAR FROM HOME puts a kid I might have known in a real
adventure.  Angus is a kid I would have *admired*.  But *been*?  Sorry.
Therefore, I don't want to just "see" a film like this.  I want to *get
into* it.
     If you think you agree, then try to see FAR FROM HOME on the big
screen.  If you have to see it on video, then do so deliberately.
Disconnect the phone, commit yourself to sit there, just as you would
in a theater.  Block out the world, the endlessly psychoanalyzing
commentaries, the exchange of monologues where people appear to
interact but never reach touch one another.
     FAR FROM HOME is *not* far from home, even though some of us may
be.  And like life, it's a life-or-death adventure.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     FAR FROM HOME: THE ADVENTURES OF YELLOW DOG is a traditional lost
boy and his dog story.  It is completely predictable but full of a warm
and generous heart.  It says nothing you have not heard before, but it
is a simple, sweet, and life affirming show to watch.
     The fourteen-year-old boy (Jesse Bradford) in the movie is not
interested in girls yet and likes boats instead.  He finds a stray dog
whom he calls Yellow (played by Dakota) and falls in love with the dog
and wants to keep him.  The boy has good taste since the dog is
extremely lovable, gentle, loyal, and smart--all believably so.  It is
easy to want to keep this dog.  He passes up on a cute girl who is
sweet on him, but there will be time enough later in life for that I
guess.  I must admit, I wanted him to pay more attention to her.
     His parents are played by Mimi Rogers and Bruce Davidson.  Their
parts are inconsequential and poorly written.  Rogers seems to go from
one minor role to another which is a shame since she has a lot of
talent.  She was terrific in SOMEONE IS WATCHING OVER ME and in THE
RAPTURE.  [Now THE RAPTURE was an extremely unusual show].
     Shortly after the movie starts, the dog and boy get lost hundreds
of miles from home.  The movie is about whether, and if so how, they
will return.  You could write the plot yourself.  It is that simple.
For a kids show though I thought it sufficed.  I especially liked the
way the boy always treated the dog with respect.  I kept waiting for
the scene where the boy gets frustrated and tries to take it out on the
dog, but thankfully, that scene never came.
     There is a lot of beautiful scenery of the Pacific coast and
forests of Canada.  All of the visuals of the yellow rescue planes and
helicopters were particularly striking against the blue and gray coast
and the lush green forest backdrops.
     The movie runs 1:30 which felt fine albeit perhaps a bit short.
It is rated PG only for a few scary scenes of wild animals and
dangerous cliffs.  My son (almost six) handled it all fine and was only
a little scared.  He said he liked the movie.  He and I would both give
it a mild thumbs up for kids.  For grown-ups, it is a sweet and
relaxing time at the movies but it never engages your brain.  For young
kids, say under 5, who might get scared of a wolf snarling, this movie
might prove too much.  I give it **.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: January 30, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
