Title
Review for Prelude to a Kiss (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     PRELUDE TO A KISS is a film directed by Norman Rene, from a
screenplay by Craig Lucas.  It stars Alec Baldwin, Meg Ryan, Sydney
Walker, with Kathy Bates, Patty Duke, and Ned Beatty.  Rated PG-13, due
to language.
     PRELUDE TO A KISS suffers from coming so late in the nearly
exhausted cycle of body-switching comedies that infested the movie
screens in the 80s, the best being probably BIG, the most profitable
GHOST, the most ill-timed PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED, the most sleazy one
that escapes my mind just now but was a remake of a 60s sleazoid comedy
about a sleazeball who comes back as a woman [SWITCH -Mod.].  By now,
most of us have had about all we want of this particular subgenre for
the next few years.  This is unfortunate because PRELUDE is a sweet,
likable film with some winning performances.  The story is also a
little thin and would have benefited from some interesting subplot,
such as one exploiting the charming performance by the man who plays
Peter's (Alec Baldwin) best friend.  I think Peter's friend is gay, not
because he kisses Peter just before the wedding but because of
something in the dialog about the friend never getting married.
     In fact one of the most interesting and successful aspects of
PRELUDE is the skillful and sensitive way it handles the homosexual
tensions inherent in the situation, to wit an old man's soul in a young
woman's body and vice versa.  It's true that the script descends into
smirking humor once or twice, principally when Sydney Walker in his own
body and "in Meg Ryan's," as it were, goes out of his way to say that
Baldwin wasn't to his taste as a lover.  On the other, and more
convincing hand, we are presented with some intimate moments and one
very tender kiss between Walker and Baldwin.  By comparison look at the
tricky way GHOST avoided showing us Whoopi Goldberg being kissed by a
woman (again).
     This is the pleasantest role I've seen Baldwin in.  He is quirky,
sexy, sensitive, passionately devoted to getting at the truth about his
wife's change in character and to righting a great wrong.  He expresses
tender emotions lightly and convincingly and his finely tuned
performance anchors the movie.
     Meg Ryan is a good choice for the bohemian, darkly figured Rita,
who is so afraid of life that she can barely restrain her love of death.
Ryan is appealing and quite comfortable with what is effectively a dual
role.
     The showiest performance, and the one that may be remembered at
Oscar time, is Walker's.  The bitter, dying, absent old man who
rediscovers the preciousness of life, even a dying life.  He has a
couple of powerful speeches that are the moral center of this film.
     The film is adapted from a stage play, which is probably why it is
talkier than most movies, given to speeches more than dialog.  No
throw-away lines here; every word is to a purpose.  Otherwise, the
transition from stage to screen is mostly seamless and more successful
than most such adaptations.
     Mention also ought to be made of the fine, but brief supporting
roles from Kathy Bates as Walker's daughter, from Ned Beatty and Patty
Duke as Ryan's parents.
     The moments of all-out magic may be not as magical on the screen as
on the stage, but the rest of this story is handled mostly convincingly
thanks to the excellence of the actors and some sensitive direction from
Norman Rene, the director of the 1989 AIDS drama, LONG TIME COMPANION.
     I recommend PRELUDE to anyone with a taste for the romantic, the
life-affirming, for the witty and erotic.  This is a charmer and I very
much enjoyed it even at full ticket price.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Romance, comedy, fantasy, and even a
     little softcore horror combine in an intelligent and
     thoroughly enjoyable film.  PRELUDE handles an old idea, but
     at the same time says a lot about life and human
     relationships.  Even the acting by minor characters is good.
     (This is one of those films whose actual premise comes as a
     surprise well into the film.  I will be very vague below
     rather than spoil the plot.)  Rating: high +2.
     Peter Hoskins (played by Alec Baldwin) and Rita Boyle (played by Meg
Ryan) are made for each other.  They are both bright, lively people.  Peter
is quiet, sedate, and thoughtful.  Rita on the other hand
 is all over the map.  She clearly playfully loves life in the daylight but
at night has terrors that something terrible will happen to her world.  She
does not know how right she is.  Something will happen to her on her wedding
day.  It is something that is weird, right out of the Twilight Zone with
touches of Kafka.  At the same time Peter is going to be pulled into a
strange struggle to prove his love.
     Take an idea that has been done many times in films.  Make it one that
everybody thought could not be done one more time.  Give this idea to a good
enough writer and you occasionally can find fresh new approaches.  In this
case the writer is Craig Lucas who proves that an old fantasy mechanism can
be given a new spin and can reveal insights into human nature and the aging
process that nobody has seen in it before.   Lucas wrote his story first as
a Broadway play.  Now he adapted his story into a screenplay.  PRELUDE TO A
KISS was his fifth play and second produced screenplay.  His previous film
was the excellent LONGTIME COMPANION.  Lucas's play MISSING PERSONS, his
film LONGTIME COMPANION, and now his film PRELUDE TO A KISS were all
directed by Norman Rene'.  Rene' who must be a great director, since just
about every speaking performance in his films seems to be very good.  I
think many people will be enthralled by Richard Riehle's performance as an
elderly man who crashes the wedding.  I found myself fascinated with a small
but magnetic performance by Stanley Tucci playing Peter's best friend,
Taylor.  It is just a small role, but Rene' invests the character with a lot
of personality.  Also notable is Ned Beatty as Rita's father, but most
people expect Beatty to turn in a good performance.  It is some of the
lesser known actors who give this film its texture.
     PRELUDE TO A KISS is a light fantasy with some heavy ideas that
audiences can think about or choose to ignore.  Operating on multiple
levels, it is a surprisingly satisfying film to be coming out in the summer
fluff season.  I rate it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
