Title
Review for Boon sang yuen (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
"It is as difficult to love someone forever as it is to hate someone 
forever."
Starring Wu Chien-lien, Leon Lai, Anita Mui, Huang Lei, Ge You
Directed by Ann Hui
Written by Kin-chung Chan, from the novel by Eileen Chang
Cinematography by Ping-bin Lee
        EIGHTEEN SPRINGS is a love story in which no one ever says the words 
"I love you."  No one speaks the word "love" in any context, as far as 
I recall.  There is talk of marriage, of money, of couples who are 
good pairs, of couples who are poor matches--but never of love.  
Marriage is less a matter of what is right than what is appropriate.  
Yet the movie is founded on the convincing, touching, deeply felt 
romance between Shujun (FALLEN ANGELS' Leon Lai) and Manjing (EAT 
DRINK MAN WOMAN's Wu Chien-lien), two young people who are 
transparently in love, even if they never say the words.
        Shujun is the son of a wealthy family in Nanjing.  Manjing's father 
died when she was young, and her sister (Anita Mui) had to take a 
shameful job as a "ballroom hostess" to provide for the family.  
Because the sister's work reflects poorly on Manjing's entire family, 
she is an unsuitable bride for Shujun--according to his family.
        Today, Shujun might ignore his family's wishes, but he and Manjing 
live in Shanghai in the 1930s, where marriages were decided by decorum 
as much as by desire, so he does not have that liberty.  They live in 
a world not unlike Jane Austen's, where social codes and manners 
govern all behaviour, and the way people act within such strict 
guidelines can be at times humorous, at times heartbreaking.
        Heartbreaking, mostly, for the difference in social status is merely 
the beginning of the lovers' problems.  Shujun's choice of family over 
self has tragic consequences, especially for Manjing.  The problems 
become perhaps too extreme--Chinese movies never seem to err on the 
side of caution when it comes to providing hardships for their 
characters.  The latter half of the film struck me as being a bit too 
much, because the first half is so gentle, so graceful and delicate in 
its exploration of young love.  Nevertheless, the idyllic beginning 
makes the lovers' later separation, their loss and longing, terribly 
poignant.  
        EIGHTEEN SPRINGS is refreshing in the way it devotes time to the 
courtship, unlike most movies, which treat romance in a perfunctory 
manner.  Here, we see love developing, rather than being informed 
about it after the fact.
        Shujun and Manjing are introduced by a mutual friend (Huang Lei) when 
Shujun comes to work in a factory in Shanghai.  The budding romantic 
tension is subtle but unmistakable.  Soon Shujun and Manjing are 
finding moments alone together, but there is no overt romance, no 
profession of love.  They grow close, and, without even a kiss, are 
soon discussing marriage.   It is typical of their hesitant courtship 
that marriage is not so much proposed as suggested: "Wouldn't it be 
nice if we were married?"  But we can believe that it would be nice.  
They are both quiet, mild-mannered, conscientious; they are 
comfortable together.
        Their love manifests itself in small, understated gestures.  Shujun 
learns that Manjing lost one of her gloves, so he takes a flashlight 
and searches through the woods at night to find it.  When he gives it 
to her the next day, he doesn't tell her about the trouble he went 
through--clearly, the act of giving, of pleasing her, is all the 
gratification he needs.  He walks her home from work every night, and 
when they part, they simply say, "See you tomorrow," but the way they 
glance at each other as they do, awkward, guarded, wanting to say more 
but afraid to do so, perfectly captures the fragile emotions of young 
lovers.  Credit for this belongs to Lai and Wu, who are both 
wonderful: they imbue mundane exchanges and brief gestures with 
complex, profound, restrained feelings.
        This is one of the great pleasures of the film, that it pays 
attention to the nuances of feeling that attend even the smallest 
gestures.  In this sense, it is a domestic movie, a movie about 
everyday lives, everyday things.  Such films can be drab, but in the 
right hands they can be fascinating--as this one is--because they 
remind us that there are hidden worlds of emotion that we tend to 
forget about, that we take for granted as we go about our lives.  
Unfortunately, Shujun and Manjing never get the chance to take those 
emotions for granted.
