Title
Review for Gimme Shelter (1970)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/046d0ba5725ae6628825693d00641cd9?OpenDocument
Prancing about onstage like some giggling, underdeveloped girl, Mick
Jagger can barely control his audience with an ineffectual plea:
"Brothers, sisters - we don't want this. We all want to have a good
time. So let's settle down now ororor we just won't play anymore."
While the Rolling Stones preen onstage and Jagger fiddles with his
endless mane of bangs, the leather biker boys who comprise the Hell's
Angels control the 300,000 hippies in the audience clamoring for
attention and Jagger's skinny bod.
This concert footage is intercut with scenes of the Rolling Stones'
lawyer, bespectacled fussbudget Melvin Belli, as he organizes their free
concert in California. The locals seem wary of bringing the Rolling
Stones to town, along with all those crazy fans: Someone's sure to get
hurt. We also catch glimpses of the obviously whacked out Stones on a
press junket, oblivious to the manic fans who fervently gather around
them.
Welcome to 1969, four months after Woodstock. The Stones are joined by
Jefferson Airplane in a free concert at Altamont Speedway. On the long,
bleak day, the crowd gathers in hot anticipation, some stripping
themselves naked and running through the crowd while others booze and
smoke up.
It's the end of the '60s, man, and what an ending! During the
performance, the lead singer of Jefferson Airplane is knocked out by an
angry biker, the crowd is drubbed with pool sticks and chains, and a
lone gunman who has Jagger in his sights is cut down by the knife of a
Hell's Angel. It's the tragic tale of Altamont, where a member of the
Stones' ad hoc security team stabbed a gun-toting fan to death. History
has been made, once again, with blood.
Gimme Shelter, filmed by the Maysles Brothers, is a time capsule of the
violent climate in 1969, shot over the course of ten days during the
Rolling Stones tour. The handheld camera moves around, capturing poorly
lit, washed out images of dejected youth, bummed out rock stars and a
wild performance. It isn't pretty, all ragged zooms and
catch-as-catch-can shots which move from one definitive late '60s image
to another - tight bellbottoms and long waves of hair, kissing couples
and peace signs, and travelers with all their worldly possessions in
their sacks traveling through the good old USA.
Mick Jagger really isn't much of a live performer, overly concerned with
his appearance, forcing eccentric ad-libs. However, the crowd adores
Mick's fervent energy. Women leap on stage to wrap themselves around
him. Oddly enough, it'd all be just a fun (and forgettable) road movie
leading up to an aggressive and hip "alternative to Woodstock" were it
not for the shots of the Rolling Stones sitting around the editing
console watching the aftermath and inevitability of the Altamont
tragedy.
When the murder occurs, Jagger rewinds the editing machine and watches
it again in grim slow motion, his face reflecting -- what? Relief that
he wasn't gunned down in cold blood? A thudding moment of realization
that the '60s have gone out with a brutal bang? Whatever it is, the
Maysles Brothers are sensible enough to linger on his face while
watching the footage, and the grim visages of his Rolling Stones
companions, particularly the cartoon-faced Charlie Watts as he smokes a
cigarette, eyes filled with emptiness.
The movie lacks focus and feels rough and tumble, hastily thrown
together and forcing its "death of the '60s" theme by rushing through
the murder finale. They really don't have much footage of its aftermath,
except the Stones' dejected faces in the editing room and the hippies
leaving the concert. That's the marvel of creatively editing around
something the filmmakers hadn't anticipated - using the metaphor of
death.
However, there's no denying that as a sign of its times, Gimme Shelter
is an indispensable document with uses the popular rock ballads of the
Rolling Stones as the pulse for the cheerfully drugged young people and
the hostile antics of the bikers, captured en masse on that fatal day by
the filmmakers. Songs like "Under My Thumb," "Satisfaction" and,
especially, "Sympathy for the Devil" become more than pop and fizz,
existing onscreen as cultural milestones and commentary on those
watching (and, indeed, those performing).
The best place to end this review lies in describing the quiet
melancholy of a single unbroken shot. The Rolling Stones listen to the
playback of their slow, dreamy "Wild Horses." They smoke, fiddle with
their boots, and sit staring at the walls of the recording studio as the
song carries on. Though this happens several days before Altamont, it
works as an eerie prediction that something great is coming -- great and
terrible and strange, and the Rolling Stones will have no choice but to
hurry up and wait.
Scenes like this play out as if Gimme Shelter were a thriller, and the
Altamont killing is the ticking time bomb which drives the story
forward. It's a movie which merits the attention of a re-release,
whether viewed as a history lesson in American culture or as an exercise
in slow mounting dread. Mick Jagger never knew what hit him.
Directors: Albert Maysles, David Maysles, Charlotte Zwerin
Producers: Albert Maysles, David Maysles, Charlotte Zwerin
Starring: Mick Jagger, Kith Richards, Mick Taylor, Charlie Watts, Bill
Wyman, Melvin Belli
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1970) ***1/2 - C:The Rolling Stones.
I am not a huge music fan and I must admit that I don't own any albums by
the Rolling Stones, which made me hesitant to watch a documentary about a
concert they performed back in 1969. However, "Gimme Shelter" is a
fascinating film. At that concert, four babies were born and four people
were killed, and one of the murders was captured on camera by the crew
filming the documentary. It seems as though that before the concert, the
Hell's Angels were asked to make sure that no one gets onto the stage and it
seems they took their job a little too seriously. Even without that, the
documentary is still interesting. People keep trying to grab Mick Jagger,
dogs run across the stage, etc. It has a "Hey, Look At The Freaks" feel to
it, as we watch so many people whacked out on drugs do really embarassing
and stupid things. I hope that these people had children, that these
children rent this film, see their parents making complete fools of
themselves, and then torment their parents until the day they die. This film
would be great for schools to show as part of their "Say No To Drugs"
programs. George Lucas is credited for some of the camera work.
As a footnote: Jim Carrey's character in The Cable Guy, right before singing
"Somebody To Love" by Jefferson Airplane, credits the song's success to this
film. However, even though Jefferson Airplane does play at the concert, that
song is not part of the film.
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Brian Koller
In late 1969, the Rolling Stones headlined a
free concert at the Altamont Speedway, located
outside San Francisco.  It was billed as the
Western Woodstock, in comparison to the legendary
music festival held just a few months before.
And the two concerts had many things in common.
Jefferson Airplane and the Grateful Dead performed
at both, there were hundreds of thousands of
fans in attendance, illicit drugs were rampant,
there was disorganization and transportation problems,
and many fans decided that they would enjoy the
concert more if they took off all their clothes.
But there was a significant difference between
Woodstock and Altamont: violence.  Whatever faults
Woodstock may have had, it was peaceful.  There
were four deaths at Altamont, including a gun-waving
fanatic stabbed and beaten to death by Hell's Angels.
The violence begins when the Stones arrive for the
concert.  Mick Jagger is punched in the jaw by
a crazed hippie before he can reach his trailer.
Even during the warm-up acts, the Hell's Angels,
foolishly hired as security, are clubbing concert
attendees, especially those rushing the stage or
messing with their motorcycles.  Airplane lead singer
Marty Balin is mistakenly assaulted by a Hell's Angel.
By the time the Stones are performing, there is a
constant melee in front of the stage, causing Jagger
to break off singing to plead uselessly for an end
to the fighting.
This story is jumbled with other scenes involving
the Rolling Stones.  We see them leaving their room
at a dumpy Holiday Inn (these guys needed better
managers), watch them listen with dazed expressions
to playbacks from upcoming album "Sticky Fingers",
and watch them watch themselves on monitors,
post-concert.  Jagger and drummer Charlie Watts
do the talking, guitarist Keith Richards and the
others are mostly seen smoking cigarettes or
playing onstage.
Among the concert performers is Tina Turner, who
treats her microphone like a giant phalanx symbol.
Among the many cameramen, some of whom were themselves
assaulted, was a young George Lucas.
--
