Title
Review for Stand by Me (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chad Polenz
Stand By Me
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1986, R, 87 minutes [1 hour, 27 minutes]
[drama]
starring; Will Wheaton (Gordie), River Phoenix (Chris), Corey Feldman
(Teddy), Jerry O'Connell (Vern), written by Raynold Gideon, Bruce A. Evans,
produced by Raynold Gideon, Bruce A. Evans, Andrew Scheinman, directed by Rob
Reiner, based on the novella "The Body" by Stephen King.
        We all had our best friends with whom we went on great adventures as
children, but did we experience a loss of innocence with them? "Stand By Me"
is a good movie that tires, perhaps a tad too hard, to answer that question
by combining a sense of youth adventure with the seriousness of the loss of
innocence.
        The films stars Will Wheaton as Gordie LaChance, a typical kid growing up in
a small town in the 1950s, which makes for a real American atmosphere. Gordie
and his three best friends have a secret club of sorts, but each member is
quite different. There is Chris (Phoenix), the leader of the gang and
part-time troublemaker; Teddy (Feldman), the hyper kid with an over-active
imagination; and Vern (O'Connell), the geeky fat kid they all pick on. The
boys are all 12 years old, but they seem a rather mature for their age as
they constantly smoke and swear like old men. 
        One day Vern tells the guys he overheard his brother figure out the location
of a missing child, who everyone assumes is dead and the town is upset over
this. They all become excited when they realize they could become heroes if
they find the boy's body. They set out on a long hike through the woods and
mountains, covering over 20 miles, but they consider it an unrealistic goal.
But the film is not about finding the body, it's about the journey itself,
and this provides for the good sense of innocence.
        Meanwhile, a group of bullies who are much older but less mature than Gordie
and his friends have come up with the same plan. The entire film is
essentially a study to compare and contrast the two sets of characters and
what they represent: Gordie's gang = innocence and adventure; the bullies =
being brutal and desensitized for sake of doing so.
        Most of the film depicts Gordie, Chris, Teddy, and Vern's quest and many
things happen to them on the way, both funny and serious. They get into a
fight with a junkyard owner and his dog, they out-run a train on a bridge,
they tell stories of their future sexual conquests, and they have a traumatic
experience with leeches. No plot forms, instead, everything is just
characterization, dialogue, and camaraderie which makes for a good,
lighthearted story. The only problem is sometimes it goes overboard and
becomes sappy. All the boys break down in tears at least once as they talk
about something bad that has happened to them. They realize they're growing
up, and when they finally see the dead body their lives are changed
instantly.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz
