Title
Review for Mrs. Winterbourne (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Shirley MacLaine, Ricki Lake, Brendan Fraser, Miguel Sandoval
Director: Richard Benjamin
Producers: Dale Pollock, Ross Canter, Oren Koules
Screenplay: Lisa-Marie Radano and Phoef Sutton based on the novel 
      I MARRIED A DEAD MAN by Cornell Woolrich
Music: Patrick Doyle
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     It's said that nothing new comes out of Hollywood these days, and 
that's certainly the case with MRS. WINTERBOURNE, a romantic comedy 
based on Cornell Woolrich's I MARRIED A DEAD MAN.  This film creates a 
sense of deja vu that may have viewers flashing back to last year's 
WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, a remarkably similar story.  However, while 
SLEEPING boasted the talents of a charismatic Sandra Bullock and affable 
Bill Pullman, MRS. WINTERBOURNE has an irritating Ricki Lake and bland 
Brendan Fraser.  It's not hard to guess which is the better movie.
     Stripped to its bare bones, MRS. WINTERBOURNE is about a lonely 
woman finding a family and romance when she pretends to be the wife of a 
dead man.  Connie Doyle (Ricki Lake) is abandoned on the streets of New 
York City when she refuses to abort her boyfriend's child.  Nine months 
pregnant and homeless, she stows away on a train to Boston, where she 
meets Hugh Winterbourne (Brendan Fraser) and his expecting wife, 
Patricia (Susan Haskell).  The train is involved in a wreck, and Hugh 
and Patricia are killed.  As a result of certain artificial 
circumstances, Connie is believed to be Patricia, and her baby, who is 
born just after the crash, is accepted as the late Hugh's son.  The pair 
are invited to the Winterbournes' Boston mansion to meet Hugh's mother, 
Grace (Shirley MacLaine), and his twin brother, Bill (also Fraser).  
While Grace accepts Connie's story without question, Bill is suspicious, 
especially when she signs a check "Connie Doyle" instead of "Patricia 
Winterbourne". 
     Perhaps because it bears such a marked resemblance to WHILE YOU 
WERE SLEEPING, MRS. WINTERBOURNE comes across as stale and recycled.  
The plot is littered with the kinds of contrivances and coincidences 
common to all mistaken identity stories, but, instead of dealing with 
such issues in a fresh and intelligent manner, the script treats them 
with a workmanlike, sit-com approach (not surprising, considering that 
co-screenwriter Phoef Sutton worked on CHEERS).  And, although MRS. 
WINTERBOURNE offers a few humorous moments, the comedy isn't consistent.
     As I've often said in the past, chemistry is critical to a romantic 
comedy's success.  Here, there's precious little between leads Ricki 
Lake and Brendan Fraser.  Fraser, who hasn't given a good performance 
since SCHOOL TIES, makes Bill ineffectual and uninteresting.  Lake, a TV 
talk show host and veteran of John Waters movies, does a credible Rosie 
O'Donnell imitation -- that's to say she's equally aggravating.  At 
least Shirley MacLaine is her usual solid self, but, although her 
presence saves a few scenes, she can't rescue MRS. WINTERBOURNE.  
     For director Richard Benjamin, who debuted behind the camera with 
1982's MY FAVORITE YEAR, MRS. WINTERBOURNE isn't likely to be a stand-
out on his resume.  This film mistakes action for energy, ridiculous 
circumstances for comedy, and a mismatched male/female pairing for 
romance.  Those in search of a lighthearted love story would do better 
checking out THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS, or, for something really 
similar, renting WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING.  Unlike MRS. WINTERBOURNE, 
neither of those films is mired in mediocrity.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
I recall MRS. WINTERBOURNE being compared to WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, though
nowhere near as charming. That's the basics of the reviews I remember reading
anyway. This is very true I suppose, but I don't know that I would have
actually thought of the comparison without hearing it first.
The first half an hour or so of MRS. WINTERBOURNE is nauseating. Bad
directing and even worse acting are what we experience. Canned dialogue that
comes off sounding like the first rehearsal of a junior high play will make
you want to stop the tape (since it's out of theaters a long time now) right
then and there. But if you hold out, the film does actually manage to
improve. That doesn't mean a whole lot, but if you can really REALLY get past
how sappy and cheezy this movie is, then you might actually find it somewhat c
ute.
Ricki Lake stars as Connie Doyle, a young girl who moves out to New York on
her eighteenth birthday. With nowhere to go and nowhere to stay, she is
quickly and easily befriended by Steve DeCunzo (played by Loren Dean, who is
much better in this year's GATTACA), a con-men of women's hearts. Claiming to
be a producer, he quickly wins her heart and lets her into his apartment. The
relationship dissipates, and when Connie announces she's pregnant, Steve
decides he wants no part of it and kicks her out onto the street.
Roaming the streets penniless, Connie ends up at the train station where she
accidently winds up on a train to who knows where. Panic strikes when tickets
are being collected and Connie naturally doesn't have one. She is saved by
the carefree, playful Hugh Winterbourne (Bredan Fraser), who roleplays as her
husband. Hugh takes Connie back to his bunker (?) and introduces her to his
real wife, Patricia, who is also pregnant and the same amount along.
When Patricia notices Connie's longing admiration of her wedding ring, she
insists that Connie try it on. Cue train wreck. Next thing we know, Connie is
coming to conciousness in a New England hospital as the memory of the train
wreck hits her. But her attention soon focuses on the fact that she's no
longer pregnant. In a panic, she calls for the nurse and "her" baby is
brought to her, safe and sound. One problem - the name tag reads "Baby Boy
Winterbourne". Sure enough, Patricia's wedding ring is still on her finger
and she has been confused as Patricia, who was killed, along with Hugh, in
the crash.
As luck would have it, Hugh's family never did meet Patricia, and this makes
it easy when, to Connie's nervous dismay, she is taken into the Winterbourne
home. There Connie finds a loving acceptance like she never knew and finds it
harder and harder to divulge her true identity, especially when she starts
falling for Hugh's twin brother Bill.
It's a good thing that when someone dies in the movies, they don't have to
worry about blood tests or fingerprints or whatever you normally think might
be looked at to determine who it is that's dead and buried in a train wreck.
Why, a simple ring engraved with someone else's name will allow you to keep
on living as that person!
Shirley McLaine is sadly waisted in this film as Grace Winterbourne, Hugh and
Bill's mother. She is the only one who gives a solid, straight thru
perfomance. Miguel Sandoval is a delight as the Winterbourne servant Paco.
There is enough in this film to make it watchable, but it's a real shame it
didn't do more with itself.
For all intents and purposes, my 21 year old sister LOVED the movie. Of
course she's not one to care about the acting or directing as much, and I
suppose that makes her a little bit more like the typical movie-goer.
However, this film still sucks when looked at as an attempt at motion picture
art,  but has just enough sugar coated charm to garner two stars out of me.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MRS. WINTERBOURE is another one of those mistaken identity films.
It is reported to be a remake of NO MAN OF HER OWN (1949) and J'AI
EPOUSE UNE OMBRE (1982), but since I have never seen either of these I
can not verify this.  At any rate, MRS. WINTERBOURE feels like a movie
you have seen a hundred times before, and predictability is its middle
name.
     The set up for the movie is that Connie Doyle (Ricki Lake) gets
pregnant by a cliche of an uncaring louse of a boyfriend, Steve (Loren
Dean).  Steve gets his buddies to claim that they slept with her so he
can say that he can not be sure whose kid it is.  He then kicks her out
into the cold.
     One hellish night on a train she meets another equally pregnant
woman, Patricia Winterbourne (Susan Haskell) and her husband Hugh
(Brendan Fraser).  After a train wreck, Connie is mistakenly identified
as Patricia Winterbourne since the real Patricia and her husband were
killed.  This bit of confusion whisks Connie into a life of luxury as
the daughter-in-law of super-rich Grace Winterbourne (Shirley
MacLaine).  Living with Grace is Hugh's twin Bill (Brendan Fraser).
The family turns out to be dysfunctional as are almost all rich
families in the movies.
     Most of the picture is about whether Connie will be found out.
What is your guess?  Although Bill claims to hate Connie, how do you
think their relationship will turn out?  Since Steve's son is now
super-rich, what do you think Steve will do?  See what I mean, you
could write the script yourself.  The producers did not need to hire
Lisa-Marie Radano and Phoef Sutton to craft a script from Cornell
Woolrich's book ("I Married a Dead Man").
     Actually, the biggest problem with the show is not its
predictability nor its believability, both of which are substantial,
but the lack of energy.  The directing by Richard Benjamin is aimless.
The actors float through the movie as if they are all on Sominex.  Most
of the film is a failed attempt at comedy, but the lines the actors are
given are so ineffectual that it is hopeless.  Frequently the film
relies on sight gags that make little sense and are not particularly
funny.  Connie, for example, sees the reflection of an upside down
crucifix in the baptismal water and somehow this causes her to faint.
     After trying comedy in the first part, the story switches to a
more serious tone toward the end.  The characters begin to show their
warm hearts, but the characters are so lifeless that this part works no
better than the first.  I tried to like this show, but there is so
little there that it was not possible for me.  I will give it this, it
is pretty inoffensive.  For people wanting to watch something to fall
asleep by, it probably fills the bill.
     MRS. WINTERBOURNE runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for a little bad
language.  It would probably fine for kids say 10 and up.  I do not
recommend it, and I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Pairing Shirley MacLaine and Ricki Lake is probably a violation of
the recent Telecommunications Decency Act-- coming soon: Former Lives of
Angst-Filled Psychic Teenagers!-- but since this isn't television, I
guess we don't have to worry.  The two star in MRS.  WINTERBOURNE, a
shallow fairy tale that's even *lighter* than such similar fluff as
PRETTY WOMAN and WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING.  Based on Cornell Woolrich's
novel "I Married a Dead Man," the plot has a pregnant unwed mother
(Lake) mistaken as a rich man's widow after a train wreck kills both him
and his pregnant wife.  (She wakes up in the hospital, with everyone
calling her a different name.  Sound familiar?) What sounds like the
perfect (albeit grim) "Cinderella story" needs, well, a better actress
than Lake.  She's photogenic enough-- and, of a refreshingly "non-model"
type-- but she's too coarse.  Yeah, I know, her blunt approach fits the
character, but she's still taxing to an audience already contending with
logic leaps, telegraphed emotions, and a few too many happily-ever-
after's.  Directed by Richard Benjamin.  Need I say more?  
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Ben Hoffman
     As an actor, Richard Benjamin always turned in a good
performance.  With rare exceptions, his directorial endeavors somehow
have fallen flat.  Mrs. Winterbourne is an example of the latter.  What
saves the film is the talent of Shirley MacLaine, who plays the title
role.  MacLaine is a born actress.  When, in the film, she does a
momentary movement of her hands and head I suddenly remembered that her
original fame was as a dancer.  The slight momentary movements were so
graceful, so delightful, so filled with Class.
     It is the story that turns the film down into little more than
just another ordinary movie.  The first scene is of a man lying on a
bed, a couple of bullet holes in him.  The TV is on but nobody is
listening.  He,  Steve DeCunzo (Loren Dean), is dead.. How and why and
by whom did DeCunzo meet his Maker?   Flashback.
     Connie Doyle (Ricki Lake) is a young woman on a train but neither
knows nor cares where it is going.  Homeless, broke and in the last
months of pregnancy she is sorely in need of a miracle.  The film's
author provides exactly that.  Based on the novel, "I Married A Dead
Man" by Cornell Woolrich, a series of unlikely events happen
unexpectedly.  There is a train accident and the penniless Connie ends
up in a hospital. She is mistakenly thought, by everyone, to be Mrs.
Wellbourne's daughter-in-law  (also pregnant) who was on the same train
on her way to meet her mother-in-law for the first time..  Both she
and her husband, Hugh Winterbourne (Brendan Frazer) are killed in the
derailment.
     Once we have accepted this series of coincidences, the film moves
along nicely even to the point where the dead Hugh has a twin brother,
Bill.  Connie has to keep the family from discovering who she really is
while her "brother-in-law'" Bill appears to be suspicious.  Because the
actors are so good, because Connie is so charming and Bill so handsome
we are in their rooting for them.  This mistaken identity bit is a
kind of romantic comedy . . . and story of a murder.  Well told.  And,
again, there;s MacLaine.
