Title
Review for Auntie Mame (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Based upon the Broadway play also starring Rosalind
Russell, which was in turn based upon the novel by
Ed Fitzgerald, "Auntie Mame" is an exuberant comedy.
While sometimes overdone, and with a plot that amounts
to a series of skits dominated by Russell, the
production has much energy and wit.
The film takes place during the years 1928 through
the early 1940s.  Russell plays the title role, an
eccentric socialite obligated to raise her orphaned
nephew Patrick (Jan Handzlik).  Patrick is earnest
and naive, but also something of a twit.  Mame is at
odds with conservative bank trustee Babcock (Fred Clark)
over Patrick's education.
Mame loses her fortune during the 1929 stock market
crash, and is forced to work at demeaning jobs.  She
is rescued by wealthy southerner Burnside (Forrest
Tucker), who soon leaves her a widow.  Meanwhile,
Patrick (now played by Roger Smith) has grown up,
but is still a twit.  He is engaged to marry nasal-voiced
snob Gloria (Joanna Barnes), whose buffoonish father
(Willard Waterman) bears a prejudice against Jews.
Most of the supporting cast is more eccentric than
Auntie Mame.  Vera (Coral Browne) is an affected
drunk, O'Bannion (Robin Hughes) is a phony 'Irish'
writer, Gooch (Peggy Cass) is a mousey secretary.
House servant Ito (Yuki Shimoda) laughs like a
delirious idiot.  The parade of colorful characters
robs the film of its credibility, and the certainty
of a happy ending robs the film of any suspense.
Still, it is fun watching Russell try to walk in
wrong-sized boots, and Barnes' performance is a hoot.
Morton Da Costa produced and directed "Auntie Mame",
and also has a bit part playing Patrick's father.
He closes many scenes by freezing the actors,
darkening the set, and putting a spotlight on
Russell's face.  This technique seems artificial,
but it does express the warmth and vitality of
Russell's character.  The film was remade in 1974
as the infamous flop "Mame", starring Lucille Ball.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
