Title
Review for Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2 (2000)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Joe Berlinger
WRITTEN BY: Joe Berlingerand Andrew Birkin
CAST: Jeffrey Donovan, Erica Leerhsen, Tristine Skyler, Stephen Barker Turner, Kim Director
MPAA: Rated R for violence, language, sexuality and drug use.
Runtime: USA:90
"The Blair Witch Project" was perhaps one of a kind, a unique film
that played completely on its own merit, managing to scare even the
most experienced horror fans out of their senses. Its success made a
sequel inevitable, but this is not the sequel, I suspect, anyone much
wanted.
After the release of "The Blair Witch Project", tourists have
practically invaded the small town of Burkettsville, in order to get a
glimpse of the Blair Witch. Locals have turned this mass hysteria into
a great business opportunity, selling twig-sculptures, stones and dirt
like those in the movie, and the exasperated local sheriff patrols the
woods with a bullhorn, shouting, "Get out of these woods and go home!
There is no goddamned Blair Witch!". Jeff () is one of those people,
who has used the sudden popularity of the small town to his
advantage. After he got released from the mental institution, he
created a mobile business that attracts thousands of customers through
the Internet. As the movie starts he is leading one of these groups
into the woods, on the "Blair Witch Hunt". Among the five strangers is
Stephen and his girlfriend, the pregnant Tristen, who are writing a
book on the hysteria caused by the film called "The Blair Witch:
History or Hysteria?", and Kim, who dresses in black and has some
psychic powers. The last member of the crew is Erica, a young
beautiful witch-wannabe, who constantly quotes from the Wiccan lore,
saying "The first rule of Wicca is, do no harm, because whatever you
do will come back to you threefold." This strange group plunges into
the woods, where they begin to argue about their different approaches
to the experience. On the very first night that they decide to spend
under the stars amidst the ruins of Parr's abandoned house, strange
things start happening. When they wake up their equipment is gone and
only the tapes remain. After a while they discover strange markings on
their bodies. They are somehow lost in time, as it loops
uncontrollably back and forth. They are all haunted by hallucinations
and horrible nightmares and soon they can not see the difference
between dreams and reality. The only thing that they are sure of is
that they have brought something or someone with them from the woods..
Documentary director Joe Berlinger ("Paradice Lost") helms "Blair
Witch 2", leaving the creators of the first film (Dan Myrick and Ed
Sanches) in the background. The opening scenes--the documentary
showing the townspeople affected by the first film-- is a more
promising approach, because instead of trying to cover similar ground,
it goes outside the first film and makes its own stand. But soon the
movie gets confused and sidetracked by its own story, that is never
resolved and ends with a very anticlimaxic epilogue. In a way, this is
a typical Hollywood sequel. More money has been spent and more people
have worked on a project that was doomed to fail. The horror and
suspense of the original simply could not be repeated. Of course in
these situations, quantity is more important than quality and profit
is more important than the artistical values. From its opening scenes
when the camera gracefully panes over the bloody-red forest, with
Carter Burwell's ("Being John Malkovich" and "Fargo") musical score in
the background, you realize that with the exception of its title, this
film has absolutely nothing to do with "The Blair Witch
Project". "Blair Witch.." was filmed by handheld videocameras and
nfeatured acting that was mostly based on improvisation. In the sequel
the technical aspect of the film is close to perfection, creating a
completely different atmosphere. With its graceful cinematography,
production design and flashy editing, the film has a very polished
look, which is impossible to associate with the first installment. And
though Berlinger directs his film with an energy and pace that makes
the adrenaline rush through the body a couple of times, he has
obviously misunderstood the nature of his predecessor. The key is
simplicity. "Blair Witch Project" had a story which was incredibly
simple. That allowed the audience to fill the gaps with our own
imagination. The film was practically an empty screen, on which we
projected our most frightening nightmares. The effect was incredibly
powerful, lasting and entir e everyone, but in a different way. "Book
of Shadows" feels incredibly controlled and restrict. Here, very
little is left to our imagination and the story is so complex and
"clever" that the screenwriters are the first to get lost in it. There
is is no book of shadows and no conclusion that we can be satisfied
with. This is simply a less artistic film that doesn't have the talent
and originality of its predecessor. It resorts to fancy cinematography
and special effects to create the right effect and doesn't always
succeed. But most importantly: it stands on its own ground and has
almost no connection with the first movie, which doesn't allow it to
destroy the original. In the end, I can't call it a bad effort. It's
less artistic, not so scary and less original, but certainly not
bad. It's simply different. In fact, if you haven't seen "The Blair
Witch Project", you might like this film for what it is -- a cross
between "The Blair Witch Project" and the "Scream"-films. The only
element that remains constant and similar between the two films is the
solid acting (Jeffrey Donovan and Tristine Skyler should be mentioned)
and incredible sense of surrealism. But it's a common knowledge and
experience that, with a few exceptions, every movie sequel is worse
than the original and some are even not worth making. To me the story
of "The Blair Witch Project" seemed completed, but there are obviously
no limits to commercial success that "The Book of Shadows" is
certainly assured. And it's already time to look forward to "Blair
Witch 3".

Author
Robin Clifford
In 1999 "The Blair Witch Project" created a movie-going tempest as one of
the most profitable films in history. Because of the enormous publicity and
hype, tourists flocked to the tiny Maryland town of Burkittsville to learn
more about the truth and legend of the Blair Witch. Jeff Patterson (Jeffrey
Donovan), a local resident with a questionable past, is taking advantage of
the phenomenon with his Blair Witch store and the newly inaugurated Blair
Witch Hunt tour. Four people from Boston sign up for the tour and they
spend the night on the sight of the house of the notorious child murderer,
Rustin Parr. But, something happens during the night and five hours of
their lives are missing. They soon realize that they encountered something
evil in the woods and it is bent on vengeance in "The Book of Shadows:
Blair Witch 2"
Sequels to popular horror films usually fall far short of the expectations
raised by the original flick. The seminal horror films, "The Exorcist" and
"The Omen," were both followed with mediocre, is not outright bad, sequels
that paled in comparison to their originals. When I saw "The Blair Witch
Project" last year, I found the student film-like qualities - shaky camera
and amateur feel - were tempered by the intelligence and imagination of the
mock documentary's story idea. I liked the film, but didn't understand why
huge numbers of people declared it the greatest horror flick ever. It was
an interesting effort, maybe even good, but not great.
"Blair Witch 2" fares a bit better than the other sequels I mentioned. The
second entry in the Blair Witch series (BW3 is in the works) benefits from
a bigger budget, an experienced (albeit, in documentaries) director and a
script that has intelligence (by director Joe Berlinger and Dick Beebe).
There are some confusing moments as the tale cuts between the live action,
images on video and flash (forwards or backs? It's hard to tell sometimes
in the context of the story). But, overall, it is a linear telling as the
five protagonists head off into the woods near Burkittsville to uncover the
truth about the Blair Witch.
Jeff loads his guests into his camouflage painted van with ample quantities
of beer, booze and weed for their stay in the woods. They camp on the site
of the child murders, decades before, and set up a variety of video gear to
try to capture taped evidence of the Blair Witch. Then the group gets down
to doing some hearty partying. Kim (Kim Director) is a member of the Wicken
faith and is out to clear the tainted name of witches everywhere. Erica
(Erica Leerhsen) is a mega-Goth chick who joins the tour because she
"thought the movie was cool." Tristine (Tristine Skyler) and Stephen
(Stephen Baker Turner) are a couple of researchers on the hunt to garner
material for their grad school work, The Blair Witch: History or Hysteria.
Their revelries are interrupted, at one point, when a competing group, The
Blair Witch Tour (made up of Japanese and German tourists), tries to crash
the campsite. The interlopers are turned away and they head to the infamous
site called Coffin Rock, where ritual murders were done years ago. The Hunt
gang continues to party until they all eventually pass out. The next
morning, they are horrified to find that, while they were asleep, someone
trashed the camp, destroying all the video equipment and shredding the
volumes of research brought by Tristine and Stephen. Tristine,
inexplicably, tells the rest that the tapes from the camera are buried
under the foundation of the murder ruins (as were the tapes in the original
BW). They find the tapes, pack up and head back to Jeffrey's digs to use
his elaborate video gear to check out what was recorded. They find, while
watching, that the time stamp on one of the videos has an abrupt jump in
the middle that shows a glitch cover the five hours when all were thought
to be asleep.
Things start to blur, at this point, as the action jumps around. Dreams and
daydreams mix with reality and the video surveillance cameras around
Jeffrey's place record something quite different from the live action. As
they continue to try to unravel the mystery of the missing hours, it
becomes apparent that something wicked has this way come. Kim goes missing
and the local sheriff calls Jeff on the phone to investigate the brutal,
ritualistic murders of the Blair Witch Tour group at Coffin Rock. Reality
and the fantastical merge together as the confused and frightened campers
learn what really happened during that crucial five-hour lapse.
The helmer and co-scripter for BW2, Berlinger, as I said, hails from a
documentary background. (I recommend his "Paradise Lost: The Child Murders
at Robin Hood Hills.") This is his first outing in film fiction and he does
a yeoman's job of marshalling his actors to the effort. The young actors in
the sequel are a generic collection of unknowns who don't really give any
dimension to their characters. Kim Director is quite photogenic, but looks
more like a model posing than a thespian. Erica Leershen gets some mileage
out of her cynical Goth chic persona. Skyler and Turner are merely OK as
the researchers. Jeff Donovan does the goofy doper well enough but, again,
none of the perfs, except for the very funny comic relief by the town
sheriff (whose name, unfortunately, I have yet to find), are remarkable.
Suspense driven, rather than horror, the story contains very few chilling
moments. One, where the spirit of a murdered child from the distant past
appears before the Hunt crew, actual brought a shiver to my spine, but the
rest of this horror sequel isn't really horrific, just shocking at times.
There is some confusion in the way the events are portrayed, which has
caused some negative buzz for BW2. It does require your attention and some
contemplation afterwards, but, as sequels go, I've seen worse, much worse.
(Did I mention "The Exorcist 2" and "The Omen 2"?) I give "The Book of
Shadows: Blair Witch 2" a C+.
For more Reeling Reviews visit www. reelingreviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
BOOK OF SHADOWS: BLAIR WITCH 2
(Artisan)
Starring:  Kim Director, Jeffrey Donovan, Erica Leersehn, Stephen Barker
Turner, Tristen Skyler, Lanny Flaherty.
Screenplay:  Dick Beebe and Joe Berlinger.
Producer:  Bill Carraro.
Director:  Joe Berlinger.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, adult themes, nudity, sexual
situations, drug use)
Running Time:  89 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     In coming up with a concept for a sequel to THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT
-- as apparently sequel-proof a film as ever was made -- the producers
actually had a brilliant idea. In the summer of 1999, THE BLAIR WITCH
PROJECT wasn't so much an innovative, polarizing suspense film as it was a
cultural phenomenon. Somehow, a microscopic budget and an ingenious web
site had combined to create a box office smash, intensive media coverage
and fan fascination. So instead of devising a sequel to THE BLAIR WITCH
PROJECT, Haxan Films devised a sequel to the cultural phenomenon. BOOK OF
SHADOWS: BLAIR WITCH 2 would be set in the world where the first film was
a hit, inspiring people to tour the places where the Blair Witch mythology
had been born.
     For about five minutes, that concept is executed to perfection. 
Director Joe Berlinger (the gifted documentarian behind PARADISE LOST and
BROTHER'S KEEPER with his partner Bruce Sinofsky, making his fiction
feature debut) opens with news footage and faux interviews with residents
of Burkittsville, Maryland commenting on how the influx of Blair Witch
devotees and curiosity-seekers has turned the town upside-down. It's
clever stuff, but it's soon discarded for a "dramatization" of a story
about one particular group of tourists. Jeff (Jeffrey Donovan) is the
opportunistic tour guide; Erica (Erica Leersehn) is a Wiccan trying to
commune with the spirit of the original Blair Witch; Stephen (Stephen
Barker Turner) and Tristen (Tristen Skyler) are co-authoring a book on the
Blair Witch mythology; and Kim (Kim Director) is a psychic Goth girl. All
is well until they wake up after their first night camping to discover
their campsite trashed, and no one able to recall five hours of their
experience the previous night.
     There was no way that BLAIR WITCH 2 could capture the intensity of
the original, though it tries to cling to some of the details (like naming
all the characters after the actors playing them). It's ultimately a
pretty conventional horror film, but the reason it fails is not that it's
conventional. It's simply wretchedly executed even as a conventional
horror film. Berlinger and company never rustle up a single decent scare
during the film's hour and a half running time, opting instead for lurid
quick-cuts to brutal murders. Even the basic structure of the film
undercuts any chance for suspense. At various points in the main story,
Berlinger splices in police interviews with characters in the film,
interviews clearly intended as flash-forwards to a point after the main
story has ended. How stupid is it to telegraph exactly who will live and
who will die in a conventional horror film?
     The truly depressing thing about BLAIR WITCH 2 is that it discards
such a potentially intriguing framework for its story. There's an amusing
moment early in the film where a competing tour group crosses paths with
our protagonists, suggesting that the film will continue to draw on the
original film's appeal as a central element to the story. But ultimately
the idea of a constructed mythology and its effect on psychology gives way
to obvious apparitions and overly literal supernatural phenomenon. Then
the film can't even manage to render those obvious apparitions in a creepy
way, devoting most of the film to tedious scenes of characters watching
videotape or shrieking accusations at one another. Plenty of BLAIR WITCH
PROJECT detractors counted the incessant arguing and shouting among their
gripes. Now imagine all that arguing and shouting by actors reading awful
dialogue instead of improvising their anxiety, and you get a sense for how
irritating BLAIR WITCH 2 turns out to be.
     If nothing else made the majority of BLAIR WITCH 2 a painful
experience, there would be the inexplicably bizarre performance by Lanny
Flaherty as a surly sheriff. Flaherty acts as though his only frame of
reference for cinematic lawmen was Jackie Gleason in the SMOKEY AND THE
BANDIT films, inspiring fits of unintentional laughter every time he
appears or utters a thickly-drawled threat. It's hard to build an
atmosphere of impending doom when one of the actors appears convinced
that the film is a broad comedy. There are welcome elements of self-parody
in BLAIR WITCH 2, but Berlinger doesn't know when to turn off the gags and
make a real scary movie. The makers of BLAIR WITCH 2 were smart enough to
realize that they couldn't catch the same lighting in a bottle again. They
just weren't talented enough to catch a different kind of lightning. BLAIR
WITCH 2 proves to be nothing but a big empty bottle.

Author
Susan Granger
  It's marketing vs. movie-making. Last weekend, the newest
installment in this media phenomenon saturated 3000 screens in the
U.S. and about 1000 screens overseas, almost double the normal amount
for a wide-release movie. That generates a huge box-office tally but
doesn't truly tell the tale. The original used the Internet to spread
the fake-but-funky horror story about aspiring film students who
vanished in Maryland's Black Hills. This time, it's saturation
booking. Documentary film-maker Joe Berlinger begins with what's
happened to Burkittsville, where a local entrepreneur and former
mental patient (Jeffrey Donovan) guides hiking tours through the
supposedly haunted woods to the utter frustration of the Sheriff
(Lanny Flaherty), who bellows, "There is no goddamn Blair Witch!"
Nevertheless, four intrepid campers take off: a preacher's daughter
who fancies herself a white magic Wiccan (Erica Leershen), a Goth
psychic (Kim Director), a cocky writer (Stephen Turner) who is
determined to expose the Blair Witch as mass hysteria and his
troubled, pregnant girl-friend (Tristen Skyler). The body count mounts
as a competing tour crosses their path, along with sex, lies and
endless videotaping, culminating in a Civil War-era factory. To evoke
fear, Berlinger relies on standard slasher shocks, gore, nudity, and a
guitar-metal soundtrack, all quite reminiscent of the "Scream"
franchise. As a result, the characters are stock stereotypes, the
dialogue's banal and there's no tension. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" is a thudding 2. Perhaps
there really is a Blair Witch curse to wreak havoc on the third
installment, a "prequel," being made by the co-directors Eduardo
Sanchez and Daniel Myrick from the original, Orlando-based Haxan
Films.

Author
Jan M. Bednarczuk
I went to Blair Witch Project 2: Book of Shadows with the highest 
of hopes.  The original film, released last summer, was genuinely 
scary and terrifying; I hoped that this movie would live up to 
its predecessor.  Unfortunately, my hopes were soon dashed.
As the movie opens, the audience is shown pseudo-documentary 
clips of Burkittsville, Maryland residents being interviewed 
about the sudden tourist influx to their town as a result of the 
original Blair Witch Project movie.  It's a mostly humorous, 
self-aware poke at the media hype and hysteria surrounding the 
first film.  During this segment, we are introduced to the 
protagonist, a young man who sells Blair Witch-related 
memorabilia from his website.
The movie then cuts to a title that informs us that what we are 
about to see occurred one year previously.  We see the same young 
man that was selling Blair Witch paraphernalia, but now he is 
confined in a mental institution the sort of which one only finds 
in bad horror movies. We see him having some sort of disgusting 
white goo unconvincingly forced down his nose while a 
cigarette-smoking doctor luridly leers above him.  We see him 
throwing himself wildly around a padded room; we see him cowering 
naked in a shower stall as a fire hose is turned on him.  No 
explanation is provided for why he is in the mental institution; 
in fact, these scenes are barely referred to again.  I had a 
sinking feeling during these opening scenes; generally, a 
hospital scene that is set with poor lighting, filthy interiors, 
and evil doctors is a sure sign that you are in the throes of a 
truly horrible movie.
The movie cuts again, this time to the present.  The young man, 
whose name is Jeffrey (played by Jeffrey Donovan -- as in the 
first movie, the character names are identical to the actors' 
names, although this movie admits up front that it is 
fictional, so there's no reason for the practice this time 
around), is rounding up a group of people that he will be leading 
into the woods that weekend for the "Blair Witch Hunt," which is 
a promotional gimmick he came up with and sells on his website.
We meet Tristen and Steven, a young couple who are writing a book 
about the Blair Witch experience.  Steven is a skeptic, believing 
the whole thing to be the result of mass hysteria.  Tristen, on 
the other hand, believes that there may be some truth to the 
rumors of supernatural occurrence.  She is wan and soft-spoken; 
she complains that the radio is playing too loudly.  (She also 
complains that she feels nauseated; I knew immediately that the 
character was pregnant, and my intuition was confirmed a few 
scenes later when Kim psychomagically susses it out.  How did I 
know?  Because in bad movies, nauseated women are always 
pregnant.) The fourth member of their party is Erica, a Wiccan 
with flowing hair and wide eyes who wants to prove that the Blair 
Witch was a good witch, not evil.  They pick up the fifth and 
final team member in a cemetery.  Kim is dressed completely in 
black, has extreme Goth-style makeup on, and occasionally 
displays seemingly psychic abilities, but otherwise seems to be 
the most intelligent and reasonable person out of the entire 
bunch.  Presumably she wanted to be picked up in the cemetery 
just for dramatic effect; it's never explained.
The party of five heads off into the woods as promised.  They 
reach the crumbling ruins of the foundation of Rustin Parr's 
house and set up camp, complete with extensive video equipment 
with which to record the night's events.  There is a brief 
encounter with a rival Blair Witch tour group who had planned to 
camp at that site as well, but after a few words are exchanged, 
the rival group huffs off and makes camp elsewhere.  The movie 
veers off at this point to spend many long, long minutes showing 
the drinking party that ensues after the sun goes down.  Sexual 
innuendoes are tossed around, much hard liquor, beer, and pot is 
consumed, and nothing much else happens.  This would be a great 
point to get up and go to the bathroom if necessary.
The next day, the team wakes up and discovers that their camera 
equipment has been completely trashed, and that Steven and 
Tristen's manuscript paper is fluttering down from the sky in 
shreds, like snow.  The videotapes are missing, but thanks to a 
psychic intuition from Kim, they discover the videotapes buried 
underneath the foundation of the house, "right where the original 
Blair Witch tapes were found!"  Ooh.  Spooky.
The team goes back to Jeffrey's house  -- a creepy old Civil 
War-era warehouse in the heart of the woods -- to regroup and 
review the tapes.  They soon discover that the tapes mysteriously 
skip five hours of the night.  Wacky hijinks ensue.  Tristen 
starts having weird dreams in which she is the Blair Witch, 
everybody starts finding these weird rune-like burn marks on 
their bodies, Steven and Erica have some highly disturbing mutual 
hallucinations, and everything pretty much goes to hell in a 
handbasket.  Throughout the entire ordeal, Jeffrey and the others 
continue to scrutinize the videotapes, which seem to have some 
kind of weird images on them at about the point that the time 
jumps; eventually Tristen wanders in, mutters something about 
"reverse," and from this they somehow realize that they have to 
play the tapes backwards.  When they do this, they discover what 
really happened during the five lost hours.  (One of the things 
they see on the videotape is footage of themselves burying the 
videotapes.  Okay, if the videotapes were being buried, then how 
were they recording themselves...oh, nevermind.)
This movie was awful.  Simply awful.  The characters are 
broadly-drawn caricatures that are never allowed any depth or 
development.  Erica is the Nature-Loving Wiccan.  Tristen is the 
Weak and Sympathetic Woman.  Steven is the Overbearing Asshole.  
Kim is the Antisocial Goth Girl.  Old, tired cliches were used to 
illustrate these caricatures.  How do we know Tristen is weak and 
sympathetic?  Because she's pregnant!  How do we know Kim is an 
antisocial Goth girl?  Because she wears a lot of eye makeup!  
How do we know the local sheriff is a bad guy?  Because he has 
jagged teeth and talks like he's straight out of "Deliverance"!  
This is weak storytelling at its worst.  Rather than taking the 
time to flesh out the characters and make them truly sympathetic, 
the writer chose to give each one a few stereotypical 
characteristics, in an attempt to use some cinematic shorthand 
and thereby skip straight to the action.  It didn't work.  On top 
of being poorly developed, most of the characters were either 
seriously unlikable or patently stupid.  ("Honey, you just had a 
miscarriage out in the woods and got medical attention at a 
hospital that looks like it belongs in a bad slasher movie.  
Let's get on a plane home."  "No.  I am having these bizarre 
nightmares and seeing strange visions and I want to find out 
what's going on."  "OK.")  Frankly, by the end of the movie, I 
was rooting for the Witch.
I also felt that there was simply too much blood 'n' gore in this 
film.  The first movie worked by never showing us the horror.  
The Witch was a palpable presence in that movie, but we never saw 
it; we never saw anything, in fact.  The horror was all 
off-screen, and thus our imaginations worked overtime to envision 
what it might possibly be.  This is the hallmark of a truly 
creepy and disturbing horror movie.  Blair Witch 2 dispensed with 
such niceties and went straight for the gross-out.  This was 
evident from the opening scenes of the mad doctors forcing white 
goo down Jeffrey's throat, and continued throughout the film as 
the audience is treated to occasional confusing and disorienting 
footage of what appears to be a ritual massacre of some sort.  
Knives plunge into flesh, bloody fingers trail off into the 
darkness, and none of it is explained until the very end, when it 
was too late for me to care.
This movie didn't stop with showing us the gore, either; it went 
for broke and showed us everything. By the end of the movie, 
there are no questions remaining about the missing five hours.  
It is all explained; in fact, it is all shown on-screen in loving 
detail.  I confess to being someone who prefers horror movies in 
which you never see the monster, or see only brief glimpses, mere 
suggestions of what the monster is; it is not because I find the 
monster so terrifying, but because I find the absence of the 
monster to be infinitely more terrifying.   
I have seen interviews with the director in which he suggested 
that there is no "monster," that all of the evil was perpetrated 
only by the human mind.  I found this to be a miserably poor 
explanation; if it was in fact the director's intent, then he 
needs to have some words with the writer, because it was not made 
clear at all.  (I know a lot of people who like to go to parties 
and get drunk and stoned out of their minds; none of them has 
ever gone on a murderous rampage and then experienced mass 
hallucinations with a group of other people for the next week or 
so.  And if there was no Witch, then what about the vanishing 
tree?  The snowfall of manuscript paper?  Hm?) 
Blair Witch 2: Book of Shadows was a horrible movie.  From the 
poorly-written characters to the implausible story to the plot 
inconsistencies to the gross-out shots, it was a bad effort 
through and through.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
BOOK OF SHADOWS: BLAIR WITCH 2 (2000) / *** 1/2
Directed by Joe Berlinger. Screenplay by Dick Beebe and Berlinger. 
Starring Jeffrey Donovan, Kim Director, Stephen Barker Turner. Running
time: 90 minutes. Rated R for offensive language throughout by the MFCB.
Reviewed on October 30th, 2000.
It comes as little surprise that "The Blair Witch Project"'s phenomenal
success in 1999 -- building up from film festival hype early in the year,
through to its box office domination in mid-summer -- would lead to a
rapid sequel. Unusually, Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez, the
masterminds behind the first film, had little to do with "Book Of
Shadows: Blair Witch 2" (they serve as executive producers only). Instead,
the reins have been turned over to documentarian Joe Berlinger.
What Berlinger has crafted is a film as unlike "The Blair Witch Project" 
as that movie was from its horror/thriller ancestors. There are key
similarities -- all the actors are relative unknowns who play characters
with their own names; amateur camerawork plays an important role,
although here it is more a plot device than a stylistic ploy; and the
ending is perhaps even more maddeningly ambiguous than the original,
leaving audiences again wondering just what it was they witnessed.
But while "The Blair Witch Project" was mostly an exercise in
atmospherics, playing upon primordial fears of being lost in the woods,
the curiously-titled "Book Of Shadows" (no such artefact appears in the
movie) favours a more conventional horror storyline to comment upon its
themes. "Video never lies," claims one character early on. "Book Of
Shadows" asks the question, what if a video (or film, or whatever) 
differed from your own recollections? In a way, then, "Book Of Shadows" 
deals with a very modern fear, but one whose roots are ancient -- the
paranoia of knowing you are innocent even if all the evidence suggests
your guilt. Berlinger ties this into an undercurrent about the supposition
that violent media breeds violent people, as well as some wry commentary
on the success and saturation of "The Blair Witch Project" in general.
Much like the original movie played with the conceit that it was Heather
Donahue's "actual" footage (and convinced millions that it was a
depiction of actual events), "Book Of Shadows" picks things up as hordes
of fans invade Burkittsville, the hamlet which, according to "Blair
Witch" mythology, stands on the site of the original Blair township. "Book
Of Shadows" muddles reality here -- many of the Burkittsville residence
are steadfast that "The Blair Witch Project" is just a movie and yet such
hallmarks as the ruins of Rustin Parr's house (where Heather Donahue and
Mike Williams met their final recorded fate) actually exist.
The first five minutes is a hilarious spoof of the "Blair Witch" frenzy. 
One woman, for example, explains how she used to sell "Blair Witch" stick
figures from her home and on the Internet, until one day a man dropped by
and also wanted to buy rocks from her back yard. So now she sells stick
figures and rocks -- but the rocks don't sell so well online "because
rocks cost more to ship". But this sequence almost threatens to undermine
the tension right off the bat, and a humorous vein running throughout the
movie is poorly conceived and unnecessary.
We next meet Jeffrey Donovan, a "Blair Witch" fan who is just starting up
a tour of the Black Hills forest called the Blair Witch Hunt. His first
customers include Stephen Turner and his pregnant girlfriend Tristen
Skyler, who are researching a book about the "Blair Witch" hysteria; Erica
Leerhsen, a Wiccan who sees Elly Kedward -- the purported Blair Witch --
as a tragic, misunderstood figure; and Kim Director, a Goth who seems to
possess telepathic abilities. Things start to get weird almost from the
word go when, upon reaching the foundations of Rustin Parr's house, they
discover an enormous tree has sprung up in its midst.
Despite this spooky occurrence, the five settle in for a night of 
carousing, interrupted only by a confrontation with another tour group
which tries to lay claim to the Parr ruins. They vow to party all through
the night, but awaken the next morning with the realisation that they
cannot account for five hours. More mysterious still, all the recording
equipment Jeff brought him has vanished -- except for the tapes
themselves, which are discovered in the same hollow as Heather Donahue's
tapes some years earlier. They return to Jeff's home in a dilapidated
broom factory to view the tapes and find out what happened during their
blackout. But eldritch visions haunt them, and they slowly realise that
something may have returned with them from the Black Hills.
Like the first movie, "Book Of Shadows" manages to coax decent 
performances from its essentially unknown cast. While none of the leads in
the sequel enjoy quite so powerful a moment as Heather's "I'm so sorry" 
soliloquy -- and the improvisational feel of the original is sadly absent
-- there is still some good work here, especially from Skyler and Turner. 
Director is fun, but doesn't really enjoy a lot of range. Leerhsen,
although very charismatic, is defined by her religion and never really
moves beyond that. Donovan, unfortunately, fails to establish a
consistency of portrayal, and is not helped by being saddled with the
picture's most puzzling character -- his status as a former mental patient
is constantly referred to, but this never really comes into play, and
hangs like a loose end.
Berlinger paces the movie well, piling on the strangeness without letting
the movie descend into utter confusion. Make no mistake: the actual chain
of events is not clear, and this may frustrate some viewers. But this is 
by design, not accident, and is the reason "Book Of Shadows" provides 
almost the same level of psychological trauma as its predecessor. It is
true to say that Berlinger makes some missteps -- his portrayal of the
Burkittsville locals, including a farcical sheriff, is downright insulting
at times, and his failure to develop the "Blair Witch" mythos in any
meaningful manner is disappointing. Nonetheless, "Book Of Shadows" is
an effective and worthy successor to "The Blair Witch Project". Now you'll
never think of camping or camcorders the same way again.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/BlairWitch2.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Ross Anthony
"There are a lot of nay-sayers who come in and ... say 'nay.'" 
This is the offhand, pseudo-documentary commentary that opens "Blair 
Witch" the sequel. A laid back, even silly mood "with witch" to contrast 
chilling horror. Well, not quite chilling horror; but eerie scary at 
least. 
I'd wager to say this film is quite nearly similar to the first 
inentertainment value - but for different reasons. A hugely welcome 35mm 
camera on a hugely welcome tripod make the sequel several times more 
watchable than the first. No more dizziness, headaches or vomiting. That 
indelible image of grass and trees waving, scratching back and forth 
against the screen as our actor/cinematographers run amok, has been 
thankfully left as a first film phenomenon. Also, 98% of what you see on 
screen is not shot by the participants at all, but in normal film 
fashion with a real anonymous camera-operator. The editing, though a bit 
dodgy in the start, becomes quite normal. 
Another welcome addition, the sequel has a bit more "plan" to it. 
Unfortunately, the plan never fully develops nor are the actors really 
scared. No matter what I read about that first film in the press notes 
... it is still this reviewers opinion that those actors were truly 
riled and confused. And that captured on film is worth more than a very 
good plan. The sequel hosts no such real emotions. Though the actors are 
perhaps equally talented - the first batch didn't have to act as often. 
Directing, acting and story being quite mediocre; it's the lack of 
climax that drops this film into the below average zone. Though the 
drama is actually pretty interesting, dare I say even mildly compelling, 
there's nothing meaningful that really ties the whole piece together at 
the end. Additionally, the motif of each player turning on the other was 
worked to death (pardon the statement) in the first film. 
Unfortunately too, so passes the soul of the seed that is the "Blair 
Witch Project." Who cares about some child killing witch myth? It 
certainly wasn't this plot that brought the original film out of the 
woods and into cinema lore; it was the scheme! The truly riled actors, 
the ballsie hype, the simple idea. 
This second film is more of the former and less of the later; making it 
more like any other ordinary scary movie of recent years. But in all 
fairness, for as much as it's departed from the first in guts, a sense 
of continuum maintains. And as with the first, there isn't much blood or 
slashing here - if that's the kind of thing you were hoping for, look 
elsewhere. 
A year later in Burkittsville, the region the first "Project" claimed 
home to the murderous Blair Witch is now overrun with movie fans and 
tourists. One opportunist with a van and camera equipment, accompanied 
by four paying customers, sets out to camp at the foundation of that 
infamous unholy house of the first film. All in good fun, but as you 
might guess, they don't get much of a pleasant night's sleep, while more 
than just the cameras play tricks on them. 
The Ending Contest: In 100 words or less write me a better ending to 
this film. (Shouldn't be too hard) I'll look over the entries and pick 
from them my personal favorite - sorry it's completely subjective. That 
winner will be printed on this site by Thanksgiving ... so send 'em in 
now. And let me look around, I can probably find a couple of free IMAX 
tickets around here somewhere to award the winner as well.
Blair Witch 2: Book of Shadows. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R 
* Starring Kim Director, Jeffrey Donovan, Erica Leerhsen, Tristen 
Skyler, Stephen Barker Turner, Lanny Flaherty. 
*  Directed by Joe Berlinger. 
*  Written by Joe Berlinger and Dick Beebe. 
*  Produced by Bill Carraro. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Jerry Saravia
Perhaps I am overindulgent in my praise but I still think "The Blair Witch 
Project" is one of the best horror films of the last twenty years. It was 
good enough for me to dedicate a webpage to the film considering how many 
people had misunderstood it and its intentions. Although the film may not 
have been completely original, its approach certainly was. Primarily shot on 
video and 16mm black-and-white film, it had the look and feel of an extremely 
low-budget feature that could have been made by anyone with a camcorder and a 
computer. The difference with "Blair" as opposed to other independent horror 
flicks, such as "The Evil Dead" and "Halloween," is that it did not feel like 
a movie - it sort of transpired before our eyes in practically documentary 
fashion. Now we have a sequel, "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2," that commits 
the error of most other shopworn sequels - it has gore, sex, loud heavy metal 
music, and a host of ghostly manifestations right out of 1999's "The 
Haunting." The original suggested the 
menace of evil. This "Blair" leaves precious little to the imagination, 
though we can be thankful that there is still no visible witch. 
"Blair Witch 2" begins promisingly enough. There is a nifty prologue set in 
the town of Burkittsville where the "Blair Witch" mania has spun out of 
control, and the local citizens speak out on how they have dealt with it. The 
local sheriff reassures the "Blair" fans that there is no witch in the town 
or in the woods. But then things go wrong. A mental asylum is shown as a 
flashback of where Jeffrey Donovan, a former patient, was abused by the 
doctors and guards. Once Jeffrey is released, he organizes a Blair Witch 
Hunt, which is a tour of the Black Hills woods where the original movie took 
place. Jeffrey finds four other willing participants for his tour through the 
magic of the Internet. They include: Kim Director, a telekinetic goth chick 
(resembling a pale Heather Donahue) who found the movie to be cool; Erica 
Leerhsen, a sensitive Wiccan obsessed with spreading the good word about 
witches; and a couple (Stephen Barker Turner and Tristen Skyler) involved in 
writing a book on the Blair Witch. Together they
 camp out in the woods where they find misplaced trees and another wandering 
tour group. After a wild night of drugs and heavy Jack Daniels boozing, they 
find out the next day that the cameras are all gone, except for the tapes, 
and all the research from the Blair authors is shredded. What happened during 
that night? And what is it with all the bloody witch markings on their 
bodies? And who killed that rival tour group at Coffin Rock? 
At this point, the film begins to get a little more intriguing in the 
investigation of the tapes that were set up in the cameras to record their 
nighttime activities. The group's intent is to discover what happened to 
them, and what they find is quite grisly and decadent to say the least. 
Unfortunately, director Joe Berlinger (acclaimed documentarian of films such 
as "Paradise Lost" and "Brother's Keeper") throws in everything to the mix 
except the witch. We get milisecond shock cuts in the form of flashforwards, 
relentlessly repeated montages of stabbings and dripping blood, ghostly 
manifestations of the Burkittsville children killed long ago by the witch, 
naked bodies dancing and cavorting in the woods, some sexual byplay between 
Erica and Stephen, and so on. Although it is not as overdone as your basic 
slasher cum horror flick sequel, it feels like a bastardization of everything 
the original "Blair Witch" did so well.
Another problem are the characters who feel like they had been recycled from 
the "Scream" mix (Marilyn Manson's song "Disposable Teens" gives a hint of 
what's to come). With the sole exception of the goth chick, all the 
characters are unmemorable and bland to say the least - they scream, shout 
and argue but they hardly have much in the way of personality. Heather, Mike 
and Josh were annoying too but they had gobs of humanity, wit and sympathy - 
everything this cast lacks. The pregnant Tristen Skyler, who should be the 
most sympathetic of the bunch, comes across as the most unlikable - she even 
dreams of killing her newborn! If we cannot care about the characters, then 
we care less if there is a witch inducing a group hypnosis on this bunch.
The concept of this film is fascinating - it assumes the original was just a 
film and that this group is out to perhaps debunk the myth. Although the 
ending is gripping, it lacks the emotional subtext of the original. There are 
some good Heather Donahue jokes, a nod to Frederick Wiseman's excellent 
documentary, "Titicut Follies," and some occasionally tense scenes but 
mostly, this is a lifeless, perfunctory affair. It's obvious that nobody 
could have made a decent sequel to a phenomenon like "The Blair Witch 
Project," a horror film that only comes around once in a blue moon. There is 
sound advice from Randy in "Scream 2" that the filmmakers should listen to - 
'Sequels suck. They are inferior films. The horror genre was destroyed by 
them'. Sounds just about right.     
Please check out my BLAIR WITCH PROJECT analysis at 
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/index3.shtml
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at 
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at 
jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Christopher Null
     The cinematic event of 1999 desperately wants you to make it the
cinematic event of 2000, as the (first) sequel to The Blair Witch
Project is rushed into theaters just in time for Halloween.  Alas, it's
not to be, and soon the original will become regarded as a one-hit
wonder and a footnote in the annals of independent film.
     Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2 is clearly Made In Hollywood, but
it's still trying to pretend to be a documentary.  The story this time? 
In Book of Shadows, the original Blair Witch was "just a movie," but
this time it's for real -- this is what happened after all those
tourists descended upon Burkittsville, MD, believing the woods to be
genuinely haunted.
     Of course, as the film points out, that was all phony.  Um, but now
the woods really are haunted.  So the original wasn't phony after all. 
I think.  Uh-huh.  Who's going to buy it this time?
     Book of Shadows is so self-referential, The Blair Witch Project is
invoked at least once every five minutes.  The film even opens with a
montage of news clips and movie reviews (Hello, Ebert!) all talking
about that Blair Witch phenomenon.  You know, in case you hadn't heard
about it.
     All of this would be forgivable if the sequel was any good.  All
the fuss turns out to be for naught, a vain attempt at making a
Hollywood snuff film full of disjointed fright gags.  Book of Shadows
has the same nauseating camerawork as the original and takes place in a
forest, but that's where the similarities end.
     This time around, half-crazed Blair Witch fans decide to venture
into the Black Hills in search of the truth behind the legend.  Within
hours, it turns out the "myth" of the Blair Witch is anything but, and
our unlikely heroes (including a once-psychotic tour guide, a Goth
chick, a self-professed Wiccan, and a book-writing couple) find
themselves waking up in their now-trashed camp with no memory of the
last several hours.  Then it's back to the tour guide's house (a spooky,
converted factory deep in the woods, natch) as the quintet tries to
figure out what happened to the missing time.  And then the body count
clock starts to tick.
     I wasn't a rabid fanatic of the original Witch, but at least the
original had a consistent mythology that, despite being cryptic, was
relatively sensical.  Book of Shadows is all over the map and completely
random, jumping from scene to scene (as well as forward and backward in
time) without much care for structure or logic.  Frankly, the film just
doesn't make a lot of sense, and it's not compelling enough to make it
worth the effort to try and figure out.
     Much of the blame should fall in the lap of director Joe Berlinger,
best known for his fabulous (and real) documentaries, Brother's Keeper
and Paradise Lost, who is way out of his element in this world of MTV
jump cuts and a throbbing heavy metal soundtrack.  The cliché-driven
characters aren't much help, either, but fundamentally you have to
expect that this is just what happens when Hollywood tries to glom on to
an indie phenomenon (see also She's the One attempt at rekindling The
Brothers McMullen).
     Of course, the biggest question most are wondering about is, Is it
scary?  No.  It's creepy, but the spine-tingling power of the final
scene of Blair Witch is nowhere to be found here.
     And as for this titular "Book of Shadows," that's one little detail
that seems to have been excised from the film altogether.  I guess we're
just going to have to wait for Blair Witch 3 to figure that out.
Director: Joe Berlinger
Producer: Bill Carraro, Daniel Myrick, Eduardo Sánchez
Writer: Joe Berlinger, Dick Beebe
Starring: Kim Director, Jeffrey Donovan, Erica Leerhsen, Tristine
Skyler, Stephen Barker Turner
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Laura Clifford
It's 1999 and fans of a movie called "The Blair Witch Project" are flocking
to the annoyed town of Burkittsville, Maryland.  Local resident (and former
mental patient) Jeffrey Patterson is cashing in with Blair Witch merchandise
and is taking four tourists on his inaugural 'Blair Witch Hunt' armed with
multiple video cameras.  Once at the ruins of Rustin Parr's house, however, 
the group blacks out (after a fair share of partying) to discover ruined 
equipment, shredded book drafts, and several hours unaccounted for on their 
video in "Book of Shadows:  Blair Witch 2."
Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez, the original Blair Witch creators, step
back to executive producer credits for the sequel (they are supposedly writing
Blair Witch 3, which will be a prequel) to their smash hit "The Blair Witch
Project" and let documentarian Joe Berlinger ("Paradise Lost," "Brother's 
Keeper") pick up the reins as director and cowriter (with Dick Beebe, 1999's 
"House on Haunted Hill").
Firstly, this film bears no resemblance to its predecessor except for its 
adherence to the Blair Witch lore, so artfully created and expanded upon on 
the www.blairwitch.com website.  While I've heard preview audiences complain
that this film is incomprehensible, given thought, it very neatly 
ties into the legend, while also acknowledging the film as a media event
with a wink and an intriguing look at the cause and effect of violence in
popular artforms.  It helps to have kept up with all the Sci-Fi channel
specials (this one recalls the video/DVD special airing of "The Burkittsville 
Seven").
The film's establishing act humorously begins with MTV's Kurt Loder speaking
about the phenomenom followed by Roger Ebert's television review before
showing hordes of teenagers raiding Burkittsville's cemetary and Black Hills
('Get out of the woods!  There's no damn Blair Witch! screams the town
sheriff over a megaphone.)  One woman recounts how she so successfully sold
Blair Witch twig figures on her front lawn that she eventually was persuaded
to sell the stones from her rock garden for $10.  This is as funny and hip and
the original film's premise, although we begin to see MTV style edits of
disturbing images of torture and mutilation around the time the opening credits 
begin to roll over Marilyn Manson's "Disposable Teens."
Second act rounds up the new group.  Tellingly, young couple Tristen Skyler 
and Stephen Turner are working on a book about "The Blair Witch Project"
that asks 'hysteria or history?'  (As in "The Blair Witch Project," the
characters' names are the same as the actors who play them.)  Erica Leerhsen
is a Wiccan who wants to commune with the Blair Witch, who she believes
was a child of nature, like herself, treated in her time like some unfortunate
women of Salem.  Goth chick Kim Director professes to be psychic, immediately
sensing Tristen's unwanted pregnancy.
The group set up camp at the ruins of the house where the movie trio met
their demise and are immediately overrun by a walking tour group comprised of
two young entrepeneurs and their customers, a Chinese couple and a German
woman.  After a brief spat, Stephen's group coyly suggest they saw something
sinister at Coffin Rock, which sends the second group scurrying.
Alcohol and pot are consumed in abundance before the five awaken to find
the 'Hysteria or History' text fluttering down upon them like snow.  With
Kim's help, they find their videotapes in the same place Heather's were 
discovered.  Then Tristen has a miscarriage.  Do they flee sensibly after
all this (and a visit to the ER)?  No, they retreat to Jeff's home - an
abandoned nineteenth century warehouse in the Black Hills.  (Disturbingly,
the sheriff tries to contact Jeff when the other tour group is found
massacred on Coffin Rock.)
Joe Berlinger has fashioned a nice puzzle box where his film can be viewed
from two different perspectives.  The film, as we see it, is really the
recollection of the Hunt's survivors, as we see them interrogated by the
police - flashback in two layers.  However, as in the first film, there is
video document, which can be construed as either reality or as something
to condemn the survivors as 'enhanced' by the Blair Witch.  The film 
acknowledges "Project" as a movie, while allowing that where so many people,
including this film's protagonists, believed it to be true, that perception 
can become reality.
There are no shaky camera effects here - in fact we get special effects in
ghostly images seen by the quintet.  Once again, sound is used to jarring
effect.  Unfortunately, the midsection of this film sags a bit.  Where the 
first film was so believable because of its amateur quality, this one suffers 
when a line is delivered too dramatically in front of a steady camera.  A
reference back to the first film's 'standing in a corner' doesn't make sense.
Horror movie conventions, such as having the group split up when they should
be huddled together, call attention to themselves in this otherwise clever
script.
"Book of Shadows:  the Blair Witch 2" couldn't hope to equal its predecessor,
yet it's a surprisingly intelligent and welcome addition to a genre that's
usually a dumping ground for low budget efforts.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Pop quiz: What does BOOK OF SHADOWS: BLAIR WITCH 2, the sequel to that indie
smash hit THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT, have in common with its ancestor?  
To be fair, part of the crew, namely joint writers, directors and editors
Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sánchez, did hang around for the sequel.  But this
time all they get are producers' credits, which they may want to see removed
from this turkey.
This time director Joe Berlinger, working from an obtuse script by Dick
Beebe, Joe Berlinger, Jon Bokenkamp and Neal Stevens, creates a movie that
so hard to follow that you'll be happy that it gives you no reason to care
that you're confused.  I wasn't a fan of THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT, but it is
a cinematic masterpiece of originality compared to its sequel, which is a
bad example of a teen slasher flick.  Fright in BOOK OF SHADOWS comes only
from sudden loud noises.  The episodes of sliced human flesh and spurting
blood are gross, not scary.
The basic premise this time is that a bunch of kids sign up on THE BLAIR
WITCH PROJECT web site -- a movie that plugs it's own web site has a lot of
gall -- to take a tour into the woods to look for the witch.  While hanging
out amongst the trees, the kids babble incoherent and perfectly ridiculous
lines.  "I think you're being a monomaniacal reductionist!" one girl says to
one of the guys as her version of a classy put-down.  I don't know about
you, but that would sure shut me up.  (Although they might more precisely be
referred to as "young adults," the characters are so juvenile that I will
continue to refer to them as "kids" in the review.)
When the movie isn't trying, without success, to terrify us, it tries with
even less success to amuse us with its self-deprecating humor.  "Newsflash
everyone!  That was just a movie," Stephen (Stephen Barker Turner) says when
the kids begin to take the witch story too seriously.  "Video never lies;
film does," says another.  The sequel, you see, is done on film whereas the
original was done on video with a motion-sickness inducing shakicam, so they
are poking fun at their own movie.  Funny huh?  Not really.
The kids do find one flaw in the original movie that the film critics
missed.  They said it was unrealistic to expect the kids in the original to
spend time terrified in the woods without having sex with each other.  After
all, they reason, "sex is the greatest stress reliever in the world."  Ah,
from the mouths of babes, ...
BOOK OF SHADOWS: BLAIR WITCH 2 runs just 1:30, but you'll swear it was
longer.  It is rated R for violence, language, sexuality and drug use and
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I didn't much care for the original BLAIR WITCH PROJECT. On the whole, I
thought it was boring. To me, it felt like a bunch of kids running around in
their wooded backyard scaring one another with a video camera. I was
frightened by only one scene: the final shot. I did however truly admire
what the film did in respect to movie innovation. It was able to blur the
line between fact and fiction for a lot of people, it managed to
successfully wrangle the power of the Internet and use it to complement the
film and it showed Hollywood that you don't need to spend $25 million on a
star's salary alone...in order to make a successful film. With all that in
mind, I was looking forward to seeing what the second installment had to
offer.
Pre-hype wise, I was once again, extremely impressed with Artisan
Entertainment's ability to harness the up-to-date technologies of the
Internet and put together an extremely cool event called the Blair Witch Web
Fest. The webcast was made to take place over three days, with plenty of
relevant horror guests including the stars and director of the film,
musicians, witches, horror alumni and plenty of chats, goodies and games to
keep everyone entertained. Those who were not able to attend in person,
could simply logon and participate in the chats and "become" a greater part
of the cinematic process. Artisan Entertainment seems to be generations
ahead of the rest of the generic cookie-cutter studio official websites, and
should rightfully be applauded for their avant-garde efforts.
Oh yeah...harumph...now that we've gotten that out of the way...how was the
film, you say? Let's see...
PLOT:
Four fans of the original "Blair Witch Project" movie hop on a tour to visit
the actual locations where the first film apparently took place. Led by a
local psychologically disturbed individual, the fun-loving teens drink and
party all night, only to wake up and find themselves unable to remember a
big chunk of their evening past, and caught in the middle of a ritualistic
murder investigation. Are they all cold-blooded killers? Is one of them a
witch and spooking the others? Are they all innocent but nuts? Does Roger
Ebert actually make an appearance in this film? All very scary thoughts...
CRITIQUE:
If you're looking for thrills, chills and plenty of scares...this film is
not for you. This movie is a decent psychological mystery filled with
paranoia and delusions, which messes with your head and demands that you
keep thinking about it, even after you've left the theatre. Not necessarily
an audience-friendly film, but then again, neither was the original. My
initial reaction to this film was lukewarm. It wasn't until further
contemplation that the film struck a chord with me and eventually
ingratiated itself the tag of a "good" movie. But if the boogie-man a la
SCREAM is what you're looking for, you will not find it here. If you're
looking for something similar to the first film, you will not get that here
either. This film is original in its own right, with all of the characters
making reference and working off the events which "apparently" took place in
the first film. They speak about the characters, they follow in their
footsteps, and they too, eventually get caught up in something that's
apparently beyond their simple teen grasps. But is all of this entertaining,
thrilling or even interesting? To some, yes...to others, no.
I enjoyed parts of this film, and didn't care much for others. I liked the
way that the whole movie was shot. Nice style. Good directing. Perhaps too
many flashbacks for its own good, but enough spooky moments to make you
question the events taking place and get into the mystery of it all. But at
some point, a lot of the film's events felt redundant, like they were going
around in circles. Everyone confused, everyone pointing fingers, who did
what to whom? But it isn't until you figure out the truth in the end, that
all of that disorder begins to make a little sense. I won't say any more
because I wouldn't want to spoil it for anyone, but suffice it to say that
"seeing is not always believing". Unfortunately for the audience, the film
doesn't really offer up too many clues during the actual picture or graft
out any real solutions, but for those who enjoy the head trips, watch your
step on the way in and enjoy.
I think that the core Blair Witch audience might appreciate this movie, or
those who don't mind sitting through the same film over and over again, just
to uncover its secrets. For most, the film will provide no obvious scares
(cheap or otherwise) or miraculous strokes of terror. But this film is not
about that. It's all about undertones and your interpretation of the events
taking place. Perception, interpretation, reality...all play different roles
in this movie. It's up to you to figure out who is playing who. Not exactly
what John Q. Public generally looks for in a movie, eh? But even beyond all
that, this film managed to keep me interested for most of its way, provided
for a couple of spooky scenes, and did finally manage to re-insert T&A back
into horror films, so even your average moviegoer has to give it at least
that much! The actors were so-so, with decent performances here and there,
over-acting there and here, and the soundtrack, appropriately heavy, creepy
and hip (gotta sell those soundtracks!).
So if you like head-games, enjoy all that supernatural witch mumbo-jumbo and
appreciate films which blur the line between the reality of your mind and
the actual events (think OJ, people!), then you might just really enjoy this
one. A LOST HIGHWAY for the teens. Not a classic, not a bad movie, not a
great movie...but definitely something interesting. PS: Incidentally, don't
ask me what "Book of Shadows" means because that's another thing that the
film doesn't hand you on a platter. You gotta work for this one, people.
NOTE: My appreciation of this film was lifted after I read a bit more about
it after my viewing. Now if you are confused about the film, its characters
or what really happened, and want to achieve a deeper understanding of the
material, I suggest you read some of what the director of this film had to
say here ,">http://joblo.com/blairwitch2-extra.htm>, but please note that it
does contain possible ** SPOILERS **. I would suggest that you read it only
after having seen the film.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Original drafts for this movie included one which had news crews tracking
the original kids and another featuring Heather Donahue's relatives
searching for her remains. But when first-time fiction director Joe
Berlinger got the directing nod (his previous work included three critically
acclaimed documentaries), he scrapped all that aside in favor of a more
radical approach. "I wanted to make a sequel to the phenomenon, not to the
movie."
Berlinger admits that his original cut of the film left the studio asking
him to "deliver scares earlier". Re-shoots took place up to a month before
release, and the director admitted that he was "not entirely happy with how
it was integrated into the movie". Berlinger went on to say, "If we weren't
up against a release date I would have tried to figure out a [better] way.
But all those posters say "October 27", not "Coming this fall".
(Entertainment Weekly, #564, pgs 30-32)
Writer/director Joe Berlinger has also given himself a cameo in this film.
He plays the "Burkittsville Tourist #1" early on in the film.
The creators of the original BLAIR WITCH PROJECT, Daniel Myrick and Eduardo
Sanchez, did not write, direct or produce this film, but did receive credit
as "executive producers". They are however, slated to collaborate on the
third installment of the "Blair Witch" series (currently envisioned as a
prequel).
The original BLAIR WITCH movie cost $30,000 to produce, cost Artisan
Entertainment $1 million to purchase and grossed $141 million domestically
and more than $109 million overseas. This film cost $15 million.
Several famous TV personalities are shown early on in this film, mentioning
the original BLAIR WITCH PROJECT on their respective programs, including Jay
Leno, Conan O'Brien and film critic Roger Ebert.

Author
Brandon Herring

Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2  * * * out of * * * *
Starring: Steven Baker Turner, Tristine Skyler, Kim Director, Erica Leerhsen, 
Jeffrey Donovan, Lanny Flaterhy.
Directed by: Joe Berlinger
Rated R: strong violence, blood, sexuality, nudity, language, drug use.
Running Time: 90 minutes
After the surprise $140 million dollar hit "The Blair Witch Project" a sequel 
was inevitable. Even though 65% of the audience who viewed this masterpiece, 
most hated it. I for one though it was a brilliant piece of art, and it 
literally scared the hell out of me, leaving me in my seat to sit, shaking, 
wondering what I just viewed. After I heard talks of a sequel, I wanted to 
kill whoever was making up the rumors, until I found out they were true, and 
now that the sequel has come out I must say I'm quite surprised at how 
well-made the movie was.
Opening with a clever sequence, of people praising and dissing on "The Blair 
Witch Project" we meet Jeff Patterson, a Blair Witch fantatic who sells stuff 
in his hometown in Maryland, stickmen, blair witch t-shirts, you get the 
point. He takes four people out into the woods on a journey known as "The 
Blair Witch Hunt", Kim, a smart gothic psychic, Erica a Wiccan witch, Tristen 
and Stephen a couple who are obsessed with Blair Witch was well, and Tristen 
is expecting a child, but obviously doesn't want to keep it.
After spending the night in the woods, they wake up to find themselves 
covered in shreds of paper, which is the work of Tristen and Stephen, not 
knowing what they did for five hours, the five people retreat to Jeff's home 
(an old factory) and view the tapes of what they did, what they find out is 
utterly shocking, and surprising, though I thought the film goes into too 
much of a slasher pic type of ending. Until then though, the film is quite 
clever and shocking, and very very gory. What the first film accomplished in 
Hollywood was that you didn't need gore, violence or monsters to scare you.
"Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" is a decieving title, there is no Book of 
Shadows, and the movie really has nothing to do with the first, except for 
Blair Witch herself. Sadly though she does not make a star-studded 
appearance, and really there is not any scares in the film at all, a few 
shlocks here and there, with a pumping rock soundtrack to back it up, but 
narely a scare is in the film. One would have hoped for a better "Book of 
Shadows" but Joe Berlinger does what he can with the film, and has some very 
good direction.
The stars in the first movie were memorable for not having a script, and 
adlibbing most of their stuff, in here the script is written out and it is 
quite obvious, the standout of the film is Kim Director as the gothic girl, 
she takes on her role and takes over the screen in the process. The rest of 
the cast is ok, but they aren't anything compared to Kim. There is some flaws 
in the movie, as well as some plot holes for those who didn't visit the 
website. But all in all "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" is one to be 
visited, maybe more than once.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 10/27/00

Author
Chad Polenz
"The Blair Witch Project" was one of the most innovative and effective films 
I've ever seen. It proved to the world you don't have to spend a lot of money 
to make a good movie. If I was a professor of film studies at some 
prestigious university I'd show it to my students as an example of 
creativity. I'd also show my students the sequel, "Book of Shadows: Blair 
Witch 2," to warn them of the perils of Hollywood. It's an unnecessary sequel 
to a big hit that doesn't nearly live up to the original. It does so in such 
an all-around cliche way it's funny and sad at the same time. 
The fact this movie was ever made is kind of surprising to me. The original 
story did have a lot of ambiguity to it and the finale was open-ended so that 
every viewer had his or her own theory as to what happened. "Book Of Shadows" 
doesn't pick up where that movie ended, in fact, it doesn't even take place 
in the same reality as the original. It's about the phenomenon of the movie 
in the "real" world and about "real" people taking a supposedly fictitious 
story a little too seriously. 
That's what the plot revolves around - five 20-something-year-olds who flock 
to the woods where the movie was filmed because they believe, or at least 
WANT to believe the legend of the Blair Witch is real. What's strange this 
time around is that the movie employs the use of having the actors use their 
real names even though they're clearly in a fictional movie. There's really 
no point to that. 
* Jeff is the neurotic tour wrangler who lives near the supposedly haunted 
woods and sells homemade memorabilia of the movie through his web site. He 
was once in an insane asylum and his mental instability continually crops up 
throughout the movie. 
* Erica is a self-professed witch who is furious at the success of "The Blair 
Witch Project" because she believes it continues the centuries-old stereotype 
and image of a witch as a mean old lady who casts black magic spells and eats 
children. She says real witches don't believe in heaven or hell or God or the 
devil, "I believe in nature."
* Kim is a total Goth chick who has apparently listened to one too many 
Marilyn Manson records. She's a freak, she knows it and she's proud of it. 
It's her way of rebelling but she doesn't have much of a spiritual side. 
She's along for the ride mostly because she has nothing better to do. 
* Stephen and Tristen round out the group as the only two "normal" people. 
They're lovers who are co-writing a book about group fear and how myths and 
legends still effect people today. 
The five take a tour of the woods and camp at the site of the demolished home 
of the hermit from the Blair Witch mythos. While there they run into another 
tour group and almost get into a brawl with them over who gets to sleep at 
the site. They spend the night partying pretty hard for a bunch of strangers 
who don't know each other and when they wake up they find their stuff's been 
severely messed with, some of it even destroyed.
We're also shown in bizarre music video-like sequences that the other group 
was murdered in their sleep just like the story of "Coffin Rock." The five 
head back to Jeff's spooky home - an abandoned warehouse in the middle of the 
woods - with lots of video equipment and the like. They review Jeff's tapes 
to see if they can figure out what happened and one by one they start to go a 
little mad. 
Here's where "Book of Shadows" distinguishes itself, where it becomes what it 
is and that is kind of a cross between "The Shining" and "Scream." It's clear 
something happened to them that night in the woods and they've been touched 
by the witch. They all suspect the others are keeping secrets and that 
everyone is out to get them when they turn their backs. Tristen all but 
suffers a mental breakdown as does Erica who then disappears. Jeff and Kim 
then suspect Stephen of purposely getting rid of her. Meanwhile they watch 
the tapes of the night's events to discover some hidden footage of them 
commiting wanton acts of carnality 
There's a lot more detail to the story than this but we don't have to analyze 
all of it to critique it. This is a mainstream horror movie so of course 
Jeff's warehouse is pretty fantastic and detailed. The art direction is moody 
and intimidating to complement the story and the atmosphere. If it weren't 
blatantly obvious this was a manufactured horror movie it would have worked, 
instead, it just seems forced. 
The screenplay does a fine job in getting each of the characters' motivations 
down but the editing process and the direction kind of botch it up. 
Throughout the entire film we're constantly cutting, unexpectedly, to 
flashbacks of Jeff in the insane asylum or to each of the characters sitting 
in a police questioning room being asked about a heinous act they committed. 
In a better screenplay and in a better editor's hands this technique would 
have been much more effective, but here these intercut scenes are more 
confusing than anything else, not nearly as intense and suspenseful as they 
should be. 
The actual supernatural elements are just plain silly when you put them into 
perspective. To make a long story short our protagonists are framed for mass 
murder by an unseen force who can manipulate videotapes. Either that or 
they've all just gone nuts and we're seeing things through their eyes. I 
think the movie options for the former theory and when those scenes of the 
hidden videos occur they are quite creepy. We're just as shocked as the 
characters are to see themselves committing the things they did. But then you 
have to wonder why would the spirit of the Blair Witch be so interested in 
messing with these kids' heads in a way that not only scares them to think 
they could have done such things but is also captured on videotape? 
The answer is because this is a Hollywood spin on an indie idea and they 
screwed it up. The original "Blair Witch Project" was so horrifying because 
of its simple and ambiguous elements, like the monoliths from "2001: A Space 
Odyssey." What you don't see is frightening, but if they give you modern 
clues to their existence something isn't right. The idea a supernatural force 
could be terrifying through modern technology is certainly a scary one - the 
way this movie plays out that idea it is not. 
The ending of this movie surprised me and left me wanting more. But that's 
what separates "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" from the original - this one 
mistakes cliffhangers for brilliant ambiguity. 

*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Michael Redman
"Book" should have remained in shadows
Certain things in our lives are inevitable. Death, sorrow, love, heartbreak,
pain, joy. We expect these events. We know they're going to happen and some,
we even look forward to. It's part of the human condition.
We have also become accustomed to inevitable occurrences in our society. As
we near the fall election, several of them are hitting us in the face.
Politicians exaggerate their own importance. Our side is always right;
theirs is always wrong. In the end, voters are usually forced to choose the
lesser of two whocares.
In Hollywood the one indisputable inevitable is that if a film makes big
money, there will be a sequel. Even if the original story doesn't merit one.
Even if the first film is complete in itself. Even if success is a fluke.
"The Blair Witch Project" was made with a budget of $1.75 and exploded on
the screen, raking in huge profits. The concept was brilliant. The
filmmakers created a remarkable buzz that the story might be real. The film
itself was even more convincing. The movie _must_ be authentic. Why else
would such amateurish footage be on the big screen?
The first film caught lightning in a bottle. The sequel proves you can't
pour that old lightning into a new bottle.
You have to give this effort some credit. It would have been easy to have
made the same movie again with a new group of kids. It would have been easy,
but of course, it wouldn't have worked.
Instead "Book Of Shadows" acknowledges the first film as a movie and
concentrates on the hysteria following its release. It's a great scheme and
possibly the only entertaining way to do a sequel.
Unfortunately it doesn't work either.
Five kids spend the night in the woods at the scene of the first film. Weird
stuff happens and they retreat to an old factory where one of them lives.
Even weirder stuff happens. Some people die, there's blood and knives and
none of the characters have a lick of common sense.
While supposedly doing serious research, the group sets up a circle of
surveillance cameras in the ruins of the old house in the woods and vows to
stay alert all night awaiting a visitation. Then they proceed to get totally
trashed on drugs and alcohol and party down with very loud, very obnoxious
heavy metal music. It's a bad plan.
The cast shows some early promise. A couple is doing research on a "Blair
Witch" book. The tour guide is a former mental patient turned ebay
aficionado. A Goth amazon princess adds a bit of comedic relief. The
obligatory hot babe is the 2000 spiritual cinematic descendent of the cute
hippie chick, the cute rock and roll chick and the cute disco chick: the
cute Wiccan chick.
The first film's unaccomplished actors came across as real people in a real
situation because hours and hours of video were shot during days in the
woods. This time, these unaccomplished actors just come across as
unaccomplished actors. There's not one character you care about when they
start shouting for no reason.
Although what passes for a plot starts out with a solid idea, it's ruined by
poor execution. The follow-up to one of the most successful horror films
ever is nothing more than a bad slasher movie. They're trapped in an old big
weird house. They stupidly separate into various rooms. There are strange
noises, they see scary apparitions and people disappear. Ever see this movie?
Seasoned documentary director Joe Berlinger should know better. The film
features mostly cheap tricks and unnecessary gore. For a storyline filled
with surprises, it's oddly predicable.
"The Blair Witch Project" was a rare triumph of style over substance. "The
Book Of Shadows" is a triumph of tedium over promise.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 25 years. For the first
time during that period, he's going to vote for someone who might make a
good President. But he'll have to use a pencil to do it. Send vapid
political commentary to redman@bluemarble.net.)
[This appeared in the 11/2/00 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net]

Author
Jon Popick
Lightning doesn't strike twice.  It doesn't even come close.  Book of
Shadows, the sequel to 1999's much-hyped hit The Blair Witch Project,
pales in comparison to its predecessor.  In fact, they're apples and
oranges.
The first film was good because it was believable.  Even after the
relentless media coverage, some viewers still weren't sure if the film
was real or fake (believe me  I got dozens of dopey e-mail messages
asking if I knew the real truth).  Part of the original's believability
was in the acting, or perhaps the lack thereof.  Josh, Heather and Mike
weren't acting so much as reacting to what was happening to them. There
was no score, and the fact that the film was shot using two handheld
cameras (which were operated by the actors) added to Blair Witch's
realism.
The best part about the original is that it didn't rely on special
effects or even anything visually disturbing to freak people out. The
visions were mostly in your head, and we all know that what you can
imagine can be 1000 times more frightening than anything Hollywood can
create (Battlefield Earth aside).  In 30 years, it will still be scary.
People won't laugh at the dated technology like they're doing with the
re-release of The Exorcist.  Regrettably, the sequel doesn't follow the
same formula for terror.
Shadows ups the character count from three to five, and while none of
the new kids have much acting experience, each tries really hard to do a
good job.  (Too hard, actually - none of them do particularly well.)
And the actor-wielding, handheld cameras were discarded in favor of more
traditional filming techniques (using a film crew complete with director
and cinematographer).  The lack of score has been replaced with a slew
of "hot" modern rock tracks.
Director Joe Berlinger (Paradise Lost) explains away the differences at
the beginning of the film via a title card that points out the fact that
Shadows is a fictionalized version of the actual events that transpired
following the release of the first film.  Shadows begins promisingly,
using documentary-style clips of interviews with Burkittsville, Maryland
residents explaining the effects the success of the first film had on
their community and, more specifically, themselves.
Things begin to go astray once the real action starts to take place.
Shadows is about Jeffrey Donovan, a former mental patient who creates an
adventure tour of the supposedly haunted wooded area of Burkittsville.
His first expedition includes a Wiccan girl (Kim Director), a couple
doing research on a Blair Witch book (Tristine Skyler and Stephen Barker
Turner), and a psychic who looks like a goth version of Debi Mazar
(Erica Leerhsen).  Like the first film, the real names of each actor are
used for their characters.
The group's first stop is at the ruins of Rustin Parr's home, where they
spend the night and wake up to untold horrors that aren't really that
horrifying.  The fab five even run into a group of sightseers from a
rival tour group, and their fate becomes so obvious it's almost
laughable.  There are occasional flashes of what we're supposed to
assume are the murders described in the first film, but other than that,
Shadows offers nothing too frightening.  There's no whopper ending that
leaves things unresolved, but there are about a half-dozen times when
characters shout `What the f--- is going on?'  Call me crazy, but I'd
rather have the former than the latter.
Berlinger, who has no previous non-documentary feature work under his
belt (he did direct episodes of Homicide and the short-lived WB drama
D.C.), co-wrote Shadows' script with Dick Beebe (House on Haunted
Hill).  The film was executive-produced by Blair Witch's Daniel Myrick
and Eduardo Sánchez, who surround themselves with some quality
behind-the-camera talent, including editor Sarah Flack (The Limey),
cinematographer Nancy Schreiber (Your Friends and Neighbors) and musical
maestro Carter Burwell (Three Kings).  Unfortunately, Shadows will never
be able to get out of the shadow of The Blair Witch Project.  As horror
sequels go, it's still better than the rest of the slop out there (aside
from Scream 2), but compared to the original, it's a whopping
disappointment.
1:32 - R for adult language, nudity, drug use and drinking

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joe Berlinger.
Cast: Jeffrey Donovan, Kim Director, Stephen Baker Turner, Erica Leehrsen, 
Tristen Skylar.
2000 - 90 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, brief nudity, sexual situations, and gore).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 29, 2000.
1999's "The Blair Witch Project" was a landmark, groundbreaking motion 
picture--a $250,000 cinema verite-style pseudo-documentary that ended up 
becoming the must-see film of the summer and making over $140-million. Its 
financial and mostly critical success, however, did not win over some 
viewers, who passionately hated everything about its shaky-cam, 
"you-are-there" style of filmmaking. For every person who felt it was one of 
the most frightening movies they had ever seen, there was another who 
disliked it for the exact opposite reason, stating that it wasn't scary in 
the least. A horror film that became the biggest-grossing independent movie 
of all time, still, can only mean one thing, and that's a sequel.
With the directing reigns being handed over from Eduardo Sanchez and Daniel 
Myrick to, coincidentally, documentarian Joe Berlinger (making his fictional 
feature film debut), "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" is the type of hugely 
hyped sequel that is just asking for trouble. By taking a more mainstream 
approach to the Blair Witch legend, in the auspicious screenplay by Dick 
Bebee and Joe Berlinger, the movie is bound to disappoint fans who were 
expecting more of the same, while keeping those detractors of the original in 
the dark with another story that raises more questions than answers. 
Nevertheless, "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" is clever, entertaining, and 
thought-provoking, a purely original thriller that is able to stand on its 
own two feet.
A fictional account of what happened to five grad students following the 
release of the original "Blair Witch Project" in the summer of 1999, "BW2" 
follows a group of twentysomethings who agree to take part in the 
self-proclaimed Blair Witch Hunt, an Internet-based organization begun by 
Jeffrey (Jeffrey Donovan), in which he and four curiosity-seekers, including 
a couple (Stephen Baker Turner, Tristen Skyler) writing a book on the Blair 
Witch hysteria, a Wiccan (Erica Leehrsen), and a psychic goth girl (Kim 
Director), travel to the Black Hills of Burkittsville, MD to retrace the 
footsteps of Heather, Mike, and Josh. Following a night spent partying and 
drinking among the ruins of Rustin Parr's house (the place where the original 
climaxed), they awaken to discover that they have no recollection of the past 
five hours, with the only possible answers lying within the video camera that 
Jeffrey had been using, a 'la Heather Donahue.
Setting up shop at Jeffrey's apartment (in the form of an old, dilapidated 
factory located in the middle of the woods), the five of them plan to sift 
through the tapes, hoping to put the aforementioned fragmented night 
together, which left them all with mysterious marks on their body. As Tristen 
grows more and more unhinged following a miscarriage, Erica starts to fear 
for her life, and they all begin to have spooky hallucinations from beyond 
the grave, the questionable Blair Witch myth gradually proves itself to be 
all too real.
A one-of-a-kind masterpiece that ultimately saw itself overcome with hype, 
the novelty of "The Blair Witch Project" could never be duplicated, and 
luckily, director Berlinger (1996's brilliant "Paradise Lost: The Child 
Murders at Robin Hood Hills") realized this before filming a carbon copy. 
Equipped with a script, subtle special effects, a steadicam, and a more 
visceral approach, "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" succeeds in the fresh way 
in which it tells its story, which is not a direct sequel to its predecessor 
as much as a fictional, occasionally satirical study on the effects the first 
film had on audiences and the media.
Unlike the unflinchingly real, improvised performances of Heather Donahue, 
Joshua Leonard, and Michael Williams, the cast populating "Book of Shadows" 
have an actual screenplay to work with and, thus, are not nearly as 
impressive. Granted, many of their acting abilities are questionable, and the 
characters played by Erica Leehrsen and Tristen Skylar are overly annoying, 
but they do respectable jobs for primarily newcomers. Easily the standout in 
what could be a star-making appearance, Kim Director (whose only previous 
credits include bit parts in many recent Spike Lee films, including 1999's 
"Summer of Sam" and 2000's "Bamboozled") is an alluring, charismatic presence 
in the role of a good-natured fan of "The Blair Witch Project" who finds 
herself under suspicions simply because of her goth chick persona.
While never truly scary, the picture does contain several disturbing moments, 
not the least being the way the film toys with the fine line between 
perception and reality, and the hallucinatory sights of dead children, 
previous victims of dead serial killer Rustin Parr. With an ominous music 
score by Carter Burwell and atmospheric cinematography by Nancy Schreiber, 
"Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" is inferior to the incomparable series 
opener (as expected), but is much better than could possibly be expected. By 
concluding on a cliffhanging note that leaves much of what happened in the 
previous 85 minutes up to you to decide, the film is nothing short of 
intriguing, and as a horror-mystery opening on Halloween weekend, is the 
perfect way to spend the spooky holiday.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Book_of_Shadows:_Blair_Witch_2_ (R) no stars (out of ****)
Much like how _The_Exorcist_ begat _Exorcist_II:_The_Heretic_, last
year's shock success _The_Blair_Witch_Project_ has spawned a baffling and
altogether atrocious follow-up, _Book_of_Shadows:_Blair_Witch_2_.  Less a
sequel than an extremely loose spinoff--which has just about nothing to
do with either part of its title,  I might add--this film won't win over
the original's many detractors, and it is certain to incense the first's
cult of ardent supporters.
Director Joe Berlinger has described _Book_of_Shadows_ as an
"anti-sequel," and the premise he and writing collaborator Dick Beebe
(_BWP_ writers-directors Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez only take an
executive producing credit here) does hold some potential for an
interesting deconstruction of not merely the first _Blair_Witch_, but the
pop culture phenomenon it created.  _BW2_ doesn't take place in the same
"universe" inhabited by the original's characters of Heather, Mike, and
Josh; it takes place in the world of the here and now--that is, a world
where _The_Blair_Witch_Project_ is a blockbuster movie that has sent
tourism soaring in the filming location of Burkittsville, Maryland.  The
film opens with a witty faux-documentary segment that succinctly covers
the media frenzy around the film and fans' obsession with all things
Blair.
Once the nominal plot kicks in after the credit roll, _BW2_ begins is
big downhill plunge.  Among the many _BWP_ fans who have flocked to those
familiar woods is the "Blair Witch Hunt" tour group: Jeff (Jeffrey
Donovan), the tour organizer and former mental patient; Erica (Erica
Leerhsen), a practicing Wiccan who wants debunk the negative perception
of her religion; Stephen (Stephen Barker Turner), a supernatural skeptic
who is writing a book on the Blair Witch myth with his pregnant believer
girlfriend Tristen (Tristen Skyler); and Kim (Kim Director), token Goth
chick.  They set up camp at the ruins of the house featured in _BWP_'s
finale, and after a night of hard drinking, everyone wakes up the next
morning to find all their video equipment destroyed--and their memory
similarly damaged; no one has any recollection of all that went on that
night, let alone falling asleep.  Perhaps holding the answers are their
mysteriously untouched videotapes, and the five retreat to Jeff's
abandoned warehouse home to study them.
Given that _The_Blair_Witch_Project_'s ambiguous, debatable ending was a
major reason for the film's cult status, it was perhaps a wise move on
the part of Berlinger and Beebe to not offer any explanation about what
exactly happened.  I don't think anyone goes into _Book_of_Shadows_
expecting to find any specific answers about the first film's doomed
trio, anyway; however, I'm sure the common expectation is for some
additional background on the Blair Witch.  Alas, what the audience gets
is a repetitive and incredibly tedious chain of events where the five
have strange hallucinations when not watching playback of their
videotapes.  A few oblique references are made to the Blair Witch legend,
but they will be largely incomprehensible to anyone who hasn't done
extensive pre-viewing research at the Blair Witch website.  Unlike the
original film, where the expanded backstory works as an enhancement to a
stand-alone film, it's practically required reading if one wants to make
sense of whatever place _BW2_ has in the larger mythology--though even
Blair Witch fanatics may have difficulty sorting it all out as well.
But ties to the bigger Blair Witch picture are secondary to the casual
viewer, who simply wants to be scared.  Not only is there anything
remotely spooky to be found in _Book_of_Shadows_, no sense of suspense is
ever generated due to a self-defeating storytelling choice: flash
forwards.  In haphazardly jumping back and forth in time, Berlinger
indiscreetly gives away who exactly will survive and who will die, not to
mention the exact fate of these survivors; throughout the film he even
drops not-so-subtle hints--visual ones, no less--of what went down during
those missing hours.  With all its secrets and would-be shocks more than
telegraphed far in advance, there is a dull inevitability attached to
what should have been the film's "climactic" moments.
So, for most of _Book_of_Shadows_, one wonders what Berlinger's
intentions were, he clearly didn't set out to make the simple scary movie
everyone wants and expects.  The answer finally comes in the film's final
moments, which indeed reveals an aim "above" standard genre satisfaction:
to address the zeitgeist question of popular entertainment's connection
to real-life crime.  It's an admirable goal within the context of a
horror film, but there's a fine line between "ambitious" and
"pretentious."  By not offering anything fresh nor particularly
insightful on the subject, and without going about it in an entertaining
nor convincing way (the abysmal acting--or, rather, yelling--sends any
foundation in reality out the window), Berlinger and his empty
_Book_of_Shadows_ end up on the wrong side of that line.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://www.mrbrownmovies.com
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

