Title
Review for Superstar: The Life and Times of Andy Warhol (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
90 min., not rated, Documentary, 1990
Director: Chuck Workman
Cast: Andy Warhol, Dennis Hopper, Sylvia Miles, Fran Lebowitz,
      Ultra Violet, Viva
     This is a documentary about one of the most interesting and
brilliant people in entertainment history, Andy Warhol, who lived from
1928 to 1987.  He became famous after painting some Campbell's soup
cans.  He continued painting as well as branching out into movie-making.
Some of his movies were bizarre, like a six-hour underground film about
a person sleeping and ANDY WARHOL'S FRANKENSTEIN.  Some were sexually
oriented in nature, like ANDY WARHOL'S DRACULA.  Some were black in
nature, like ANDY WARHOL'S BAD.  But most of all they were Andy.
     I tend not to care for documentaries too much.  I have seen
several, like CHUCK BERRY--HAIL! HAIL! ROCK 'N' ROLL, THE COMPLEAT
BEATLES, and THE MAKING OF A LEGEND: GONE WITH THE WIND, that I have
just found slow and boring.  When watching a documentary I like to be
entertained as I am learning about the person/group.  The best actual
documentary that I have seen is MADONNA: TRUTH OR DARE (my actual
favorite is "Weird Al" Yankovic's spoof of documentaries called THE
COMPLEAT AL).  SUPERSTAR I found to be an enjoyable documentary to
watch.  It wasn't too long and it didn't bore me.  To the best of my
knowledge, SUPERSTAR is not on video cassette [actually it is; I just
saw it in my videostore yesterday, under "Andy Warhol, Superstar"
-Moderator], but is still running in the small arty type theaters.  I
don't recommend SUPERSTAR for a general audience, but for people who are
interested in Andy Warhol.  If you are not interested in Andy Warhol,
this film will probably be incredibly boring for you.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give SUPERSTAR a three.  SUPERSTAR is unrated but
contains explicit language, brief female nudity, and brief male nudity.
     This film had a lot of ways of hiding what it was telling you so
that you didn't realize that you were gaining knowledge.  The part that
I felt was the best done was the beginning with the television screens.
It was visually pleasing, yet insightful into Andy Warhol.  I also liked
how, towards the center of the film, clips from many of Warhol's films
were included.  I feel that it is interesting that most of the people
who are interviewed in the film are now dead.  I also find it
interesting that Andy Warhol was shot by one of his former actresses and
sad that he died, not of the gunshot wound, but of the care he received
in the hospital.  I really don't have too much more to say, other than I
enjoyed the film, and I will try to hunt out some of Andy's old work to
see.
