Title
Review for All the Rage (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
This film in which guns play a major part in each pivotal scene is
probably supposed to start out as humorous look at the impact of
firearms in modern society before becoming shockingly appalling in its
last reel. The problem is that It's the Rage is neither funny nor
disturbing, and even its eclectic A-list cast can't save it from being
yet another bad Pulp Fiction rip-off.
Rage begins in the home of Warren and Helen Harding (played by
Pleasantville co-stars Jeff Daniels and Joan Allen), a wealthy yet
miserable couple that are awakened late one evening by what appears to
be a burglar. Warren guns down the intruder in the living room, but it
isn't until afterwards that he realizes that the prowler was actually
his business partner. Helen thinks her husband knowingly executed his
colleague, while Warren assumes that his associate was secretly
schtupping his wife. The cops (Robert Forster and Bokeem Woodbine) don't
know who to believe but are pretty sure that something fishy is going
on.
With murder acting as the final straw for their marriage, Helen moves
out and gets a job as an assistant to an insane billionaire named Norton
Morgan (Gary Sinise, Mission to Mars), who has made a fortune doing
something with computers, while simultaneously developing a fear of any
type of information. Norton chased away his previous assistant and now
spends his days cooped up in his giant office playing with his cyber-dog
and doesn't appear to be too into hygiene (but what computer billionaire
is?).
Norton's former assistant (Josh Brolin, The Mod Squad) dreams of making
movies for a living but instead finds work as a video store clerk and
develops a unhealthy fixation on a bleached-blonde, Bosco-stealing
delinquent named Annabel Lee (Anna Paquin, Rogue from X-Men). Rage also
features characters played by André Braugher (Frequency), David
Schwimmer (Friends) and Giovanni Ribisi (Gone in 60 Seconds), and all of
the film's characters are linked to each other, whether they know it or
not. In that respect, Rage is a bit like Magnolia or Short Cuts, but not
nearly as interesting or as well-executed as either.
While the acting in Rage isn't too bad, the script seems particularly
hackneyed. The whole harried-assistant-to-a-psychopath has already been
done to perfection by Frank Whalley (Swimming With Sharks) and Philip
Seymour Hoffman (The Big Lebowski). The bickering couple who live in the
large, soulless house reeks of Lester and Caroline Burnham (even though
Rage was completed before American Beauty was released). I can't think
of anything much worse than a film that thinks it's edgy and quirky but
just plain isn't.
Rage, which will see a brief theatrical run before bowing on pay
television, was directed by James D. Stern, who has recently helmed the
IMAX film Michael Jordan to the MAX, as well as directing Stomp on
Broadway. The script was written by Keith Reddin, who penned the play
Life During Wartime (adapted for the screen as The Alarmist), and Devo's
Mark Mothersbaugh (The Adventures of Rocky & Bullwinkle) provides the
score.
1:37 – R for adult language, violence and sexual content

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Jeremiah Kipp.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/e63ca07a750cf033882568d0001963bf?OpenDocument
Quite a cast has been assembled for this Altman-esque tale of
interlocked lives, all clamoring around the "serious social problem" of
gun control. While there's no denying that the USA has over fifty
million gun owners and it's a subject worthy of address and debate, this
movie thuddingly hits the same numb point over and over again: guns are
bad, guns can kill. That's about as resonant as It's the Rage will get.
Jeff Daniels and Joan Allen play a miserable suburban couple whose
marriage is disrupted by an accidental shooting in their living room at
midnight. As it turns out, the guy was Daniels' business partner. Allen
moves out in disgust and, through a process of self-discovery, figures
out that her happy little life was nothing more than a middle class
prison. She hides away at her new workplace, in the employ of eccentric
millionaire and computer guru Gary Sinise. Daniels sits at home fuming,
renting pornography and playing with his gun.
Andre Braugher (as Daniels' attorney) and David Schwimmer play a gay
couple who have just purchased their first pistol. Good timing, too, if
you're talking soap operas. Schwimmer has begun to suspect his longtime
companion of having an affair. Braugher's problems escalate when his
white trash lover (Anna Paquin) becomes afraid that her powder keg older
brother (wild Giovanni Ribisi) is gonna grab his gun and blow Braugher
away. 
Of course, this being an Altman-esque intertwined plot, Ribisi is
chasing after entirely the wrong guy. He thinks friendly video store
clerk Josh Brolin is the one who's playing Lolita with his kid sister.
Wouldn't you know that Brolin worked for mad computer guru Sinise at the
start of the movie?
Guns figure into each narrative, and because they're so close at hand
our trigger happy cast are always a hairs breath from blowing each other
away. Unfortunately, they don't. We the audience are stuck with ninety
minutes of angry one-note characters who rub their quirkiness in our
faces. Jeff Daniels flounders as a pompous hubbie who screams and yells
when he doesn't get his way and David Schwimmer is grating as a swishy
gay stereotype prone to fidgety hissy-fits. Robert Forster sleepwalks
through the standard "cop ready for retirement" role who's investigating
every other character, often launching into bone dry, monotonous
speeches about the grim state of the world. Oh, the humanity.
I don't fault the cast, though. Some of them, like the always reliable
Joan Allen, fare better than others. Gary Sinise in particular has fun
with his socially inept geek persona, often reacting to the computer
screens in his room which purportedly reflect his games but seem to
display his own manic thoughts (which sometimes involve violence and
guns, natch.) Only problem is, the charismatic and mannered Sinise often
looks like he belongs in another movie entirely - say, a better Terry
Gilliam movie, than the bland, by-the-numbers movie of the week everyone
else is taking part in.
Once you get past the characters, the very look of the film screams
student filmmaker. The budget shows its seams painfully in poorly lit
flat imagery, often cheating shots to avoid showing the entire house of
a millionaire or upper middle class couple in ways which limit the film
visually. The final montage where everything heats up and blows,
involving several guns going off and many characters buying the farm,
it's so choppy and unclear that I didn't know what happened to a major
character until catching it a second time.
Intended as a bleak comedy about the "gun control problem", the movie
never finds enough social nuances in its display of guns in the homes of
the rich, the middle class and the poor to work as humor or political
satire. The caricatures and situations James Stern has placed under his
microscope are simply too broad to have much of an impact. 
By the time I reached the closing credits, where we are informed what
happened to each of the characters afterwards in a cutesy anecdote about
what they learned (such as "Don't shoot the friendly charging rhino,
climb up a tree instead!"), the temptation was great to hang up my
liberal conscience and join Charlton Heston's merry men at the NRA. I
had to remind myself, "It's only a movie, it's only a movie…" 
Director: James D. Stern
Producer: Peter Gilbert, Anne McCarthy, Ash R. Shah, James D. Stern
Writer: Keith Reddin
Starring: Joan Allen, Jeff Daniels, Gary Sinise, Andre Braugher, Robert
Forster, Anna Paquin, Giovanni Ribisi, Josh Brolin, David Schwimmer,
Bokeem Woodbine
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
