Title
Review for Cider House Rules, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE CIDER HOUSE RULES" (Miramax Films)
   Adapted by John Irving from his own best-seller, this is
the extraordinary story of one boy's journey into maturity in the
1940s. Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire) grew up in a sheltered existence at
an orphange in St. Clouds, Maine, under the kindly, paternal care of
ether-addicted Dr. Larch (Michael Caine) who, each night, after
reading a chapter from Charles Dickens, bid the wistful, unwanted boys
a poignant "Good night, you princes of Maine, you kings of New
England." As Larch's favorite, Homer learns a lot about performing
safe, if illegal, abortions but less about right and wrong. Which is
why he decides to explore the outside world, hitching a ride with a
young woman (Charlize Theron) and her fiance (Paul Rudd), an Air Force
pilot. Taking a job as an apple picker, he joins a black migrant
worker crew, headed by Mr. Rose (Delroy Lindo) and his daughter
(Erykah Badu).  Director Lasse Hallstrom is sensitively and
affectionately in tune with Irving's off-beat, idiosyncratic
characters, eliciting substantial, Oscar-caliber performances as Homer
copes with a crisis of conscience involving abortion, medical ethics
and racial prejudice. Wide-eyed and impressionable, Tobey Maguire is
delicately convincing, particularly as he's dazzled by luminous
Charlize Theron. Michael Caine not only masters the elusive accent but
captures the fierce intensity and enormously touching vulnerability of
Larch. And edgy Delroy Lindo is tender yet terrifying, never hitting a
false note. The fable-like quality is greatly enhanced by Oliver
Stapleton's vivid, impressionistic photography. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, The Cider House Rules is a haunting 10. Mixing
quirky humor, menace, and pathos, it's an emotionally uplifting
experience - one of the best pictures of the year.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Tobey Maguire, Michael Caine, Charlize Theron, Delroy Lindo, Paul
Rudd, Kathy Baker, Jane Alexander, Erykah Badu, Kate Nelligan, Heavy D, Kieran
Culkin, K. Todd Freeman, and J.K. Simmons.
Towards the end of The Cider House Rules, a dying character informs protagonist
Homer (Tobey Maguire) of the most important lesson in life: "Sometimes you
gotta break the rules to put it straight." The quote sums up the moral of the
entire film. Individuals are so unique that they must create their own rules to
survive and never become enslaved by what someone else thinks is suitable.
Tagging along and depending on another person for an enjoyable existence can
only make you blind to the rest of the world, you can only see through their
eyes, you see what they want to see and don't want to see. Homer at first is
blind to the rest of the world. Working in an orphanage performing illegal
abortions with his kind mentor Dr Larch (Michael Caine), the bright ingenuous
Homer has never seen a city or the ocean or anything at all outside of the
small town in Maine where he was born and raised. Even though Homer knows his
life contains nothing but joy in which younger orphans lionize him and nurses
respect him, he inexplicably yearns for more in life. From the books he has
read or from the only film he has ever seen (King Kong), he knows there is much
more out there to explore and cherish. When a young couple seeking an abortion
visit the orphanage, Homer decides that leaving town with them is the best
chance he'll have to answer his curiosity. 
The message of the story is very clear, that this boy wants to discover what
the world is like by himself, without having to lean on another for assistance.
However, throughout the movie, in my opinion, Homer never actually completes
his true goal. There are very few times in which he is actually by himself
discovering and learning something different from before. It seemed like he
left the orphanage to avoid Dr. Larch's protectiveness, yet when he is on his
trip, he is always around someone else, as if this other person is a valid
replacement for the doctor. Homer hangs around co-workers during work time and
at night, around the beautiful and confused Candy (the ubiquitous Charlize
Theron) at other times, and around Candy's WWII pilot boyfriend Wally (Paul
Rudd) when he is in town. Wasn't the whole point of Homer's travels to discover
who he actually his as an individual? Or to make some decisions without asking
another person's opinion first? There were a some moments in which Homer takes
control but certainly not enough. Another irritating section of the story is
that Homer does not even leave the state of Maine in his journey for
self-clarification. It doesn't seem like much of an effort if you barely travel
a day's worth of time. Supposedly an attempt to "see what the world is really
like," Homer doesn't even change time zones. With such a short distance of
travelling, it is really hard to believe that Homer has really changed. 
These unsatisfactory elements of the plot fortunately have no harm on the
fantastic acting from the splendid cast. Delroy Lindo and Michael Caine were
particularly superb as completely different men teaching Homer completely
different lessons. Tobey Maguire, who understandably is starting to get the
same roles in his films, is also perfectly naďve as the main character. The
only problem with the acting was that there were so many characters that some
talented actors, including Jane Alexander and Kate Nelligan, were underused. 
John Irving, adapting his own novel of the same name, writes a fine script,
which contains a number of examples of characters breaking the traditional
rules to become happier in life. At times the message is a little too obviously
thrown in to conversations  but at other times it is perfectly subtle and
thought provoking. Lasse Hallstrom (My Life As a Dog, What's Eating Gilbert
Grape) adds his talented directorial skills to the picture. The New England
scenery is beautifully detailed and colorfully attractive to the eye. 
Some unbelievably realistic acting, directing, and screenwriting make The Cider
House Rules fun to watch, but afterwards when trying to identify the true moral
of the story, some of the details are downright disappointing. 

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 1999.
Starring Tobey Maguire, Charlize Theron, Michael Caine, Delroy Lindo, 
Paul Rudd, Jane Alexander, Kathy Baker, Erykah Badu, Kieran Culkin, Kate
Nelligan, Heavy D.
Screenplay by John Irving.
Directed by Lasse HallstrF6m.
Rated PG-13.
If any lessons can be derived from "The Cider House Rules," one is
that a film can be damaged by trying too hard for Oscar
nominations. The other is that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts &
Sciences are a bunch of suckers.  It's not hard to see how this
average film was able to fool the Academy into handing it no less than
seven nominations: "The Cider House Rules" is a slow, quiet,
historical film that contains abortion, a "controversial" topic, as a
major theme. It possesses all the aspects of an Important Film and
constantly pushes on you the idea that it is a supremely Important
movie. That, of course, is precisely the problem with "The Cider House
Rules." Not one moment goes by without the film informing us on how
much we should all marvel at just how Important what we are watching
really is.  Too bad "The Cider House Rules," despite being a
relentlessly Important film, has neither the narrative flow nor the
thematic substance to qualify as truly Important. It's mostly
well-made and good-looking, and it's also mostly empty.
Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire) is an orphan nobody was able to
permanently adopt. Brought up at the St. Cloud's Orphanage in a small
Maine town, Homer is told by his keeper, the kindly Dr. Wilbur Larch
(Michael Caine), that if he's going to stay there, he ought to "be of
use." So Dr. Larch teaches Homer the skills of a doctor: learning to
deliver babies and care for and comfort the mothers. Homer, however,
refuses to take on one of Dr.  Larch's duties -- performing
abortions. Dr. Larch has no qualms about it; he performs them because
he doesn't want back-alley abortionists killing pregnant women, but
Homer refuses on the grounds that abortions are illegal (or were, in
the late 1930's). When Homer grows older, he longs to see the world
beyond the orphanage, and his chance comes when an air force pilot
named Wally (Paul Rudd) and his girlfriend Candy (Charlize Theron)
come in for an abortion. Homer asks to leave with them over
Dr. Lester's objections, and Wally agrees to take him. Homer then
proceeds to get a job on Wally's family's apple farm, where he meets
the head of the apple pickers, a large black man called Mr. Rose
(Delroy Lindo) and his daughter Rose (Erykah Badu), and also strikes
up a romantic relationship with Candy after her boyfriend once again
departs for war. Thrown out into the real world, Homer learns that
issues of morality are perhaps not quite so clear-cut as he thought
they were.
There are things to like about "The Cider House Rules." The actors,
for example: Maguire has an almost uncanny leading-man presence about
him, in that he doesn't immediately grab a viewer or even do much of
anything to garner attention, but it's somehow difficult to ignore
him. His understated calm and thoughtful eyes are well-suited to the
character of Homer, who must work out difficult moral issues without
breaking an externally tranquil demeanor. Charlize Theron is fine as
his love interest; with an actress like her, it's not hard to see why
Homer takes a liking to Candy. The interplay between the two, with
Candy aloofly refusing to make a decision while Homer presses her for
one, is one of the most interesting aspects of the film.  Michael
Caine and Delroy Lindo give powerful turns as two of Homer's father
figures, both noble but flawed men. Caine's New Englander accent is
for the most part believable, though he tends to stress his R's a bit
too much (a common problem for British actors playing
American). Singer Erykah Badu is remarkably unglamorous and
surprisingly touching in a pivotal role.
John Irving adapted his own novel in writing the screenplay for "The
Cider House Rules," so it's not hard to figure out why the film feels
as if it's been gloriously over-stuffed. This being an Important Film
written by an author who apparently couldn't bear to let one bit of
his book be left out, we get one of the worst examples of
"kitchen-sink" filmmaking this side of Oliver Stone (Lasse
HallstrF6m's relatively restrained direction notwithstanding). Irving
seemingly isn't content to merely deal with the supremely thorny issue
of abortion; we must also get, in order, orphans, dying children,
dying mothers, drug addiction, adultery, incest, and suicide. When the
film finally pulled out (I kid you not) a crippled war veteran,
Irving's emotional manipulation had reached its nadir. Playing with an
audience's emotions is one thing, but does it have to be drummed in
with a sledgehammer? I was with the film through many of its jumps
through sentimental hoops, but by the final reel, it had lost me. Plot
developments that could have been affecting were now merely grating,
not to mention convenient.
Furthermore, for all the film's posturing about being a frank and open
debate about abortion, the subject is given no more than a superficial
gloss-over by Irving. It does deliver a fairly strong argument in
favor of legalizing abortion (or keeping it legal in the contemporary
sense): Dr.  Larch clearly explains his position, that he performs
abortions so they will be done properly and in a sanitary
environment. That's fine, but Homer's great "objection" to the
practice is little more than a peep about it being illegal, and Irving
eventually negates that argument by introducing the idea of making
one's own decisions, regardless of what the law may dictate (as in the
rules posted in the cider house, which are routinely broken by the
farm workers). Where is the counter-argument, the one pro-lifers
consistently spout about protecting life? The film is most definitely
not an even-handed treatment of the subject, but rather an obvious
pro-choice diatribe.  This critic isn't even a pro-life advocate; I
actually tend to fall in the pro-choice camp, but I also recognize
that an argument is made stronger by acknowledging the opposing
viewpoint. "The Cider House Rules" barely does, and Homer's eventual
decision to perform an abortion in the case of incest (which he never
had a problem with anyway) doesn't force him or the film to take a
definite stand on the issue one way or the other. This is a perfectly,
infuriatingly safe way to deal with an issue, and one as controversial
as abortion deserved better.
Irving's screenplay is a perfect example of why keeping film
adaptations faithful to their source material is not necessarily a
good idea.  Several things here almost certainly worked better on
paper than on screen, such as the double-pronged storytelling that
keeps frustratingly cutting back to the orphanage when we ought to be
caught up in Homer's travels. "The Cider House Rules" isn't a bad film
-- it's far too crisply-made and nicely-acted for that. Toss in some
beautiful New England scenery and economic direction, and you're
pretty much assured that it will at least be a pleasing trip. But
those looking for something a little more substantial will be
disappointed, and certainly we ought to expect more out of our Best
Picture nominees.  Sadly, "The Cider House Rules" isn't quite the
Important Film it wants to be. There is no narrative or thematic
consistency to it; the film never takes a definite course. As a
picture that deals with some morally thorny issues, this one stays
relentlessly safe, and irritatingly aloof from its subject matter,
which all adds up to a great deal of emptiness when the end credits
roll: We realize that "The Cider House Rules" was a good-looking,
well-acted film about nothing in particular.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
The Cider House Rules (1999) 
Rated PG-13; running time 129 minutes
Genre: Drama
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0124315 
Official site: http://www.miramax.com/  
Written by: John Irving
Directed by: Lasse Hallstrom
Starring: Tobey Maguire, Michael Caine, Charlize Theron, Delroy Lindo, 
Paul Rudd, Jane Alexander, Kathy Baker, Erykah Badu, Kieran Culkin, 
Kate Nelligan, Heavy D, K. Todd Freeman, Paz de la Huerta, Sean Andrew, 
Spencer Diamond, Skye McCole Bartusiak, Erik Sullivan
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamscider.html
After having sat through over three hours of fast-moving action 
involving characters who wouldn't "let me in" to their world in 
"Magnolia", it was a refreshing change of pace to sit back and relax 
with "The Cider House Rules".  Felt like...family.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine) is an unusual man in an unusual place 
during an unusual time: along with Nurse Angela (Kathy Baker) and Nurse 
Edna (Jane Alexander), Larch oversees a home for unwanted children--born 
and yet-to-be born--in St. Cloud, Maine during World War II.  The 
abortions he performs are illegal, but in his eyes, they are necessary, 
considering the alternative (terribly unsafe backalley hatchet jobs).  
This, though, is little comfort to young Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire); 
along with housemates Buster (Kieran Culkin), Mary Agnes (Pas de la 
Huerta), Copperfield (Sean Andrew), Hazel (Skye McCole Bartusiak), Fuzzy 
(Erik Sullivan) and the adorable Curly (Spencer Diamond), Homer grows up 
as an orphan under the care of Larch and the nurses, and becomes almost 
as skilled as the good doctor himself.  The difference, though, is that 
Homer objects to Larch's actions, and has no intentions on being an 
abortionist.
Homer's life takes a drastic change when Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd), 
an Air Force pilot, brings his girlfriend Candy Kendall (Charlize 
Theron) to St. Cloud for an abortion.  When they leave, Homer goes with 
them, and experiences life as an apple picker in the cider mill of 
Wally's family, including his mother Olive (Kate Nelligan).  There, he 
meets a band of migrant workers led by Mr. Rose (Delroy Lindo), his 
daughter Rose Rose (Erykah Badu, in her acting debut), Peaches (Heavy 
D), and Muddy (K. Todd Freeman).  But Homer's former life isn't quite 
behind him; not yet...
The Upshot:
I went into "The Cider House Rules" fully prepared to be either 
disappointed, or put to sleep, by Yet Another art flick.  I need to get 
rid of my jadedness; it would've done this film a disservice had I let 
it win out.  "Cider" was like a breath of fresh air following the "work" 
I had to do to roll with "Magnolia" (lest ye think I'm doggin' that 
flick, check out my "Magnolia" review first.  I'm just sayin'.)   It was 
nice to just let this film wash over me; quite nice to let the movie be.
The flow of the movie served it well.  Told almost as a bedtime story, I 
could easily hear the nurses reading it to the kids as a lullaby; not 
for sleepy-time, but instead to soothe them from the reality that not 
many people were (and sadly, are still not) interested in adopting them 
once they were no longer babies.  Of course, not every aspect of the 
film was a peaceful as all this; the harsh reality of choosing to end a 
life, was a heavy burden to bear by mother and doctor alike.  That the 
movie didn't get bogged down with the heaviness, is indicative of the 
quality of this film.
One would think that a flick that dealt with such a big Issue as 
abortion, from both sides of the fence, would come off as overly 
strident.  One would be wrong.  Though the Issue was "resolved" in the 
end as heavily balanced on one side over the other (you'll have to see 
it to know which), there was no heavy-handed pro-choice or pro-life 
Message involved; the real Message addressed the humanity of the 
characters involved.
And o, the humanity.  The characters felt as natural as those you might 
meet in a small town in 1940's Maine whose only residents are orphans 
and the caretakers that look after them; the actors, likewise, fit the 
clothes of their roles quite well.  Other than the horrible go at an 
American accent, I could easily believe Caine's Dr. Larch, and the 
compassion he had for orphans and pregnant mothers alike; the way he and 
the nurses made the orphans feel special without patronizing them, 
warmed my jaded heart.  Maguire as the eagerly naive Homer, could teach 
Mr. DiCaprio and pals a thing or three about the importance of not being 
so full of your celebrity that you forget how to act; he was charming 
and engaging, and I look forward to seeing him in more movies.  Ditto 
Charlize Theron; my estimation of her acting skills shot way up after 
this flick.  In fact, I can't remember a missed-note from any of the 
actors or characters--including the children.  Heck, especially the 
children; after the sour taste that "Stuart Little" left in my mouth for 
Cutesy Orphan Kids, I was pleasantly surprised by the easygoing 
performances of the young actors (and I fell in love with Spencer 
Diamond; I'd adopt him in a heartbeat!)
The movie took a weird turn when Homer left the orphanage for the cider 
mill; it wasn't exactly difficult to follow, but the motivations (so to 
speak) for the actions of the characters involved, weren't as clear 
during this part of the movie as they were in the orphanage.  That said, 
Delroy Lindo once again knocked my socks off; I find it hard to believe 
that, considering what his Mr. Rose character went through, I could feel 
as...attached...to his character after the movie ended, as I did going 
in.  Though Erykah Badu's movie debut drew my attention [too much, in 
spots; was she wearing contacts?], Lindo's powerful performance kept it.   
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
I sometimes have to remind myself that, especially in period pieces like 
this, expressions of "strength" (so to speak) by Black folk, are of 
necessity more muted than they should be able to be in modern day 
movies; that is, just as one wouldn't expect John Coffey to Go Off On 
any of the officers in "The Green Mile", for example, one should also 
not expect Rose Rose to take more serious issue at Candy's charitable 
efforts to give her hand-me-downs.
That said, I cannot help but note this in that regard: White Privilege 
once again reared its ugly head when Migrant Worker Homer was eagerly, 
and repeatedly, invited to sup with both the Kendall and Worthington 
families--but Rose, who at least Candy knew for a much longer time, 
received no such invitation, and none seemed to be forthcoming any time 
soon.  Excuse it away if you will, but I doubt that such excuses would 
go far in Rose's eyes.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
A sweet story with characters that felt Real (especially after having 
just seen "Magnolia", which felt Otherworldly in comparison), one could 
almost forgive Michael Caine for his awful American accent--which gave 
way to his otherwise brilliantly understated performance.  An additional 
tip o' the hat to Delroy Lindo for pulling off the seemingly impossible 
(no spoilers here; you'll have to see it to understand what I mean).
"The Cider House Rules": (rating: greenlight)  
After a year filled with Big!Event! movies (c.f. "Star Wars" The 
Revision), and ultra-long telethon flicks (c.f. "Magnolia"), "Cider" 
gets my props for being a "simple" story with heart.  Y'all go.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES
(Miramax)
Starring:  Tobey Maguire, Charlize Theron, Michael Caine, Delroy Lindo,
Paul Rudd, Erykah Badu, Kathy Baker.
Screenplay:  John Irving, based on his novel.
Producer:  Richard N. Gladstein.
Director:  Lasse Halstrom.
MPAA Rating:  R (adult themes, profanity, sexual situations, violence)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A word of sympathy, first of all, for the marketing and publicity
people at Miramax Films. I guarantee you I would not want the job of
selling to the American public a film in which the character arc of the
protagonist is completed by performing an abortion. They'll avoid the
subject assiduously, of course, focusing instead on the idea that THE
CIDER HOUSE RULES is about a journey to self-awareness, about learning to
make complex choices, and so on, and et cetera, and yada yada, all of
which is even (more or less) true. It's also true that John Irving has no
qualms about being provocative, and that he's willing to cast performing
abortions in a quasi-heroic light if it serves the purpose of one of his
uniquely compassionate tales. 
     THE CIDER HOUSE RULES isn't worth avoiding simply because of that one
thematic element ... nor, unfortunately, it is particularly worth seeking 
out. Once again delving into protagonists with atypical parental
circumstances, Irving (adapting his own novel) tells the story of an
orphan named Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire). Homer has lived his entire life
at St. Cloud's Orphanage in Maine, and now, as a young adult in 1943,
finds himself apprenticed to the orphanage's unconventional obstetrician
and caretaker Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine). Unsure of his own place in
the world, however, Homer decides to explore it. He leaves with Candy
Kendall (Charlize Theron) and Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd) -- a young
couple who have come to St. Cloud's for Dr. Larch's illegal services --
eventually landing as a picker at Wally's family apple orchard. It is
there that Homer has experiences that broaden his horizons, from
encounters with romance to encounters with the grey areas of morality.
     The first half of THE CIDER HOUSE RULES walks an awkward tightrope
between edgy humanism and dangerous sentimentality. The relationship
between Larch and Homer is the focal point, a strange father-son
connection that gives two actors intriguing material to work with. Caine
is particularly good as Larch, playing devilish advocate regarding the
harsh realities of the world. That relationship, however, is played out in
a setting filled with adorable urchins, including one inquisitive but
doomed fellow who spends his days under an oxygen tent. Irving tries to
wink at the mawkishness (plenty of Dickensian references abound), but 
director Lasse Hallstrom spends a bit too much time lingering on the
orphans' upturned faces. For a story that's ultimately not about orphans,
the opening of THE CIDER HOUSE RULES is too much about orphans.
     What the story is about, ultimately, is Homer's progress towards
understanding life outside the orphanage. To that end, Tobey Maguire
proves to be a marvelous Homer Wells. His performance is a challenging mix
of innocence and experience; his face captures both a hard life and a life
lived in isolation. He's certainly the best choice for an Irving
protagonist since Robin Williams' Garp, but THE CIDER HOUSE RULES still
can't quite achieve Irving-style magic, even with Irving himself doing the
script honors. The narrative meanders appropriately between Homer's
relationship with Candy, his work with the apple-picking crew and life
back at the orphanage, yet the meandering just doesn't have that whimsical
sense of purpose that marks Irving's novels. 
     It is most worth noting that THE CIDER HOUSE RULES on film packs 15
years of Homer's life into about a year and a half. There may be no better
evidence that Irving is a writer whose stories really need to be turned
into mini-series. The film does do a nice job conveying the theme that
"situational morality" need not be an epithet; indeed, this is may be one
of the most deeply radical concepts you'll see on film this year. It is
there you see a glimmer of the literary Irving, one of the glimmers you
can see in Maguire and Caine. Too often, though, those glimmers are
obscured by conventional filmmaking. Maybe those marketing folk don't have
such a tough job after all. In THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, you have to work a
little too hard to find Irving the provocateur.

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Lasse Hallstrom
STARRING:         Tobey Maguire, Michael Caine, Charlize Theron, Delroy
Lindo, Paul Rudd
WRITTEN BY:       John Irving
RATED:            PG-13 for mature thematic elements, sexuality, nudity,
substance abuse, and some violence
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       Proverbs 3:5, Proverbs 28:26, Jeremiah 10:23
It is hard to imagine that a movie which includes abortion and incest as
prominent plot devices could be so sensitive, so delicate, so insightful
and yes, even so enjoyable.  Somehow, THE CIDER HOUSE RULES manages to
keep an even keel in the face of the harsh subject matter and allows a
substantial amount of heart to shine through.
Set in the 1940's, the film tells the story of a unique young man named
Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire, RIDE WITH THE DEVIL).  An orphan, twice
rejected as an infant by possible adoptive parents, he grows up in the
care and under the tutelage of Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine, LITTLE
VOICE), father figure to the orphans of St. Cloud, obstetrician or
abortionist to the unhappily pregnant women who come there seeking his
help.
Figuring that as long as Homer was going to stay at the orphanage, he
might as well be of use, Dr. Larch begins teaching him all he knows about
obstetrics.  Soon Homer is delivering babies like a professional.  He
refuses to perform abortions, instead wondering why the couples just
didn't behave more responsibly.  Larch, too old and experienced to have
such youthful ideals, marvels that Homer "continues to have such high
expectations of people."
Such is the result of an insulated upbringing.  Though skilled in certain
medical procedures, Homer remains woefully naive and ignorant about most
everything else.  He finally figures that in order to find his place in
the world, he must go out into it.
Befriending a young couple who had come to see Dr. Larch, he hitches a
ride with them and parlays that into landing a job as an apple picker with
a group of black migrant workers at the orchard where they lived. Thus,
Homer begins his worldly instruction, with new friend Candy Kendall
(Charlize Theron, THE ASTRONAUT'S WIFE) a willing tutor.
Tobey Maguire is well cast yet again as an inherently good man who is
seeking answers to life's questions... many of which he was unaware needed
to be asked.  He demonstrates a quiet strength and thoughtful curiosity
that is both warm and appealing.
Michael Caine is, in a word, brilliant as the caring caretaker of these
orphans, many of whom he helped to bring into the world.  Calling them
"princes of Maine, kings of New England" in his ritualistic goodnight, Mr.
Caine manages to communicate the love and commitment Larch has towards
these children without becoming maudlin or saccharine.
Delroy Lindo (A LIFE LESS ORDINARY) has many powerful moments as Mr.
Rose, the strong and charismatic leader of the apple pickers whom Homer
joins.
Director Lasse Hallstrom (WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE?) and
screenwriter/novelist John Irving (THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP), who
adapted his own work for this movie deserve much of the credit for the
balanced approach to the sensitive subject matter.  Regardless of one's
personal stand on the divisive matter of abortion, it is hard to imagine
anyone becoming offended by the evenhanded treatment used by these
filmmakers.
The title is a reference to a list of rules posted in the quarters of the
illiterate apple pickers.  Figuring the rules didn't apply to them since
they didn't have a hand in writing them, they decide to ignore the list
and make up their own rules as they go along.  Dr. Larch, in his own way,
acts similarly.
There is a danger in that line of reasoning.  God has also given us a set
of rules.  Unlike the list posted in the cider house, God's rules, if
followed, promise us benefits beyond our imagination.   And yet, many
continue to ignore His "rules" preferring to make up their own as they go
through life.
"Trust in the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own
understanding." Proverbs 3:5 [KJV]
Just as a builder follows a designer's blueprint or a conductor follows a
composer's score, why shouldn't we follow the rules of life given to us by
life's architect for our own blessing?

Author
John Sylva
The Cider House Rules (1999) by John Sylva    Rating: A
What is the true purpose of film?  If you ask me, the true goal of a film is to
affect the viewer to no end, letting them feel the storyline and the
characters, making them feel what they are watching is genuine.  No genre of
film affects me, or succeeds at this, more than one, that being the priceless
coming of age story.  If well executed, a coming of age film will soak you in
its plot, absorb you in its characters, deliver a satisfying, often heart
warming resolution, and leave you hypnotized, dying for more of its magnificent
treasures.  Director Lasse Hallstrom ("What's Eating Gilbert Gape") brings us
"The Cider House Rules", an uplifting, inspirational tale about finding
yourself, finding yourself and discovering to truly live for the first time. 
Based on his novel of the same name, John Irving pens the screenplay of this
warm drama, filling his masterful script with unspeakable emotion, power, and
three-dimensional characters who are put to life by a stellar cast.  All of the
characteristics I named that should be included within a wonderful coming of
age drama are gone above and beyond in "Cider," which stands as one of the, if
not the, best films of 1999.
Set in the war stricken mid 1940's, the beginning scenes of "The Cider House
Rules", which play like a first chapter to the film of sorts, set up the
magical story at a peaceful, isolated St. Clouds, Maine orphanage, where Homer
Wells (Tobey Maguire) has resided his entire life.  He was born in that
orphanage, left to be up for adoption, but through his childhood years, he
never found a permanent family other than the family he had at the busy, large,
cozy building where he had grown up in.  The only mother or father figure Homer
ever has had is the caring, gentle Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine) who has
worked as a doctor in the orphanage for decades.  As he has grown, Dr. Larch
teaches Homer the basics of being a doctor, and gives him the honor of
delivering a number of babies, and being his assistant.  In the film's opening
minutes, we get to know a number of children who await their adoption, and we
are allowed to feel the close bond that they have with Homer, and in turn a
close bond with the viewer, as they look up to him as a father figure, for he's
been with them their entire lives, and win the audience's hearts with their
attractive personalities and wonderful dialogue. 
In the film's second "chapter," soldier Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd) and Candy
Kendall (Charlize Theron), a high class couple, arrive at the orphanage to have
an abortion performed, but after this task is finished, the welcoming couple
instantly befriend Homer, taking him with them back to their hometown.  Thus
begins a new chapter in Homer's life, leaving the one place he could call home
to see the world for the first time.  From here, Homer looks for his place in
life, something different than the life that he left, which was somewhat
restricted.  Eventually, after Wally is called to duty for the War, a romance
is sparked between Candy and Homer, resulting in Homer's first true love.  As
the relationship between Candy and Homer strengthens, Homer becomes a pro apple
picker with number of African American workers who don't accept the first timer
at first, but end up becoming close to him.
The character of Homer Wells is an amusing, curious one, much like the
characters were in last year's coming of age drama "Pleasantville."  Like the
characters in the underrated â98 flick, Homer is a stranger to the world. 
He's never seen a lobster, never seen the ocean.  "Cider" takes Homer on an
extraordinary journey about getting a taste of life for the first time, and
becoming a man.
At the ripe age of 24, Tobey Maguire is undoubtedly the most natural male actor
under the age of thirty, rehearsing his characters effortlessly.  Robbed of any
recognition for his role in last year's splendid "Pleasantville," Maguire
shines in "The Cider House Rules," letting you relate and feel for his
character who grows mentally throughout the powerful course of the film. 
Michael Caine gives a strong, Oscar worthy performance as his sickly character,
rehearsing his lines boldly and realistically.  The standout performance is
from Charlize Theron, who has that old fashioned movie star look and feel about
her, giving her strongest, most memorable and likable turn as an actress yet.
"The Cider House Rules" is beautifully shot, capturing the true beauty of fine
Massachusetts landscapes. (It was filmed in Massachusetts, but set in Maine.) 
Set against some of the most memorable, hauntingly beautiful settings in a film
this year, "The Cider House Rules" is an uplifting film that couldn't have been
better.  The musical score helps to give "Cider" an old fashioned,
inspirational feel to it that leaves a smile  spread across your face once the
credits start rolling.  Within its 131 minute running time, the film tells the
story of finding your place in life, finding close friendships from those who
you would least expect, bonding with a different race, doing the right thing,
and eventually letting go of things you've experienced.  But over all of its
high qualities, perhaps the element I admire most about "The Cider House Rules"
is the fact that it portrays characters as wonderful people, although they make
some bad choices along the way.  "Cider" will open your mind to letting
individuals into your life, even if they have done a bad thing or two, as the
film shows that good people do mess up, but if given a chance, they can shine
just as much as anyone else in the world could.  Rarely does a film pack so
much into it that it comes off as an awesomely overwhelming experience.  "The
Cider House Rules" blends comedy, drama, and romance into a rather short
running time for its kind, becoming one of the most admirable, memorable films
of 1999.
The Bottom Line: Corny I know, but this "Cider" really does, "rule."

Author
Jamey Hughton
In anticipation of the John Irving adaptation `The Cider House Rules', I
imagine audiences were more skeptical than optimistic. Although Irving's
novels have been revised to big-screen format in such gems as `The World
According to Garp', the most recent example was the sentimental 1998
drama `Simon Birch' - a film that Irving reportedly detested to such a
degree that he wanted his name removed from the finished product. In
addition, the production of `The Cider House Rules' represents a 13-year
battle for theatrical redemption. But surely don't scoff and dismiss it
as another boring sentimental weeper, because `Cider House' actually
offers a touching human story with a finely textured dramatic impact. To
pass it up would not be a substantial mistake, but the experience is
light, moving and ultimately worth your while.
The story opens during the mid-1940's at an orphanage in St. Clouds,
Maine, where Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire) has resided for his entire
life. Homer was denied admittance into the army because of a heart
defect, and so he has stayed to help the kindly old head physician Dr.
Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine) conduct deliveries and illegal abortions.
When young couple Candy Kendall (Charlize Theron) and Air Force pilot
Lt. Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd) arrive at St. Clouds with a request
for the latter, Homer spots an opportunity to depart and begin a life of
his own. Once out in the world, he is given his first view of the
rippling waves of the ocean and is graciously offered a job in an apple
orchard owned by Wally and his mother. Here, living in the Cider House
with Mr. Rose (Delroy Lindo) and his employees, Homer finds a
comfortable niche away from the orphanage. And when Lt. Worthington is
called into battle, a romantic subplot develops between Homer and Candy,
who (as it turns out) are hopelessly in love with each other.
Quite simply, `The Cider House Rules' is a movie of subplots. Another
particularly shocking one, involving Mr. Rose and his young daughter
(Erykah Badu), also culminates as the film reaches the meat of the story
during its second half. I suspect that, without these involving examples
of threading the central coming-of-age story together, the film could
have toppled altogether like a clumsy house of cards. The process of
evaluating Irving's novel to the fullest and discovering the morals and
values of Homer's journey is a somewhat overlong (and occasionally
aimless) exercise for director Lasse Hallstrom and company. Ultimately
though, the film peaks during the climactic moments in dramatic
satisfaction without even beginning to get excessive, and the rough
patches earlier are overcome by a string of marvelous performances from
a top-notch ensemble cast.
Maguire (`Pleasantville') is totally believable as the chief protagonist
in `The Cider House Rules', and his earlier scenes with Caine (shining
brightly in an Oscar-nominated performance) are among the most effective
in the film. Theron (the rising star of `Mighty Joe Young' and `The
Astronaut's Wife') is superbly convincing as the character of Candy, who
deals with grueling issues that will be easily related to. The remainder
of the cast (including the always forceful Delroy Lindo) deliver uniform
performances of greatness. Backed by a beautifully flowing musical score
by Rachel Portman and gorgeous cinematography courtesy of Oliver
Stapleton, `The Cider House Rules' moves melodiously until Homer's
journey has come to a close, offering several Kodak moments of poignancy
and good-natured humor along the journey.
Looking back on the film, I'm finding it difficult to properly interpret
some of the underlying messages that Hallstrom was attempting to
identify. At times, `The Cider House Rules' becomes a victim of its own
leisurely agenda - in hindsight, the cream filling is more tasteless
than it seemed as I was exiting the theater. But `Cider House' still
manages to win you over with its sublimely moving story, even if the
emotional depth you were hoping for never fully arises. John Irving
should be pleased with this finished product, and for that matter, so
should you. `The Cider House Rules' induces a rewarding smile as the
curtain closes, and that seems sufficient enough.
Your Comments Appreciated! movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Yes, John Irving has his meandering plots and quirky twists - even his 
eccentric names - but he is no Charles Dickens.
There are a lot of Dickensian allusions in THE CIDER HOUSE RULES.  Dr. 
Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine) and his protégé Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire) 
read DAVID COPPERFIELD aloud at bedtime, to their charges in the orphanage.  
Homer also reads SKETCHES BY BOZ.  Of course there's supposed to be a 
parallel between Wells and Copperfield, the rising to manhood the stuff of 
epic and expansive story.
Somehow THE CIDER HOUSE RULES is not as wide as it tries to be.
The time, early 1940's, the war going on.  Larch is a doctor who runs a 
castle-like facility in the wilds of Maine.  It's an orphanage, maternity 
hospital, and abortion clinic under one roof.  Larch is the only doctor, 
though he has two nurses Edna (Kathy Baker) and Angela (Jane Alexander), and 
his orphan-turned-assistant Homer.  In a series of expository scenes, we 
watch women giving birth and leaving their babies, women choosing to 
terminate their pregnancies, and couples studying the young populace of St. 
Cloud's in hopes of taking home the child of their dreams.  Actually, 
director Lasse Hallstrom and novelist/screenwriter John Irving have put 
together some comfortable and endearing scenes within the walls of the old 
place.  The children sleep in attic dormers, the single beds stretching down 
the great room, and every night they listen to stories (the girls to Nurse 
Angela, the boys to Larch or Homer) and wonderfully worded prayers.  Upon 
lights out, Dr. Larch's ritual is the farewell, "Good night you princes of 
Maine, you kings of New England."  Weekly they view the movie KING KONG, the 
projector breaking down predictably.  Between the hard labors and failed 
adoptions, life is good.
Up the dirt road one day drive Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd) and pregnant 
girlfriend Candy Kendall (Charlize Theron), their mission to seek an 
abortion.  Wally is in the Army Air Corps, and answers Homer's questions as 
Candy recovers from the procedure.  The glimpses Homer catches of the 
outside world cause him to decide, quite on the spur of the moment, to leave 
the orphanage.  It doesn't seem to matter where he goes; Homer just wants to 
widen his vista.  Wally and Candy take him to Wally's mother's orchard, 
where Homer joins a crew of black migrant workers who sleep in the cider 
house and pick the Worthingtons' apples.  For a while Homer receives letters 
from St. Cloud's, beckoning him gently back.  But Homer stays, and after 
Wally is called to active duty, Homer proceeds to fall in love with Candy.  
When it's not apple season, Homer sleeps by himself in the cider house bunks 
- or pulls one beside his to accommodate Candy - and he also works for 
Candy's father, harvesting lobsters.  Between his shifts, Homer and Candy 
neck in the woods or in Paul's sedan parked in the lot of the drive-in 
theater, which is closed because of wartime blackouts.  Life is good.
A small caution: what follows is a spoiler, not of the climax but of a 
rising event that leads to the climax.
The problems occur at this point.  One of them concerns the pregnancy of 
Rose Rose (Erykah Badu), the victim of an incestuous union with her father, 
played by Delroy Lindo.  Mr. Rose is the crew boss of the migrants, and 
although usually very polite and dignified, he takes vehement exception to 
Homer's interest in assisting Rose.  That is, until Homer reveals his 
medical experience, including his ability to perform abortions.
Irving infuses his story with this controversial subject, having Wilbur 
Larch preach the evils of back-alley abortions (one victim of a botched 
abortion turns up at St. Cloud's only to die afterwards, of "ignorance," 
according to the doctor).  He also derides Homer for his objections to 
abortion, his argument being that as long as women will have them done 
illegally, they'd better have them done safely.  My question, why doesn't 
Irving at least objectify the topic by showing both sides?  Why don't we see 
women sobbing with guilt or breaking up with their angry boyfriends, or even 
a protestor or detective confronting the state-paid abortionist?  What the 
filmmaker is happy with is a product that smacks of pro-choice bias.  What's 
worse is the predictable outcome of Homer's caving in to the old 
rationalization that abortion is all right in cases of incest.
Will Paul return from the war?  Will Homer return to St. Cloud's, to his 
father-figure Dr. Larch and all of his adopted brothers and sisters?  These 
questions I will not spoil.
Another question: is the business surrounding the title weighty enough?  The 
short story writer Raymond Carver used to create his stories without titles. 
  Then he would listen very hard to what the story was telling him, and 
select some small phrase that would resonate with meaning.  What Irving has 
here is a cool-sounding name, but not enough earned importance behind it.  
Like much of the film, there's a false profoundness.
The film is beautifully photographed.  Maine looks stunning in the fall, and 
it seems most of the filming was in this season or in winter.  The long 
shots of lakes and wooded valleys imbue the picture with a solid and 
timeless setting.  And the many antique pieces of medical equipment are 
terrific to look at.  Especially intriguing are the newborn cradles, types 
of canvas slings, and a breathing apparatus Larch has made for a sick boy.  
We are further treated to vintage apple cider presses and other old routines 
involved in apple-picking and lobster-fishing.
Michael Caine, an Academy Award nominee for Best Supporting Actor for this 
film, does a nice job as Larch.  His style is quite natural and well-timed;  
his American accent is full of r's,  though I did pick up his Cockney accent 
on a few words.  Why didn't Hallstrom have him - or any of the other 
characters, for that matter - do a pronounced New England twang?
Tobey Maguire is the real male lead, and his performance is subtly powerful. 
  As he believes he has a heart defect, Homer tries to remain composed at 
all times, never getting too raucous.  Maguire plays cool most of the time, 
and at high points expresses his emotions with quiet facial strain.  Quite 
effective.  He is most life-like when he turns to sarcasm with Candy, as 
their illicit relationship approaches a turning point.  He is least 
life-like when the script causes him to go against the philosophy he thought 
he would embrace for life.
Charlize Theron is believable as Candy.  She is sweetly concerned with Rose 
Rose, giving her clothes and, later, counseling about her pregnancy.  Her 
boyfriend, played by Paul Rudd, gets too little screen time, but also 
delivers a likable, well-sketched character.
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES has taken its place as one of the five nominees for 
Best Picture of 1999.  Why shouldn't it win?  Not because the Academy might 
have a backroom political agenda or whim in giving it the nod for nominee, 
but because the film does not have a feeling of completeness, the feeling of 
clear direction and tight arrival that a much better-than-average film must 
have to make the cut of the final five.  The events we watch feel desultory, 
half-baked, placed in front of some very lovely backdrops and moving music.  
But this is not Dickens, and neither is it Academy Award material.


Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on 24 March, 2000;=20
certificate 12; 129 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Lasse Hallstr=F6m; produced by Richard N. Gladstein.
Written by John Irving; based upon his own novel.
Photographed by Oliver Stapleton; edited by Lisa Zeno Churgin.
"The Cider House Rules", rich in texture and Dickensian in themes, is such a=
=20
skilful dance of a film that it hops over cinema's trickiest hurdles and we=20
hardly even notice. It makes sentimentality enjoyable, adapts a novel withou=
t=20
condensing it into a patronising Hollywood formula and avoids silly=20
speechmaking when commenting on the complex issue of abortion.
The source material is a 1985 best seller by John Irving, which ran eight=20
hundred pages and covered forty years in the life of an orphan named Homer=20
Wells. In adapting his book to the screen, Irving wrote a multitude of scrip=
t=20
drafts and took them to several directors; it's taken so long he's written a=
=20
book on the project itself. Miraculous, then, that the movie has been=20
realised at all, let alone so well.
It is set in the 1940s, and Homer (Tobey Maguire) has grown up in a Maine=20
orphanage, St. Cloud's. He was adopted twice as a baby, sent back once=20
because he didn't cry enough, and taken back on the other occasion because=20
one set of parents beat him. His father figure is the dedicated Dr. Larch=20
(Michael Caine), who is addicted to ether, and performs abortions at a time=20
when they are illegal, but is a good man nonetheless -- in taking Homer unde=
r=20
his wing, and making sure he is "of use", he has taught the boy enough about=
=20
medicine to qualify him as a skilled surgeon.
Homer is not convinced he wants to be a doctor, though, and has reservations=
=20
about the moral validity of abortion. He would like to see the outside world=
,=20
and gets his chance when the cute young couple of Wally (Paul Rudd) and Cand=
y=20
(Charlize Theron) come to St. Cloud's to get rid of an unwanted pregnancy.=20
Wally's family has an orchard near the ocean, and Homer is offered a job=20
there.
Wally gets called up to serve in World War Two, but since Homer has a heart=20
condition, he remains at his new home, picking apples. He and Candy begin a=20
love affair, which is significant because it's a taste of normal life, and=20
once he's sampled the joys of the real world, Homer must face up to its=20
grimmer realities too. When a seemingly upright orchard worker impregnates=20
his teenage daughter, Homer feels compelled to intervene, as the question of=
=20
abortion suddenly seems much less clear-cut. And so does his decision to=20
leave St. Cloud's -- perhaps Larch was right all along, and Homer is his=20
natural successor.
I am simplifying the story to a damaging degree; it does make good sense,=20
even though Irving had to compress the events of the novel into a two-year=20
period. The film is tighter and more focused for it; the abortion thread is=20
woven in with great skill, whereas in the book it seemed a tad tacked-on. An=
d=20
the messages are clearer -- rules may be for the good of humanity, but part=20
of being truly human is knowing when to break them; and people belong where=20
they can do the most good.
Both works feature mature character depictions, like that of the incestuous=20
father, Mr. Rose (Delroy Lindo). He doesn't realise he's done anything=20
damaging, and that's the kind of self-delusion which similar people go=20
through in real life. Homer, the hero of the piece, doesn't do any=20
grandstanding; Tobey Maguire's performance is engaging because of boyish=20
innocence and quiet dignity. The character was raised in an orphanage,=20
remember, and has learnt to reveal in his eyes alone what he feels about his=
=20
wonderful and terrible discoveries.
The movie is more obviously sincere than the novel, which, although generall=
y=20
absorbing, had moments of messy wording that left me unsure of their tone.=20
The director, Lasse Hallstr=F6m, and his cinematographer, Oliver Stapleton,=20
have crafted an intimate New England look reminiscent of the third act in=20
"The Shawshank Redemption", full of naturally beautiful browns and greens. W=
e=20
can't help but be moved by all the cute little orphans, either, and it's nic=
e=20
to see Jane Alexander return to the screen, in the role of one of Larch's=20
nurses.
This is not quite a perfect movie. It doesn't emphasise any particular plot=20
point as being the driving force behind the narrative, the romance is=20
underdeveloped and Homer's final farewell to is too brief. But generally it=20
is an effective tearjerker, with old-fashioned pacing, sweet violin music an=
d=20
an admirable social conscience. Please, sir... I want some more.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which=20
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films
 Director: Lasse Hallstrom
 Writer:   John Irving
 Cast: Tobey Maguire, Charlize Theron, Michael Caine,
Delroy Lindo, Paul Rudd, Erykah Badu, Kieran Culkin, Heavy
D, Kathy Baker, Kate Nelligan, Jane Alexander
   Given the concern of the Catholic church to movies it
believes defamatory such as "Stigmata" and "Dogma," the big
surprise is that no pickets have been thrown outside
screenings of "The Cider House Rules." The book by John
Irving, wonderfully adapted to the screen by the author
himself under the direction of Swedish helmer Lasse
Hallstrom, makes a clear statement in favor of a woman's
right to choose.  The principal performer, who has been
coached by an experienced physician in the art of delivering
babies, refuses on moral grounds to join his mentor in
aborting fetuses of women who ask him to do so.  Yet he
sees the light later on and freely helps a woman who is the
victim of incest and who is desperate to end her
two-months'-old pregnancy.
   The film is only peripherally about abortion and is in no
way designed as a clever masquerade for pro-choice
propaganda.  John Irving's screenplay--which condenses his
massive book's study of 15 years in the life of a man into just
one and one-half--is a coming of age drama in the best sense
of the term.  Devoid of sticky sentimentality and utilizing
cutesy images sparingly, this 131-minute film features
ensemble work of high order particularly from Michael Caine
(once accused of a willingness to make just about any movie
for money) and from Tobey Maguire as a lad who needs to
break out of an insular, though happy, environment to find out
who he really is.  Box office can hardly be damaged by the
presence of the dazzling Charlize Theron, perhaps the most
attractive young actress in the business, who shows this time
that being an astronaut's wife earlier this year was simply a
redeemable error.
   Opening in St. Clouds, Maine, during the mid-1940s shortly
after America's entry into war, the story focuses on an
orphanage run by the good-hearted Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael
Caine), who not only delivers babies from women who do not
want them but takes the infants into his friendly institution
until they can become adopted.  Though this is no Dickensian
establishment--Dr. Larch shows movies, reads to the kids at
bedtime, and wishes good night in an authentic New England
accent to "you princes of Maine, you kings of New
England--the tots are nonetheless eager to be adopted.  They
paste on their most adorable expressions when would-be
parents come to look them over.  The doctor's favorite,
Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire), is twice adopted and twice
returned, but Larch takes him under his wing and, as the boy
matures, he is taught how to deliver babies though the lad
has never been even to high school.  
   While Homer is understandably the happiest of the
orphanage's inmates, he has not been out of Maine nor
has he seen the ocean. Impulsively he quits the
establishment and hitches a ride with a soldier, Wally
Worthington (Paul Rudd), and his girl friend Candy Kendall
(Charlize Theron), and takes a job picking apples at Candy's
mother's place where he befriends a group of migrant
workers under the supervision of Mr. Rose (Delroy Lindo). 
Two dramatic occurrence are to change Homer's life: his
intensifying relationship with Candy after Wally departs for
service in Burma; and his dilemma when a victim of incest
asks him to perform an abortion.  Not until Homer confronts
the prospective father--who, like Ray Winsome's character in
Tim Roth's searing "The War Zone" becomes incensed with
the accusation--does director Hallstrom kick in with the story's
melodramatic flourishes.
   Homer learns that he is not the only person faced with
making big decisions with his life.  Candy, who has fallen in
love with him, must decide what she will do when her boy
friend comes home from the war.  Rose (Erykah Badu), who
is the victim of incest, must overcome her reluctance to make
a decision about her pregnancy.  Her dad must face up to his
responsibility and determine a course of action for himself. 
Ultimately, Homer has seen enough of life to make a
decision about his own future.
   Curiously enough, the film--which is a winning one in all
respects--does not become more involving once the conflicts
go into high gear.  Its most pleasurable aspects for the
viewer are taking in the gorgeous autumnal atmosphere of
Maine (actually filmed in Massachusetts), gazing at the
exceptional beauty of Charlize Theron, and observing the
interplay between Dr. Larch, a childless father to a band of
lovely youngsters, and his protege, the impressionable and
wholesome Homer.  Coincidentally, Tobey Maguire, in a lead
role in Ang Lee's "Ride with the Devil," connects with an
actress who is primarily a singer (Jewel) while in "Cider
House Rules" he plays adviser to still another performer who
is known principally as a vocalist (Erykah Badu).  The title
comes from a list of regulations posted in the apple orchard,
rules that are not made up by the migrants who must follow
them and who therefore do not feel compelled to obey them.
Presumably, this serves as metaphor for Homer's situation:
as a disciple of Dr. Larch, he must go by the rules which an
outside force imposes on him.  Not until he finds his own way
can Homer truly comply with more authentic directives--which
must come from his own head.  John Irving's book about the
need for family and purpose fits perfectly on the screen.
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 131 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES *** 1/3. Directed by Lasse Hallstrom. Written 
by John Irving, based on his novel. Photography, Oliver Stapleton. 
Editing, Lisa  Zeno Churgin. Production design, David Gropman. Music, 
Rachel Portman. Produced by Richard N. Gladstein. Cast: Tobey Maguire 
(Homer Wells), Michael Caine (Dr. Wilbur Larch), Charlize Theron 
(Candy Kendall), Delroy Lindo (Rose), Paul Rudd (Wally Worthington), 
Jane Alexander (Nurse Edna), Kathy Baker (Nurse Angela), Kieran 
Culkin (Buster), Kate Nelligan (Olive Worthington), Erykah Badu (Rose 
Rose), Heavy D (Peaches) et al. A Miramax release. 125 minutes. PG-13
John Irving's novels are fat, have surprises and asides, can meander 
in interesting ways, and add fantasy to realism. Three have been made 
into films  : "The World According to Garp," (script by Steve 
Tesich);  "The Hotel New Hampshire," (script by Tony Richardson); and 
"Simon Burch" (adapted very freely from "A Prayer for Owen Meany" 
with a script by that film's director Mark Steven Johnson)
Irving has not been happy with the films, as he details in his "My 
Movie Business: A Memoir."  He took matters into his own hands by 
doing the scenario of "The Cider House Rules," a project for 13 
years. His script is only a smallish part of the novel, which has 
been pruned, cut, simplified and made into a most appealing, original 
movie. You have to see it in order to understand how its title-- a 
bit precious and esoteric perhaps-- works out. Were Irving starting 
from scratch, the film might have been simply called "Homer Wells."
It takes you swiftly from the 1920s (when Homer was born) to 1943-45 
the years of its major "action," although some hurried reviews make 
it begin in the 1930s. Michael Caine plays Wilbur Larch,  who 
apparently is not just the M.D. but the loving and beloved ruler of 
the St.Cloud's orphanage in Maine.
What once was probably a millionaire's rambling mansion at the end of 
an unpaved road, has been housing a number of parentless (or 
unwanted) children for years. There are not so many of them so that 
the building is cracking at the seams, yet for reasons not stated but 
easy to infer
( pedagogical, psychological, practical-- such as heating) the kids 
are concentrated in a large dormitory. It reminds one of "Zero for 
Conduct" or "Au Revoir les Enfants" more as a contrast than a 
similarity since the place is a loving, caring one. None of those 
aspects is spelled out in the classically lean script, but it does 
not have to be.
The oldest child --shown as a young man throughout most of the film 
--is a boy who was twice adopted and twice returned--for no valid 
reasons. He has been "baptized" Homer Wells by Dr. Larch. The 
surrogate father and son bond between Homer and Wilbur is a thing of 
beauty, not deja vu movie-formulaic, not gloppily sentimental, not 
artificially colorful. It is always touching and attention-holding.
As the senior orphan, quietly and efficiently, Homer has become the 
doctor's assistant to the point of having Larch say "I've taught him 
all I know." Like Larch, the young man loves the children and, in a 
sense, has become their teen-age father. The tiny staff (at least 
what we see of it) of the establishment is simply the doctor, Homer 
and two un-fussy, un-glamorous, dedicated nurses. Ther doctor and one 
of the women have a relationship.  so fleetingly and delicately shown 
that it warms you up.)
Homer can do anything the doctor does, except that he refuses to 
participate in abortions. These  are illegal. Larch is in some demand 
--by word of mouth, we suppose. He justifies performing performs them 
as an alternative to the women getting butchered up by back-street 
abortionists. Is it divine coincidence? The role that brought Michael 
Caine to prominence was that of Alfie in the eponymous story of an 
amoral  Cockney seducer who even arranges an abortion.
All this takes place in the first part of the movie. Toby Maguire and 
Michael Caine are superb  in  warmth, restraint,  as distinctive, not 
hammed up characters. Caine's long list of roles in dramas, action 
movies, comedies, psychological films, science-fiction, etc. etc. has 
included spies, con-men, professors, military heroes, spies, cops, 
gangsters, and everything else imaginable. His acting here may well 
be the jewel in his crown. His New England accent is excellent -- but 
just in case some people get picky, when answering a boy's questions 
about his past the doctor adds "before that I was an immigrant" 
"What's an immigrant?" says the child. "Someone who does not  live in 
Maine."
Maguire has an un-sonorous -even a tad raucous--voice, gives an 
almost minimalist performance, yet paradoxically he covers a wide 
emotional range  The children are terrific. They are not miserable; 
they are not Dickensian victims (in a clever touch they are read 
"David Copperfield" in installments); they are surrounded by 
affection. Yet they would all love to be adopted, to have a "real" 
family. A touching sequence where children try  to hook might-be 
parents with broad smiles is a gem.
America is in World War II. In a Ford convertible, Wally,  a young, 
volunteer lieutenant who flies the lethal Burma Run, drives up with 
his girl Candy. She's two-months pregnant. All goes well. Following 
the operation, Homer hitches a ride with the couple. He wants to 
experience the outside world. He's never seen the sea (in Maine!), a 
lobster, or a movie other than a beat-up print of "King Kong" that is 
projected to the children over and over. Or any girl of Candy's age 
and looks.
Wally gets him a job picking apples (hence the cider) on his mother's 
farm, not too far away, along with a group of black itinerant workers 
who show up at every season. And as his new friend Wally returns to 
the war in Asia, Homer finds in Candy (the daughter of a nearby 
lobster fisherman), a friendly guide. She teaches him how to drive; 
she shows him a drive-in theater; he sees his second movie 
("Wuthering Heights") which rather puzzles him: "It's no King Kong!")
The second part concentrates on Homer away from St. Cloud's, yet it 
does cut back to the orphanage, its happenings, its sorrows, Dr. 
Larch's strange, often funny maneuvers to fool the Board of Trustees 
and keep a kind of status quo. And meanwhile, back on the apple farm 
and the shores of the Atlantic things happen, things that will go 
even beyond a kind of coming-of-age for Homer. The first section was 
beautifully unrushed. The second picks up in speed but still without 
haste. It has some symmetries with the earlier sections, some 
predictable but fascinating nonetheless. The production and 
photography are of a high order that spreads out the Americana side 
of the story without making it "picturesque."
The choice of  Lasse Hallstrom as the director was  inspired. He is 
the Swede who made the near-classic  "My Life as a Dog" (Sweden, 
1985) and in the USA,  "Once Around"" What's Eating Gilbert Grape" 
and "Something to Talk About." His work,  character-driven, shows 
exceptional empathy for children and young people.
Even more than usual I am avoiding clueing in the readers to plot 
developments. Just see the movie. The late Francois Truffaut would 
have loved it. It matches almost uncannily his views of love, 
children, grown-ups who understand them, and adults doing the right 
thing and the wrong thing.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Ross Anthony
"Goodnight you princes of Maine, you kings of New England."
The Cider House Rules
"Cider House" cuddles itself around you like a sixty year old afghan.
Seemingly a heartwarming yarn of a cynical, yet loving, orphanage caretaker
(Caine) and one orphan that's been adopted twice and returned twice
(Maguire); this crochet comforter eventually becomes more of a patch work
quilt. Caine narrates this much of the tale even before the opening credits
finish. Though the first act blankets the screen with the warm
cinematographic look and against-all-odds optimism of "October Sky," "Cider
House Rules" never quite leaves the ground.
Caine grooms Maguire for his position as caretaker/obstetrician at the St.
Cloud orphanage, but instead, the good-natured, intelligent young Maguire
seizes a sudden opportunity to see the world. This is where the movie
changes its tone. No longer about the Caine/Maguire (promising son leaving
his possessive, but loving father) relationship, "Cider House" becomes a
soap opera platform for a pro-choice/pro-life debate eventually favoring the
former.
An attempted metaphor for society's meaningless out-of-date, out-of-touch
traditions/rituals/morals, "The Rules" serve as a constant pain in the butt
to those "real" (in-touch) people in the film. But, since these rules have
never been demonstrated to mean a darn thing to our endearing main
character, all the fuss about them at the end doesn't mean much to the
viewer. It could have worked, had Irving re-written Maguire's already
lovably indifferent demeanor.
The photography is grand and the acting solid all the way through with
special cudos to Delroy Lindo as the apple picker crew boss. Though each
scene stands strong on its own, the film as a whole falls short, trying hard
to condense just too much of the novel's material into a little over two
hours of cinema time. New threads start too far from where the old ones
finish, leaving "Cider House" with more patches than a quilt despite its
sincerely fine beginning.
Though two other John Irving books have been made into films ("World
According to Garp" and "Hotel New Hampshire"), the "Cider House" screenplay
is the first to have been penned by him as well.
The Cider House Rules. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Tobey Maguire, Michael Caine, Charlize Theron, Delory Lindo and
Erykah Badu.
Directed by Lasse Hallstrom.
Screenplay by John Irving (Based upon his novel).
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CIDER HOUSE RULES, THE (director: Lasse Hallström; screenwriter: John
Irving, based on his novel; cinematography: Oliver Stapleton; cast:
Tobey Maguire (Homer Wells), Michael Caine (Dr. Wilbur Larch), Charlize
Theron (Candy Kendall), Delroy Lindo (Mr. Rose), Paul Rudd (Wally
Worthington), Jane Alexander (Nurse Edna), Kathy Baker (Nurse Angela),
Kieran Culkin (Buster), Kate Nelligan (Olive Worthington), Erykah Badu
(Rose Rose), Heavy D (Peaches), Spencer Diamond (Curly), K. Todd Freeman
(Muddy), Erik Sullivan (Fuzzy), 1999)
An old-fashioned coming-of-age story with a big heart; "The Cider House
Rules" is a slow-moving tale that builds on its characterizations and
never waivers in the warmness of its story, no matter, even if somehow
events turn sour. It is the kind of humanistic story Hollywood can do
very well, when it puts its mind to it, and in this production has done
itself proud, making it the kind of film Oscar is partial to. The one
fly in the ointment, is its pro-choice emphasis, probably too
controversial for Hollywood to want to deal with, even if the director
has gone out of his way to be evenhanded in presenting both sides of the
issue in the film and so far no outcries from church groups against the
film have materialized.
John Irving, whose meandering novel this film is based on, after not
being pleased with other films based on his novels ("The World According
to Garp,"  "The Hotel New Hampshire," and "Simon Birch" ), stayed with
the film as screenwriter and made sure it accurately reflected what his
book was like. The film took him 13 years in trying to get the project
off the ground; the result is a pleasingly sensitive narrative, avoiding
anything too sugary. It is one in which Caine gives a masterful
performance; Maguire, in a minimalist performance, is convincing as the
innocent young man searching for answers to life; and Lindo, as a black
migrant worker, Mr. Rose, with both a good and bad side to him, gives
off a strong and very charismatic presence, as the head of the work
crew. Mr. Irving makes a cameo as the train stationmaster. In his book,
"My Movie Business," Irving explains all the hardships he went through
in getting this movie produced, which included having his first choice
of director Philip Boros die, depart amicably from his second choice
Wayne Wang, and then cashiered Michael Winterbottom not-so-amicably
before hiring Hallstrom.
It is a story about St. Clouds's orphanage in Maine, out there in the
boondocks, where the unwanted children reside under the loving care of
its director, an obstetrician, Dr. Wilbur Larch (Caine). It is a place
no one goes to unless they want to adopt a child or abort one. The story
begins with the birth of Homer Wells (Toby) in 1922, and it tells of two
failed attempts to have him adopted, resulting in him being returned to
the orphanage. Dr. Larch becomes resigned that Homer will remain in the
orphanage and decides to make him his protege, and teaches him how to
deliver babies and all the medical knowledge he came to acquire. The
only thing Homer won't do, is abortions.
The main theme of the film is that in your life it's most important "to
be of use." It is also about rules and how they are applied. The rules
that make the most sense, are the one's that are made by the party
concerned, not by some outsider. Dr. Larch's pro-choice stand is based
on his recognition that people should decide for themselves what they
want and that if medical people wouldn't do abortions, those who need
abortions would get them in other unsafe places. Dr. Larch has lost his
idealism and is very flexible about what he believes, and what he
believes most is that he should be of help in any way he can, especially
to the children under his care and the couples and pregnant women who
visit the orphanage. Out of necessity, he has become very practical and
cunning in getting along with a world, that for the most part, he
considers, to be a very selfish and cold place. On the contrary, Homer
has led an insulated life, never having left Maine; and, therefore, his
views are very rigid and naive about most things and, especially, about
abortion, which he doesn't believe in except in a case of rape or
incest. With him it is not necessarily a religious reason, as it is one
that he has experienced himself, being an abandoned child. He believes
people must learn to be responsible and that couples should just behave
morally, and thereby everything will be fine.
The story is set mainly in the years between 1943 and 1945, during WW11.
The first part of the film is about the kids in the orphanage and the
great love they receive there from Dr. Larch, who reads them stories and
joyfully bids his children "Good night, you princes of Maine--you kings
of New England!" There is a loving goodnight from him, each and every
evening, with the same refrain. The benevolent humanitarian, the
abortionist, whose only apparent character defect, other than his
maverick interpretation on the rules, is getting high on ether. He is
the one who is almost saintly in caring for the unwanted children, as
supposedly many who are pro-life supporters, are not there for these
kids with monetary or parental support, but choose to ignore the problem
from their more secure quarters in life, even though they are quite
vocal in their pro-life stand. The good doctor would be happy delivering
babies and not doing abortions, if he thought that all the babies he
delivered would be adopted. The only question he couldn't answer,
probably because it is a question that can't be answered, is when Homer
says, "What if I were aborted? That would mean I wouldn't have had a
chance to live."
One of the most powerful scenes, is when a prospective couple visit the
center and all the children who were just tossing snowballs at one
another, quickly switch gears, putting on big smiles, as they vie for
the couple's attention, hoping they will be the one chosen to go home
with them. It reminded me of going to an animal shelter to adopt a dog
and watching how they also make friendly gestures at their prospective
owners. The point made, is that the children still want to go home to a
family, despite this orphanage being such a kindly run place.
The second part of the film involves the good-hearted, quiet and sincere
Homer, seeing life from a point of view away from the orphanage. He
befriends an army pilot (Rudd) on leave and his attractive girlfriend,
Candy (Theron ), whom he takes to the orphanage for an abortion. Homer
gets a ride with them away from the orphanage, leaving it to see the
world and an ocean he has never seen, and decides to take a job as an
apple-picker that the pilot offers him, which is on his mother's
orchard. He is the only white among the black migrant workers. This is
no problem to Homer, he is an outsider wherever he would be, and fits in
nicely with the workers, living with them and sharing in their worldly
experiences.
The film gets its name from a list of rules posted on the cider house
wall where the migrant's live, which have never been read by them
because they are illiterate. When they ask Homer to read them the rules,
they tell him the rules were made by those who don't live in the house
and that is why they don't apply to them. The only rules they can
follow, are made by the ones who live in the house. This is, of course,
analogous to Dr. Larch' thinking about rules, that rules have to make
sense for those that are following them.
Swedish Director Lasse Hallström (My Life as a Dog/WHAT'S EATING GILBERT
GRAPE?) has made an articulate film, one that goes over territory such
as abortion, incest, murder, and forging records, and asks the viewer to
use their intelligence in seeing what is right or wrong. It is, at all
times, a visually beautiful film. The children are heart-stoppers, and
Caine is simply brilliant in drawing them out. I loved his response to
one of the orphans who asked him, where he's from, and he responds, "I'm
an immigrant." The child says, "Where's that?" and he says, "Somewhere
not in Maine." There is not one flawed scene in the story, in a story
that has a few subplots that run parallel to its main motif. But the
film remains mostly a story about those trying to live a just life,
trying to find their destiny in a troubled world, where answers are not
always so rigidly determined, but take a certain wisdom to solve them, a
wisdom that is gained through experience and following one's heart.
Homer learns that it never hurts to love another and that it is
necessary to find a place to live where you can call home. Whether or
not one's fate is sealed at birth, might or might not be so, but chance
certainly interferes with one's life-long designs, and if Homer felt
what love from a woman was like, to have-and-lose such love in his
worldly venture, he also learned how important the love the doctor had
for him was, who acted as a surrogate father towards him and the
children; and, how the doctor loved him dearly, doing all that he could
for him, and that Homer was now in a position of doing the same thing
for others. Homer's insightful look at the world, is also the viewer's
way of seeing things the way a child would, who hungers so much for
honest affection and is striving to find his place in the world.
The filmmaker has told a positive story, in a straight narrative style.
The only failing in the film is that, maybe, the director walked too
fine a line in regards to the subplot in the film, about the abortion
issue, not making his motives absolutely clear, when it seems obvious
where the film's heart lies, anyway. But, maybe the filmmaker wasn't
clear enough in where the film's leanings were and answered it like a
liberal Republican engaged in a presidential primary might be forced to
answer the question, in order not to scare the right- wing away from
him.
As for me, this is a beautiful and delicate film, that all but spells
out its leanings for pro-choice being a practical answer to the
controversial problem. Yet some movie reviewers, including the esteemed
Roger Ebert, the most widely read critic in America, find that the theme
of the film is muddled. Ebert is not sure what the point of the story is
about, as it seems to arrive at no clear point of view, for his tastes.
A response like that surprises me, because it is one thing to not like
the film, but I can't see not liking it for that reason, since I found
the direction the film was heading down to be very clear and I had no
trouble with its showing how terrifying an ordeal an abortion could be,
as it also showed how necessary it was not to leave an abortion in the
the hands of someone with a coat-hanger, that it was a medical problem
as much as it was an ethical problem and a decision that only the one
with the pregnancy problem could decide whether it was the right or
wrong thing to do. I couldn't see how the filmmaker could be clearer
about what side of the fence the film was on. That it was not up to us
to judge everyone, whether it is the misdeeds of a Mr. Rose or of a
pregnant woman, we can only try and help someone the best way we can.
The story had a natural rhythm to it, and the relationship between Caine
and Maguire wasn't contrived, but seemed to generate its own energy; it
seemed genuinely affecting. I felt very touched by the film and its
ability to tell such a heartbreaking story in such a sensitive and
intelligent manner, without it being an art house film. It was also no
mystery about what Homer will do on his return to the clinic; he will do
what he thinks is best for the children he loves and for the couples who
visit the orphanage. That is the point of the film, one can only do what
is in their heart and learned through their experiences in life,
everything else is superficial and based on someone else's belief.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David N. Butterworth
        While screen adaptations of John Irving's novels have been
disappointingly uneven, the films have all shared one particular strength:
key casting.  Who can forget John Lithgow as Roberta Muldoon, the
transsexual quarterback of "The World According to Garp," or Nastassja
Kinski as Susie the Bear in "The Hotel New Hampshire"?
        A lot of good casting decisions have gone into the making of "The
Cider House Rules," an adaptation of Irving's poetic 1994 novel about a
restless young man called Homer Wells.
        Among those sound judgments was the decision to have the splendid
Tobey Maguire assume the pivotal role; the decision to cast Michael Caine
as his mentor and father figure, Dr. Wilbur Larch, the ether-addicted head
obstetrician of the St. Cloud's orphanage, Maine; and the decision to offer
Jane Alexander and Kathy Baker supporting roles as his head nurses.
        Then there are the brethren who populate the apple orchard where
Homer Wells finds himself shortly after leaving St. Cloud's, including
Delroy Lindo, OscarŽ-worthy as the foreman of the migrant work detail that
drifts up and down the coast as the seasons take them.  There's Kate
Nelligan as the matriarch of the cider house, and Charlize Theron as Candy,
the lovely, lonely wife of a WWII bomber pilot (Paul Rudd) sent away on a
mission overseas leaving Candy to set lobster traps with Homer Wells, a man
who's never seen the ocean before let alone a lobster.
        Am I forgetting anyone?  Yes.  Kieran Culkin and Paz de la Huerta
as dissolute orphanage residents who make you sit up and take notice every
time they're on the screen.
        But with "The Cider House Rules," the good people decisions don't
end with the cast.  Irving has written his own screenplay in order to get
it right this time (last year's "Simon Birch," loosely based on his "A
Prayer for Owen Meaney," was a big-screen example of Irving handled
sub-standardly); the author appears fleetingly as a stationmaster here.
Rachel Portman, a composer of such sweet and lyrical tenderness, provides a
score that's absolutely right for the project--sweet, lyrical, and tender.
There's impressive New England photography by Oliver Stapleton too.
        Last but by no means least is "My Life as a Dog" director Lasse
Hallström, who shows enormous skill in pulling this collective together and
helping bring Irving's marvelously touching story to life.  For the many
beloved who pass away in "The Cider House Rules," it's an extraordinarily
life-affirming story.  And now, thanks to these talented individuals, it's
an extraordinarily life-affirming film.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Greg King
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES (M).  
(Miramax/Village Roadshow)
Director: Lasse Hallstrom
Stars: Tobey Maguire, Charlize Theron, Michael Caine, Paul Rudd, Delroy 
Lindo, Erykah Badu, Jane Alexander, Kathy Baker, Kieran Culkin,
Heavy D, Kate Nelligan
Running time: 125 minutes.
John Irving's sprawling novels have mainly followed the quest
of a misunderstood youth to find his own place in the world (The World
According To Garp, Simon Birch, etc).  But they have never been easy
to adapt for the screen, with many subplots and characters being
ditched altogether.  The Cider House Rules however marks the first
time that Irving has adapted one of his own novels for the screen.
This brings a reverence to its treatment of the text, the characters
and the themes.  However, Irving's screenplay is still too literary,
and he tends to down play many of the darker elements of the story -
abortion, incest, etc.  The narrative also unfolds at a rather
ponderous pace that eventually diminishes much of its emotional
impact.
This charming coming of age story takes place in Maine during
the early 1940's.  The hero, Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire, from
Pleasantville, etc), has been raised in St Clouds orphanage.  Dr Larch
(Michael Caine, in one of his best performances for years) takes an
almost paternal interest in the welfare of his charges, but he has a
soft spot for Homer, whom he trains as his assistant.  Dr Larch also
performs abortions on demand, even though they are illegal.
But Homer feels that there is more to life than helping Larch
at the orphanage and decides to strike out on his own, hoping to
experience more of the world.  When the beautiful Candy (Charlize
Theron, from The Astronaut's Wife, etc) and her fighter pilot
boyfriend (Paul Rudd, from Clueless, etc) come to the orphanage for an
abortion, Homer leaves with them.  He works in an apple orchard.
There he slowly falls in love with Candy, and is also drawn into the
personal lives of his fellow workers.  During his mini-odyssey, Homer
comes to realise his destiny and find his place in the world.  He
ultimately learns that, unlike his time at the orphanage, life and
love do not always follow a neatly ordered set of rules.  Indeed, some
rules were meant to be broken.
The ensemble cast deliver solid performances.  Maguire
delivers a mature and subtle performance in the central role of Homer,
and one can see his character grow in strength and self confidence as
the film develops.  However, it is Caine who is most impressive.  He
just seems to get better with age, and delivers one of his more well
rounded characterisations as the unhappy but deeply caring Dr Larch.
Swedish director Lasse Hallstom (My Life As A Dog, What's
Eating Gilbert Grape, etc) handles the material with intelligence, but
without any real sense of compassion or warmth.  Hallstrom only came
aboard when original director Phillip Borsos died of leukaemia and
Michael Winterbottom departed, citing creative differences with
Irving.  However, Oliver Stapleton's cinematography is gorgeous, and
visually the film is a joy to watch.  
*** 
greg king
http://www.netau.com.au/gregking

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Cider House Rules (1999) 3 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Tobey
Maguire, Charlize Theron, Michael Caine, Delroy Lindo, Paul Rudd, Kathy
Baker and Jane Alexander. 
 One young man's search for self-discovery is the main focus of "The
Cider House Rules", a literate and moving adaptation of John Irving's
best-selling novel.
 The movie, featuring a screenplay by Irving, tells of the journey of
Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire), an orphan groomed by kindly old doctor
Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine) to be his successor.
 Larch is a warm-hearted but practical physician who helps women in
trouble either by finding homes for their babies after delivering them,
or performing abortions if the women so desire.
 The movie is set in New Hampshire during the years of World War II, so
Larch's activities, though humanitarian, are illegal.
 Homer learns medicine from Larch, and while Homer does not mind
delivering babies, he will not perform abortions.
 Having spent most of his life at St. Cloud's orphanage, Homer decides
to see what it is like in the outside world, after meeting Wally
Worthington (Paul Rudd) and Candy Kendall (Charlize Theron), who has
come to Larch to terminate an unwanted pregnancy.
 Homer leaves with the pair, going to work picking apples on a farm
owned by Worthington's family, while Rudd - who is in the Army Air Corps
- returns to duty flying missions in Asia.
 Homer learns more than he bargained for in the outside world. He
discovers love, betrayal, heartache and dark secrets he never imagined
were possible.
 Maguire gives a finely honed performance as Homer as he combines
worldliness learned through his years of assisting Larch, and naiveté -
his ignorance of the levels to which people can fall.
 It is Maguire's most fully developed characterization to date.
 Caine is magnificent as the pragmatic, yet idealistic Larch. He is a
kindly, caring man who refuses to judge others. His only desire is to
help people, even if he must use illegal means to do so.
 Delroy Lindo adds another notch to his already sterling resume as Mr.
Rose, the leader of the migrant workers who befriends Homer and teaches
him not only about picking apples, but about the outside world.
 Mr. Rose is a man with a terrible, dark secret, yet he still is able to
garner sympathy.
 Theron's Candy is a woman-child who, as she says, hates being alone.
With her lover off to war, she gravitates to Homer. She is not a selfish
woman, but a needy one.
 Offering able support as Larch's longtime nurses are Kathy Baker and
Jane Alexander. Their screen time is minimal, but they complement Larch
with their warmth and compassion toward their charges.
 "The Cider House Rules" is a movie that smoothly combines humor and
tragedy, darkness and light. It is Homer's odyssey about learning - not
only of the outside world - but about who he really is and about
accepting the responsibility of his destiny.
 Most of all, "The Cider House Rules" is a movie with heart.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
James Sanford
         When it was first published in 1985, John Irving's "The Cider
House Rules" aroused a fair amount of controversy because of its
staunchly pro-abortion stance. In adapting his book to the screen,
Irving has softened up its politics a bit and given a slightly
sentimental gloss to his extremely Dickensian tale of orphan Homer Wells
(Tobey Maguire) and his adventures in and outside the St. Cloud's
Orphanage. Even so, "Cider House" the movie is unlikely to win any
endorsements from the pro-life coalition.
 Nor, for that matter, is it certain to enchant fans of the
novel, since Irving has pared his almost 600-page work down to its
essentials, cutting numerous characters and deleting scores of colorful
incidents along the way.
 A couple of years ago, actor Tom Hulce won rave reviews for his
staging of "The Cider House Rules" as an epic two-part play at a Los
Angeles theater, and seeing the film might convince you Hulce knew the
material better than its author. The two-hour cinematic version of
"Cider" comes off as a piece of carefully written, warmly played
exposition leading up to a dramatic payoff that never materializes.
Bathed in an autumnal New England glow and tenderly scored by Rachel
Portman, this is an extremely pretty movie to look at and listen to, but
although Irving's basic plot remains, the richness of his prose hasn't
truly transferred to the screen.
 The picture is directed by Swedish-born Lasse Hallstrom, who,
in the years since his breakthrough feature "My Life As A Dog," has
specialized in chronicling unorthodox and dysfunctional families ("Once
Around," "What's Eating Gilbert Grape?", "Something to Talk About"). In
"Cider," the patriarch of the story is Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine),
who risks his career offering abortions to unhappily pregnant women in
WWII era Maine instead of dispatching them to back-alley butchers.
Homer, his assistant, has more qualms about providing such services,
until he meets first a beautiful orchard worker in the family way named
Candy (Charlize Theron), then the tragic Rose Rose (singer Erykah Badu,
doing impressive work in a difficult role) who carries both an unwanted
baby and a ghastly secret.
 The title refers to a typewritten list of restrictions posted
in the bunkhouse where Homer, Rose and some of the other migrant workers
live. Everyone ignores the decrees, perhaps because as several
characters note, "sometimes you have to break the rules to set things
straight." Picking apples in and of itself certainly calls to mind the
Garden of Eden, and that's scarcely the most daring behavior these
characters indulge in.
 Maguire brings an immediate likability to Homer -- he looks
almost like a young Dick Van Dyke -- and provides a solid anchor for the
saga. Caine is also fine, as are Theron and the charismatic Paul Rudd as
the young lovers who help introduce Homer to the world outside St.
Cloud's. Still, the movie stubbornly refuses to take off. Exactly what's
holding it back is unclear, but it could have something to do with the
way Irving and Hallstrom have tried to subvert a sprawling, occasionally
shocking epic of a book into a mellow, conventional mainstream film.
Somewhere along the way, "The Cider House Rules" turned into something
almost as safe as milk. James Sanford

Author
Jerry Saravia
"The Cider House Rules" is the kind of film that has every element in place:
strikingly good performances, beautiful cinematography, and solid art
direction. Considering this film is set in the 1940's, the period detail is
astoundingly vivid - the cars, the clothes, the houses all have the right look
and design. And so it is frustrating to see that when everything falls in
place, the structure of the film takes a dramatic left turn and leaves numerous
plotholes in its wake. 
The film opens at a snowy train stop in St. Cloud's, Maine where an orphanage
exists called the Cider House. It is run by Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine), a
fastidious doctor who performs abortions with the help of his young protege,
Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire). Larch's mission is to save women from the clutches
of amateur doctors in back alleys - he sees himself performing a service
unavailable to most women. His moments of solace and refuge is in his addiction
to ether. 
Homer assists Larch as often as he can, and his home is at Cider House since he
is an orphan and practically grew up there. But Homer feels cold and lonely
there, despite knowing all the young, parentless kids who look up to him. He
needs an exit to another world he has not seen, outside of what I like to call
"The Cider House Blues." He gets a chance one day when Candy (Charlize Theron)
arrives at Cider House for an abortion with her boyfriend, Wally (Paul Rudd),
who is preparing to go to war. Homer leaves with them, and goes to work at
Wally's apple-picking family farm with a group of African-American migrant
workers lead by Mr. Rose (the intense Delroy Lindo). While Wally fights the
war, Homer falls in love with Candy, and discovers that there are other movies
that exist besides "King Kong."  
"The Cider House Blues" has a subplot involving incest, and the question of
abortion comes up again, as Homer decides if he should perform such a
procedure. Unfortunately these episodes at Wally's family farm are less than
enchanting and cliche ridden. John Irving adapted his own novel for the screen,
but it is not dramatic enough to stimulate much interest. Although the romance
between Homer and Candy is sparkling and flavorful, it does not mix well with
the migrant workers and their crisis, or the Cider House subplot where Dr.
Larch forges an entire application on Homer and his medical background so he
can get him back to assist. Once the film ends, there are a lot of unresolved
situations and fractured relationships between characters. The final sequence
is anticlimactic, promising more than is actually delivered. 
"The Cider House Rules" is still a finely crafted and beautifully made film.
Michael Caine is as good as he has ever been, mimicking an American accent
flawlessly and creating a sympathetic character out of the saintly Dr. Larch.
Tobey Maguire reminds me more and more of a young Kevin Kline, sometimes
suggesting a cocky side with his eyebrows. Charlize Theron looks like a woman
of the 40's, sexy and sweet and troubled. But the film sort of ends abruptly
and loses us in the seeming construction of a final act that goes nowhere. It
is only half of a great movie, but at least, it is a decent half.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Life is bleak at the orphanage at St. Cloud, Maine during the
Depression era.  The weather is cold.  The doctor who autocratically
runs the orphanage, Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine), is an ether addict
who performs illegal abortions.  And of course orphans learn about
rejection the youngest of anybody.  This could be the worst of all
possible worlds but for all Larchs shortcomings, his love and
compassion transform the orphanage.
     Into this orphanage is brought Homer Wells (played as an adult by
Tobey Maguire), twice adopted and twice returned.  Homer is raised by
Larch's love and by the love of the staff.  As a teenager Homer is
trained to have a medical knowledge almost rivaling Larch's.  Homer
personally wants nothing to do with abortions, and Larch respects that.
Homer delivers children and can handle a wide range of medical
emergencies like a professional.
     Homer has never been far from St. Cloud, never seen the ocean,
never even seen a lobster.  He longs to see a little of the real world.
When a serviceman brings his girlfriend Candy Kendall (Charlize
Theron)) for an abortion, Homer befriends the two, and when it comes
time to leave Homer asks to go with them.  Homer has no skills he knows
how to sell and gratefully takes a job as an apple picker.  The team of
farm workers, all black but for Homer, is led by Mr. Rose (Delroy
Lindo).  Homer must try to fit into the team.
     Peppered through the story as a continuing theme are rules and
people who break rules.  Under age boys drive cars and operate as
doctors.  Adult doctors perform abortions.  We also see love against
the rules.  Irving shows us cases where rule-breaking is excusable and
cases where it cannot be forgiven.  The whole story seems to be a
backdrop for examples of when rules should and should not be broken.
It is almost like a school exercise in which one tries to put as many
prepositions in a single sentence as possible, with the actual meaning
of the sentence having only secondary importance.  Irving may be saying
nothing more complex than that rules should be made only with
understanding and caution and should be broken only for unselfish
reasons.  But in giving all the examples John Irving, who wrote the
screenplay based on his own novel, has simplified the story to the
point where it is quite predictable.  We are pretty sure how it is all
going to end, and we know Homer is going to use his medical knowledge
just as surely as we know James Bond will use all of the gizmos he has
been given.
     Lasse Hallstrom, director of MY LIFE AS A DOG, tells stories
slowly and deliberately with a lot of personality texture.  He takes
his time developing his characters.  Toby Maguire's normally pensive
style has been useful in his career.  He seems to specialize in roles
in which he is a little bit of an outsider and has to work out what
things are all about.  In THE ICE STORM he has to navigate the adults'
world of sexual mores.  In PLEASANTVILLE he has to figure his way in
1950s TV-land.  Where another actor might jump into a situation he
thinks about it and intellectualizes it.  Irving and Hallstrom have
given Michael Caine a role different from those he has played in the
past.  That is not easy to do with an actor like Caine, but this is
Caine as we have not seen him before, an odd combination of sleazy and
loving.  Delroy Lindo adds a touch of magnificence and dignity to a
farm worker who is more complex than he at first seems.
     Irving's story is a little simplistic but engaging and the film
captures a sort of nostalgic feel.  I rate THE CIDER HOUSE RULES a 7 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale

Author
Walter Frith
Orphans.  How they are often forgotten.  Having known a couple growing up, I
won't pretend to know what it feels like to be one, but some of their
stories are unforgettable.  'The Cider House Rules' takes a look at the
orphan's way of life, from a positive and very sensitive point of view and
stretches its story to include the adventures of one who is now a man,
setting off to experience the world for himself.  Tobey Maguire
('Pleasantville'), is Homer Wells, a young man working at an orphanage (and
abortion clinic) in Maine during World War II and is loved by all who live
and work there.  Homer is a right hand man to Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael
Caine...playing with an American accent in his finest work in years which
will bring him an Oscar nomination).  Dr. Larch sees Homer as the one who
will carry on his work at the orphanage when he leaves.  Community
bureaucrats want Larch relieved of his position.  Some critics are making
this film a political issue by saying that it is really about abortion at
its deepest roots but this argument doesn't wash.  Abortions are only a part
of the story to wash away the false notion that they didn't occur 50 or 60
years ago.  It's like a gangster film.  The main plot is about crime.  You
don't look at a gangster film as being a study of guns!
Dr. Larch comforts the boys each night as they get tucked in and as he turns
off the light and closes the door to the room, he says: "Good night, you
princes of Maine, you kings of New England!"  Homer desires to leave the
orphanage and see the world for himself.  He is tempted by Candy Kendall
(Charlize Theron) and her boyfriend Walter (Paul Rudd).  They arrive one day
at the orphanage clinic to have an abortion and Homer decides to go off with
them and experience the free side of life.  Homer says that he's never seen
the ocean and gets a chance to look at it.  He also takes up a job picking
apples at Walter's family owned farm and befriends Mr. Rose (Delroy Lindo)
and his daughter Rose Rose (Erykah Badu).  After going off to fight in the
war, Walter leaves Candy behind and she and Homer have an affair.
Meanwhile, the story shifts back and fourth at times to the adventures of
Homer's strengthening as a man and the events taking place at the orphanage.
One of the things most unexpected but welcomed as a piece of exceptional
drama, are the scenes which take place at the farm where Homer works.  There
is a story of disenchantment involving incest, violence and disagreement
about the way of life there.  The film is ideal at examining the reality
that people from "the greatest generation" were the same as people today in
terms of personal behaviour, and in the film industry recently, we have had
a number of examples that show that times change but people don't.
The film is directed by Lasse Hallstrom, the Swedish director responsible
for such films as 'My Life as a Dog', 'Once Around' and 'What's Eating
Gilbert Grape?', a movie with a curious tie-in to this film about a young
man coming of age and seeing the world in more realistic terms than he's
been used to.  The film is also written by John Irving, based on his novel
and his screenplay is without pretentious qualities, sentimentality or
cliches.
As for the cast, there are many things you can say.  I look back to 1987's
'The Untouchables' and my father and I still have a debate over the way
Kevin Costner played Elliot Ness.  My father called it a "wet wash cloth
performance" while I was impressed by it.  The whole point of the film was
to draw wisdom from a more experienced character, that of Jimmy Malone (Sean
Connery).  That's the way I saw 'The Cider House Rules' play out.  Tobey
Maguire's character of Homer is rather toned done but Maguire draws his
experience in life from those more experienced and becomes a better man for
it, especially when he finds out at the end what Dr. Larch does for him.
Charlize Theron, Delroy Lindo, along with Jane Alexander and Kathy Baker who
plays nurses at the clinic are characters who aren't really given a deep
sense of focus as much as they should be but their contributions to the film
and still significant.  Michael Caine is the real treat of this film, giving
his best performance since his Oscar win in 1986 for best supporting actor
in 'Hannah and Her Sisters'.  Caine won rave reviews in 1998 as a third
string English talent agent in 'Little Voice' and while winning a Golden
Globe for it, he was snubbed by the Oscars and didn't even get nominated for
the role.  'The Cider House Rules' may bring Caine another Oscar win as he
was sort of the surprise winner in 1986 and Caine's clever talent as an
actor is matched by his willingness to diversify himself and he is one of
the best at it.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Christopher Null
     I went into THE CIDER HOUSE RULES with a blank slate, knowing
nothing about the movie at all.
     I didn't even know how to pronounce the title.  It could've been
"The cider house-rules," meaning "This is the cider house, and these are
the rules."  Or it could've been "The cider house *rules*!" meaning
"That cider house is damn cool!"
     Wiser readers have probably already figured out that the former is
correct, and while this isn't a movie about a bunch of rules, it comes
awfully close.  Based on John Irving's novel (he also wrote the script),
CIDER HOUSE has that "adapted from the book" feeling -- like the writer
didn't want to edit out any of the chaff because it was all too
precious.
     Well, CIDER HOUSE is a sloppy mess because of it.  We start with
the 1930/1940's childhood of main character Homer (Maguire), his
adolescence in a remote Maine orphanage, his apprenticeship to the
orphanage's OB/GYN and abortionist Doctor Larch (Caine), his infatuation
with a patient who comes in for services (Theron), his decision to
become an apple picker, and... okay, are you bored yet?
     Try as I might, I can't even make it sound interesting, much less
exciting.  How this book became a film is beyond me.  Obviously
searching to recreate the magic of introspective period dramas like THE
ICE STORM and DEAD POETS SOCIETY, THE CIDER HOUSE RULES is an
exceedingly poor imitation that just doesn't work, mainly because
nothing happens in its two-plus hours.
     To enjoy the film at all, you'll need to take pleasure in the
details.  Maguire is typically excellent as the brooding Homer.  Caine,
doing his first American accent, is surprisingly effective as Homer's
counterpoint.  The supporting cast is uniformly good, excepting the
inexplicably cast musician Erykah Badu.  As a character study, CIDER
HOUSE is mild entertainment, but it's not enough to merit recommending
the film.
     THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, you'll be interested to know, represents a
13 year struggle to make it to the big screen.  Oh, how you feel that.
http://www.miramax.com/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=0&midStr=1312
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Bill Chambers
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Tobey Maguire, Michael Caine, Charlize Theron, Delroy Lindo
screenplay by John Irving, based on his novel
directed by Lasse Hallström
If, occasionally during The Cider House Rules, one corner of the screen
curled up and peeled away like a turning page to reveal the next scene,
the wipe would seem entirely natural. I haven't encountered a movie that
so resembles the experience of reading a good paperback this year, no
doubt because John Irving wrote the tearjerking The Cider House Rules as
a book first and a screenplay second.
"Annie" it's not: at a depression-era New England orphanage-cum-abortion
clinic, Dr. Wilbur Larch (Caine) has successfully preened one of the
abandoned kids, Homer Wells (Maguire), into both his professional equal
and an upstanding young man, an example for the other boys and girls to
follow.
After spending twenty-some-odd years in Larch's care, Homer justly
develops wanderlust, and he leaps at the opportunity to fly the coop
with a beautiful patient, Candy (Theron), and Wally, her soldier mate
(Paul Rudd). Larch is deeply offended by his surrogate son's decision,
and reveals an X-ray indicating Homer's bad heart, which will stop
working if he gets overexcited, but neither scare tactics nor loyalty
can prevent the inevitable: true to his namesake, Homer will have his
odyssey.
It suits Maguire that he must remain calm and somewhat idle at all times
in The Cider House Rules, since the actor's greatest feature is a pair
of observant eyes. Before leaving for war, Wally finds Homer a new job
at a cider house, where he will be the only white employee among migrant
blacks. For those who haven't correctly presumed, Candy falls for Homer
in her boyfriend's absence, and thus begins a passionate love affair
between them. The story contains other "meanwhile"s; we are kept abreast
of Larch's frustrating situation with the bureaucrats who want to tamper
with his operation as well as that of a sick orphan named Fuzzy. The
latter constitutes a shameless subplot (right down to the adorable
child's name) born of the Chaplin tradition.
Caine is winning as the ether-addicted doctor, though his American
accent takes some getting used to. (The filmmakers have added a line or
two about why Larch sometimes sounds English.) I appreciated Larch's
selfishness, and Caine's willingness to play prickly. The incandescent
Theron is probably the weakest of the ensemble, through no fault of her
own-Candy is drawn as blandly wholesome (abortion notwithstanding), and
her indecision (Am I in love with Homer or Wally?) is aggravating.
Both Maguire and Lindo, as Mr. Rose, the boss of the cider house, are
exemplary. Lindo's initial smiley authority complements Maguire's
preternatural stillness-Mr. Rose goes through a transformation, at least
in our eyes, that I won't reveal here, which Lindo handles with finesse.
Just when the film is becoming a little too precious, Mr. Rose provides
welcome conflict, and without becoming a full-fledged villain. Lindo has
been blessed with what is, say I, the movie's most memorable scene, a
breathy, heartrending apologia.
Swede helmer Hallström (My Life as a Dog) hasn't strayed far from his
1993 effort, What's Eating Gilbert Grape, in stylistic terms: apart from
obvious period differences (Grape takes place in the modern era), the
two films share timeless images, as well as gentility. Just four
pictures after his American career suffered a false start with the
unengaging weepie Once Around, Hallström has Hollywood Oscar contenders
licked. Though not formulaic, The Cider House Rules is in the mode of
old-fashioned crowd-pleasers, passionate tales of self-discovery set
against a historical backdrop. If only Hallström had not relied on
Rachel Portman's syrupy and intrusive score, which confirms too often
that we're watching melodrama.
The Cider House Rules retained a novelistic structure in the adaptation:
its peaks feel like chapter breaks. Much is covered over the course of
two hours-and-fifteen minutes, including pro-choice (the movie argues in
favour of it with worst case scenarios, which may ruffle a few
feathers), young love, and race relations. (It's a brilliant conceit,
really: Homer's passivity not only spares the audience the arguments
that typically ensue between on-screen adulterers, it also immediately
puts his oppressed co-workers at ease-they don't consider him a threat,
despite his skin colour.) Each of these issues is carefully handled,
though the episodic nature of the plotting inevitably means that some
resolutions are more satisfying than others.
Where The Cider House Rules most brings to mind a John Irving read is in
its aftereffects. When the first closing credit appeared, I experienced
three stages of post-partum. First, elation-what a finish! Then came
relief-the film is so stuffed it leaves you a little bloated. Then came
a profound sense of displacement: I hadn't realized how seductive its
world was. Hallström has married delicate, spare visuals and solid
performances to Irving's low key yet enthralling narrative. The outcome
is a grandly satisfying mainstream entertainment with few shortcomings.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) The rules of the cider house remain unread for the
longest time. But in the meantime, there are other rules that everyone
follows, rules that help things run more smoothly. And these are the
rules that count.
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES is Lasse Hallström's adaptation of John Irving's
novel. It follows Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire in another solid,
well-delivered role), an orphan who grows to adolescence in a Maine
orphanage. The orphanage's doctor, Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine,
performing with a convincing American accent) raises Homer as though he
were his own. Under his tutelage Homer learns about general practice,
pediatrics, and yes, even gynecology.
Dr. Larch is relieved that Homer is growing into such a promising young
man because he'd hate to see the orphanage fall into the hands of more
traditional, less liberal doctors. (Dr. Larch is willing to perform
abortions, even though they are illegal in the 1940s). But Homer has
other ideas. He's lived his whole life in the orphanage and he wants to
get out. Besides, he's not willing to perform an abortion, in spite of
Dr. Larch's constant lecturing.
Eventually, Homer finds a way to leave, and he does. He takes the first
job he can find, picking apples. He starts a complicated yet rewarding
life outside the orphanage, where he finds love, work, money, and
friendship in the apple business, but Dr. Larch and the staff send him
reminders about how important it is for them that he return and take
over.
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES is sweet and sentimental. The characters are good
and well-meaning, even though the conflicts and complexities that
confront them are genuinely troubling. The characters address such
issues as abortion, violence, love, freedom, and responsibility. There's
a lot going on in THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, which should earn praise for
Hallström and Irving (who advised on the film and even plays a small
role as the stationmaster). 
But the movie takes on too much for my tastes. The life in the orphanage
and the life outside could have made two different movies. Maybe 45
minutes of film time pass at the orphanage, and we think we know the
story and all the characters. But after Homer leaves,we meet a bushel of
new characters at the orchard. To Irving (and to Homer), the two parts
are equally important. But on film, the Y-shaped story doesn't seem
right.
Similarly, the film isn't sharp or incisive. Its message is soft and
mushy like applesauce, instead of clear and distilled, like hard cider.
Instead of jolting your mind, it's easy to swallow, plain and palatable.
It brings up hard issues like abortion, trauma, and fraud, but it never
takes a convincing stance one way or the other. In itself this is not a
criticism; in fact, it seems to be Irving's point -- that meaningful
rules can only be made by those who have to abide by them; but because
the movie asked so many interesting and controversial questions, I wish
it had at least told us what ITS rules were, and how it arrived at them.
But these points could work in favor of the movie, depending on your
tastes. For instance, you might say that merely addressing these issues
is enough, or that a sweet drama is no place for divisive political
issues. 
For me, I wish the movie had narrowed and sharpened its focus. Still, I
enjoyed it overall. I was won over by the charming and simple
characters. Nobody had a mean streak. Nobody was the villain. The people
who caused pain and conflict were normal people making unoriginal
mistakes. Irving and Hallstrom gave them room to learn from their
mistakes, then let life flow on.
"Have you ever heard of Russian roulette?"
"Certainly, I played it all the time with my father" 
-- Rex Harrison & Linda Darnell(?), Unfaithfully Yours (1948)

Author
Steve Rhodes
Yawn.  THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, written by John Irving, based on his book,
and directed by Lasse Hallström (MY LIFE AS A DOG), is an exceedingly
handsome picture.  But like a TV movie featuring John-Boy Walton, the
film's slow pacing and sappy storyline is sleep inducing.
The acting is close to being inert, and each of the excessively large
number of characters is drastically underwritten.  At least the
messages, which the film provides in abundance, are good ones.
The film opens at the world's kindest orphanage.  Run by a wise and
generous doctor, Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine), the institution
features fun snowball fights, nightly book readings and free movies.
Still, as we are poignantly reminded, the occupants would much rather be
adopted.
Aiding the good doctor is his unschooled assistant, Homer Wells (Tobey
Maguire), who was "twice adopted and twice returned" when little.
Although Homer lives in Maine, he has never seen an ocean or even a
lobster.  He does, however, know how to be almost as good a physician as
Dr. Lynch due to his extensive, on-the-job training.
Following the lure of the open road, Homer leaves his orphanage home to
go off with a beautiful woman, Candy Kendall (Charlize Theron), and her
serviceman boyfriend, Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd).  They take him to
work in the apple orchard owned by Wally's family.  (They had come to
the orphanage in order for Dr. Lynch to perform an abortion on Candy.)
A pivotal scene in the movie has Homer and Dr. Lynch disagreeing about
abortions with Homer dead-set against them and Dr. Lynch, who performs
them regularly, in favor of them.  In this predictable plot, as soon as
you know that the young man can perform abortions, even though he is
against them, you know what a major scene later will undoubtedly be.
And when Wally inevitably rejoins his unit -- the movie is set during
1943 -- you can guess what will happen back at the home front.
Every time you get on the verge of nodding off, Hallström pulls the
camera back, revealing a sweeping vista of the Maine mountains in all
their autumn splendor of golds, reds and greens.  Keep those gorgeous
visuals in your mind.  Enjoying them almost makes up for the lameness of
the script.
THE CIDER HOUSE RULES runs a long 2:11.  It is rated PG-13 for mature
thematic elements, sexuality, nudity, substance abuse and some violence
and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Author John Irving so despised last fall's film adaptation of his short
story A Prayer for Owen Meaney that he yanked his blessing from it,
forcing the producers to call it Simon Birch instead.  So he wrote the
screenplay for his novel The Cider House Rules himself, and the result
is one whopper of a fantastic picture.  It's an unconventional
coming-of-age story that is split into two equally beautiful halves.
The film begins in the 1920s, where we are introduced to young Homer
Wells, a resident of a secluded orphanage in St. Clouds, Maine.  Homer
was actually adopted and returned twice; once because he didn't cry
(orphans quickly learn it does them no good) and once because he
wouldn't stop (a victim of child abuse).  Taken under the wing of the
orphanage's director, Dr. Wilbur Larch (Michael Caine, Little Voice),
Homer grows up (becoming Tobey Maguire, Ride with the Devil) in the
institution, watches the other children find homes and comes to accept
the fact that he will likely spend his entire youth there.  Under the
doctor's tutelage, Homer even learns how to deliver babies and perform
abortions, even though the idea of the latter is at odds with his
personal beliefs.
Despite having a warm father figure in Dr. Larch and the job of big
brother to the orphanage's other children, Homer longs for a different
life with firm rules and clearer objectives.  He longs to leave, but
can't even join the armed forces because of a heart defect.  Homer finds
an opportunity when a pregnant young woman named Candy Kendall (Charlize
Theron, Mighty Joe Young) visits the orphanage to have an abortion
performed.  Her fiancé, Wally Worthington (Paul Rudd, The Object of My
Affection), is a serviceman on leave to help harvest his family's apple
orchard.  When Candy and Wally depart, Homer goes with them, taking up
residence in the rundown cider house on the Worthingtons' land.
In the cider house, which is chock full of popular R&B artists
(including Heavy D and Erykah Badu), Homer finds exactly what he is
looking for, despite the hard, backbreaking work in the orchards.  He
misses Dr. Larch and the other children, but hey, when you've got a girl
like Candy hanging around, it's easy to forget the things that you used
to hold close to you.  The two develop a relationship once Wally heads
back to war and, let me tell you, there is almost nothing more
disturbing than watching Maguire with the angelic Theron.  But even in
the happiness of his newly found freedom, Homer learns that life isn't
full of straightforward answers, despite having rules to live by for the
first time in his life.
The acting in The Cider House Rules is terrific, especially Caine, who
was robbed of a statue last year for Little Voice.  Well, someone was
robbed  either him or Bill Murray (Rushmore).  As the ether-sniffing
doctor, Caine shows genuine love for every child that he cares for,
taking the time to name each one as they are born, and reading them
stories each night.  The line `Goodnight, you Princes of Maine, you
Kings of New England,' which Larch uses as a sign-off to the children
every evening before bed, still leaves a lump in my throat when I see
the trailer, even though it's been over two months since I've seen the
film.  Delroy Lindo (A Life Less Ordinary) also shines in a supporting
role as Badu's father.
The Cider House Rules is a breathtakingly gorgeous film, with director
Lasse Hallström (What's Eating Gilbert Grape) and cinematographer Oliver
Stapleton (William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream) crafting
both beautiful backgrounds and amazingly lush scenery.  The film is as
beautiful as any you will see this year, save possibly Sleepy Hollow and
Snow Falling on Cedars.  My only complaint is the ending (which I would
spoil by explaining here) and the fact that the credits say `Introducing
Erykah Badu,' despite the fact that she already had a role in Blues
Brothers 2000.  Do they think we could ever forget the train wreck that
was Blues Brothers 2000?  Make another film like The Cider House Rules
and I just might be able to.
2:11 - PG-13 for mature thematic elements, sexuality, nudity, substance
abuse and some violence

Author
Duncan Stevens
Imagine Dickens with a lush soundtrack and with the surroundings bathed in
a rosy glow, and you have the feel of Lasse Hallstrom's film "The Cider
House Rules," a rather disconcerting adaptation of John Irving's novel.
While the effect is pleasant to watch, it doesn't really say anything of
consequence--odd, because the novel had plenty to say, and Irving himself
adapted the novel for the screen. The result is a competent but not
particularly memorable film.
The setting is Maine between the world wars. Tobey Maguire stars as one
Homer Wells, an orphan born and raised at St. Cloud's, which doubles as
orphanage and abortion clinic, the latter covertly, of course. Michael
Caine is Dr. Larch, the compassionate doctor who runs St. Cloud's,
performing abortions and delivering babies as necessary, and supervising
the various waifs under his care. Dr. Larch takes Homer on as his
assistant, and Homer gets a thorough medical education without ever going
to high school--but, don't you know, he longs to Get Out And See The
World, and when Candy (Charlize Theron) comes to St. Cloud's for an
abortion, with boyfriend Wally (Paul Rudd) in tow, Homer, rejecting Dr.
Larch's entreaties to stay at St. Cloud's, hitches a ride to the coast
with them and takes up apple-picking in Candy's family orchard alongside a
set of poor black migrant workers. Homer discovers along the way that Dr.
Larch's ethics had more of an effect on him than he realizes, though, and
complications ensue. If it sounds confusing, trust me, it's not. You can
doze off for long stretches and still follow the story perfectly well.
Among the prevailing themes in the book was abortion, since that's the
heart of the conflict between Homer and Dr. Larch--Homer won't perform
abortions, Dr. Larch will. It's implicit that abortion is at the heart of
Homer leaving the orphanage, since succeeding Dr. Larch as head physician
implies taking over his abortion duties as well. But while the abortion
issue in the book was polemical--Irving was very clearly taking a side,
namely pro- abortion--it just seems pat here; the conflict is resolved, if
that's the way to put it, in a way that seems firmly within the stock
arguments of the abortion debate, and it's unlikely that this film's
treatment of the problem will add anything to that debate. Granted, it's
hard to imagine a film that could change anyone's mind on this particular
issue, but this doesn't feel like a particularly thoughtful consideration.
The book uses the larger theme of rules and the necessity of rule-breaking
to set up its abortion argument--the "rules" of the title are a set of
directives posted in the orchard's bunkhouse, universally ignored--but the
book also had the luxury of several additional minor characters and quite
a few more events to make that argument. The film's treatment of the
subject, by contrast, intermittently appears and then leaves again for
long stretches, and thematically the whole thing wanders.
Part of the problem is Maguire. He has a winning smile, but not much more,
and he's not particularly good at conveying anything other than
indecision. That's not necessarily a handicap for some parts, but Irving's
protagonists are all written blandly, straight men for the various zany
and peculiar events and characters around them, and hence they need actors
with vibrant personalities to play them. Maguire, alas, has very little
personality, and what he has doesn't exactly seem principle-driven and
resolute. Because of that, then, Homer's moral odyssey is fairly
unconvincing--we don't really buy it; the convictions never seemed all
that deeply held anyway. (His face, which is almost entirely
expressionless, doesn't help his cause.) The problem is exacerbated by
Caine's vivid performance as Dr. Larch, since Caine seems genuinely
animated by his convictions--and with the character on one side of the
debate ablaze with moral certitute and the other simply saying his lines,
the eventual result feels like a bit of a foregone conclusion. Maguire
isn't bad, by any means, but he underplays all his most important moments,
including one crucial scene where he's supposed to be burning with
indignation but in fact sounds no more than mildly annoyed. Raise that
voice, Tobey! Chew some scenery! Wake *up*! Theron, for her part, has very
little to do besides be attractive, and Delroy Lindo, as one of the
orchard workers, is nicely expressive--but the story revolves around
Maguire.
A movie that spends as much time as this one does in and around an
orphanage has inherent sentimentality risks, and Hallstrom doesn't do
enough to stave off that element. A subplot involving a boy (named Fuzzy,
of all things) who's permanently confined in a breathing tube and watches
people wistfully through the plastic--no points for picking up on the
Poignant Metaphor here--gets far too much attention in light of its
minimal role in the story. Even the orchard scenes, which are presumably
meant to represent a grittier side of life, look too much like a New
England postcard to feel all that real. There's an irony here, since
anyone who's read Irving's novels knows that there's nothing even vaguely
sentimental about them--the characters are drawn with an unsparing eye,
and their faults and foibles are always on display. Without Irving's prose
to keep the comic tone going, though, the movie alternates between sweet
and ponderous, neither of which is a particularly Irvingish quality. The
problem might have been avoided had the script not eliminated a certain
character, a girl at the orphanage who left it to find Homer; Melony, as
she was called, was far too earthy to sentimentalize, and she served as a
foil of sorts. As it is, there's very little dramatic tension in the film,
except at a few key points. (There's another irony here, of course, namely
that the sentimentality doesn't seem to affect Maguire--he may be
surrounded by heart- tugging orphans, but his heart doesn't seem to be
tugged.) The soundtrack, sometimes appropriate but often intrusive,
heightens the melodramatic feel.
All that said, though, there are things to like about Cider House Rules.
Prominent among them is a marvelous performance by Caine, justly nominated
for an Oscar; he conveys the fatherly instincts that he has for Homer
without ever seeming mawkish. There's a back-and-forth letter-writing
scene between him and Homer done by voice-over that's particularly
resonant, arguably more so than any of the scenes where the two are
actually together--perhaps it's because Maguire is more effective as
voice-over (his voice has more expression than his face) than actually on
screen, but the dialogue crackles in that scene more than at any other
point in the film. Caine, who's British, adopts a New England accent
almost perfectly, and combines waspishness (toward those who don't
understand his mission) with affection (for the orphans) in a rather
nuanced way. Moreover, there's a subtheme about maturity as measured in
the ability to make decisions that's actually rather well done: Candy's
immaturity is indicated by her inability to make decisions, and Homer
eventually learns that growing up means having to make hard choices.
Still, the heart of this film, for better or worse, is Maguire's
character, and Maguire doesn't really carry off the part. It's not a bad
effort, but it works better as an attractive spectacle than as an actual
story.
