Title
Review for Doctor Zhivago (1965)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
     The filmmaker retrospective this year focused on four of the late
David Lean's films; three of them are among his lesser-known, non-epic
pictures.  Here's four thumbnail reviews...
BRIEF ENCOUNTER (David Lean Retrospective/Britain, 1945):
It has its moments, and you get Stanley Holloway wandering in and out,
so it's watchable; but despite it's reputation as one of the great
romantic films of all time, I found it unexceptional.  (However, I think
they forgot to show a reel of it; that I'm not sure should tell you
something about the pace of it.)
HOBSON'S CHOICE (David Lean Retrospective/Britain, 1945):
Lean's only out-and-out comedy, this is a treat, telling the story of a
period romance of practicality between a humble and rather simple
cobbler (John Mills) and the elder daughter (Brenda de Banzie) of a
wealthy, imperious ogre of a bootmaker played by Charles Laughton.  The
parts with Laughton are actually rather slow, but once the film settles
on Mills and de Banzie (who decides that it's time she got married and
that Mills has his points), it's a charmer.
DOCTOR ZHIVAGO (David Lean Retrospective/Britain, 1965):
Very beautiful and pretty to look at, like a Christmas snow scene under
glass: after the first hour and a half, you want to turn it upside down
and shake it.  Alec Guinness is (as usual) magnetic in the few spots
he's on, but Ralph Richardson isn't really given much room to move
around in.  Did anyone else find themselves snorting with amusement
during Omar Sharif's last scene?  Another tragic mass transit story...
SUMMERTIME (David Lean Retrospective/Britain, 1955):
I like Katherine Hepburn, I like the script, Lean captures Venice
nicely, and it's interesting to see what Darren McGavin looked like when
he was young and hadn't discovered vampires yet.  Nothing very special,
but you feel full up afterwards.

Author
Brian Koller
"Doctor Zhivago" is a good, if overlong, film
adaptation of the Nobel prize-winning novel by
Boris Pasternak.  While not as good as "Bridge
on the River Kwai" or "Lawrence of Arabia", director
David Lean continued his winning streak, as the
film was a commercial success and received ten
Oscar nominations.
"Doctor Zhivago" has the cinematography of an
epic, but the plot of a romance novel.  The story
takes place during the Russian Revolution.  Young,
idealistic poet/doctor Yuri (Omar Sharif) marries
Tanya (Geraldine Chaplin), but is frequently separated
from her due to war.  Lara (Julie Christie) is a
passionate woman mistreated by her lover, world-weary
politician Komarovsky (Rod Steiger).
Lara leaves Komarovsky to marry revolutionary Pasha
(Tom Courtenay), who conducts a brutal campaign against
White insurgents.  The storylines are connected as Yuri
and Lara serve together in the war, and have an affair
afterwards.  Yevgraf (Alec Guinness) is narrator and
half-brother of Yuri.
"Doctor Zhivago" goes on and on and on for 197 minutes.
This is shorter than "Lawrence of Arabia", but it feels
longer.  Dramatic touches are sometimes laughable,
such as Pasha's entrance after Komarovsky has been
shot, the long-expected first embrace between Lara
and Yuri, Yuri's bad luck upon seeing Lara for the
last time, and Yuri's insolence when his life is on
the line (which occurs often).
The theme music, which won an Oscar for Maurice Jarre,
is hummable but repetitive.  Robert Bolt somehow won
Best Adapted Screenplay over "Cat Ballou" and "Ship of
Fools".  "Doctor Zhivago" deserved its Best Art Direction
Oscar, as the sets are very impressive, especially a
cottage filled with ice formations.  As you would
expect from a big-budget Lean epic, the cinematography
(Freddy Young) is good.
While "Doctor Zhivago" is a competent film, it has
been somewhat over-rated over the years.  The characters
of Yuri and Lara do not seem real enough to merit
involvement.  Still, the film does get across some of
the horrors of war, and the irony of a 'worker's
revolution' becoming just another despotic dictatorship.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
