Title
Review for Long Day Closes, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
     THE LONG DAY CLOSES is a film that takes several months in the
life of Bud (Leigh McCormack), a twelve year old boy growing up in 1956
Liverpool, and gives us a series of glimpses into some of the most
ordinary, everyday moments that occur.  This is a movie without plot
and with precious little characterization.  It moves along at a snail's
pace, progressively losing more and more of the audience as it becomes
apparent that absolutely nothing is going to happen.
     THE LONG DAY CLOSES is very much the visual equivalent of a verse
or a poem: beautiful images, but no narrative (that's not to imply
that poems often don't have deeper meanings).  This movie is a visual
feast and a cinematographer's dream, but for the average movie-goer,
eighty-three minutes of odd camera-angles and interesting shots is too
much.
     The audience at the showing I attended numbered about twenty at
the start of the film.  By the end, it was down to about fifteen.
Personally, I don't think the movie was bad enough to walk out on, but
I can understand why those who left did so.  Movies can survive without
coherent stories if they have solid, three-dimensional characters.  THE
LONG DAY CLOSES has neither and, as a result, ends up being an
overly-long bore.  Numerous opportunities for character development are
left dangling, and we're forced to watch a bunch of people we never get
to feel for.  Even Bud, who's in nearly every scene, is flat and
uninteresting.
     Supposedly, Terence Davies has filmed his childhood memories.
That's an interesting notion, and in the context of the movie, it's
easy to see how this could be the case- a great deal of attention is
paid to the smallest details.  Unfortunately, except in unusual
circumstances, the mundane recollections of a person aren't the kinds
of cinematic gems designed to captivate an audience.  There are a few
incidents in THE LONG DAY CLOSES that briefly caught my attention, but
they couldn't hold it.  On those rare occasions when the film managed
to strike a responsive chord within me, it let the opportunity slip
away.  Then it was back to staring at meaningless images on the screen
again.
     I can't recommend THE LONG DAY CLOSES to any but the most devout
art film students and die-hard lovers of unusual cinematography.  For
anyone else that happens to see this movie, they will likely find the
title a fitting one.  After getting out of the theater, it will
certainly seem like it's been a long day.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Film Review by Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics at http://www.ofcs.org
In 'The Long Day Closes' writer and director Terence Davies shows his 
virtuosity with cinematic technique - mainly poetic shots and scenes 
that bridge reality.  But he doesn't do much with plot.
There's a scene that makes us look at a still shot of a carpet for about 
two minutes, before the camera slowly pans up to frame the young star 
Bud (Leigh McCormack) gazing out the window.  At various times this 
little English boy watches the lives and fascinating actions of those 
around him.  Many times Bud hangs about the house with his mother 
(Marjorie Yates); occasionally he does chores for her, but more 
frequently he asks for money that will get him into his beloved 
'pictures.'  The one friend Bud supposedly has does not appear onscreen 
for too long.  Once, playing with another boy, he runs past Bud's house.  
In scene after scene we witness Bud's loneliness, which is tempered only 
by his good cheer - at least he is not whiny and irritating.  Davies 
portrays well the desultory underside of childhood, the long hours of 
nothing-to-do.  But is this charming randomness worth its 84-minute 
running time?
An interesting device Davies employs is voice-overs from vintage films, 
apparently dialogue that has left its mark on Bud.  In one sequence we 
watch Bud in the balcony of a wonderful movie palace, only to have the 
scene melt masterfully into the setting of a carnival, the camera 
following the young adults that draw so much of Bud's admiration.  These 
uses of cinematic references do resonate with meaning, saying a lot 
about the imagination and its power over us.  If the editing of the film 
is not tight, it does at least attempt to depict the profound 
sensibilities of a delicate and likable boy.
And Leigh McCormack is likable.  Somewhat a mama's boy at times, but not 
selfish and not gloomy:  Bud extends his hand with the rest of the boys 
at school, and takes the swats across his palm.  He does not sneak out 
of reporting to the headmaster's office when he is late one day.  When 
he is designated among the majority of the boys with head lice, Bud 
suffers through the creosote hair tonic and the tiny-toothed lice comb 
with only a grimace.  In perhaps the most adorable scene in the film, we 
watch him take part in a duet to entertain the family and gathered 
guests.  Here McCormack shows the gameness of a much older performer.  
He's able effortlessly to etch a boy sensitive and sweet, pious and 
rascally, dreamy and responsible.  
As his mother, Marjorie Yates shows a quiet mastery of character.  Most 
touching is a scene during which she sings an old air to Bud.  They are 
sitting close but not looking at each other, and the camera is as still 
as they.  After Mother mentions that this was a song her father would 
sing to her, we watch amazed as her eyes fill up with longing.  A good 
example of a small but well-directed scene.  We are also treated to 
wonderful performances by an ensemble of supporting actors - Anthony 
Watson, Nicolas Lamont, Ayse Owens, Tina Malone, Jimmy Wilde, and Robin 
Polley.
The film is set in the last days of 1955 and mostly in 1956.  (We get to 
see a curious public gathering in which neighbors cross their arms and 
link their hands, dancing and crooning a community version of 'Auld Lang 
Syne'.  Here's a nice mix of history and nostalgia.)  Complimenting a 
film that serves as a strong study of English life in the mid-fifties, 
the sets are intricate and realistic, the street vibrant with 
middle-class goings-on.  What makes Davies' vision so curious is his 
flash-forwards into what seems to be the present, the streets and Bud's 
house abandoned, wrecked by decades of rain and neglect.
Terence Davies (who directed 'The Neon Bible' a couple of years after 
'The Long Day Closes') has captured much of the down-time of childhood:  
what it is like to live in a loving family; to get left behind as your 
older brothers go off with their girlfriends; to sit for hours through 
stories that take you out of your own life, the beam of light flickering 
romantically just above your head, the darkness a close and valuable 
ally.  I borrowed the film on video from our local library, and I'm glad 
I watched it.  It sorely needs something more happening - sorry, but all 
poetic work and no play make Terence a dull boy.  But for strong acting 
and camera work, 'The Long Day Closes' should be watched and studied for 
a long time to come.


Author
Dennis Schwartz

LONG DAY CLOSES, THE (director/writer: Terence Davies; cinematographer:
Michael Coulter; editor: William Diver; cast: Leigh McCormack (Bud),
Anthony Watson (Kevin), Nicholas Lamont (John), Ayse Owens (Helen ),
Marjorie Yates (Bud's Mother), 1992-UK)
A love letter to the cinema, as some well-known Hollywood musical films
are paid homage to, as well as Orson Welles' The Magnificent Ambersons,
using the following quote from that film: "In those days they had time
for everything." Directed by Terence Davies (Distant Voices, Still
Lives) with a reverie for an 11-year-old's private thoughts, set in the
working-class Liverpool period of 1955-56. The film is about his
innocent autobiographical reflections, which are devoid of
sentimentality and are emotially rich in seeing what influenced the
child to be the kind of adult he became. What the film lacks in script
and conventional production values, it makes up in poetical lyricism.
What takes place on the screen is a series of close-ups of the child and
allusions about the child's reactions to growing up, without any
particular effort to tell a story. It makes for a different way of
filmmaking, one that is plotless, that would have been marvelous if it
weren't so boring at times. Yet, there are shots that are memorable,
making me want to applaud Davies for the effort more than for the
result.
Bud (Leigh McCormack) is the gentle child, seen reacting with his elder
siblings and his warm mother (Yates), and with the other children in his
junior school. At home, he seems to be a momma's boy, staying mostly
alone and listening to the radio. When he goes out, it is mostly to the
cinema, where he is in love with the movies he sees. Movies are his one
true enjoyment and escape from the terrors of growing up, as they are
more valuable to him than what he learns in school.
Bud is framed in most shots, where he is off alone by the window,
watching his neighbors interact or watching his mother hang the clothes
out to dry. The tableaux-like compositions are elegantly stated, whether
it is a sunny day and the neighborhood is seen in a cheery mood, or
during a driving rain, where the street he resides in looks forlorn, or
inside his mother's flat on Christmas, with the window showing inclement
weather outside but the house is warm inside with song and food. Bud is
learning to live with school bullies, teachers who hit him on the back
of his hand and demand obedience, the heavy symbolism inferred from his
Catholic religious experiences which he tries to understand in his daily
life, and his own nightmarish dreams. He seems to be innocent of sexual
desires.
The film, like the reading of poetry, demands concentration on its
visualizations and allows for the free translation of what is seen, as
no explanations follow. The closing shot of The Long Day Closes, is of a
striking sunset in black & white images, which was very evocative, the
suggestion being of how grinding this childhood period was for the child
trying to come to grips with things, but now looking back at it, he can
see all the beauty in it that was always there, and not the least, being
the way his mother always had such a chipper attitude.
There is a warm place in the film reserved for the standard contemporary
pop music of the times, with such songs as "I don't know why I love you
like I do" and, "At Sundown," which is sung by Doris Day; Judy Garland
sings "Over the Bannister"; and, "Tammy" is sung by Debbie Reynolds."
The major problem with this experimental film is not the poetry or the
wonderful images seen, but that it is not a fulfilling cinematic
experience because we don't get to know any characters in the film with
any depth and we are more or less left with snapshot impressions of what
Bud experienced rather than feeling we know him better than that. For
those who have fallen in love with art films, this one might be better
suited to your taste than to the general public's.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
