Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Linda Fiorentino, Peter Berg, Bill Pullman, J. T. Walsh.
Screenplay:  Steve Barancik.
Director:  John Dahl.
     John Dahl has to be considered one of the most unlikely success
stories of recent years.  Last year, his made-for-cable film RED ROCK
WEST found a second life in a few art houses around the country, and
became something of a cult hit.  THE LAST SEDUCTION also made its first
appearance on cable earlier this year, but from the looks of things,
Dahl will be able to make a few films directly for the big screen if he
so chooses.  Film noir has been a hot genre lately, and few directors
with more established reputations are making them better than John
Dahl.  THE LAST SEDUCTION is a wonderfully nasty piece of work, sparked
by Linda Fiorentino's bad-to-the-bone lead performance.
     Fiorentino plays Bridget Gregory, a New York City telemarketing
manager with ambition and attitude.  After her husband Clay (Bill
Pullman), a shady doctor, scores $100,000 selling pharmaceutical
cocaine to pay off a loan shark, Bridget takes the money and runs.  She
ends up in Beston, an upstate town too small for her big plans, but
she's forced to stay put to avoid being found by Clay.  In Beston
Bridget hooks up with Mike Swale (Peter Berg), an earnest young fellow
who falls hard for her.  With Mike in the palm of her hand, and Clay
and his detectives hot on her trail, Bridget sets in motion a
convoluted plan manipulating everyone and everything in her way.
     The critical error many recent film noir attempts have made (the
abysmal COLOR OF NIGHT comes most quickly to mind) is that they operate
on the premise that all you need are minimalist lighting and a few plot
twists to maintain audience interest.  Characters become props holding
up a plot, rather than the elements that drive the plot.  Dahl and
screenwriter Steve Barancik do not make that error.  Everything
revolves around the interactions between Bridget, Clay and Mike, and
all three are well-constructed characters.  Bill Pullman, who has been
making a career out of playing the spurned nice guy (SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE, MALICE) takes on the role of spurned not-so-nice-guy Clay and
attacks it with gusto.  His seething disgust at having underestimated
Bridget once becomes a fierce determination to get back at her, but he
is completely unprepared for the lengths to which she'll go.  Peter
Berg is excellent as the big-hearted small-town boy who longs to break
free to the big time, and latches on to his love for Bridget as his
best chance to motivate himself after a disastrous first attempt to
leave Beston.  In order for THE LAST SEDUCTION to work to the fullest,
Berg has to convince us that there's a reason besides simple naivete
that he stays with Bridget, and he makes Mike's need genuine.
     However, everyone else is just renting screen time from Linda
Fiorentino; she owns the show.  Her Bridget is a creature of pure ego
and ambition, and as such there is always the chance that she might
seem beyone accepting as a real person.  Occasionally, that seems to be
the case.  Because Barancik deliberately avoids providing us with any
easy motivation for Bridget's actions (a troubled childhood, for
example), her calculation becomes a bit difficult to swallow in one
gulp.  But Fiorentino is so alive in this part that she makes Bridget
real, and her glee is infectuous.  She is at her best when using
stereotypical assumptions about women to her advantage, such as a scene
where she brings cookies out to the detective who is keeping an eye on
her so that she can plant nails under his tires, or one where she
convinces Mike that she loves him by plainting a note showing his name
in a little heart for him to find.  Bridget's most valuable asset is
that nobody quite believes that she can be as amoral as she seems, and
consequently she is able to catch everyone at their most vulnerable.
     THE LAST SEDUCTION's plot does have the requisite twists, turns
and surprises, but none of them are particularly jaw-dropping.  Dahl
and Barancik are more concerned with tone and character, and deliver in
both categories.  But if there is one aspect of the story which is
truly impressive, it is what *doesn't* happen.  The formulaic qualities
of so many movies have conditioned us to expect a comeuppance for
characters like Bridget at a specific plot point; however, at crucial
moments when it seems that she's made a critical mistake, she's still
one step ahead.  Clockwork plots like THE LAST SEDUCTION can sometimes
seem too contrived for their own good, and some viewere might find it
simply too cold.  Many others will find Fiorentino and THE LAST
SEDUCTION the perfect antidote to the recent glut of stylish but
vacuous blockbusters.

Author
Rich Siege
Starring: Linda Fiorentino,  Peter Berg,  J.T. Walsh,  Bill Pullman
Directed by:  John Dahl
Screenplay:  Steve Barancik
Produced by: Jonathan Shestack
Released by: October Films
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is director John Dahl's follow up to his
sleeper hit RED ROCK WEST, and like his prior film, this one involves
a decent, honest, albeit somewhat naive small town guy who unwittingly
gets between a criminal couple who've developed a rather lethal dislike
for each other.  In this case, small town insurance adjuster Mike
Swale (Peter Berg) falls for Bridget Gregory (Linda Fiorentino), a
mysterious no-nonsense, tough-talking  New Yorker who shows up at his
hometown bar and immediately bowls him over with her sophisticated
style and unselfconscious expression of her sexual needs.  What Mike
doesn't know is: she's hiding out from her crooked-doctor husband Clay
(Bill Pullman) from whom she's just stolen all the proceeds from a big,
once-in-a-lifetime drug deal he's just completed.
     The film centers on Bridget, who's brutally cold and manipulating,
a natural-born grifter.  She unfolds her crafty schemes to safeguard
her stolen fortune with the cool precision of a master spy from the old
"Mission Impossible" TV series.  You can almost see her mind racing ahead
of each scene,  planning just the right moves to keep the hapless
Mike--or anyone else she needs to control--on her string.
     Linda Fiorentino is a joy to watch in this role.  Despite her
character's utter lack of kindness or conscience, her virtually
unshakable confidence, her wit and her sexual brashness  make her
character engaging and enjoyable to watch.
     Bill Pullman, as Bridget's husband Clay, is effective as a sort of
pale reflection of Bridget.  While he has the same basic sensibilities
as his wife, he just doesn't have the smarts or talent to compete with
her.
     Peter Berg's Mike is an appropriately self-conscious yokel; keenly
aware of his lack of sophistication and judgment when it comes to "city
girls." He's not stupid--well, maybe a little;  But basically, he's
just a regular guy.  Against the likes of Bridget, however, he has no
chance.
     Bridget's lawyer (J. T. Walsh) is the only person Bridget seems to
have any respect for.  He provides Bridget with sage advice and moral
support over the telephone.  He's the only one who understands her true
nature: "Anyone check you for a heartbeat lately?", he asks her at one
point.
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is tighter and more suspenseful than RED ROCK
WEST.  The dialog is crisp and to the point.  The cool-but-tense feel
of the film is sustained throughout.   The understated jazz score by
John Vitarelli adds the perfect mood to this very enjoyable film.
Rated: R - (language, nudity, sexual situations)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     If you like black comedy (film noir), this one should be right up
your alley.  It's mostly about an unbelievably monstrous conniver,
Bridget Gregory (Linda Fiorentino) who from the very first scenes is
obviously a woman to avoid.  She has sent her husband, Clay (Bill
Pullman), out to make a drug deal with some very unsavory characters.
No sooner does he return with the briefcase full of bills than she
takes off with the money, leaving him to face the mobsters who expect
their cut.
     Aware that her husband is going to do everything to find her, she
holes up in a small town where she seduces Mike (Peter Berg) a nice
nobody she meets at a bar.  He is tired of this mall town life and
would like to branch out and Bridget, he believes, can help him out.
Has he got the wrong number!  Bridget has her own agenda about how she
will use Mike; her plotting keeps the moving reeling along.
     Like with much of black comedy you have to ignore the many things
you are expected to believe which you would not accept in a
straightforward drama.  But given that, this one is quite entertaining
with Fiorentino great as the femme fatale.

Author
Rev Dr Phil Herring
     Late last year I saw a quirky, stylish film called RED ROCK WEST
by the then little-known director John Dahl.  It had some of the
elements of a road movie (including, I might add somewhat facetiously,
Dennis Hopper), but was at its heart a thriller, with shades of film
noir (for example, the bad woman who leads a basically good man astray
with her womanly wiles).  It was solidly paced, with well-written
characters and an original plot, and I liked it.  In Australia, though,
it was released quite some time after it was made, and only saw a
limited release in a few art-house cinemas.
     So it was with some optimism that I approached THE LAST
SEDUCTION.  I wasn't disappointed (and neither was the appreciative
full house at Sydney's Dendy Cinema, which in general shuns the output
from the Hollywood factories in favour of more innovative product).
Dahl didn't write this film (script credit goes to Steve Barancik), but
it still bears a strong resemblance to his previous work.  It's dark,
and it features a rather naive young man being led astray by a smarter
and less scrupulous woman, who is seeking the removal of a troublesome
husband.  If you saw RED ROCK WEST, this much will be familiar,
especially when you find out that the film is set in a small town.  (I
might also somewhat cynically add that the main plot difference lies in
the woman being the drifter, and the man the local.)
     Such resemblances aside, the film is very different in mood and
pacing.  The action is set in a small town in upstate New York, a town
that seem to go out of its way to be boring.  The evil woman in this
film is Bridget, wife a bent doctor, who robs her husband of a large
sum of money gained from a one-off drug deal.  She's forced to hide out
in the tiny town of Benton, where she meets Mike, a local bored with
the small town after trying his luck in the bright lights of Buffalo,
N.Y., but back in his hometown after a failed marriage.
     Unlike Nicholas Cage's drifter character in the previous film,
however, Bridget (played by Linda Fiorentino) is no dummy--she's a
hard, manipulating bitch.  It's poor Mike (played by Peter Berg) who
gets sucked into a relationship that is, from the outset,
manipulative.  Watching Mike get used and abused by Bridget is the main
driving force in the film.  It will make you squirm.
     Bridget also has all the best lines.  Her opportunism and
objectivist ethos is so transparent that you just have to laugh at her
one-liners, showing as they do the sheer balls of the woman.  She's a
smart character, there's no doubt about that, and her plotting is a
times obvious and at others, utterly opaque.  Either way there's plenty
of suspense and action, mixed with laughs along the way--and although
the film doesn't take itself all that seriously (as indeed it
shouldn't), it's a brilliant piece of film-making, and well worth the
price of admission.
     The roles of the characters raise some interesting side issues,
however.  One element that I had to consider was the role of the
corrupting woman in this film, and by implication, in the genre of film
noir.  Although I really doubt that this film falls into the latter
category, it shares many elements with it, and even at moments invokes
DOUBLE INDEMNITY, the film that gave rise to the genre.  The waitress
in the Dendy's restaurant (which, incidentally, serves very good food)
expressed a *very* positive attitude towards the character of Bridget,
despite admitting that she is, essentially, a conniving bitch you'd
really rather not know personally.  While I fully admit that feminism
is about giving women choices (including the choice to be conniving
bitches), I'm not entirely sure that this film has shaken itself free
of the older ideas about the woman-as-corrupter.  This element was
important in the 1940s as an expression of the puritanism and misogyny
of the cinema of the day, but what does it suggest to the audiences of
1994? Mind you, THE LAST SEDUCTION doesn't insist on the same moral
ending as a film of the 1940's would, so maybe I'm leading myself up
the garden path here.
     What I *am* sure of, though, is the continued stereotyping of drug
dealers in Hollywood films.  It seems that every bad guy in a film
these days is a drug dealer.  There used to be some variety on this
score (note that THE GETAWAY breaks this pattern, but is a remake of
a much older film), but today it has become a cliche.  It's a sign of
the strength of this film, though, that neither of these particular
cliches get in the way of what is, essentially, a very fun film to
watch.
-- Phil.

Author
Jules N. Binocula
     If you're trying to make a name for yourself as a
young-writer-director who loves to modernize 40's-and-50's-style
neo-Hellenic-film-noir-pseudo-tragedies--have fun.  But you *must* do
one thing above all else: have your characters understand that anyone
they meet who is beautiful--will be trying to f*** with them.
     If your characters don't suspect a slap-in-the-face and a
knife-in-the-back from every out-of-town brassiere with lace, then your
screen-world soon becomes boring and predictable.  If your characters
are lucky enough to suspect trouble, and they find themselves in moral
quicksand--helpless to stop it--you're in business.
     But, remember: once you let us meet your sensation-loving people,
you must guide us inside their psyches with gentle authority, and
induce us to promise to love, cherish and stick with them to the
rancid, bitter end.  Otherwise, you--the director--lose your customers
in a crowded, derivative, intellectual conceit--a seedy, aimless,
masquerade of your own perverse creation.
     Simply speaking, THE LAST SEDUCTION follows a sociopathic
nymphomaniac (symbolizing ambitious urban-amorality) who's toting
sin-tempting nipples and an unexplained impulse for theft and
compulsive adultery; spending her spare time trying to pump in extra
cash by pretending to murder other people's husbands--while she
seduces a countrified stooge to do her dirty work back home.  That's
the easy part.  The rest is more obvious.
     If director, JOHN DAHL wants to make answering-machine-era
adultery and murder seem fresh and promising by exposing his own
jaundiced fascination with eternally predatory, insatiably manipulative
Medusas, who are we to complain?  If he can pull it off....
     Dahl lays his talent at the feet of a famous male subconscious
agenda:  the repressed desire to possess a sophisticated, mysterious
woman who curiously exists only to have sex with you--while convincing
you to get rich being her one-and-only secret-illicit-adventure
partner.  An enviable lifestyle?  You make the call.
     On the surface, it's a harmlessly, entertaining masturbatory
extrapolation of the post-50's "PLAYBOY Philosophy," and, if plotted
properly, could yield a vigorous, lusty suspense-thriller--kind of like
a 90's James M. Cain story of yuppie hypocrites who get their kicks
murdering private detectives in sports-utility vehicles.
     But, to his discredit, Mr. Dahl is so enamored with his own
machinations of the "sex-and-greed-to-a-dead-end-lead" story angles,
that he forgets that the most important element in a good thriller is
not the "how," but the "why."
     (And borrowed-twists from THE CRYING GAME, DOUBLE INDEMNITY, and
BODY HEAT don't help endear us to his cerebral crusade.)
     Normally, in these types of twisty, dime-store plot-gymnastics,
the bewitching woman is a seemingly coincidentally placed, sensually
spidery "antagonist", who draws a self-doubting, emasculated male into
her hedonistic web of predatory plans.  But, anxious to outdo everyone
who has ever tried the genre, Mr. Dahl wants to swing both ways and
make her both the opaque seductress and the carnivorous, abused,
on-the-lam heroine (and corrupt anti-heroine).  Where can an
over-stimulated audience find some warmth and understanding?  Not in
this film.
     The story uses so much calculation, it dilutes any developing
audience-allegiances--only to drive us all nowhere but back to where we
started.
     Dahl kick-starts his needlessly dizzying story by reving the
sensual, testicle-slicing ambition of Linda Fiorentino's Brigid
(rhyming with "frigid,"--but that's where the resemblance ends).
     Then we meet her hazy, dope-dealing doctor-husband, who smacks her
face before she steals $350,000 of his stolen (narcotics-derived)
community assets.  Just another ordinary, genre-driven, domestically
dysfunctional screen-squabble, updated for current social mores.
     For a film reeking of ruthlessness, ironically, it's Dahl himself
who commits the most unpardonable sin--allowing us to be confused by
people's half-explained pasts, and fuzzy future plans.  He throws away
early scenes which could've helped us understand whether she's a
generic sociopath, oxymoronically dominant and insecure, terminally
impulsive, or just nakedly copying Hitchcock's PSYCHO, in her vain
escape from New York for Chicago with $700,000 in laundered bills.
     Yet, despite the schizoid character development, the film is more
than marginally likable, mostly because it doesn't try to "get-heavy"
with cumbersome personality explications.  Unfortunately, neither does
it try to "get serious" and make us care about its throbbing, but
philosophically stagnant, souls.
     The attempt at a deadpan tone keeps the plot afloat for a
while--only to submerge it with convoluted conceits--jammed into a
designer pair of black panties with nothing inside but naked schemes.
Recommendation: If you're desperate for lusty, vicious, gonad-eating 
women--then treat yourself to the genuine articles: DOUBLE INDEMNITY, 
an X-rated wall-to-wall-flesh-fest, and a campy, Russ Meyer bosomaniacal 
extravaganza.  
     If all else fails, you can sit it out and pray that Mr. Dahl
reaches narrative puberty before THE LAST SEDUCTION becomes his last
attempt at noirish-homage.

Author
Jon A. Webb
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is a clever film, one of those stories where
you know not quite everything but think you do, so that you eagerly
follow the plot down some false paths and discover to your delight that
things didn't turn out that way at all--something like, say, DEATHTRAP
but not quite so deceptive.
     Linda Fiorentino plays a woman whose self-possessed, bitchy
behavior must be seen to be believed--and it's a lot of fun to watch.
Fiorentino creates a memorable character here, who I hope to see again
(ANOTHER SEDUCTION, maybe?) The movie opens with her driving the men in
a telephone boiler room almost crazy in pushing them to sell fraudulent
commemorative coins; her behavior here sets the tone for the rest of
the film, though she is really restraining herself in this scene, if
you can believe it.
     The direction, by John Dahl, is quite clever, leading from one
point of trickery by Fiorentino's character to another, and touching
now and then on the earnest stupidity of her husband (played by Bill
Pullman, who has never managed to hold on to a woman in any film he's
been in, so far as I can recall. He's a little less Mr. Nice Guy here,
but he's still not nearly a match for Fiorentino's character.  One gets
the impression she married him just because he was easy to manipulate.)
     Peter Berg plays the object of the seduction. He's a nice straight
country kid, more or less the same character he played in THE ACCUSED.
It's an acceptable performance, but it would've been nice if he'd been
able to throw in something extra given the strength of Fiorentino's
character.  I would've liked to see a moment of awareness that maybe
she was just leading him on, then "Naww...."
     I liked Linda Fiorentino's performance very much.  She reminded me
of Michelle Forbes in her great parts in "Star Trek: The Next
Generation" and KALIFORNIA, though I understand that Fiorentino has a
sort of trademark on this kind of role. Forbes would have been
interesting in this part, too--her physical strength would have
contrasted better, I think, in the places where the character has to
pretend to be shy and sexually repressed.
     I thought the caricature of small-town life a little broad
(everyone says hello, etc.) but liked the bit about black men.
     One thing I really liked about the film is how the strength of
Firentino's character is so impressive that you end up rooting for her
in the end--in spite of her being the embodiment of evil.  It's great
when an actress can turn things around like that.

Author
Eric Grossman
     A good thriller is increasingly hard to come by.  All too often,
filmmakers rely on tired genre conventions and clics that never raise
the audience's heart rate above resting.  Fortunately, THE LAST
SEDUCTION, playing at Laemmle's Sunset-5, does not fall into this
trap.  Director John Dahl, who has traveled the cinematic road of film
noir before with his two previous outings, KILL ME AGAIN and RED ROCK
WEST, does a superb job in creating subtle, powerful tension in this
simple but engaging story.
     Linda Fiorentino gives as a good of a performance that I have seen
this year as Bridget Gregory, a smart, sexy, nefarious woman who
decides to double-cross her seemingly clean-cut husband, Clay (Bill
Pullman), who has just received a large amount of cash from a
drug-deal.  Bridget takes off with the cash and leaves New York as
quickly as possible for Chicago.  On the way, she stops in the small
town of Beston where she meets Mike Swale (Peter Berg), a small town
guy who wants to be bigger than what destiny has planned for him. Mike
immediately falls for Bridget and hopes that her big-city attitude and
pedigree will rub off on him.  With the advice of her lawyer (J.T.
Walsh), Bridget decides to lay low for a while in Beston and she soon
seduces Mike to participate in her twisted schemes.
     The movie is simple enough, but what is interesting is how Dahl
and screenwriter Steve Barancik hook us in with essentially three
characters and a small town.  The movie works on a psychological level,
the place where all thrillers function best.  There are no big
car-chases, no big gun-fights, no buckets of blood, just an amazingly
well written, well acted set of characters, particularly Fiorentino.
She is so cold-hearted, so conniving, so mean, and unfortunately for
the men who get involved with her, so sexy that we cannot help but be
fascinated by her.  The movie takes the femme fatale to new heights and
while this may or may not be progress, we now have a movie where the
woman is truly more smart, more cunning and more dangerous than the men
around her.
     What also makes Fiorentino's performance so good is that Peter
Berg and Bill Pullman play so well against her.  Berg is able to find
the right balance of naive, neediness and suppressed anger for his
character.  Bill Pullman, with his wild facial expressions and
pseudo-calm dialogue creates a sympathetic character whose biggest
fault is that he is smart, but not smart enough to keep up with his
tricky wife.
     Besides allowing Bridget and Mike to meet, the small town setting
for the film was a crucial choice.  There is a scene where Bridget is
walking down a Beston sidewalk and she is taken aback when strangers
smile and say hello.  She is out of her environment but it is fun to
watch how quickly she masters and manipulates it as well as its
people.
     Fresh and original, THE LAST SEDUCTION has all that is good about
a small, independent film while having the production values of a
studio picture.  Linda Pearl's production design, Jeffrey Jur's
cinematography and Eric L. Beason's editing are all first rate.  If
you like film noir, good filmmaking, and suspense, go see this film.

Author
James Berardinelli
"[THE LAST SEDUCTION] is a roller coaster of twists and turns.  It is the 
classic film noir thriller, but it turns everything on its head.  Just 
when you think you know what's going to happen, it does a twist into the 
unexpected.  I'm a fan of the [noir] genre.  I like atmosphere and I'm 
fascinated by the psychology of the characters--the deceit, the 
betrayal and the desperation." 
          - John Dahl, director of THE LAST SEDUCTION 
     Linda Fiorentino's Bridget Gregory does things to men that most of
us wouldn't consider for what we scrape off the sidewalk.  Using the
word "bad" to describe her is as mammoth an understatement as calling
the Sistine Chapel "nice" or the Grand Canyon "big."  It has been
decades since someone the likes of Bridget has graced the screen
(Barbara Stanwyck in DOUBLE INDEMNITY comes to mind, although her
language was never this colorful), and who knows how long it will be
until our next opportunity?
     Director John Dahl has fun with this material, filming the modern-
day noir potboiler with such gusto that it's impossible not to fall
under its spell, nor under the influence of its sultry, completely
conscienceless leading lady.  Dahl, the man behind the twisty RED ROCK
WEST, saturates this picture with atmosphere.  Every time Bridget takes
another pull on her cigarette, we're reminded of a time when 98% of new
releases where in black-and-white.
     Sap #1 is Bridget's husband, Clay (Bill Pullman).  At her
prompting, he gets involved in a drug deal that nets him $700,000.  He
thinks that he and his wife are going to use this to feather their nest
egg, but Bridget has other plans--why split what she can have all to
herself?  No sooner has Bill gone into the shower than she grabs the
money and runs, heading for the small upstate New York town of Beston,
where people always say "hello," "please," and "thank you," and no one
locks their doors at night.
     Sap #2 is Mike Swale (Peter Berg), a Beston native who thinks the
town is too small for him--until Bridget arrives.  To her, he's a means
to an end, something to use up and throw away.  To him, she's the love
of his life, and he means to make her love him in return, regardless of
the cost.  Big mistake.
     THE LAST SEDUCTION's dialogue, scripted by Steve Barancik and
spoken by the likes of Fiorentino, Pullman, Berg, and J. T. Walsh, is
scintillating, often hilarious, and occasionally insightful.  The best
lines are about Bridget--"Anyone check you for a heartbeat lately?" and
"I love you ... I'm sure you feel the same way-- I'm sure you love you,
too"--or from her--"Spare me your brainless, countrified morality."
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is an entertaining motion picture to immerse
oneself in--significant chunks of the plot fall apart on close
examination, but it holds up well enough during the watching, and
nothing can dispel the power of Fiorentino's performance.  It's great
to see a woman getting this sort of plum role, and it proves that you
don't have to go way over-the-top like Lena Olin in ROMEO IS BLEEDING
to ooze nastiness--or, in Bridget's case, to spew it.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is an excellent black comedy and thriller about
lying, betrayal, sex, and murder.  It is directed by John Dahl and
written by Steve Barancik.  It stars Linda Fiorentino as literally the
toughest woman in movie history.  She is tougher than nails, never
vulnerable, and would do absolutely anything to get what she wants.
     The movie bears some resemblance to the tough and double dealing
of Barbara Stanwyck in DOUBLE INDEMNITY (which I saw about a year ago
on cable - check it out some time, it is excellent too).  The script is
sharp and witty.  The staccato tone of the script reminds me of some of
David Mamet's writing especially in his movie HOUSE OF GAMEs.
     THE LAST SEDUCTION is about a woman (Fiorentino) who talks her
husband (Bill Pullman) into dealing drugs and then skips town with all
the money ($700,000) even though loan sharks are threatening to maim
and then kill him.  All of this happens in the first few minutes.  The
rest of the show takes place mainly into a middle American community in
upstate New York where she finds a "boyfriend" (Peter Berg).  He claims
he is just her sex toy.  One of the messages he leaves on her answering
machine is "I love you and I am sure the feeling is mutual - you love
you too".
     There are lots of plot twists - some predictable, some not, and
one quite surprising.  There are many great scenes.  The pick up scene
in the bar has never been done that way before and really worked well.
     In a typical Hollywood movie, we would eventually find
Fiorentino's character's sweet side, but not here - she is a complete
and perfectly evil character with no redeeming qualities.  It is
fascinating watching Fiorentino to see what she will do next.  It was
perfect casting having her play the lead.  Like the devil, it was easy
to be drawn to her.  She is quite an attractive actress.  The husband
and the boyfriend also are well chosen and do a good job.
     See if you like the ending.  At first, I thought it too abrupt and
then decided it was a good ending after all.
     I have no criticism of the show.  If you like black comedy like
say HAROLD AND MAUDE or DOUBLE INDEMNITY, you will probably like this
show.  It is not a movie for everyone, but I certainly recommend it and
award it ***.  The movie is not rated, but would be R for sex, some
profanity, a little nudity, non-gory and non-bloody violence, and an
adult theme.  I would not take teenagers to see it; it is an adult
show.  It runs a well edited 1:50.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 18, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Last year RED ROCK WEST, directed by John Dahl, went directly to
video, then got a small theatrical release based on very good word of
mouth.  It fact, it was a nice little thriller that deserved much
better treatment.  That was unfortunate.  But when Dahl's THE LAST
SEDUCTION got the same treatment this year it was nearly criminal.  I
am sorry I missed it on HBO, but it was worth paying to see in a
theater.  This steamy crime thriller with tight and fascinating script
by Steve Barancik is far better than the average run of theatrical
films.
     Bridget Gregory (played by Linda Fiorentino) is as cold and
calculating a woman as has ever has been shown on the screen.  She is
as quick-thinking and amoral as a computer.  Gregory instantly sizes up
situations and subtly manipulates people and events to her own
advantage.  She works for insurance companies as a "lead generator,"
someone who is able to find potential customers for her company.  And
she must be good at her job based on the sampling we see.  Just as a
demonstration of her abilities she takes a credit history database and
in a chillingly logical manner generates a list of women who would be
anxious to have their husbands murdered.  The method makes sufficient
sense that one almost worries that some viewer will copy the method in
real life.  This is a female Hannibal Lecter whose fixation is making
money rather than on cannibalism and mutilation,  And because her
desires are so normal, she is much harder to catch.
     As the film opens Bridget does her thing for a New York City
insurance company while her physician husband, Clay (Bill Pullman)
pulls off a dangerous but lucrative drug deal that Bridget has master-
minded.  Hubby comes home with lots of cash, only to have his loving
wife take the money and run.  She is headed to Chicago, but to avoid
thugs hired by her husband, she lays low in Beston, a suburb of
Buffalo.  She picks up one of the locals, Mike Swale (Peter Berg) as a
bedmate to use with approximately the same consideration she would give
a vibrator.  Under Dahl's direction the sex scenes are often explicit
and erotic.  Some of the violence scenes are also fairly graphic.
     Fiorentino plays Bridget like a breed of spider.  She is purely
cold and calculating, the epitome of sang froid.  Peter Berg seems
sufficiently young and naive to fall into her web.  And Bill Pullman,
who was pushed around by the woman in his life in RUTHLESS PEOPLE, here
plays someone a lot smarter but still totally out-classed.
J. T. Walsh, who has becoming a very familiar screen heavy, plays a
crooked lawyer who can only look on with envy at what Bridget can do.
     Fiorentino makes this film as exciting a thriller as we have seen
this year.  This is film noir with a vengeance with a femme fatale who
could give lessons to Stanwick in DOUBLE INDEMNITY and Turner in BODY
HEAT.  Watch for it.  I give this film a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jason Overbeck
The Last Seduction is smart, sexy, dark, and funny.  Every scene is
briliant, a wonderful handling of film noir.  This is also a film that
offers up a delicious womans role, as a killer bitch, manipulating men
to do dirty tasks in the name of "love."  Linda Fiorentino plays the
lady, every man dream and nightmare.
Fiorentino has her husband sell pharmaceutical cocaine, then she steals
the money from him and heads to Chicago.  She holds up in a small town
outside of Buffalo caled Beston.  There she meets a guy and goes home
with him.  When consulting her lawyer later she is told to stay put and
find a job.  She does and continues to see this guy who complains, "I
feel like a sex toy" she responds "live it up."
Meanwhile her husband owes money to a loanshark that likes to break
thumbs, and he hires a private eye tofind this broad.  The plot twists
and twists to a conclusion that is totally satisfying, and darkly funny.
I can't say enough about Fiorentino's performance which goes for broke
and turns up a sly and brilliant performance that will make men cring
and turned on.  She deserved an academy award but was robbed on a
technicality, the film premiered on cable (the distributer HAD NO BALLS)
and thus she was robbed, and so was the film.  This is one of the best
films of the ninties, a great ride!

Author
Edward W. Felton
     My father, bless him, has taught me two valuable lessons in life;
learn to tie your own bow ties, and steer well clear of made-for-TV
movies.  Honest advice, I thought; most TV movies seemed to feature
Jaclyn Smith or some other fading star, and almost always seemed to
have  Mommy  in the title.  However, a few years ago, a strange thing
happened; both HBO in the United States and Channel 4 in England
started coming out with carefully crafted, creatively budgeted movies
of extremely high quality.  Prominent among these was HBO's RED ROCK
WEST, an odd little film noir  that caused quite a stir when first
released.  I saw in the cinema about two years ago, as it got a
theatrical release in Europe.  A quirky tale with an excellent cast,
with Nicholas Cage as the nice guy, Dennis Hopper as the crazy bad guy
(a real stretch, presumably) and Lara Flynn Boyle as the pasty-faced
love interest.  With lots of guns, dusty country roads and fun cameos,
RED ROCK WEST was a lot of fun.  THE LAST SEDUCTION is a similar HBO
effort, but simply doesn't match it for quality.
     So basically what happens is that killer babe from hell, Linda
Fiorentino, robs her unpleasant husband of a bag of cash and goes
underground in a small town.  She stays nicely incognito, ludicrously
strutting into the redneck bar in with high heels and power
shoulder pads.  Still, we learn a great deal about her character.  She
can write backwards.  Insightful stuff.  Tumbling into the sack with
the local Brad Pitt, without the acting talent, we get what we really
came for ... cue moodily lit limbs and arched backs-a-plenty.  Irked
hubby sends heavies after her, only to be foiled by the witty, sassy
and invincible Wendy Kroy.  An hour of transparent plot devices and
tacked-on characterizations later, and nothing much has changed.
     Critics have raved over Fiorentino, describing her as both sex and
talent incarnate.  I wouldn't go that far; although certainly not
unattractive, and more than willing to get her kit off in the name of
cinema verite, she's just not that special.  Hers is a big, and
therefore admirable role for a woman, though curiously
one-dimensional.  She's tough, she's cool, she's sexy.  But then so is
Paul Newman, only he doesn't have to break out the skimpy underwear to
achieve it.  As far as I know.  Anyway, the lack of an adequate male
lead to balance the movie although this isn't so important in reverse
lessens the range of the film considerably.  Small, boring country
towns are by definition, small and boring, one wildcat in high heels
doesn't exactly set the screen on fire.  The scenes between her and the
himbo lover are laughable;  What are you running from, Wendy?   There's
some original innovative dialogue for you.  The New York scenes, merely
familiar, include that damn location under the Brooklyn Bridge, used
for the bazillionth time.  Add to that a moronic plot twist (remember
De Niro as Louis Cypher in ANGEL HEART?  Yup....) and a plethora of dull
characters, and we re checking wristwatches an hour into the film.  An
irritatingly repetitive jazz score, vaguely reminiscent of The Firm, is
constant and grinding.  Great legs emerging from car door, the sort of
thing normally smothered in a sax solo, receive the same bouncy eight
bars as the chase through a building, and hero in contemplative mood.
Fiorentino, however, has definite potential for the future, but she's
not enough to carry this movie on her own.  The conclusion, after a
tortuously convoluted final reel, the inevitable triumph of the female
will, is nicely tied up, and the movie becomes At Last Seductive: too
little, too late.  A disappointing two out of ten.
