Title
Review for Lunes de fiel (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BITTER MOON is a very well made and well directed movie by Roman
Polanski.  It is a story about depravity and cruelty told mainly with
long flashbacks.
     The main couple is a man who calls himself "an obnoxious cripple"
(played by Peter Coyote whose best movie was A MAN IN LOVE) and a very
beautiful and sensual woman (played by Emmanuelle Seigner from
FRANTIC).  The "other couple" is played by Hugh Grant (who seems to be
in every other movie this year, but his best was FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL) and Kristin Scott-Thomas (from FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL but
much better on TV in Masterpiece Theater's "Body and Soul").
     The non-flashback part of the show is set on a cruise ship in the
Mediterranean in winter - a bleak, cold, and stormy time.  The script
(Gerard Brach, John Brownjohn, Pascal Bruckner, Jeff Gross, and Roman
Polanski) is very effective and has Grant drawn into a black hole
listening to Coyote tell the story of his marriage.  Grant listens in
repulsion because he wants to have an affair with Coyote's wife, and
Coyote will not agree until Grant hears the whole story.
     Basically, they loved each other intensely but Coyote got bored
and started badly abusing Seigner to get her to leave.  When you see
her, you may find it very hard to believe he would EVER get bored of
her, but you must suspend disbelief.  Meanwhile she loved him like she
was a little puppy dog who keeps coming back no matter how bad it
gets.  You may be able to guess where the movie goes from there, but I
suspect you will not guess the ending.
     This is one depressing, but well done movie.  The acting by
Scott-Thomas and Coyote are okay except than Coyote goes overboard a
bit.  I am a big fan of Scott-Thomas, and I wish she had a much bigger
role.  Grant gives the worst performance.  He keeps looking like he
couldn't believe he actually agreed to make such a movie.  Seigner's
acting is the best of the bunch, but the real high point of this movie
is the directing.  Polanski knows what he wants to do, and he does it.
     Some movies are feel good movies.  This one is a big black hole of
depressing images.  If Hollywood screen tested this movie, they would
have demanded another ending.  Nothing upbeat here.  Polanski paints a
world without redemption.
     BITTER MOON runs an acceptably long 2:13.  It is rated R for abuse
and violence.  It would be too intense for all but the most mature
teenagers.  I recommend BITTER MOON to adults and rate it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
I seem to carry a love/hate relationship with Roman Polanski.  Just about
every time I promise not to see one of his films again, another one comes up
which gets one's curiosity flared up.  And eventually
one falls for it, and goes to see it.  The question is, if this one is going
to be as bad as the previous one.  Not bad in the sense that the film is
bad, but distasteful as Roman tends to be, despite his obviously superb
film, and story telling techniques.
BITTER MOON, is the story, well, let's see.... could be about a couple whose
fires have gone out a long time ago, and are always on the look out for a
new experience... or the story of another couple on a holiday trying to
figure out if their marriage is worth while saving.
One couple is a no win situation.  Oscar and Mimi have been lovers for a
long time, but since Oscar has been in a wheel chair, his ability to enjoy
sex has turned into a voyeuristic event, watching his wife try to enjoy
herself.  And while she is attractive, and a very good tease, it still bores
Oscar to death.  And he tells his story in flashbacks.  Nigel and Fiona have
been married for a while but their ways have gotten boring, and not quite as
exciting as either would like.  She is looking for the word exciting, and
he is looking for whatever it might be that he refuses to grow into.  Maybe
his reluctance is a bit of the stand offish way that his class brings him up
into in his native country.  Pleasures are meant to be kept buried and not
discussed type of thing.
And Oscar and Mimi play on this weakness to the hilt.  It is never quite
clear if Mimi and Nigel do get mixed together and do anything, but in a wild
night of drinking and fun, Fiona and Mimi do have some fun.  While it opens
up some horizons for Fiona, it now leaves her and her husband together to
find
out what they really want from each other, and how to enjoy it.
Roman Polansky is a master of film angles and the visual style that teases
us to no end.  Mimi gets to strut everything she's got, and makes us want
her as much as Nigel.  And Oscar is never oblivious to that look, or
comment.  The question, then, is how is all this going to come to a halt, or
end.  And to me, this is where Roman Polansky usually tends to fail as a
story teller. He's very good at it all, except the endings, which do not all
have to be that tragic, or despondent.  Although, in this case, Nigel and
Fiona do get a chance to start over.  But sadly, the two that helped them
resolve their differences will not.  Their style is, either, dead, or on the
way out.
But, I wonder if much of this is really a reflection of a lifestyle that
borders on the hypocritical, and boring.  The people involved, are on a
cruise of well to do peoples whose best times tend to be how much sexual fun
and partying they can get, if not a business deal here and there.  And Roman
allows us to see this elitist group to destroy itself, and almost take an
innocent couple with them.  It doesn't happen, as the foundation of the
couple is better than what the decadent side might have to offer.
The film has incidental music by Vangelis, badly used by the way ( why
doesn't HE make a film.? ), but as usual the cinematography is what makes
this film so attractive.  It is beautifully designed and thought out.  Few
directors will ever look at things in a style so well defined as Roman
Polansky does instinctively.
BITTER MOON is not a great film, but the performances of Peter Coyote and
Emmanuelle Seigner are excellent.  Both Hugh Grant and Kristin Scott Thomas
come off a bit foppish but nevertheless they are good.  The ending almost
appears as a soap opera. Nice film.  Technically excellent.
3 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Ygdrasil's Film Newsgroup
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Peter Coyote, Emmanuelle Seigner, Hugh Grant, 
           Kristin Scott-Thomas
Director:  Roman Polanski
Producer:  Roman Polanski
Screenplay:  Roman Polanski, Gerard Brach, and John Brownjohn based 
          on LUNES DE FIEL by Pascal Bruckner
Music:  Vangelis
Released by Fine Line Features
     Roman Polanski has never done anything conventional.  Since he
first gained international recognition thirty-two years ago with KNIFE
IN THE WATER, his path has been of his own blazing.  With such films as
ROSMARY'S BABY and CHINATOWN, the director raised his name to
prominence.  BITTER MOON, Polanski's newest effort, represents a
nadir.  This is bad melodrama, complete with hammy acting and purple
prose, and far too long to be even passingly entertaining.  It's soap
opera quality, from beginning to sensationalistic end.
     It's understandable if someone who sits down to watch this film
suddenly wonders whether they've accidentally stumbled into FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL.  After all, the first actors to appear are Hugh
Grant and Kristin Scott-Thomas (each from FOUR WEDDINGS), and she's
playing a woman named Fiona (her FOUR WEDDINGS name).  Thematically,
however, BITTER MOON, with its failed attempts to delve into the issue
of sexual repression, has more in common with another recent Hugh Grant
offering--SIRENS.
     Grant plays Nigel and Scott-Thomas is his wife Fiona.  The pair
are on a cruise to Istanbul, where they hope to breathe new life into a
commonplace marriage.  On board, they meet the crippled American Oscar
(Peter Coyote) and his mysterious, beautiful wife Mimi (Emmanuelle
Seigner, director Polanski's real-life mate).  Oscar draws Nigel aside
so he can tell him the long and sordid tale of how he and Mimi met,
fell in love, then grew to despise one another.  Nigel is equally
repulsed and fascinated and, almost against his will, begins to fall
for Mimi.
     It's a weakness of BITTER MOON that the explosive ending seems
cheap and contrived rather than the natural wrap to a series of
events.  One of the main problems is that the shipboard plot drifts
around without a suitable anchor.  The characters of Nigel and Fiona
have as much substance as shadows, and their interactions with Mimi and
Oscar are forced and unnatural.  The finale, if examined closely,
doesn't make a whole lot of sense.
     The flashback sequences, which constitute two-thirds of the
movie's screen time, are moderately more compelling, but they take far
too much time.  The pendulum-like swing of the dynamic between Oscar
and Mimi--from obsession and love to dependence and hatred--is
fascinating as a concept, but Polanski's translation of it from written
page is awkward and plodding.  The limits of actress Emmanuelle Seigner
may be part of the problem.  She's seductive and sexy, but has a
tendency to overact even the smallest scenes.
     Peter Coyote manages to be too much of the cliched American, but
this is more the fault of the writing than his acting.  His voiceovers
are hideous--not only in the way that they intrude on the story, but
in the choice of hackneyed expressions.  That this is intentional
because of the nature of Oscar (he's supposed to be a frustrated,
second-rate author) makes little difference--such dime-store prose is
distracting and annoying.  At one point, Oscar describes Mimi as his
"sorceress in white sneakers."  On another occasion, he explains how
they "lived on love and stale croissants." Need I say more?
     The "eroticism" of BITTER MOON is overdone.  Certain scenes
approach the levels of soft-core pornography with seemingly little
purpose other than to titillate or shock various segments of the
audience.  The opposite of repression may be awareness and acceptance,
but it doesn't require an explicit recounting of sexual antics to get
the point across.  Do we really need to see Peter Coyote cavorting
around on all fours in a pig mask and nothing else?  (Actually, that
was one of the movie's funnier moments.)
     I'm not sure what audience Polanski aimed this movie at, but I'm
obviously not in the target group.  Once the overly-long narrative had
concluded, I felt nothing but apathy for the characters, themes, and
situations presented therein.  BITTER MOON is being marketed in the
United States as an art film, but this is one of the instances when the
line between art and exploitation blurs and mingles, and not for the
better.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jon A. Webb
     I couldn't tell if BITTER MOON was intended as a serious study of
sexual obsession or as a too-subtle parody of the same thing.  Roman
Polanski has either gone off the deep end with this story of a man
overwhelmed by desire for his young wife (played by Emmanuel Seigner,
who happens to be Polanski's young wife) or I and the audience I was
with are simply too unsophisticated to appreciate this wry, witty story
of the sexual exploits of a pompous fool.
     Peter Coyote plays a wrecked man who claims to have been destroyed
by his intensely sexual relationship with his wife.  On a cruise to
Israel, Hugh Grant meets first his wife, and later him, and is warned
against her charms. (Oddly, Grant's wife in this film is Kristin
Scott-Thomas, his friend from FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, who again
plays a woman named Fiona.)
     The strangest thing about this film is that Coyote's character
writes and talks with consistently lurid, purple prose.  He comes to
Paris to be a writer, though it's obvious he can't write at all, as his
style is straight out of the pages of a romance novel combined with
Penthouse letters.
     I have a suspicion that Polanski intended Coyote's character to
have a comic effect, at which he is certainly successful, but then
somehow in the editing the point of the film, which was to make a
comedy, got strangely twisted by someone with no sense of humor.  The
overall tone of the film is entirely serious, if excessively cliche,
and the direciton never makes it clear how you are supposed to react.
     If this is a serious film, it has been done better before, for
example in the execrable WILD ORCHID or the mediocre 9-1/2 WEEKS.
I never before realized how good these movies could look in
comparison.  Compared to Coyote as directed by Polanski, Mickey Rourke
is Marlon Brando before he gained weight.
     I have a suggestion for improving the film, if Polanski wants to
try again.  Try casting Grant as the wrecked lover and Coyote as the
naif.  The effect would be entirely different, and much more
intersting, if it were Grant saying those lines--assuming he could
keep his expression straight, that is.
     One other thing: Polanski would be well-advised to keep young
children out of his films.  One cannot help but wonder what the casting
requirements must be.
