Title
Review for One Night Stand (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The accepted wisdom about one-night stands is that they
are virtually meaningless trysts between people who may or
not be persons of substance.  In the hands of Mike Figgis,
though, the title takes on an ironic sense: the sexual
rendezvous of two attractive human beings has a seismic
impact on their lives and those of the people who love them
by causing two generally superficial beings to re-examine their
existence.  While "One Night Stand" does not share the
quality of Mike Figgis's masterwork, "Leaving Las Vegas," the
picture carries some of his signature pointers.  Like "Vegas,"
this film zeroes in on one character who is in desperate
straits, in this case a man dying of AIDS, while bearing still
another resemblance in highlighting characters who are at the
most dramatic points in their lives.
   Written originally by Joe Eszterhas who had Nicolas Cage
in mind for the key role of Max, "One Night Stand" was
overhauled by Figgis who retains full credit for its writing. 
Opening theatrically as Max (Wesley Snipes) addresses his
audience directly to describe his shallow but busy life, the
movie follows him as he walks down the familiar New York
streets of his childhood, on the way to a meeting with an
actor, Charlie (Robert Downey Jr.), with whom he once
shared a deep friendship.  Max describes himself as an
advertising man, a successful one of about 35 years, who has
a sense of guilt for abandoning his friendship with Charlie.
   When Max misses his flight to L.A. because of traffic
congestion, he meets Karen (Nastassja Kinski), who has
called attention to an ink stain on Max's shirt and later joins
her at a concert.  The two are later mugged, and when Max
fights off the felons, Karen invites him to share her quarters
for the night.  One year later Max, a resident of Los Angeles
who is married to Mimi (Ming-Na Wen), returns to New York
to visit Charlie, now hospitalized with AIDS, and coincidentally
runs into Karen.  What follows seems contrived but features a
dramatic payoff that brings the entire work into sharper focus.
   While "One Night Stand" does not have the edgy acting of
Nicolas Cage and Elizabeth Shue from "Leaving Las Vegas,"
it is performed particularly well by Robert Downey Jr., who
redeems himself from a disastrous role in the indie movie
directed by his dad, "Hugo Pool."  Like Eric Roberts in "It's My
Party," the dying Charlie insists on setting up a party in his
hospital room, his pals regaling him with gifts, laughs, and
good cheer.  While he looks deathly ill, he can elicit surprising
laughs from the audience by the grimaces on his face, the
most enduring being the expression he suggests when he
sees Max locked in a passionate embrace with Karen who, it
turns out, is Charlie's sister-in-law.  In several well-developed
and partly improvised episodes preceding this love-clasp,
Figgis exposes us to the coming breakdown of Max's
marriage to Mimi, who objects strongly to the way Max has
been putting down the shallow people he works with in his ad
agency.  The humor of his job is effectively pointed out at a
meeting in which the serious discussion of the day is how to
get a public to become interested in having their hot dogs with
their sponsor's sauerkraut.  Still another prolonged and very
funny episode finds Mimi suspiciously smelling Max, who had
just returned from his one-night stand in New York, accusing
him of misbehavior--which, she concludes, is proven by the
cigarette smoke she sniffs on his clothing.  Max has been
caught: he has not really given up smoking.
   Figgis knows how to back up the humor and pathos of his
production with the right music, contrasting New York and
L.A. not as Neil Simon did in "California Suite" but by
differentiating the coasts by a jazz track to represent the East
and pop music for the Hollywood set.  Perhaps the most
interesting subtext is the way race has absolutely nothing to
do with the dynamics of the story.  Max is black, his wife
Asian-American, and his lover a dazzling blonde. Rated R. 
Running Time: 102 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Steve Kong
After seeing Mike Figgis' Leaving Las Vegas, I was expecting a lot from One
Night Stand.  I'm sad to say that I'm sorely disappointed with One Night
Stand.
One Night Stand opens with Max Carlyle (Wesley Snipes) talking directly to
the audience, explaining some back history.  After this opening monologue,
we get into the first "act".  The first act is great.  It is a character
study of Snipes' Max and Natassja Kinski's Karen.  Max is in New York for
business and on the day that he is scheduled to fly back to Los Angeles,
where he lives, he misses his flight.  He meets Karen, who after a series
of events, ends up with Max in bed.  This first act shows the characters
well.  It is when this first act ends and the words "One Year Later" pops
up on the screen does the movie slide downhill and turn into the average
soap opera.  One year after Max and Karen's one night stand, Max's best
friend, who is gay and HIV positive, Charlie (Robert Downey Jr.) is dying.
In a freak coincident Max meets up with Karen again through a predictable
plot twist.  From here we get to see the typical "marriage on the rocks"
drama.
Figgis who takes quad-duties with One Night Stand; writing, directing,
composing the music, and producing, should have really concentrated on one
or two of these things instead of all four.  The writing, which originates
from a Joe Eszterhas (Basic Instinct) script, is mediocre at best.  The
music is, most of the time, out of place.  And the directing is off beat.
The performances by the leads are good.  Snipes does a good job with his
role as Max Carlyle, though there could have been more from him.  Kiniski
is great as Karen.  As for Robert Downey Jr. as Charlie, he is the one to
see the movie for.  Though his part in the movie is just a cheap way of
getting Max and Karen back together, Downey Jr. gives a touching
performance as the dying Charlie.  On the minor roles, Ming-Na Wen (The Joy
Luck Club) gives an average performance as Max's sex-starved wife.  And
Kyle MacLachlan (The Trigger Effect) gives a bland boring performance as
Charlie's homophobic brother.
One of my bigger complaints about One Night Stand, next to the music and
writing, is the way the camera and the cuts are handled.  Both seem sloppy,
at least to me, and the slow fades to black make the slow moving movie seem
even slower.  I think that Figgis' is trying too hard to make his films
"different" and it shows.
One Night Stand is definitely video-only material.  Leaving Las Vegas was a
great movie that did character studies on the two leads, but One Night
Stand is just a typical shallow TV soap opera made for the big screen.  And
though I enjoyed the first third or so of the film, the rest of the film is
somewhat unbearable and the plot twists are completely predictable and
silly.  Figgis should learn to concentrate more on one or two roles in the
film making process instead of trying to take the reigns at four of them.
Skip One Night Stand in the theatres and if you want to see a third of a
good film or a great performance from Robert Downey Jr., check it out on
video.

Author
James Berardinelli
     ONE NIGHT STAND, director Mike Figgis' follow-up to his critically 
acclaimed 1995 feature, LEAVING LAS VEGAS, is a peculiar combination of 
two disparate plot ideas and approaches.  The first, a finely-realized 
portrait of a man and woman's striving to connect and find comfort in a 
culture that embraces emotional isolation, comprises the first thirty 
minutes.  The other, a sometimes-tedious, often absurd soap opera about 
marital difficulties, is so much more shallow and uninvolving that it's 
difficult to believe that both are the product of one man's imagination.  
     ONE NIGHT STAND revolves around the relationships of two married 
couples.  The film introduces us to Max (Wesley Snipes), our narrator, a 
highly successful TV commercial director who's in New York on business.  
While there, he stops by to see an old friend, Charlie (Robert Downey 
Jr.), who has been diagnosed as HIV+.  Over the years, a rift has 
developed between the former buddies, and Max is eager to repair it.  
Back at his hotel, Max finds his attention arrested by a beautiful blond 
woman, Karen (Nastassja Kinski).  After she points out an ink spot on 
his shirt, she invites him to her room so he can change his shirt.  
Later that night, after he misses his flight to L.A., he joins Karen at 
a concert.  Afterwards, following an attempted mugging, they end up 
sleeping together.  The next day, Max returns to the West Coast, where 
his lively, sex-starved wife, Mimi (Ming-Na Wen), is waiting for him.
     That's the good part of the film.  The scenes between Max and Karen 
are well-realized, with an interesting photographic style that captures 
both the characters' desperation and the eroticism of the situation, and 
a haunting jazz score composed by writer/director Figgis.  Although both 
individuals claim to be happily married, it's plain that they both crave 
a closeness and connection that they don't have with their spouses.  For 
Max and Karen, sex isn't an expression of passion or physical pleasure, 
but an attempt to plug an emotional void.  They don't love each other, 
but they fulfill a need.
     Then, following a caption that reads "One year later," ONE NIGHT 
STAND undergoes a precipitous drop in quality.  Max, accompanied by 
Mimi, is back in New York because Charlie is dying.  In his friend's 
hospital room, he unexpectedly encounters Karen, who turns out to be the 
wife of Charlie's brother, Vernon (Kyle MacLachlan).  The next hour is 
filled with Charlie's seemingly-endless death, pregnant glances between 
Karen and Max, and an unbelievably dull dinner where the two couples 
engage in all sorts of pointless conversation.  The "surprising" twist 
at the end, which is anything but unexpected, causes ONE NIGHT STAND to 
conclude on a sour, contrived note.
     None of the character interaction in the film's second act comes 
close to matching that of the first act.  And, while Robert Downey Jr. 
gives a powerful performance as the dying Charlie, it's not an original 
role.  In fact, the bedridden, AIDS-inflicted individual has been used 
so often that it's in danger of becoming a cliché, and Figgis' 
interpretation of this character doesn't offer anything new.  Charlie is 
basically just a plot device to reunite Max and Karen so they can 
complete their unfinished business.
     Because Max is the narrator, he is the best developed of the five 
principles.  Snipes, who occasionally mixes in a serious role amidst 
action pictures (take his fine work in THE WATERDANCE, for example), is 
believable as a successful-but-frustrated artist, although questions 
about his latent homosexuality are never answered.  Kinski's Karen is 
largely one-dimensional, but the actress successfully uncovers her 
alter-ego's emotional core.  Both Mimi and Vernon are underdeveloped, 
although the vivacious Ming-Na Wen gives a strong enough performance to 
capture our attention, if not our interest.  Kyle MacLachlan, on the 
other hand, is boring.
     After the emotional wallop delivered by LEAVING LAS VEGAS, the 
uneven, soap opera-ish presentation of ONE NIGHT STAND is disappointing.  
When Figgis' film is exploring emotional isolation, it rings true, but 
when it tries to mix and match couples and expand the Karen/Max 
relationship onto a larger canvas, it loses its focus.  This is one of 
those rare movies where it might be worthwhile to leave partway through.  
Once the timespan fast-forwards fifty-two weeks, ONE NIGHT STAND has 
presented almost everything of value that it has to offer.  After that, 
it's a slow burn to a predictable finish.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Michael Dequina
One Night Stand (R) ** (out of ****)
        One Night Stand began life as another Joe Eszterhas sex romp, but after
Leaving Las Vegas's Mike Figgis came on board to direct and extensively
rewrite the script, Eszterhas amicably relinquished all writing credit.
Figgis's resulting film is perhaps more serious-minded than Eszterhas
originally intended, but after a promising start, this look at adultery
loses its way--and, in the end, anything resembling a point.
        The film begins rather oddly, with Max Carlyle (Wesley Snipes, who won the
Best Actor at the Venice Film Festival for his fine performance) emerging
from a New York hotel and introducing himself directly to the camera.  He
is a successful Los Angeles commercial director, with a large house, a
beautiful wife named Mimi (Ming-Na Wen), and two young children.  Max's
family does not accompany him on this trip, which he makes partly for
business but mostly to reconnect with his former best friend, gay,
AIDS-stricken performance artist Charlie (Robert Downey Jr.).
        Unexpected chaos and confusion (involving a hotel clerk played by Figgis
himself, hiding his moptop under a bad Elvis-like wig) prompt Max to stay
in New York for an extra night, and by chance he meets Karen (Nastassja
Kinski), a mysterious blonde who is also married.  The traumatic
circumstances that lead to the titular adulterous encounter are mechanical,
but, under the director's capable hand, they are quite believable, and when
the two do fall into bed, it is depicted in a non-exploitative (and very
non-Eszterhas) fashion: brief glimpses, sensuously scored by Figgis
himself, punctuated by fadeouts (the latter a visual flourish Figgis comes
to overuse as the film progresses).
         The next day Max returns home to L.A. feeling removed from his life, and
this is where the film starts running into some trouble.  While the reasons
behind his feelings of detachment are completely understandable, those
behind the strain between Max and Mimi are not.  Certainly the one night
would cause some marital turbulence, but it is implied that their marriage
already had some underlying problems, a point which is poorly established
(the only detectable problem is Mimi's aggressiveness in the bedroom).
More strain comes a year later, when Max, this time with Mimi in tow,
returns to the Big Apple to visit the now-bedridden Charlie, and
reencounters Karen, who, as it turns out, is married to Charlie's brother
Vernon (Kyle MacLachlan).
        With his discreet handling of the one night, Figgis successfully
establishes that the Max and Karen's initial encounter is not about a cheap
thrill.  But it is also meant to show a passionate spiritual connection
being made between Max and Karen, which I could not grasp; instead I simply
saw two people clinging to each other in a moment of weakness--no more, no
less.  So when the reunited Max and Karen try hard to not give in to their
feelings, one wonders exactly what those feelings are.  Lust?  No; their
night together is shown as more than a cheap thrill.  Love?  That seems to
be the intent, but one never gets a clear idea of it, especially since we
get no real insight into what Karen feels the whole time, and Kinski adds
no dimension to her flatly written role.  In fact, the only characters that
are not written with any depth are Max and Charlie (marvelously played by
Downey), who, not surprisingly, serves as the voice of reason.
        Figgis told Entertainment Weekly that he does not think that any of the
original Eszterhas script remains in the film, but one would never guess
based on the pair of twists that cap the film.  Lacking in any concrete
buildup, subtle or overt, these developments seem to come straight out of
Eszerhas's manipulative bag of tricks.  As problematic as I found One Night
Stand to be for much of its running time, at the very least it appeared to
be setting up a point.  But by the time the conclusion rolls around, you
wonder if Figgis ever really had one.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in your heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Max Carlyle's soul is being eaten from the inside out.  A happily
married man with a beautiful wife and two adorable kids, he strayed just
this one time a while back, and his life has never been the same since.
Although none of his friends or relatives know, he knows, and
his guilt has become unbearable.
     Mike Figgis, the talented writer, director and composer of the
devastating LEAVING LAS VEGAS, takes on all three positions again in
ONE NIGHT STAND.  Even though the film suffers from its aloof and
uninviting approach, the Figgis genius in staging scenes is very
evident albeit in frequently subtle ways.
     Max, a wealthy, successful director of television commercials is
played against type by Wesley Snipes.  Max gets stuck in New York
without a hotel room due to a UN 50th anniversary celebration.
(Earlier, he had made intense but innocent eye contact with a lovely
married woman named Karen in a hotel lobby.)  Nastassja Kinski, who has
aged 5 years in the past 15, gives a sweet and delicate performance as
Karen, a rocket scientist -- really.  Whereas Kinski once burst with
raw sexual energy, see CAT WOMAN for example, here she has a charming
innocence.  Her reserved allure outshines Snipes, who spends more time
than necessary brooding.
     Max and Karen end up going to a string quartet concert together
since she has a pair of tickets, and they are both without their
spouses.  This is all on the up-and-up even if a bit risky given the
close proximity of two such attractive people.  Figgis has them making
small talk in whispers at the concert.  The beauty of the staging is
that we never hear a word they say, but their body language,
particularly in the way Karen tilts her head, shows the heaving
flirting going on.
     All of this would probably have come to nothing had a mugging not
scared them badly, thereby bringing them together physically.  The
intimacy of their hug speaks volumes about their feelings even when
their words deny it.  Since she has a hotel room, she offers the spare
bed for him to sleep on until his plane leaves in the morning.  "Look,
you just saved my life," she tells him since he did scare off their
attackers.  "And we're both adults.  We're both married.  It is the
least I can do."  When she wakes with nightmares that night, she
willingly does much more.  With precise, ballet-like movements they
consummate their affair.  Cutting in and out of the shadowy images,
editor John Smith and cinematographer Declan Quinn give the scene a
gossamer beauty than has a mysteriously asexual feeling.
     When Max returns home still smelling of Karen's perfume, his world
has been forever turned upside down.  His gorgeous and sexually
aggressive wife, Mimi, suspects him right away -- he's been smoking
again.  (Well, yes, as a form of pre-foreplay with Karen, and not a
solo act as his wife assumes.)  Although Mimi seems to know every
position imaginable, she suggests they rent a video to learn some more.
This makes the already morose Max even more depressed.  How could he
not love someone this terrific?
     Ming-Na Wen, the narrator and one of the leads in THE JOY LUCK
CLUB, gives a bold and brassy performance as Mimi, who makes Max's
guilt over cheating on her easy to empathize with.  Ever confident Wen
steals all of her scenes with Snipes.
     A subplot has Robert Downey Jr. as Max's dying, old friend
Charlie.  Max goes to comfort Charlie who has AIDS.  Although Max
specifically points out to the audience in the opening that he is not
gay, the story introduces some doubt.  Downey, looking too well-fed for
the part, does an excellent job of acting a prolonged death.
     The bifurcated movie would have been better served if it had
chosen one subject rather than two.  Just when the infidelity aspects
start to become interesting, it switches to the hospital room.  And
when the AIDS story starts to touch your heart, back we go to Max's
romantic troubles.
     In a movie rich with minor characters, Kyle MacLachlan appears as
Charlie's homophobic and rubber-glove wearing brother Vernon.  Vernon
frequents Charlie's hospital room and keeps a nervous smile on his face
most of the time.
     The problem with the picture seems on the surface to be its
plodding pacing, but actually the defect has to do more with the
approach Figgis takes with the material.  The rarely compelling movie
takes an ethereal attitude about much of the activities.  Max's
troubles, for example, are never adequately connected to either his
infidelity or his dying friend.  And everyone seems somehow removed
from the material even though all of their acting, with the possible
exception of Snipes, is good.
     The ending suffers from excessive cuteness and a twist from out of
left field but manages to work anyway.  ONE NIGHT STAND is a film that
is less than the sum of its parts.  Figgis misses the mark slightly but
makes an interesting picture nevertheless.
     ONE NIGHT STAND runs 1:44.  It is rated R for drug usage, sex,
nudity, profanity, and adult themes.  It would be acceptable for older
and mature teenagers.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Wesley Snipes, Nastassja Kinski, Robert Downey Jr., Ming-Na
Wen, and Kyle MacLachlan
Synopsis:
Max (Wesley Snipes) is a director of commercials who has a wife, two
kids, a dog, and house in sunny California. Unfortunately, Max is
unhappily married. In the beginning of the movie Max is alone in New
York to visit his best friend Charlie (Robert Downey Jr.) who has just
been diagnosed with AIDS.  By chance Max meets a lady scientist named
Karen (Nastassja Kinski ) who is attending a convention in New York.
Soon romantic sparks fly, and the two have a one night stand. Max flies
back home to California and has guilty feelings for a long time. Two
years later, Max and his wife Mimi (Ming-Na Wen) are in New York to
visit Charlie who now lays dying in the hospital. Max is shocked to see
Karen at the hospital; apparently Charlie's brother's wife is none other
than Karen. Not only that, but the passion between Max and Karen is
alive and well. What will the two of them do about it?
Opinion: 
Mike Figgis apparently had a big hand in this movie since, he was
director, writer, and the guy who composed the jazzy musical score. Did
he do a good job? Hmm. Interesting cinematography. Often the camera
moves between scenes by fading in and out of black or ending in a color
freeze-frame that becomes a black and white snapshot. The acting is
pretty solid, especially by Robert Downey Jr. as the AIDS victim. The
chemistry between Wesley Snipes and Nastassja Kinski is moderate, rather
than hot. Similar to ‘When Harry Met Sally' but perhaps not as cohesive,
‘One Night Stand' is one of those ‘life' movies where boy meets girl
while jazzy vocals and music play in the background. People who liked
‘When Harry Met Sally' would probably learn towards this movie.

Author
David N. Butterworth
"One Night Stand" is a slight, puerile, and rather pointless tale of
infidelity that tries too hard to be deep.  The performances are all fine;
it's the writer, composer, and director--Mike Figgis all--that spoil the
show.
Successful television commercial director Max Carlyle (Wesley Snipes) is in
New York visiting an old friend who's dying of AIDS.  He misses his flight
back to L.A., however, for a variety of reasons--a leaky pen in his shirt
pocket, bad traffic, and a more-than-passing interest in an intriguing
blonde called Karen (Nastassja Kinski), with whom he winds up spending the
night.
Max returns to L.A. where his petite, fun-loving wife Mimi (played by
Ming-Na Wen) tells him she misses her "Mr. Pufnstuf," referring to Max's
(recently used) "equipment."  Once home, the family dog acts all funny
around him (Max didn't *shower*!?) causing Mimi to comment, half in jest
and half in fear, "maybe he smells another bitch on you?"  Charming.
A year later, Max and Karen bump (and grind) into each other again,
triggering a chain of coincidences that result in the film's ridiculous
(double!) climax.  (Talking of entendres, there are plenty of unintentional
laughs in "One Night Stand" but deliberate attempts at humor fall
completely flat.)
Stylistically, "One Night Stand" is awkward.  Scenes frequently fade to
black, not at the end but throughout, and often.  It's a sophomoric
technique that damages the film's tempo: scenes that appear to have ended
continue, and those that require resolution have gone by the wayside when
the image returns.  Having Snipes talk directly to camera in the opening
sequence sets an inappropriate expectation also, especially as the
technique is never used again (one frustrated sigh to camera
notwithstanding).
Similarly, Figgis slaps together a schizophrenic score--jazz doodlings,
solo piano pieces, melancholic strings, and flighty vocal passages--as if
this multifaceted filmmaker can't decide what mood he wants to establish.
The crisis at the center of the film is troubling as it elevates "One Night
Stand" to a level of "significance" it doesn't deserve.  While Robert
Downey Jr. is appropriately cast and affecting as Charlie, Max's
HIV-positive friend, it's uncomfortable and decidedly tacky watching Max
and Karen groping at each other while Charlie's life ticks away.  Kyle
MacLachlan, as Charlie's brother Vernon, doesn't have much to do (unless
doubling for Matthew Perry was a script requirement), and Julian Sands and
Amanda Donohoe, both often extreme performers, are wasted in minor roles.
Nothing makes a whole lot of sense.  Max has a sexy wife so we should
believe he's looking for more than just physical gratification?  Mimi's
dinner conversation might not be all that stimulating--Max tries to stir
things up by suggesting, for example, that the California mudslides were
started deliberately--but he doesn't engage Karen in any kind of
intellectual discussion either.
While "One Night Stand" isn't nearly as Penthouse Forum as Figgis' previous
film, the critically-acclaimed boozefest "Leaving Las Vegas," it does
continue his penchant for seedy situations in which his lead actresses slip
in and out of flimsy outfits.  After a couple of wet dreams in a row, Mike
Figgis might want to consider refocusing his efforts in a less adolescent
direction--one that might provide him with the depth he seeks.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The first half of Mike Figgis' ONE NIGHT STAND contains some of the
most effective film-making moments to hit American screens this year, yet
even at the outset it's obvious that Figgis isn't working at his sharpest.
The film opens with protagonist Max Carlyle (Wesley Snipes) directly
addressing the audience as he walks down a Manhattan street.  He relates
to us that he's a successful L.A.-based television commercial director,
happily married with children and hoplessly straight, though some of his
best friends are gay.  In fact, the reason he's in New York is to mend
fences with Charlie Reevis (Robert Downey Jr.), an estranged gay buddy Max
just learned has AIDS.  It's a lazy narrative device which allows Figgis
five minutes of screen time to re-hash the press notes before allowing Max
to finish with a portentous "We'll see what happens."
     What happens, at least for nearly an hour, is a marvelously detailed
portrait of an isolated infidelity and what it means to a man's life.  In
his New York hotel, Max meets a beautiful woman named Karen (Nastassja
Kinski), then ends up spending the evening in her company after missing
his flight back to California.  One string quartet concert and a thwarted
mugging later, Max and Karen are sharing a bed, and a sexual encounter
staged with tremendous eloquence.  The sequence lingers and builds,
showing the participants taking tentative steps while fooling themselves
that each subsequent step is as far as they will go.
    The scenes between Max and Karen are tantalizing, but they're also
risky, since Figgis is showing us an act of adultery without first
providing much context to build sympathy for the characters.  That doesn't
happen until Max returns to Los Angeles, and we get a chance to see him
with his wife Mimi (Ming-Na Wen).  In one outrageous and hilarious scene,
Figgis shows Mimi ordering Max through a fast and furious bout of
lovemaking.  The two sex scenes in ONE NIGHT STAND are probably the most
disparate I've seen in a single film, and the most uniquely effective.
Max's shallow, romanceless life unfolds gradually, allowing the
significance of his one night stand to build in our minds even as it
builds in his.
     All is well in ONE NIGHT STAND until the words "One Year Later"
appear on the screen, at which point the film begins to disintegrate like
a bad marriage.  In part, the casting of Snipes in the lead role is
responsible.  Snipes is a reliable performer, but he never seems entirely
in touch with this character.  To be fair, Figgis has written the part as
the most guilt-wracked, angst-filled and introspective soul this side of
Hamlet.  Max spends much of the second half of ONE NIGHT STAND wandering
about in a heavy-lidded daze, ever on the verge of bursting into a
profound soliloquy.  There are a couple of solid moments between Snipes
and Downey (affecting and acerbic as the terminally ill Charlie), but at a
certain point, 45 minutes in anticipation of a life-changing revelation
feels like about 30 minutes too many.
     The blame for that belongs entirely with Figgis, who can't hold the
level of interest built by the film's first half.  At turns he opts either
to tell too much (in Snipes' opening monologue) or too little (in most of
the second hour).  It's a story which hints and teases, then offers a
resolution which asks for a tremendous leap of faith as to the
compatibility of certain characters.  What begins as honest and probing
turns sluggish, predictable and coy.  ONE NIGHT STAND is at its most
provocative when it finds a man beginning to question everything
fundamental in his life.  Sooner or later, for our sake if not for his
own, he needs to stop questioning and actually do something.  Snipes as
the melancholy Dane isn't the stuff of which great drama is made.

Author
Berge Garabedian
Mike Figgis' follow-up to the critically acclaimed LEAVING LAS VEGAS
(8.5/10) from 1995, examines the repercussions of marital infidelity,
and another man's struggle with HIV contamination.
PLOT:
A married man with two kids has a one-night affair with a married woman
during a weekend business trip to New York. Once back in LA, he
contemplates his life and the consequences of his sinful act.
CRITIQUE:
Comparing this film to FATAL ATTRACTION (8/10) or PHILADELPHIA (7/10)
would be doing a great disservice to either one of those films, but
nonetheless, the plot line doesn't stretch far from their respective
story lines. Marital infidelity and a close friend dying of AIDS are
the main topics in this film. Unfortunately, Figgis resolves absolutely
nothing in regards to the infidelity topic, and scores only a few
points in respect to the horror of a man dying of this disease. The
film concludes on an absolutely ridiculous circumstance, which doesn't
actually show anyone working through any of their complex issues.
The main problem I had with this film was its lack of honesty and
realism in regards to the after-effects of a one-night affair. Nobody
in this story seemed hurt, angry or despondent about the situation,
while the better half of the film concentrated on a friend's struggle
with the fatal disease. Robert Downey Jr. played his part as the man
dying of AIDS remarkably well, while the rest of the cast didn't offer
any mentionable performances. I found Kinski's character weak in
persona, but did like Ming-Wa's strong and independent wife character
(Mind you, I've had a thing for her since TV's "The Single Guy").
Overall, this film had very little entertainment value, no grand moral
conclusions or solutions, and nothing exceptionally interesting to
offer anyone. Figgis' directorial style was cool at times, but he did
overuse the "fade to black" shot during one too many internals. If you
are interested in either subject matter of this movie, I suggest that
you rent either one of the two films that I mentioned earlier on, and
save yourself some time and money. 
Little Known Facts: 
Joe Eszterhas was an uncredited writer on this film (This might explain
a lot of things...:)).
Wesley Snipes appeared in Michael Jackson's "Bad" music video. You can
only see him in the full length, 16 minute, black & white/color music
video. And despite the fact that Wesley does not often acknowledge it,
he did attend the State University of New York (SUNY) at Purchase and
graduated with a BFA in 1985.
Robert Downey Jr. lived with fellow actor Sarah Jessica Parker for 7
years during the 1980s, and studied ballet in London when he was young.
Nastassja Kinski has a daughter with Quincy Jones, and is fluent in
English, German, French, Italian and Russian. 
