Title
Review for Last Night (1998)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: The world will come to an end at midnight.  Everyone
knows it and must make a final peace with the last hours of their
lives.  This is an intelligent science fiction film with no special
effects, just personalities and ideas.  Rating: 8 (0 to 10), high +2
(-4 to +4)
   - It is the last night of the planet and several different people
     are reacting each in their own way to the end.  The film covers 6
     PM to midnight.  The main character is Patrick played by David
     McKellan who also wrote and directed.
   - Reminiscent of ON THE BEACH.  But much more so of a story Richard
     Matheson wrote, "The Last Day."  (P.S.  On rereading the 1953
     Matheson, this film is almost a loose adaptation of that story.
     The similarities may be mere coincidence, but they are numerous
     and they are very striking.)
   - US release may be problematical.  The title is lackluster and
     non-memorable, though very appropriate when you know about the
     film.  Also provincial Americans may not care about the end of the
     world coming to Toronto.  They probably would feel it would not
     affect them.  Perhaps a PBS release would be possible.
   - Patrick's family has declared it Christmas and are hurt that the
     (adult) children will not spend the whole evening with them.
   - Grocery stores mostly looted.  It seems though that one of
     everything is left.
   - Some people continue business as usual, some want sex, some react
     with religion, some riot.  Some people are in total denial.
   - Much comedy, much drama.
   - Very Canadian cast.
   - It does not get dark.  It is just always daytime.
   - Radio playing "Last Night I Didn't Get to Sleep At All."  How
     appropriate.
   - David Cronenberg as a kind of bland functionary manager at the gas
     company.  Genvieve Bujold as French teacher visiting former
     student.
   - Science fiction film with no special effects, cost about two
     million dollars.
   - The person you have been thrown together with by chance becomes
     the most important person to you for the rest of your life.
   - Why would it be so precisely at midnight?  What about other time
     zones?  What is the nature of what is destroying the world?

Author
Christopher Null
     It's six hours until the end of the world, and Bruce Willis, Robert
Duvall, and Will Smith are nowhere in sight.  The world is *really gonna
end* -- so what do you do with those six hours?
     I rarely read film production notes, but writer/director/star Don
McKellar's introduction to LAST NIGHT caught my eye this time.  I quote,
`The world is ending, once again.  But this time, in my movie, there is
no overburdened loner duking it out with the asteroid, no presidents or
generals turning the tables on extra-terrestrials.  Those heroes are out
there, somewhere, one hopes, but I was interested in the rest of us
suckers-hapless individuals who, with limited access to nuclear
resources, would have to come to terms with the fast-approaching
finale.'
     This is heady stuff.  I've long toyed with the idea of writing a
black comedy set on the eve of our destruction, but always abandoned the
idea because it's just too maudlin.  Atom Egoyan veteran McKellar
doesn't completely escape that sentiment in this film, but he does a
commendable job at taking what might be the most difficult of subjects
and turning it into something that's enjoyable to watch.
     Reminiscent of SHORT CUTS in many ways, LAST NIGHT follows the
intertwined stories of the last six hours in the lives of several
people.  McKellar takes the lead as Patrick, a troubled man who has to
deal with his family (including sister Polly), sex-crazed friend Craig
(Rennie), and lost lamb Sandra (Oh), who's trying to get home in time so
she and her husband can kill each other before midnight, when the world
will go away (in a mysterious fate).
     None of this is played to comedy  well, maybe a *little* comedy,
and before long, the world has indeed ended for what might be the first
time on film, and everyone's life has changed along the way (you know,
before they died).
     LAST NIGHT is heavy filmmaking, but it rewards the patient viewer.
It's deep and thoughtful, and quite sleepy in parts, but McKellar, in
his directorial debut, has done an admirable job.  I know I couldn't
have done it.
Director: Don McKellar
Producer: Niv Fichman, Daniel Iron, Caroline Benjo
Writer: Don McKellar
Starring: Don McKellar, Sandra Oh, Callum Keith Rennie, Sarah Polley,
David Cronenberg, Tracy Wright, Genevieve Bujold
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Dennis Schwartz

LAST NIGHT (director/writer: Don McKellar;  cinematographer: Doug Koch;
editor: Reginald Harkema; cast: Don McKellar (Patrick Wheeler), Sandra
Oh (Sandra), Callum Keith Rennie (Craig), Sarah Polley (Jennifer
Wheeler), David Cronenberg (Duncan), Tracy Wright (Donna), Genevieve
Bujold (Mrs. Carlton), Roberta Maxwell (Patrick's Mother), Robin Gammel
(Patrick's Father), Trent McMullen (Alex), Karen Glave (Lily), Charmion
King (Grandmother), Jessica Booker (Rose), 1998-Canada)
Don McKellar's witty debut film "Last Night" is about the end of the
world. It tells how a number of people in Toronto intend to spend their
last hours from 6 p.m. till midnight. Those we see, either have a
farewell dinner, get nostalgic over old home videos, play their most
memorable music (Pete Seeger singing "Kum Ba Yah"), pray to God, gather
for a street celebration, give a piano concert, get violent, or fulfill
their sexual fantasies. McKellar goes for the smaller private moments
rather than a grand philosophical argument about the meaning of life or
a catastrophic special effect ending. Because of that, everything
becomes personal for the small group whose selected stories run parallel
to the demise of the world.
Why Doomsday is upon the world is never explained; we only know that
there is no doubt that it will take place and all the inhabitants of the
city are resigned to that. The focus of the film isn't on any sort of
biblical apocalypse, nor is it on the outside revellers and looters, or
on those who gather in the city square to make it a New Year's eve
celebration, but it is on those who think out what they want to do and
plan to spend a thoughtful evening preparing for the end.
The Wheeler family uses the catastrophe as an excuse to make this a
Christmas celebration, believing that even if it isn't Christmas that
day was the most memorable one for the family and the day of the year
they most fondly remember. The dinner is presided over by Mr. and Mrs.
Wheeler, their elderly guests are Rose and Mrs. Wheeler's mother, their
only son Patrick (Don McKellar), who is scolded for arriving an hour
late, his sister (Polley), who brings along her husband (Trent).
Patrick's parents are disturbed that he wants to spend the final moments
alone and not join them in praying to God at the end.
Patrick's sister and her husband plan to go to the square and celebrate
with the masses gathered at the square.
Sandra Oh's car was disabled by some rowdies, and she is stuck at a
grocery store on the opposite side of town from where she lives. She is
anxious to get home to her husband of two months, whom she loves very
much and made a suicide pact so that they would die together before
midnight by shooting each other simultaneously with her two berettas,
that is, after celebrating life together with a last meal, which she has
gathered from the grocery store that has just been looted. She is trying
to phone him but none of the public phones work, thereby she meets
Patrick who is returning to his apartment and talks him into letting her
use his apartment phone. She can't reach her husband and the two
strangers are brought together, trying to relate to each other in a
civil manner. Sandra needs a car to drive crosstown to get home, since
there is no other transportation available, and Patrick acts as the
perfect gentleman trying to get her a car while secretly wishing she
would stay with him.
Craig (Callum Keith Rennie) is busy that evening fulfilling his long
checklist of sexual accomplishments he wants to complete before dying.
We first see him when a prostitute (Glave) comes to his luxury
apartment, she is to be the first black woman he made love to. He then
has his high school French teacher (Genevieve Bujold), someone he has
always been attracted to, come over so he can act on that longtime
sexual fantasy.
Patrick, in his failed attempt to get a car for Sandra from the street,
remembers that he sold his antique car to his old high school friend
Craig and goes over there, but is surprised to meet his old French
teacher in the apartment, his immediate response is to revert back to
their relationship of teacher-pupil. Craig is at first unwilling to give
up such a valuable possession as his antique car, but gets talked into
it. When Sandra leaves in the car, Craig tells Patrick that on his
sexual list of things, is a homosexual fling. But Craig can't get all
his wishes, so he will have to settle for his next visitor, the
thirty-something virgin (Tracy). He always wanted a virgin and now will
fulfill his last sex wish just before midnight.
In the business section of town, the director of a gas company
(Cronenberg) phones all his customers to assure them the gas company
will keep doing their job until the end and then goes home to eat some
Ben and Jerry's ice cream in his meticulous apartment, only to be
disturbed by a violent intruder.
Patrick is prepared to die alone absorbed in thoughts about his dearly
departed wife, but is interrupted again by Sandra, who couldn't make it
through the hostile crowd, and asks if they could spend the final
moments together. They briefly tell each other their life story, both of
them feeling something strong growing inside them, but she wants to know
more about him, as she tells him: "Tell me something to make me love
you."
The film has an impinging discreteness and courtesy about it that
elevates the critical situation into a chance for the characters to
depart from the world maintaining what they believe in. The sardonic
humor and clever performances by Sandra Oh, Don McKellar and Callum
Keith Rennie, leave a lasting impression. Sandra and Don make their
experiences seem so vitally human, while Callum remains the eternal
materialist. The premise is a question that many people have asked
themselves, as I recall parties where the game played was to say how you
would like to die, and the responses were always so varied and
revealing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David Nusair
Starring Don McKellar, Callum Keith Rennie, Sandra Oh
"Last Night" could have an "AKA" tagged on the end of it that says, "It's
the end of the world, and we feel fine".  
"Last Night" is about just that.  The last night of planet earth's
existence.  The world is going to end at precisely midnight, January 1st,
2000.  How scientists were so accurately able to predict when this
catastrophic event would occur is never explained.  Nor is the event
itself.  Throughout the entire movie, no explanation is given as to why
this is happening.  In doing this, McKellar (who also wrote and directed
the film) seems to be trying to transcend the genre.  He's attempted to
make a film about people, and how each of them deals with their last night
of life.  The film contains no science fiction elements, which allows the
viewer to concentrate on the feelings and actions of the characters. 
McKellar is largely successful in his attempt to rise above his material. 
The film is set in Toronto, and follows several people in their various
escapades on the last night of existence.  There's McKellar, who plays a
man who just wants to be alone when the moment occurs, but keeps getting
interrupted by a woman (Sandra Oh) in search of her husband.  Her husband,
played by David Cronenberg, is spending the day working at the gas
company, informing people that they will attempt to keep providing gas
right up until the end.  Finally, there's McKellar's friend, played by
Callum Keith Rennie, a man who has spent his final months trying out every
sexual perversion you can think of.
McKellar has crafted a gang of the some of the most interesting characters
I've seen in a film in months.  These people all felt real to me,
especially the character played by Sandra Oh.  We can see her desperation,
her utter need to be with her husband in the final hours.  Rennie is good,
too, as the man who wants to literally try everything before he dies.  He
exudes such charm and likeablity, it's not surprising that we're rooting
for him to get what he wants.  But for me, the biggest surprise in the
movie is McKellar.  I knew that he was a talented director, but I had no
idea he could act as well.  His insistence to be alone, much to the dismay
of his parents, is something that most people would find difficult to
understand, but as played by McKellar, we can understand his reasons.  He
doesn't buy into the whole notion that just because everyone's going to
die, he should immediately find some companionship.  He realizes the
relationship would be forced, and they would only be together for the sake
of being together.  McKellar gives a brilliant performance, and I hope he
alternates between directing and acting.
My only quibble with the film is that we never find out why the world is
ending.  I really wanted to know, and my need to know was hanging over the
film at all times.  I appreciate the fact that McKellar didn't want the
material to rule the film, and that he wanted the movie to be more of a
study in human behavious.  However, in not telling the audience what the
cause of earth's destruction is, he's left a big question that is in their
minds throughout the film.  Another problem is we never see anybody
panicking.  I would imagine if the world was ending, and there was nothing
to be done about it, a large segment of the population would be going out
of their minds.  Instead, we are treated to shots of a giant crowd
partying like it's New Year's Eve.  I just didn't buy the fact that
everyone had completely accepted their fate.  No one had the urge to "rage
against the dying of the light".
Despite these small problems, "Last Night" is one of the best movies of
the year.  As opposed to the moronic "Armageddon", "Last Night" treats the
subject at hand with maturity and believabilty.  And Bruce Willis never
shows up to save the day.
-- 
David Nusair                                      dnusair@chat.carleton.ca
Come visit my "Reel Film Reviews" site! "http://chat.carleton.ca/~dnusair" 

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: Last Night
Rated [R], 69 minutes
Starring Don McKellar, Sandra Oh, Sarah Polley, Callum Keith Rennie,
David Cronenberg and Genevieve Bujold
Written and Directed by Don McKellar
website: http://www.lastnight.net
If one must see only one Canadian film this year . . . wait until next
year and hope to see two better films than Last Night, a production that
approaches the quality of middle echelon college flicks. Meaning? Last
Night should've stayed on the festival circuit or the Sundance Channel.
At minimum, I'll give writer/actor Don McKellar credit for trying to
stretch himself as a director. While his first effort, Last Night, may
have been good training for what it takes to be a director, it has all
the looks of a fair to middling senior student project. All the
interesting stuff is tied up in the script, which, as with his work on
The Red Violin, shows where his strengths lie.
The concept is good: What would you do if the world was about to end? No
hope of salvation. No Bruce Willis to blow up his spaceship and save the
day. It's an idea fit for Millenium Fever, but the execution is
uninteresting.
McKellar's characters cover a good range of reaction save one: panic.
Patrick (McKellar) just wants to be alone, though he does suffer through
a final Christmas dinner with his family, unwrapping `presents' of
discarded toys of Christmas past. His sister Jennifer (Sarah Polley)
wants the dinner over with so she can go and party like there's no
tomorrow -- picture New Year's Eve in Times Square. The ball drops.
Everybody dies.

There's Sandra (Sandra Oh) whose efforts to get home for a
murder-suicide pact with her husband go astray when a mob trashes her
car. It's a long walk home, during which she meets Patrick and a sort of
friendship is formed. Patrick brings her to his best friend Craig
(Callum Keith Rennie) who has cars to spare. Craig also has a detailed
chart of every sexual activity, position and partner type that he can
think of, and is working his way down the list to the very end. Duncan
(David Cronenberg) works at the gas company, and calls every customer to
let them know that the gas will still be on all the way to the end.
That's about as clever as the film gets. Cronenberg's name should ring
some bells with you, as should French actress Genevieve Bujold, who has
a small part as one of the checkboxes on Craig's list.

All the while, an elderly marathoner runs through the empty streets
yelling out how much time is left at the top of her lungs. On the radio
a DJ is playing the `Greatest 500 Songs Of All Time,' including timeless
tunes by Burton Cummings, the DeFranco Family, The Looking Glass and
Edward Bear. The songs alone  would be enough to make any music lover
put a pistol in the mouth, but Last Night is a Canadian film and that's
Canadian content. The song list doesn't even come off as a sly bit of
satire, that's how remarkably unemotional and ineffective this flick is.

Last Night has the look of a 16mm shoot blown up to 35, on out of
date stock. That may have been intentional, to visually represent
something, but Cranky ain't smart enough to figure that out. It looks
like a student film. Its actors have very little idea of what they're
supposed to mean in the big scheme of things.  Cranky will ignore the
special effects part of his brain that says: how is the Earth going to
die? Is it falling into the sun? Is it getting hit by an asteroid? Where
are the gravitational effects? because the budget is too low to pay for
'em. Actually, the budget is too low to pay for much of anything.
There's little emotional conflict of any kind in the family scenes (has
the government spiked the water supply with valium?) and no character
performance in the overall story to sympathize with. Last Night is the
kind of flick fit for obscure film festivals where prizes are given as
freely as pats on the backs for getting the product made.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Last Night, he would have paid...
Cranky liked McKellar's writing in Red Violin, though on that project
there was a collaborator. Didn't like it here. Didn't believe the
characters. Didn't believe the situations. Doesn't believe you should
spend your cash.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Lions Gate Films
 Director:  Don McKellar
 Writer:  Don McKellar
 Cast: David Cronenberg, Tracy Wright, Genevieve Bujold,
Roberta Maxwell, Robin Gammel, Trent McMullen, Karen
Glave, Jackie Burroughs, Arsinee Khanjian, Don McKellar,
Sandra Oh, Sarah Polley, Callum Keith Rennie
   As the millennium approaches, the assassination of
President Kennedy will undoubtedly make the news
magazines as one of the seminal events of the century. 
Remember the big question whose answer everyone over 40
seems to know, "Where were you on the day that JFK was
killed?"  In the Canadian movie "Last Night," which was a
surprise hit at the 1998 Toronto International Film Festival
and won the prestigious Prix de la jeunesse at
Cannes, Don McKellar has a more interesting query.  "Where
were you on the night the world came to an end?"  We seem
to have some time left before that milestone in the Earth's
sorry history, so let's rephrase: "What do you think you'll be
doing during the final hours of humankind's existence?" 
Completing a round-the-world excursion?  Smoking your final
joint at a week-long party with friends?  Huddled and
trembling in the corner like a hapless schizophrenic?  Mc
Kellar--a talented young man who wrote the offbeat "Thirty-
two Short Films About Glenn Gould" and the epic, if bloated,
"The Red Violin"--suggests otherwise, using a diverse group
of Toronto residents to stand in for the world at large.  
   McKellar's would appear a natural subject for a movie
about the ultimate fin de siecle, and yet when you think back
to how the Americans treated the theme-- in "Armageddon,"
"Deep Impact," and the like--you get what Hollywood knows
its market wants: explosions, heavy violence, and the use of
all the special effects that money can buy to ignite and
convulse the screen.  Though "Last Night" is not without
chaos, the disorder is carried out only by the crazy
teen-agers in the cast who do little more than shoot a guy off
screen, roll over a couple of vehicles, and cheer amid confetti
in Toronto's principal square as the clock ticks the time to
termination.  McKellar focuses inward to afford us a film
whose positive features are its originality, sensitivity, and
unpredictability, but whose noble aims are all but overrun by
largely mediocre improvisation-style acting and the image of
an off-Broadway play adapted to the screen by a guy with a
limited budget.
   Though they say that in your final moments, your entire life
passes before your eyes, the gang of Canadians--some
earnest, some quirky--go about their lives as though
nothing more depressing than another New Year's Eve were
taking place.  Chief among the surprises is the activity of
Duncan the gas man (David Cronenberg of all people),
whose startles the audience by being so utterly matter-of-fact. 
Duncan spends Earth's final six hours sitting at the phone in
the office of his company calling people in the region to
assure them that the company expects to supply its product
until the very end.  The sole comic moments in this otherwise
astonishingly ordinary, mundane group are supplied by Craig
Zwiller (Callum Keith Rennie), a fun-loving puckish fellow who
is the only one in the picture doing what you might expect a
fun-loving fellow to do: his aim is to have every kind of sex
imaginable during the world's final two months, and he has
strewn a check list across every inch of wallspace in his
kitchen outlining the specifics.  To no one's surprise he finds
virtually all the willing partners he needs--people of all races
and proclivities, not exluding a fifty-ish virgin (Tracy Wright)
and his former French teacher, Mrs. Carlton (Genevieve
Bujold).  
   McKellar is a sort of Canadian Woody Allen: not only
directing, writing and acting in his own picture but emulating
the American comic with his hangdog face and all-around
nerdish demeanor.  Though his character, Patrick, shares
with Greta Garbo a need to be alone on this of all nights,
away from his decent, prayerful family (Roberta Maxwell and
Robin Gammel as Mr. and Mrs. Wheeler), he is jolted back to
life by an amazing encounter with an intelligent but desperate
woman of Asian background, Sandra (Sandra Oh). Sandra is
eager to get home to the husband she loves but, realizing
that this is not going to happen, spends her final hours
discussing life and death with the newly invigorated young
man.
   While granting that "Last Night" is a welcome change from
the types of disaster movies realized in razzle-dazzle
manners by Hollywood (here we have no idea how and why
the earth is ending nor should we care), this off-beat
Canadian entry with a dollop of black humor, a generous
serving of philosophy, and an entirely sober concept of what
we'll be doing just before the second Big Bang, is done in by
its staginess.  McKellar might well consider taking his script
to prestigious off-Broadway theaters in New York such
as the Promenade and the CSC Repertory.  "Last Night" is
the work of a good playwright, not a screenwriter.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Don McKellar, Sandra Oh, David Cronenberg. Directed by Don
McKellar. Rated R.
The end of the world is here, but in Canadian director Don McKellar's
feature debut Last Night, there are no Satans, no comets, no astronauts
and no heroes (well, in the traditional sense of the word). It's a
thoughtful, affecting film, one that pulls no punches and plays no
tricks. This isn't an f/x production and those expecting action would
do well to stay away; this is for those who would like a quiet
apocalyptic vision for a change. This is not about the end of the world
as a concept -- we never find out why the world is ending or how
everyone knows it's ending -- but about how real, normal people deal
with it and what they do in the last six hours of their lives.
McKellar, who wrote The Red Violin for François Girard, casts himself
here as Patrick Wheeler, an average, reasonably happy man (though his
previous wife died of cancer) who has decided that he wants to spend
his last six hours at home alone, quietly. His parents are pissy that
he doesn't want to spend the time with his family -- but family dinners
can be boring even on the last day of your life, and Patrick has no
intention of putting himself through it. He is adamant that these hours
will be his.
But along comes Sandra (Sandra Oh), who has lost her car to doomsday
raiders (read: those who want to take advantage of the apocalypse to
commit no-consequence crimes, thereby letting their anger out) and is
looking for her husband, who seems to have disappeared. She comes to
Patrick's door in desperation, begging to use his phone, not knowing
where else to go. He reluctantly lets her in. Her husband doesn't
answer. They start talking. Patrick soon finds out why she is so
desperate to find her husband and what is in that mysterious case she
is carrying: she and her hubby made a pact to shoot each other right
before the world ends.
In a seemingly unrelated plot line, a gas company employee spends his
last hours calling each of his customers assuring them that he
will "make every effort to keep their gas flowing right up until the
end." Patrick's friend wants to realize every sexual fantasy he's ever
had -- including, but certainly not limited to sex with his teacher and
sex with another man (he propositions Patrick). Meanwhile, those who
decided to party their brains out on the last day, party on.
Last Night has more than its share of humor and it's even being
marketed as half-comedic, when in fact, it epitomizes poignancy. This
lies in the characters. David Cronenberg's gas company employee is one
of the year's saddest, most touching characters; even more impressive
considering how little screen time he was granted. Sandra Oh's Sandra
is devastating as a woman who refuses to let the world take her life.
Patrick seems to be the only content character on screen, but even he
has undertones of sadness. The movie isn't a weep-fest or a melodrama
because it's too good for either genre and because it ends with a
decisive touch of hope and redemption.
The sex-fantasy subplot may be a bit too "out there" for a film
otherwise so subdued that even I felt like screaming "BIG BANG!" at the
screen sometimes. But it tends to balance out well and I can't call the
film uneven. Actually, it's quite the opposite: most of the movie is
hypnotic in its relentless stability and calmness. The antidote to End
of Days, Last Night is the patient person's Armageddon.
The key to the movie is that we don't know how or why the world is
ending. The only information we are given is that for the past few
weeks (months?), the sun has stayed up 24/7, the cell phones haven't
worked and the government has closed up shop. No explanation is ever
provided. This maybe frustrating to some -- even I admit to wanting
something concrete at points -- but it is the reason this movie
succeeds. Providing an answer to logistical questions would have
diverted attention from the movie's main focus, which is hardly the end
of the world in and of itself.
McKellar's directorial debut is entertaining, deeply moving, dignified
and the all-important ending is just perfect. Seeing Last Night the
same week as End of Days made me realize how important it is to be able
to see films produced outside of the American Hollywood movie-mill,
especially those from north of the border.

Author
Steve Rhodes
When Patrick Wheeler (Don McKellar) was little, he was always down early
on Christmas to open his presents.  Now grown, he's an hour late to the
family gathering.  As they sit around the Christmas tree opening their
presents, his mother (Roberta Maxwell) reproves him for his lack of
punctuality.  As happy Christmas music plays through the house, Patrick
reminds his mother that it's not actually Christmas but the end of the
world.
In LAST NIGHT the world has six hours left before its demise, leaving
people the conundrum of what to do with those precious last hours.  The
intelligent script by McKellar, who also directs and stars in the movie,
carefully avoids discussions of why and how the earth will end.  We
learn that the earth's inhabitants have known about the cataclysmic
event for a few months, but that's all we learn.  The film concentrates
on the small stories, not the large ones.  Rather than focusing on
governments and reactions around the world, McKellar takes a microscopic
view of how some of the citizens of Toronto handle the end of their
lives.
The beauty of the production is that it is easy to see parts of yourself
in every character's reaction to the crisis.  Most people have not
contemplated their own deaths, much less the deaths of everyone they
know.  Think about it for a moment.  Assume that the world will end and
that you are down to the last few hours.  What do you want to do, and
with whom do you want to do it?  And what if you're single and not
currently in a relationship?
Feeling like an intriguing episode from the old television series called
"The Twilight Zone," the movie takes a short story approach.  There are
many characters, but the tightly written drama contains neither subplots
about scientists trying to avert the disaster nor any other narrative
diversions.
One character, Sandra (Sandra Oh), is trying without much luck to get
home to meet her husband before midnight.  Not wanting to go gentle into
that good night, they plan on blowing each other's brains out right
before the end.  A reluctant Patrick agrees to help her find
transportation.
In a story that is much more a drama than a comedy, Craig Zwiller
(Callum Keith Rennie) provides some of the modest laughs.  He is a man
with a plan.  He has a long list of pleasures, mainly sexual, that he's
always wanted to experience.  With an anal-retentive intensity, he's
been checking them off.  He's got a few left, like having sex with his
old high-school French teacher (Genevičve Bujold), and he's completing
the list as fast as he can.  Having been at it for months, he appears to
be one of the few having any pleasure, what with the apocalypse about to
arrive.
Most people react awkwardly, not knowing how to deal with such an
uncomfortable and unique situation.  David Cronenberg plays a manager at
the gas company, who tries to help out his customers by calling each one
to assure them that the company will try to keep their gas going as long
as possible.  He meticulously draws a line through the name of each of
his clients.  It passes the time for him, almost alone in his big office
building.
For some the end of the world is treated as a gigantic celebration like
a New Year's Eve party in Times Square.  In a cameo, Sarah Polley plays
Patrick's sister Jennifer, one of the revelers.  If they are going to
die, they figure that they might as well party until the end.  There are
of course looters, and worse, roaming the streets.  The story includes
this element but doesn't dwell on it.
An absorbing and thought-provoking little film, it grows on you.
Light-years from the special effects approach we are used to from
Hollywood, the picture engages your mind rather than your gut, making a
convincing argument that less can be more when it comes to filmmaking.
LAST NIGHT runs 1:36.  It is rated R for sexuality, language and brief
violence and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Richard Scheib
Canada/France. 1998. Director/Screenplay - Don McKellar, Producers - Niv 
Fichman & Daniel Iron, Photography - Douglas Koch, Music - Alexina Louie 
& Alex Pauk, Digital Visual Effects - Buzz Image Group (Supervisor - 
Stephane Landry), Special Effects Supervisor - John LaForet, Production 
Design - John Dondertman. Production Company - Red Violin 
Productions/Rhombus Media/Odeon Films Inc/Le Sept Arte/Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation/Haut et Corte/Canada Television and Cable 
Production Fund/Telefilm Canada/Equity Investment Program/The Canadian 
Film or Video Tax Credit.
Don McKellar (Patrick Wheeler), Sandra Oh (Sandra), Calvin Keith Rennie 
(Craig Zwiller), David Cronenberg (Duncan), Tracey Wright (Donna), 
Genevieve Bujold (Mrs Carlton), Robin Gammell (Mr Wheeler), Roberta 
Maxwell (Mrs Wheeler), Sarah Polley (Jennifer Wheeler), Karen Glave 
(Lily), Trent McCullen (Alex)
Plot: The world is due to end at midnight - there are six hours left. 
Architect Patrick Wheeler tries to escape his family's attempts to 
celebrate a Christmas dinner, desiring to spend it alone and refusing to 
treat the day as any different and engage in meaningless gestures. But 
he is instead drawn in to helping a woman, Sandra, make her way home 
across a city that is collapsing into anarchy so that she can commit 
suicide with her husband. Meanwhile Patrick's best friend Craig 
determines to spend his remaining hours fulfilling all of his sexual 
fantasies, while a gas company executive sets out to ring every client 
and assure them the gas will be kept on until the very end.
This was one of six international films commissioned in 1998 to 
commemorate the turn of the millennium. Others in the series included 
the Taiwanese 'The Hole' and Hal Hartley's 'Book of Life'. 'Last Night' 
is the Canadian representative and marks the directorial debut of 
actor/screenwriter Don McKellar.
McKellar's film is never specifically mentioned as taking place around 
the millenial turning point. Rather McKellar's spin is to use the 
connection as the springboard for an intriguingly thoughtful What If ? 
drama, to ask how various people would meet the end if everybody had 
only six hours left to live. McKellar has stated that he didn't want to 
make a 'Deep Impact' or an 'Armageddon'. And the difference between 
these and what McKellar is attempting to achieve is immediately apparent 
- where 'Deep Impact' and 'Armageddon' are driven by state of the art 
special effects and feature only cliche-ridden human dramas, 'Last 
Night' is low-key and driven by characterization. (McKellar has said his 
model for his film was 'The Day the Earth Caught Fire' (1961), although 
the film he actually comes closest to is the little seen 1990 drama 
'Miracle Mile' and to some extent the 'The Last Night of the World' 
segment of 'The Illustrated Man' (1968)). McKellar is wholly unconcerned 
with the show-stopping spectacle of disaster movies - to such extent 
that the type of disaster that is about to occur is never specified 
apart from a vague reference near the end about how there is no night 
anymore which suggests something to do with the sun. The only special 
effects McKellar offers is the most simple effect of having the screen 
white out when the disaster comes.
But where McKellar eschews special effects he achieves considerable 
dramatic effect with small nevertheless potent background details - the 
radio station on the soundtrack that spends the hours counting down the 
Top 500 songs of All Time; the casual suggestion that McKellar makes to 
Oh that she just steal a car to drive home and her sudden realization 
that civilized nicety doesn't matter anymore (the subsequent break-in 
scene amusingly sends up every action movie cliche of trying to jump 
start a car); the hooker who says that she wants to experience an 
orgasm; the people who just sit on a tram car waiting even when they 
know no driver is coming. McKellar's does have a certain awkwardness in 
handling some of the actors in the early scenes but the film quickly 
absorbs and builds a strong climax. Unlike 'Deep Impact' et al none of 
the characters are cliches, each are written with depth and complexity. 
Perhaps the nearest that McKellar comes to cliche is reserving the 
humour for the most obvious target - Rennie as the friend who is 
determined to fulfil all his sexual fantasies - but even that produces 
an extremely funny scene where Rennie awkwardly propositions McKellar 
about trying gay sex. Maybe also one would have liked to have seen a 
little more given over to David Cronenberg's executive character who 
remains a relative enigma. But these are minor faults in an otherwise 
original and undeniably intelligent End of the World drama.
Viewed at the 1998 Vancouver International Film Festival
Copyright Richard Scheib 1998


Author
Jeremiah McVay
        Last Night [as in the last night] begins with a Christmas
dinner-- it's not Christmas. The world is about to end, however,
and two aging parents have decided to bring their family together one
last time just as they do every year for the holiday. They
only have six hours to live and they know it.
        This is more of an ensemble piece than anything else, following
a group of people over the last hours of existence. We see
them cope in different ways, but they all revolve around a central
figure: Patrick Wheeler (played by writer/director, Don
McKellar). He is the core of the film and his rather subtle performance
holds most everything together. It would be a bit much
to say that everyone else supports him because it's more like all the
actors/characters share the light, McKellar simply holding it
a little longer. There really was not one bad performance in the bunch
and none overshadowed the rest.
        The main strength of the film is probably its screenplay. It's a
rather straightforward script that really lets you get into each
character in a way that never seems at all forced. The writing serves
itself well by focusing on a set of characters rather than the
inevitable panic in the streets. It probably would have been easy to let
the feeling of panic that often permeates the film
overshadow the smaller events of the individual characters, something
which would have upset the entire tone of the piece.
        Basically, this film is about people who need things-- mostly
other people. None are truly desperate, even in their final
hours. It's interesting to note that, even through all the human
interaction, not once is a reason given for the end of the world. It's
just an accepted thing, and the entire world is, of course, changed by
it and for it. This, even more so than the lack of focus on
the worldwide panic, is a very intelligent choice in that it would have
simply hindered the story and characters. It would have
seemed totally unnatural for any of the characters to have explained the
reason for the end of the world. It was enough that it
was common knowledge amongst them; why would they have any need of
explaining it to each other?
        As well-grounded as the screenplay was, it could have been less
so if directed differently (luckily this probably posed little
problem since McKellar took on both chores). The direction simply flows.
There was not one point where it drew attention to
itself, which, while not always a good thing, would simply have been a
distraction here.
        This was just a very fluid movie-- it never seemed to linger too
long or put focus where focus need not be. In terms of
craft, it was near flawless, and, in terms of entertainment and
provocation of thought, it approached a level rarely even come
close to by most.
