Title
Review for Simple Wish, A (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     This year New York City is hosting the annual NAFGA (North
American Fairy Godmothers Association) convention, and, of course,
every self-respecting fairy godmother wants to be there, including the
lone male fairy godmother Murray (Martin Short) and one gone over to
the dark side, a witch named Claudia (Kathleen Turner).  For
companionship, Claudia brings along her recently humanized dog Boots
(Amanda Plummer).
     It must have sounded promising to Mara Wilson's parents when her
agent pitched her proposed part in A SIMPLE WISH.  After Mara's success
in a featured role in MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET followed by a starring
role in MATILDA, she would get to work with two big name stars,
Kathleen Turner and Martin Short, in a film with a promising plot.
     Perhaps her parents should have studied the script by Jeff
Rothberg (THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE) to see if it contained more than
some cute magic tricks - it doesn't.
     Probably more apropos would have been for them to view director
Michael Ritchie's collection of films including such forgettable ones
as his last three, THE FANTASTICKS, COPS AND ROBBERSONS and THE SCOUT.
Ritchie spends all of his creative energy in A SIMPLE WISH in clever
staging of the wishes, and allocates no time for directing the acting.
If Turner and Short have insulted their viewing public with more
pathetic acting in other movies, the names of the films do not come to
mind.
     A SIMPLE WISH has one of the most inauspicious beginnings on
record.  Murray, looking extra weird with his large front teeth caps,
is taking his fairy godmother qualifying exam.  For five long and
tedious minutes, Short demonstrates how to overact while doing
slapstick.
     We then switch to the Greening family.  Single dad, aren't they
all in the movies today, Oliver (Robert Pastorelli) drives a
horse-drawn carriage around Central Park, but he wants to be a Broadway
singer in the musical TWO CITIES.  His son Charlie (Francis Capra) is
the typical obnoxious movie teenager.  His daughter Anabel, played
sweetly by the gifted actress Mara Wilson, has a brand new and highly
incompetent fairy godmother, Murray, to help her.
     "One wish per customer and no wishes for more wishes," explains
Murray.  "They plugged that loophole up years ago.  In past years there
were abuses."
     There are about a half dozen wishes in the show and Murray screws
up most of the them.  My favorite is when Murray transports Anabel and
himself to the fleabag Plaza Motel in Nebraska instead of the luxurious
Plaza Hotel in Manhattan.  When the tobacco chewing redneck who owns
the place draws a bead on them with a shotgun, Murray tries to turns
him into a little rabbit.  Ops, big mistake.  An angry giant rabbi
starts attacking them.
     Prophetically, Anabel says at one point, "This stinks."  To which
Murray concurs, "I know, it's bad."  And how.
     A SIMPLE WISH runs 1:30.  It is rated PG for perhaps a few bad
words that I missed.  The show would be acceptable for all ages.  My
son Jeffrey, age 8, thought the show was "excellent," and his buddy
Matthew, age 8, said that the film "goes up there among my favorites."
I found most of the film pathetic so I give it thumbs down.  For the
imaginative wishes and for poor Mara Wilson's nice performance in a
terrible picture, I give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I have a theory that, in an earlier stage of development, the premise
for A SIMPLE WISH went something like this:  Murray (Martin Short), who
aspires to being the first male fairy godmother, turns out to be
completely inept at the job, but an affirmative action mandate forces the
godmothers to admit him.  This would be before the real-world affirmative
action debate heated up, forcing controversy-shy Universal executives to
drop that angle entirely.
     The theory, I'll admit, is based on no evidence in the version of A
SIMPLE WISH which actually made it to the screen.  The alternative,
unfortunately, is that the story never made a shred of sense at _any_
point in its development.  It's the kind of exasperating kiddie fantasy
where stuff just happens, without any character, story or internal logic
to guide it.
     Of course, the stuff which does happen may be plenty to satisfy young
viewers.  In the course of his repeatedly bungled attempts to help young
Anabel Greening (Mara Wilson) turn her father (Robert Pastorelli) into a
Broadway star, Murray gets caught in an iron gate, causes a wind storm to
sweep a teacher down a school hallway, turns a redneck into a 50 foot tall
rabbi, turns a horse into a mouse and has the father's chief rival begin
vomiting up frogs at an inopportune moment during his audition.
Meanwhile, evil excommunicated godmother Claudia (Kathleen Turner), who
has an axe to grind and magic wands to steal, has fun with computer
graphics, rendering folks either two-dimensional or extremely pliable 
depending on the whim which seizes her.
     The special effects are, admittedly, temporarily distracting.  When
they stop, however, A SIMPLE WISH borders on the unbearable.  Martin
Short, who should be taken only in small doses even on his best days,
turns Murray into a flinching, snorting and generally annoying creation
without a glimmer of charm.  Mara Wilson, who was so appealing in last
year's delightful MATILDA, barely registers here at all, while Francis
Capra registers far too often as Wilson's big brother.  There is not a
single likeable character in the film, turning every scene into a long
wait for some kind of goofy visual effect to snap you out of your stupor.
     All of these problems make the gaping hole at the center of the film
all the more evident.  A SIMPLE WISH is based around a high-concept
premise -- a male fairy godmother, and an incompetent one at that -- yet
not once is there any attempt to explain why he wanted to be a fairy
godmother, how he managed to become one, or why no one is keeping an eye
on him.  In fact, A SIMPLE WISH is comprised of nothing but missed
opportunities and half-developed ideas.  What goes on at the fairy
godmothers' convention which takes place during the film?  Does it matter
that Murray is using a broken wand for much of the film?  Why not make
more use of the complicated rules of fairy godmother-hood, which
apparently are so abstruse that Murray has to carry around a cheat sheet?
And why does Claudia's assistant Boots (Amanda Plummer), who is supposed
to be a dog turned into a human, look instead like a refugee from "Cats"?
     Time and again, A SIMPLE WISH wanders from scene to scene as though
blissfully unconcerned about arriving at anything resembling a point.  
Then again, maybe someone got cold feet and stripped it of its point.
It's more charitable, I think, to imagine the darkly satirical film A
SIMPLE WISH might have been than to dwell on the muddled mess it turned
out to be.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Mara Wilson, Martin Short, Kathleen Turner, Francis Capra, Robert
Pastorelli, Amanda Plummer, Teri Garr, Ruby Dee Director: Michael
Ritchie Screenplay: Jeff Rothberg
There's nothing simple about a movie which is more adequately described
as handicapped, retarded and disabled. Big warning bells should be
ringing in any parent's mind, if a strange man suddenly walks into their
child's bedroom, claiming to be a Fairy Godmother. My first reaction
would be to break his weedy little wand, before promptly raising a
double barrelled shot gun to his face.
This is a 'Cinderella' story gone badly wrong. A little girl's world is
turned upside down by the annoying intrusion of a whiny, whimpish,
incompetent Fairy Godfather (Martin Short). The result is a wish gone
awry - the girl's father becomes a statue, and his horse and carriage
turns into a mouse and pumpkin. Unless the spell is broken by midnight,
they will remain animal, mineral and vegetable forever. In the midst of
this mini-crisis, the evil witch, ex-fairy godmother Claudia (Kathleen
Turner), has also stolen the wands of all the good Fairy Godmothers.
Waves of nausea begin minutes into the movie, when Martin Short starts
waving his accident prone wand about the screen. This reaches
full-throttled retching, stomach churning gagging, and recurrent barfing
when a man starts to vomit frogs. This is probably a good time to exit
before the mean 'runs' start as well. If this movie was meant to make
children laugh, I didn't hear it. In fact the only noises I heard
throughout this screening were whimpering children frightened by the
Fairy Godfather 'oddity', and cries from others wanting to leave. Kids,
help your parent's save money; parent's protect your child's sanity; go
home and watch a good episode of 'Lassie' instead.
Fairy Godfathers are a fairy tale rarity. After this disgraceful
portrayal of male fairies, perhaps extinction would be the most humane
option - before another child makes the erroneous mistake of making a
not so simple wish - subjugating the world to further unnecessary
terror.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
      A SIMPLE WISH is well-cast, I'll give it that.  Martin Short is
the perfect choice for a bumbling fairy godmother (hey, it's the nine-
ties) who botches his first assignment, granting a wish to a little girl
(Myra Wilson) whose father (Robert Pastorelli) is an aspiring New York
City stage actor.  And who else would you want but Kathleen Turner as
the evil godmother-turned-Wicked Witch of the West Side, out to claim
his (and every other good witch's) wand?  Short is, at times, passable,
but Ms. Turner is great fun.  Her character gets the shaft on screen
time, though, and that's a loss.  The rest of this crap is strictly for
kids, with wit of the squirting-catsup-bottle-in-the-face variety.
(Okay, okay, there *is* an inspired encounter between Short, Wilson, 
and a Nebraska redneck, but that's about it.) One hour was more than
enough for me.  I left around the time that a character began vomiting
computer-generated frogs.  Did I miss a scene of someone farting fish?

Author
James Sanford
         Once upon a time, there was a movie queen named Kathleen, who
starred in great films like ``Body Heat,'' ``Romancing the Stone,''
``The Accidental Tourist'' and ``War of the Roses.'' She was
beautiful, talented, rich and famous, and seemed destined to live
happily ever after.
  Then one day, the Wicked Witch of the West Coast blew into
town and put an evil spell on Kathleen that ruined her taste in
scripts. ``Everyone will adore you in `V.I. Warshawski,' and playing a
plump frump in `House of Cards' will do wonders for your sex appeal,''
advised the wily witch.  Before Kathleen knew it, she herself was
playing a witch and not very well, either.
  ``Hmmm,'' Kathleen thought, ``whatever happened to that happy
ending?''
  It's nowhere to be found in ``A Simple Wish,'' Kathleen
Turner's latest kamikaze mission. Perhaps she figured playing an
over-the-top villainess would give her career a needed boost, a la
Glenn Close doing Cruella DeVil.
  Sadly, Turner's turn is more reminiscent of Bette Midler
muddling through ``Hocus Pocus.'' ``A Simple Wish'' works overtime to
please, but to no avail. There's one inspired sight gag, but it
scarcely redeems the rest of this debacle.
  Martin Short, seemingly trying out a bad Jim Carrey
impersonation, is Murray, a less-than-gifted fairy godmother who turns
up in New York to assist a little girl.
  The child in question is Anabel (Mara Wilson), a veritable
fountain of faith, whose belief in magic irks her cynical brother
Charlie (Francis Capra, a youngster unencumbered by anything
resembling talent). ``There are no fairy godmothers in Manhattan!''
scoffs Charlie, a line that should bring down the house when ``A
Simple Wish'' plays the East Village.
  Shortly after Murray botches Anabel's wish, evil ex-fairy
Claudia (Turner) and her assistant Boots (Amanda Plummer) sweep into
town to swipe the magic wands from all the current wish-granters. The
ensuing comic clash between inept Murray and smarmy Claudia is almost
as funny as ``Long Day's Journey Into Night,'' and every bit as
magical.
  ``A Simple Wish'' offers a textbook example of all the worst
tendencies of `family entertainment,' including cut-rate
special-effects, a slapdash script, and the lamest one-liners this
side of ``Batman & Robin.''  Turner is neither campy nor creepy, and
the scene in which Short and Plummer bark and snarl at each other must
surely mark an all-time low for both actors.  Adorable Wilson looks on
the verge of embarassment throughout, as well she should.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mara Wilson, Martin Short, Kathleen Turner, Francis Capra, 
      Robert Pastorelli, Amanda Plummer, Teri Garr, Ruby Dee
Director: Michael Ritchie
Producers: Sid, Bill, and Jon Sheinberg
Screenplay: Jeff Rothberg
Cinematography: Ralf Bode
Music: Bruce Broughton
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     A SIMPLE WISH falls into the category occupied by dozens of other 
recent family features that share a few traits -- they're innocuous, 
mediocre, and thoroughly forgettable.  The movie, directed by Michael 
Ritchie (THE BAD NEWS BEARS, FLETCH) from a script by Jeff Rothberg, 
isn't bad per se, but it's the kind of production where nothing sticks 
in the mind once you've exited the theater.  Inept films linger like a 
bad taste and good movies bathe the viewer in a pleasant afterglow, but 
A SIMPLE WISH's feeble impression vanishes the moment that there's 
something marginally interesting to captivate the attention (like 
looking both ways before crossing the street).
     The best thing about A SIMPLE WISH is young actress Mara Wilson, 
who despite being noticeably older here than in her previous two 
outings, A MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET and MATILDA, still retains her 
feckless charm and unforced acting style.  The worst thing about the 
movie is Martin Short.  Under ideal circumstances, Short can be grating, 
but here, attempting to mimic Jim Carrey, he's occasionally unbearable.  
The scenes where he's not around tend to be A SIMPLE WISH's most 
entertaining.  
     The plot flows along the lines of a modern-day, fractured fable.  
Seven-year old Anabel Greening (Wilson) is facing a dire prospect:  
unless her widowed father (Robert Pastorelli), a Central Park hansom cab 
driver, gets a part in the Broadway musical, TWO CITIES, he has decided 
to pack up Anabel and her older brother, Charlie (Francis Capra), and 
move to Nebraska.  To prevent this unthinkable event from occurring, 
Anabel requests the aid of a fairy godmother.  What she gets is the 
incompetent Murray (Short), the only guy who's working on a fairy 
godmothers' holiday, and, instead of granting Anabel's simple wish, he 
exacerbates matters.  To further complicate the situation, the evil 
witch Claudia (Kathleen Turner) is out to take control of the North 
American Fairy Godmothers' Association, and Murray has the magic wand 
she craves the most.
     At least A SIMPLE WISH never takes itself seriously.  It knows that 
it's a silly film, and everyone plays along, keeping the tone somewhere 
between relaxed and campy.  Kathleen Turner and Amanda Plummer have fun 
chewing on the scenery, although their antics are mercifully restrained 
compared to Short's.  Francis Capra manages to be a little less 
obnoxious here than he was in KAZAAM, and Robert Pastorelli (MICHAEL) 
brings an appealing mixture of dignity and likeability to his role.  
Teri Garr and Ruby Dee have small parts as traditional fairy godmothers.
     There are times when the film's self-deprecating humor is amusing.  
Turner has some of the best lines, describing the job of a fairy 
godmother as "listening to [little girls'] insipid wishes" and calling 
Cinderella a "masochistic idiot."  The script refers to and/or pokes fun 
at such targets as bedtime stories, Broadway musicals in general and 
Andrew Lloyd Webber in particular, Shakespeare, THE WIZARD OF OZ, and, 
incredibly, CITIZEN KANE (watch the snow globe).  It would all be a lot 
more enjoyable if Martin Short didn't keep interrupting.
     It's easy to tell that A SIMPLE WISH doesn't have the limitless 
budget of Universal's other recent summer release, THE LOST WORLD.  
Spielberg's summer blockbuster was defined by state-of-the-art special 
effects.  A SIMPLE WISH is hampered by some rather cheap-looking 
visuals.  The film's attempts at magic are awkward to watch.  For 
example, there's a group of digitally-designed frogs that allow the 
viewer to appreciate just how impressive the Budweiser TV commercial 
creations are.
     I assume the target group for A SIMPLE WISH is basically the same 
one as for last year's MATILDA.  A number of similar elements are in 
place:  a plucky heroine played by Mara Wilson, magic, echoes of 
Dickens, a cartoon-like villain, and a happy ending.  Of course, since A 
SIMPLE WISH isn't as skillfully constructed and is saddled with Martin 
Short, the best advice I can offer is to rent MATILDA now and wait for A 
SIMPLE WISH to hit video shelves in the near future.  It won't take too 
long -- this film doesn't have the strength or stamina to stand up 
against the other mid-July competition.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
