Title
Review for Guncrazy (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian L. Johnson
1:37, R, Action/Drama, 1992, Made-for-Cable-Television
Director: Tamra Davis
Cast: Drew Barrymore, James LeGros, Billy Drago, Rodney Harvey,
      Joe Dallesandro, Michael Ironside, Ione Skye
     Promiscuous teenager Drew Barrymore gets James LeGros, who is in
prison for manslaughter, as a pen pal.  Barrymore learns that LeGros
likes guns, so she learns how to use them.  LeGros gets out of prison on
parole and he goes to live in the same town as Barrymore.  Even though
LeGros can't have sex, he and Barrymore find that they have some things
in common, especially a liking for guns.
     GUN CRAZY was aired on, and made for, Showtime, several months ago
and it was just released on videocassette.  Apparently the film had a
small theatrical run, too, but it didn't come to any theaters around my
area.  Even though this film is a B movie, I think that it ends up
looking like it had a much higher budget then it really did.  Part of
the reason for this is that it has a very talented cast.  I highly
recommend this film.  On a scale of zero to five, I give GUN CRAZY a
five.  GUN CRAZY is rated R for explicit language, adult situations, and
violence.
     Drew Barrymore ("2000 Malibu Road," SKETCH ARTIST), I think, is the
most alluring female in movies today.  She has had the same basic type
of character in most of her recent films that I have seen; POISON IVY
(1992 version), FAR FROM HOME, and BEYOND CONTROL: THE AMY FISHER STORY.
She plays a sensuous young female, and she doesn't have to go nude to
portray this character.  I think that she is much better in this role
then actresses that go nude (like Shannon Tweed in NIGHT EYES 2 or Bo
Derek in GHOSTS CAN'T DO IT).  I think that Drew Barrymore's performance
made this film, even though the entire cast is very talented.  She is
excellent in her role and completely believable.
     James LeGros (DRUGSTORE COWBOY, POINT BREAK) is excellent in his
role.  Billy Drago (THE UNTOUCHABLES, DELTA FORCE 2: OPERATION
STRANGLEHOLD) plays a preacher and is excellent.  Joe Dallesandro
(CRY-BABY, WILD ORCHID 2: TWO SHADES OF BLUE) gives a perfectly slimy
performance as Drew Barrymore's mother's boyfriend.  Who ever played the
sheriff also was great.  Ione Skye (GAS FOOD LODGING, WAYNE'S WORLD) has
a great cameo.  She plays a friend of Barrymore's, who is the daughter
of the sheriff.  Even though her part is very small, she brings life to
her character.
     GUN CRAZY is well written, although the basic plot behind the film
is not original.  The basic plot line of the film reminded me of WISDOM
(with Emilio Estevez and Demi Moore).  However some parts of the film
are different.  Also, I enjoyed GUN CRAZY more than WISDOM.

Author
Ron Hogan
1)  CLAIRE OF THE MOON is the first film from director Nicole Conn.  It
is the story of two women who become roommates at a writer's retreat.
Claire is the author of "Life Can Ruin Your Hair," a woman who hates
therapists and "fucks strangers" in a search for intimacy.  She is
paired with Noel, an author/therapist and a lesbian.  The film's setup
is pretty obvious--it doesn't take a genius to figure out that by the
end of the film, Moel and Claire are going to wind up having sex.  But
it isn't a case of the lesbian seducing the straight woman.  It's a case
of two women, in a developing process of dialogue, discovering hidden
facets of each other, and of themselves, and coming together as a result
of their mutual discoveries.  It is a meditation on intimacy--what it
is, how people think it can be achieved, and what they will do to
achieve it.
2)  The location of this film at a writer's retreat allows for a
literary or academic focus on issues of intimacy and sexuality, while at
the same time allowing for representatives from multiple discursive
positions.  So in addition to Claire and Noel, there's a Southern Gothic
romance writer, an academic feminist, a New Ager, a housewife who wants
to write, and the lesbian couple that runs the retreat.  While the
film's primary focus is on Claire and Noel, each of these characters has
something to contribute to the debate.
3)  Films of a political nature such as this often have one problem--
they are strong on politics but weak on film technique (witness the
recent thrashing of RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER).  They serve as propaganda
pieces, but without artistic, particularly cinematic, flair.  This can
often be traced to a rejection of the political values considered to be
inherent in Classical Hollywood Cinematic technique, though this is of
course not only the case.  A very few films are capable of challenging
both the form of mainstream filmmaking as well as the content.  I am
pleased to say that CLAIRE OF THE MOON is one of these films.  I was
struck several times in watching the film of the resemblance of certain
stylistic tropes to ones in the Cuban film MEMORIES OF UNDERDEVELOPMENT,
which include the insertion of "imaginary" scenes, or those which are
intended to represent the thoughts or fantasies of the characters, with
no marker of transition between filmic reality and filmic fantasy.  And
a remarkable scene on the beach, shot in slow motion to accentuate the
patterns of wind which blow sand and Claire's jacket, with no sound but
the music and the heightened sound of the wind.  A hyperreal scene that
is all the more powerful for not being objectively realistic, or even
pretending to be as is the case with mainstream films, but to highlight
certain aspects of reality to give the scene a powerful effect.  The
unreal takes on a psychological reality of its own.
4)  The same can be said for the way in which the sensual/sexual scenes
of this film are handled--especially in a sequence in which the two
women tell each other their sexual fantasies.  By establishing a rhythm
of editing out of a very few shots (somewhere around 5-10), Conn creates
a lyrical effect to Claire's fantasy that has to be seen in order to be
fully appreciated.  The film does not skimp in its sensuality--both in
a scene in which Claire has sex with a man she picks up in a bar, and in
the eventual culmination of Claire and Noel's process of intimation.
These scenes--well, to me they seem to capture more of the real feeling
of sexuality, without breaking it down into a set schema of erotic
moments as usually seems to take place in the Hollywood film.  It's hard
to describe.
5)  I do think I can say, however, that the lesbian scene in this film
is handled much more erotically than the corresponding scene in DESERT
HEARTS, which does strike me more as a tableaux of sexy moments rather
than an act of sexual intercourse.  Which leads me to comment on the LA
TIMES review, which calls CLAIRE OF THE MOON "the best lesbian drama
since DESERT HEARTS."  Which it is, to be sure, but the remark is a 
fairly insipid one.  After all, how many lesbian dramas have there been
since DESERT HEARTS?  Not avant-garde films like Su Friedrich's DAMNED
IF YOU DON'T (1987), but mainstream or at least art-house release?  I
can't think of very many--and FRIED GREEN TOMATOES does not count for
the purposes of this debate.  I think the film should be commended for
its achievement--it is an incredible film for a a first time director,
and an incredible non-mainstream film with a definite political view.
But such films are rare, and glib reductions by newspaper critics which
neatly file these films into types (i.e., the lesbian film) serve to
keep these films in alienated positions within the film spectrum as much
as they single those films out for acclaim.
6)  The second film I want to discuss in this review, like CLAIRE OF THE
MOON, is a film about a woman directed by a woman, and a first film:
Tamra Davis' GUNCRAZY.  It is the story of Anita (Golden Globe nominated
Drew Barrymore), a teenager in a California desert town, who is
surrounded by peers who think Japan is in Europe, and who is called
"sperm bank" by several people--in reference to her promiscuity, which
stems from a desperate craving for affection, some way to escape the
emptiness of her life.  And her landscape *is* bleak--living in a
rundown trailer with her runaway mother's ex-boyfriend, surrounded by
mindless youth, dead husks of automobiles and refuse, with the only
nonmundane character in town (besides her best girlfriend) being a
slightly insane fundamentalist preacher and snake handler.
7)  Until she becomes the pen pal of Howard, a convict in a California
prison.  She find herself falling in love with him through his letters,
especially when it turns out that they both share a fascination with
firearms.  While she waits for him to be paroled, she learns how to
shoot, and turns out to be a damn good shot at that.  Their courtship,
once Howard does arrive, focuses on guns--which she supplies for him as
tokens of her love--"I remember how you wrote in your letter that
.9mm's were your favorite," she says, handing him a gun.
8)  But guns aren't only the thing that brings their lives together, in
place of sex.  Guns end up becoming the means by which their lives will
unravel, going off at the wrong moments and plunging them into a course
that has to end in gunfire and death.  At the same time, though, they
seem to be a means for Anita to take charge of her live--to make shit
happen instead of having shit happen to her.  But she soon learns that
her desire for the power that guns can provide is not strong enough for
her to attack the innocent--she only uses them in desperate acts of
survival.
9)  Howard and Anita are two alienated people in a hostile landscape.
As Howard's parole officer tells them, "As far as I'm concerned, you're
both trash."  The film works to tell us that this is not the case, that
as Anita says, they "*are* nice people."  The conditions of Anita's life
are a fault of her circumstances, not her character.  Howard knows this,
knows that Anita is a good person, and so he takes every step, once they
know that the law is closing in, to ensure that Anita has a chance to
become the good person she is capable of becoming.
10)  I wish I could come up with some insightful comparison between
these two films, something along the lines of "women's pictures" or some
other Critspeak.  But all I can come up with is that these films are
both about journeys of self-discovery, and of the creation of bonds of
intimacy.  That one is a variant on an action film, and the other is an
intellectual art film, that one couple becomes intimate through words
and ideas and the other couple through guns and desperation are surface
differences.  Underneath the genre distinctions, films deal with the
same basic types of issues (see Robin Woods writing on genre); only the
means by which those issues are addressed differ.

Author
James Berardinelli
Running Length:  1:36
Rated:  R (Violence, language, sexual situations, mature themes)
Starring:  Drew Barrymore, James LeGros, Billy Drago,
           Joe Dallesandro, Michael Ironside, Ione Skye
Director:  Tamra Davis
Producers:  Zane W. Levitt and Diane Firestone
Screenplay:  Matthew Bright
Music:  Ed Tomney
Released by First Look Pictures
     Anita (Drew Barrymore) is on the fast track to nowhere, staring her
own self-destruction in the face.  Abandoned by the mother whose
boyfriend she lives with and is sexually abused by, Anita is looking for
a way out.  She finds it through Howard (James LeGros), an ex-convict
that she becomes pen-pals with.  After his release from prison, the two
get together and find that their bond goes deeper than a mutual love of
guns.
     GUN CRAZY, while sharing the title and some of the themes of the
1949 Joseph H.  Lewis film that inspired it, is less a remake than a
re-interpretation.  The mood and tone remain constant, but the
characters and their relationships have been modernized.
     Distilled to its essence, GUN CRAZY is a love story.  Admittedly,
this isn't the kind of nice, romantic film that the audience can sit
through content to know that everything will turn out all right in the
end.  Equally, the formulas of the traditional romance are out the
window.  GUN CRAZY is unapologetically bizarre in its treatment of the
relationship between Anita and Howard.  In some ways, it's reminiscent
of what exists between Lula and Sailor in David Lynch's WILD AT HEART.
     The biggest negative about GUN CRAZY is a tendency toward
self-parody.  There are several instances during the movie when
circumstances become too outlandish to be believed.  A case in point is
that of a church service held by Hank (Billy Drago) that goes far beyond
the usual interpretation of a revivalist religious ceremony.  Even the
most ridiculous elements of this over-the-top scene have been left
intact in the final print of the movie.
     This film is not particularly concerned about getting all the
details right, either.  Some of the events of GUN CRAZY stretch the
limits of credibility.  While few of these slips are glaring, it will be
apparent even to a casual viewer that the script is not air-tight.
     The most fascinating element of GUN CRAZY is how it develops the
character of Anita.  The casting of Drew Barrymore in the role might at
first seem odd, but she does an excellent job playing an
affection-starved youth.  For Anita, sex is something she uses in a
fruitless effort to be liked.  Her mother has abandoned her and her
mother's boyfriend, with whom she lives, cares about her only when he
needs a woman.  That she happens to fall in love with Howard is a quirk
of fate.  She would have fallen in love with anyone - he just happens to
be in the right place at the right time.
     Anita initially learns to fire a gun so that she will have
something in common with Howard when he gets out of prison.  Later, the
particular gun that she learns with, and guns in general, take on
greater significance.  In many ways, because of Howard's sexual
impotence, they become a surrogate for sex in the relationship.  As
Anita puts it, sex was never anything special to her, but firing guns
is.  She'd rather shoot with Howard than sleep with him.
     At first glance, GUN CRAZY might appear to be a shallow
exploitation film, complete with low budget and little-known actors.
That it was shown on Showtime before getting theatrical release serves
only to further tarnish its image.  However, beneath the surface, this
movie has surprisingly deep currents, with characters and relationships
that are complex.  GUN CRAZY certainly isn't for everyone, but anyone
who has a taste for twisted love stories will find something here to
savor.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
