Title
Review for Waterland (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Vince Deehan
Directed by Stephen Gyllenhaal 
Written by Peter Prince. Based on the novel by Graham Swift 
Cast: Jeremy Irons, Sinead Cusack, Ethan Hawke, Grant Warnock, Lena Headey,
David Morrissey and John Heard.
WATERLAND is an unusual and original film set in both the US and the UK 
concerning the life of Tom Crick (Jeremy Irons), an English schoolteacher of 
History now settled in Pittsburgh, telling his American pupils 
of his tragic past in England.  Irons' character has been settled in the US 
for about twenty years, although settled is perhaps not a word that could be 
used to describe his life.  His wife Mary (played by Irons' real-life wife 
Sinead Cusack) tells Tom that she anticipates the prospect of having a 
child soon.  This worries Tom, who knows that Mary is incapable of having 
children, and he immediately becomes concerned that he may be "losing" his 
wife. Losing her to the pain and trauma of her childhood.
Tom teaches at a high school in Pittsburgh and we see Tom teaching History to a 
class of teenagers in 1974.  The kids don't seem particularly interested and 
when one of the pupils, Matthew Price (Ethan Hawke), articulates this 
disinterest directly to Tom, the teacher finds himself resorting to telling 
his own personal history in a wildly misguided attempt to capture the pupils 
attention.  Tom tells the class of his teenage years in East Anglia on the 
flat east coast of England.  His story concerns his relationship with his 
sweetheart Mary (now played by Lena Headey).  The kids are partly amused and 
partly shocked when Tom describes how he and Mary had sex on trains when 
they were only sixteen.  One pupil voices her concern and tells him how she 
is now sixteen and states she is not sexually active herself and clearly shows 
her discomfort.  Although this partly puts Tom off his stride, he continues 
to regale the pupils with his stories.  
Tom tells them of how his older and slightly retarded brother Dick 
(David Morrissey) also took a shine to Mary.  When young Mary tells Tom that 
she has seen Dick following her around on his motorbike, Tom unwisely suggests 
that Mary should talk to his brother so as to teach him what girls are like 
and so that this would enable him to be able to get a girlfriend of his own. 
Tom unwittingly sows the seeds here for an imminent tragedy that will have 
a profound effect on his life forever.
WATERLAND's strength lies in the great script, excellent cinematography of the 
flat and slightly eerie flatlands of Anglia by Robert Elswit, and some 
outstanding acting.  Chief acting honours go to Jeremy Irons and Lena Headey.  
Irons plays a man who is not exactly bursting with charisma but Irons makes 
you interested in this rather tragic character.  Lena Headey who plays the 
young Mary, as a sixteen year old, is outstanding in a very demanding role 
that would be beyond the reach of many young actors.  Unfortunately Grant 
Warnock as the young Tom, while good, is no match for Headey's skills and 
rather lets their scenes down somewhat.  David Morrissey plays the retarded 
Dick to perfection and Pete Posthelwaite, although in a very small part, is 
as brilliant as ever.  Sinead Cusack as the adult Mary is badly letdown by 
the false teeth she is made to wear in the film, that frankly make her look 
preposterous and detracted my attention from her good performance.
WATERLAND is a quiet film which tells an intriguing story and tells it 
with great style.
Review written on Sun 3rd March 1996 by Vince Deehan (vince@deehan.demon.co.uk)
