Title
Review for Courage Under Fire (1996)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
     COURAGE UNDER FIRE is the latest film from Director Edward Zwick
(GLORY and LEGENDS OF THE FALL).  It is an extremely moving picture
that left me with my heart racing and my arms clutching myself and
staring at the screen.  If you find yourself in tears at points as I
was, do not be surprised.  This is not a manipulative film, but a
genuine one.  It is in a word - devastating.
     Denzel Washington plays Lieutenant Colonel Nathaniel Serling In
another brilliant performance by one of the best actors in the world
today.  I hope every member of the Academy sees his work in it and
remembers it at Oscar time.  He is vulnerable, charming, troubled,
honest, confused, strong and scared, and these are only some of the
ranges of emotions he displays.  His performance alone is worth the
seven dollar admission, but the show has much more to offer than just
one good piece of acting.  COURAGE UNDER FIRE is filled with marvelous
acting, and the acting is not even the best part.
     The gripping and intelligent script by Patrick Sheane Duncan based
on his novel, and the directing are the genius of the film.  This
script succeeds not on a plethora of clever one liners, but on the
fabric it creates.  The show is a tribute to the ambiguity of life and
especially of battle.  It is an intricate puzzle that seems deceptively
simple but is actually an Escher print of a puzzle.  It uses the
cinematic technique of the story told from different viewpoints and
with dramatic editing by Steven Rosenblum.  Rosenblum weaves these
recollections back and forth with the present time as different players
relate their ever changing visions of reality.
     The show starts with a massive tank battle during Desert Storm.
Before the battle Colonel Serling calls his troops together for a
prayer and then a charge of, "Let's kill 'em all!"  This mixture of a
pseudo-football huddle scene with a life and death situation puts the
audience on notice that this picture is not one you will be able to
take lightly.  This is high energy entertainment certainly, but one
with some heavy stories to tell.
     The tank battle is awesome.  The fiery cinematography by Roger
Deakins (THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, ROB ROY and MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON)
makes it look like a battle between an overgrown set of dinosaurs in
Hell.  The script is superb in showing the natural confusion of battle.
When tanks start firing at each other in the dark, it becomes unclear
who is the enemy and who isn't.  Colonel Serling makes a mistake and
orders the destruction of one of his own tanks.  The non-investigation
of this along with the Colonel's remorse over it become the subtext of
the plot.
     Most of the show then takes places right after the war.  As an
ironic conciliation prize, rather than promotion, Colonel Serling and
his superior, General Hershberg (Michael Moriarty), are assigned to
investigate those nominated for battle awards.  The Colonel draws the
first woman in U. S. history, Captain Karen Walden (Meg Ryan), ever to
be nominated for the Metal of Honor for combat duty.  She was a medical
chopper pilot who was shot down and killed in a courageous battle to
defend a downed attack helicopter.
     Pentagon PR representative Bruno (Bronson Pinchot) thinks this is
fantastic.  He plans to have a tearjerker of a ceremony on the White
House lawn with all of the networks present.  Pinchot, whom I have had
dinner with a couple of times and who can be extremely funny in the
right roles, is terribly miscast here.
     The show consists of Colonel Serling's interviews with Monfriez
(Lou Diamond Phillips), Ilario (Matt Damon), Altameyer (Seth Gilliam),
Banacek (Zeljko Ivanek), Boylar (Tim Ransom), and others.  At first, it
is an open and shut case - give that woman her metal.  Soon however, a
few holes develop or do they?  A reporter, Tony Gartner (Scott Glenn),
begins nosing around.  He is interested in finding out the complete
truth about the tank battle friendly fire episode and about the Captain
Walden story.
     The acting is exceptional although Washington's is head and
shoulders above everyone else.  Supporting Academy Award candidates are
certainly possible for Lou Diamond Phillips as the tough poker playing
soldier and Meg Ryan as the is she tough or isn't she Captain.  The
scene where her chopper crashes sent chills all over my body.
     This moving film has music by James Horner (LEGENDS OF THE FALL,
BRAVEHEART, and APOLLO 13) that is stirring and dramatic - full of
horns and kettle drums.  An impressive film with an exhilarating score
to match.
     COURAGE UNDER FIRE runs a fast 1:57.  It is rated R for the
violence of war and for some bad language.  There is no sex or nudity.
It would be fine for any teenager.  I can not say enough good things
about COURAGE UNDER FIRE.  It is movie making at its finest.  I hope to
see Zwick, Washington, Duncan and others getting awards for it.  I give
it my strongest recommendation and award it a full ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Denzel Washington, Meg Ryan, Lou Diamond Phillips, Michael
Moriarty, Matt Damon, Scott Glenn.
Screenplay:  Patrick Sheane Duncan.
Director:  Edward Zwick.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Akira Kurosawa's classic film RASHOMON may be the definitive
cinematic text for film critics, because no film may work better at
keeping us honest.  The story of an assault seen through the eyes of four
different individuals is about the subjectivity of reality, how perception
creates "truth," and every time I think about RASHOMON it makes me
structure my arguments with care, and with an eye to my own subjectivity.
I was thinking about RASHOMON quite a bit as I watched COURAGE UNDER FIRE,
and not just because it is about conflicting accounts of a single event.
Throughout the film, I found my perspective shifting, my opinion rising
and falling to the point where I realized that I was responding to COURAGE
UNDER FIRE in pieces, and not as a whole.
     That response was at least in part the result of the kind of film
COURAGE UNDER FIRE is, the kind of ambitious, sprawling drama which
director Edward Zwick (GLORY, LEGENDS OF THE FALL) has favored since his
television days as co-creator of "thirtysomething."  It is the story of
Lt. Col. Nat Serling (Denzel Washington), a tank commander in the Gulf War
who, in the middle of a confusing night battle, gives an order to fire
which results in the destruction of a friendly tank, and the death of a
close friend.  Serling is re-assigned to the Pentagon, where he is given
the task of investigating a posthumous candidate for the Medal of Honor --
Capt. Karen Walden (Meg Ryan), the first woman ever nominated for the
award.  The story is that helicopter pilot Walden led a rescue mission
which saved several lives, but that story is an inconsistent one.
Serling's interviews with Walden's crew lead to more questions than
answers in a quest for an evasive truth.
     Reaction #1:  Edward Zwick is turning into a marvelous director of
battle scenes.  In GLORY, LEGENDS, and now in COURAGE UNDER FIRE, he
captures the feel of war with a chaotic poetry, vistas of destruction
which are nevertheless spectacular to behold.  Perhaps more impressive,
Zwick has accomplished something that the news was never able to
accomplish, namely to drive home the fact that the Gulf War was not a
video game or a casual police activity like rousting a wino off a park
bench with a baton.  It was a war, and COURAGE UNDER FIRE does justice to
the sacrifices of its participants.
     Reaction #2:  Patrick Sheane Duncan over-loaded his screenplay.  For
a very long time, it is not clear what COURAGE UNDER FIRE is really about.
Is it a war-time tale of the terrors of the trenches?  Is it a domestic
drama focusing on Serling's profound guilt over his actions in the Gulf
and his inability to re-connect with his family?  Is it an attack on the
inability of the military, and by extension the nation, to own up to its
mistakes?  Is it a sort of mystery, where the real story of Walden's
actions will provide the payoff?  It takes forever for Duncan to clarify
what all of these stories have to do with one another, but by then they
don't provide the layers of emotional resonance he was aiming for; mainly,
they provide confusion.  There are too many conflicts in COURAGE UNDER
FIRE, blunting the impact of the one which should have stirred the
audience.
     Reaction #3:  Meg Ryan really does have some dramatic chops.  In
previous serious efforts like WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN and RESTORATION, I
found it difficult to buy Ryan in a role which strayed from her quirky
comic ingenues.  COURAGE UNDER FIRE is an even greater challenge, because
she isn't playing only one Karen Walden; she is playing Karen Walden as
she is described in each individual soldier's story.  She appears only in
flashback, and her character develops only as Serling learns more about
her, but she is nevertheless a powerful presence in the film.
     Reaction #4:  Denzel Washington has his limits.  Washington is a
tremendous actor, and he does some excellent work in COURAGE UNDER FIRE,
but there are moments when the intelligence and confidence he almost
always projects just don't seem appropriate.  Serling has moments of real
despair and confusion, and Washington doesn't always bring those qualities
across.
     Reaction #5:  COURAGE UNDER FIRE comes through with an emotional
conclusion, and features some great supporting performances (particularly
Matt Damon as the medic in Walden's crew).  It is the kind of film which
satisfies even as it leaves you suspecting that the scope should have been
narrowed.  COURAGE UNDER FIRE is a film which looks better from the back
than the front, and a bit thick around the middle -- it's a different
experience from different angles. 

Author
Christopher Null
     The so-called Gulf War is the only war in which America was involved
that, due to my age, I can personally remember.  I saw it on CNN like
everyone else, listening to the death toll of Iraqis climb into the 100,000
range, while U.S. casualties stayed around 300 -- half of whom were killed
by accidents or friendly fire.  The idea of a Gulf "War" will always be
kind of silly to me, because the word "war" implies two sides fighting each
other.  The Gulf War was the wholesale slaughter of Iraqis by U.S. troops.
     I'm not saying the Gulf War was a bad, or unjust, operation.  It's
more of a joke than anything else, and that's why when a film comes out
attempting to glamorize the war and make heroes out of fictional soldiers
and fictional events, I greet it with a bit of skepticism.  COURAGE UNDER
FIRE is the first real Gulf War movie.  It probably won't be the last.
     Keeping in mind that this is *all make-believe,* the film's story is
this.  Karen Walden (Meg Ryan) was a helicopter pilot, shot down during a
rescue attempt which turned into an ad hoc offensive.  Stranded in Iraqi
territory overnight, Karen and her crew fended off the enemy until a
morning rescue saved them all -- except her.
     Or so the story goes.  Because of her courage, Karen is being
considered for the Medal of Honor, and Serling (Denzel Washington) is on
the investigatory case.  All seems well until another side of the story
surfaces, mainly told by one Monfriez (Lou Diamond Phillips), who says
Karen was a coward and that the whole thing is a sham.  We see the events
(over and over and over and over) from about six points of view, each time
with a twist of some sort.  On top of that, Serling is fighting his own
demons due to a little incident where he blew up a friendly tank -- on
accident -- and this incident is played over and over as well.
     Where to start with the litany of things that bothered me about
COURAGE?  For one, *who cares* about this story?  The characters are not
compelling, and Karen is so obnoxious and Ryan's performance is so horrible
that I was glad she was dead.  (Don't get me started on Ryan's
faker-than-fake Southern accent:  "Peeyick 'iiiyem uhhhhp!" (Pick him up!))
Serling's subplot has very little to do with the rest of the story.  And
the whole thing is just pointless, coming off as propaganda, glamorizing
war and the military.  *Please do not believe the hype.*
     Then again, the movie is quite pretty.  The story, while poor, is
well-told at least, and Washington's performance is good, as usual.
Comparisons to RASHOMON are a bit out of place, but not out of the realm of
reason.  And I had a lot more fun looking at the local scenery and
locations (the movie was largely shot in Austin) than anything else.
     I guess the case for COURAGE UNDER FIRE is that it is exposing this
abstract "truth" of how Americans were killed by friendly fire in the Gulf
War.  Is that truth?  If so, it's one we already knew.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael Redman
Denzel Washington is Lt. Col. Nat Sterling, a tank commander during the
Gulf War who accidentally fires on one of his own tanks, killing a good
friend.  After the war, Sterling is driven to alcoholism and
psychological self-destruction by the guilt. He's also dealing with his
investigation into whether Karen Walden (Meg Ryan), a chopper pilot,
should be awarded the Medal Of Honor posthumously.
Sterling's condition isn't helped by the fact that the rescue mission
Walden lead is shrouded in mystery. Every witness that he interviews
has a different version of the story. With each interview, the war is
replayed over and over to his horror. He pours himself into the puzzle
in order to dull his own pain, but it doesn't work and his
relationships with his wife and children drift further away.
This is the first war movie from the conflict in the Gulf and it does a
credible job of the battle scenes: dramatic and spectacular guns and
explosions juxtaposed with frightened and panicked soldiers trying to
survive.
The story of the investigation is intriguing. For some reason, everyone
is lying about what happened. It's unclear as to if Walden was a hero
or a coward.  As each version of the event is played, and each somewhat
different from the one before, the truth becomes more muddied and yet
adds one more piece of the jigsaw puzzle.
Washington turns in his usual fine performance. Ryan is surprisingly
convincing in a dramatic role, a stretch from her usual romantic comedy
parts. Most of the rest of the cast is excellent, especially Scott
Glenn as the "Washington Post" reporter. An exception is mission member
Lou Diamond Phillips who turns in a good performance but seems like
he's in a different movie.
That's the problem with too much of the film. Often the characters
don't seem as connected as you would expect them to be. Sterling and
his wife were supposedly once very close but now distanced, but there's
not much evidence of that closeness ever having existed. His
interaction with his commanding officer and friend is devoid of
emotion.
The film has a difficult time deciding what it is about. The two main
plots--Walden's story and Sterling's story--would each have been fodder
for a film.  Both in the same is a bit too much.
Great acting and a good tale, but with a few too many flaws to take
this movie where it could have gone.
[This originally appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
8/2/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Edwin Jahiel
COURAGE UNDER FIRE *** Directed by Edward Zwick. 
Written by Patrick Sheane
Duncan. Photography, Roger Deakins.Editting,Steven 
Rosenblum.  Production design, John Graysmark. 
Music, James Horne. Cast:  Denzel Washington (Lt. 
Col. Nathaniel Serling), Meg Ryan (Capt. Karen 
Walden), Lou Diamond Phillips (Monfriez), Michael 
Moriarty (General Hershberg), Matt Damon (Ilario), 
Seth Gilliam (Altameyer), Bronson
Pinchot (Bruno), Scott Glenn (Tony Gartner) and 
Regina Taylor (Meredith). A TCF release. 116 mins.  
Rated R (wartime violence)
The serious specialties and interests of the key 
makers of  "Courage Under Fire" almost guarantee 
quality in this film. Edward Zwick  journalist, 
editor (The New Republic, Rolling Stone), worked on 
TV (features, co-creating "Family," 
"thirtysomething," "My So-Called Life") and directed 
"About Last Night," "Glory," (where Denzel 
Washington figured prominently ), "Legends of the 
Fall." 
Vietnam veteran  Patrick Sheane Duncan is the 
writer-director of the excellent Vietnam film "84 
Charlie Mopic," produced and wrote several episodes 
of HBO's "Vietnam War Story," co-wrote and directed 
the documentary series "Medal of Honor." He has 
other credits too, including the script of "Mr. 
Holland." 
 "Courage" is a fine film, although  I wonder 
whether or not it will remain in our memories. Few 
movies, even good ones, do, for complex reasons. In 
"Courage," Denzel Washington plays tank commander 
Lt. Col. Serling who, during the Gulf War, leads his 
men in a night attack. The men are very macho, 
slightly Hollywoodized. The Allied Coalition is not 
referred to--granted that this war was led by the 
US. This was my passing thought as, somehow, I 
remembered "Objective Burma"  which had the Brits 
howling that in their very own theater of war,  
Errol Flynn and Co. were depicted as the major 
fighters! 
Just nit-picking. Another nit is that in the thick 
of a well-shot and choreographed battle, we see 
Arabs on camels improbably taking in the sights from 
atop a high sand dune. My last nit is that our 
soldiers speak of Ay-rabs and Eye-raqis, the way GIs 
said Eye-talians in WWII. 
During the fray's confusion, the Colonel gives an 
order that results in the death of one his friends. 
Friendly fire has always been one of the tragedies 
of combat -- and seldom mentioned in movies.
Cut to the post-Gulf Pentagon where Serling, though 
exonerated, drags the burden of a terribly guilty 
conscience. His superior, General Hershberg, orders 
him to review the case of Capt. Karen Walden (Meg 
Ryan), a Medevac pilot posthumously nominated for 
the Medal of Honor for her "courage under fire."  A 
female soldier so honored is a first, one that 
reflects on the new army and public relations. It is 
also press and political fodder as well as 
vote-getting from feminists. (An obnoxiously 
opportunistic White House staffer seems to rejoice 
at all this). 
Serling is expected to produce a quick rubber-stamp 
for the nomination, but, taking his job seriously 
(doubly so because of his own trauma), he 
investigates  conscientiously among the survivors of 
the Captain's crew-- and keeps running into 
inconsistencies, gaps and   contradictions. 
The situation has been compared to that of the 
famous "Rashomon" You can see why, yet the 
connection is tenuous. In the Japanese classic four 
unconnected people told different stories of the 
same event because of different perceptions and 
memories. In "Courage,"
it is the interpretations that are different, for 
reasons I will not reveal. All the while, flashbacks 
illustrate the many faces of Capt. Walden, each one 
as told by  a different interviewee. (It's of course 
a good old device. See "Citizen Kane" for its best 
illustration).  
Denzel Washington is more than a star. He is one of 
our top actors and in his unassuming ways, a screen 
presence. His facial and body expressions fill very 
well a small but powerful range of feelings: private 
pain, a deep belief in the honor of the Army, a 
dedication to truth. Even when almost commanded to 
drop the investigation, Serling remains like a quiet 
bulldog that won't let go. His methods are simple, 
both logical and intuitive, efficacious. Although he 
is no Hercule Poirot or Lieutenant Columbo, he has 
Columbo's double-checking mindset. When, like Peter 
Falk, he says casually: "OK. One more question," you 
can see that he is on to a new clue.
There are moments of highly-charged emotion, yet on 
the whole the film does not come through as really 
engaging or affecting. I can't tell exactly why on a 
single viewing, but I believe that this is caused by 
the movie's very polish and high production values, 
the neat, predictable outcome, and the ambitious 
editing that zig-zags more than necessary.  
Would-be impassive yet warm Denzel Washington 
carries the movie  with the help of  Matt Damon who 
excels in a nuanced role stretching from jocular and 
naive to tortured soul. Lou Diamond Phillips has a 
melodramatic, over-the-top but effective part. The 
acting by most others is, at a minimum, competent. 
Reviewers have split into  I-hate-Ryan and 
Ryan-is-great camps. Again, after just one screening 
I can't really take sides but my impression of Meg 
Ryan was that she did all that was expected of her. 
In spite of people lying to, and authorities leaning 
on Serling, this is a decent picture in the moral 
sense. Essentially it is the story of a suffering 
man,  of a woman he never met, and of convincingly 
shown reactions of soldiers under extreme pressures. 
The battlefield events are well-handled, done with 
technical virtuosity but without gung-ho heroics or 
graphic and gratuitous violence. The political and 
the women-in-arms aspects are incidental. At the 
same time, there is a solid subtext that could bear 
the title of a famous 19th Century French book, 
"Military Grandeur and Servitude."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     COURAGE UNDER FIRE has been compared to Akira Kurosawa's RASHOMON,
as I suppose any film with contradictory flashbacks is likely to be.
But RASHOMON had more respect for its audience.  The classic Japanese
film said that the truth cannot be determined by talking to people
after the fact and, in fact, that the truth may no longer exist after
the fact.  COURAGE UNDER FIRE is not so intelligent a film and feels
the need to tie everything up for the viewer.  In the end of COURAGE
UNDER FIRE you know who the good guys are and who the bad guys are.
And it is not hard to guess well before the end.  It treats itself asa
mystery film, sort of a courtroom drama without the courtroom, with a
not-too-surprising solution revealed at the end.
     Lt. Colonel Nathaniel Serling (Denzel Washington) was an armored
tank commander in the Persian Gulf War.  In the action of battle he
makes a split-second decision and accidentally kills several of his own
men.  He unwillingly takes part in an Army cover-up of the incident
which would make both him and the Army look bad and he is given a desk
job at the Pentagon.  Meanwhile the Army is considering awarding the
Medal of Honor posthumously to Captain Karen Walden (Meg Ryan).
Serling has only to write a superficial report on the events
surrounding Walden's heroism and death following the crash of the Red
Cross helicopter she was flying.   But Serling notes that there is
contradictory information in the reports of the people who witnessed
Walden's death and decides that it has to be cleared up before he is
willing to file his report.  He conducts his investigation under
pressure to conclude from his commander (Michael Moriarty) and a slimy
Whitehouse aide (Bronson Pinchot).  He must sift through accounts and
try to determine the truth.
     Edward Zwick directs Denzel Washington for the second time here,
having previously directed GLORY.  Zwick has a feel for creating vivid
battle scenes with a believable high-speed pacing and a certain chaos.
It is rare to find such a combination of thoughtful scripting with
action scenes.  Patrick Sheane Duncan's script walks a careful
tightrope being neither greatly pro-military nor anti-military.  In a
sense it is a film with a respect for heroes, but at the same time does
not minimize the horror of battle.  It is respectful of the Medal of
Honor, but at the same time has ironic scenes of soldiers praying
together before battle and concluding with "Let's kill 'em all."
Through much of the film he and director Zwick seem to maintain a
careful control of the style, then in the final third that control
starts to fail.  A gratuitous (non-battle) action scene is used for
some unneeded visual excitement toward the end of the film.  Then it
all ends with a slightly too perfect conclusion and a sequence of
scenes that are both cliched and overly sentimental.  It is a bad
faltering for a film that had done reasonably well up to that point.
Also, it is disappointing to see a director of Zwick's stature using
fairly blatant product placements.
     Denzel Washington has been playing well-balanced and in-control
characters for quite a while and it is nice to see him playing a man
with some serious emotional problems.  In fact, he is by far not the
only character who tries to hide a troubled core under an expression of
composure.  Matt Damon is particularly good as Ilario whose affable
manner does not quite hide a tense emotional core.  This is a good role
for Meg Ryan and calling on talents that she has not shown before, but
though her character hangs over the whole film, she is given star
billing for what is really not much more than a supporting role.  Lou
Diamond Phillips plays a somewhat two-dimensional character, Monfriez
and he does little to make the character memorable.
     COURAGE UNDER FIRE offers some very good action battle scenes and
a somewhat engaging mystery.  But it has only one really well-developed
character and its mystery is not solved by clever deduction so much as
by asking witnesses what happened long enough until the truth comes
out.  Still, when the film waves its flag for wartime heroes, it is
hard not to salute.  The film rates a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Denzel Washington, Meg Ryan, Lou Diamond Phillips, Matt Damon, 
      Scott Glenn, Seth Gilliam, Michael Moriarty, Regina Taylor, 
      Bronson Pinchot
Director: Edward Zwick
Producers: John Davis, Joseph M. Singer, and David T. Friendly
Screenplay: Patrick Sheane Duncan
Cinematography: Roger Deakins
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
     It's often said that if you're going to borrow, borrow from the 
best.  And, in motion pictures, one of the best is certainly Akira 
Kurosawa.  His THE SEVEN SAMURAI was remade as John Sturges' immensely 
popular THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN.  His THE HIDDEN FORTRESS inspired George 
Lucas' epic STAR WARS.  And now, the premise of 1950's RASHOMON has been 
re-worked by director Edward Zwick and screenwriter Patrick Sheane 
Duncan for COURAGE UNDER FIRE, a powerful and intelligent examination of 
the consequences of guilt and responsibility, and the meaning of 
absolute truth.
     COURAGE UNDER FIRE shows us another face of war's horrors, although 
this particular perspective is less bleak than that of a PLATOON or an 
APOCALYPSE NOW.  Those movies were brutally effective because they 
reveled in bleakness, cynicism, and carnage; COURAGE UNDER FIRE gains 
its power by affirming that the cost of war isn't the inevitable 
eradication of every trace of human dignity and heroism.  The acts of 
valor depicted here stand out because they are contrasted with the 
barbarism that results from the battlefield transformation of thinking 
men into heartless killers.
     Depending on your point of view, the Gulf War could have been one 
(or more) of many things:  a bold stroke for liberty, a punitive strike 
against a deserving enemy, muscle-flexing by a president eager to shed 
his weakling image, or an attempt to whip the country into a patriotic 
frenzy.  For those involved in the combat, however, the political 
reasoning underlying the war was of little importance.  Battle meant the 
potential for death, and that potential unleashed the best and worst of 
human nature.
     Lieutenant Colonel Nat Serling (Denzel Washington) was a tank 
commander during the Gulf War.  On the night of February 25, 1991, his 
troops engaged the Iraqis, and, during the confusion, Serling mistook 
one of his own tanks for the enemy.  He gave the order to fire, and 
ended up killing his best friend.  Since then, Serling has been burdened 
by guilt.  He has become an alcoholic, his marriage is falling apart, 
and the government, which is covering up the incident, hasn't offered a 
means to assuage his bruised conscience.
     Six months after the war's conclusion, Serling is working on the 
staff of General Hershberg (Michael Moriarty), investigating potential 
medal recipients.  In that capacity, he is asked to rubber-stamp the 
approval of a posthumous Congressional Medal of Honor for Captain Karen 
Walden, a helicopter pilot who is credited for saving five lives at the 
cost of her own.  She would be the first woman to receive the Medal of 
Honor for combat.  As Serling begins his investigation, however, he 
discovers discrepancies in the stories of those involved.  He digs 
deeper, and uncovers contrasting perspectives of the same events.  
Ilario (Matt Damon), one of the men in Walden's medi-vac unit, claims 
that "the heavier the pressure, the calmer she got."  Monfriez (Lou 
Diamond Phillips), another of Walden's men, has a different story, 
stating emphatically, "She was afraid... She was a coward.  That's the 
bottom line..."
     Kurosawa's RASHOMON depicted a murder from several different 
viewpoints.  COURAGE UNDER FIRE uses a similar technique for events in 
the desert.  Which Karen Walden is the real one:  Ilario's, Monfriez's, 
or someone else's?  Or is the truth unknowable?  For Serling, whose 
honor demands that he get to the bottom of things, understanding what 
happened when Walden crash-landed becomes an obsession.  Even when he is 
officially removed from the investigation because the White House is 
getting impatient to award the medal, he refuses to give it up.  He asks 
for help from Tony Gartner (Scott Glenn), a Washington Post reporter, 
promising answers in return for aid.
     Serling's quest is like putting together a puzzle with pieces 
missing, and we work alongside him to unravel the mystery.  The audience 
is in synch with the film; the script is neither one step ahead of us 
nor one step behind.  Ultimately, as the truth begins to surface, 
everyone must face the consequences of their actions.  COURAGE UNDER 
FIRE ends with a moment of catharsis, but there are no overblown 
speeches -- only a simple, quiet scene that touches the heart more 
profoundly than anything accomplished by melodramatic manipulation.  Is 
it overly-sentimental?  Perhaps.  Is it effective?  Definitely.
      Denzel Washington, whom Zwick directed to an Oscar in GLORY, is in 
top form here, essaying a tormented man with a noble heart who's caught 
in a vortex of political and emotional turmoil.  Meg Ryan, aiming to 
break away from her reputation as a romantic comedy leading lady, uses 
this opportunity to attempt more demanding, dramatic acting.  Because 
her character is seen only through the flashbacks of others, she must 
essentially play multiple roles -- a task which she carries out 
admirably.
     In GLORY, Zwick effectively married a powerful human interest story 
with well-choreographed battle sequences.  Here, he once again 
accomplishes this, although the combat takes place in a far more 
technologically advanced arena.  But the campaigns of COURAGE UNDER FIRE 
that leave the deepest impression aren't those involving ground troops 
and air cover.  Rather, they're the deeper, more personal struggles of 
Nat Serling as he sifts through the war-ravaged elements of the human 
spirit for that "one little piece of shining something for people to 
believe in."  COURAGE UNDER FIRE is as profound and intelligent as it is 
moving, and that makes this memorable motion picture one of 1996's best.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Rich Meitin
Capsule review: Moving and absorbing. Excellent acting, direction,
scriptwriting. A shoo-in for multiple Oscars.
It's nice to know that the hollywood studio system can still come up with
a fine film, every now and again. I doubt if we'll see a better "big"
movie all year.
It would be a shame to discuss too much about the storyline here, because
so much of the drama depends on the carefully orchestrated flashbacks that
allow the characters, their conflicts, and their secrets to unfold. So
I'll tread very lightly.
Denzel Washington, charismatic as always, plays Nathanial Serling, an Army
colonel who is tormented by a deadly serious mistake he made during the
Gulf conflict. After the battle, he finds himself at the Pentagon,
assigned to investigate whether a posthumous Medal of Honor should be
awarded to Captain Karen Walden, a medevac chopper pilot, played with
gritty humanity by Meg Ryan in the many flashback scenes. Captain Walden
is the first woman to be considered for a combat medal, so the White House
(in light of the photo-op that will be created by hanging the medal around
the neck of the dead pilot's pretty young daughter in the Rose Garden) is
putting on extra pressure for a quick, positive decision. 
At the same time, Colonel Serling continues to be pressured by the Army
brass to lie about the mistake he made during the war.  Serling feels,
without knowing completely why, that he must seek his redemption through
truth  -- he must unmask the facts of both incidents, despite the
pressures from above. But the truth about Captain Walden is hard to find,
and the truth about himself is hard to face. As time goes on, he is aided
in his quest by a clandestine relationship with a Washington Post
reporter, played with admirable restraint by Scott Glenn. Serling
eventually wins the conflict with his commanding officer: Full
investigation and disclosure are made, culminating in a scene that could
have been a Great Big Truly Awful Hollywood Climax in the hands of a less
skilled director. Instead, that moment was handled with equally admirable
restraint. 
Among the many fine aspects of this film: The battle scenes are so
personal, so intimate, if you will, that I felt more deeply than ever how
War is Hell -- not because of massive battles and high-tech weaponry, but
because of the impossible responsibilities and poignant relationships in
the trenches. _Courage _ shows in close-up how battle is a soldier's
crucible. True "courage" is not an abstract ideal. Nor is it bravado.
Rather, it is a kind of integrity which underlies difficult, sometimes
sudden, often ambiguous real-life decisions.  Do you abandon a badly
wounded, inmmovable soldier when hasty retreat is probably the safest
recourse for the rest of your unit? Do you risk revealing your position to
the enemy if that might save the lives of others? 
_Courage_ also explores the theme of a Woman in War, not a helpmate or
lover-in-waiting, ala classic war films, but a tough, exhausted, bleeding,
gun-toting combatant and squad leader. It examines how equal awards and
equal rank are not the same as equal respect and equal treatment.
Consider, for example, how an enlisted street-wise, hyper-male tough guy
might react to a female commanding officer in battle. 
It is wonderful to experience the artful intertwining of the two
storylines. There is a symbiosis between Ryan's and Washington's
characters. He helps her by bringing to light the full dimensions of her
courage, and, because of his mission to reveal her story, she in effect
helps him reclaim his own courage. 

Author
Ife Hsu
Twentieth Century Fox (1996)
Running Time: 1:50hr
Starring: Denzel Washington, Meg Ryan, Lou Diamond Phillips,
Matt Damon, Scott Glenn, Michael Moriarty.
Director: Edward Zwick.
Edward Zwick's  Courage Under Fire is not really about the Gulf
War. It is an inspiring, thoughtful, and honest movie about the
search for truth, and ultimate redemption. Washington plays
Colonel Nathaniel Serling, a decorated officer who wrongly
ordered shooting of own troops at the Gulf War.  While
struggling with guilty and remorse, he is given an assignment to
investigate the story behind the death of Karen Walden (Meg Ryan). 
Walden is the first woman to be nomindated for the congressional
Medal of Honor. She is to receive the posthumous award for
having led a mission to rescue other US soldiers surrounded by
Iraqi troops. 
Withstand all the pressure (White House, Pentagon, Newscasters)
to produce a report commending Walden, Serling finds
inconsistencies behind the stories told by surviving members of
the rescue mission and refuses another situation where only
authorized truth is revealed. 
Washington, Ryan give riveting performances. Washington's
Serling immerses into alcoholism, denial, and isolation to
combat his remorse.  Walden's story is a way to cleanse his soul
marked by the lies forged onto his fatal misdoing at the Gulf
War.  Ryan divergely plays four Karen Waldens that come to life
only through those who remembers her (parents, fellow soldiers),
and shows vulnerability, strength, and charisma. Courage Under
Fire also features excellent supporting cast especially Lou
Diamond Phillips and Matt Damon. 
Zwick has shown an excellent eye for cinematography (note
previous efforts Glory, Legends of the Fall). All battle scenes
are well choreographed and fairly accurate. The horrors of war
are not focused with gore and violence much reduced from other
war-related movies (i.e. Platoon). Despite some emotional
manipulation of the audience at the end, Courage Under Fire
still ranks easily as the best movie of this summer and will
likely contend for Academy Awards.  

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Substance has slammed into the summer season with the landfall of
COURAGE UNDER FIRE, an imposing and entirely affecting military drama
that reteams Oscar-winning actor Denzel Washington with his glorious
GLORY director Edward Zwick.  This time we're witness to a modern
conflict, as the movie opens on a friendly-fire incident during the Gulf
War.  Commanding a compliment of armored vehicles, Lieutenant Colonel
Nat Serling (Washington) gives the order to fire on what is thought to
be an enemy target.  His men die, instead.  Six months after the end of
the war, Serling is working on his own death-- a slow suicide via
Scotch-- when he is assigned to investigate the approval of a posthumous
Medal of Honor for a helicopter pilot (a gritty Meg Ryan) who died in
the war.  A discrepancy in the surviving accounts piques Serling's
interest and, soon, he begins uncovering the truth about many things,
including his own suffering state.
     COURAGE UNDER FIRE carries surprising emotional weight, even as it
all too often relies on familiar dramatic devices.  You may wince at
such seeming cliches as Serling grasping for the whispered words of a
dying man lying on a hospital bed.  Or his clandestine meeting with a
newspaper reporter (Scott Glenn) complete with a trench coat, sun-
glasses, and, amusingly, a Redskins cap.  The too-polished plot is as
potentially distracting as the tightrope casting (Ryan, with a slurred
Southern accent; Lou Diamond Phillips as a buffed and tough solider;
Bronson Pinchot as a White House spin doctor).  Credit a couple of
rock-solid performances (including Washington and Michael Moriarty as
the commanding officer) and a no-nonsense approach by Zwick and
screenwriter Patrick Sheane Duncan (MR. HOLLAND'S ANUS, NICK OF TIME).
Their frank presentation of the subject matter and a unflinching
attention to detail help drive home the point that the consequences of
war are hell.  Go and have a good cry.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Viboon
This 1996 film is directed by Edward Zwick (Legends of the Fall), stars
Denzel Washington (Crimson Tide), Meg Ryan (When a Man Loves a Woman)
and Lou Diamond Phillips (Labamba). It has a running time of 155
minutes. There are some explosive combat violence and some foul
language, but no nudity, gore nor sex.
Courage Under Fire is the first big-budget Hollywood movie about the
Gulf War. An Army Lieutenant Colonel, Nat Serling (Denzel Washington),
ordered his men to fire at a seemingly enemy tank in the confusion of a
night battle. However, it turned out that the tank was one of their own
and he had indirectly killed his close friend. Pardoned, but ridden with
guilt and disillusioned, Serling was re-assigned to the Pentagon to
investigate a candidate for the Medal of Honour -- Capt. Karen Walden
(Meg Ryan), the first woman ever nominated for the award. It was
reported that Walden had lead a helicopter rescue mission that saved
many lives, but ultimately sacrificing her's. On paper, Walden certainly
deserved the medal. However, as the investigation wore on, there were
more questions than answers, and Serling became increasing confused by
the testimony of the eyewitnesses.
His search for the truth, both in his life and in Walden's death, was
what the movie was about.
The film explored some sub-plots along the way. First was the
self-destructive nature of Serling. After the friendly fire situation,
he was no more the macho "kill 'em all" type. Instead, he became an
alcoholic, had frequent nightmares and was unable to connect with his
family -- the investigation was the only thing that kept him in one
piece, will he ever recover? Then the movie also touched on the issue of
women in combat, even with everything being equal, will they be treated
so? Also surfaced was the relationship of Serling and his mentor, Gen.
Hershberg (Michael Moriarty). The latter wanted the medal to be approved
(under pressure from the White House) and the friendly fire incident
forgotten, however Serling had different ideas. How will the conflict be
resolved?
Courage Under Fire could be viewed as a courtroom movie without the
courtroom. The investigation into Walden's last day made up most of the
movie. And here lies the movie's greatest strength. Eyewitness accounts
can be unreliable, but several somewhat bizarre accounts on the same
event can provide much mystery. As Serling listened to the eyewitnesses,
the audience were treated to the visuals of the story. Surprisingly, the
movie did not feel repetitive at all. The writer had taken great care
that the story flowed even during flashbacks, and the editing team made
sure that the action was as tight the fourth time as it was the first
time the story was told. And because of this, the movie kept the
audience engaged. They had become the jury, listening to Walden's case,
and Serling's character was the prosecutor examining the witnesses.
As an added bonus, the main characters were also portrayed well by the
main stars. Denzel Washington was fine as usual as the hero. Meg Ryan
managed to shed more of her cute image and showed the different sides of
Walden, as described by the witnesses. Lesser characters were also
adequately believable.
However, Courage Under Fire was not without its flaws. The movie tried
to tackle many issues at once, resulting in some sub-plots (mentioned
above) being under-developed, or resolved too easily. An example would
be Serling's character. His role in the movie was at times overshadowed
by Walden's, even though he should be the person at the centre of our
focus. The movie ended too conveniently when the investigation ended.
When all is said and done, Courage Under Fire is still worth the $7, it
kept the audience engaged for most of the film, questioning the fate of
Walden. It also flowed easily, with no major plot hiccups. On the scale
of army drama, it is not A Few Good Men of 1996. But it certainly packed
more drama than the recently shown A Time To Kill.
Reviewed on 10 November 1996 - by Viboon.
-----------------------------------
PS. This is my maiden review. Please forward all your comments to
viboon@pacific.net.sg. Thank you for reading.
