Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Bleu (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring: Juliette Binoche, Benoit Regent, Charlotte Very.
Screenplay:  Krzysztof Kieslowski & Krzysztof Piesiewicz.
Director:  Krzysztof Kieslowski.
     I can't claim that my experience with French films has been all
that extensive, but the limited experience I have had has lent itself
to the following stereotypical image:  two characters sitting in a
dimly lit cafe, smoking cigarettes and speaking cryptically to one
another in extremely muted tones.  These films tended to deal with
emotionally stunted people in an emotionally stunted manner,
potentially intriguing but inert, if not downright soporific.  It
caused me no end of amusement to find a scene exactly like the one I
just described in Krzysztof Kieslowski's THREE COLORS: BLUE.  It caused
me more pleasure to discover that scene only one part of a complex and
fascinating character study of grief, directed with a mesmerizing
grace.  So now I wonder...is it French cinema that has changed, or is
it me?
     THREE COLORS: BLUE opens with a car crash which claims the life of
renowned composer Patrice de Courcy and his five-year-old daughter,
leaving wife Julie (Juliette Binoche) as the only survivor.  Julie
first considers suicide, but eventually decides to sever all ties with
her previous life and move into a small flat in Paris.  There she
wishes nothing more than to spend the rest of her days doing nothing,
free of the loves and friendships she describes as "traps."  However,
she finds that freedom difficult, as she develops a friendship with
neighbor Lucille (Charlotte Very).  When her husband's former partner
Olivier (Benoit Regent) goes public with his intention to complete
Patrice's unfinished final concerto, Julie is forced to confront facts
which might finally shake her from her reverie.
     From a narrative standpoint, BLUE is not the most easily
accessible of films.  There is very little dialogure, in fact very
little sound of any kind; even the car crash is notable for its
understatement.  Only the occasional explosions of Zbigniew Preisner's
score tend to break the silence, loading the music with significance.
Kieslowski chooses to allow us into Julie's world almost entirely
through images, but how arresting those images are.  In one scene,
Julie sits in a cafe and listens to a street musician playing one of
Patrice's compostions; Kieslowski indicates how long she stays simply
through the changing shadows cast by Julie's coffee cup.  Another scene
shows Julie standing in her flat as a man runs down the hall banging on
doors, seeking help while being chased, apparently by muggers.  It's a
confident but rarely showy directing job by Kieslowski, allowing
Julie's story to unfold slowly and clearly.
     The centerpiece of BLUE is the performance of Juliette Binoche as
Julie, and it's a winner.  While not the type of performance American
film audiences are used to seeing, it is nonetheless extremely
effective.  Like many characters we saw in 1993, Julie tries to make
herself safe by placing herself in an emotional vacuum, but she betrays
her natural inclinations to reach out in scenes with her elderly mother
and with Lucille.  At times the role might appear one-note, yet there
are deeper shadings.  The early scene in which Julie sleeps with
Olivier simply to provide him with closure to his previously unrequited
love is strangely emotional.  and her physical response to a group of
young girls coming into the pool where she is swimming packs a punch.
Binoche proves herself as deserving as any actor this year of Oscar
consideration.
     Where BLUE is likely to irritate many is in the deliberate
opaquity of some of its images.  Julie's reaction to the discovery of a
nest of mice in her apartment never really connects, nor do the images
of bungee jumping.  A scene between Julie and the young man who
witnessed the car crash seems repetitive, relevant only for the
introduction of an object which will later prove significant.  BLUE
proves to be very slow going at times, and requires immense patience.
However, as details concerning the relationship between Julie and
Patrice unfold, such patience will be proved worthwhile.  THREE
COLORS:  BLUE is an intensely focused examination of one woman's
attempt at self-deception for her own perceived good, and will likely
stick with me for some time.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  varies
Running Length:  1:38
Rated:  No MPAA Rating (Sexual situations, mature themes, nudity)
"Blue, liberty; White, equality; Red, fraternity.  We wanted to show what 
these well-known historical notions mean to us today, who already possess 
liberty, who are already equal, and for whom fraternity is a common 
ideal.  Therefore, in BLUE, liberty is not treated in a social or 
political way ... but if we talk about liberty, we mean individual liberty, 
the liberty of life itself."
               - Writers Krzysztof Kieslowski and Krzysztof Piesiewicz
     One moment, Julie (Juliette Binoche) had everything; the next, her
husband and daughter have been killed in a car accident and her own
face is a patchwork of lacerations.  The physical recovery proves less
difficult than the emotional one, and Julie ends up selling her house,
burning her late composer-husband's compositions, putting her mother in
a home, and running off to live in relative anonymity, with "no
memories, no love, no children."  Life, however, is intent on forcing
Julie to confront certain elements of her past that she might rather
not face.
     BLUE, the first of Krzysztof Kieslowski's "colors" trilogy (WHITE
and RED have recently been completed, marking the director's farewell
to the industry, as he has announced his retirement), is a powerful
motion picture--both in terms of its dramatic impact and in its method
of presentation.
     Reminiscent of FEARLESS in the manner that it handles the
transformation of an individual through a life-altering tragedy, BLUE
delves deeply into the psyche of Julie and leads us to examine our own
perspectives on life, loneliness, and liberty as we watch her cope with
her new, and dramatically different, existence.  We are also reminded
that control is frequently an illusion.
     Juliette Binoche, in what amounts to a one-woman show, turns in
her best performance since THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, and
arguably her most accomplished ever.  She manages to bring an element
of humanity and sympathy to a potentially unsympathetic character.
There is little in Julie, as written, for the audience to latch onto,
but Ms. Binoche provides the emotional link to the story.
     Along with director of photography Slawomir Idziak, Krzysztof
Kieslowski has created one of the most technically impressive
productions in recent years, rivaling Martin Scorsese's THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE for sheer visual impact.  Mr. Kieslowski uses light and
shadow like a painter uses his pallet, and even some of the most simple
images--such as a sugar cube absorbing coffee--are memorable.  Then
there's the use of color--and one color in particular.  In addition to
blue filters and blue lighting, any number of objects are blue--a foil
balloon, a tinted window, awnings, a folder, the walls of a room,
coats, skirts, scarves, blouses, jeans, shirts, trash bags, crystals, a
lollypop and its wrapper, binders, graffiti, a pool, a van, and a pen.
Each use of the title color underlines the central messages.
     Lately, a number of French imports have had music as a common
element.  These have included such titles as TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE,
UN COEUR EN HIVER, THE ACCOMPANIST, and now BLUE.  Mr.  Kieslowski
makes use of Zbigniew Preisner's grand score in the same innovative
fashion that he molds the visual facets of his project.  The music
mirrors the actions.
     Coping with loss and trying to build life anew is certainly not a
unique theme, but the manner in which BLUE portrays one woman's journey
along this path is fresh and eye-opening.  As rich in emotional impact
as in style, this motion picture sets a high standard that we as
viewers can only hope the other two chapters of the trilogy will
match.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Gareth Rees
     Julie (Juliette Binoche) is happily married to rich and famous
composer Patrice, and has a lovely young daughter.  Within a couple of
minutes of the opening of the film Julie's husband and child are killed
in a car crash.  Her life, that was once full of good things, is now
empty, and Julie has to somehow learn to cope.
     Her first reaction is to hide; she leaves her manor house and
orders that all its furniture be sold; she rents an apartment in a
slightly disreputable part of the city; she spends her time drinking
coffee and trying to forget.
     But she is unable to escape her husband's music.  Just before his
death, he was working on a commission for a grand symphonic chorus that
would be played at a festival of European Unity.  Whenever she is
reminded of her husband, poignant extracts of this unfinished chorus
appear to haunt her.  She visits the archives and destroys the
manuscript, but still the ethereal music follows her.
     There are minor twists and turns (she meets her husband's mistress
and befriends a stripper) but finally she is forced to come to terms
with her bereavement by completing the chorus.
     Stated barely like that, THREE COLOURS: BLUE sounds corny and
unconvincing.  But in fact it's a joy to watch; Binoche is very pretty
and conveys very well the anger and frustration and resentment of her
grief.  The music is wonderful (composed by Zbigniew Preisner who
composed the equally excellent music for LA DOUBLE VIE DE VERONIQUE),
more so by the spareness of its use--the only times the film uses
music are when brief extracts of the chorus visit Julie; at these times
the characters seem to stop moving and the screen slowly fades to
blue.  The plot may not be exciting but that doesn't seem to matter;
THREE COLOURS: BLUE is a simple film that left me wanting more.
     THREE COLOURS: BLUE is the first of a trilogy of films by
Kieslowski that will be dedicated to the three colours of the French
flag and explore the themes of liberty, equality and fraternity.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     It's hard to defend the artiness of BLUE.  With a Kieslowski movie
(maybe with all Kieslowski movies), either you get it or you don't.  If
you get it, you're a fan.  The movie becomes a mystical, dream-like
experience.  You recall the most indulgent camera angles and close-ups
at the oddest moments of your day.  Perhaps you hum a few bars of
Zbigniew Preisner's formidable score as you drink your coffee in the
morning, or you have a nightmare about the kind of car crash that sets
this story in motion.  And when a friend doesn't appreciate the film --
in fact, they think it's a dull, pretentious throwback to the French
New Wave or somesuch -- you find yourself speechless.  It's hard to use
words to explain the cinema's moments of great beauty, and you may as
well give up before you begin.
     THREE COLORS: BLUE is the first film in Polish director
Krzysztof Kieslowski's trilogy built around the precious themes of
liberty, equality, and fraternity (the second and third films are WHITE
and RED, respectively).  The concepts correspond to the three colors of
the French flag, and the conceit is actually less a stricture than a
simple excuse for Kieslowski to make a set of movies that meditate on
love, loss, and our essential humanity.  Liberty is personified in the
newly-widowed Julie (Binoche), who survives the automobile accident
that kills her husband Patrice (a famous composer) and daughter Anna.
This sea change in her life drives her to divorce herself from familiar
people and surroundings, but she's dogged by an unwelcome artifact from
her husband's life.  His unfinished composition, Song for the
Unification of Europe, is the subject of intense interest, and although
Julie disposes of Patrice's notes for the piece (and tries to dispose
of all her own memories), it continues to insinuate itself into her
life until she confronts the music as well as her own devastated
psyche.
     It sounds very color-by-numbers, but the film is actually
anything but.  Kieslowski is a bold filmmaker, with a knack for
hypnotizing an audience.  As much as Kieslowski's THE DOUBLE LIFE OF
VERONIQUE seemed concerned with lenses, this one dwells on reflections
-- Julie's face reflected on the curve of a spoon, a doctor's face
reflected in the iris of her eye, filling the screen.  The richness of
imagery occasionally rivals that of a novel (Julie touches a sugar cube
to coffee; as we watch, the sugar turns the luminous color of her own
skin).  And Kieslowski works at capturing the essence of memory and the
passage of time.  At four moments during the film, the screen fades
completely and music swells - Patrice's unfinished piece - and then the
music cuts, and the scene fades back in at exactly the moment where it
faded out.  It's part of the mystery of the film that a viewer can have
an immediate and intuitive grasp on such an abstract device.
     Intuition, indeed, is the driving force behind Kieslowski's
films.  The relationships and imagery are drawn so intricately that the
pictures reward repeated viewing, and it's only on the second or third
time around that the whole power of one of these films really becomes
apparent.  It's easy to belittle a film like this, with its languid
pace, elliptical dialog, and propensity for introspection
(navel-gazing?).  Don't these somber sequences substitute a content New
Age-ism for any real statements in response to the questions they
pose?  Isn't Kieslowski living in a blithe, egocentric dream world? How
can we be expected to identify with the rich widow of a French composer
as she mourns her way through Paris?
     Yet through Binoche's performance and Kieslowski's guidance, we
do identify.  We feel Julie's aloneness even as we understand her
resolve to cast off her sentiment and distance herself from the
inexorable sadness.  At the end of BLUE, as Preisner's music swells up
on the soundtrack, all of the disparate characters and situations that
make up Julie's story finally come together.  Pictures recall pictures
as Julie is finally reflected in the eyes of another, and the delicate
shape of another character is traced on a video monitor, echoed in
shades of blue.  These final moments articulate character and
contradictory emotion in one crystalline, irrefutable passage of
images, absolutely wordless -- the very definition of great cinema.  If
you're asking the same questions as our director, the simple clarity of
such images provides answers enough.

Author
Chad Polenz
***
1994, R, 98 minutes [1 hour, 38 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Juliette Binoche (Julie), Benoit Regent (Olivier), Charlotte Very
(Lucille), Phillippe Volter (Realtor), produced by Marin Karmitz, written by
Krzystof Kieslowski, Krzystof Piesiewicz, directed by Krzystof Kieslowski.
If you ever wondered what it would be like to be invisible, "Blue" will give
you the feeling you are. It is a film where all we do is follow a woman
around, get to know her, and see what an interesting life she leads. We
hardly ever get stories told like this, and although this can become rather
strange at times, it is still original, realistic, and enjoyable.
We meet a woman named Julie (Binoche), who finds herself unable to cope with
the death of her husband and daughter who died in a car accident she was also
involved in. The accident itself opens up the story, but it is portrayed in
somewhat of a strange manner. At first Julie tries to commit suicide, but
can't bring herself to do it. Is she afraid of death or does she really want
to live? 
Slowly, things start to return to normal in her life. She doesn't want
anything around her that will remind her of her family, so she sells her
house and all of her possessions and moves from the country to the city. 
Kieslowski's film tends to have a rather strange tone, both in the way the
story is told, but also in the way it is presented, that is, not exactly in a
straightforward manner. At times this can become confusing, but nevertheless
it makes the story more intriguing and interesting.
Julie has some kind of an affair with her husband's friend Olivier (Regent),
but she doesn't seem to enjoy it much. It's as if she can't feel anything
anymore. This sense of emptiness can be felt throughout the film, as there is
no real plot to it, just some strangely connected events in Julie's life;
swimming, dining, talking with her neighbors, etc. 
Some small things occur to build up her character, but it seems more like an
excuse to follow show how seemingly normal people can live unusual lives. For
example, her neighbor Lucille (Very), is a prostitute of sorts, whom she
saves her from being evicted because she won't sign a petition to have her
removed. She does this not so much to defend Lucille, but rather just to
spite everyone and stay out of controversy.
Julie's husband was a famous French composer whose music would supposedly
unite Europe, but when she gets a copy of his unfinished symphony she throws
it away until she learns Olivier tried to finish it. This is an example of
powerful symbolism: is it because of her own honor and/or selfishness she
would threaten something that could bring peace between nations? Or is it
love and respect for her husband, that only he could finish the piece? 
Not much happens in "Blue" but it is still a good movie to watch just to
observe how normal people really are.
visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html
