Title
Review for Hardball (2001)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Keanu Reeves, John Hawkes, Trevor Morgan,
Bryan Hearne, Julian Griffith, Michael Jordan, Graham
Beckel, Allan Ellis Jr., Christopher Lofton, Michael
Perkins, Brian Reed, DeWayne Harris. Directed by Brian
Robbins. Rated PG-13.
Hardball isn't what the advertising made it look like,
but it's too close. It could have been an
extraordinary story in a familiar framework; instead,
it's a conventional story with a few extraordinary
moments. Indeed, there are times, usually a few
seconds long, when the film is so genuine and
heart-rending that you wonder if the story cliches
weren't dictated to director Brian Robbins in the
interest of making something populist. Oh, and in
serious movies, Keanu Reeves seems to consistently be
a problem.
Conor O'Neill (Reeves) enters a church late at night.
The priest tells him that it's time to lock up, and
asks "Do you need faith? Forgiveness?" The response?
"I need the Bulls to make the spread." And how:
O'Neill is thousands of dollars in debt to bookies and
sports bar owners around Chicago. His last resort is a
wealthy stockbroker friend of his, who's at the end of
his rope. Instead of "lending" O'Neill another twelve
thousand dollars, he agrees to pay five hundred a week
to coach an inner city kids' baseball team.
One of Hardball's virtues is humanizing the "street
kids," most of whom eventually become gang members, or
worse. They're streetsmart and trash-talking, but
they're kids, with the same fears and anxieties as any
other 10-year-old. And as O'Neill predictably
rehabilitates himself through coaching this
disorganized-but-talented group of baseball players,
the most vivid personalities that emerge are those
same children.
There are moments when Hardball comes utterly alive. I
got bleary-eyed during the scene at the major-league
stadium, when the kids wave at Sammy Sosa and... he
waves back. Another scene has O'Neill visiting the
Projects home of Andre, one of his players. When
O'Neill asks what the kids do around here for fun,
Andre responds: "Play baseball with you."
For all the success the movie has with those little
moments, it strikes out with the main storyline, which
takes precisely the course you would expect. There's
not a single surprise along the way, from the kids'
gradual acceptance of O'Neill and vice-versa, to his
miraculous recovery, to the "sudden" death of one of
the main characters to the Big Game at the end (though
to the movie's credit, the game itself isn't shown,
but the penultimate game is). There's even the naughty
sidekick who tries to pull the protagonist back into
his nightmare.
Keanu Reeves is problematic. He has had mild success
as a serious actor -- I liked him in The Devil's
Advocate, and The Watcher -- but here he's too
jittery, as if someone told him to exaggerate his
every motion to the point of his performance looking
for all the world like a pantomime. I didn't buy Diane
Lane as teacher/love interest either, but maybe that's
because the script doesn't give her a chance to become
a character.
I can't give Hardball a high rating, but I suppose I'm
fond of it. It has some real poignancy, and real
people, somewhere under that nightmare of a plot. In
light of recent events, and the daunting prospect of
"rebuilding," here's a movie about a character who,
however predictably, rebuilds himself. If only it had
been, say, Ed Norton, instead of poor, old Keanu. But
I hear The Matrix Reloaded has started filming. 
Up Next: The Curse of the Jade Scorpion


Author
Homer Yen
If you see at least 10 movies a year and if you're the 
kind of moviegoer that likes to settle into your seat 
before the previews begin, you've probably seen 
trailers of Public Service Announcements.  Situated 
after unwelcome commercials but before film previews, 
you might have seen clips espousing the cause of the 
Will Rogers Institute, a charity race for some dreaded 
disease, or the warm segment in which a person 
standing in front of his broken down car in a 
torrential downpour is given an umbrella by a passing 
car.  "Courtesy," says the voice-over.  "Pass it on." 
One uplifting PSA is the one that features young 
adults who struggle to do something better with their 
lives despite the dark pressures of inner city life. 
With the tagline, "Opportunity, the anti-drug," it 
projects a spirit that is uplifting and hopeful.  The 
essence of that two-minute segment is captured in 
"Hardball," based on an early 90s memoir of coaching 
Little League baseball in Chicago's Cabrini-Green 
housing project.  The film is a surprisingly emotional 
and gritty melodrama about inner city youths and a 
down-and-out loser who hope to find a safe haven. 
The film quickly establishes a tone of despondency and 
desperation as we meet Conor (Keanu Reeves), an 
addicted gambler indebted to the wrong kinds of 
people.  His creditors don't charge interest; they 
just bash heads.  Looking as if he hadn't slept in a 
week, we see him praying in church.  A passing priest 
asks, "You looking for faith? Forgiveness?"  Conor 
solemnly replies, "I'm looking for the Bulls to cover 
the spread." 
In dire straits, he calls a long-time friend for help. 
 Conor is told that he'll get $500 a week in return 
for his services as a coach for a boy's baseball team 
in the projects.  With little choice in the matter, he 
grudgingly reports to the tattered field and meets his 
team.  Underprivileged, the kids lack tact, 
discipline, and brotherhood.  It'll take a miracle for 
them to jell.  
But baseball has a strange way of bringing everyone 
closer together.  And with the right coach and the 
right attitude, miracles can happen.  "New rule," 
demands Conor.  "No one can say anything bad about 
anyone else on the team." And with those words the 
kids begin to slowly develop a sense of camaraderie 
and a sense of unity.  The kids, all feisty yet 
adorable, see Conor as the father that they never had 
and baseball as their anti-drug.  Conor meanwhile 
slowly transforms from seedy hustler to a man who 
rediscovers his self-respect.  Reeves-as-Conor turns 
in one of his better dramatic performances (which even 
made me want to say his trademark line of "Whoa").   
While the baseball story is what the film swings for, 
it's the biting urban milieu that allows the film to 
go the distance.  Otherwise, it would be about as 
interesting as watching today's Bulls (without Jordan, 
Pippen, and Rodman).  When Conor escorts a team member 
back to his project apartment, for example, he is 
shocked to see everyone sitting on the floor.  His 
player matter-of-factly says, "no one wants to get hit 
by bullets."  The pall of inner city life may 
discourage them and tragedy may try to overtake them. 
But baseball and hope will always be their anti-drug. 
__________________________________________________ 
Terrorist Attacks on U.S. - How can you help? 
Donate cash, emergency relief information 
http://dailynews.yahoo.com/fc/US/Emergency_Information/

Author
Steve Rhodes
HARDBALL, directed by Brian Robbins (VARSITY BLUES) and written by John Gatins
(SUMMER CATCH), contains more miraculous conversions than a revival.  An awkward
blend of THE BAD NEWS BEARS with BOYZ N THE HOOD, the movie strains credibility
with every plot twist.
Set in the rough environment of an inner city ghetto where the kids are shot at,
beaten up and offered drugs, it stars Keanu Reeves as a gambler and a loser
named Conor O'Neill.  Conor is an almost completely despicable character until,
in the last act, he makes his saintly transformation.  Up until then, he is a
nervous and jumpy guy whose only interest in coaching baseball is so that the
bookies with baseball bats don't kill him before he hits it big with his
basketball bets and can pay off his debts.  Reeves plays an unsympathetic
character and plays him badly, so his fans might want to skip this film.  In a
throwaway part, Diane Lane is given nothing to do as Conor's almost
girlfriend.
Since Conor can earn five hundred a week, he agrees to coach a little kids'
baseball team.  They are such trash talkers, trash mumblers to be more precise,
that it is easy to see why the movie originally got an R rating.  The team is so
bad that a 16-to-1 loss is cause for minor celebration.  Although Conor does
little more than take attendance and lean against the fence, the kids
miraculously learn the game of baseball without anyone teaching them.  And just
asking them to stop the bad language is all that is needed for them to cleanup
their act.  Although he pays the kids almost no attention, they are somehow
inspired by his surly presence.  "Don't you think I might have something better
to do than worry about you guys and your little baseball team," he tells them on
one of the many times when he abandons them.
The last act is a tear-jerker that makes the movie questionable for kids under
12 who may be significantly traumatized by it.  You have to give the film this. 
Through a twist of fate, it is strangely topical.  One of the kids is thrown off
of the team because it is discovered that his mother has doctored his birth
certificate so that he appears to be younger than he really is.
HARDBALL runs 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for "thematic elements, language and some
violence," and would be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, thought it was a really good movie and gave it ***.  His
favorite character was G-Baby (DeWayne Warren).
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, September 14, 2001. 
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Bob Bloom
HARDBALL (2001) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Keanu Reeves, Diane Lane, John
Hawkes, D.B. Sweeney, Mike McGlone, and Graham Beckel, Screenplay by John
Gatins, based upon the book by Daniel Coyle. Directed by Brian Robbins. Rated
RG-13. Approx. 106 minutes. 
 Many factors contribute to the distant nature of Hardball: the flimsy
characterizations, the plot clichés, the overall familiar feel of this
comedy-drama. 
 Hardball may sound like an inner-city remake of The Bad News Bears, but the
sunny, light touch of that film is nowhere to be found in this somber feature.
Part of Hardball's lack of spontaneity can be blamed on its star, Keanu Reeves.
He is a talented performer, but not a  charismatic one who can grab an audience
and hold it to his bosom. 
In Hardball, Reeves plays Conor O'Neill, a degenerate gambler who owes thousands
to various bookies. 
To help erase his debt, he takes over - for $500 a week -from a busy investment
banker pal as coach of an inner-city Little League team. 
Of course, O'Neill cares nothing about the kids under his charge. It's merely a
means of getting money for his weekly payoffs. But, as happened to crusty Walter
Matthau in Bad News Bears, the youngsters eventually get under O'Neill's skin,
sparking a regeneration and transforming him into a warm and caring individual.
 But questions remain: How and why is O'Neill the way he is? No one is born a
compulsive gambler, risking life and limb on the throw of the dice or a shot at
the buzzer. 
 We only get a surface picture of this desperate hustler. 
 His young charges are merely types: Loud, brash youngsters who look and act
older than their ages because of the circumstances life has dealt them. 
 Showing the wretched and sometimes deadly conditions these young boys must
routinely face is what sets Hardball apart. For these youngsters, fear is a
constant companion. 
 Escorting one child to his door, O'Neill notices the family sitting on the
floor watching television. Asked why, the young man matter-of-factly tells his
coach that it's to keep low and avoid stray bullets. 
 The young men who comprise O'Neill's team are heart warmers.  For them the
baseball diamond is a refuge. Watching them come together as a team is
inspiring. 
 But the script really fails to address how O'Neill sparks these rambunctious
youngsters to solidify into a united force. In one scene he orders them to stop
the trash talk amongst themselves, and before you can say Sammy Sosa, they are
do-or-die teammates. 
 Hardball may bring a tear to your eye, especially when the dangers of the
projects are tragically brought home to O'Neill and his team. Yet, even this
feels more like a clichéd standard plot device than the natural course of
action. 
 What Hardball needed was a larger-than-life actor, one who can inspire, for the
part of Conor O'Neill. Reeves is competent and can ably show angst, but he lacks
the warmth required to pull off the part. 
 Hardball has a few moments of truth. The rest, however, feels like your
watching a game replay. 
 Bob Bloom isthe film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He can
be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Bloom's reviews also can be found by logging into www.jconline.com and clicking
on golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Pete Croatto
Michael Robbins' Hardball is quite the cinematic achievement.  In about
two hours, we get a glancing examination of ghetto life, a funeral with
a heartfelt eulogy, speeches about never giving up, a cache of cute kids
(including a fat one with asthma), a hard-luck gambler who finds
salvation in a good woman and a climactic "big game," where the
underdogs prove to have a bigger bite than anyone ever imagined.
All that's needed is a guy getting hit in the nuts and a food fight to
have the first film solely based on cinematic clichés.  I can't wait to
see the deleted scenes when it comes out on DVD.
Obviously, Hardball is a strikeout of a movie that never gets the bat
anywhere near the ball.  It stars Keanu Reeves as the aforementioned
gambler, who seems to owe every bookie in Chicago an amount of money
that rivals the gross national product of Guam.  Out of solutions, he
begs his successful corporate friend (the always welcome Mike McGlone)
to lend him $5,000.  Instead, McGlone offers Reeves the chance to help
him coach a youth baseball team from the projects for a nice weekly
stipend.
Reeves, who wants to keep his fingers, accepts the offer, but discovers
McGlone is only too happy to let him handle the team entirely.  The
drowsy-voiced protagonist must teach the sassy inner city kids the
baseball basics in a life of absentee parents and merciless gangs.  And
maybe, just maybe, they'll play in the big championship game.
One of the glorious surprises in the screenplay by John Gatins (Summer
Catch), adapted from Daniel Coyle's non-fiction book, is that there
aren't any.  The movie coasts from heartfelt moment to heartfelt moment
like a zombie.  That wouldn't be so bad, if the characters had an ounce
of subtlety or humanity to them.  Most of the kids' time is spent
yelling at each other, talking in slang and acting surprised.  There's
little that's naturally amusing about them, as they all seem to know the
cameras are rolling.  The worst of the lot is a tough-talking younger
player (DeWayne Warren) whose sole purpose, as the movie unfolds, is
being an emotional pawn, a tactic so utterly despicable I can't find the
right words to express myself.
The adults also don't fare well.  Reeves is impressively uninspiring as
the down-on-his-luck loser.  The character is poorly written, but Reeves
gives another charisma-free performance.  Every time he speaks, he
sounds like he just got up from a long nap and is gradually waking up. 
Kids are supposed to rally around this guy?  Diane Lane, who co-stars as
Reeves' obligatory love interest, remains a glowing screen presence (see
My Dog Skip for better proof).  It's too bad that her role here consists
of uttering lines like, "These kids trust you, and they don't trust
anyone!"  Then there's D.B. Sweeney as an evil rival coach and John
Hawkes as Reeves' scummy betting buddy and other unoriginal characters
you've seen before and hope never to see again.
I wanted Hardball to be good.  Robbins' Varsity Blues was a funny and
alternately taut tale of Texas high school football that had Ali Larter
smothered in whipped cream and Jon Voight sneering at everything that
moved.  I haven't seen Robbins' goofy Ready to Rumble in its entirety,
but I am intrigued that "Macho Man" Randy Savage and Martin Landau can
exist in the same movie without there being serious worldwide
repercussions.
Robbins obviously needs to go back to his forte -- making sports movies
for guys and not cutesy, cuddly pap such as Hardball, which also manages
to annoy and insult the audience.  Here's hoping that happens in the
immediate future.
Director: Michael Robbins
Producer: Tina Nides, Mike Nollins, Michael Robbins
Writer: John Gatins
Starring: Keanu Reeves, Diane Lane, John Hawkes, D.B. Sweeney, Mike
McGlone, DeWayne Warren
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Conor O'Neill (Keanu Reeves) is a gambling addict in way over his head to
the local bookies, owing them thousands. His best friend from childhood,
Jimmy Fleming (Mike McGlone), has bailed his buddy out of such fixes many
times before, but this time is just too much. Instead of just giving Conor
the cash, Jimmy makes a deal - $500 a week for 10 weeks. The only catch is,
O'Neill has to coach an inner city Little League baseball team in
"Hardball."
The screenplay, by John Gatins, is based on the book by Daniel Coyle, an
account of the author's own experience as a youth baseball coach in
Chicago's notorious Cabrini-Green project. Director Brian Robbins brings
the story back to the Windy City as it follows loser Conor hitting the
bottom of his own personal barrel. He owes not just one, but two bookies
big time, and his immediate future has visions of broken bones. Desperate,
Conor tries to hit up Jimmy, a hot shot at a big time investment firm, only
to sell his soul for $5000 and the agreement to coach the Kekambas, the
ball team that Fleming's company sponsors. And, Conor will only get paid
after each week of coaching the team.
The reluctant Conor meets the team for the first time and they are a mixed
collection of kids, all shapes, sizes and ages and all with a desire to
play ball. Little G-baby (DeWayne Warren), the smallest of the lot, is both
team mascot and most dedicated player, despite his diminutive size. Miles
(A. Delon Ellis, Jr.) is the team's star pitcher, but only if he can jive
to "Big Poppa" on his headphones when on the mound. Jefferson (Julian
Griffith) is a 'big-boned' boy with an asthma condition. Kofi (Michael
Perkins) is possibly the Kekambas's best player. Andre (Bryan Hearne) is
tough kid who needs the anchor of his team far more than he realizes, with
Jamal (Michael B. Jordan) his best friend. Ray Ray (Brian Reed), Alex
(Alexander Telles), Sterling (Sterling Elijah Brim) and Clarence
(Christopher Loften) make up the rest of the team. I mention each of the
kids by name for a reason. It is one of the best casting of a large bunch
of young actors and they, uniformly, act the part of members of a team. My
favorite is the charismatic little kid playing G-baby.
This is a movie, in concept, like many inspirational sports team flicks
we've seen - "The Bad News Bears," "The Mighty Ducks," "Mystery, Alaska"
and a myriad of others come to mind, of course. The difference lay in a
subtle undercurrent of social commentary that "Hardball" conveys. Sure it's
a rags to riches team tale as the Kekambas start out as a motley collection
of kids and, over the weeks working with Conor and each other, become a
worthy adversary for the opposition. There are also things said about the
matriarchal nature of inner city life, where the father figure does not
come to play in the equation of raising a child. Unfortunately, this aspect
of the film is underplayed for the sake of the inspirational team story.
The screenplay tries to cover too much ground in its moderate run time.
Besides the main yarn about the boys, there is also the fall and rise of
gambler Conor, a budding romance between him and the kids' dedicate school
teacher, Elizabeth Wilkes (Diane Lane), the aforementioned social
commentary, ghetto violence, personal tragedy, triumph and redemption. To
the makers' credit, the sentimentality does not get schmarmy, especially
after the film's dramatic, sudden climax. Things never really get beneath
the surface, either, as Robbins touches upon each social and personal
subject but not giving time to explore each or, even, some fully.
Keanu Reeves as a low life gambling, and possibly booze, addict who has hit
rock bottom doesn't quite cut it. He lacks the edge that someone out of
control and desperate at their plight would have, but is likable as Conor,
anyway. Diane Lane is under-utilized as the dedicated teacher and potential
love interest, with both parts given short shrift in the story. John Hawkes
is credible as O'Neill's sidekick Ticky Tobin. Mike McGlone made an affable
debut in Edward Burn's "The Brothers McMullen" but is given virtually
nothing to do here. D.B. Sweeney is the obligatory tight ass manager of the
other top team, the Bua Was. Home run hitter Sammy Sosa makes an appearance
as himself
"Hardball" isn't all it could be but its heart is definitely in the right
place. There is a good, inspirational sports movie buried in here that
provides good role models and a degree of thoughtfulness for kids. Be aware
that there is graphic language and gang violence. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures
 Director: Brian Robbins
 Writer:  Daniel Coyle's novel, "A Season in the Projects," John
Gatins
 Cast: Keanu Reeves, Diane Lane, John Hawkes, D.B. Sweeney,
Bryan Hearne, Julian Griffith, Michael B. Jordan, Graham Beckel
 Screened at: Loews E-Walk 9/16/01
   There are many reasons that a man will gamble compulsively. 
The most obvious one is that he wants to make money more
quickly than he can in the stock market.  A second possibility is
that placing high-stake bets whether in a card game or on a
sporting event gives him a rush that he simply cannot get on his
job or at home.  Psychologists, however, point out that given the
losses suffered by the large majority of such speculators, they
must have an unconscious desire to lose--because they dislike
their very reflections in the mirror and regularly fight their own
rational nature in order to inflict punishment on themselves.  This
third and most intriguing judgment forms the basis of Brian
Robbins's "Hardball," a film based on Daniel Coyle's novel with
the more pretentious name, "A Season in the Projects," adapted
for the screen by John Gatins.  "Hardball," which highlights the
acting talents of Keanu Reeves as the sort of character he was
born to play, deals with a loser, Conor O'Neill, who becomes a
winner not by going through a 12-step religious program or by
lying on the couch while a bored professional collects $125 an
hour.  He gets to like himself by losing himself in the service of
others, specifically by coaching an urban Little League team of
black kids living in a tough Chicago housing project.
   The most obvious statement the reasonably perceptive
moviegoer can make about the film is that it is cranked out by a
Hollywood formula team, taking no chances but rather giving the
audience what it wants--a guy who is suffering, goes through an
unorthodox rehab program, becoming a winner by converting a
group of mildly motivated kids into a victorious ball team.  You
don't have to ask whether these pre-teens will win the state
championship or whether they will receive spanking new
uniforms, courtesy of a community that takes an interest in the
underdog.  To make this sort of movie without following the
guidelines of, say, Adam Sandler's winning albeit more comedic
ways in "Waterboy," could cut into studio profits.  But darn it:
these youngsters do get to draw a tear or two from even a
cynical spectator in the movie seats even if they do not get to use
a word naughtier than "bitch" or take any action that would lose
for them the sympathy of their viewers.  Formulaic this may be,
but at least Brian Robbins is directing a work that is devoid of
misanthropy and, given recent events in New York and
Washington, this may be just what the doctor ordered.
   Conor O'Neill (Keanu Reeves) is down on his luck.  Owing
gambling debts to a bartender and others, he makes the usual
mistake of playing double-or-nothing, seeking to erase the
arrears in one fell swoop but succeeding only in getting himself
into deeper hot water. Seeking a loan from a friend, a broker in
an investment house, he instead gets an offer: $500 a week if he
would perform an important community service.  Though he
seems to lack a knowledge of sports given his record on the
courts, he is to coach a team of inner-city kids who regularly
fumble the ball, strike out at bat, and have little self-esteem other
than that which rubs off when taught by the attractive Elizabeth
Wilkes (Diane Lane) in a Catholic school.  The kids are
individuals, even if Conor appears to treat them for the most part
as a group: one has asthma, another is tries to play illegally with
a forged birth certificate.  They're all cute, they all listen to what
the coach says even if they more than occasionally get into fights
with one another.  Strangely enough, we never get to see any
specifics that the adult imparts to the minors short of giving them
pep talks. There's nothing about signals that the catcher should
make for the pitcher or clues about how a shortstop can better
field a line drive.
   The story shifts regularly from the ball field to the classroom,
spending a considerable amount of time on O'Neill's troubles as
he is harassed and beaten by his creditors, hectored by at least
one of the mothers of the kids, and taken down a peg by teacher
Elizabeth--who plays hard-to-get when Conor asks her for a date
though she obviously likes him and approves of the way he has
with the youngsters.  "Hardball," then. has balance and variety. 
One must question why the movie got an "R" rating, given the
almost schoolmarmish language of the kids and the fights which
look staged as though carried on in a live production which has
the director worrying about injuries to the performers.  In no way
does the film really play hardball, but it is at base an entertaining
and uplifting drama with adorable performances by the little-
leaguers and a surprisingly effective show by the often criticized
Keanu Reeves.
Rated R.  Running time: 105 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
        If Biggie Smalls weren't dead already, certainly the sight and sound of
Keanu Reeves murdering his hit "Big Poppa" not once, but twice in _Hardball_
would have done the job.  For the rest of us, sitting through the schmaltzfest
that is _Hardball_ amounts to a two-hour torture session that would make one
long for the great beyond.
        Watching Reeves lord over a boys' baseball team in a
_Bad_News_Bears_-ish comedy is a horrifying enough prospect, but _Hardball_ is
even more galling than what the misleading ad campaign sells it as: it's a
teary, inspirational sports drama.  But despite having the same early fall berth
and also featuring a name star above its title, _Hardball_ is no
_Remember_the_Titans_, the truly uplifting and moving blockbuster that starred
Denzel Washington--for reasons that go far beyond the lopsided Keanu vs. Denzel
argument.
        First and foremost is the lead character of Conor O'Neill.  Reeves'
lackluster performance aside (more on that later), Conor, who begins the film as
a compulsive gambler deep in debt to loan sharks, is hardly an interesting or
appealing "hero."  In exchange for a weekly check, a businessman friend (Mike
McGlone) makes Conor coach an inner city little league team, the Kekambas.  The
usual would-be heartwarming hokum ensues: Conor learns that there's more to life
than sports bets; the kids are inspired to win by Conor.
        Or are they?  Conor does a lot of things with the Kekambas, but one of
them is certainly not coaching.  The most he is shown doing during practice
sessions is hitting balls to outfielders.  He never gives anyone any pointers
except that it's important to show up.  Duh.  As such the Kekambas' winning ways
are completely their own doing, with very little to no help from Conor.  It's
staggering how director Brian Robbins and screenwriter John Gatins adapted a
book (by Daniel Coyle) about little league coaching by completely erasing just
about all trace of the practice.
        So _Hardball_ becomes one of those films where the African-Americans
make life better for the white man with little to no return, and the balance is
thrown even further with one especially manipulative late-inning turn.  But
Robbins starts making mawkish far earlier than that; any occurrence that can
make the slightest tug at a heartstring, such as a player not getting a team
T-shirt, is accompanied by a maudlin score cue.  The young cast is instructed to
pout for maximum effect whenever not hammering home their characters' single
defining quality, e.g. one player has to wear headphones and listen to "Big
Poppa" while pitching (hence setting the stage for Reeves' rickety renditions);
one kid who is actually too young to play nonetheless listens to Conor's sage
advice by showing up for every game and practice.
        Reeves has turned in awful performances for top-notch directors such as
Francis Ford Coppola and Kenneth Branagh, so it's no shock that he doesn't do
any better for a hack like Robbins.  What is surprising is that Robbins appears
to have given Reeves complete free reign, for Conor is prone to Keanu-isms that
you see the star doing at awards shows and in interviews: the constant head
bobbing, the arm-waving.  Reeves is also still a block o' balsa when it comes
time to show emotion, whether during the sappiness of the final stretch or in
the afterthought of a romantic subplot between Conor and a schoolteacher (Diane
Lane, wasted again).
        Yet as tempting as it is to pin _Hardball_'s failure on Reeves, fault
must go to the shockingly untalented Robbins, who, after _Varsity_Blues_ and
_Ready_to_Rumble_, continues his streak of wretched sports-tinged movies.  It
figures that "Hardball"'s big lesson is about the importance of showing up, for
obviously the _Head_of_the_Class_ alum owes his directing career to being at the
right place at the right time.  Who the hell knows wherever and whenever that
may have been, but it's certainly a moment in time cursed by true film fans
everywhere.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
First of all, forget the trailer for this movie, because this is not, and I
repeat, not a "kid's movie" or a "comedy" for that matter. It has a few elements
of both but most of all, it's about one adult character's journey to recovery.
There's swearing in the film, violence and the main character smokes like a
chimney, drinks like a fish and gambles like there's no tomorrow. Definitely not
a Saturday afternoon flick for the children.
PLOT:
A gambling man who drinks too much is stuck between a rock and a hard place. He
owes money all over town, and the only way that he could pay his debts back is
by coaching an inner-city kid's baseball team. He reluctantly agrees to do it,
but ultimately cannot fight his own demons and must come to grips with what he
wants for his own life.
CRITIQUE:
Every other year, there seems to be a film that comes out of left field for me
(pun intended). A movie that makes me forget about all of the more reasonable
points on which to appreciate a film on a more "technical" level, and just goes
for the heart. Well, I am human after all and every now and then, a soft spot is
gonna be touched, and as much as REMEMBER THE TITANS was mostly unoriginal and
predictable last year, HARDBALL goes through much of the same material that
we've seen before here, but still manages to work as an all-around successful
movie with its heart so obviously in the right place. Is it sappy? Yes! Is it
predictable? Yes! Does it matter? No. This is the kind of movie that either
pulls you into its web or doesn't. It's a very simple premise (a lost man
looking for a way out of his gambling debts), but it plays all of its cards just
right. The main character in this film, Keanu Reeves, isn't a "nice guy". He
doesn't start off as a nice guy, and even when given the opportunity to redeem
himself, doesn't quickly turn into a nice guy overnight. He has problems in his
life...many problems. He gambles too much, drinks too much and doesn't really
have any goals. But it isn't long before he's confronted with many of the
lessons of life, which most of us already know, but seem to take for granted.
Live for the day. Cherish your loved ones. Create a meaning for yourself. Don't
give up on your dreams. Cliches to be sure, but also very true. Reeves'
character spends a lot of time with underprivileged children in this movie, and
ultimately begins to see the harsh reality of their lives and the tough nature
of being brought up under less groomed conditions. Basically, he gets a second
chance in his own life.
The "projects" shown in this film are a place that would scare the crap out of
any living adult, and sadly, many children live and breathe there every day. I
liked this movie because it gave me my own slap across the face. Life could be
much worse. There are a lot of people who need help out there. Giving back to
the community is important. Life is never perfect, but you can always try and
improve yourself. I also appreciated the superb work done here by the
filmmakers, since the story is essentially one that we've seen a number of times
before, but it's made more relevant here, there's comedy mixed into the drama
and Reeves is given the opportunity to utilize his restrained acting demeanor to
draw us further into his character's inner-struggles (you never really know
where he's coming from or going). But even more importantly, they should all be
commended for pulling off one of the most difficult tasks in the movie biz and
that is the fine line between films that are super-sappy and effectively
poignant.
I was touched by this film and hope to bring some attention to it with this
review. Alright, so maybe I was having an "off-day" or something, but it grabbed
me by the heart-strings and played me like a fool, and this is a very rare
occurrence indeed. By the end of this puppy, I was tearing up like a diapered
child myself. Very odd. So if you enjoyed REMEMBER THE TITANS and don't mind
sitting through a fairly predictable movie with a sound message of hope,
redemption, faith and second chances, I suspect that you will be taken by this
film as well. And the fact that it's all based on a true story (and a book
entitled "Hardball: A Season in the Projects" by Daniel Coyle) makes it all that
much more effective.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Any Given Sunday (7/10) - Baseketball (6/10) - Family Man (8/10) - For the Love
of the Game (7/10) - Mystery, Alaska (8/10) - Remember the Titans (7/10) - The
Replacements (6/10) - Sweet November (6/10) - Varsity Blues (7/10)

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "HARDBALL" (Paramount Pictures)
    Think of it as a baseball version of "The Mighty Ducks" or an
updated "Bad News Bears" with a white guy who is seeking redemption coming into
a ghetto to help black kids find hope and salvation. Keanu Reeves ("Sweet
November,""The Matrix") plays Conor O'Neill, a Chicago gambler who owes $11,000
to two demanding bookies. When he tries to borrow money from a friend to pay the
debt, he must agree to coach a Little League team, the Kekambas, from the
Cabrini Green housing projects in order to get $500-a-week. The team's unruly
assortment of free-swinging, wise-cracking young players who live in fear and
squalor amidst violence, predictably, switch his perspective on life.
Particularly effective are Julian Griffith, A. Delon Ellis Jr., Michael Perkins,
and little DeWayne Warren as G-Baby. As their dedicated teacher, Diane Lane
provides an unnecessary romantic twist, while D.B. Sweeney is a rival coach.
Adapting Daniel Coyne's novel, screenwriter John Gatins ("Summer Catch") and
director Brian Robbins ("Good Burger," "Varsity Blues," "Ready to Rumble") have
discarded many of former coach Coyne's trenchant observations about the
relationships between the poor, African-American children and their white,
middle-class adult coaches in favor of the usual, simplistic clichés - like the
elitist league president, the contemptuous coach of the best team, the teacher
who insists that the kids learn, and the parents' demands from the bleachers -
and Chicago Cubs player Sammy Sosa does a cameo. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Hardball" gets a sappy, sentimental box-score of 5. And what we're
seeing is a sanitized adaptation, not the original version in which there was so
much four-letter-word profanity that it could never have received a PG-13
rating.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Hardball (2001)
Keanu Reeves, Diane Lane, John Hawkes, Trevor Morgan, D.B. Sweeney,
Brian Hearne, Julian Griffith, Michael B. Jordan, Graham Beckel, Alan
Ellis Jr., Kristopher Lofton, Michael Perkins, Brian Reed, DeWayne
Warren. Screenplay by John Gatins. Directed by Brian Robbins. 105 min
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
If you're feeling the least bit cynical, then you may wish to skip
"Hardball." The film, about a troubled man who finds redemption by
coaching a group of little boys from the ghetto, bends over backwards to
touch your emotional buttons. In fact, something occurs late in the
movie that is so shamelessly manipulative that some viewers may deem it
patently offensive. Still, I found "Hardball" rewarding because, beneath
the sappy music and formulaic story, the core of the film rang true.
Keanu Reeves plays Conor O'Neill, a compulsive gambler $11,000 in debt
to a pair of angry bookies. He wanders from one Chicago neighborhood bar
to another, trying to avoid those to whom he owes money while searching
for someone to front him enough cash for the next bet. O'Neill is
utterly lost – the only solution he can see to the problems brought on
by his gambling is yet more gambling.
In interviews and at public appearances, Keanu Reeves is notorious for
stammering and looking ill at ease. As O'Neill, he takes that hesitancy
and discomfort and channels it into the character. His performance is
very effective, working against expectations for the leading man in a
feel-good movie. His O'Neill is not inherently noble; he finds
redemption only by stumbling into it.
The opportunity to live a life that extends beyond himself comes from an
acquaintance that offers O'Neill $500 a week to take over his position
as coach for the Kekambas, a Little League team from the projects. As
with most characters in this genre, he doesn't like working with kids
and has no interest in the job, but his desperation for cash forces him
to accept the deal.
Even more unsure of himself than usual, he meets the team. Thankfully,
the young actors playing the Kekambas come off not as stereotypes, but
simply as ordinary boys living in hellish surroundings. Particularly
memorable are Jefferson (Julian Griffith), a kid determined to work
around his asthma and extra pounds, Miles (Alan Ellis Jr.), who listens
to a tape of his favorite song in order to set his pitching rhythm, and
brothers Kofi (Michael Perkins) and G-Baby (DeWayne Warren), whose
devotion to one another is touching, but never overplayed.
In fact, nothing about the boys is overplayed. They are refreshingly
natural, making it even more painful to watch them navigate the grounds
of the projects like small soldiers looking for sanctuary on enemy turf.
They don't treat O'Neill as some great white savior, either. Rather,
they are simply glad to have an adult, any adult, willing to organize
safe activities for them.
Once the coach/team dynamics are established, the story follows the
obvious path, even providing a dedicated teacher (Diane Lane) to serve
as moral compass and potential love interest to O'Neill. Only the
verisimilitude of O'Neill and the boys keep the story from becoming
insufferable. And then comes the incident that really pushes the
envelope. I won't reveal it here – you'll have to decide whether it is a
fair representation of a tragic part of ghetto life, a cheap, cruel ploy
to wring tears from the audience at any cost, or both.
The credits for the film list it as being "inspired by" the book,
"Hardball: A Season in the Projects," by Daniel Coyle, which followed
the 1991 founding of a baseball league for kids in Chicago's infamous
Cabrini-Green housing project by two men: one black and one white. Bob
Muzikowski, a recovering addict turned Christian and Al Carter, a
government employee specializing in gang relations, spearheaded the
project, although they squabbled about virtually everything. Carter,
eager to celebrate the boys' racial heritage, grew increasingly
uncomfortable with middle-class white men coaching black children. In
1993, Muzikowski charged Carter with misappropriating funds from the
project, while Carter was busy forming another league.
Just a few days ago, a federal judge refused Muzikowski's request to
block the opening of "Hardball." Muzikowski is suing Paramount Pictures,
claiming that the O'Neill character defames him, and that the boys'
cursing in the movie is also defamatory, because such behavior is not
allowed by the league. At this point, the judge is siding with
Paramount's contention that the film is clearly identified as fiction
and protected by the First Amendment.
Indeed, "Hardball" is clearly fiction, and pretty cheesy fiction at
that. But, thanks to the performances of Reeves and the boys, and the
stark depiction of life in the projects, there is enough substance in
the movie to warrant a viewing. As I write these words on my laptop
computer in my cozy middle-class living room, precious human beings
continue their struggle to survive in the projects. Any film that
reminds us of such inequities deserves to be shown.

Author
Laura Clifford
Conor O'Neill (Keanu Reeves) is a drunk up to his neck in gambling debts.
When he turns to investment banker buddy Jimmy Fleming (Mike McGlone, 
"The Brothers McMullen") for yet another loan, Jimmy pitches him a deal -
coach a Cabrini Green Little League team to fulfill Jimmy's corporate
pledge and he'll pay Conor $500 a week.  Conor reluctantly agrees and is
surprised by his own feelings for the kids he comes to know in "Hardball."
Screenwriter John Gatins ("Summer Catch," "Ready to Rumble") Hollywoodizes
Daniel Coyle's book "Hardball:  A Season in the Projects" and serves up
an uneven "The Bad News Bears" hybrid.  Conor serves more as symbolic
outside masculine interest than effective sports coach and is forced to
sway wildly to the plot's mechanics, turning his concern for the kids and
romantic interest in their teacher Elizabeth Wilkes (Diane Lane) off
and on like a faucet.
Conor's a lowlife who exists by gambling on and scalping tickets to local 
sporting events with his best friend Ticky Tobin (John Hawkes, "The Perfect 
Storm").  He uses his deceased dad's betting account to place another bet 
when his own account's being called in and loses again.  Now he's being hunted
by two bookies, yet uses Ticky to introduce him to a third.
When he finds himself the coach of the Kekambas, eight ten year olds and an
underage mascot G-Baby (DeWayne Warren), Conor needs to make a deal with Miss 
Wilkes and a suspicious mom to help Kofi Evans (Michael Perkins) deliver a 
book report in order to have enough kids to play.  Then Conor finds out his
responsibilities also include getting his kids home safely after he callously
sends asthmatic Jefferson (Julian Griffith) home after dark and the poor kid
winds up in the hospital, beaten up by the ever present drug dealers and
gang members outside his home.  Although Conor lives in a rundown, inner city
apartment, his eyes are opened to the violence of daily life in Chicago's
projects.  He begins to take a real interest in the kids whose sole joy is
found on the baseball field.
Ironically, the Keanu Reeves who's accused of only being able to deliver
'whoas' and 'dudes' is more believable in roles such as the investment banker
he (unbelievably) tries to pass himself off as here than the lowlife he's
cast as.  Reeves has charm to spare with the kids and Lane but fails to
convince in his drinking, gambling scenes.  The guy just exudes too much inner
peace to ever seem truly desperate.  Diane Lane is solid as the inner city 
teacher who takes an interest in the unlikely guy who's fired up her students. 
The kids, all but two making their film debuts, are all naturals, with young 
DeWayne Warren a standout as the crowd pleasing G-Baby.  Also good is A. Delon
Ellis, Jr. as the silent star pitcher who needs the rhythm of The Notorious 
B.I.G.'s 'Big Poppa' rap on his walkman in order to win.  D.B. Sweeney wears 
the false bravado and shifty eyes of a competing coach in the game for himself
"Hardball" is directed by Brian Robbins ("Varsity Blues") in a straightforward
manner, although he yanks his lead too abruptly through emotional shifts
(Conor's boorish behavior towards Elizabeth on their first date and later 
abandonment of his team just don't wash as handled here).  The PG-13 rated
film has been criticized for the bad language spouting from the mouths of
its kids, but it would seem unnatural for these kids to speak otherwise.
Admirably, "Hardball" avoids schmarm and offers numerous crowd-pleasing
moments, but it only delivers a base hit instead of hitting one out of the
park.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
