Title
Review for Rocky Horror Picture Show, The (1975)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/4650ea226b8fd7108825696b0058451e?OpenDocument
Well here we are, doing the time warp again.
Celebrating 25 years of making high-schoolers giddy with its debauchery
and high camp, The Rocky Horror Picture Show is back with a 25th
Anniversary two-disc DVD edition, complete with deleted scenes,
outtakes, interviews, and an audience participation track.
But never mind the extra scenes: Nobody sees Rocky Horror out of some
longing for a deeper meaning.  We see it because it's a messed up film,
and every once in a while its fun to just sit back, go wild, dress up in
garters and watch a messed up movie.
Um.  Forget that thing about dressing up in garters.
For those unfamiliar with Rocky Horror, the film concerns the creation
of a oversexed Frankenstein by the name of Rocky for the sole purpose of
being a lovetoy for sexually ambiguous transvestite Dr. Frank-n-Furter
(Tim Curry).  Frankie's a little crazy, so he invites motorcycle gangs
to party, murders people in public, eats food on their corpses, and
begins singing and dancing funny rock musical numbers.  Witnessing this
are Brad (Barry Bostwick) and Janet (Susan Surrandon), two
recently-engaged youngsters living in the shadow of the 70s.  This
bizarre combination leads to some of the most fucked-up musical numbers
you'll ever hear outside of the parody songs you sing to yourself in the
shower and a generally enjoyable film.
Rocky Horror was pretty purely brain candy when it came out, and it
remains that way to present day, extras or no.  If you haven't already,
you should definitely see it, if only so that you will no longer be
considered a virgin in the eyes of fanatics.  But as for all this extra
junk?  Just give me a simple sweet transvestite and forget about all the
rest of it.
Director: Jim Sharman
Producer: Michael White
Writer: Jim Sharman and Richard O'Brien
Starring: Tim Curry, Susan Surrandon, Barry Bostwick, Richard O'Brien,
Patricia Quinn, Nell Campbell, Jonathan Adams, Peter Hinwood, Meatloaf,
and Charles Gray
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Brian Matherly
See this review as it was intended at: http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Tim Curry, Susan Sarandon, Barry Bostwick, Richard O'Brien,
Patricia Quinn, Nell Campbell, Meat Loaf, Charles Gray, Jonathan Adams,
Peter Hinwood 
Written by: Jim Sharman and Richard O'Brien 
Directed by: Jim Sharman 
Running Time: 100 minutes 
"Say, any of you know how to Madison?" 
--- Brad "Asshole" Majors (Barry Bostwick) shows just how unhip he is
after watching the kooky Transylvanians wrap up their ode to the Time
Warp in the cult classic The Rocky Horror Picture Show. 
The story behind The Rocky Horror Picture Show is one of legend.  In the
early 70's, stage actor turned first-time playwright Richard O'Brien
decided he wanted to make a musical homage to the crazy B-movies he had
grown up with as a child, set to a bunch of catchy rock tunes of his own
design.  The result was the stage play The Rocky Horror Show, which
opened to fairly decent reviews in London in 1973 and was even hailed
the Best Musical of 1973 by prominent drama critics in England.  The
play was so successful that the film rights were immediately snapped up
and production on the film began a mere year later, in October of 1974. 
The film version (now titled The Rocky Horror PICTURE Show) was released
in 1975... and immediately tanked at the box office.  Whether it was
because Fox wasn't quite sure how to market it to audiences or that
audiences didn't quite know what to make of it themselves has never
really been determined, but the one common bit of knowledge about the
film was that it was a huge flop.  It seemed that the infectious spirit
brought about by the stage version had not been infused into the film
version and Fox quickly had it pulled from theaters. 
A year later, something entirely strange and magical happened.  Prints
of the film started to be distributed to theaters in small amounts and
were circulating at midnight shows across the country, and it was then
that a whole new audience found the film.  This new audience was prone
to dressing up like the characters from the film, acting out segments in
front of the screen as the movie played, yelling rude comments at the
screen, and just generally having a good time.  Word quickly spread
about this new phenomena of interactive film and The Rocky Horror
Picture Show's life as the ultimate cult film was born. 
For the virgins out there who are unaware, the plot centers around a
loving couple, Brad Majors (Barry Bostwick) and Janet Weiss (Susan
Sarandon), who come from a small town called Denton.  Brad and Janet
have just attended the wedding of two of their friends and decide that
they also want to be wed.  They plan a trip to see the man who led to
their meeting, Dr. Everett Scott (Jonathan Adams, who played the
narrator in the original stage version), but their car gets a flat on
the way to his home.  Remembering a castle they had seen back a few
miles down the road, they decide to walk there and see if the residents
have a phone they might be able to use to call for assistance. 
The castle is actually the home of a race of aliens from the planet
Transsexual (in the galaxy of Transylvania), who are lead by the
eccentric fishnet-stocking wearing mad scientist Dr. Frank-N-Furter (Tim
Curry).  Frank-N-Furter has masterminded the secret to creating life and
has done so in the form of Rocky (Peter Hinwood).  As Rocky becomes
accustomed to his new environment, Brad and Janet find themselves at the
mercy of Frank-N-Furter's mad schemes.  Little do any of them know that
the doctor's handyman, Riff-Raff (original author Richard O'Brien), and
domestic, Magenta (Patricia Quinn), are actually Transsexual planetary
protectors who have been sent to stop Frank from spreading his alien
evil all over the Earth. 
Going back and revisiting this film after ten years (1990 being the
first time I had ever seen it), it is amazing to me that this film ever
got made or has had the staying power that it has.  If I had been a Fox
executive around the time of its release, I don't think I would have
known what to make of it either.  For all intents and purposes it is a
bad movie (though bad in a really good sort of way), but sumptuous
production design and a great deal of incredibly catchy songs really
help to increase the likability of the film.  By the time the credits
role, it is fairly easy to have gotten wrapped up in the film and its
characters, and one really gets the feeling that Richard O'Brien
definitely was a fan of the old cheesy B-movies his film is based on. 
When I say that the wall-to-wall songs are catchy what I really mean to
say is that, once you hear them, they will be ingrained in your head for
all of eternity.  It goes without saying that the "Time Warp" is the
most popular song in the film.  Even people who have never seen the
movie know of that particular song.  What those who haven't seen the
movie don't know though, is that there are even more songs in the film
that are just as worthy of acknowledgment.  My personal favorite is
"Over at the Frankenstein Place", but "Dammit Janet" is also maddeningly
catchy.  Tim Curry's vocals on the rocking tune "Sweet Transvestite"
need to be heard to be believed.  The finale of the film, a big floor
show staged by Frank-N-Furter and featuring most of the cast in garters
and fishnets (including Barry Bostwick... frightening!), features no
less than four songs ("Rose Tint my World", "Don't Dream It", "Wild and
Untamed Thing", and "I'm Going Home"), all of which are immensely
singable. 
The film's true popularity and longevity resides in its audience
participation though.  Despite the catchiness of the songs, this movie
would have been long forgotten about if it hadn't have been for the
multitude of folks who dress up every Friday or Saturday night to rush
out and be a part of their own little floor show.  Watching this film at
home is nothing compared to actually experiencing this in a theater with
hundreds of rabid fans (unless you don't mind inviting friends over and
letting them shoot water guns in your home or letting them throw rice
and pieces of toast all over the place). 
Note: Director Jim Sharman brought back to the central characters of the
film, in the form of a sequel, resulting in the very much forgotten film
Shock Treatment, which picks up with Brad and Janet (this time played by
Cliff De Young and Jessica Harper!) as contestants on a game show in
their home town of Denton.  The two are menaced by the evil TV station
manager (also played by De Young), who wishes to claim Janet as his
own.  O'Brien returned as a writer/performer on the project (as did
Quinn, Campbell, and Gray in performance capacity only), but the film
had nowhere near the spirit of the original. 
25 years later, this film is still the pinnacle of cult filmdom and is
continuously screened at midnight all over the world.  As a lasting
testament to the longevity of the film and its legion of fans, a brand
new special edition 2-disc DVD set has been released that is the most
comprehensive compendium of Rocky Horror to date (even out shining the
laserdisc special edition that was released for its 20th anniversary). 
If you are one of those people who can't get enough of the film, this
disc should be more than enough to satisfy your appetites. 
In an attempt to recreate the interactivity of the film, Fox Home
Entertainment has released this wonderful 2-disc DVD set loaded with so
many extras that it'll take a good eight hours just to take in the
majority of it all.  The film itself is located on the first disc and
has been given a beautiful transfer that shows it in its original aspect
ratio of 1.85:1 (enhanced for 16x9 televisions).  The film is presented
in two different versions, the US theatrical version and the UK version
which adds a musical number during the finale called "Superheroes". 
For ambitious viewers, the disc also includes a hidden version (located
on the main menu by clicking left from the scene selection menu choice
and highlighting a pair of lips in the lower left corner) which presents
the film in the manner it was originally supposed to have been seen. 
Originally, the film was to have been similar to The Wizard of Oz, with
the first half of the it seen in black and white (and not changing to
color until the Transylvanians are first revealed to Brad and Janet
during the Time Warp musical number).  Most reports, including a
documentary on the disc, say that the color was supposed to appear when
Frank-N-Furter first shows up in the elevator, but it does seem to work
better where it was placed on this version, depicting the vast
difference between the world Brad and Janet were used to compared with
the one to which they are introduced. 
The film contains a commentary track by show creator (and faithful
handyman) Richard O'Brien and co-star Patricia Quinn which is fairly
enjoyable (and Quinn immediately starts off by refusing to speak about
Sarandon nearly contracting pneumonia while having to walk around wet
and half-naked on freezing cold sets, which she apparently complained
about the entire film and in future interviews).  The two seem like old
friends and have great stories to tell, but they also point out cast
members that are sadly no longer with us anymore (and there are quite a
few). 
Fox has also tried to recreate the feel of attending the film in a
theater with several audience participation segments.  The first feature
(and the most simple) is a subtitle prompter which lets you know when to
open up on people with your water guns or when the right time to throw
your toast is.  The second feature is an audience participation track,
which lets you in on what you might hear on a good night out at the
show.  Most of the comments are unintelligible because it is basically
just a large group of people screaming their heads off, but every once
and a while a comment can be heard that will invoke a bit of laughter. 
The final participation segment uses a technology very much like the
technology used on The Matrix DVD, where a pair of lips will appear
on-screen during certain scenes of the film (mostly during the musical
numbers) that can be selected by pressing enter on your remote.  When
selected, you will be taken out of the film and into a live
participation version of the scene put on during one of the many
screenings that occur all over the world.  Once the segment is over, you
are deposited right back into the film where you left off. 
The first disc also contains a few DVD-ROM goodies for those with that
particular type of DVD player.  There is a timeline of the evolution
from the stage play version to worldwide cult sensation, a video
jukebox, a You Don't Know Jack-styled trivia game (which is about as
bare bones a You Don't Know Jack parody as it can be), and a bizarre
Mad-Libs styled word game known as Riff-Raff's Story Lab.  Links to the
Rocky Horror websites are also available from the DVD-ROM portion of the
disc. 
The second disc features even more goodies for the person who loves
extras.  Former lite-rock video channel turned music historians VH-1
have allowed some of their outtake footage from the "Behind the Music:
Rocky Horror" special that they ran earlier in the year to be shown
here, as well as a Pop-Up Video for the Meat Loaf-sung "Hot Patootie". 
The "Behind the Music" segments are all very interesting, especially
Richard O'Brien's jaunt through the castle (which is now a hotel!) where
the film was originally shot.  There are also extensions of the
Sarandon, Bostwick, Quinn, O'Brien,
and Meat Loaf interviews. 
As far as extras for the film itself go, there are two deleted musical
numbers that are also included here.  One of which is just the
"Superheroes" number available in the UK version, but there is also
another rare musical number presented here called "Once in a While".  A
series of alternate takes are also presented here, but none of them are
really much of a revelation (except for the undressing scene in which we
see that Patricia Quinn is having a hard time unbuttoning Barry
Bostwick's pants).  For the completist who must have every little bit of
Rocky Horror paraphernalia, a misprinted end sequence and alternate
credit sequence are also presented here.  Rounding out the disc is a
decent documentary called Rocky Horror Double Feature Video Show, two
theatrical trailers (proclaiming that the film is "a different sort of
Jaws"), a still gallery, and two sing-a-longs (for "Toucha Toucha Touch
Me" and "Sweet Transvestite"). 
Fox's special edition is the DVD set that Rocky Horror fans have been
waiting for all their lives ("You're lucky... I'm lucky... he's lucky...
we're all lucky!").  It's not just amazing enough that tons of classic
Italian films are finally getting their recognition in the U.S., but
even long standing traditions are finally receiving their due on the
wonderful DVD format.  As with their excellent DVDs of The Abyss, Fight
Club, Independence Day, and The Sound of Music, Fox shows that they have
most certainly made the commitment to provide the things that DVD lovers
want.  I raise a toast to them (cue the throwing of the bread) as I cut
out the lights, sit back, and watch those disembodied lips begin to sing
about B-movie tradition. [R]
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger - Widescreen25
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Editor in Chief  - The Jacksonville Film Journal
Specializing in DVDs, home video, cult favorites and the indie scene.
http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., R, Comedy/Musical/Science Fiction/Cult, 1975
Distributor: CBS FOX (but not currently available for purchase)
Director: Jim Sharman
Cast: Tim Curry, Susan Sarandon, Barry Bostwick, Richard O'Brien,
      Meatloaf, Patricia Quinn, "Little Nell" Campbell,
      Jonathan Adams, Charles Gray, Peter Hinwood
     Straight and naive couple Barry Bostwick and Susan Sarandon are
going on a drive in the woods to visit Adams when one of their tires
blows out.  They return to a castle they had recently passed to see if
they can use a phone to call for help.  At the castle they meet
Transylvanian transvestite Tim Curry, his creation Peter Hinwood, his
servants Richard O'Brien and Patricia Quinn, groupie "Little Nell"
Campbell, and many others.   As the night progresses Barry Bostwick and
Susan Sarandon get loosened up.
     I am a very big fan of THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW and strongly
urge, if you haven't gone to see it, that you do so.  Who knows, you
might surprise yourself and like it.  On a rating scale of zero to five,
I give ROCKY a five.  THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW is rated R for adult
situations, explicit language, adult humor, and brief female nudity.  *A
WORD OF WARNING*, THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW is not for little
children or people who are easily shocked for it contains a lot of
sexual innuendo and a range of other taboo subjects.
     THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW was originally released in the
theaters in 1975 and was a box office bomb.  Since then a cult following
has been established and the movie has started theatrical runs at
midnight.  THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW can still be seen in the
theater on the big screen, and, for those people who don't want to go
out to the movies at midnight, it is on video cassette at those video
stores that got the film when it was available for purchase.  For your
first viewing you may wish to see ROCKY on video because in the theater
there is a lot of audience reaction to the film and some of the lines
will be drowned out.
     THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW is one of those films that gets
better each time you view it.  The first time that I saw ROCKY, I felt
that this was a very bizarre film.  Most of the cast end up wearing
fishnet tights at some point in the film.  This sort of shocked me, and
sort-of turned me off to the film.  I liked the songs a lot though.  The
second time I liked the film a lot more.  I was no longer shocked at all
by the attire of some of the characters in the film.  I found ROCKY to
be a truly original film.  Where else can you find a man who walks
around for almost an hour and forty minutes wearing little more than
fishnet tights and a garter belt?  The film contains wonderful songs
that make you want to sing along, and if you go to the theater to see
ROCKY you will find out that the audience does sing along.  Now THE
ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW is one of my favorite movies.  I have bought
the soundtrack and the video cassette, and have seen the play THE ROCKY
HORROR SHOW three times.
     A big part of ROCKY in the theaters is that all the cult fans call
out reactions to lines in the film, sing along, and, in theaters that
allow it, some people throw things at the screen at certain points like
toilet paper, rice, and water.  Some people dress up like their favorite
character in the film.  Some people dance in the isles.  If you are
lucky, at your theater will be a group of ROCKY fans who act out the
film as it goes along.  In short it's a great deal of fun.  All this
will be missed if you watch the video (however, just before and after
the film on the video cassette there are scenes of theaters playing
ROCKY with the audience participation).  And for those of you
interested, the minister in the beginning of ROCKY was played by Tim
Curry and the three other people in the church were played by Richard
O'Brien, Patricia Quinn, and "Little Nell" Campbell.
     THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW is based on an English play called
THE ROCKY HORROR SHOW that played in London and was written by Richard
O'Brien.  All the music and lyrics for the songs were written by Richard
O'Brien also.  The film was co-written by Jim Sharman (the director of
THE ROCKY HORROR SHOW) and Richard O'Brien.
     Tim Curry (THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, CLUE, IT) plays Dr. Frank-N-
Furter (a scientist).  Frank-N-Furter is the main character in the film.
He is a transvestite from Transsexual Transylvania (Transsexual is a
planet).  Frank-N-Furter is creating the perfect creation, Rocky
Horror, and about to unveil him to a group of Transylvanians when two
strangers show up and threaten taking Rocky away from him.
     Susan Sarandon (PRETTY BABY, BULL DURHAM) plays Janet Weiss (a
heroine).  Janet is one of the two people who get brought into Frank-N-
Furter's castle and exposed to a different view on sexuality.  She falls
in love with Rocky Horror, much to Frank's dismay.  In the beginning of
the film Janet is very uncomfortable in Frank's castle, but as the night
wears on she starts to feel more at home!
     Barry Bostwick (MOVIE! MOVIE!, CAPTIVE, A PARENT TRAP HAWAIIAN
HONEYMOON, SLITHER) plays Brad Majors (a hero).  Brad is the other
person brought into Frank's castle, and he is sexually loosened by
Frank.  He is confused with the castle, yet likes it at the same time.
He just doesn't know how to react to what happens to him.  He and Janet
are engaged to be married.
     Richard O'Brien (FLASH GORDON, SHOCK TREATMENT, JUBILEE) plays Riff
Raff (a handyman).  It is said that Richard O'Brien wrote the role of
Riff Raff for himself.  Whether it is true or not, I don't know.  Riff
Raff is the caretaker of Frank's castle.  He is also from Transsexual
Transylvania.   Riff Raff doesn't care much for Rocky Horror.
     Patricia Quinn (SHOCK TREATMENT) plays Magenta (a domestic).
Magenta is Riff Raff's sister and she is also from Transsexual
Transylvania.  Magenta doesn't like Rocky Horror very much, and she
isn't very pleased with the way Frank treats her.
     "Little Nell" Campbell (JUBILEE) plays Columbia (a groupie).  She
came to Frank's castle because she was in love with Frank.  At Frank's
castle she fell in love with Eddie.  She worships the ground that Eddie
walks on and is very upset with what happens to him.  She seems to
despise Brad and Janet.
     Jonathan Adams plays Dr. Everett V.  Scott (a rival scientist).
Dr. Scott is a former teacher of both Brad and Janet.  He is now a
friend to both of them.  He, apparently, has been investigating Frank
for a period of time and coincidently picks this night, when Brad and
Janet are at Frank's castle, to act.  This action endangers the lives of
Brad, Janet, and Dr. Scott.
     Peter Hinwood (THE ODYSSEY) plays Rocky Horror (a creation).  Rocky
Horror is "born" in the beginning of the film.  Riff Raff and Magenta
terrorize him.  Frank comes after him for sexual reasons and Janet
tempts him.  Rocky is very confused by the whole ordeal and just wants
to get away from it all.
     Meatloaf (ROADIE, WAYNE'S WORLD) plays Eddie (an ex-delivery boy).
Eddie is Columbia's lover and Frank's ex-lover.  Frank needed to get a
brain for Rocky so he took half of Eddie's.  Then he put Eddie in deep
freeze for future use if necessary.  Eddie has the smallest role in the
film, but the one who, in my opinion, is the most liked.
     Charles Gray (DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER, THE MIRROR CRACK'D, SHOCK
TREATMENT, YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE) plays The Criminologist (an expert).
The Criminologist narrates the dreadful story of what happened to Brad
and Janet (The Denton Affair).
     Also for those of you interested, on the walls of Frank's castle
are many famous paintings, like the Mona Lisa.  And the male statues in
Frank's lab have lipstick and fingernail polish on.
     This film has an interesting style.  Events that have happened in
the past are narrated by the Criminologist; yet the scenes with Brad and
Janet are done like they are taking place in the present.  The scenes
with the Criminologist are spliced in the middle of scenes with Brad and
Janet.
     If this film comes to a theater in your area definitely go see it
and don't forget to bring your squirt gun filled with water, (Scott)
toilet paper, and rice.  Remember, in the lines of Frank-N-Furter,
"Don't dream it, be it."

Author
Mathew Tschirgi
This review is by Mathew Tschirgi and may not be reprinted in any form without 
his permission unless one e-mails him at magus@mindspring.com.  Thank you.
THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW 'SPECIAL EDITION' (1975)
Starring: Tim Curry and Susan Sarandon
Cult films are never mainstream.  The casual viewer of a cult film will look 
at it and be repulsed and confused, yelling out 'What the hell is that?'.  
Fans of these sorts of movies will be laughing at every other second at all 
the 'hidden jokes' they missed the first time around while normal movie 
watchers will look at them like they're insane.  THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE 
SHOW, recently re-released in a 'SPECIAL EDITION' to video, is the mother of 
all cult films.  Period.
Like some other cult films, most notably LITTLE SHOP OF HORRORS, THE ROCKY 
HORROR PICTURE SHOW is a musical with a twisted edge to it.  This movie begins 
out innocently enough- a couple get engaged at a friend's wedding and get a 
flat tire in the middle of the night while it's raining.  They go to a castle 
to try to use the phone.  Little do they know that the castle is owned by Dr. 
Frank N. Furter, a mad transexual transvestite scientist who has recently 
created a creature he will use for personal reasons.
The acting is pretty good overall.  Tim Curry (HOME ALONE 2, LEGEND) is 
over-the-top as Frank N. Furter.  It's interesting to see that this movie was 
one of future Oscar winner Susan Sarandon's (DEAD MAN WALKING) first film- she 
plays Janet, the girlfriend of Brad Majors.  Even the singer Meatloaf is in 
it!!
The songs are all very good yet twisted in their own way.  A sampling of 
titles range from DAMN IT, JANET to TOUCH-A TOUCH-A TOUCH-A TOUCH ME.
All the actors sing their songs with no dubbing from other actors- kind of a 
bad thing.  Barry Bostwick (Brad Majors) tries to sing as does Susan Sarandon, 
but Tim Curry is clearly the most professional having extensive stage 
experience.  Meatloaf sings like Meatloaf.
The new SPECIAL EDITION contains two original movie trailers of the film as 
well as two songs deleted from the original version.  Sadly, the songs are 
tacked after the credits- kind of defeats the purpose.  If you want to see a 
different film, watch this one!!
Comments?  Criticisms?  E-mail me at magus@mindspring.com
