Title
Review for Pussbucket (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
105 min., not yet rated, Horror/Musical, 1991, Black & White
Director: Lisa Houle
Cast: Terrence Fleming, Eric Hammer, Brian Sullivan, Gina Cammarota,
      Madeline Virbasius, Walter Prince, Ultra Lavish, Evelyn Rosa,
      Onyx Coale, Dion, Steve Green, Steven Deal
     Two religious maniacs, Judas (played by Terrence Fleming) and
Corned Beef (played by Eric Hammer), are visited by two aliens, Madeline
Virbasius and Dion.  Virbasius, dressed as the Virgin Mary, tells the
two to kill people for Jesus and to drain the puss from their heads and
bring it back to them.  Fleming and Hammer set out to bring "the Virgin
Mary" back as much puss back as possible in a bucket (hence the title).
     I was lucky enough to see an advance showing of this film from
somebody who was involved in its production.  PUSSBUCKET is based on the
Broadway musical and is done by Blessed Elysium Productions.  It is
going to be distributed by Film Threat Video, and I don't know when it
will be made available.  PUSSBUCKET, which is currently not rated, I
expect will end up with an R rating.  On a scale of zero to five, I give
PUSSBUCKET a three (with reservations).  PUSSBUCKET contains explicit
language, adult situations, and violence (it actually contains one scene
of graphic violence with a prosthetic breast, but it is so obviously
fake, it don't count it).
     PUSSBUCKET is an interesting grade Z film.  It is shot in grainy
black and white and is obviously an amateur production with a *very* low
budget.  I think the biggest problems with the film are: it is
amateurishly filmed with a lot of jerky motions; a lot of close-ups that
end up going too close; and the film is about half an hour too long.
Other than that PUSSBUCKET is an interesting film that will reward the
patient viewer with some wonderful moments.
     Two parts of the film that were particularly good was the
television evangelist, Steve Green, with his 1-900-DIAL GOD number, and
the news anchor man, Steven Deal.  The songs in the film, what few there
are, are great.  Unfortunately it doesn't look like all the  songs from
the Broadway show made it into this film (I haven't seen the Broadway
show, but I only remember three songs from the film, and I am sure the
Broadway musical contained more than that).
     Unfortunately for the film, some of the scenes are so badly
photographed and the sound is so poor that it is unclear what is going
on and that drags the film down.  I don't recommend this film for
everybody, but only those with an open mind and a taste for the bizarre.
I don't know what the release availability of this film is going to be.
If it comes to your video store for a cheap enough rate, you might be
interested in trying it.
