Title
Review for Espinazo del Diablo, El (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: During the Spanish Civil War young Carlos is sent to 
    a dreary orphanage complete with an unexploded bomb in the 
    courtyard, a murder mystery, and a restless spirit.  His life 
    may depend on his learning the secret of the phantom.  This is 
    a stylish ghost story and murder mystery, though the emphasis 
    is on the murder mystery.  The writer and director is the 
    incomparable Guillermo del Toro.  Rating: 8 (0 to 10), high +2 
    (-4 to +4) 
The Golden Age of the Mexican horror film was during the 1950s and 
1960s.  During this period the Mexican film industry turned out 
horror films with more enthusiasm than budget or quality.  
Featured in the films were vampires, werewolves, Aztec mummies, 
and professional wrestlers.  The latter were usually heroes.  They 
may not have gotten theatrical release in this country but the 
films would occasionally be pressed into service for late night 
horror film programs.  Beyond that they were not much seen in the 
US.  The supply died in the late 1960s and for a long time there 
were no horror films from Mexico.  In 1993 a quality Mexican 
horror film, CRONOS, directed by Guillermo del Toro, was released.  
It was good enough that it played here mostly in art houses.  In 
1997 del Toro released another film, MIMIC.  Both are atmospheric 
and visually remarkable films.  THE DEVIL'S BACKBONE is the third 
from del Toro, a stylish ghost story set in a boarding school near 
end of the Spanish Civil War. 
The film opens with a bomb bay opening and a bomb being dropped.  
The bomb falls in a schoolyard, but does not explode.  To this 
same school is brought Carlos (played by Fernando Tielve), a new 
student.  Almost immediately on arrival Carlos sees a ghostly 
presence in a doorway and the sight will shape his life at the 
school.  Carlos has a hard time adapting to the new school and 
winning the friendship of the other students.  Bigger children 
bully him and the teachers unfairly discipline him.  But more 
unusual and more disturbing is that he continues to see the 
ghostly presence.  At night he will see a shadow of the specter by 
his bed.  He soon finds out the ghost is called by the other 
children "the one who sighs."  The ghost might be Santi is a 
fellow student who disappeared and was thought to be murdered.  
The students are all terrified of Santi, but Carlos a bit less 
than the others are.  For this reason Santi seems more willing to 
appear to him.  Carlos learns about the school staff through 
little clandestine nighttime spying trips.  He learns particularly 
about Professor Casares (Federico Luppi of CRONOS), his wife 
Carmen (Marisa Paredes), and the handyman, the handsome Jacinto 
(Eduardo Noriega). 
THE DEVIL'S BACKBONE is only partially a ghost story.  It part it 
is a standard boarding school story with horrors coming as much 
from the school bully as from the ghost.  Eventually Carlos will 
have to find how it was that Santi became a ghost.  The script of 
this film was del Toro's school thesis.  Taking place in wartime 
and with a killer in the story, one might think the film could 
easily enough horror without a ghost.  Even if all the elements 
are not necessary for the story, they are fit together in a very 
nice way.  Del Toro has a beautiful eye for color and landscape.  
So in spite of the fact that some of the horror effects not 
particularly unique and the ghost is not frightening  for long, 
the sheer beauty of the film's production make this a pleasure to  
watch.  Del Toro keeps the digital work to a minimum and when he 
uses it, he uses it well.  This is not the original film that 
CRONOS was, but it does work. 
Sadly Mexican horror died in the late 1960s before it could really 
get going.  Guillermo del Toro has brought about a minor rebirth 
and is the only director keeping it alive.  But he is just about 
the best Mexico has ever had and is one of the best horror 
directors making films today.  I rate the Mexican/Spanish 
production THE DEVIL'S BACKBONE an 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a 
high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale. 
