Title
Review for Buddy (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Really, is anyone going to be surprised to learn that I walked out
on BUDDY, director Caroline Thompson's family-friendly drama, based on
the real life of Gertrude Lintz, an eccentric socialite in the 1920's
who loved animals, liked to keep chimps around the house, and raised a
certain gorilla as if it were a human child?  Despite a game cast (Rene
Russo, Robbie Coltrane, Irma P. Hall, and, in one scene, the Artist
Formerly Known as Pee Wee Herman), a workable premise, and a director
who most certainly knows her way around odd (she wrote EDWARD SCISSOR-
HANDS, among other things), there isn't a thing here to engage the
brain.  No subtext, no wit, no tension, no terror.  Nothing.  Nada.
Zip.
     So, if you can find amusement in watching well-dressed chimps mon-
key around a mansion... or delight in the care and feeding of anima-
tronic animal infants... or have never seen David Letterman pose the
question Can a Guy in a Gorilla Suit Get Into a Feature Film?, then 
this might be the movie for you.  Or, more likely, your kids.  Other-
wise, you'll probably end up as I did, feeling like a caged animal after
a mere twenty minutes.  My companion, however, had another half-hour of
optimism in her and, until that blessed beeline to the lobby, I passed
the time by imagining alternate fates for the furry tyke:  drop-kicked
by Bruce Willis, cryogenically frozen with Mike Myers, pitched head-
first into a lava flow, and, of course, swallowed whole by a still-
hungry Tyrannosaurus Rex.  Chomp.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Rene Russo, Robbie Coltrane , Alan Cumming, Irma P. Hall 
Director: Caroline Thompson
Producers: Steve Nicolaides and Fred Fuchs
Screenplay: Caroline Thompson, based on the book ANIMALS ARE MY HOBBY by 
      Gertrude Davies Lintz
Cinematography: John Alonzo and Steve Mason
Music: Elmer Bernstein
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     In a summer when dinosaurs are king, what chance does a gorilla not 
named King Kong have?  Since many parents have decided that THE LOST 
WORLD is suitable fare for youngsters, it's easy to overlook a film like 
BUDDY, which director Caroline Thompson (BLACK BEAUTY) clearly crafted 
with children in mind.  (Don't mothers or fathers care that THE LOST 
WORLD is rated PG-13 for a good reason?)  Unfortunately, this movie is 
an unremarkable example of film making, and doesn't distinguish itself 
in the way that recent family features like BABE and SHILOH have.
     BUDDY is loosely based on a true story (although it takes 
considerable liberties with the facts).  In 1931, a wealthy Brooklyn 
eccentric named Gertrude Lintz (played by Rene Russo) took a sick baby 
gorilla into her care, and, with the help of her husband, Bill (Robbie 
Coltrane), and her assistant, Dick Kroener (Alan Cumming), nursed him 
back to health.  She kept the animal, named Massa in real life but 
changed to Buddy for the movie, for the next four years.  Eventually, 
when he became too large and dangerous for a domestic environment, 
Gertrude donated him to the Philadelphia zoo, where he lived until 1984, 
setting a record for captive gorilla longevity.
     Part of the problem with the movie is that BUDDY relies too much on 
its animatronic inventions and its real animals, relegating both the 
story and the human actors to places of secondary importance.  In 
addition to the title character, a product of Jim Henson's creature 
shop, there are four chimpanzees, a parrot, kittens, raccoons, and 
numerous other representatives of this planet's wild life population.  
Each of these four-legged scene-stealers has at least a moment or two, 
the most memorable of which belong to the chimps.  None of the humans, 
except perhaps the delightful Irma B. Hall as the Lintz' maid, can hold 
their own in such furry and feathered company.
     The animatronic work on Buddy is impressive enough to be almost 
believable (it's certainly a far cry better than Rick Baker's monkey 
suit performance in 1976's KING KONG), although I never for a moment 
thought I was watching a real gorilla.  The chimpanzees are BUDDY's 
legitimate stars, though, primarily because they're the real thing, not 
marvels of modern motion picture technology.  On the other hand, Rene 
Russo, who gets top billing, does little to distinguish herself or 
develop Gertrude into a multi-dimensional character.
     One of BUDDY's themes might remind attentive viewers of an element 
of JURASSIC PARK -- that humankind, no matter how good its intentions, 
cannot bend nature to its will.  In Spielberg's film, the dinosaurs got 
out of control and went on a rampage.  In BUDDY, the ape becomes 
frightened and confused, and reacts with such violence that not even 
Gertrude can calm him down.  Actually, had the movie concentrated more 
on this aspect of the story rather than expending so much time and 
effort being "cute," it might have been more gripping.  
     The most interesting sequence takes place during the 1933 World's 
Fair in Chicago, where Gertrude appears in a pavilion with her gorilla 
and chimps.  Buddy escapes and wreaks havoc, but the movie passes 
quickly through this critical juncture, failing to exploit opportunities 
to fashion a narrative of greater scope and depth.  Too often, BUDDY 
seems rushed like this, and its sketchy approach to compelling issues 
about human interaction with animals can lead to a certain amount of 
dissatisfaction.  To a degree, BUDDY works as light entertainment, but 
it misses an opportunity to be much more.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Rene Russo, Robbie Coltrane , Alan Cumming, Irma P. Hall Director:
Caroline Thompson Screenplay: Caroline Thompson, based on the book
ANIMALS ARE MY HOBBY by Gertrude Davies Lintz
I'll begin by telling you why I don't think 'Buddy' works well as a
family film. Remember Bambi, and how Bambi's mother gets shot towards
the end of the movie. Sad as this may be, the audience is fortunately
spared the gruesome details of what actually follows a kill - the
division of the spoils into venison, and a wall mount for her head.
Similarly, remember that kind spider in 'Charlotte's Web', who spun her
web in order to save Wilbur the pig's life. Fortunately, children are
spared the unpleasant details of how she will likely be her off-springs
first meal after they hatch.
So how does the above relate to 'Buddy'? A baby gorilla raised in the
wealthy, eccentric home of Gertrude Lintz (Renee Russo). Firstly, I
don't think the audience were expecting to see this once charming, sweet
innocent gorilla grow into a moody, violent animal who frightens
everyone at a fair, knocks his human mother about, rips his cage doors
open, and after a thunderstorm destroys several rooms of the mansion in
a confused, frightened rage. We all know he's out of his habitat, so
return him to the jungle, and save us from this 'ape-to-adolescent'
theatrical.
Some other comments. Children will be very frightened of gorillas by the
end of this movie. By Jo I was PETRIFIED, even after watching 'George of
the Jungle', which actually endeared me to the great Apes. This being a
true story makes it all the more heart breaking. Dressing animals in
clothes and pretending that they are your children, is very unnatural.
My advice to Gertrude Lintz is to buy a Ken and Barbie Doll if she wants
to play dress up, and to invest her time and fortune on homeless
children instead. Sure they may grow up to be anorexic or psychopathic,
but at least they won't grow up to be like this baby gorilla.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what does a six hundred pound gorilla do?  Anything he wants.
But when he is smaller, he is adorable and quite manageable.  Well, in
the right hands.
     BUDDY is a coming of age picture about a gorilla.  Based on a true
story of an eccentric but loving woman who kept a menagerie in her
mansion, the film takes some surprising twists.  Most surprising of all
is that a picture filled with chimpanzees and a baby gorilla manages to
avoid most of the slapstick cliches one would expect.  If you have a
natural aversion to saccharine chimps, you might find these amazingly
delightful and expressive.  And anyone would love the gorilla.
     BUDDY opens in the late 1920s with rich Gertrude "Trudy" Lintz,
played completely seriously by Rene Russo, entering a movie theater
with her two children dressed in their finest frocks.  Pandemonium sets
in when the audience realizes that her kids are chimps.
     Trudy goes back to her estate where she and her husband Dr. Bill
Lintz (Robbie Coltrane from the impressive TV series "Cracker") share
the house and grounds with a virtual Noah's ark.  From porcupines to
kittens, they all live there, and the apes even eat with the humans.
"It's enough to drive you to the nut house," complains their maid Emma
(Irma P. Hall, who played the aunt in A FAMILY THING).  "Of course this
place probably already is the nut house."
     The four chimps are treated completely like children.  They are
given their own bedrooms full of kids' furniture and their backyard is
complete with the latest children's playground equipment.  For this
they are expected to brush their teeth, wash their faces and say their
prayers.  Most of all, they are expected to have impeccable table
manners in the formal dinning room where they eat with Dr. and Mrs.
Lintz.  Well, as impeccable as apes can have.
     Into this cozy world comes a baby gorilla whom Trudy names Buddy.
She nurses him back to health and the chemistry between them is genuine
even if Buddy is the only non-animal in the picture.  He is a
combination of animatronics and a man in a gorilla suit.  Buddy
possesses tremendous charm, most of all when he is a baby even if that
is the least convincing of the special effects.
     One day, the Bowmans come by to see Trudy's animals and ask her to
exhibit them in the Chicago World's Fair.  Mrs. Bowman is scared to
death when she sees the almost fully grown Buddy.  But, "he's as gentle
as a lamb," Trudy tries to reassure her.  "Then why is there a chain on
his door?" asks Mrs. Bowman.  Good question and a precursor to the rest
of the story.
     Throughout most of BUDDY, the story is a wonderful and magical
adventure into the animal kingdom, but parents with impressionable
children must be forewarned that the movie turns tragically sad and
quite frightening before it ultimately ends on an upbeat note.
     It is precisely because the film was able to morph into a more
serious film that hooked me.  Before that it was little more than light
hearted pabulum.  Once things turned bad, I realized how much I had
come to love Buddy.
     BUDDY runs a fast 1:23.  It is rated PG for some frightening
scenes of an angry gorilla.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, liked the movie,
but was very scared in a few of the scenes.  The rest of the kids in
the audience seemed to handle it pretty well, but again, I'd be
careful.  Jeffrey's favorite parts of the movie were the adorable "baby
Buddy and the kittens."  Because of the effectiveness of the ending, I
am able to recommend the picture and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
