Title
Review for Love and Death (1975)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        It's hard to imagine a Mel Brooks movie inspiring a Woody 
Allen movie, but I'm convinced that's exactly what happened with 
LOVE AND DEATH. Now, hear me out. It's not just that they're both 
period piece comedies set in the 19th century with wacky battle 
scenes, it's that BLAZING SADDLES was released in 1974 and 
became a huge hit, pioneering the NAKED GUN / AIRPLANE! 
genre of Joke-a-Second parodies. Riding on the coattails of that 
film, Woody released LOVE AND DEATH the next year, his only 
foray into full-scale parody territory.
        Yes, Woody's done his take on just about every type of 
movie, but LOVE AND DEATH is a direct parody of Russian 
literature like BROTHERS KARAMOZOV and DR. ZHIVAGO with 
liberal rips on extentialist philosophy thrown in. This movie is 
loaded with the cheap sight gags the JAS parodies are known for, 
but it's also the only Allen film where serious dialogue is overdone 
to the point where it becomes funny (a la Leslie Nielson) and terrible 
jokes and puns abound (again, Nielson's films come to mind). He 
also must have been watching too many "Get Smart" reruns 
because his comedic delivery here is almost identical to that of 
Don Adams.
        Woody plays a Russian thinker who has pseudointellectual 
debates with his cousin Diane Keaton, who by this point had 
adopted Woody's mannerisms. (She probably should have realized 
she'd been living with him too long when she started picking up 
twelve-year-old girls.) Being Woody, he's also in love with her, 
but she doesn't return the feelings, opting instead to be more 
promiscuous than Papa Karamozov himself. At one point in the 
movie, Woody is about the only person in Russia she hasn't 
slept with -- and that's a huge country.
        This is all mostly a setup for Woody to work in his usual 
one-liners and sitcom-like situations. Some of the more comedically-
notable are the scene where Woody is challenged to a duel, the 
sequence where Woody flirts with a woman at the theatre, Diane 
seducing Napoleon while Woody tries to shoot him in the 
background, Woody's execution scene, his frequent brushes 
with Death and the big battle scene where nearly all the Russians 
are killed. There are a lot of memorable moments in LOVE AND 
DEATH but a lot of forgettable ones as well. No other Allen film 
has quite so many dreadfully bad jokes. It's a good thing Woody 
stopped imitating his comedic inferiors and instead aimed higher 
with his follow-up film, ANNIE HALL, which I think you might 
have heard of.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
