Title
Review for Third Man, The (1949)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Brian Koller
"The Third Man" is one of the best films of the 1940s.
It is an outstanding film, with a script so dense that
its quality cannot be fully appreciated with a single
viewing.  The quirky score, featuring a zither, puts
a light touch on what would otherwise be a very tense
film.  The cast is first-rate, and there is some fine
cinematography of Vienna's bombed out buildings and
underground sewers.
Joseph Cotten stars as potboiler author Holly Martins,
who has come to Austria to work for old friend Harry Lime
(Orson Welles).  Postwar Austria is politically divided
into sectors controlled by the U.S., England, France
and Russia.  A black market thrives, and there is much
political intrigue.  Upon arrival, Cotten learns that
Lime has died in a suspicious car accident... was it
murder?  Lime left behind other loose ends: he was
wanted on multiple counts of murder for profiteering
from diluted penicillin.  Cotten also falls for Lime's
devoted girlfriend, lovely but unhappy Alida Valli.
"The Third Man" isn't exactly a forgotten classic,
but it still has not received its due recognition.
This may be because it was a British production,
and filmed on location in Austria.  The film is
also in need of preservation: the sound quality was
low on the print that I saw.  Which is a shame, since
every word of the dialogue deserves to be heard.
There are two versions of the film.  The British print
is 104 minutes.  Producer David O. Selznick carefully
pruned 11 minutes for the American version, replacing
the opening narration by director Carol Reed with that
of Joseph Cotten.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
It's unclear what I can possibly add to what's already been said -- and
said better -- about this film.  While "The Third Man" doesn't have the
single line "one and only" review from Pauline Kael attached to it, it
certainly is up there among the acknowledged masterworks from the
1940s, and it has certainly been commented on.
Since it's now the 1990s, Film Forum is presenting "The Third Man" for
a 50th Anniversary run (http://www.filmforum.com/3rdman.html).  This is
the somewhat longer British version.  The difference is about eleven
minutes and an introductory voice-over from the director.  I've seen
this film -- the American version -- once before but it was a long time
ago, when I was at Berkeley.  If I remember correctly, it was shown as
part of a not particularly interesting class on existentialism (such
classes are sometimes there for those who aren't sure of what they're
in school for, I think) (we also saw "Hiroshima, Mon Amour" and "Woman
of the Dunes").  I was probably in the process of dropping out of
graduate school at the time, and my recollection of the film is
somewhat fuzzy, more a remembrance of certain images, bits of plot and
Orson Welles's celebrated entrance than anything else.  I can't tell
you where the differences between versions are.
Briefly, the plot involves a naive American writer arriving in postwar
Vienna to see an old friend.  Upon arriving, he finds that his friend
is dead: he was hit by a car while crossing the street a few days
before.  Because parts of the story don't add up -- initially, he
simply doesn't believe the police when they say his old friend ran in
vicious circles; later, he learns that there was a mysterious third man
at the accident site -- he begins investigating the circumstances of
the death.  He becomes entangled in the Viennese underworld as he digs
deeper, and is attracted to his friend's girlfriend, Anna.
The film winds through like a long nightmare, complete with absurd
incidents and the incongruous zither music.  This is how it should be;
the plot, after all, has the familiar nightmare of arriving someplace
and finding the world upside down.  The film's dreamscape is a ruined
Vienna, the skyline with the spiral of the Stephansdom visible but
pockmarked (http://info.wien.at/e/mus/mus02081.htm), piles of rubble
everywhere, skeletons of buildings appearing all too frequently,
prominent inhabitants who don't quite achieve normalcy, and bystanders
who watch and stare.  And this is merely daylight, above ground
Vienna.  We also see a nighttime Vienna of long, Expressionist shadows,
surreal chases, weirdly lit sewers, and Orson Welles's entrance
underneath an accidental shaft of light.  All these things in the film
are tuned perfectly.
This world of "The Third Man" is a surreal one of arbitrary forces --
the confused authority of the governing Allied Armies is the most
visible example -- where moral choices are made in an ethical vacuum.
Much is gray, from the evil Harry Lime showing a light side in helping
Anna, to the crusader Calloway using others as tools for emotional
manipulation.  This ambiguous morality is solely created by one's
self.  And I suppose this is why the film was shown with that
Existentialism class.

Author
Steve Rhodes
So what kind of a man was Harry Lime?  What were the circumstances
surrounding his death?  And who was the mysterious third man, rumored to
have helped carry Harry's dead body to the curb after the truck ran him
over?
Director Carol Reed's classic THE THIRD MAN has just been restored and
is in the process of being re-released theatrically.  Now, with the
restoration of the 11 minutes of footage trimmed from the American
release by producer David O. Selznick, we can see the film as
Continental audiences first saw it.  (There were no missing scenes to be
restored since Selznick's cuts were to shorten the running lengths of
scenes and to cut down the use of German, which isn't subtitled.)
Not having seen the movie in what seems like a zillion years, but which
must be less than 50 since the film originally came out in 1949, I was
able to look at it again with few preconceived notions.
Set in a post-World-War-II Vienna, the picture does a masterful job of
recreating an era of complex politics and a city picking itself up from
the ashes.  City blocks are full of architectural masterpieces
juxtaposed with buildings in complete rubble.
In the story by Graham Greene and Alexander Korda, the ambiguous
characters perfectly match Robert Krasker's heavily shadowed
black-and-white cinematography.  The characters' exact intentions and
motivations are up for discussion.
One day, Holly Martins (Joseph Cotten), a writer of Westerns of dubious
quality, shows up in Vienna's central train station.  He's there to meet
his friend Harry Lime, who has offered him a job.  Learning that Harry
is dead, Holly sets out to investigate.
The military police, lead by Major Calloway (Trevor Howard), are looking
into Harry's dealings but don't care how he died.  They are happy to see
such a notorious crook dead.  In an horrific scam, Harry has been
stealing and then watering down the city's limited supply of penicillin,
which has caused pain and death for hundreds of children.
Alida Valli plays Harry's loyal girlfriend, Anna Schmidt.  And, of
course, Orson Welles has the part of Harry Lime, a man who doesn't even
appear until the second half of the movie.
Seeing the movie again after all these years, I was struck by several
things.  Although Harry Lime is the central character, Wells has a
remarkably small part.  His first appearance in the movie has a power
and a charm that makes it one of the most endearing scenes in cinematic
history.  Long after you've forgotten everything else, you'll remember
the image of the man hiding in the shadows, whose beaming face is
briefly lit by the light from nearby.
With its dominant Austrian zither music, the film serves notice that it
doesn't intend to fit neatly into any genre.  The music is whimsical,
mysterious and sometimes even a little sad.  Every time you start to
ponder a situation seriously, the music comes up to suggest that things
may not be quite what they seem.  And it warns us not to take things too
seriously.
The writers seem to be just off camera, laughing with little in-jokes
that they alone understand.  The scene in the Ferris wheel, in which
Harry draws a heart on the glass, is one such moment.  How is it to be
taken?  The writers seem to enjoy toying with us.
The overwhelming emotion on seeing it again is to realize how the
picture works best on a visual and a musical level.  One could imagine
doing away with all of the dialog and relying on the pictures and the
music alone.  Actually, the only truly memorable line is Harry's
reflection to Holly.  "In Italy for 30 years under the Borgias they had
warfare, terror, murder and bloodshed, but they produced Michelangelo,
Leonardo da Vinci and the Renaissance," Harry points out with his
signature devilish grin.  "In Switzerland they had brotherly love.  They
had 500 years of democracy and peace, and what did that produce?   The
cuckoo clock."
Space operas aside, one wonders which films of today will still be
popular 50 years from now.  THE THIRD MAN and CITIZEN KANE will still be
considered classics 50 years hence, but which ones of today will rise up
to join them?  This simple question is harder than it might appear since
it involves not only artistic merit but also changing opinions.  While
waiting for the mid-twenty-first century's official classics list, go
enjoy some of the sure winners now, like THE THIRD MAN, especially if
you're lucky enough to have it playing theatrically in your area.
THE THIRD MAN runs 1:44.  It is rated PG for mature themes and would be
fine for any kid old enough to be interested, which probably means
around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dragan Antulov
New "Oscars" were handed over two nights ago. The reaction
that is almost certain is the multitude of furious rants by
film lovers who can't forgive the Academy for favouring
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE, "crowd-pleasing" romantic comedy over
"true art" in Spielberg's WWII epic SAVING PRIVATE RYAN. Of
course, this is nothing new and the debate between those who
judge films solely as "art" and those who judge them as
"popular entertainment" has been waged for decades. This
distinction could also be seen in a different perspectives
of film critics and average audience when they judge films
made in certain time periods. Nice example is the question
"What is the best film made in 1940s?" Average movie goer
would quickly answer with a single word: CASABLANCA. Average
critic would offer at least two other titles. One of them is
THE THIRD MAN, 1949 thriller by British director Carol Reed
- film that could be perfect companion piece to CASABLANCA.
Same as Michael Curtiz's celebrated melodrama, THE THIRD MAN
cleverly uses relatively obscure and now almost forgotten
details of that time period in Europe. The setting is
post-WW2 Vienna, picturesque capital of ancient and mighty
Austrian Empire. The empire is long gone, and Austria
reduced to small country, carved up into occupation zones by
victorious Allies. The population of the bombed out capital
is enduring unimaginable economic hardships and many of once
proud citizens are forced to earn for a living through the
thriving black market. To this city comes Holly Martins
(played by Joseph Cotton), American writer of cheap pulp
westerns, who has been invited to the city by his old
college friend Harry Lime. Martins is alcoholic and broke,
and writing about Lime's medical charity operation could
help him to start his career all over again. However, soon
upon the arrival, he is greeted with the shocking news of
Lime's death in automobile accident. To make things even
more puzzling, Major Calloway (played by Trevor Howard)
tells him that Harry Lime happened to be one of the worst
black market racketeers in town. Disbelieving and against
Calloway's wishes, Holly decides to stay in Vienna and try
to clear his friend's name. In the process he meets Anna
Schmidt (played by Allida Valli), actress and Harry's
mistress. Soon, details about Harry's illegal activities
with fake penicillin emerge, as well as contradictory
details about his death. Martins becomes convinced that his
friend was murdered, but the real truth is even more
shocking.
Comparisons between CASABLANCA and THE THIRD MAN are simply
unavoidable. They both have World War 2 in the background,
complex characters with various motivations and not so clear
moral allignment. They both have protagonist who is torn
between conflicting loyalties, self-interest and desire to
do the right thing. However, under that superficial
similarity lies clear distinction and the very reason why
the public prefers the former, and the critics the latter.
CASABLANCA, despite being excellent film, is nothing more
than a piece of WW2 propaganda wrapped into crowd-pleasing
melodrama. THE THIRD MAN, on the other hand, is made four
years after the war ended. Its author, Carol Reed, spent the
war covering it as documentary film-maker in British
military, and seen enough things to know that the world
can't be divided into two worlds of Black and White. The
characters in his film, thanks to screenwriter Graham
Greene, are set in the different shades of Gray. The film
reveals the real results of the noble and epic struggle
heroes of CASABLANCA engaged in. Europe, instead of enjoying
freedom and democracy, is impoverished, demolished, occupied
and humiliated. War time alliances are breaking apart in the
eve of Cold War and noble ideals are replaced with pragmatic
policies.
In such gloomy and nihilistic world, there aren't any place
for old-fashioned heroes. Holly Martins is the last of them,
still believing in things like friendship and doing the
right thing. Unfortunately, this simplistic division of
people into good guys and bad guys, that came straight out
of his pulp westerns, would bring him nothing but misery.
Joseph Cotton was excellent in this role. Another character
that still clings to something like moral code is Anna
Schmidt (played by Italian actress Allida Valli, great diva
of 1940s), but her character is already damaged with the
unimaginable horrors and moral disasters she had endured
through the war years. Her devotion to the deceased lover,
involved in outrageous racket with faulty medicine, is the
attempt to hang onto something solid in the world with the
lost foundations. Even the representatives of law and order,
who are supposed to be the good guys, are people without
scruples. Calloway shows no signs of sympathy towards
Martins or Anna - for him they are simply means to the end.
It was an excellent idea to have Bernard Lee (later best
known as M in the James Bond series) cast as his trusted
sergeant and some kind of comic relief.
However, the pearl that shines most brightely among the
actors in this film is Orson Welles. He plays the worst
villain of them all, yet the viewer, same as poor Anna,
can't escape his captivating evil charisma. Welles'
appearances in film are relatively brief, but they are the
most memorable - whether it is his effective entrance in the
last third of the movie, the final confrontation in Vienna
sewers or the great dialogue at the Ferris Wheel. The latter
scene is most remembered by Welles' immortal words about
Switzerland and Renaissance Italy. Welles simply chewes the
screen and it shouldn't surprise anyone, since he actually
wrote all his lines and practically directed those scenes.
Among other things that distinguishes this film from the
others is the atmosphere. Carol Reed employed all his talent
to picture despair, cynicism and nihilism through visual
means. Many scenes are filmed from unusual angles, which is
metaphor for the twisted moral perspectives of the movie
protagonists. The locations of post-war Vienna were also
perfect -they possess strong contrast between glorious past,
represented in old imperial architecture, and gloomy
present, represented through bombed out ruins. This contrast
serves as metaphor for distinction between nice faade and
ugly reality (another good example is the scene where
gangster Popescu makes threat to Martins in the form of
literary criticism). The streets of Vienna, especially in
the night, seems like a scenery more appropriate for horror
than for thriller, but Reed amends that by employing zither
music by Anton Karas. The lighthearted music (especially the
title theme that later became unofficial Viennese anthem) is
in another deep contrast with anything but cheerful events
of the film, and it also serve as ironic commentary.
Finally, Reed ends film with the one of the longest but most
powerful shots in the history of cinema.
THE THIRD MAN was the film in many ways before its time. The
quantity of cynicism, misanthropy and nihilism seemed more
suitable for some future time periods, including our own.
Luckily, we haven't been exposed to the remake yet (if we
don't count dreadful 1997 Croatian version called TRECA
ZENA). Until that happens we can enjoy THE THIRD MAN as
true, unhindered masterpiece and the ultimate film noire of
all times.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Joseph Cotten, Orson Welles, Alida Valli, Trevor Howard, Bernard Lee,
and Wilfrid Hyde-White
"The Third Man" tells the story of a writer, Holly Martins, searching for the
true details regarding the mysterious death of a close friend Harry Lime. This
brief outline of the plot makes "The Third Man" sound like the majority of
films in the noir genre. However, Carol Reed's masterpiece is far from the
norm. The setting takes place in post World War 2 Vienna, Austria, a very
chaotic atmosphere in which the Allied Powers police the streets and the black
market dominates the economy. Since Vienna contains a number of different
nationalities living in the same region, there are various communication
problems and because of this, it is difficult to tell who is on whose side.
Reed takes full advantage of this chaotic, paranoid environment. His
unbelievable control over light and dark is what specifically makes this film
stand out from others. His use of shadows in dark alley ways or sewers creates
some memorable chase scenes. In these scenes, Reed mainly displays shadows
chasing after shadows, with very few shots of the actual humans. This is
extremely clever because with shadows you never know exactly where someone is
and also with dark figures it adds to the mysteriousness of the environment.
Reed presents some of the most beautiful black and white shots have ever seen.
It is truly amazing how detailed he makes some of the night scenes.
"The Third Man" is also strongly supported with an excellent script by novelist
Graham Greene. As the film progresses, we learn more and more about the
supposedly accidental murder of Lime (Orson Welles) and who Lime really is. The
film begins with Martins (Joseph Cotten) learning about Lime's accidental death
but when he reaches the funeral there is a very strained and dubious mood. This
mood shows that Lime's death certainly has another story to it. Thus the
mystery begins with Martins interviewing Lime's friends. Through these
interviews Lime and the viewer simultaneously discover more evidence until a
porter informs us that there was a third man carrying Lime's body when everyone
else swore there were only two. At this point in the film, paranoia reaches its
zenith. It is very difficult to tell what exactly is going on. Who is lying?
Who is telling the truth? Who is to trust? Who is the third man?? Greene asks
these questions and does not give the answer until you least expect it.
The performances in the film are also flawless. Cotten plays Martins perfectly
as your not-so-average hero. He drinks heavily, he is a failing writer, and he
does not get the girl. You may not even agree with some of his final moral
decisions. Martins' appearance just shows that the effects of the war were
devastating and virulent on all. Since Martins, once very successful, was
obviously hurt by the war even though the film never really adresses the topic.
The outcome of Welles' Harry Lime is another effect of the war. Driven away
from democracy, Lime goes against his friends and loved ones to succeed.
Welles' short but sweet performance answers all of the film's questions about
Lime in a heartbeat.
As this film turns fifty years old, it incredibly still contains the same
adrenaline. A must-see for film noir fans and to those looking for another
masterpiece starring Orson Welles and Joseph Cotten.
visit new web site by Lars Lindahl - Lars Attacks
http://www.angelfire.com/ny3/larsattacks

Author
James Sanford
         Post-WWII America was a place of prosperity and hope. But in
Europe, the conditions were quite different, and few films have captured
the grim atmosphere of the late 1940s as memorably as "The Third Man,"
director Carol Reed's 1949 classic. Shot on location in the war-ravaged
streets of Vienna and written by Graham Greene ("The End of the
Affair"), the movie succeeds both as a thriller and as a mood piece,
evoking a joyless world in which almost everyone has a past they won't
discuss and a future they can't fathom.
 For years, we've been watching a 93-minute cut of "The Third
Man," but now Criterion has reissued the film with 11 extra minutes
previously seen only in the European release. The additions prove you
can never have too much of a good thing.
 Set at the time of the Allied occupation, the story begins with
American author Holly Martins (Joseph Cotten) arriving in Vienna to take
a job with his long-lost buddy Harry Lime (Orson Welles). But within
minutes of getting off the train, Martins is told Lime recently died in
an accident. The conflicting stories of the alleged witnesses to the
death make Martins suspicious and, despite protests from British officer
Calloway (Trevor Howard), Martins tracks down Lime's girlfriend Anna
(Alida Valli) and begins searching for the truth about his friend's
fate.
 Elements of German Expressionism, Italian Neo-Realism and
American film noir pop up regularly throughout "The Third Man," but Reed
forges them all into a magnificent whole. The titled camera angles
beautifully express Martins' sense of disorientation as he makes his way
through the city and sound and shadow become as much a part of the
action as any of the characters. Decades before Dolby Stereo, Reed
managed to find a way to make it appear voices were coming at the
villain from all directions during the movie's final chase through the
sewers.
 Unforgettable images and scenes abound: an angelic-looking
little boy accusing Martins of murder; a taut meeting between two men on
a ferris wheel; the unnerving sight of fingers poking up through a grate
in the street like blades of grass struggling to sprout in a rocky bed.
The music, performed entirely on the zither by Anton Karas, is some of
the most striking ever heard in a film.
 Meanwhile, Greene's dialogue crackles with grim humor and
frankness. "You were born to be murdered," Calloway tells Martins, while
the utterly disillusioned Anna's entire outlook on life is summed up in
one of her first lines: "I don't know anything anymore, except that I
want to be dead, too," she murmurs to Martins when he questions her
about Lime's untimely demise.
 While the mystery is certainly compelling enough, the
relationship between Anna and Martins is truly the heart of the film. He
falls hopelessly for her and makes a difficult sacrifice in the hopes of
winning her affection, but she's too nihilistic to put any stock in
love. Were it made today, a happy ending would probably be imposed on
these two, but Greene and Reed understood that in real life people who
don't want to be saved rarely thank those who try to rescue them. James
Sanford
