Title
Review for Bionic Showdown: The Six Million Dollar Man and the Bionic Woman (1989) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Tim Voon
The 1989 BIONIC SHOWDOWN should have been one of those tele-movies long
forgotten in the whirlpool of ordinariness surrounding the 80's. If not
for a then unknown, but now well known star known as Ms Sandra Bullock,
this movie would not have come to my attention at all. In this
particular episode of metallic hardware, Sandra is the latest instalment
or should I say successor, of the Bionic Woman aka Jamie Summers
(Lindsey Wagner). Back with old flame Steve Austin (Lee Majors), whose
circuits are getting outdated as quickly as CPU's come in and out of
vogue, they once again battle the forces of evil.
Moving away from the popular theme of Bionics vs Cyborgs, the plot has
been redirected towards a scenario more common ground to the 80's -
namely the cold war between the east and west. Playing on the hot
prospect of tense relationships between the Soviet Union and the United
States, the villains aim to antagonise all concerned in order to
generate self-profit. Their wild card comes in the form of a new bionic
man.
So where does Ms Bullock fit into the big scheme of things? Well, she's
a young woman who was crippled during her childhood, and carries with
her intelligence, wit, sensitivity and humour. These characteristics
become evident in movies like SPEED and WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, are
present a decade ago. Even in this early piece of acting, she is
beginning to show the elements of vulnerability that make people love
and want to protect her. This is a weapon more powerful than bionics if
you ask me.
As for Jamie Summers and Steve Austin, surviving the eighties has become
harder than just reliving the seventies. With good humour and humility,
they graciously make room to the new generation of bionics that has
emerged to replace them. Jamie gets to pull a door apart and uses her
bionic ear only once. Steve gets to flex his bionic muscles, but gets
badly beaten by the new bionic on the block. Sad to say they are a
living testimony of the changing times and rapidly advancing technology.
However, the spotlight in this movie falls on Sandra. She is left with
the difficult task of defeating the evil bionic. For some unknown reason
she is technologically weaker than her male counterpart, and has to use
her brains instead of her brawn to defeat the villain. All that starts
well also ends well, but one gets the benign feeling that this movie was
intended to spawn a new tele-series. But time has revealed that this was
not to be and fortunately so, otherwise Sandra Bullock may not be the
movie star we know today.
--------------C60E9EE92F50D8B2DD67F284
Content-Type: text/html; charset=iso-8859-1
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit



The 1989 BIONIC SHOWDOWN should have been one of those tele-movies long
forgotten in the whirlpool of ordinariness surrounding the 80's. If not
for a then unknown, but now well known star known as Ms Sandra Bullock,
this movie would not have come to my attention at all. In this particular
episode of metallic hardware, Sandra is the latest instalment or should
I say successor, of the Bionic Woman aka Jamie Summers (Lindsey Wagner).
Back with old flame Steve Austin (Lee Majors), whose circuits are getting
outdated as quickly as CPU's come in and out of vogue, they once again
battle the forces of evil.

Moving away from the popular theme of Bionics vs Cyborgs, the plot has
been redirected towards a scenario more common ground to the 80's - namely
the cold war between the east and west. Playing on the hot prospect of
tense relationships between the Soviet Union and the United States, the
villains aim to antagonise all concerned in order to generate self-profit.
Their wild card comes in the form of a new bionic man.

So where does Ms Bullock fit into the big scheme of things? Well, she's
a young woman who was crippled during her childhood, and carries with her
intelligence, wit, sensitivity and humour. These characteristics become
evident in movies like SPEED and WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, are present a
decade ago. Even in this early piece of acting, she is beginning to show
the elements of vulnerability that make people love and want to protect
her. This is a weapon more powerful than bionics if you ask me.

As for Jamie Summers and Steve Austin, surviving the eighties has become
harder than just reliving the seventies. With good humour and humility,
they graciously make room to the new generation of bionics that has emerged
to replace them. Jamie gets to pull a door apart and uses her bionic ear
only once. Steve gets to flex his bionic muscles, but gets badly beaten
by the new bionic on the block. Sad to say they are a living testimony
of the changing times and rapidly advancing technology.

However, the spotlight in this movie falls on Sandra. She is left with
the difficult task of defeating the evil bionic. For some unknown reason
she is technologically weaker than her male counterpart, and has to use
her brains instead of her brawn to defeat the villain. All that starts
well also ends well, but one gets the benign feeling that this movie was
intended to spawn a new tele-series. But time has revealed that this was
not to be and fortunately so, otherwise Sandra Bullock may not be the movie
star we know today.
 
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
 
 
