Title
Review for Broken Arrow (1996)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Ben Hoffman
     If you get turned on by action, explosions, train derailments,
planes crashing and practically no dialogue, BROKEN ARROW is the film
for you.  For my part I cannot help but wonder why the newly
rejuvenated Travolta would be in a film so senseless that its whole
plot can be summed up in one sentence:
     A pilot on a B-3 Stealth bomber carrying two nuclear warheads
decides to blackmail the U. S. Government for millions of dollars or he
will blow up the bomb and put millions of people's lives in danger.
That's it.  That's the whole story.  Not what one would call subtle.
(Broken Arrow refers to the lost nuclear missile.)
     John Woo, who directed Van Damme in HARD TARGET, and has made many
action films, is just the man for this kind of film but you have to
like that kind of mayhem or you will find yourself laughing in the
theater's darkness at the utter absurdity of the stunts and action
happening up on the screen.
     John Travolta is the villain, Christian Slater is the hero,
Samantha Mathis is a park ranger who gets involved.  A lot of talent
wasted.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Woo
Writer: Graham Yost
Starring: John Travolta, Christian Slater, Samantha Mathis, Delroy
Lindo, Frank Whaley, Bob Gunton, Howie Long, Kurtwood Smith, French
Stewart
If you know me, you know that I think of John Woo as a God.  His action
films are probably the best in the world - filled with stylistic,
balletic, and visceral bloodbaths; plots motivated by characters; and a
strong, multi-leveled opposition between characters.  Indeed, his
"Face/Off" was probably the best film of the summer, and one of the most
entertaining of the year.  But every great director has their little
slip-ups.  Danny Boyle, Quentin Tarantino, Kevin Smith, Robert Altman,
Woody Allen...everyone.
"Broken Arrow" isn't BAD, really, but it's not very good either.  It's
horrible compared to Woo's other films (you'd hardly believe the guy who
directed this directed "The Killer," or even "Face/Off").  But I try not
to review from that particular stand-point (example: "The Frighteners"
sucked compared to Peter Jackson's other films, but was still a good
film overall and received a 3-star review from me), so basically all
this film needed to do was be fun.  Well, it really wasn't.
But anyway, this is the little premise: two pilots (Travolta and Slater)
are ordered to fly some nuclear weapons on a new jet thingy, but
Travolta goes nuts, sends Slater out on a parachute, and steals the
weapons as a tool of ransom.  Slater teams with annoying-park ranger
chick (Samantha Mathis, teaming them up after "Pump Up the Volume"), and
they go on to stop Travolta from ripping off the government, and perhaps
setting one or two of those nukes off.
There's a lot of action, yet the film is never really exciting. 
"Prepare to o ballistic" was one of the little promotional mantras this
had when advertised, but when I saw it (even in a surround sound home
theatre system thingy), I wasn't really all that moved.  I mean, this is
the guy who got adrenalized watching Dustin Hoffman beat up a bunch of
cockney thugs in "Straw Dogs," and I was damn near limp with this one. 
I think Woo's other films are damn near orgasmic, but this was pretty
tepid, even with some cool stuff in it (Travolta's exit is pretty cool).
Why weren't these action scenes as adrenalin-pumping-exciting enough for
me?  I'm not really sure.  He has some slow-mo shots of people dying,
but of course they're not as poignant without the gallons of blood
escaping their body (a cliche, but I love it).  And there's some really
cool little action sight-gags in it (a shot with a helicopter wing
almost slicing Mathis into thirds is pretty cool).
But I think the problem lies within the characters.  In earlier John Woo
flicks (and "Face/Off"), he creates strong characters (in that they're
pretty well-developed, although not all the time); people who we care
about.  When Chow Yun-Fat and Danny Lee are in the church fighting off
the huge gang of their opponents, I was excited.  Because I didn't
really care if Slater and Mathis were shot up or something, I was never
really in any tense situation.  When you have a character you care about
in a life-threatening situation, things get tense.  When you actually
would prefer Mathis to be shot by Travolta so she would stop being
annoying, you have a bit of a tension problem.
John Woo also has a great trademark of creating character opposition
between two of the characters.  In "A Better Tomorrow," the fractured
relationship between the two brothers was pretty moving.  In "Face/Off,"
there was also a parallelism between Sean and Castor, setting up a lot
of irony, and made us care about both of them, even if one was a raving
maniac (actually, it actually asks us whether or not we like the villain
or the hero).  Here, Travolta is likeable JUST because he's funny.  But
Slater is only likable because Slater does a good job with the role, and
because the script has ordered us to like him.  The extent of the
opposition between the two seems to be that they box, and Slater keeps
loosing.  I was not thrilled at all by their relationship, and it causes
the film to suffer.
There are some plusses, though.  The two leads (Travolta and Slater)
both do good jobs.  I mean, I usually don't like Slater a lot, but he
was good here.  And Travolta certainly knows how to make a good old
campy villain.  With his cool-ass cigarette smoking, striking visage,
and...well, everything, he just does a great job of making us like him. 
In later scenes, he seems to show some human qualities to his role, even
if they're not even in there, which actually seems to help the
relationship between the two, even if very minimally.  But at least he
tried where the writers would not.
"Broken Arrow" is not a horrible film, but it's very disappointing for a
great filmmaker like John Woo.  If he and the writers had spent more
time on it, they probably would have been able to make an amazing film,
but alas, they failed.  But at least he came back with the jaw-dropping
amazing "Face/Off."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Christopher Null
     BROKEN ARROW is the first really big-budget film of the year, and you
can tell right from the start that all the money went into one thing: 
blowing up helicopters.
     Classic action director John Woo, redeeming himself for making a
Jean-Claude Van Damme movie (HARD TARGET) in 1992, proves himself capable
in the Hollywood arena of big explosions with this stylish story.  BROKEN
ARROW is your (very) basic action/adventure featuring an air force pilot
gone mad (John Travolta), the sidekick (Christian Slater) who tries to
stop him from stealing two nuclear weapons (aka broken arrows) and holding
a city hostage, and the really cute park ranger (Samantha Mathis) who
teams up with him to save the world.
     Obviously, anything with a plot as far-fetched as this is going to
take a lot more than 100 minutes to completely flesh out, so screenwriter
Graham Yost has left much of the story to our imagination, relying instead
on lots of exploding helicopters, trains, jeeps, planes, buildings, and
the occasional nuclear weapon.  Oh, and guns, and even fist fights, when
there's nothing left to blow up.
     Not that this is bad.  Even though it's pretty mindless, it's
actually a lot of fun.  Yes, the dialogue is really corny (when the
movie's best line is "You da man," you know you're in trouble), the
dramatics are overdone, the humor is largely unintentional, and the plot
is driven by coincidence and lucky, wild guesses.  But what Yost has left
out in substance, Woo makes up for with style.  His signature slo-mo
fighting and gunplay are choreographed better than any Hollywood insider
could hope to achieve, and Woo can really get your heart rate going, *even
though* you know how things are going to turn out.  You really have no
choice but to cut him some slack in the story department.
     Woo also makes an interesting (and blatant) attempt to pay homage to
Sergio Leone's THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE UGLY, with many of that film's
touches.  Most notably, a bar of theme music is played for John Travolta
whenever he's on screen.  While kitschy, Travolta (in his third "goofy
criminal" role in two years) is *not* Clint Eastwood...and Woo isn't
Leone, for that matter.
     But all this stuff is probably just quibbling from a crusty film
critic.  While BROKEN ARROW is truly mindless eye candy, it's a whole lot
of fun for anyone who feels that more testosterone is better.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Scott Mendelson
        Well, I just came back from Broken Arrow, and I must say, I was
disappointed.  While I still enjoyed it, it could have been a lot
better.
        First of all, the good stuff:  The action scenes are awesome(of course,
this being a John Woo film, anything less would be horrific)and the
stunt work is impressive.  As for the acting, it ranges from the
Great(John Travolta, who can now play a bad guy whenever he wants) the
Good(Delroy Lindo, great as always in a small part) the
mediocre(Christian Slater needs work before trying another action hero)
to the awful(Samantha Mathis... acting lessons anyone?).  Travolta, as
the loony navy pilot who steals two nuclear weapons,  has a calm style
of villainy and wisely doesn't go over the top.  This shows best when he
calmly asks a bad guy: "Would you please be so kind as to not shoot at
the thermal nuclear device?"  A lesser actor would have screamed at the
guy and probably killed him for a cheap laugh.  Sometimes this works,
but sometimes we wish villains would stop being so damn hyperactive.
        As for Slater, he just doesn't fit my idea of an action hero.  And his
stiff, wooden delivery does nothing to convince me otherwise.  But
Mathis is much, much worse.  She has absolutely no purpose to the film
other than to tag along, be saved by Slater, take her shirt off, and
keep saying: "This is a bad idea!" once every 10 minutes.
        But my big problem is that not enough happens in the movie.  Basically
the entire movie can be summed up in one sentence: Travolta steals
bombs, and duels with Slater, first in a desert, and then on a train. 
An action film of this type needs more locations.  Raiders of the Lost
Ark probably had a dozen different battle grounds.  This film has two.
        Another problem is the lack of surprises.  The film opens with Slater
getting his brains punched out in a sparring match. Travolta tells him
he lacks the will to win.  Is this foreshadowing?  Anyone who has seen 4
action movies in a lifetime can probably guess exactly what is going to
happen and when.  How do we know that Travolta is a bad guy?  Well,
during the opening flight, he squints his eyes and the camera gives him
a looming close-up!! Uh, huh...
        Also, there seems to be a lack of emotion in this film.  If your best
friend pulled a gun on you, tried to kill you, then ejected you out of a
plane, only to try to blow you up many times, just to get rich, wouldn't
you be a little hurt?  Also, after all this, you are unable to talk your
buddy out of this plot, you are forced to beat him up and leave him to
die, wouldn't this sadden you a little bit?  The script fails to give
one line or reaction of sadness to Slater over the fact that his best
friend has betrayed his trust.
        The plot seems a bit simplistic.  Hell, all you have to do to start a
bomb is punch in a 5 digit code, and all you have to do to disarm it is
to enter the wrong code three times,  or get this, touch a single button
on a remote control.   And, yes, this film's bombs do have those
convenient red timers, counting the seconds till doom.  
        Still, I did like the film.  It was well paced, with some amazing
stunts and action sequences. John Travolta has a lot of fun playing a
heavy.   And it does let Slater pull the official "Woo Dive" which is
when someone jumps forward or backward, while firing one pistol in each
hand at an enemy.  This time, it's a forward, head first dive.  And,
when it came, those who understood cheered.        "B-"

Author
John Beachem
Vic Deakins (John Travolta) and Riley Hale (Christian Slater) are two top 
notch air force pilots on a training mission involving a stealth bomber and 
two nuclear warheads. While things are going fine at first, Deakins suddenly 
tries to kill Hale and take over the plane. Gunfire ensues and the plane 
crashes, but not before both pilots manage to eject. Hale lands safely and 
meets up with park ranger Terry Carmichael (Samantha Mathis), whom he 
convinces to help him. Meanwhile, Deakins is in league with a group of 
terrorists who want to steal the two nuclear warheads and get millions from 
the government. The president, realizing there's a broken arrow situation 
(that's when we lose nuclear warheads. Apparently it happens quite often), 
sends in a recovery team. What he doesn't realize is how carefully Deakins 
has planned for everything the government is going to throw at them. Now the 
only people who have any chance at stopping Deakins are Hale and Carmichael, 
and they're running out of time.
Here's a little tip to all future writers out there: when your script is a 
blatant attempt to cash in on recent genre success (in this case the success 
of films like Speed), don't include words like "broken" in your title. So, 
does Broken Arrow live up to its title? Is the film truly broken? Not 
exactly, but it's certainly in need of some repairs. All the requisite 
elements for a classic '90s action flick are here (I didn't think it was 
possible for the words classic and '90s to appear in the same sentence). 
We've got betrayal by a friend, a love interest that begins with mistrust, a 
few shoot-outs, at least one really big explosion, and a villain who acts 
obscenely calm no matter what might be happening around him. So, with all 
the necessary elements present, what could go wrong? Well, in some ways, 
having all the necessary elements is exactly what goes wrong. There are 
simply zero surprises in this movie (aside from the appearance of Howie 
Long, but that doesn't exactly count), and it's in desperate need of a few. 
Is the film still enjoyable? Yes, but in the same way sitting down in your 
favorite beat up, knocked around, but broken in easy chair is enjoyable. You 
know it's bad, you know it should be replaced, but you just can't help 
yourself.
Obviously the acting in a movie like Broken Arrow isn't of supreme 
importance, but I feel it's worth mentioning anyway. John Travolta leads the 
way with his usual over-the-top performance, though thankfully this time 
around it suits the character. I'm sure this man can act in another way, he 
showed he could in Pulp Fiction, but he seems to feel obligated to act 
maniacal in everything else. It works here, but it won't always, and it's 
going to get on peoples' nerves in time. I've always found Christian Slater 
to be a rather underrated actor. People seem to label him as a Jack 
Nicholson imitator and not give him a second thought. I'm not saying the man 
is a great actor, but he's certainly a good one, and he occasionally borders 
on greatness (True Romance for example). This isn't one of those times, but 
Slater does what he can with some wooden dialogue and a cliched character, 
and manages to keep us entertained. Samantha Mathis (Pump up the Volume) 
does a spectacular Sandra Bullock impersonation in the movie, but that's not 
exactly a good thing. As I said, Howie Long shows up, but don't worry, he 
has about five lines so he's tolerable. Delroy Lindo (Gone in Sixty Seconds) 
and Frank Whaley (Swimming With Sharks) both make brief appearances, but 
Whaley is given one of the film's really good lines after being told what a 
"Broken Arrow" is. He gets a shocked look on his face before muttering "I'm 
not sure what's scarier, that we have one right now, or that it happens so 
often you actually have a term for it."
Perhaps what I find most disappointing about Broken Arrow is Graham Yost's 
(who also wrote Speed... what a surprise, eh?) script. It's not that it's a 
bad script, it's simply that it takes no chances. Yost is obviously content 
to write something very similar to Speed and let John Woo work his magic 
(which he does, but more on that later). Not only are there no surprises, 
there's very little excitement this time around. The script places the 
actors in predictable situations, and they respond to these situations 
exactly as we expect them to. The actors all seem to realize they're in a 
film that's little more than a rehash, and they act accordingly. Is it 
possible I'm expecting too much out of the script that it throw some 
surprises at us? I suppose it could be, but I don't think so. Alright, 
script aside, are there any other flaws to the film? Well, the suspension of 
disbelief factor runs just a little bit high. We're expected to believe 
things like a nuclear blast underground would have zero effect on the 
surface, that a nuke is so light it can be dragged up the stairs by one 
person, and of course that the military doesn't monitor those who deal with 
nuclear weapons all that closely. Now, I can look past those things, but I 
can suspend my disbelief pretty well. Your average movie goer might have a 
harder time with it.
What makes the film work despite these things working against it is John 
Woo's ability to direct an action scene like few men can. I'm not saying his 
direction is flawless, mind you. The film's pacing is a little off, jumping 
frantically from scene to scene at times before suddenly slowing down for no 
apparent reason. Still, that's easy to forgive when you see what Woo can do 
with a scene as simple as a shoot-out in a mine. It's really quite 
mesmerizing, watching men jump from cover to cover, blasting everything in 
sight and switching from slow motion to real-time movement every now and 
then. There's something poetic about these scenes, and I fear they can't be 
described adequately. Also working in the film's favor is an enjoyable score 
by Hans Zimmer (Gladiator), and particularly a quaint little bit he wrote 
which plays every time Travolta appears on screen. Broken Arrow does run a 
bit too long at 108 minutes, which could easily have been chopped down to 
90. I'd recommend the film to those of you who love Woo's style of 
direction, Travolta's style of overacting, and Graham Yost's style of 
re-using the same script over and over again. I give the movie three and a 
half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Steve Kong
If you know me well enough, you know that I'm a big John Woo fan.  And this
makes it hard for me to review his films.  I'll try to put this bias aside
for this review of his second US film.
Two Air Force officers take up a B-3 experimental bomber with two nuclear
bombs in the bomb bay.  They are going to be flying over the Utah while
being tracked by a ground station to see if they can be caught.  Riley Hale
(Christian Slater) slyly says before take-off, "When the time comes that we
have to go to war against Utah, we are really going to kick ass, you know?"
 During mid-flight Vic Deakins (John Travolta) tries to kill his co-pilot
Riley Hale in order to jettison the nuclear bombs.  We find out later that
Deakins is working with a businessman, Mr. Pritchett (Bob Gunton), and they
plan to make a load of cash with these nuclear devices.
Something goes wrong during the mid-flight fight and Hale is ejected while
Deakins jettisons the bombs and also ejects.  Hale meets up with a park
ranger (Samantha Mathis) and together they try to stop Deakins and his band
of military men from taking off with the nuclear weapons.
The script is by Graham Yost, whose last script was Speed.  Yost, who as
we've seen with Speed and now with Broken Arrow, is not a great writer.
His scripts need the help of a good director to come out on top, and with
both Speed (directed by Jan De Bont) and now Broken Arrow, he got what he
needed, and the films come out on top.  Yost needs to work on writing more
believable and less silly dialogue (while running down a hill to catch some
Humvees carrying the nukes, Mathis' character says to herself, "This isn't
a good idea."  Duh..)  What we don't see in Broken Arrow, as we do in Woo's
previous Hong Kong releases and in Face/Off, is the blurred difference
between the good and bad characters.  In Broken Arrow the characters are
either good or bad.
Woo looks to have gotten more freedom on this project he did in his debut
US film Hard Target.  He pulls out his bag of tricks and uses them to the
fullest.  These included the-endless-gun-magazine, the slow-mo, and the
double-fisted gunfights.  These all make for incredibly fun action that is
visually inspiring.
Worth mentioning is Hans Zimmer's score for the film.  He knows how to
create themes for characters, and he shows this with his very memorable
theme for John Travolta's character Vic Deakins.
Broken Arrow is a loud, sometimes dumb, movie about two dueling Air Force
pilots, which is basically a long chase movie.  Suspension of disbelief is
a necessity for this film, but if you can suspend your disbelief, Broken
Arrow can be enjoyed for its amazing and visually stunning action.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The first Big Action Movie of the year opens, appropriately enough,
in a boxing ring.  In this corner is John Travolta, a test-pilot-gone-
bad who's stealing nukes and demanding ransom.  His challenger is
Christian Slater, his copilot and supposed friend.  Their playpen is the
Utah Canyonlands, where Travolta has ditched their B-3 Stealth bomber
and is planning Bad Things if Uncle Sam doesn't pay.  Assisting Mr.
Slater is his PUMP UP THE VOLUME costar Samantha Mathis as a feisty Park
Ranger.  Together, they chase the Comeback Kid via plane, train, boat,
moat, and Humvie, as only SPEED scribe Graham Yost could imagine.
     Behind the lens is legendary action director John Woo (HARD BOILED,
HARD TARGET), who seems a mere shadow of his usual self.  Sure, he
brings a unique rhythm to an already too-familiar formula, but his
action sequences lack the fluid finesse that Woo is world-renowned for.
No bone breaking ballet here, just the occasional over-the-top thrill.
Such as Mathis and Slater evading a crashing helicopter's tail rotor.
Or the film's final twenty minutes, set aboard a hijacked freight train.
     All told, BROKEN ARROW is entertaining enough.  The script is
lively, Travolta is a blast as a badass, and John Woo is effective
enough, even at quarter-speed.  Unfortunately, there's not much that
*anyone* can do with the more, uh, erroneous casting choices.  Christian
Slater is hardly larger-than-life, but some viewers will probably accept
him as an action hero.  Samantha Mathis, however, is just plain awful.
What's she doing here?  The inclusion of, say, Travolta's GET SHORTY
costar Delroy Lindo we can understand.  Even former NFL player Howie
Long is an acceptable addition.  But looks-all-of-twenty-years-old Frank
Whaley as a Pentagon "suit?" Maybe the casting director was thinking
John *Hughes*.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BROKEN ARROW is a non-stop action film by the Hong Kong master
action director John Woo.  Don't waste your time seeing this film in
anything less than your local monster screen house.  This is the type
of movie for which they made digital sound, and there is enough low
base to rumble you right off your seat.  Some of the noises are so loud
that you may find yourself jumping straight up in the air.  The
subwoofers are in overdrive throughout the show.  It has more
explosions that I have ever seen in any film plus it has almost much
fire as in BACKDRAFT.  I judge action films by how much they get your
adrenaline pumping, and by that metric, BROKEN ARROW really delivers
the goods.
     The movie starts with two fighter pilots Vic "Deak" Deakins (John
Travolta) and Riley Hale (Christian Slater) sparing in a boxing ring.
Every punch sounds like small bombs exploding, which is a metaphor for
the rest of the film.  Soon they are asked to take two live nuclear
weapons on a low flying mission in a fairly new B-3 stealth bomber.
Hale tells Deak he knows what turns him on, "It's the nukes.  I know
you love having the power of god at your fingertips."
     Soon Deak turns bad, drops the nukes unarmed, and shoots Hale out
of the plane.  It turns out that Deak has a plan to ransom the return
of the bombs, or he will blow up a large part of the southwestern
United States.  A wimpy civilian expert at the Pentagon, aptly named
Giles Prentice (Frank Whaley), is brought in to spearhead the
investigation to find the nukes.  When Giles is told there is a "broken
arrow", he says, "I don't know what's scarier - losing nuclear weapons
or that it happens so often that we have a name for it."  Giles wants
to be taken seriously so he tells Hale that, "just for the record, I'm
not entirely a civilian.  I was a lieutenant in the ROTC at Yale."
     Hale gets a sidekick of a Park Ranger, Terry Carmichael played by
Samantha Mathis whom you may remember as Janie in THE AMERICAN
PRESIDENT.  She is great.  She is full of bravado, fighting skills, and
good ideas about how to get out of tough situations.  The chemistry
between the two of them is similar to that of Sandra Bullock and Keanu
Reeves in SPEED.  I must confess, that although I admired Samantha
Mathis's performance, I think Sandra Bullock could have done even it
better.  Actually, I wish the romantic potential between Hale and
Carmichael had been more fully developed.
     The script by Graham Yost is fast paced and extremely funny.  When
one of Deak's cohorts is shooting over the weapons while trying to hit
Hale, Deak gets angry.  Gritting his teeth and slowly exaggerating each
word, Deak tells him, "would you mind not shooting at the thermonuclear
weapons."
     Travolta is menacing and well cast as a bad guy.  Watch especially
the way he exaggerates his mouth movements and the way he can portray
evil with his eyes.  He is so evil he almost becomes a caricature.
Christian Slater (UNTAMED HEART and BED OF ROSES) is a wonderful actor
who specializes in sweet guys with a heart of a gold.  Here he proves
that he can play good guys who are tough as well.  He plays his
character in cowboy fashion with two guns blazing as he runs and jumps
toward the bad guys.
     Although it has excellent acting, directing, and writing, the real
reason to see BROKEN ARROW is the action and the stunts.  Although it
does not come up to the tense pacing of SPEED, the show really sizzles
with extremely realistic special effects similar to, but much better
than, those in TRUE LIES.  The action sequences here are innovative,
e.g., car chases, but in Hummers and explosions, but thermonuclear
ones.  The great editing by Joe Hutshing, Steve Mirkovich, and John
Wright add to the tension of the special effects.  The scene of the
helicopter coming out of nowhere to get Hale shows the editing skills
best.  Watch how they cut back and forth between the calm of the desert
and the fury of the helicopter coming.
     BROKEN ARROW is a movie where it is easy to suspend disbelief and
ignore the numerous implausibilities in the plot since overall it feels
sufficiently real.  Although I can not prove it, I believe that Hale
and Carmichael managed to kill 35 of the 20 bad guys in the movie.
     BROKEN ARROW flies by at 1:40.  The film is rated R for violence
and a little bad language.  There is no sex or nudity.  The violence,
although sometimes bloody, was more often like a Western where the bad
guys get shot rapidly and die quickly.  This movie would be fine for
teenagers.  BROKEN ARROW provides a fast paced and exciting time at the
movies, and I enjoyed it thoroughly.  I think you would too so I
recommend this show to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Clark Goble
I should have known better.  I keep hearing about how great John Woo is. 
So I went and saw this wretched Van Damme movie directed by him.  It had
one or two interesting scenes, but far, far too much slow-mo, little plot,
terrible dialog, and you never really cared about the characters.  And
beyond that you always never were involved in the movie at all.  Through
the whole thing you felt like - so what?
But everyone talks about Woo.  So I went and rented his "classics" from
his Hong Kong days.  There was some interesting stunts, such as sliding
down a bannister while shooting a gun, but nothing really outstanding. 
And the stunts were so frequently over the top to such a degree that they
made James Bond seem like hard biting realism!  I mean this one guy single
handedly wipes out a mafia group by RAPELLING down from the ceiling with a
shotgun and a machine gun.  Give me a break.  Some of the stunts were
redeeming enough that I didn't fall asleep in the movies though.
Then, knowing far better, I went to see Broken Arrow, Woo's latest
American attempt at making a decent film.  I can sum up this movie in one
word.  Boring.  Two words if said with emphasis: BOOOOOR-ING.   The dialog
is so cheesy, so cliched that I can't believe someone actually penned it. 
About the only amazing thing is that Travolta actually takes his dialog
and makes it work.  Of course Travolta is basically reprising the same
role he's been doing since Pulp Fiction, but it at least was one redeeming
feature to the film.  Actually the special effects of the stealth fighter
were pretty good also.  And the scenery of the desert was great, but then
I go camping there all the time.
Which brings me to my next point.  No it isn't the poor cinematography,
cheesy sets, or unbelievable jumping and rolling over rocks.  It is the
park ranger.  Now personally I'd be in heaven if a park ranger like that
ever looked me up.  But the acting job by the actress portraying the
cliched love interest is simply a bit much.  Or little rather.  Who cast
this woman?  And how can she roll through the dirt, jump around cars, and
never have a hair out of place nor get her uniform dirty?  And her first
act upon meeting Slater is a little strange.  I won't give it away as a
spoiler, lest someone actually see this turkey and be offended.  (Although
they ought to be offended by the film and not the spoiler)
All in all you can probably get much more excitment if you just drive down
south to Moab, the San Raphael Swell or even Zion's and look around. 
You'll undoubtedly see about as much action and be far more interested in
what you see than if you go into the theatre to see this piece of crap.
People always complain about how Tarantino, Rodriguez and others borrow
from Woo.  Well at least they usually do something interesting with the
style.  Well actually Rodriguez has still to make a movie with an involved
plot or characters, but Tarantino has Reservoir Dogs, Pulp Fiction, and
the scripts for True Romance and Natural Born Killers.  Although the
latter shows that even a good script can be made into a horrid movie.
But enough - just avoid this movie like the plague.  You'll be much happier.
/// Clark Goble /// cgoble@fiber.net ///

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: John Travolta, Christian Slater, Samantha Mathis, Delroy Lindo, 
      Frank Whaley, Bob Gunton, Howie Long, Vondie Curtis-Hall, 
      Kurtwood Smith
Director: John Woo
Producers: Bill Badalato, Mark Gordon, and Terence Chang
Screenplay: Graham Yost
Cinematography: Peter Levy
Music: Hans Zimmer
U.S. Distributor: Twentieth-Century Fox
     By another name, BROKEN ARROW is SPEED gone nuclear.  Yet, despite 
all the explosions, violence, special effects, and other choreographed 
excesses, this film doesn't have quite the same impact.  It's fun, to be 
sure, and the wild ride doesn't let up for a moment, but the level of 
tension isn't quite as high.  It probably has something to do with the 
premise --  after all, the threat of a nuclear holocaust isn't quite as 
unique an idea as a bus that will blow up if it decelerates below 50 
mph.
     According to the movie, a "broken arrow" is the military term for a 
lost nuclear weapon.  Here, there are two, but they aren't really lost.  
Rather, they have been stolen by Air Force Major Vic Deakins (John 
Travolta at his most nasty).  Vic thinks the military has done him a 
grave injustice by repeatedly passing him over for promotion, and he's 
out to get revenge.  His demands are simple:  $250 million or one major 
American city will be atomized.
     The only two standing between Vic and a luxurious retirement are 
his ex-partner, Captain Riley Hale (Christian Slater), and a Utah park 
ranger, Terry Carmichael (Samantha Mathis).  They hook up when Terry 
finds Riley after Vic ejects him from a stealth bomber.  The rest of the 
film is a cat-and-mouse game, with Riley and Terry chasing Vic, or the 
other way around, depending on who has the missiles.  There are all the 
requisite close calls and narrow escapes, but nothing quite as nerve-
wracking as watching a bus thunder towards a gap in a freeway-under-
construction.
     The writer of BROKEN ARROW, Graham Yost, also wrote SPEED, which 
accounts for many of the similarities.  Director John Woo, best known 
for Hong Kong action flicks like THE KILLER and HARD BOILED, is in his 
second Hollywood outing (his previous American film, HARD TARGET, was a 
Van Damme vehicle).  Woo, whose inimitable style has earned him legions 
of fans across the world, seems very much at home in this high-tech 
arena.  His characteristic trademarks, such as someone leaping through 
the air with guns blazing in both hands, are all in evidence.  As 
always, Woo choreographs action like a ballet, creating some of the most 
artistic violence to be found anywhere.
     After playing the protagonist in three straight films (PULP 
FICTION, GET SHORTY, WHITE MAN'S BURDEN), John Travolta finally gets a 
chance to try his hand at a despicable-to-the-core villain.  And, boy, 
is he *cool*.  Vic Deakins is one of the most delicious bad guys since 
Alan Rickman put on a fake German accent for DIE HARD.  Vic, who loves 
"having the power of God at [his] fingertips," is smooth, heartless, and 
very dangerous.  
     Christian Slater, who plays a radically different role here than in 
his other current film, BED OF ROSES, is an adequate hero.  His Riley 
doesn't have Vic's twisted charisma, but Slater musters enough screen 
presence to get us on his side.  And, while it's nice to see him teamed 
up again with Samantha Mathis (the two previously joined forces in PUMP 
UP THE VOLUME), the two never really click.  Mathis, who seems better 
suited to movies like LITTLE WOMEN,  isn't an especially effective 
action star.
     The preposterous thrills in BROKEN ARROW take the characters from a 
fight aboard a stealth bomber to a car chase across the flats of Utah to 
the bowels of a disused copper mine to a speeding train.  The pace is 
relentless; Woo never allows the excitement to flag.  In the end, BROKEN 
ARROW is an exhilarating, if empty, experience.  It's the kind of thing 
where you turn off your brain and dig your fingernails into the armrest.  
It won't be quite as satisfying as a SPEED or DIE HARD, but there's 
still enough here to leave anyone exhausted. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: jberardinell@delphi.com, berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The plot is simple enough, with more than a few plot elements
borrowed from THUNDERBALL.  Vic Deakins (played by John Travolta) and
Riley Hale (Christian Slater) are Air Force pilots who fly the sleek,
fully digitized B-3 stealth bomber with live nuclear bombs.  Deakins
has also taken a fatherly interest in Hale, giving him lessons on the
philosophy of winning while brutally beating him in the boxing ring.
Of course he does not expect Hale to make much use of these lessons.
Just a few hours later tries to kill Hale as part of his plan to steal
two nuclear bombs.  Hale, together and self-drafted National Park
Ranger Terry Carmichael (Samantha Mathis) have race to recover the
bombs before Deakins can get his intended use from the nuclear devices.
     Christian Slater should be almost as angry as his character in
this since Woo seems to have not so much let Travolta steal the film as
having goaded him into it.  Travolta is given an arsenal of cinematic
mannerisms, comments on the action, and even a few slow-motion
entrances all intended to make the actor look oh-so-cool.  Slater's
dialogue and acting are by comparison much more restrained and why only
Travolta got the Sergio Leone treatment is not clear.  Samantha Mathis
is an also-ran, as well as an also- jumped, and an also-fired-guns.
She just does not seem to show up very well on the screen and Woo did
not polish her the way he did with Travolta.  About all we learn about
her is that she lives alone with her dog and for this script that seems
to be enough.  Woo seems to think that the National Park Service trains
their rangers like Navy SEALS and gets their uniforms shipped in by
rocket from the Planet Krypton.  Delroy Lindo, who played so well off
Travolta in GET SHORTY, gets less opportunity to do it here as an Air
Force colonel pulled into the action.
     The pacing of BROKEN ARROW is fast and you are never very far from
the next action scene.  This is a style pioneered by the Bond series
taken to extremes that make those films slow by comparison.  But even
the Bond films spend more time building the characters.  Graham Yost,
who wrote SPEED, gave this film much or more of the same pacing.  The
action of BROKEN ARROW takes place over a period of about eighteen
hours and the more serious events (if it is not a misuse of that word)
are treated as just an extension of the boxing ring lesson at the
beginning of the film, as if Slater is giving a rebuttal.
     Of course BROKEN ARROW has lots of flashy visual effects:
digitized flying scenes, a nuclear detonation, Travolta's performance,
helicopter crashes, etc.  Flying a helicopter in this film is a lot
like wearing a red shirt in the first "Star Trek" series: it is really
tough to do it and stay alive.  Most of the effects are quite good
though the computer digitized flying sequences are far too easy to pick
out.
     Driving BROKEN ARROW are its action sequences and they are well
done.  The plot is told competently, though in the spoiler section
below I will mention some holes.  But the script never fleshes out it
characters.  It would have been worth it to have two fewer fights and a
little character development instead.  I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.
     SPOILER...SPOILER...SPOILER...SPOILER...SPOILER...SPOILER...
     Three scenes particularly bothered me about the script.  Somehow
before the action of the film Travolta's character seems to have
tampered with the electronics of the bombs to change the arming
sequence.  As he put it "I used uncoded circuit panels."  Since when do
the pilots have anything to do with building the electronics into
nuclear bombs?  And just what are "uncoded circuit panels?"  It sounds
like it is just double talk to explain an impossible plot twist.
     In one scene Travolta's opens a door panel on the train and there
is Slater's character, waiting for him to open the door.  How do you
sneak up on a train with a helicopter and how did Slater not only know
that a door was going to open, but just what door it would be?
     The physics of Travolta's final scene is absurd.  Why is only the
bomb torn loose, why does it have so much momentum, why isn't
Travolta's character crushed against the wall before the bomb ever gets
to him?  The bomb almost seems to turn into a rocket.

Author
Bryant Frazer
GRADE B+ (Recommended with reservations)
        When Hong Kong action director John Woo made his first American
movie, the Jean-Claude Van Damme vehicle Hard Target, he had to recut and
re-submit it to the ratings board 17 times in order to secure an R rating.
Woo was probably surprised and baffled by the whole process, since Hard
Target was downright languid by HK standards. But in the U.S., Woo's
original cut looked radically violent, albeit strangely poetic. Even
re-edited for Hollywood-style clarity and shorn of 20 minutes of footage,
the released version of Hard Target is a severely flawed but oddly
compelling piece of work. 
       On the bigger-budget Broken Arrow, one would suspect there might be
even less room for Woo to indulge his old habits. In Woo's Hong Kong
movies, outrageous set pieces and severe body counts are part of the
territory, even though Woo himself takes a very moral high ground,
insisting that the graphic violence is a metaphor for his characters'
inner lives (the most violent of all Woo movies, Hard Boiled, is also the
one that deals metaphorically with the upcoming social turbulence of the
1997 reunification of Hong Kong itself with mainland China). 
        In some ways, Broken Arrow is really two movies. One of them is
Hollywood's movie: a blockbuster action picture with militaristic
fetishes, digital special effects, a complicated terrorist storyline, and
a couple of proven box office draws in the lead. The other one is John
Woo's movie: a down-to-earth character study of two men who interact by
trying to outsmart one another, and express their frustrations through
gunfire and sucker punches. Accordingly, the film's biggest flaw is also
its biggest asset. While Broken Arrow is too quirky to be a great
Hollywood action picture, and too straightforward to be a great John Woo
movie, it's fascinating to see the ways that Woo makes the most of what
he's given. 
        What he's given, as anyone who's seen the ads knows, is the story
of pilot Vic Deakins (John Travolta), who beats the crap out of his
partner, Riley Hale (Christian Slater), in mid-flight and dumps their
bomber's payload of two unarmed nuclear bombs into the Utah desert. 
Naturally, he demands payment from the government in exchange for not
blowing up a city. As fast as you can say "Speed 2" or even "Die Hard 4,"
it's up to Hale and plucky park ranger Terry Carmichael (Samantha Mathis,
who co-starred with Slater in Pump Up the Volume) to outsmart Deakins and
foil his plans. 
        Does this sound OK? Well, the script is a big, lumbering
catastrophe. It's written by Speed's screenwriter, Graham Yost, and it's
every bit as outlandish as that film, but has none of the novelty. For
starters, the protracted sense of cause-and-effect that's crucial to a
taut thriller is entirely missing in this plot, where there seems to be no
logical explanation for anything that happens. It takes forever for the
movie to get into gear, partly because the audience is made to lumber
alongside the military types back at Mission Control as they spend two
reels figuring out, duh, that Something's Not RIght. 
        The dialogue is even worse than the story. Slater is earnest and
appealing, and Mathis couldn't be much more charming, but the lines
they're given to spout at each other are mainly of the "Omigosh!" variety.
(Was Woo perhaps unaware of exactly how trite this would sound?) Even so,
Travolta milks this meager material brilliantly and closes right in on his
own character, perhaps sensing an easy kill -- he nets the performance of
his career, and probably saves the film. His psychopath isn't particularly
frightening, but he is funny and charismatic -- unusual for a mad bomber.
And he's the cold, cool center of what may be the film's best scene, a
sadistic seduction episode having to do with Mathis's essential
vulnerability, Travolta's considerable sexual magnetism, and impending
cataclysm. 
        Travolta aside, Woo is the main attraction, and I've got to hand
it to him -- I think our man comes through in the face of adversity. He
cuts straight to the quick, emphasizing the rivalry between Hale and
Deakins in a mesmerizing boxing sequence that opens the film.  (Typical
Woo -a $20 wager placed on that fight becomes a symbol for the detached
oneupsmanship that drives their relationship during the rest of the
movie). And it's a rare comic- book action flick that has so many moments
approaching the sublime. 
        They look like this: Hale wakes up from a night spent crumpled and
bloody on the desert floor as his unfurled parachute, caught by the wind,
tugs him gently across the ground. Or this:  as soon as one of his cohorts
ventures that the sonofabitch might be dead after all, jump cut to
Travolta-as-Deakins rising suddenly out of the landscape in slo-mo
close-up. Or even this:  dazzled by a swarm of butterflies, Hale explains
to his still-unnamed companion that if you see such delicate creatures in
the aftermath of a nuclear detonation, it's a sign that you won't die of
radiation poisoning. 
        Such moments (and others equally Woovian, like Slater suspended in
mid-air, pumping heat at Travolta out of both fists) ensure that Broken
Arrow actually gets better as it goes along.  Critics have suggested that
Woo lacks basic storytelling skills, yet his meaning is clearest when he's
not relying on fancy special effects to carry the show (I lost count of
exactly how many tiresome helicopter crashes we see, but I'll bet every
one of them is digitally enhanced). Even so, it's understandable if
American action fans are wondering why this director gets so much good
press. Woo surely has a great Hollywood movie in him, but after Hard
Target and Broken Arrow, I'm still waiting to see it. 

Author
Michael Redman
John Travolta has come a long way since his "Saturday Night Fever" days. His
latest films have shown a depth undreamed of during his disco period. (Of
course, just about anything would be depth compared to disco.) The evil
criminal genius character in this film isn't exactly a step forward.
He and Christian Slater are Air Force buddies but their relationship takes a
turn for the worse when Travolta decides to kill his friend and steal nuclear
weapons. His plan is to ransom the bombs for a zillion bucks and get back at
the military for passing him over for promotion at the same time.
Slater survives, teams up with the film's babe factor, a park ranger, and
sets out to stop the nefarious plot. From then on, it's a shoot-em-up with big guns.
In truth, Travolta isn't bad in his role, but the character, like the rest of
the film, isn't believable. Supposedly he has the entire scheme plotted out
and every possibility dealt with. For a genius, he doesn't do so well. Not one
of his plans works.
Luckily for the future of the to-be-bombed Southwest, Slater falls into every
possible piece of luck. Ejected from a stealth bomber into the Utah desert, he
is rescued by the park ranger. In that same vast wasteland, he somehow locates
Travolta with little trouble. Every time that he is left behind, he again
locates his prey easily. Remarkably enough, armed with only a pistol, he
defeats an army of bad guys and their big modern military stuff.
There are impressive bits: grand explosions, scenes from "Close Encounters",
sound effects from "Star Wars", a truck chase from "Indiana Jones" and even
music reminiscent of "Twin Peaks". Admirable pieces of a jigsaw puzzle that
don't make a complete picture.
As mentioned in previous comments about "Sense And Sensibility", there are
movies that are obviously aimed at one sex or the other. This is decidedly a
guy film, just not a very good one.
[This appeared in the 2/15/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
