Title
Review for Gravesend (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
     "The buzz" about GRAVESEND was that it's a startling debut 
showcasing the promise of a new director, NYU Film School dropout 
Salvatore Stabile.  The reality goes to show how misleading "the buzz" 
can be, for, while there's no doubt that GRAVESEND hints at Stabile's 
talent, that potential is (as yet) mostly unrealized.  And "startling" 
isn't the first word that comes to mind when describing this motion 
picture -- "underwritten" is a better choice.
     Admittedly, the manner in which Stabile has filmed GRAVESEND forces 
the viewer to notice his approach.  It's a confrontational, in-your-face 
style that never rests.  Stabile places his handheld 16 mm camera right 
in the middle of the action and keeps it moving.  Unfortunately, his 
occasional lapses into artsy pretentiousness (black & white scenes, 
shots that are intentionally overexposed, etc.) distract from his 
otherwise kinetic and visceral methods.  Those who have compared the 
director to Tarantino or early Scorsese are giving him too much credit.
     The aspect that undermines GRAVESEND isn't the camerawork or the 
director's touch, but Stabile's script, which is uninvolving and 
repetitive, and features a quartet of ill-developed characters.  At 
eighty-six minutes, GRAVESEND is short, but there are times when it 
feels interminable, as we seem to be going in circles, covering the same 
ground and watching the characters have the same arguments more than 
once.  GRAVESEND also features a significant quantity of banal, profane 
dialogue.  In fact, it's this element that points up one of the major 
differences between Stabile and Tarantino.  Tarantino's dialogue is a 
pleasure to listen to -- there's rhythm and style to the way the words 
are pieced together.  The same cannot be said of the lines Stabile has 
saddled his four GRAVESEND protagonists with.  
     GRAVESEND spends one night on the streets of Brooklyn with four 
bored, disaffected young men.  We meet this quartet of friends -- Zane 
(Tony Tucci), Ray (Michael Parducci), Chicken (Tom Malloy), and Mikey 
(Thomas Brandise) -- as they sit around in Ray's basement, arguing and 
trading quips.  When Ray's brother comes downstairs to demand quiet, 
things get out of hand.  Zane whips out a gun and, not believing it to 
be loaded, pulls the trigger.  Suddenly, there's blood everywhere, and 
Ray's brother is lying on the floor, dead.  The rest of the film follows 
the co-conspirators as they attempt to raise the $500 in cash needed to 
dispose of the body.  And, as the night wears on, the level of mistrust 
(not to mention the body count) escalates.
     One of the most serious flaws with GRAVESEND is that none of the 
characters are credibly developed.  I never for a moment believed that 
any of these individuals were more than creations of a writer's fertile 
mind.  This is partly the fault of Stabile's screenplay and partly the 
fault of the actors.  With the exception of Tony Tucci, whose Zane is 
consistently well-realized as a fountain of ill-concealed hostility, the 
performances are lackluster.  There are scenes when Parducci, Malloy, 
and Brandise hit their stride, but it doesn't happen often enough.
     Films about nihilistic, unsympathetic protagonists are always more 
difficult to execute than those featuring likable heroes, so Stabile has 
at least shown a degree of ambition in his first feature.  On those 
occasions when GRAVESEND works, it has the capability to engage and 
entertain.  Unfortunately, because of script deficiencies and bad 
choices (such as an ill-advised voiceover narrative), there aren't 
enough of those moments for this film to climb out of the continuum of 
"life on the streets" movie mediocrity.  After an involving first 
fifteen minutes, GRAVESEND runs into a dead end.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Ben Hoffman
It has been many years since I rode through the Gravesend area on a
street car.  Not far from the famed oceanside playground of Coney
Island, Gravesend was even then a miserable Brooklyn neighborhood.
Today it is inhabited by poor Italians, their children without
goals, everyone "hanging out."   The film is a depiction of a
hair-raising night in Gravesend when four friends, obviously losers,
whose combined intelligence is less than that of an ant, find
themselves with a dead body on their hands.
One of them, Zane (Tony Tucci), had been playing with a gun and as
guns have been known to do it went off, killing the brother of
Ray (Michael Parducci).  What are they going to do?   Along with
friends Chicken (Tom Malloy) and Mikey (Thomas Brandise) they mull
over their very limited options:  Do they call the police and
explain it was an accident or do they try to get rid of body.
Zuane, who fired the gun, is not about to take a chance on the police
buying their accident alibi.  Instead, he and the others try to
enlist the aid of a drug dealer who is known to be able to dump
bodies.  That's JoJo the Junkie (Macky Aquilino in a beautiful
performance).  In addition to $500 he wants a thumb. (sic.)  Before
long the friends have to dispose of another body.
The story of how the film was made (on a rumored $5000) is as
interesting as the movie itself.  Salvatore Stabile, only 22, wrote
and directed this tense, revealing film.  Just about singlehandedly
he set about visiting those in Hollywood who could get the movie
produced.   Luckily he hit on Oliver Stone and others who were
impressed with "Sal's" crude, first film, gave him money to upgrade
it and get it shown.
If this is not a 100% professional film, it certainly is a good
start.  DREAMWORKS SKG, Steven Spielberg's company, has tapped young
Stabile to a 2-picture deal.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Indie films are in.  And the dream of every independent filmmaker
is that, with just a piece of plastic, they can finance a picture that
will eventually get backing from some major studio.  Presenting at film
festivals and trying to connect with key people in the film industry
are fledgling filmmaker's equivalent of buying lottery tickets.  As in
most forms of gambling, the majority of the players don't win.
     Twenty-two year old Salvatore Stabile hit it big.  He placed a
$5,000 bet on his film about his beat-up Brooklyn neighborhood.  He hit
the jackpot when he got financing from Oliver Stone to improve the
picture and get it released.  Stabile went on to hit it even bigger
with a two picture deal from Steven Spielberg's Dreamworks studio.  And
you thought Horatio Alger stories were dead.  I've seen many directors
more deserving that Stabile, whose first film feels too much like a
cheap Quentin Tarantino knockoff, but I'm happy to see someone who does
show talent getting a chance at fame and fortune.  (Now, if budding
film critics could just get such opportunities, ...)
     GRAVESEND is a generally unknown area of Brooklyn where Stabile
grew up.   His insightful and touching voice-over makes the film
special, and he speaks from the heart about life in Gravesend.  If his
writing of the rest of the movie were of the same caliber, the film
would have been worth recommending.  As it, the picture demonstrates
his promise as a writer and director but little more.
     The setup for the story is that four aimless young men -- Zane
(Tony Tucci), Ray (Michael Parducci), Chicken (Tom Malloy) and Mikey
(Thomas Brandise) -- meet regularly in the basement of Ray's house to
goof off, argue and smoke dope.  Ray lives alone with his brother Mark
since their parents died a few years back.  (Each of the men has a
dysfunctional or dead family.  We learn of the men's backgrounds
through grainy black-and-white flashbacks while Stabile narrates a
summary of their troubled history.)
     Their standard routine has Mark coming down and yelling at them,
first to be quiet and then to go home.  One night, Zane fires an
"unloaded" gun at Mark and shatters his usual ritual.  The rest of the
movie has them driving around town with Mark's dead body in the trunk
as they try to figure out how to get rid of it.  The surprisingly
professional acting is marred by the script's lack of focus and
direction.  In between black comedy routines, the actors wile away
their time wrestling and making small talk as if they are trying to run
out the clock so that can declare their first movie finished.
     The film does have a few memorable lines.  Stabile's percipient
reflection on Zane, the show's hothead, is one of the best.  "Zane
wasn't well liked," he remarks.  "We were his friends, and we didn't
like him."
     In another good scene, they negotiate with a local junkie named
Jo-Jo, played like a Mafioso reject by Macky Aquilino, to bury Mark's
body.  The best they can do is get Jo-Jo to bury it for $500 and a
thumb -- Mark's thumb, which upsets Ray's sense of propriety.
     I wish Stabile luck with his opportunity to make his fortune since
GRAVESEND, even at sloppiest, shows promise.
     GRAVESEND runs just 1:25.  It is rated R for violence, profanity,
and pot and cocaine usage.  Teenagers should go only if they are both
older and mature.  I can't recommend the film, but I do think it is
worth **.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 22, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
