Title
Review for Haut bas fragile (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena

FILM TITLE:         HAUT BAS FRAGILE (Up,Down,Fragile)
DIRECTOR:        JACQUES RIVETTE
COUNTRY:          FRANCE 1995
CINEMATOGRAPHY: CHRISTOPHE POLLOCK
MUSIC:                FRANCOIS BREANT
CAST:                  Laurence Cote, Marianne Denicourt, Anna Karina, Andre
Marcon, Nathalie Richard, Bruno Todeschini, Christine Vezinet
SUPER FEATURES: The acting, as usual. Nice, dreamy, dance sequences.
 It's been said, in a few reviews of Jacques Rivette's work, that he has a
serious admiration for the American musical film. Whether this is true or
not, may be of inconsequence to the fact that this film has some song and
dance routines in it, and that one can just about tell when they are going
to break into it .... well, we knew that in the Hollywood musicals, too, so
that's not a surprise.
 But the difference here, may be how it is used. In most of the famed
Hollywood musicals, the world stops for the song, and then it continues
again. The way Jacques Rivette uses this is more subtle, and kind makes each
person and character have their own identification with the Hollywood
musical, by breaking into it when the situation brings it about. The next
question is, is this a musical? No. Then what is it?
 A more subtle answer comes in the way that Jacques Rivette does his films,
and shows us his characters. Basically, these are people that have grown up
seeing Hollywood musicals on the telly, and their inspiration comes across
various times, for three of the women. The fourth one, is apparently too
worried about a song she likes, to be able to dance, although her moves in
her own bedroom, are totally dance like, and appear choreographed.
 Story .... story .... a bit more difficult of a proposition. Basically this
is a day in the lives of four women, some of which connect, and some who
don't, but they all share a liking for musicals, and on occasion break into
singing. Even though, this appears rather mechanical like Hollywood
musicals, there are times, when the apparent intent, is not to sing and
dance, as we would expect, at all, but merely to go through the motions to
show that this is something that the character likes. If something like this
is the intent, this is a magnificent film for the actors. They get a chance
to live out their character;s fantasies and inspirations, which more often
than not have to be left behind to a set of words, or a minimal action. Here
they are shown. One could easily say that Ninon likes things that come to
the age of FAME, SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE, and that Louise is a great fan of Gene
Kelly, but this might be to degrade the film of its own personality. The two
girls interpret many of their feelings through a song, or dance.
 The odd thing, is that it takes nearly one third of the film for the first
dance sequence to break through, and it is Ninon, who has bumped into
someone she is beginning to like, even if he, at first, proves elusive and
not trustworthy. Their routine is actually very sensuous and they spend the
rest of the film looking for that spark through which to make their
relationship get a start. Louise, by comparison, is recovering from a coma
she has been in for several years, and though she does not exactly look
healthy ( awfully skinny and bony ), she appears to be improving through the
film, and it is in the end, when we really find that she is actually the
strongest of the characters, and can make decisions faster than the others.
She decides in one moment if her relationship to a pursuer is going to start
it is going to begin at that very point, when he has to tell her the whole
story surrounding her father's whatever, and then they will make love right
there on the spot. By contrast, Ninon, is moody and spacey, and too much
into her own dancing craze to lounge music. And Ida, is also moody, and
volatile, spending her time trying to find a song she heard many years
before, which a local singer appears to have done.
 Acting. This whole film, like all Rivette endeavors, is nothing but acting,
at its best. It's really hard to fault anyone in the film, and the
continuity is actually impressive considering the film is so long, and that
all of a sudden, we are at the end. The women, have a very impressive sense
of self through out the film, and this adds to the movement of the film.
Nothing seems to be out of place, and the continuity does not waver from its
very own form. Which would seem to render it to be a very good film. It is.
But not for American audiences, who are used to fast moving films that have
no character depth at all. By contrast, then, this is a director that deals
strictly with character depth.
 The only annoying thing about Jacques Rivette's work, is that the general
perception is that there is some sort of intellectual exercise in action,
some metaphysics, that the director is engaging in, which for the most part
is hogwash. There is no way, from an actor or director's point of view that
anyone can contrive a scale of order for the actor to deliver all the lines
and be perfect and clean all the time. No one would be able to afford those
kinds of endeavors, and the time it takes to make them. The film then, is a
result of magnificent studying by the actors, of each character's role in
their own world, much similar to how Mike Leigh works, something that is
very important to French Experimental Theatres, with the likes of Peter
Brook doing their thing in Paris. But this is not so much "studying" as it
is "doing", thus creating a physical environment for each character to work
in. As such, then, the result are characters that we can relate to, that do
not appear out of place, and disconnected with their world, even if they are
thinking... well, it helps that they think out loud, in so many ways, and
the director creates situations so none of the characters have to think by
themselves.. this is the chance they have to open up, and they do, even if
it is a song, or a dance.
 Very nice film, although, sadly, if it were left to American audiences, it
would have long been buried by now. This director deserves recognition for
the magnificent work he does with actors, which is second to none.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

UP/ DOWN/ FRAGILE (HAUT/ BAS/ FRAGILE)(director/writer: Jacques Rivette;
screenwriter: Laurence Côte/Pascal Bonitzer/Christine Laurent;
cinematographer: Christophe Pollock; cast: Marianne Denicourt (Louise),
Nathalie Richard (Ninon), Laurence Côte (Ida), Andre Marcon (Roland),
Anna Karina (Sarah), Bruno Todeschini (Lucien), 1995-Fr.)
The title comes from the markings found on packages delivered by the
postal service. The inspiration of the film comes from the studio-like
Hollywood musicals of the '50s. According to Rivette, he was most
influenced by Stanley Donen's musical GIVE A GIRL A BREAK (1953). His
other influences are the great French directors of the past, such as
Renoir and Vigo. I rented UP DOWN FRAGILE, along with Rivette's first
feature, PARIS BELONGS TO US (1960), and it was interesting to see how
Rivette kept some of the same themes, how one has the need to be alone
and also the need to be with a group, how one handles reality and
fantasy, and the politics of being. It is his firm belief that the
individual alone is responsible for his life's direction, it is one's
responsibility to take charge of one's life not anyone else'. In his
newer film, which was stylistically and cinematically a much more
sophisticated and well-done production than the former, we see these
themes come out clearer, brought out by a director who is more assured
of his abilities to work with actors on a more experimental basis, as
they each collaborate on the script, as he gets them to improvise in
their roles.
The film follows the life of its three main characters: Ninon (Natashe),
Louise (Marianne), and Ida (Laurence), as they try to work out their
many problems in life, occasionally breaking out in song and dance at
the oddest moments, even when the film is moving along in a dramatic
fashion. This lighthearted approach to the film annoyed me on my first
viewing, but when I watched the film for a second time, I felt more
relaxed and was able to get in the mood Rivette probably intended for
his film to be viewed; which is, that it is up to me to fill in the
meaning of the story. But, this also, allowed me not to take this film
as a very serious work but more or less as a spectacle in the Hollywood
tradition, a tradition that Rivette gladly acknowledges a kinship and
admiration for.
Its entertainment value was enhanced by the gorgeous use of colors,
which captured the summertime Paris streets and parks, as well as the
beautful indoor sets. We followed the moped messenger, ex-whore, Ninon,
do her deliveries. Then we viewed Louise's splendidly delicious living
quarters; she is from an upper-class family, having just been released
from a clinic after being five-years in a coma following an accident.
She is being followed for her own protection by an neophyte bodyguard,
Lucien (Bruno), hired by her father without her knowledge to protect
her. She will awkwardly meet and fall in love with him. Ida is the
adopted orphan, working as a librarian, looking for her real parents,
wanting to find out why they put her up for adoption, still plagued by
that. Roland (Andre) is the set designer, the male thread that connects
all three women heroines, the Gene Kelly look-alike. He meets Louise in
her aunt's house, the one she has just inherited; he falls in love with
Ninon at the site of their respective workplaces, which are on the same
street, where she works as a messenger and he designs stage sets; and,
lastly, he meets Ida while doing research in the library she works at,
hearing her hum a tune that he recognizes, which turns out to be a song
Sarah (Anna) uses in her nightclub act, a place he often frequents.
Sarah is the real mother Ida has been looking for.
That this musical is better than most of the Hollywood musicals it
flatteringly immitates, is true to a certain extent. It is better in the
sense, that Rivette is able to bring out the poetry of the real-life
situations and present his existential view of life and not just play
for the song and dance to be the thing.Though the Hollywood performers
are more professional and have better voices and quicker feet, is
certainly true, but they also, seem to rely on an artificial story.
While for Rivette, as amateur as his performers might seem to be in
comparison, the story still seems real and important, and the musical
numbers are intrusive but seem to be imbued with a magical quality about
them, that makes them seem  just as fantasy oriented as the typical
Hollywood production; and, in my opinion, that makes for a more
interesting and better film. Though it makes for a different way for
American audiences to appreciate the musical, a form of film that
Hollywood at one time was the most innovative creators of, but has now
all but abandoned that genre because of high production costs and not
enough box office gross to show for its efforts.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
