Title
Review for Pornographer, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
"See, my parents never talked to me about sex," explains the boyishly
handsome Paul Ryan (Michael DeGood), a 25-year-old man with the maturity
level of a young teen.  "If I ever talked about a girl in class, my
parents would tease me."
Not having a clue as to how to ask a woman out, Paul turns instead to a
fantasy world of pornography and prostitutes, not that he finds it
particularly fulfilling.  "Lately I've been wanting something different,
something more," he tells us of his desire for a genuine relationship.
This is not surprising since he is secure but unhappy with his world of
paid sex.  He needs a real relationship with a woman.  His prostitutes
will say whatever he wants, but he knows that their words have no
meaning.
Writer/director Doug Atchison's THE PORNOGRAPHER is a wonderful film
quite comparable to the highly acclaimed and popular BOOGIE NIGHTS.
Even if it isn't quite as funny as BOOGIE NIGHTS, THE PORNOGRAPHER is
much more genuine and touching.  As the director correctly explained at
our screening, "the story is more about love, loneliness and corruption
than pornography."
Paul's first feeble attempts to secure dates end disastrously.  Unable
to master the dating ritual, he decides to make semi-autobiographical
porn flicks in which he can get the girl.   After all, he reasons, porn
flicks are so poorly made and plotless that he is confident that he
could do better.
Seeing himself as a successful adult film director, he goes to one of
the big porn studios to secure a position.  Producer Spano (Craig
Wasson), a Jerry Springer look-alike, explains the business to him.
(Spano proudly shows off his equivalent of an Oscar for the best
girl-to-girl sex movie of 1994.)
"This is where dreams come true," Spano says of the adult film industry.
"Twenty percent of video rentals are for adult videos," he reminds Paul,
who looks upon Spano as a mentor and hero.
The reality of the business turns out to be much more gruesome than Paul
ever imagined.  Spano sends Paul to meet Charise (Monique Parent), a
hard nosed, veteran porn actress who uses Paul, much as the producers
use young actresses, as she follows her scheme to setup her own studio.
Spano demands the equivalent of the ruby slippers before he will let
Paul make pictures for him.  All Paul need do is bring back -- read
corrupt -- some innocent young woman who has never done anything in the
sex industry before.  Paul knows just the woman, Kate (Katheryn Cain), a
sweet young Tennessean who is a broke, young actress living in LA.  The
problem is that Kate is a charmingly naive, girl-next-door type whom he
feels guilty about leading astray.  You can almost see Paul's angel and
devil speaking to him on opposite shoulders.
Paul pulls out all stops to lure Kate in.  "The risk takers, they're the
ones that get ahead.  They're the ones that pass you by in the
limousines," he tells her, repeating lines that he heard earlier.  "This
is about dreams," he tells her in an attempt to clinch his deal with her
to do just a little test video in a bikini.
Parts of the film are hilarious with most of the best lines being
unprintable.  Its excellent acting and handsome look belie its very low
budget.  Partly tragic, frequently funny and always touching, the film
creates characters you care about even when they go astray.  A deeply
moving film with the porn industry as its backdrop, THE PORNOGRAPHER
shows indie films at their best and without a single witch.
THE PORNOGRAPHER runs 1:29.  It is not rated but might be an R for
strong sexuality, nudity, drug usage, language and brief violence.  The
film would be acceptable for high school seniors.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  PORNOGRAPHER, THE (director/writer/editor: Doug Atchison; cinematographer:
Christopher Mosio; cast: Michael DeGood (Paul Ryan), Craig Wasson (Spano),
Monique Parent (Charise), Katheryn Cain (Kate), Rena Riffel (Tiffany), Todd
Feder (Randy), Marjorie Harris (Teresa), Kelly Stone (Natalie); Runtime: 86;
Integrity Pictures; 1999) 
Paul Ryan (Michael DeGood) is a 25-year-old para-legal who is socially retarded.
He realizes his sexual needs through hookers by paying for sex and by collecting
porno videos. After a series of rejections with eligible women, Paul goes into
the porno business himself as a director. This is a film that uses the porn
business as its background, but is really about the loneliness and the
corruption of an individual. 
This low-budget indie is mostly a character study of how 'an ordinary guy' such
as Paul could descend into the seedy world of porno all because he doesn't know
how to get a date. He rationalizes his plight by saying in a voiceover, "My
parents said sex is a bad thing." 
Paul hooks up with the sleazy porno producer Spano (Craig Wasson) after he
starts making amateur porno films about his fantasy life. He reasons the quality
of the commercial porno films is so poor, he can easily make better films. The
successful porno king encourages him to get away from using hookers and to start
getting fresh girls, as he encourages him to get into the business to make some
good money. He also sends him a veteran porno actress who is currently out of
favor with him, Charise (Monique Parent), to see if he can make a film with her
that he could produce. She tells Paul she saved her dough and wants to go into
business for herself, with Paul as her director. When Paul bites at her offer,
he soon finds she's a user just like the men in that industry. He thereby
returns to work for Spano, as he begins to see how rotten this business is. 
Paul corrupts an innocent neighbor and aspiring actress who just moved to LA,
Kate (Katheryn Cain), by getting her to do some bikini shots for a test video,
which he gets her to sign a release for by telling her the business is about
taking risks to get ahead. He then manipulates her to do a porno sex film by
telling her "This is about making dreams come true." He then sells the porno
flick to Spano for a handsome profit. When she wants the film back because she
would be embarrassed if her family ever saw it and threatens suicide, he goes to
Spano to retrieve it. Spano treats him with contempt as a phony and the confused
Paul starts to come apart as he is filled with rage as he questions who he is
and what he did, as he returns to Spano's office with a gun. 
The film was a humorless and unclear look at the sleaze industry, but was much
better at telling the story of a disturbed and lonely young man who is estranged
from society. The film had an anti-septic and unsexy look to it, as its sex
scenes were not erotic. It seemed like a film made by outsiders, who took easy
shots at the sleaze industry. The film had little emotional impact even though
the story was exploitive and aimed to get sympathy for its victims. It also had
a bogus moral message about the suffering Paul would go through because he did
wrong and the severe price he must pay for his mistakes, as it ends in an
unbelievable and heavy-handed manner. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
