Title
Review for Christmas Story, A (1983)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jamey Hughton
This Christmas, little Ralphie Parker (Peter Billingsley) wants nothing
more than a Red Ryder BB Gun under the tree. Although cautioned by many
that he will ‘shoot his eye out', Ralphie remains optimistic, conjuring
up a detailed scheme to get on the good side of his parents and
teachers. It could be possible that no one has ever wanted anything with
more passion than Ralphie wants this BB Gun, and the story of his
eternal struggle is a charming one.
`A Christmas Story' is a favorite among many during the Holiday season,
and boy, it is certainly easy to see why. Ralphie's endless desire for
the BB Gun may transport you back to your childhood, when you were
craving a certain gift for Christmas and the anxiety was almost
indescribable. Evoking pleasant childhood memories is only one of the
many things `A Christmas Story' does so well. Here are a few features
that make this film such a charming little package for everybody during
the Holiday season:
1) Period detail. This film is based on the memoirs of late humorist
Jean Shepard, who shares his experiences as a young boy living in the
1940's with loving detail. Shepard narrates from a first person
point-of-view, divulging his various adventures one snowy December, in
which visions of taking aim with his new BB Gun replaced that of
sugarplums dancing in his head. Shepard's first-hand commentary of
several situations is not only downright hilarious, but also witty and
warm, with various metaphorical meanings that ring perfectly with the
essence of comic timing. On top of that, young Billingsley's stupefied
reactions to each predicament is absolutely perfect in contrast with the
narration. Director Bob Clark captures the look and feel of the era with
wonderful technicality. I can hardly imagine a more accurate depiction
of what Christmas for young Ralphie must have been like.
2) Mom and Dad. Both Melinda Dillon (as mom) and Darren McGavin (as ‘the
old man') are perfect in their roles. It's hard to fathom a more
agreeable pair for the requirements of a story like this one, with each
possessing at least one memorable trait that instantly separates them
from the wooden caricatures that could have been featured. For instance,
he is a bloodthirsty turkey hound, and she is forgiving and
understanding when it comes to some serious issues. In portraying the
writer as a persistent but mild-mannered young lad, Peter Billingsley
has struck quite the chord. His performance is richly textured, making
all of the humorous situations he stumbles into radiate with flavor and
enjoyment. Which brings us to....
3) The Comic Situations. There are plenty of memorable moments in `A
Christmas Story'. Moments that undoubtedly will improve in comic potency
upon each new viewing, with so much more to explore and to cherish. I am
particularly partial of the ‘f-word scene', in which Ralphie blurts out
the shocking four-letter obscenity while helping the old man in the
yard. Again, Shepard's method of handling this amusing scenario is
nothing short of comic wizardry. The numerous sequences that stick in
one's mind include, of course, the famous department store Santa scene -
in which Billingsley has some problems in telling Old Saint Nick what he
wants under the tree.
I could go on, but I'll finish on this note: `A Christmas Story' is a
standout among Holiday movies, because it captures so much in a meager
90 minutes. Not only is it funny, it's often genuinely hilarious....not
to mention warm, fluffy and touching in all the appropriate places. I
plan on making `A Christmas Story' a Christmas tradition. Why don't you?
Your Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In a show full of all the incidents of childhood that happen only
in the movies, a typical one has a 4th grader rescued by firemen after
he sticks his tongue to a frozen telephone pole.  After a triple-dog
dare, he is, of course, obligated by the strict code of childhood
ethics to inflict certain damage to his body.
     Director Bob Clark's 1983 film, A CHRISTMAS STORY, tries to be
Cute with a capital C.  Set in the 1940s, it is told almost exclusively
in voice-over.  As the grown Ralphie, Jean Shepherd speaks through
heavy narration about the Christmas Ralphie was 9-years-old.
     The story is nominally about Ralphie's quest to get an air rifle
for Christmas and not just any air rifle -- a genuine Red Ryder.  The
gun quest serves as a glue to hold together a rag-tag collection of
childhood incidents.  Ralph, a preppie-dressed kid played by Peter
Billingsley, seems chosen for his cloying behavior.
     As "the old man," Darren McGavin plays a quirky dreamer and
would-be record setting handyman.  He becomes ecstatic when he wins a
contest and gets the world's gaudiest and most hideous lamp, a single,
long nyloned leg with a stiletto heel base and topped with a cheap
shade.  He puts his treasure in the front window for all his neighbors
to admire.  His wife (Melinda Dillon) is so embarrassed that she
devises a plan to get rid of the monstrosity.
     "Every family has a kid who won't eat," Ralphie tells the
audience.  "My kid brother had not eaten voluntarily in over 4 years."
To get nourishment in him, his mothers tricks him with games like "Show
me how the piggies eat."  Sticking his head in his plate, Ralphie's
little brother grunts away as he spreads the potatoes all over his face
in a cliche of a disastrously messy kid.
     Most of the show's episodes are heavily outlandish.  Some do work
with one of the best being a daydream sequence in class that occurs
when Ralphie turns in his big essay on what he wants for Christmas.  He
imagines that his teacher and his classmates are so impressed that the
students carry him around the room on their shoulders like a conquering
hero.  He is so taken with this fantasy that his teacher has trouble
bringing him back to reality.
     When one day, Ralphie accidentally blurts out the F-word (we don't
actually hear him say it), he is sure that it is the guillotine for him
or worse.  His punishment turns out to be the milder and more
traditional bar of soap in the mouth.
     Every adult in the picture, even the department store Santa Claus
pooh-poohs Ralphie's gun wish with, "You'll shoot your eye out."  Will
he get the gun, and if he does, will he indeed shoot his eye out?  Stay
tuned.
     All of the story's characters are too quirky.  Their dialog is
sometimes funny but the script's lack of subtlety and effective wit
makes for an increasingly tiring experience.  Roald Dahl could have
turned this material into another of his sardonic masterpieces, but the
movie's writing committee of Leigh Brown, Bob Clark and Jean Shepherd
simply do not have anything approaching Dahl's talents.
     In its simplicity this predictable picture, for all its faults,
does possess an undeniable charm underneath.  If they could have just
gotten Dahl to write the script...
     A CHRISTMAS STORY runs 1:34.  It is rated PG for a few mildly
profane words.  The film is fine for all ages.


Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1983, PG, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Peter Billingsley (Ralph Parker), Melinda Dillon (Mrs. Parker),
Darren McGavin (Mr. Parker), Jean Shepherd (Narrator), written by Jean
Shepherd, Leigh Brown, Bob Clark, produced by Rene Dupont, directed by Bob
Clark.
Truly great Christmas films have much nostalgia to them. "A Christmas Story"
is definitely one of the best because it will remind anyone of their
childhood - begging their parents and Santa Claus to bring them something
they wanted so bad. This is a story of one boy's dream of the Ultimate
Christmas Present. 
The story revolves around Ralph Parker (Billingsley), a boy in fourth grade
in 1950s middle America, where everything is alright and where "Leave It To
Beaver" might take place. This movie uses a technique that isn't used
anymore: an older man (Shepherd) narrating his childhood. The approach works
well as we can get inside Ralph and know how he thinks and feels. 
Ralph wants to a Red Ryder BB gun for Christmas. Of course Ralph's parents
and other adults are worried. "You'll shoot your eye out" is what the entire
world seems to be telling him, but he doesn't give up. When asked to write a
"theme" for class, he writes about how happy getting the gun would make him
and how he'll be careful. There is a great scene where he imagines he gets
the paper back and the teacher gives him an A with a thousand pluses on it,
while the other children applaud him and carry him like a king. This is great
storytelling because all kids (well... at least boys) have these kinds of
fantasies, but so few films play upon them so well.
But the film is not just about the want for that gun, it's about being a kid
in America. We see Ralph and his friends constantly daring each other, one
such incident leading to a tongue frozen to a flagpole - that's so true!
There's also his little bratty brother always falling behind and whining
(isn't that all little brothers exist for?). There are even two bullies who
torment Ralph and his friends.
Somehow Ralph survives Advent, but then gets himself into big trouble when
he uses "the F word." I've never seen a kid suck on a bar of soap in a film
before, and it's the little things like this that make this film so accurate
in its depiction of adolescence. Is there any way Ralph will get that BB gun
now?
"A Christmas Story" is not a landmark in film history, but it is a good
movie. The atmosphere, the acting, and the directing all add up to a good,
quality family movie that isn't cliche, cheesy, or even preachy. Overall, it
is one of the most original Christmas movies ever.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
A CHRISTMAS STORY (1983)
Rated PG; running time 94 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0085334
Written by: Jean Shepherd, Leigh Brown, Bob Clark
  (based on the novel by Jean Shepherd)
Directed by: Bob Clark
Cast: Melinda Dillon, Darren McGavin, Peter Billingsley, Ian Petrella,
Scott Schwartz, R.D. Robb, Zack Ward, Yano Anaya, Tedde Moore,
Jeff Gillen (Santa), Patty Johnson (Head Elf), Drew Hocevar (Male Elf),
John Wong (Chinese Waiter), Jean Shepherd (narrator-as Adult Ralphie)
DVD standard features (region 1): "Pan And Scan" (non-widescreen);
theatrical trailer; scene access.  Languages & Subtitles: English,
French, Spanish
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bammerchristmas.html
I've long been a "save the best for last" kinda Chick.  I blame it on my
Childhood [whine]; growing up Poor [sob] as I did, saving the good stuff
till the end was a Coping Mechanism [boohoo] I developed early on.
That's the only "good" reason I can think of for having put off
reviewing one of the best movies out there, period, for so long.
I guess my tendency towards being a lazy so-and-so might also have
something to do with it.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
In 1940's Indiana, all the hyperimaginative Ralphie (Peter Billingsley)
wanted for Christmas was a genuine Red Ryder 200-shot Carbine Action Air
Rifle.  Not much to ask for, right?
Not if you ask Ralphie's Mom (Melinda Dillon), who firmly believes that
he'd shoot his eye out.  Ralphie's Dad (Darren McGavin) doesn't have
much to say on the subject, though; he's too busy fending off the
dreaded Bumpus Hounds, fighting a furnace that fights him back, and
considering what to do with the Major Prize he received from "Italy".
Ralphie's little brother Randy (Ian Petrella) is no help either; Randy
has his hands full making a mountain out of a molehill of mashed
potatoes.  And on top of all that, Ralphie, his brother, and his friends
Flick (Scott Schwartz) and Schwartz (R.D. Robb) find themselves under
the tyranny of neighborhood bully Scut Farcus (Zack Ward) and his
diminutive friend Yano Anaya (Grover Dill).  If only Ralphie had his
trusty Old Blue BB gun, he'd save the day!
His English teacher, Miss Shields (Tedde Moore), might just be Ralphie a
save-the-day chance, when she assigns his class a normally-dreaded Theme
to write.  And this year's theme? "What I Want For Christmas".
The Upshot:
Another reason for my not having reviewed this movie until now, is that
I found myself a little overwhelmed by the task.  How does one describe,
in short form, the smiles and shrieks of laughter one has experienced
over more than 15 years of seeing the same great movie over and over,
without sounding like a babbling, fanboyish fool who talks too much?
Wait...don't answer that...
Strangely enough, for quite a few of those years, I never even saw A
CHRISTMAS STORY  in its entirety; I didn't see it during its original
theatrical run, and every time I'd catch it on TV, I'd almost literally
*catch* it on TV, usually while channel surfing during the
otherwise-boring Christmas TV Season.  In fact, it wasn't until about a
year or so ago that I finally got a chance to see it all the way
through.  Boy, I sure didn't know what I was missing.
A CHRISTMAS STORY is a rare combination of solid, unwhitewashed family
fare, and down home humor, wrapped up with a pretty bow by a stellar
cast, a surprisingly good director, and a brilliant storyteller
("writer", I've always thought, is too small a word for those talented
few who can tell Stories that are as meaningful when spoken aloud as
they are on paper).
The 1940's never seemed as much fun as it did in "Christmas", and that's
as it should be.  Previous depictions of The Good Old Days were
downright *boring*.  Not so with this retelling; though A CHRISTMAS
STORY was an 80's flick, it had none of the earmarks of that bizarre
period in history, and unless I miss my guess, it kept the spirit of
Jean Shepard's novel intact.  That Shepard, with his distinctive voice
and storytelling flair, acted as narrator, only added to the authentic
feel of "Christmas".
Ralphie's friends, family, and neighborhood, resonated with me because
it reminded me of the close-knit, but slightly warped, neighborhood of
my youth.  Much of the credit for the genuine atmosphere of the
last-nameless family certainly goes to the actors playing them.  In the
non-cutesy roles of the imaginative Ralphie and his goofy younger
brother Randy, Peter Billingsley and Ian Petrella (respectively) have a
freshness untainted by the smartaleckyness of a Macauley Culkin in the
irritating HOME ALONE series.  I Felt Melinda Dillon's (humorous) Pain
as Mom when she tried, and failed, to eat a hot meal for want of
satisfying her family's need for a second helping; but while her
stay-at-home Mom was certainly a product of her times, she had a spark
in her eye and a strength in her voice that let the audience know that
her Time would, surely, come.  Supporting players like Scott Schwartz as
the triple-dog-dared Flick, Tedde Moore as the put-upon teacher, Zack
Ward and Yano Anaya as big bully Scut Farkus and his shortstuff toady
Grover Dill, round out a brilliantly-realized cast.
But for me, "Christmas" was delivered on the talents of actor Darren
McGavin as the turkey-lovin', furnace-fightin', hounddog-hatin',
cussin'-up-a-storm Dad.  I kid you not: tears *roll* whenever I watch
the histronics Dad goes through whenever he's tackling any of life's
tough problems - like what to do with his Major Award and such.
McGavin, for me, was nothing less than perfect playing a role with as
much versatility, considering previous (and future) dramatic roles he's
played, as a Robert De Niro would come to possess.
And just color me Floored when I found out that Bob Clark, director of
that cinematic wonder called PORKY'S, helmed "Christmas".  It's like
night and day: A CHRISTMAS STORY is about as far away from PORKY'S as
SUPERNOVA is from being a real movie.  [Of course, Clark went on later
in his career to direct the horrid BABY GENIUSES.  Go figure].  In any
case, I tip my hat to Clark for his excellent eye and ear for what was
needed to let the fabulous Jean Shepard's lovingly-told tale, come to
pass.  Which reminds me: I have to look for the book "Christmas" was
based on, Shepard's novel "In God We Trust, All Others Pay Cash", to
read over the holidays.  If it's true what They say about films made
from books - "the book is always better than the movie" - reading that
novel will be a good gift to myself.
I gotta cut this overlong review; I could go on and on about this film,
and I'd *still* leave something out ["fa ra ra ra ra"...awww mannnnn, my
sides hurt just thinking about it].  No matter how many times I watch A
CHRISTMAS STORY, I can't help but to grin when Ralphie Goes Off on Ol'
Yellow Eyes, or when Dad rassles with the Bumpus Hounds, or when the
pre-bulimic Randy plays This Little Piggy, or when Flick demonstrates
one more place one shouldn't put one's tongue, or when Mom plays with
Dad's Ball, or...hell, just go watch the movie; you'll see what I mean!
DVD Thingies:
If there's anything wrong with this "Christmas" DVD, it'd have to be the
lack of extras.  There aren't any special DVD Thingies to speak of,
though seeing the original trailer was kind of a kick.  And having no
widescreen option, made Bammer an unhappy camper; I know more than a few
lovers of this "Story" groused at having to watch it in pan & scan on
DVD (though that's better than all the editing that happens to it on
commercial TV).  But I'm easy; I'd watch this movie against a brick wall
if I had to, it's *that* good.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I need to stop being such a "save the best for last" kinda Chick; my
review about one of the mostest bestest movies I've ever seen, should've
been posted long ago, sorry.  A CHRISTMAS STORY is the kind of genuinely
heartwarming, yet sincerely funny, family flick that you wouldn't mind
watching at any time of the year.  DVD Thingies or no, it's a worthy
addition to your movie shelf.
A CHRISTMAS STORY (rating: greenlight):
Remember, kids: you'll shoot your eye out!

Author
Brian Koller
Back in December, the cable station TNT showed "A Christmas Story"
twelve consecutive times.  The film has become the most televised
Christmas movie, relegating "It's a Wonderful Life" to benchwarmer
status.
It is a story of about one month of Ralphie's life.  Ralphie
is a boy, about nine years old, growing up in a middle class
neighborhood during the (late?) 1930s.  He dreams of getting
a BB gun for Christmas, waits anxiously for his Little Orphan
Annie package to arrive in the mail, and suffers indignities
at the hands of the local bully.  The narrator is Ralphie
grown up, and his nostalgic and whimsical (but never patronizing)
comments bring across what it feels like to be a kid.
My favorite narrated line is "getting ready for school was
like preparing for deep sea diving", delivered as the kid
brother is weighed down by layers of winter clothing.
Darren McGavin plays Ralphie's father.  His character is
excitable and gregarious, and he plays it so winningly that
you forget that he is old enough to be Ralphie's grandfather.
Why is "A Christmas Story" so popular?  Because it's funny!
It is a rare comedy in which nearly all the scenes work, and
repeated viewings only add to the fun, since one catches things
that were missed the first time around.  For example, before the
mother sets out to "accidently" break father's ridiculous 
leg lamp, she has a knowing look on her face and has waited until
father is distracted by fighting the wheezing furnace.  And when
father whispers to mother the shocking obscenity that Ralphie
had just uttered, his young brother leans forward to overhear
with a huge grin on his face.
There is a department store Santa who definitely does not have
the Christmas spirit, and his elf helpers are even more surly
than he is.  One of the most intimidating Santas in film history,
it is no wonder that kids start crying as soon as they are dragged
by elf helpers to his lap.  Great stuff.
Only a few minor criticisms.  A joke about the word 'fragile'
doesn't come off.  Also, the film may have been secretly funded
by the milk lobby, as many kitchen scenes feature a large, full
milk bottle, and then there's the decoder ring secret...
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
