Title
Review for Sommersby (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Louis Butler
     SOMMERSBY is a remake of a wonderful French movie called THE RETURN
OF MARTIN GUERRE, which, in turn, is based on court transcripts from the
16th Century in France.  THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE was the first movie
I saw with Gerard Depardieu, and it is well worth seeing.  However, I am
not sure if it is available on video or not.
     The basic story involves a man (Richard Gere) who returns from the
Civil War claiming to be Jack Sommersby.  It quickly becomes rather
obvious that he is *not* Jack, but, unlike MARTIN GUERRE, that isn't
really the point.  The point revolves around Laurel Sommersby (Jodie
Foster) and her relationship with this man who refuses to acknowledge
that he is not Jack Sommersby.
     What we get is a wonderful interaction between Gere and Foster, an
involving plot, and a perfectly executed ending.  No Hollywood
balderdash, just honest storytelling.  Those of you who saw the original
are in for quite a ride, since the movie does not wind up at all like
the original.
     Foster is magnificent, as always.  Her accent is absolute
perfection again, and in this regard she is beginning to remind me very
much of Meryl Streep.  Foster has an uncanny ability to metamorphose
into anything imaginable.  I'm convinced she could bring dramatic flair
to something as empty as Judy Jetson.
     Gere turns in what I think is his best performance, though I am not
familiar with all of his films.  There is an intensity in him that is
never quite completely hidden, and a slick charm that is disarming and
not at all offensive.
     The courtroom scene with Gere and Foster would be worth sitting
through an agonizingly bad movie in itself, the tension in Foster as
Gere questions her is a perfectly executed balance routine.
Fortunately, the entire movie is not terrible, but rather quite
charming.
     I heartily recommend this movie, and if the Oscars have a good
memory, we may see at least a nomination for Foster out of this.  I
wouldn't be surprised to see Gere gain some respectability from this
role, and I think it would be well deserved.
     Recommendation:  See THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE, and possibly read
the book.

Author
Gregory N. Bond
(This has just opened in Australia - it may be old news for the rest
of you.)
     This film is basically a reworking of the film THE RETURN OF
MARTIN GUERRE which in turn taken from the book THE WIFE OF MARTIN
GUERRE, which in turn is a dramatisation of real court records dating
from the French 100 years war around A. D. 1350.  Rather than set in
medieval France, the setting is the southern United States just after
the end of the United States Civil War.  John Sommersby (Gere), an
apparently cruel and cold man and the richest man in the local area,
has gone off to the war.  He has been missing six years, and, just as
his wife (Foster) is preparing to remarry, a man who may or may not be
her husband returns to claim his wife, his property and the loyalty of
the local town.  He has obviously been changed by four years in a
prison camp; his wife finds the new Mr. Sommersby a much more
attractive person and falls in love with him in a way she never had
before he went to war.  The film climaxes in a court case where
Sommersby is charged with a murder committed some time earlier.  Should
he be proved to *not* be Sommersby he would get off, otherwise he will
hang.  Is he really Sommersby? Would he pretend not to be in order to
get off?  Will he prove he is and die?
     This film is in large part a story of the (re-)discovered romance
between Foster and Gere.  The crux of the film is the uncertainty
around the identity of Gere's character.  Both leads handle the strong
ambiguity in the relationship well, and the developing affection is
well told.  The audience is not absolutely certain whether Gere is or
is not the actual Sommersby until the end (although the hints are
pretty obvious).  It is this ambiguity that gives the film its power
and appeal.  The final court case, where the questions of loyalty,
love, betrayal and identity are exposed, is powerfully moving.
     Acting from the supporting cast is excellent, including James Earl
Jones as the judge in the climactic court case.  Gere, despite his
reputation, succeeds in conveying the pain, the turmoil and the
ambiguity.  We the audience really feel for his character and
understand his motives in the final scenes (quite unexpected from
Hollywood, and potentially very unconvincing).  Foster is brilliant in
conveying the love, the doubt, the faith.  Also very impressive is the
photography - the landscapes, the scenery is spectacular.  Go and see
it on the wide screen; much of the impact will be lost on the video.
     One thing that was definitely surprising was the audience
reaction.  One of the witnesses in the court case is a true son of the
south and a "nigger-hater."  He insults the (black) judge and gets sixty
days in "our sadly uncomfortable correctional facility."  At that
point, the whole audience cheered and clapped.  Obviously, we're all
very Politically Correct.
     Unlike (I believe) the original story, where the real Guerre turns
up in the court case and it all ends in an anticlimax, the real
Sommersby is dead (buried during the opening credits), and the imposter
admits it to his wife.  This is after he has proved to the judge that
he is the real Sommersby, and been sentenced to hang.  And, bugger me
dead, he is actually hung.  This came as a bit of a shock, as I
expected the usual Hollywood happy-ever-after ending, and was (in the
back of my mind) considering how they might get out of the developing
situation.  To the credit of the director (British, not American!), he
stuck to the artistically correct ending and wasn't pressured into
diluting it, and the film is much more powerful because of it.  And
despite expectations, the end is actually quite uplifting, thanks in no
small part to the strength of Gere's acting in portraying the noble
nature of a liar and cheat grappling with honesty and love for the
first time.
--
Gregory Bond  Burdett Buckeridge & Young Ltd Melbourne Australia

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Richard Gere, Jodie Foster, Bill Pullman, James Earl Jones, 
           Lanny Flaherty
Director:  John Amiel
Producers:  Arnon Milchan and Steven Reuther
Screenplay:  Nicholas Meyer and Sarah Kernochan
Music:  Danny Elfman
Released by Warner Brothers
     The United States Civil War has ended and Jack Sommersby (Richard
Gere) is returning home to a farm in ruins and a wife (Jodie Foster)
who wishes he was dead.  It's up to Jack to prove is that he's no
longer the person he was six years ago when he left.  Gone is the man
who gambled and beat his wife, newly replaced by someone of a giving
and caring nature.  Yet even as Jack begins to assemble a new
beginning, questions of identity arise--his identity.  Could Jack
Sommersby change this much, or is this really him at all?
     SOMMERSBY is based on the 1982 French film THE RETURN OF MARTIN 
GUERRE, and is one of those rare remakes that does not tarnish the image
of its inspiration.  While SOMMERSBY owes much to its predecessor, it is
not a direct copy.  There are differences, not only in setting, but in
scripting.  With the exception of a few early scenes lifted almost
directly from MARTIN GUERRE, only the general direction of the movies
remains the same.  As a result of a cleverly-written screenplay,
SOMMERSBY manages to be faithful to the essence of MARTIN GUERRE while
also crafting a story that is different in specifics.  The transition
from 16th Century France to 19th Century America works better than I
had dared hope, and allows a few surprises for those who are familiar
with MARTIN GUERRE.  
     First and foremost, SOMMERSBY is a love story.  Much screen time is
devoted to the relationship between Jack and Laurel.  The movie takes
its time with its characters; there are no sudden epiphanies.  Love,
and its realization, comes slowly, with a look and a touch.  SOMMERSBY
is a perfect example of a film that can be erotic without nudity or
overt sexual displays.
     In many ways, this film goes against the grain of a typical
Hollywood film.  It has a slow, leisurely pace, and is almost (but not
quite--there is one fight scene) devoid of action.  It will be
interesting to see how audiences react to this sort of picture, and
whether the names of Gere and Foster have enough box-office draw to
bring out enough of an audience to trigger what will invariably be a
positive word-of-mouth.
     In SOMMERSBY, Richard Gere gives one of his most energetic
performances in recent years.  After a slew of films through which he
has drifted with little display of emotion or talent, Gere manages to
imbue Jack Sommersby with life.  This isn't the performance of a career,
but it's effective enough to allow us to accept the picture's title
character as a person.
     Jodie Foster outdoes her SILENCE OF THE LAMBS performance, again
showing why she is among today's most sought-after talents.  Foster
plays Laurel with equal parts of strength and believability.  Often in
period pieces such as this, forceful female characters seem
anachronistic.  SOMMERSBY shows that with good scripting and even better
acting, that problem can easily be overcome.
     Technically, SOMMERSBY is a superior production.  Period details
abound and the cinematography is consistently strong, and occasionally
breathtaking.  Virginia is shown to its best advantage.  Composer Danny
Elfman, best known for his BATMAN score, delivers something
refreshingly different for this film.  Occasionally the music is
imperfectly matched to the scene, but the typical Elfman repetition is
absent.  This is his most original work to date.
     SOMMERSBY should equally entertain those who have seen THE RETURN
OF  MARTIN GUERRE and those who have not.  From start to finish, it is a
well-crafted film: part love story, part mystery, and all drama.
Attention has been paid to detail, and the most painful and obvious of
Hollywood's contrivances are nowhere to be found.  With respect to
MARTIN GUERRE, SOMMERSBY is not a "rip-off".  It can legitimately be
viewed as an homage--the spirit of the story remains intact.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The day I am writing this review Siskel and Ebert had an episode in
which they reviewed five films of which four--SOMMERSBY, THE VANISHING,
HOMEWARD BOUND, and GUN CRAZY--are remakes.  There are hard choices to make
when you remake somebody else's film.  Do you just reproduce the original or
do you vary things?  When you vary the telling, can you really improve on
the original?  Does your film have something to offer people who have seen
the original?  SOMMERSBY is a rather remarkable remake of the 1982 film THE
RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE.  SOMMERSBY is Nicholas Meyer and Anthony Shaffer's
retelling of the MARTIN GUERRE story with some very ironic complexities
added.  And there is enough complexity in this film that, in fact, it may be
a better film the first time through if you have some idea what twists are
coming.  Meyer and Shaffer have balanced their story so it is equally
rewarding if you have or have not seen the original.
     The Civil War has been over for two years in Vine Hill, Tennessee, and
Laurel Sommersby (played by Jodie Foster) is about ready to declare herself
a widow and remarry.  If the truth be known, Jack Sommersby was always
better at being a "good old boy" than he was at being a husband.  But then
Jack (played by Richard Gere) returns from a Union prison camp determined to
improve Vine Hill in general and his marriage in specific.  His six-year
absence has made a new man of Jack, so much so that people start to question
if perhaps this new man might really not be Jack.  Jack sets about trying to
fix up the war-ravaged valley and to give a boost to the economy.  Or is he
just trying a confidence scheme?  What Jack is doing and why he is doing it
make this a very different film from the original.  One negative touch is
that the film's attitudes towards race relations seem a bit anachronistic,
but they are not quite as pat as they first seem.
     Kudos goes to Meyer and Shaffer's story which was adapted by Meyer and
Sarah Kernochen into a screenplay.  Director John Amiel, who also directed
television's "Singing Detective," gives us a complex story beautifully
photographed to give a strong post-Civil War feel.  While the score has a
much more traditional tone than most of Danny Elfman's scores, it is a very
likable, melodic score.  SOMMERSBY is at least satisfying and often is
poignant.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
