Title
Review for Leningrad Cowboys Go America (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Lon Ponschock
     It's got accordions in it.  There's cool points for that.  And
subtitles but not many and ... what else?  Oh yeah, the hair.  The
hair is really good.  And the shoes are excellent: just the right
touch.
     If Richard Lester (A HARD DAY'S NIGHT, HELP!) were Finnish, he'd
be Aki Kaurismaki.  And remember, we have a lot of Finnish brethren and
sistren around here.  I run into the Valmet folks all the time.  Here
is an example of Finnish humor at it's most deadpan farcical best: a
Monty Python meets the Flying Burrito Brothers.
     The Leningrad Cowboys are a rock 'n' roll band.  They sometimes
play accordions, but mostly they are a rock 'n' roll band.
     Trust me, LENINGRAD COWBOYS is a lot of fun ... a road movie with
music and Jim Jarmusch (MYSTERY TRAIN, A NIGHT ON EARTH) in a used car
lot.  The band goes from Russia to New York, New Orleans, Texas and
finally Mexico where the accordions and all that come in handy again.
I have tried to explain my love of accordions often whether it be
Conjunto, Zydeco or Oompah music, but alas, accordions are apparently
for discriminating tastes.
     I usually watch these vids by myself.  The sign of a good vid is
if you can pop your fingers and laugh out loud by yourself.  A really
good film like this one will remove all the inhibitions associated with
self-entertainment. ;-)
     Well-directed with a style bordering ... no, right *in* the country
of the absurd LENINGRAD COWBOYS GO AMERICA could be a modern classic if
somebody saw it besides me.  I guess it's the kind of show that is not
recognized by the slackers because it is too low brow and not
appreciated by the "film buffs" because ... well ... no one else saw it
*before* them.
     You can watch it and then amaze your friends with your subtle cool
taste and international erudition.  But mostly it's just plain good
fun.

Author
Will FitzHugh
Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki (the Finnish Akira Kurosawa?) gives us
a deadpan, droll comedy about a Russian band going to America.  In the
grand tradition of road movies ('Easy Rider', 'Thelma & Louise',
'Wagons West', that sort of thing) that use physical travel as a
substitute for any real character development or plot, this one ups the
ante and gets rid of all but the most basic characters and dialog as
well.  That's ok, though, because these guys are masters of every genre
of music, dress like freaks (fur coats, unicorn-like hair and really
pointy shoes) and let nothing stand in their way as they travel across
America to a gig at a Mexican wedding.
There are some great scenes as the band tries out for a New York
promoter, fails to impress, and buys a huge Caddy (from Jim Jarmusch,
no less) to drive across country.  Did I mention that they've carted
their dead bass player all the way from Finland, packed in ice?  This
comes in handy as their domineering manager uses the casket (tied to
the top of the car) to keep his supply of Budweiser cold.  He forces
the band to subsist on crumbs while he sucks down the brews.  They get
a few gigs in middle America, with varying results, and in a stirring
scene, meet a long-lost cousin working at a gas station.  By this time
they've revolted against their manager and the cousin takes over as
singer.  They experience an emotional rebirth and their final gig at
the wedding is a rousing success.
'Leningrad Cowboys' raised a few questions for me.  Is this a real
band?  And where can I get a t-shirt?  I guess they are; they played at
some MTV thing a couple of years back.  Is this some kind of joke?
Well of course it is, but like the best jokes (Butthole Surfers, Flann
O'Brien's 'At Swim-To-Birds') they never acknowledge that it's anything
but reality.  I've noticed that some people have a hard time dealing
with this kind of humor, probably because part of the joke's on the
audience.  These are the same kind of people who made Stephen Spielberg
a millionaire and think Jim Carrey is the next Jerry Lewis (whatever
the fuck that means).  These people can play the Malcolm MacDowell
character in my own personal 'Clockwork Orange', forced to watch this
movie while tied down and having their eyelids pulled back painfully by
little wire things fashioned out of the paper clips in my desk drawer.
In fact, I've been having happy recurring daydreams about it.
