Title
Review for Xizao (1999)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ross Anthony
For a filmed entitled, "Shower" there's an awful lot of bathing going on. A
business man/estranged son receives a card from his retarded younger brother
seemingly indicating that their father has died. Hence, the older brother
makes a trip to northern China only to find the father still alive. This
unexpected reunion is a catalyst for retying untied family ties. It's sweet
and unique; a charming story sure to move you.
The father and younger brother operate an old fashion bathhouse in northern
China complete with cricket fights, Chinese chess, and bickering old men.
Unfortunately, the bathhouse is an endangered species in an ancient part of
town soon to be lost to modernization.
"Shower" is a sweet little drama, warm and homey, like a fireplace or a hot
bath. And though it moves gently, the pace is perfect, occasionally
punctuated by a loud audio hit, like a thunderbolt or throaty wisp of coal
fire, to keep you from getting too comfortable.
The filmmakers leave a few buckets of backstory untold; namely, the reasons
for the ill will between the father and older son. However, this not only
frees us to enjoy the story at hand, but also gives the film another element
of curious allure. Though still not necessary, eventually the father
explains the reason for the separation. Fortunately, he doesn't expend more
than a sentence on this rather expository history.
To nit-pick one last time, the film takes another baby step too far while
discussing the neighborhood, "The buildings are like old people, no matter
how much you fix them up ... they're still old." It's a fine analogy that
would have been made stronger by letting the voice remain metaphoric. The
"Like old people" interjection subtracts from the profundity; it's
redundant, we can already see those words in the old man's eyes!
But these are petty grievances, the bulk of this flick is high quality story
telling. I quite enjoyed it! (In Mandarin with English Subtitles)
Shower. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Zhu Xu, Pu Cun Xin, Jiang Wu, He Zheng, Zhang Jin Hao, Lao Lin, Lao
Wu.
Director/Editor/Writer Zhang Yang.
Produced by Peter Loehr a Sony Classics Release.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 SHOWER (XIZAO) (director/editor: Zhang Yang; screenwriters: Liu Fen
 Dou/Mr. Zhang/Huo Xin/ Diao Yi Nan/Cai Xiang Jun; cinematographer:
 Zhang Jian; editor: Yang Hong Yu; cast: Zhu Xu (Master Liu), Pu Cun
 Xin (Da Ming), Jiang Wu (Er Ming), He Zheng (He Bing), Zhang Jin Hao
 (Bei Bei), Lao Lin (Li Ding), Lao Wu (Feng Shun); Runtime: 92; Sony
 Pictures Classics; 1999-China)
Zhang Yang's bittersweet dramatic comedy, "Shower," is meant to be a
crowd pleaser. Its manipulative and sugary story is set in modern
Beijing. When Da Ming (Pu Cun Xin) received a postcard from his retarded
younger brother Er Ming (Jiang Wu) of a picture of his elderly father
lying on his bed, he assumed that his father passed away and decided to
leave his business duties in southern China's region of Shenzhen to see
for himself. Why he didn't phone is a mystery to me, since he doesn't
seem to go anywhere without his cell phone. The only reason I can think
of him making the journey home, is that since he had no contact with his
father, Master Li (Zhu Xu), for a long period of time, maybe he thought
he would use this as an excuse to see how everything is going at home.
Before he visits his father, he takes an ultra-modern shower, one which
squirts water at him from all directions, like in a car wash. When he
enters his father's bathhouse, he enters an old-fashioned world, one in
which he doesn't care for. When he's spotted, he's warmly greeted by Er
Ming. But his father greets him apprehensively, wondering why he came.
Master Li has run a popular bathhouse in the old part of town for a
longtime and Er Ming is happy being his assistant, happiest when
greeting the customers at the front desk. Da Ming could never see
himself fitting into this lifestyle and left his widowed father to
achieve material success and a new life far away from him. When he takes
a long look at the place he can't forget, all those memories come
flashing back to him, and he decides to stay for the evening and return
to his wife the next day. The conversation between the two is guarded,
as the only penetrating question the father asks is, Are the noodles as
good in the south?
For Master Li, the place is not just a bathhouse where his customers get
a massage and a shave, and sit in the warm steam bath pools slowly
passing the time conversing and laughing, getting things off their chest
while they are in a relaxed state of mind, but is a magical place where
the old man knows he's really good at what he does and feels proud that
he could serve his community in this manner. It is his whole life. He
also has a great love for Er Ming, taking special care of the childlike
adult and playing childish games with him, like racing around the block
and having matches to see who can hold his breath the longest
underwater, while Er Ming reciprocates this love like a dog does to his
master.
The steambath customers are a varied lot of mostly lovable characters,
ranging from the elderly to an overweight teenage boy who wants to sing
"O Sole Mio" at a neighborhood cultural event, but freezes in public and
can only sing in the shower. There is a man who raises crickets and
arranges for bets on cricket fights at the bathhouse. Another man has
big business plans but none of them turn out right, as creditors come
into the bathhouse to collect from him. One of Master Li's better
customers is having problems staying home as his irate wife is beating
and nagging him, and in a moment of complete trust he tells the Master
it is because I have become impotent. Master Li has time to listen to
all these problems and give them his proper attention, as he is
everything to his customers, from physical therapist-to sexual
therapist-to sage.
The film's more serious message, is of the family's estranged
relationship.The story also looks into the family's roots in northern
China, seen through flashbacks the father has, where water was scarce
and was viewed as the most precious resource there is, a healer of all
life's ills. The film also questions the modern world and its constant
strivings for progress, which result in ripping up traditional
neighborhoods and families.
As tragedy suddenly hits home for the serious-minded son, he is now
viewed as someone who in his short stay has begun to absorb his father's
kindly wisdom for the first time and recognizes the need for a family to
be held together by love. There is a real change that has happened to
him inside, as he begins to look at what values things really have
instead of looking at things only as a materialist.
Director Zhang Yang has created a graceful, masculine film (all the main
characters are male and the story is told from their view), avoiding for
the most part the sentimentality that could have sunk the film, if
handled by a lesser director.
This mainstream, middle-brow, foreign film was the winner of audience
awards at festivals at Rotterdam and all over Europe and Asia, which
means it clicked with varous audiences because of its universal appeal.
Though, I thought, to make his point about the old and new China, he
pulled out too many old contrived tricks out of the hat, from the
bathhouse being torn down and replaced by a shopping mall, to a retarded
brother stealing the film with his comical and good-natured appeal. Yet
what I found to be outright fascinating, was the strong relationship
between the wonderfully benevolent Zhu Xu (The King of Masks), an actor
who has a certain magical screen presence, and the gifted actor who
played his retarded son, Jiang Wu, and the equally gifted actor Pu Cun
Xin who as the older son, was used by the director to signify how well
the transition was going in China from the old to the new. But what
interested me most about Shower, is that it gave me a chance to observe
everyday life in a country that has been closed to the West, and the
film has done it in a most endearing way. Other than that, I still found
the story too sweet for my taste.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Gordon Bass
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Gordon Bass.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2ff1155b5ca0201988256916001bf2b4?OpenDocument
China's a funny place today. Old men in Mao suits perform morning
stretches in the shadow of dot-com billboards. Cell-phone toting kids
cruise on beat-up bikes. And the crowd at McDonald's is notably more
enthusiastic than the one protesting at the American embassy around the
corner. 
But what's the price of progress? In Shower, Zhang Yang looks at the
widening chasm between old-school China and its Gen-Y offspring, while
playing a warm eastern riff on the return home of the prodigal son.
Businessman Da Ming represents the new generation; he's a wealthy, weary
frequent flier in a rumpled coat and tie. His father, Master Liu, is old
China; he happily runs a bathhouse in a fading Beijing neighborhood
where he lives with Da Ming's mentally handicapped younger brother Er
Ming.
Da Ming, who lives in a prosperous area of southern China, makes a
reluctant trip to Beijing under the mistaken impression that his father
is dead, only to find him alive and well. He'd love to turn right around
and head home, but agrees to spend a few days in his old family
home--which is nothing more than a room behind the deteriorating
bathhouse.
>From the start Da Ming fidgets with his cell phone, cringes at the
antiquated lifestyle of his father and brother, and itches to leave. Why
waste time in a bathhouse when you can take a five-minute shower, after
all? But after a few days in Beijing he begins to see the bathhouse for
what it is: A gathering place for the neighborhood men, a refuge from
work and wives and home life. The idiosyncratic bathhouse customers are
an extended family, and provide comic relief to the story. Retired
cronies pit fighting crickets against one another in battles that test
friendships. A young schemer hides when his get-rich-quick scheme fails
and the loan sharks are threatening. A meek husband escapes from his
domineering wife.
Sadly, the bathhouse is slated for demolition along with the rest of the
neighborhood since space is needed for anonymous hi-rise apartment
complexes. Da Ming sees Master Liu's health start to fail as the
neighborhood's days tick away; Liu's life is inextricably intertwined
with the fate of the neighborhood. It's the end of an era, and
modernity, as we've seen over and over, doesn't always equal progress
(imagine what a billion new cars and refrigerators and showers are going
to do to China's already rotten environment).
So this is Cinema 101. So the symbolism is as old as storytelling. The
bathhouse is an oasis in the midst of change, with water that renews
life and purifies. The wayward son returns home to redeem himself. And
the retarded brother is the only one who can see clearly what the
bathhouse means to the family and community. But Yang keeps the story
real, the actors (veterans of mainstream and experimental Chinese
theater) turn in restrained and moving performances, and in a summer of
tired action retreads, this heart-bendingly beautiful film is a cool
drink of grown-up pleasure.
Director: Zhang Yang
Producer: Peter Loehr
Writer: Liu Fen Dou, Zhang Yang, Diao Yi Nan, Cai Xiang Jun
Starring: Zhu Lu, Pu Cun Xin, Jiang Wu, He Zheng, Hu Bei Bei, Lin Ding,
Feng Shun
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Steve Rhodes
Yang Zhang's SHOWER is a tale about the fragility of life and the
importance of friendships and family.  Set against the backdrop of a
decades-old communal bathhouse, the story celebrates the simple
pleasures of life, not the least of which being a long soak while
kibitzing with your old buddies.
The movie opens with a suited gentleman getting quickly cleansed in a
fully automated shower, almost exactly like a car wash.  It is fast,
efficient and mechanical, everything that the bathhouse owned all of his
life by Mr. Liu (Zhu Xu) isn't.
This sweet little film charms us with its innocent images while never
becoming saccharine.  As it explores father-to-son and
brother-to-brother relationships, the script and the acting do not have
a moment that doesn't ring true.
Mr. Liu's son Da Ming (Pu Cun Xin) is a businessman who comes home for a
visit by mistake.  Da Ming's mentally-challenged brother, Er Ming (Jiang
Wu), sent his brother a postcard that Da Ming took to mean that their
father had died.
While there, an old friend pitches Da Ming a get-rich-quick business
scheme -- not another dot-com, but the idea of fifty hot dog stands.
With perfect irony, the two are inside an automated car wash at the
time.
Most of the movie has the bathhouse regulars -- who have a median age of
about 70 -- spend the day hanging out with each other as they bathe,
talk, sleep, drink tea and get massaged.  One of the major pastimes
involves cricket battles in which -- horrors! -- one guy cheats.
The sweetly innocent times are interrupted by a story that harkens back
to an even simpler time still.  In a remote mountain region of China, it
rains less than once a year we are told.  In the story, the poor natives
swap bowls of grain for bowls of water so that the young girl being
married can have the traditional bath before her wedding.  (The girl,
miraculously, is sparkling clean even before she enters the water.)
Among the many delightful subplots is one concerning a shower singer.
He belts out "O Solo Mio" with foghorn intensity so long as the water
flows.  Cut off his supply of H2O and his vocal chords collapse.
Nothing lasts forever.  The bathhouse and all of the buildings around it
are to be demolished in the name of progress.  In their place will be a
large high-rise apartment complex.  The problem with such buildings,
points out one of Mr. Liu's regulars, is that crickets don't go above
the ground floor.
After watching SHOWER, progress doesn't look quite so sweet anymore.
SHOWER runs 1:32.  The official reason for its being rated PG-13 is for
"language and nudity."  Well, excuse me.  I don't recall any profanity
and the nudity comes from some very discrete glimpses of men's rears in
the bath.  To lump this in with crude PG-13-rated films like THE IN
CROWD and BIG MOMMA'S HOUSE is a travesty.  Consider SHOWER to be a PG
film.  It should be fine for any kid old enough to be interested in the
story and able to read the English subtitles -- the film is in Mandarin.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   To my knowledge, no other picture made on the Chinese
mainland for worldwide distribution opens with quite the flair
of this one.  A pulsating drumbeat adds rhythm to a crisply
dressed young man's brisk walk to an ATM in a spanking city
whose downtown area seems filled with all the urbanity of
New York's Rockefeller Center.  He enters a building, takes
off his clothes which are to be quickly dry cleaned, inserts
some coins in an automatic laundry, and puts himself under a
shower.  More like a car wash, this is like no shower that
you'll find even in the United States.  Large brushes twirl
around hitting his body, then retreating, only to attack the
gentleman again, massaging his back while adding soap and
washing him off.  Overhead dryers discharge torrents of hot
air that make his hair stand on end.  He leaves the shower,
picks up his newly-pressed clothes, and he's off.  End of
drumbeat.  For a few minutes you might think you've
wandered into the trailer for a James Bond movie.  This is a
China that most of us in the West do not know, a place in
which at least a lucky proportion of the 1.3 billion population
are making the big ones.  In fact you might even think that
director Zhang Yang, whose work was recently featured at
New York's New Directors/New Films series, is feeding us
propaganda from the moment the protagonist gets his own
brainwashing under the steamy torrents of water.
   The big irony is that we are indeed receiving propaganda
but of a sort opposite that which we have been led to believe. 
If Zhang is not exactly prescribing a return to communism in
China, he is at least shedding some cinematic tears over its
demise.  We're not talking about the totalitarian communism
practiced by Chairman Mao or about the forced labor of the
commune, but the kind of communism that emphasizes the
word's root: community.  Community, to Zhang, is being lost
in China's race to prosper, in its abandoning of the basic
principles of neighborhood, a common trust, a one-big-family
spirit missing in the West.
   But "Shower" is anything but a dull political tract: in fact
politics as such does not even enter the picture.  This is a
sincere, appropriately sentimental and often humorous look at
an old man's family, one which has seen its eldest son
deserting the fold to go for the riches of the southern Chinese
industrial district of Shenzhen while his dad and his retarded
brother remain behind in battered Beijing surroundings.  
   Stories of sons reaching out to their estranged fathers
when the time for reconciliation is virtually past are not
uncommon, but Zhang gives this strain a uniquely Chinese
beat.  The story opens with panache as yuppie Da Ming (Pu
Cun Xin), having given himself a razzle-dazzle wash-up, flies
north to Beijing believing that his father, Master Liu (Zhu Xu),
has died.  Looking with disappointment, even scorn, on his
mentally challenged brother, Er Ming (Jiang Wu), he is
nonetheless relieved to see that his father is still very much
alive, and happily running a broken-down bathhouse that
accommodates mostly elderly men.  While the older man
provides the hot water in which the customers communally
bathe as though in a prehistoric version of a Japanese tub,
he massages their backs and strokes their egos, dispensing
avuncular advice about issues ranging from domestic
relations to the care and training of fighting crickets.  The
men drink tea, play chess, and watch their cricket matches,
occasionally disturbed by the resonant singing of "O Sole
Mio" by a chubby teen patron--who is able to sing only when
water pours about his body.  
   Da Ming sees his father for the first time...a man who
lovingly takes care of his handicapped son, racing him around
the block and competing with him in the water, and being
looked up to by the motley denizens of the bathhouse--which
provides even pedicures among its various services.  As Da
Ming and Master Liu become re-acquainted, the older man
tells his career-oriented son the almost mythical story of his
meeting decades ago with his wife, who had come from a dry
and dusty region of China which provided few baths indeed
for its citizens.  Young Da Ming becomes aware of the
spiritual poverty of his own urban life, later emerging as
frustrated as his dad and his father's patrons are upon
hearing the awful news that the neighborhood is being
gentrified. The baths and adjacent housing are to be torn
down to build a shopping center.
   "Shower" is a bitter-sweet tale of reconciliation that hasn't
an insincere bone in its body.  The portrayals are authentic,
the ensemble acting is appropriately muted and lively as
called for by the situations.   You cannot be blamed if you
see your own community here in the West threatened by the
sort of spirit-numbing gentrification that has taken place in the
name of progress, obviously giving this picture a universality
missing from even some of the great works of Zhang Yimou.
   The film won the FIPRESCI Award at the 1999 Toronto
Film Festival and has been exhibited--with other prizes as
well--at San Sebastian, Thessaloniki, Vancouver, Sundance
and Rotterdam.
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 92 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SHOWER (Xizao) (China, 1999) *** 1/4  Directed by Zhang Yang. Written 
by Liu Fen Dou, Mr.Zhang, Huo Xin, Diao Yi Nan and Cai Xiang Jun. 
Photography, Zhang Jian. Editing, Yang Hong Yu and Zhang Yang. Art 
director, Tian Meng. Music Ye Xiao Gang. Produced by Peter Loehr. In 
Mandarin, with English subtitles) Cast: Zhu Xu (Master Liu), Pu Cun 
Xin (Da Ming), Jiang Wu (Er Ming), He Zheng (He Bing), Zhang Jin Hao 
(Bei Bei), Lao Lin (Li Ding), Lao Wu (Feng Shun), et al. A Sony 
Pictures Classics release.  92 minutes. PG-13.
An excellent, warmer, gentler, kinder Chinese film, and a special 
case. It was made neither as a State project or with foreign moneys, 
but with funds raised within China by its American producer. It is 
the second of three highly successful features by the same 
director-producer team..   On the international festival circuit 
"Shower" has won many top or major awards (Toronto, San Sebastian, 
Thessaloniki, Rotterdam, etc.)
Chinese cinema is a force to be reckoned with nowadays.  Movies shown 
only within China's borders deal -- in politically correct ways--with 
proud accomplishments, such as Mao's famous March. Others, including 
exports, have historical themes or at least deal with the past. It is 
unusual for us to see works on the human condition today, including 
about tradition and modernism.
Shower opens with just that, a shower. In a busy downtown street of 
the modernized southern region of Shenzen, a man presses a button to 
enter a booth the size of  those portable potties used in 
construction sites or crowded public gatherings. It is The Amazing 
Automatic Shower which, like those clever Parisian street toilets 
(successfully tried in New York City but I do not know if they caught 
on) is a modern wonder.
The thing is rather like a mechanized car wash but now humans replace 
the cars. Water jets, liquid soap, rotating brushes, automatic drying 
are used in this fantastic People Wash. Our fellow takes off his 
clothes (real nudity here), safely stores them in a waterproof gizmo, 
gets a thorough mechanical going over, special massages, other 
treatments, and even an application of cups. (For the millions in the 
USA who don't know that the latter means, it consists of glass cups, 
heated inside to make a vacuum, applied to the back so that the 
vacuum raises the skin and theoretically sucks up bad humors and 
other enemies of good health. This was and maybe still is a common 
treatment for colds -- in Europe and in many other parts of the 
world.) This opening sequence of the film is by itself worth the cost 
of a theater ticket. I would like to apply for an importing license.
The Chinese never had it so good. But the scene, while wonderfully 
funny to foreign eyes as well as an impressive sample of Chinese 
technology, is also a serious, symbolic  element of melding the old 
and the new.
Cut to Beijing, which is in the North. In what seems to be a popular, 
old-fashioned, run-down neighborhood,  Master Liu runs a public 
bathhouse for men, with the help of his second son Er Ming. The 
latter always has an endearing smile, is mentally retarded, yet 
perfectly able to help with the establishment. The relationship 
between father and son is one of tremendous warmth and understanding, 
shown in discreet, un-gloppy scenes.
Er Ming's older brother Da Ming is handsome, chic,  married, and a 
modern, successful businessman. He lives in the south . Having 
received a cryptic postcard from junior brother, Da Ming thinks that 
Dad is either dead or seriously ill.  He catches the first available 
plane, he flies north... and finds Dad in seemingly good health.
The bathhouse is quite old-fashioned in an attractive way, spacious, 
well-equipped with hot tubs, hot and cold showers, steam rooms, 
massage-tables and the like. And it is more than a place for cleaning 
one's body. It is like the corner cafe in European, African, 
Middle-Eastern and other lands --and like the general store in older, 
rural US. small towns. For the customers, mostly aged regulars, it is 
a gathering place, a neighborhood club where talking, chatting, 
gossiping, arguing among friends is essential to life, where they 
cleanse their souls and minds. The elders (and some younger persons) 
drink tea, play chess, organize cricket fights. (There is no 
statement at film's end that no animals were harmed)
Master Liu is not only a host to his clients (a word that hardly 
expresses the friendly relationships) but a mediator and 
problem-solver. Some warm, often funny plot threads show this and add 
much to the film's atmosphere. The tale, however, is complicated by 
unwelcome news. Area authorities are going to tear down the entire 
outdated (?) neighborhood to make room for a modern mall.
Da Ming tarries awhile, behaves politely, but never cracks a smile. 
He must find that whole culture passé. Yet, as he prolongs his stay 
and more developments follow, there is a gradual understanding on his 
part, and like the movie's characters as well as for the audiences, 
comes a strong confirmation of how sad it is to have modernism 
displace yet not replace certain old traditions.
"Shower" is quietly rich in humanity, excellent acting and moving 
incidents. It has a lovely sense of humor, heart, sentiment --but no 
artificial sweeteners. There is even a flashback sequence (in old, 
arid Northwest China) which adds touching lyricism and symbolism to 
this first-rate urban movie.
