Title
Review for North West Frontier (1959)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Supremely enjoyable adventure yarn finds Kenneth More and Lauren
Bacall, among others, making a train trip to Delhi in 1905 India. 
British officer Captain Scott (More) is to escort a 6-year old Hindu
prince away from an uprising of Moslem rebel fanatics.  Accompanying
him are the prince's governess (Bacall), a cynical journalist (Herbert
Lom), an arms dealer, and a couple of representatives from the British
embassy.  With such a diverse group it's only likely to expect much
philosophical/political debate, and sure enough, everyone has their
say.  We don't weary of this, however, because their arguments never
sink to the level of bickering or breast-beating.  They are controlled
- almost polite - with each person a self-proclaimed expert on the
values of the others.  At any rate, they only get into discussions
while the train is on the move, and their journey is anything but
smooth.
Tidily-paced story has plenty of suspense, action, and interesting
characters.  Even though none of the passengers really know each other
they are always congenial, warm, and supportive.  Wilfrid Hyde-White's
dear old gentleman is unflappable no matter what the circumstances -
but he, like More, is simply displaying the distance of manners that
the British relied on to get them through those turbulent colonial
years.  More speaks in exactly the same snappy, chipper tone of voice
throughout the film (He's also the only one who seems to sweat) as if
he were rallying a scout troop.  It's easy to like these characters 
because they're always looking after each other.  Even  Gupta, the
Indian engine driver, has Victoria, his beloved engine, to fuss over. 
And Scott's relationship with Gupta is not of the sahib/menial
variety.  They genuinely enjoy each other's company.  It's great
seeing them relax and sing a cheerful boating song while the train
trundles along the empty frontier.  If this all sounds to good to be
true, then don't worry: there is still enough underlying tension from
one exponent of the group to provide a showdown at the film's end -
fortunately not to the expense of any of the other passengers.  Don't
you hate movies that set up characters with noble qualities just so it
will seem more poignant when they get killed off in some contrived act
of self-sacrifice?  Decent production values supply plenty of location
shooting, big crowd scenes, and wide-screen photography (I wish I'd
seen this in a cinema).  Strangely, the only image I remember from
first seeing this film years ago was that of the small prince standing
before a giant spinning flywheel.
