Title
Review for Prospero's Books (1991)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This has been a year for some unusually visual films.  We have seen a
man made from liquid metal in TERMINATOR 2.  We have seen a beautiful
animated fairy tale with BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.  But you haven't seen
anything like PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  Not this year.  Probably not any year.
Peter Greenaway retells the story of Shakespeare's TEMPEST.  Well, in a
manner of speaking, that is what Greenaway does.  It also, as the title
suggests is a tour of Prospero's books.  When the scholar and wizard
Prospero was ousted as the Duke of Milan and set adrift in a small boat, a
friend gave him his twenty-four magical books so that Prospero should not
die.  Shakespeare does not tell us what the twenty-four books are; Greenaway
walks us through the books and shows us the texture of the medieval magic.
     Now Prospero knows that the air, the ground, and the sea are thick with
spirits.  Knowing his books, he is able to see the spirits.  Once we start
the books, we also see the spirits all around.  Spirits generally do not
wear clothing and because of the overwhelming number of spirits we see, this
film has the most nudity from the greatest number of angles of any film that
comes to mind.  At almost any given time humans are a tiny minority in the
midst of a host of spirits that surround us--at least to the mind of
Prospero.  And that is what Greenaway has filmed, thumbing his nose at
conventions of no or limited nudity.  There is a nearly constant ballet of
naked spirits of both sexes cavorting around and visually overpowering all
humans but Prospero.
     Nothing overpowers Prospero.  We do not know if the story is happening
entirely in Prospero's head or if Prospero has made himself an all-powerful
deity playing with mortals as a child might with dolls.  Like the child
playing, Prospero gives the voices to all his characters, occasionally with
the actor providing a shadow voice speaking in near-unison.  So while
Caliban speaks in gruff Gielgud, Miranda speaks in a dual voice of John
Gielgud and Isabel Pasco.
     Greenaway's script is almost as daring as his staging.  Yes, it does
tell the story of THE TEMPEST eventually, using Shakespeare's own lines.
But it also describes the great books of Prospero in Shakespearean prose, a
writing task the Bard never attempted.  Starting with the Book of Water,
whose pages were once colorful and are now faded from dampness, each new
book is a pleasure if not a total delight.  The Book of Mirrors is lined
with mirrors.  The Book of Architecture has pop-up buildings, some of which
become sets.  Prospero's whole world can be found in his books.  No wonder
he prized them over his dukedom!
     Greenaway's visual style overpowers his story after slowing it to a
halt as dancing and singing spirits get in the way of the plot.  The sets
are like fanciful intricate paintings with beautiful images.  Not content
even there, Greenaway overlays and composes images in mattes and multiple
exposures.  The film is made in high-definition video and takes full
advantage of the electronic effects that medium provides.
     For more than two hours the viewer is bombarded (with the accent on
"bard") with visual image after visual image after visual image (although
when he tires of the intellectual content he can take a few minutes of
vacation from it watching the naked bodies).  The film is challenging and
taxing at times.  It probably requires a good knowledge of the original
play.  Recognizing this limitation for United States audiences, Miramax has
provided an 8-1/2- by 11-inch cheat sheet card to tell us Yanks what the
plot of THE TEMPEST was.  I suppose it is a nice gesture, but I am impressed
by anyone who can so fast read and remember even this short summary.  One
rather wonders what Shakespeare would have made of the film.
     Greenaway has made yet one more film that will appeal to only a very
narrow range of tastes.  But as with his COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE, AND HER
LOVER (and unlike THE DRAUGHTSMAN'S CONTRACT), I find myself in that
splinter.  This is a fantasy film that does a great deal that is new but one
I cannot recommend without strong reservations.  For those with my odd
tastes I rate it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Frank Maloney
     PROSPERO'S BOOKS is a film by Peter Greenaway.  The film stars John
Gielgud.  The music is by Michael Nyman.
     I have been postponing writing about PROSPERO'S BOOKS because,
beyond shouting I loved it and admitting that I nearly dozed off in one
place, I am somewhat at loss to know what I can say.  It is a complex
film that certainly pushes the limits the definition of what a motion
picture is.  It also pushes the limits of what the viewer can take in.
I refer to the complex imagery, the multi-voiced dialogue, the
play-within-a-play structure, and the ambiguity of purpose and message.
In the meantime, allow me to present a few tentative, first impressions.
     I doubt that many of you reading this do not know that PROSPERO'S
BOOKS is a version, a vision, of Shakespeare's final play, "The
Tempest."  You probably also have read a synopsis of the story or are
already familiar with it, so I won't rework those tailings.  "The
Tempest" is easy to read as Shakespeare's farewell to the stage and as
such it may well represent a coherent commentary on play-making and the
play-maker.  The playwright is the magician who creates and destroys
entire worlds, who has the power to name and marshal characters and
forces not accessible to you and me, mere mortals, the audience.
     Although I don't imagine that Greenaway is bidding farewell to
movie-making, his way of presenting "The Tempest" is a commentary on his
own art, a visual essay on film-making, perhaps.  Certainly, it would
not be too startling to find a correlation between the magician and the
director.  One of my favorite moments in PROSPERO'S BOOKS comes when
Prospero leads his trains of spirits past a tableau of Prospero himself
writing the dialogue the ambulatory Prospero is speaking.  In the movie,
it is the act of writing the play "The Tempest" that is the magic that
moves the action (as, indeed, it is in our quotidian life)--not a
startlingly original idea on Greenaway's part, but a masterly, succinct
image of the idea.  It is an image that is suggestive, too, of the
question of how much the creator exists outside his (or her) creation,
how much the creator is self-creating.  Of course, the maddening thing
about what one might think of as visual criticism or visual philosophy
is that the image seldoms poses more than the question.  Imagery is
inherently ambiguous.  For many viewers, the ambiguities of PROSPERO'S
BOOKS will be a barrier to the film's accessibility.
     This film is first and foremost a visual art form.  There is some
irony, perhaps, in the way Greenaway subordinates the famous dialogue to
its visual equivalents; it is almost as if a contemporary director
proposed returning to the silent film.  Of course, films are primarily
visual experiences (whereas drama, and especially poetical drama such as
Shakespeare's, are essentially verbal experiences), particularly as
films are usually made these days; great dialogue is rare and such films
are subject to criticism of being "talky."
     It occurs to me that the most useful comparisons amongst recent
films are to be made with contemporary Shakespearean films, HENRY V by
Kenneth Branagh and HAMLET by Zeffirelli.  Such films typically struggle
to find ways not to be merely filmed plays.  The directors use realistic
or even historic sets, move scenes to outdoors locations, extend action
sequences, make use of appropriate special effects, and so forth.  But
woe betide the incautious director who dares rearrange scenes, edit
speeches, or take other liberties with the "Master's received text."
     Compared with Greenaway, Branagh and Zeffirelli produced utterly
conventional film versions of the plays.  It is, it seems to me, wholly
unfair to say that Greenaway has produced not so much as a film version
of "The Tempest," but a visualization of the play's major theme.  And
that has got some people upset.
     I confessed in the beginning to an attack of the drowsies while
watching PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  This came during the wedding sequence which
more like watching "The Tempest" as one would expect to see, and had
little to do with the playfulness, the richly detailed, painterly
surfaces, cinematic fantasies that I associate with Greenaway.  Of
course, I had put in a hard day's work at work, but the fact is that
during the parts of the film that were more challenging, more daring, I
stayed right in there, alert and happy.
     And speaking of staying right in there, the man who performed that
amazing version of Caliban never failed to delight and surprise me with
his ceaseless movements -- stretching, pointing, forever straining
against the invisible chains with which Prospero enslaved him.  The
three actors who played Ariel presented a charming concept of that airy
spirit.
     Watching the calligraphy in action was beautiful and fascinating,
more choreography than calligraphy at moments.  The costumes of the
courtiers, those amazing hats, collars, and shoes, were whimsical,
hilarious, and satirical, existing in ludicrous contrast to the wisps
and scraps that clothed the spirits, speaking volumes about
artificiality and civilization.  (These clothes put me in mind of BARON
MUNCHAUSEN, for what that's worth; exaggerated styles for exaggerated
imaginations, styles that say more than the wearer knows.)
     I loved the nudity, the lack both of coyness and titillation, the
variety of bodies, the way before the movie was over I had stopped
seeing them as naked and started them merely as nude.
     I wasn't too thrilled by the silly queen act of the two servants
who team up with Caliban to take over the island, but I can live with
it, I think.
     I was pleased and impressed by the interludes in which we were told
about Prospero's 24 books, the animation, the use of HDTV in the
inserts, and especially by the identity of the 24th book.  I was also
shocked by the fate of those books, as any literate person has to be;
our reactions, as much as the movie's (and the play's) actions vis-a-vis
the books speaks volumes about the power of books over us.  The power,
rarity, and beauty of the written word is one of the essential ideas in
"The Tempest"--an idea also acted by the close-ups of the calligraphy.
Greenaway's version of the books is remarkably like the television
version of another famous fictive book, THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE
GALAXY, books that can't stay still, that squirm and babble with powers
all their own.
     I haven't any idea whether to recommend PROSPERO'S BOOKS to you;
some of you will share my love of this movie, others will be subject to
various negative reactions, including irritation and frustration.  I
intend to see it again and I won't be particularly concerned about
whether I have to pay full price or not.

Author
Pedro Sena
BUT IS NOT WILLIE SHAKESPEARE FOR THE MASSES.
And in many ways, Shakespeare's works are perfect for the movie screen,
because his characters think, dream, and have visions, in other words, have
such a visual acuity, that it actually can be shown in the celluloid, where
it can not on the stage.  One can make all the wishes, dreams, and visions,
really  live in any character's mind--- and the play gets better and
stronger still.
And the way the director shows this freedom, is with as much nakedness as he
can get away with, under the boundaries of good taste, and possible
censorship.  The nakedness here is an excellent symbol of the freedom of
mind and word, which Prospero wants, and keeps under wraps at almost all
times. It is a really good analogy for the whole play, and one that most
people are afraid to tackle.  And Greenaway does, like no other.   And in
one film he manages to ditch down the drain all the good actors who were
capable of helping you see a truth through their perfect diction........and
done by a true master of diction himself, SIR JOHN GIELGUD.  It is truly
beautiful at times, and odd at others, but the end result, is an evening
that ends with one wondering what is it exactly that we have just seen, and
what exactly was it about, and how, and how does it all come together...???
All in all, the very thing which film has forgotten under the guise and
direction of people who only do and show entertainment, instead of art.
In his island, Prospero rules.  There he has all the arts to his disposal,
and the ability to make anything happen.  And there he also has the ability
to outgrow himself, thus making possible his ascension as a magician of good
capabilities, which is all well and fine within the confines of the play
itself.   And in this island every nymph, satyr, and angel that has ever
lived owes it to be a part of a man's vision.
The film moves back and forth between images and pictures from Renaissance
texts to actual image on the screen, thus also blending the creativity, and
avid curiosity, of a time that has appeared very boring in the history
books.  The books on magic and any kind of experimentation was plentiful,
and the likes of DaVinci, were a part of it.  And Prospero wants to be in
league with the best of them.
Aside from the fact that this film is really unusual, and not specially made
for everyone to see and learn about Shakespeare, it is without any doubt a
very serious, dare I say Busby Berkeley- like, show about the thinking
of a man who has much depth......and we are let into his chambers of mind
and depth, to learn about him, and his world.
I HIGHLY RECOMMEND THIS FILM IF ANYONE IS INTERESTED IN TRULLY MODERN
ADAPTATIONS OF SHAKESPEARE'S WORK.  IT IS EXCELLENT.  JOHN GIELGUD REALLY
DESERVES A MENTION FOR AN OSCAR AT LEAST........HE IS ONE OF THE VERY BEST,
and his eloquent delivery, so gentle, so powerful, so clear, will leave you
gasping....the words are so alive.....
THE BEST GREENAWAY FILM YET, and for once it isn't psychotic, or sickening.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
125 min., R, Drama, 1991
Director: Peter Greenaway
Cast: John Gielgud, Michael Clark, Isabelle Pasco, Michel Blanc, Erland
      Josephson, Tom Bell, Kenneth Cranham, Mark Rylance, Jim Vd Woude,
      Gerard Thoolen, Pierre Bokma
It's been two hours of silence, it's been two hours of pain, it's been
two hours that are gone forever that I'll never have again!  (with
apologies to Guns N' Roses).
      I am not really a fan of William Shakespeare.  I have not *had* to
read any of his plays yet (although I have heard that high school
teachers are fond of his work so I expect I will have had to read some
by the time I graduate).  I have seen two of Shakespeare's plays on the
screen, those being the 1990 version of HAMLET, which I gave a one, and
the 1953 version of JULIUS CAESAR, which I gave a zero.  PROSPERO'S
BOOKS I give a zero (on a zero to five basis).  I am obviously not the
only person with that feeling towards this film though because at least
six people walked out of the theater while the film was running (the
first, ten minutes into the film).  The reactions from some of the
audience towards the film seemed to be the same as mine.  My mother and
my sister also went and saw the film.  My mother is a fan of William
Shakespeare's work and she didn't like the film at all.  And my sister,
who is age 14, almost fell asleep during the film.  I am not saying that
no one will like the film but it has a very limited audience.
PROSPERO'S BOOKS is rated R for female nudity, male nudity, and adult
situations.
      William Shakespeare *did not* write PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  William
Shakespeare wrote THE TEMPEST.  Someone else (sorry, I missed who wrote
it) wrote PROSPERO'S BOOKS very loosely on THE TEMPEST.  I feel that if
William Shakespeare were alive today he would be disgusted with this
film.   William Shakespeare made THE TEMPEST as a comedy.  This is
definitely not a comedy, at least as far as I can tell.  The film is
supposed to be dream sequences, but it runs more like an LSD nightmare
from hell.  There are double images on the screen (sometimes triple)
that seem to have nothing to do with each other.  There is a lot of talk
about Prospero's endless amount of books that does nothing for the film.
In fact, most of Prospero's books are just plain boring, like the book
of mirrors.  THE TEMPEST is sort of followed but for those that have not
yet read THE TEMPEST that will be lost.  The words are jumbled together
and it was hard for me to follow, and I know the plot line of THE
TEMPEST.  For this reason I suggest that if you plan to go see
PROSPERO'S BOOKS that you first check out THE TEMPEST from your local
library and read it.
      There is a lot of nudity both male and female in the film, but it
is not done in an erotic fashion.  Most of the spirits wear little or no
clothing.   But they are just not clothed, it's not like it is a wild
orgy or anything like that.  There is only one sex scene in the film and
it lasts only a fraction of a second.  There is no bad language in the
film (I am not counting the reactions of some of the audience to the
film).  In some parts of the film the dialogue is put in the corners of
the screen, maybe so those who can't understand what the people are
saying can read it.  I would recommend not bringing your young children
to the film for no other reason than they will be bored through the
entire film.  I don't think the film is worth hiring a babysitter for,
so if you are a parent with children and you must see PROSPERO'S BOOKS,
I would highly suggest renting PROSPERO'S BOOKS when it comes to video
(if it does come to video) instead of seeing it in the theaters (plus it
will save you the high costs of the theater).
      I can't say anything really good about the costumes either.  Most
of the people in the film (the spirits) seemed to have a real lack of
costumes.   Whereas most of the others had costumes to the point of
ridiculousness.   The island seems to be a very dreary place to live,
and if I were Prospero, and had his powers, I would simply conjure up a
boat and get off that island.   Most of the film takes place in a very
dreary building.  The building is sometimes like a castle with
tapestries, columns, and elegant furniture and sometimes it is very
plain.  The most important part of this building seems to be a pool
which seems to be for both swimming and urinating in (how gross huh?).
There also seems to be a forest in this island, but it is not any forest
that I would want to live in.  It is very dark and gloomy (plus that
strange Caliban lives in there).
      I really hate to walk out from a movie without anything good to
say about it, so here is the good aspects of PROSPERO'S BOOKS.  The
previews for the coming attractions was not bad at all (of course the
previews will be different in your theater but I think it is safe to say
that any preview will be better than this film).  And Isabelle Pasco is
rather pretty.  I am sorry to say that I can't even talk about her
acting abilities for she doesn't get a chance to show any off.  For
about the first half of the film Pasco is sleeping.  That seems to be
one of the main features in the film for the camera man keeps showing us
many different angles.  Also, she only gets to say a couple of words
(was it four?)  during the entire movie.  This case seems to be true for
most of the actors in the film.  The only person who really has a
speaking role was John Gielgud (and maybe the person who played
Caliban).  Most of the actors only get to mutter a few sentences, at
best.  I will stop here with my trashing of the film.  I could probably
go on forever but I don't wish to bore you.
      One last comment, at the end of the film when Prospero throws a
copy of THE TEMPEST into the pool, I think that might be symbolic of how
Peter Greenaway threw out most of the charm from THE TEMPEST when making
this film.
      I am sorry but I really can't recommend PROSPERO'S BOOKS for
anyone.   My suggestion is to save your money and go see something else,
anything else.  The film KUFFS is a very good movie.  Maybe you should
go see that instead.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Peter Greenaway
Writer: Peter Greenaway (with dialogue from "The Tempest" by William
Shakespeare)
Starring: John Gielgud, Isabelle Pasco, Michael Clark, Michael Blanc,
Erland Josephson
It becomes apparent about 7 minutes into Peter Greenaway's "Prospero's
Books" when John Gielgud says the opening line repeatedly that this will
not be a typical straight translation of Shakespeare's "The Tempest."  In
fact, if the credits did not say that this film was an adaptation of the
classic play, it would probably be very difficult to tell that this is that
play in the first place, even though much of the original dialogue is used.
To call "Prospero's Books" bizarre is an understatement; more like it
should be called "freaky as hell."  It's not a film that is concerned with:
a) telling a story, or b) reciting Shakespeare, but it is concerned with
creating mood, a certain feeling, and addressing some of the more
understated parts of the play, most notably the 24 books that Prospero owns
that he prizes more than his dukedom.  What was in all those books?  Why
are they considered so great?  In fact, the story of "The Tempest" is given
a back seat to these books and various other things.
I never read "The Tempest" (although I did happen to check out a two
paragraph summary of the play prior to seeing it - it helped only
slightly), and anyone who's coming into this film trying to see an
adaptation of the play should go elsewhere.  The story of "The Tempest"
deals with a duke of Milan named Prospero who is driven out of his land by
some of his enemies, and put in a boat with his daughter to die at sea. 
But his friend placed several of his favorite books in the boat with him,
and upon landing at an island, he mastered sorcery, and eventually began to
control the sprites and various fairies that lived there.  However, he
finds that his enemies from before are sailing nearby, and he creates a
tempest to sink their ship, and cause them to come to the island, where he
will exact his revenge on them.  But before he knows it, his daughter,
Miranda, has fallen in love with one of them, and by the finale, Prospero
has forgiven his enemies.
That's "The Tempest."  "Prospero's Books" tells this story, but only
barely.  The film is more interested in setting a mood, and creating a
beautiful and hypnotic look to the film.  For the many sprites, fairies,
and various other people inhabiting the island, there are probably hundreds
of naked extras, all walking around in the buff, and doing various things. 
Even one character, Caliban (dancer Michael Clark), dances everything
wildly, never saying a word.  And the enemies are given wacky period garb,
with giant white collars, and are forced to be tortured by sprits on the
island.
Above everything is John Gielgud, one of the greatest actors of the 20th
century, playing the bitter, angered Prospero, who plans everything that
goes on in the film, and allows Gielgud to give one of the best
performances of his career.  In the film, Prospero is seen writing the play
himself, planning out his revenge carefully, and playing on everything like
a god.  Like a playwright, he holds his enemies in his hands, and anything
he wants to happen to them will happen.  Greenaway uses this approach to
its fullest extent, even going as far as to have Gielgud say all of the
lines for the characters, who often stand mute as Gielgud's voice is filled
in for them.  Not only do you get to hear Gielgud's powerful voice when he
speaks, but you get to hear it distorted a bit when he speaks for others.
And there are the books, which we are shown one-by-one throughout the
course of the film in detail with individual summations done by another
narrator, not speaking Shakespeare like Gielgud is.  The books are often
huge, with magical powers.  For instance, a book on human anatomy pulses
and bleeds when one opens it.  Greenaway was obviously intrigued with the
fact that Prospero took so much pride in owning them that he'd take them
over his dukedom, and by seeing them, it's no wonder why.
Greenaway takes all of these elements (the story, Gielgud's god-like
presence, and the books) and creates one hell of a sensual experience out
of them.  The film is a lavish production, with lots of staginess to them,
and some very beautiful mise-en-scene, some of the best I have ever seen in
my entire life.  The cinematography by Sacha Vierny is absolutely
incredible, and Michael Nyman does yet another brilliant score, even
writing some songs that are presented in certain sections of the film.  The
costumes (and sometimes lack thereof) are ingenius looking, especially
Prospero's long, blue robe that he occasionally wears.  Greenaway
definitely has a way of making a film look just amazing, and I know that
I'm going out on a limb here, but I'd say that Peter Greenaway is probably
the best visual director to ever live...or at least up there.
It becomes obvious that Greenaway's main focus is not really the play, or
the god approach he takes, or even really the books, but that he's really
trying to take film to a whole other plateau.  I wouldn't call this film
"experimental" because it does actually tell the story.  "Prospero's Books"
is actually a whole other kind of film, perhaps "experimental narrative,"
where the story is told, but done in a completely freaky way that has never
been done before.  I've seen this film being judged as strictly an
adaptation of Shakespeare, when it's actually just a meditation on creating
what it must have been like for Prospero.
But Greenaway takes it even further, and makes this film into one of the
very few "abstract" films I've ever seen.  It's not concerned with anything
but being hypnotic and using film's plastic elements to its extremes, or at
least as far as Greenaway can take it.  Books can create a world inside a
person's head, paintings can create a visual experience, music can create
an audio experience.  Film is pretty much all of these.  We get the
visuals, the audio, and anything else that is not shown is left to the
imagination.  Greenaway crafts the film so that the visuals are striking
(not only in mise-en-scene, but the way the screen is done, we see layers
upon layers of different screens, waiting to be peeled away), the audio is
messed with (multiple tracks and whatnot), and in the end, we're still
wondering about the books.  Luckily, it left something to the imagination.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
