Title
Review for Trick (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TRICK (1999) ***  Directed by Jim Fall.Written by Jason Schafer. 
Photography, Terry Stacey. Editing, Brian A. Kates. Production 
design, Jody Asnes. Music, David Friedman. Producers, Eric 
d'Arbeloff, Fall and Ross Katz.  Cast: Christian Campbell (Gabriel), 
Brad Beyer (Rich), Lacey Kohl (Genevieve), Tori Spelling (Katherine), 
John Paul Pitoc (Mark), Clinton Leupp (Miss Coco Peru), et al. A Fine 
Line Features release. 90 minutes.  R (language, sexuality, 
toplessness)
Trick is a gay gay film. No, this is not a typo, since both meanings 
of gay are intended, as Trick is a rather upbeat romantic comedy. 
Nowadays gay films are out of the closet and into the street. Gayness 
has stopped being camouflaged or apologetic or sad or militant or 
whatever. It is treated above-board and openly. Trick is a good case 
of a movie that's entirely matter-of-fact in its subject and 
treatment.
The aptly-name Gabriel is a pretty angelic-looking, low-key gay young 
man who aspires to song-writing in the old tradition of musicals. He 
is helped (or is he hindered?) by his best friend since high-school 
days. She us Katherine, a hyper-kinetic actress. To give a 
demonstration Gabe sits at the piano and Kate sings and tap-dances. 
It's quite funny.
Gabe is a relative loner, and on the shy side. He shares an apartment 
with Rich who is heterosexual with a vengeance, as he regularly 
preempts their lodgings so as to activate his libido with a string of 
women. This  forces Gabe to spend a lot of time out of the apartment.
On such an evening, Gabe decides to have a look at the rich gay scene 
of which he is not a part. At a strip bar, he and the 
athletic-looking go-go boy Mark get each other's attention. Then, by 
coincidence, they meet on the subway, where Mark energetically picks 
up Gabe. One thing leading to another, the active Mark and the rather 
passive Gabe spend a long night (The Long Night is the title of a 
film and the essence of several others) looking for a place to be 
alone together. But they get foiled time and again, in often comic 
ways. However, what started out as a search for sex ends up as the 
beginning of a love affair.
As the  mini-Odyssey proceeds among the night-life clubs and 
activities of gays, there are several asides, parentheses, 
interruptions and characters, several of those quite entertaining. 
The film does not occur in real time, since events go from one day to 
the next dawn, but it has a sort of classic unity of time, place and 
subject.
Some scenes go on for too long before the movie cuts to the chase, 
yet many other scenes are well-times. Among others, they show quite 
cannily the transformation of Ben from timidity and embarrassment to 
sexual openness, and of Mark from stud-ness to caring (and from what 
we thought of as just a body to someone with brains).
The subject is not really terribly interesting, nor would it be in a 
non-gay film. In fact, with variations, a some heterosexual movies 
have been about a man and a woman looking for a place to be together. 
I am also thinking in particular of some Czech, Polish or Hungarian 
films  where the guilty party was a Communist society with a terrible 
dearth of apartments--even rooms. The political subtext added much. 
especially in the indirect ways needed to make such works acceptable 
to official censors.
Yet what Trick lacks in originality is made up by its colorfulness 
and by its succession of solid comic inventions. E.g. a drag queen 
called Coco Peru with her flamboyance and advice to Gabe, in the 
toilets; or, in a bar, an older man's funny new song "Come to gusta 
mi pinga"; or, in Gabe's and Rich's place, a woman who is a 
caricature of Marilyn Monroe bears her breasts and "philosophizes."

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jim Fall.
Cast: Christian Campbell, J.P. Pitoc, Tori Spelling, Lorri Bagley, Steve 
Hayes, Brad Beyer, Clinton Leupp.
1999 - 90 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed August 12, 1999.
One of the most talked-about independent films at this year's Sundance Film 
Festival, director Jim Fall's "Trick" is one of those "up-all-night" comedies 
in the vein of Martin Scorcese's 1985 "After Hours," which take place within 
a 24-hour period, and follow a certain character through his/her 
(mis)adventures during that one memorable night. Not only does "Trick" 
thoroughly entertain in the context of this genre, but it also stands as 
being the most uplifting and romantic love story of the year, thanks to the 
extremely likable and innocent lug of a main character and the crisp, funny 
screenplay by Jason Schafer. The fact that the two people involved in the 
said romance are both male is more or less insignificant, as the film's core 
relationship is something all audiences can relate to, and therefore, it 
deserves to have a universal appeal (narrow-minded homophobes 
notwithstanding). It really is difficult to knock a movie, anyway, that is as 
genuinely sweet as this one is.
Gabriel (Christian Campbell, Neve's older brother) is a twentysomething New 
Yorker who, despite being a struggling musical writer, feels that he does not 
fit into the stereotypical mold of a gay person, and has a best friend in the 
bubbly Katherine (Tori Spelling), an aspiring actress who is always going to 
auditions with him and performing his musical numbers. The night following a 
discouraging presentation of one of his latest songs, "Enter, You," Gabriel 
goes off to a gay club (something he normally doesn't do), where he first 
sets his eyes on muscular go-go dancer, Mark (J.P. Pitoc). Taking the subway 
on his way home, Mark shows up in the same car as Gabriel, and immediately 
suggests that they find a place to be alone. The rest of the film follows 
Gabriel and Mark on their journey through the nightlife of NYC, as they 
attempt to turn a "trick." It doesn't work out that way, however, as Gabriel 
finds that Katherine is at his apartment printing out 150 copies of her 
resume, followed by his roommate (Brad Beyer), who shows up with his ditzy 
girlfriend (Lorri Bagley). No matter where Gabriel and Mark go, there is a 
distraction of some sort, until it eventually doesn't seem to matter much 
anymore, as a potential one-night-stand starts to transform into what may 
very well be a budding romantic relationship.
There's no better word to describe "Trick" than 'magical.' Abandoning the 
usual topics and hang-ups of most gay-oriented movies, including "coming out" 
and AIDS, what talented director Fall has done here is given us two gay 
people who have long-since accepted their sexual orientation, as have all of 
the other characters around them, and so the movie does not become a 
serious-minded, so-called "meaningful" movie, but one that immediately 
centers in and concentrates on the characters themselves and their kinships 
with each other, most importantly in that of Gabriel and Mark, and Gabriel 
and Katherine.
The performances from all three leads, as well as many of the supporting 
actors, are well worth noting. Christian Campbell, in his first major film 
role, is perfect as the somewhat shy Gabriel, who doesn't have much 
experience with love, romance, and sex yet, but knows it when he sees it. 
Campbell fills the requirements of the role probably better than anyone else 
could, because he has this sort of dimpled baby-face that you instantly 
accept and believe as the character he is playing. J.P. Pitoc, as Mark, at 
first appears to only be the "boy of attraction," but is gradually revealed 
throughout to have many complex, human layers under his exterior appearance. 
As Gabriel's roommate's girlfriend, Lorri Bagley is hilarious. With her high, 
flaky voice, Bagley has one scene in which she unsuccessfully plays 
psychologist to the feuding Gabriel and Mark, based on a misunderstanding, 
and it turns into a centerpiece of comic brilliance. And Clinton Leupp steals 
the few scenes he has as the draq queen, Miss Coco Peru, striking a major 
resemblance to Katherine, who has words of wisdom to share with Gabriel while 
in a club bathroom, if only he can finish what he has to say before the next 
person in line outside bangs the restroom door down! 
Finally, who would have ever thought that Tori Spelling (of "90210" fame) was 
such a talented actress? Spelling is outstanding as the talkative Katherine, 
showing off her surprising gift for comedy (as in the scene where she 
inauspiciously performs the song-and-dance number, "Enter, You," in front of 
a stone-faced audience), as well as fully developing her character beyond 
two-dimensional status. Katherine could have easily been a throwaway role, 
but screenwriter Jason Schafer does something that was definitely the right 
choice; Spelling's last scene is one of unexpected poignancy and truth, in 
which we really get to know and sympathize with Katherine, a young woman who 
briefly dated Gabriel in high school before he knew he was gay, and still has 
deep feeling for him even though she knows they can never be anything more 
than best friends. We've seen this sort of character and conflict before, 
sure, but it rarely has ever been this effectively and gently done. I can now 
say, without any sort of regret or embarrassment, that I like Tori Spelling 
as an actress, and anticipate the days when she can once and for all break 
free of "Beverly Hills, 90210" and concentrate on her promising film career.
Helped along by dreamy, flattering cinematography of NYC, by Terry Stacey, 
and a sunny, '40s-style music score by David Friedman, "Trick" is the type of 
absolutely winning romantic comedy that the recent disappointing Julia 
Roberts-Richard Gere box-office hit, "Runaway Bride," only dreams of being. 
You want an unabashed, believable, stirring romantic scene with nothing more 
than a simple kiss that says it all, then look no further than the excellent 
last scene of this film, and leave "Runaway Bride" at the altar where it 
belongs. Plain and simple, the film is an idealistic fairy tale about 
something that most people constantly pine for from afar, in which you find 
love where you least expect it. A "Trick," indeed, but also a veritable 
treat. 
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Trick (1999)
Christian Campbell, John Paul Pitoc, Tori Spelling, Stephen Hayes, Clinton Leupp, Lorri Bagley, Brad Beyer. Screenplay by Jason Schafer. Directed by Jim Fall.
R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net
Once in a while, a movie will strike just the right emotional chord in
me and, for a time, I stop being a critic. Instead of studying the
various elements of the production or analyzing the subtext, I just
settle back in my seat and enjoy. "Trick" is one of those films. Sweet
and sexy, this gentle little romantic comedy boasts two lead
performances so charming that I simply didn't care to look for
problems in the film.
A number of other critics did not share my feelings. Many dismissed
"Trick" as superficial fluff and, despite giving it two out of four
stars, Roger Ebert seemed to take particular delight in shredding the
movie. On the other hand, Entertainment Weekly's Owen Gleiberman
awarded "Trick" an A- and Reel Views' James Berardinelli also offered
strong praise. How nice to see that at least a few writers saw the
same film I did.
Set in the Chelsea and West Village sections of New York City, "Trick"
takes place over the course of one day in the life of Gabriel
(Christian Campbell, Neve's brother), a songwriter with Broadway
aspirations. Gabriel is your basic All-American gay twenty-something,
perpetually sporting a smile on his wholesome, dimpled
face. Unfortunately, he is also a walking doormat. A textbook
people-pleaser, he allows his best friend Katherine (Tori Spelling) to
monopolize conversations with her self-obsessed babbling and routinely
vacates his apartment so that his straight roommate Rich (Brad Beyer)
can entertain lady friends, even if it means sleeping overnight in the
hall.
On the evening when Rich's "official" girlfriend is due to return from
a long stay in France, Gabriel kills time by bar hopping. During a
stop at a strip club, he spies Mark (John Paul Pitoc), a drop-dead
handsome go-go boy with piercing eyes, a phenomenal body and an
equally impressive basket (his nickname is "Beer Can" and it has
nothing to do with drinking).
Later, Gabriel encounters Mark on the subway and they briefly make eye
contact. When he exits, Mark follows and abruptly asks Gabriel if he
has a place where they can get together. And so the adventure begins,
as the guys encounter a series of colorful (and often maddening)
people on their quest for a bed.
Jason Schafer's screenplay runs the pair through a sociological
obstacle course, and along the way, their intended one-night stand
turns into something more, with the two young men getting to know each
other as individuals instead of attractive tricks. Affection begins to
blossom, building towards a closing scene as romantic as any I've seen
in a very long time.
It all works because of the chemistry between Gabriel and Mark, and
the considerable talents of Christian Campbell and John Paul
Pitoc. Campbell is good-looking in a fresh-scrubbed, Midwest way, and
he paints Gabriel as a likable man with a slightly nebbish quality
reminiscent of Jonathan Silverman back in his Neil Simon days. Beneath
Gabriel's polite, pleasant demeanor lies an insecure, body-conscious
kid who intensely fears rejection.
John Paul Pitoc is even more impressive. He gives a remarkably subtle
performance, ever so gradually revealing Mark's depth of
character. Initially, Mark appears to merely be a stoic hunk with a
blunt presentation style, but as the night progresses, he reveals his
kind, compassionate nature. In a particularly nice scene, he hops in
to help one of Gabriel's buddies save face with an ex-boyfriend.
Anyone attending "Trick" hoping for steamy sex scenes is in for a
disappointment. While the film is certainly erotic, the emphasis is on
courtship, trust and the beginning of intimacy rather than romping in
the sack. This is a film where hand-holding is electric and a simple
kiss feels like pure magic. The trappings may be contemporary, but at
its core, this is the kind of heartfelt romance rarely seen anymore.
Structurally, it is essential that circumstances keep Gabriel and Mark
from finding a bed and the supporting cast, particularly Tori
Spelling, energetically provides the circumstances. Spelling is
convincing (perhaps too convincing) as a pushy actress and singer who
is not nearly as talented as she thinks she is. Midway through the
film, the guys run into a tactless, overbearing drag queen who looks a
lot like a ravaged version of Spelling. I doubt the resemblance was
coincidental.
Even in my non-critical mood, I must admit that some of the plot
devices proved tiresome, but the central story between Gabriel and
Mark was so delightful that the flaws were easy to forgive. Does
"Trick" have problems? Sure, but those in the mood for a newfangled
spin on old-fashioned romance will find this a sweet and satisfying
confection.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Christian Campbell, John Paul Pitoc, and Tori Spelling
Synopsis: 
A nebbish homosexual attracts the affection of a buff and studly go-go boy,
and you know the rest of the story from watching other screen romances. Boy
meets boy. Boy loses boy. Guess what's next? 
Opinion:
Since we all know the romance formula, the way to keep it spicy is to
change the setting. Put the romance on a sinking luxury liner, or set it
during the Vietnam War, colonial America, ancient Egypt, a trauma center, a
cop station, a train ride through Europe and so on. That way when the movie
is not concentrating on the inevitable romance, there are interesting and
dangerous subplots or fascinating scenery. 
TRICK neglects this lesson. It has a predictable romance. Outside of the
romance story, we get to hear a lot of side characters complain about not
being able to break into showbiz. But their complaints never get resolved.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     TRICK is one of those rare gay romantic comedies that passes the
"straight test."  As films with gay themes became more prevalent in recent
years, they began to blur together.  Filmmakers appeared to think that the
mere act of putting a same-sex couple on the screen made the film
praise-worthy, often failing to introduce much that was entertaining on
its own merits.  Thus was born my "straight test," which allowed for a
fairly quick barometer of quality: would anyone pay the slightest
attention to the same story if the two principal characters were a man and
a woman?
     Jim Fall's bright, fun, frisky comedy not only passes the "straight
test," it makes plenty of straight romantic comedies look positively inept
by comparison.  Christian Campbell stars as Gabriel, an aspiring
musical-comedy composer who spends his days working temp jobs and his
nights feeding the ego of his best girlfriend/aspiring singer Katherine
(Tori Spelling).  That doesn't leave much time to find love, let alone a
one-night stand, until a trip to a bar introduces Gabriel to Mark (J. P.
Pitoc), a sexy go-go dancer.  They make plans for a night of simple sex,
but plans go awry when every opportunity to be alone is thwarted.  As the
evening progresses, and Gabriel and Mark get better acquainted, simple sex
begins to seem less interesting -- though also less complicated -- than
the prospect of a more serious relationship.
     TRICK's single-day structure may be something of a trick in itself,
yet there's rarely a moment when Jason Schafer's screenplay feels forced
or contrived.  Sure, it falls back on humor from drag queens and cabaret
performances.  Both devices also happen to produce two of TRICK's funniest
scenes:  a Spanish-language ode to the singer's male member, and advice
from a man made up to bear a startling resemblance to one of the cast
members.  In fact, as pure comedy, TRICK rarely stumbles.  Every character
gets wonderful moments, sparked by the kind of dialogue Woody Allen used
to produce in his prime.  Even Tori Spelling -- yes, I said Tori Spelling
-- is a revelation as the blissfully self-absorbed Katherine, particularly
throwing her "talents" behind a performance of Gabriel's composition
"Enter You."  When a director can turn Spelling into a gifted comic
actress, you know he's a talent to watch for.
     I suppose the reason TRICK is even more appealing than its laugh
value is that it does more with a gay relationship than any film I can
remember.  That's probably because it isn't _just_ about a gay
relationship.  The adorably dimpled Christian Campbell (brother of
SCREAM's Neve) makes for an appealing protagonist because he's so
recognizably human in his relationship anxieties.  The developing
relationshp between Gabriel and Mark works the way all good romantic
relationships work, exploring the way people discover surprisingly
wonderful things about each other when they least expect it.  The fact
that the relationship develops in the midst of such entertaining comedy is
a delightful bonus.  The obstacles thrown in their way do begin to feel a
bit contrived, but you may be having too much fun to notice.  TRICK is so
effortlessly charming, I may just change the name of the "straight test"
to the "TRICK test."
