Title
Review for Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Nicholas Parrott
Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid
The K Foundation at Ceredigion Museum Sat 11/11/95
     I must confess that Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty were once heroes
of mine.  In 1992 they set the charts alight, were the top selling
singles band in the UK, recorded one of the best albums ever (The White
Room) and scooped top band from the Brits Awards.  They did it with
detachment, breaking all the rules along the way.  Rumours of their
personal indulgences, lawsuits over unauthorised sampling of Abba's
music, a collection of wacky vehicles (including a US cop car, ice
cream van and military combat vehicle) and wild publicity stunts all
went to fuel the legend of pop's wildboys.  Then they retired, claiming
that they would never make another record, and set up the K
Foundation.
     Two years on they withdrew all the K Foundation's assets from the
bank, headed up to Jura and burned the lot in a fireplace in an empty
croft.  This is the only record of that event.  A one-hour home movie
of two guys burning a million pounds.  Entertainment it is not.  The K
Foundation smile and chat as they flick one fifty pound note after
another onto a burning fire.  Visually it is as exciting as watching
paper burn, but there is a morbid fascination involved.  The audience
fidgets nervously, wondering if this is 'art' or a personal form of
therapy, asking themselves what on earth possessed these two guys to do
such a thing.  Were these guys for real or is it just another of their
notorious publicity stunts?
     If there was point to the exercise it maybe it was just that,
to get people talking.  After all, money is the most important symbol
in our society (witness the hysteria unleashed by the Lottery) and to
wilfully destroy it is akin to an act of heresy.  Here's the K
Foundation burning a million smackers.  Is it art?  Is it a social
statement?  Or is it just sad ?  Not surprisingly it made a lot of
people angry and many questioned the collective sanity of the K
Foundation.  But it did get people talking, all the way to the bar and
out the other side again.
     Having burned a million quid, made the home movie, and made a
documentary about it (screened on Omnibus two weeks ago), the K
Foundation are now keeping silent.  They've done the interviews about
why they did it and are now refusing to answer all questions on the
subject, feeling that they've exhausted its potential.  Permission for
the planned showing of the movie in a prison in Glasgow was withdrawn
at the last minute.  The K Foundation has disbanded itself, being
financially (and creatively) bankrupt.  The question on many people's
lips was what will they do next?  Unless they make another record who
really cares ?
