Title
Review for Fast, Cheap & Out of Control (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
Very few filmmakers could even conceive of crafting a film in the
manner which Errol Morris did for his latest film, FAST, CHEAP & OUT
OF CONTROL, and even fewer filmmakers could actually pull it off.  It
is no surprise that Mr. Morris was successful, of course -- he's
clearly one of cinema's greatest documentarians (consider, if you
will, that among his illustrious filmography one will find entries
for GATES OF HEAVEN [his first feature, to boot], A BRIEF HISTORY OF
TIME, *and* the landmark 1988 film THE THIN BLUE), and once again he
has brought forth yet another interesting and completely inventive
film with his newest documentary.
Ostensibly a film which examines the varied occupations of four
seemingly dissimilar men -- Rodney Brooks, a M.I.T. robotics expert;
Dave Hoover, an aging circus lion tamer who idolizes the late circus
trainer Clyde Beatty; Ray Mendez, a mole rat researcher; and George
Mendonca, an elderly topiary gardener -- FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL
is far more ambitious in scope than to simply document these
vocations, and is subtle in revealing its intended implications.
Only gradually do the parallels between the endeavours of the
subjects become evident, and progressively the film's themes become
apparent.
Initially, one can see no obvious connection between the film's four
subjects -- one can understandably fail to see much in common between
the work of a lion tamer and that of a gardener, or of a robotics
developer for that matter -- but Mr. Morris cleverly utilises
interviews with the subjects and associative footage of their work in
a unique manner.  FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL stealthily weaves
interview footage of the four subjects, at times intercutting the
commentary of one with the activities of another, evoking new meaning
to their diatribes and new inadvertent insights.  However, these
implications are never explicit in their presentation during the
film, leaving it very much up as an exercise to the viewer to detect
and decipher the additional layers of complexity given to each of
these scenes.  It's quite a novel and stunning technique which keeps
the audience perpetually involved, and certainly a method which lifts
the film above the drabness which afflicts a typical talking-head
documentary.
Mr. Morris' film is hardly overly cerebral, though -- while
educational and provocative, FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL is also
highly entertaining and often funny.  Mr. Mendez's wild enthusiasm
and clear affection for his blind, hairless mole rats, in conjunction
with his attire (especially the bow-tie) make for humourous viewing,
while it is mildly surreal to observe Mr. Brooks' unblinking
cheeriness during his prognostication of the forthcoming obsolescence
of "carbon-based life", to be eventually replaced by his beloved
silicon-based "lifeforms".  However, it's Mr. Morris' great affection
for his subjects, clearly evident throughout the film, which allow us
to titter at the depths of the subjects' fascinations without a hint
of ridicule entering the mix.  The comic nature of FAST, CHEAP & OUT
OF CONTROL is accentuated by Caleb Sampson's quirky score, as well as
mixing typical headshot interview footage with miscellaneous clips
from old movie serials (including one featuring Clyde Beatty), which,
as much in this film, at first appears to have little relevance but
ultimately resonates strongly with the themes explored.
It is perhaps a good thing that FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL does not
heavily rely on the interview sessions with Mr. Morris' four
spotlighted men as the sole basis for its highly unconventional
narrative, for it seems to run out of material about fifteen minutes
prematurely; that the film can continue to confound and fascinate
despite the further lack of insight into the four subjects during the
film's final fifth lessens the severity of this shortcoming.  Yet
another triumph for Mr. Morris, FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL is both
a profile of four interesting professions, and a contemplation of the
quickly changing scope of humanity and man's unsated, inordinate
demand for control.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"I'll shoot for the Queen, and you can shoot for, well, whomever."
                               - Richard Harris, UNFORGIVEN

Author
Scott Renshaw
     FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL may be the most reflexive film
experience of the year, as well as one of the richest.  As he did in
previous efforts like GATES OF HEAVEN and A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME,
director Errol Morris charges the non-fiction film with a unique energy as
he celebrates the out-liers of American culture.  His subjects this time
around are four men who, at first glance, appear to have little in common.
Dave Hoover is a circus wild animal trainer; George Mendonca is a topiary
gardener; Rodney Brooks is a robotics engineer; Ray Mendez is an
entomologist studying the insect-like African mole rat.  For 85 minutes
Morris lets them speak passionately about their crafts, until you begin to
suspect that FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL is less about those four men
than it is about Morris himself.
     That's not to say that the four men are not interesting subjects.
Mendez proves to be the star of the bunch, an animated character in a
butterfly bow tie who discusses the mole rat with a delight transcending
scholarship; Brooks also offers his insights on artificial intelligence
with the wide-eyed, mad-scientist glee.  Yet Morris isn't necessarily
interested in painting detailed portraits of his four subjects.  Though he
shows each one at work for brief snippets, he eschews the traditional
documentary approach of following them around from minute to minute.
Frequently, he simply uses their voices to underscore stock footage, or
scenes unrelated to their specific occupations.  Morris teases with
darting images, forcing us to draw connections where connections aren't
obvious.  In so doing, he reveals the connection between the four men as
people who draw connections.  Each one sees something beyond the obvious
in his chosen field, applying unexected psychology to animals, plants and
even machines.  Each is both an explorer and (in the film's most frequent
motif) a circus performer -- they do what others would never think of
doing with an enviable singularity of purpose.
     The same sentiment could be applied to Morris himself.  Where most
documentarians seek to capture nobility or significance through big names
or big events, Morris peers into more obscure corners to find the beauty
in eccentricity; where most documentarians consider overtly "cinematic"
non-fiction works somehow tainted, Morris creates vivid visual tapestries
which should make Oliver Stone shake his head in embarrassment (and he
uses Stone's frequent cinematographer Robert Richardson, just to compound
the misery).  Simply put, Morris creates daring, captivating work in a
convention-bound genre.  Perhaps one could see FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF
CONTROL as self-congratulatory, if it weren't such a giddy, intellectual
thrill ride.  When Mendez shares the idea that "the other isn't something
to be feared, it's something to be explored...it's trying to figure out
the purpose that interests me," he could be speaking for the director, or
for any viewer ready to view the human circus through new eyes.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
FAST, CHEAP AND OUT OF CONTROL
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Sony Pictures Classics/Fourth Floor Prods.
 Director:  Errol Morris
 Writer:  Errol Morris
 Cast: Dave Hoover, George Mendonca, Ray Mendez,
Rodney Brooks
   This has got to be one of the oddest movies ever made.
Daring, yes. Risk-taking, absolutely.  Reductive, no way. 
You'd have little trouble dashing off a synopsis, if that's all you
want.  But usually we want to know the big question: What is
the movie about?  In an audience of 99 people you'll probably
get 100 opinions, most of which would be, "I don't know." 
Let's try, though.
   "Fast, Cheap and Out of Control" is a documentary in that
people are being interviewed and film clips issue forth to give
visual definition to what they are saying.  These interviews are
photographed in no ordinary way. Errol Morris, who is
responsible for such dynamic works as "The Thin Blue Line,"
"A Brief History of Time," and yet another which is ostensibly
about a pet cemetery, "Gates of Heaven," has his subjects
look straight at us, i.e. right at the lens of the camera.  That's
not unusual. What is novel is that while they are looking right
at us they are simultaneously making eye contact with the
lenser via an invention of the director called, improbably, an
Interrotron, which projects an image on a teleprompter.  But
we digress.
   Let's take a stab at what the film is about.  It is foremost an
examination of a 20th century pocket of Romanticism, a time
which has is swiftly passing us by, an era in which people did
not think of going to work from 9 to 5 or of making big bucks,
but of fashioning careers out of their innermost dreams. 
Morris considers the callings of four idiosyncratic people who
could have easily been chosen for the TV program "What's
My Line" if that series still existed.  The quartet are unknown
to one another, they do not meet at any time during the
course of the filming, and their lives are not juxtaposed.  One,
the bravest of the lot, is Dave Hoover, a lion tamer who
worships Clyde Beatty, the legendary domesticator of the king
of beasts who died not (romantically) in the cage but of
cancer.  The second and most staid member of the group is
George Mendonca, not your everyday gardener, but a muse
who visualized the sculpting of plants into the shape of
humongous animals.  The third, Rodney Brooks, seems the
most wild-eyed, an MIT scientist who designs robots which
crawl around the room like insects from the movie "Mimic"
and which, unlike most automatons, are given no instructions
by their creator.  Fourth, Ray Mendez, is yet another animal
lover who is "into" mole-rats, bald, blind creatures, almost
cute, that can eat through concrete.  
   Two of the human constituents of the picture look backward
to the 19th Century, when human beings explores the jungles
rather than sitting at computer terminals.  The other pair look
forward to a time in which human beings may actually
become obsolete, the world taken over by robots and bald,
blind creatures, almost cute, that can eat through concrete. 
Through the expert camerawork of the legendary Robert
Richardson--known as the lenser for Oliver Stone's films--and
amid the Philip Glass-like soundtrack of Caleb Sampson,
each of the four rhapsodizes about his life's work while
director Morris intercuts with some corny old World War II
jungle-serial movies.
   It's take a bit of time in this short film to see any connection
whatever among the four outside of their interest in animals. 
Rodney Brooks can elicit a few laughs, looking like the mad
scientist who allows his insect-like robots to zip about the
room and contemplates sending them to Mars--an anarchic
collage of metal, fast, cheap and out of control, running
around helter-skelter like puppies who have just completed
their shots and are enjoying their first romp outdoors.  At first
we see the connection between Brooks and Ray Mendez, the
latter declaring that in the future, if robots do not take over the
world then his mole-rats will.  
   Soon we regard the affinity between Hoover, who brings
civilization to lions and big cats, and George Mendonca, who
tames wild branches by carving them into gigantic giraffes
and the like.  
   "Fast, Cheap and Out of Control," screened at the 1997
New York Film Festival, was chosen for distribution by Sony
on a scouting mission to the recent festival at Sundance in
Utah.  Even if you don't know what to make of this cerebral
party, you'll be impressed by the range of camera equipment
used, which includes 35 mm, 16mm and 8mm films, video,
black-and-white, color, sped-up motion and flashy editing. 
Morris is obviously not doing a simple set of interviews with
the usual background visuals, but whimsically sighing at the
loss of an era.  You're not likely to see other men like these
four, totally dedicated to living their dream even as they know
their work has no permanence.  The animal gardens, which
took 15 years to build, could be destroyed in a day by a
hurricane or in a while longer by insects.  Lion taming is fast
losing its appeal.  The production of robots for their own sake
is simply pure research, and pure research seems to be on
the way out, while the investigation of the life of the mole-rat
is just not going to win huge grants from the national
endowments.  
   Summing up, you've just read 893 words which attempt to
pinpoint the subject of this unique film, but truth to tell, there
is none--or, rather, as the deconstructionists might say, its
subject is whatever you in the audience think it is.  Not Rated. 
Running Time: 80 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Bill Chambers
FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL ** (out of four)
documentary, directed by Errol Morris
Considered a leading documentarian, Morris's fifth non-fiction feature
is filled with rich characters and a unique-ness that we've come to
expect from the director of films as diverse as The Thin Blue Line and
Vernon, Florida.
In Fast, Cheap... Morris links the stories of a lion tamer, a topiary
gardener, a naked mole- rat expert, and a scientist who invents
robots. Each of these people is very interesting, particularly the
lion tamer, who is revealed to have an obsession for B-movie star and
circus performer Clyde Beatty. Clips of Mr. Beatty's films, dispersed
liberally throughout, are hysterically, Ed Wood-funny. But over the
course of 82 minutes, Morris barely lets any of them speak. Instead we
get endless montages, footage which visually equates each
interviewee's occupation. While most of said footage is beautifully
shot, by Oliver Stone's DP Robert Richardson, it's all very
self-indulgent and blunt. Morris insists on spelling out his ideas, as
if he doesn't trust his own (admittedly wobbly) hypotheses. The music,
by Caleb Sampson, doesn't help matters: all tinker-y piano and goofy
orchestrations, it would better accompany a Keystone Cops movie.
The title refers to a quote from the scientist, from a scene in which
he envisions hundreds of small robots roaming the surface of planets
instead of one lumbering explorer like the Mars probe.
The title more aptly refers to the picture itself, obviously not a
good thing.

Author
Bryant Frazer
       "I've been told by several people, 'You're old fashioned. You
       want to do everything by hand,'" topiary gardener George
       Mendonca complains, defending his continued resort to hand
       shears in trimming his intricately privet-sculpted animal
       creations. "This is the only way you can do it and do it
       right." Snip, snip.
       In some ways the slickest film yet from nonfiction auteur
       Morris (THE THIN BLUE LINE, A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME), FAST,
       CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL is reportage of the highest order.
       Journalism students should dream of making connections like
       these. Cross-cutting among interviews and filmed segments,
       Morris traces the lives of four disparate professionals who
       seem to share nothing but an immersion in their work, and
       then threads them around one another in an intricate
       quadruple helix. The fun is settling into your theater seat
       and wondering just what the hell one story can possibly have
       to do with the other. What Morris manages is something akin
       to an intellectual magic trick, an interrogative sleight of
       hand.
       One of the things that feels different about an Errol Morris
       documentary -- besides the always-striking visuals -- is the
       interview style, where subjects seem to look directly at the
       viewer. Weary of pressing his cheek against the camera lens
       to get this effect during conversations, Morris developed an
       elaborate double-camera gadget he calls, half-jokingly, the
       Interrotron. Through a rig that uses a pair of teleprompters
       to project video images of the interviewer for the subject
       and vice versa, these folks talk, startlingly, right to the
       camera -- to the video image of Morris, and by extension to
       the audience.
       The gardener wonders whether, after his death, anyone will be
       interested in maintaining the garden that he's devoted half
       his life to tending. The robot scientist is more than a
       little pleased to note that his creations may be primal
       examples of what an insect or even an animal is -- a
       complicated set of sensory receptors. The mole rat specialist
       is delighted to catalog the ways in which these vermin
       animals behave like insects, and notes that they may be more
       suited to long-term survival than people. And the circus
       trainer pines for a long-lost ideal that was exemplified by
       world-renowned trainer and showman Clyde Beatty, who starred
       in such serials as ZOMBIES OF THE STRATOSPHERE (excerpted at
       some length here, with affection).
       Starting to detect the patterns? FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL
       contains a multitude of parallels and tiny intersections,
       culminating in what feels like an elegy (the film is
       dedicated to Morris's late mother and stepfather). The film
       is balanced on that airy precipice dividing the already musty
       past from the alternately exhilarating and terrifying space
       that is the future. (The title is taken from Brooks' wish
       that NASA would send a payload of hundreds of expendable
       robots to scurry about the Martian surface, creating a sort
       of road map for the terrain -- fast, cheap, and out of
       control.)
       With able assists from editors Karen Schmeer and Shondra
       Merrill and cinematographer Robert Richardson (Oliver Stone's
       longtime collaborator), this becomes a cinematic contraption
       that's a wonder of narrative divergence and coherence.
       (Further enhancing the picture's wacky intellectual mood is
       the playful score by Alloy Orchestra founder Caleb Sampson.)
       Different story threads inform and comment on one another
       with the serene inscrutability of a Kieslowski film, or a
       surrealist dream. By cobbling together out of these motley
       musings a thesis on the nature of craftsmanship, invention,
       and existence itself, Morris reveals the presence of cosmic
       themes -- creation, evolution, death -- in earthbound lives.
       At the same time, and just as significantly, he pays tribute
       to a consuming passion for one's work. This breakdown of the
       dichotomy between the everyday and the extraordinary is
       likely as profound as anything you'll encounter in pop
       culture this year, and the visuals cry out for the big
       screen. Don't miss it.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Errol Morris
       Edited by Karen Schmeer and Shondra Merrill
       Cinematography by Robert Richardson
       Music by Caleb Sampson
       U.S., 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Errol Morris
Cast: Dave Hoover, George Mendonca, Ray Mendez, Rodney Brooks
Rated PG: Minor thematic elements
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    I had no idea what to expect from Fast, Cheap & Out of Control. I
saw it simply because it was there. I knew ahead of time that it is a
documentary, and that it was directed by Errol Morris, but I couldn't
have even guessed about its content. And how pleasantly surprised I am!
Not only is the film fascinating and deeply informative (albeit centered
primarily around less-than-conversational topics), but Morris probes
seriously into some deep issues. The result is an enchanting, lively
film that anyone can watch and enjoy, and still learn something in the
process.
    The film is about four individuals who initially seem to have
nothing in common. Dave Hoover is a wild animal trainer for a circus. He
speaks at great lengths about the perils and rewards involved in
attempting to manipulate a lion. George Mendonca is a topiary
gardener--he shapes plantlife to look like animals. Ray Mendez is an
expert on the hideous mole-rat. And Rodney Brooks is a robot scientist
concerned with re-creating the way certain animals and insects move
about the earth.
    Visually, the film is striking. The cinematography, by Robert
Richardson (who commonly works on Oliver Stone films), is full of truly
absorbing images. Often times, throughout the film's amazingly brief
80-minute running time, the audience is given an image that is almost
shocking in nature--Mendonca standing on a ladder, for instance,
trimming one of his animals in the darkened rain. What goes along
perfectly with this is the music by Caleb Sampson. The soundtrack
continually pulses throughout the film with a lively, energetic feeling
that drives the film at a brisk pace. Even if you aren't interested in
the subject material, the film would be a feast for the eyes.
    Fortunately, Morris has gone to great lengths to make sure that
there's no way you can't be interested in the subject matter. Not only
are the four professions described in the film fascinating on their own,
but their relation to each other is the central meaning that Morris
manages to convey. He says something profound about life an existence
here, and it doesn't feel overwrought and pretentious--it's a
level-headed, public oriented message. In concept, it's almost so
obvious that I was surprised I had never thought of it before.
    Take Brooks, for example, whose comments on robots taking over human
life in the future are truly alarming. Here is a guy making machines
that imitate insect life almost perfectly. Before watching this film, I
had no idea that robot technology was already so advanced. Mix this with
the musings of Mendonca, who explains why the modern electric shears are
totally useless for what he does--he requires detail, and so only
old-fashioned hand shears can do the work appropriately. Meanwhile,
Mendez is totally fascinated with the way his mole-rats roll in their
feces to identify one another. And Hoover modestly explains that, if the
lion were to understand its power, that the human taunting it would
never stand a chance.
    But what do these guys have to do with one another? Well, that's why
you need to see the film. I think to truly understand and gather
everything that Morris has packed into this movie, one needs to see it
more than once. This is the way all documentaries should be--interesting
and entertaining on the surface, but also containing underlying themes
that aren't apparent just from idly watching. Fast, Cheap & Out of
Control didn't change my life, but it did change the way that I look at
this genre. It also gave me something to think about, and that alone is
worth something these days.

Author
Ben Hoffman
This documentary is unique in its presentation and, for that matter,
its subjects.   From the opening titles of circus and elephants and
wild animals the film has never a dull moment. Interspersed between
the interviews with the documentary's subjects are other scenes that
appear to have no bearing on what the persons on screen is saying
but it soon becomes apparent that these seemingly disparate scenes
are very relevant. Throughout the film there is excellent
complementing music by Caleb Sampson.
The subjects themselves, though quite varied, have one big thing in
common:  they are 100% engrossed in their activity, never worrying
about what anyone else will say or think.   Dave Hoover is a lion
tamer who believes he can understand what goes on in the minds of the
lions he tames.  This is the kind of thing Clyde Beatty propounded
when he was the most famous wild animal trainer in the 1930s.
Hoover not only wants to be "like" Beatty; he wants to "be" Beatty.
Rodney Brooks works at MIT where he is an expert on robots,
particularly those that perform like insects.   By the time he adds
"eyes" for the robot to sense what is before it; adds "arms" and
"hands" to reach out and grasp, the robots begin to look quite
human.  The uniqueness of these robots is that they move and
maneuver without human guidance.
There is George Mendonca who became a topiary gardener when he
started cutting privet and trees into animal shapes.    This became
his life's work.
Ray Mendez devotes his whole life to the study of mole-rats.  As a
child he belonged to an entomology club where members dreamed that
one day they would find a world where people live like insects . . .
whatever that means.   When mole-rats are threatened, they are
willing to let one of their group die if it will save the rest.
With that kind of behavior, what chance do humans have of ever
besting them; very little, it would appear.
Fascinatingly directed and edited, the thread that ties the segments
together is that all four are about animal life and the different
approaches each of the subjects took to fulfill a dream.

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring: Dave Hoover, George Mendonca, Ray Mendez, Rodney Brooks
Director: Errol Morris
Producer: Errol Morris
Cinematography: Robert Richardson
Music: Caleb Sampson
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     Perhaps you have the same reaction to documentaries that I do.  In 
general, they aren't my favorite type of movie, and it's usually only 
with a degree of reluctance that I see even a highly praised member of 
the genre.  Despite my misgivings, however, I almost always come away 
educated and intrigued, provided, of course, that the film maker has a 
clear idea of what he or she is doing.  And, in the case of Errol 
Morris, the man who made one of the best-ever documentaries (THE THIN 
BLUE LINE), the strength of presentation couldn't be more apparent.  
     FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL isn't much like any of Morris' other 
well-known films -- GATES OF HEAVEN (about a pet cemetery), THE THIN 
BLUE LINE (about a murder), and A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME (about science, 
space, and infinity).  In fact, at first glance, this movie appears 
startlingly unambitious by comparison -- the kind of project one might 
encounter any night on PBS or the Discovery Channel.  But there's more 
to FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL than initially meets the eye.  Not only 
is there a great deal of craft involved in the film's production, but 
its underlying themes are compelling and universal.
     The basic framework for FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL has Morris 
interviewing four men with unique, but not terribly interesting, 
professions.  Dave Hoover is a wild animal trainer who works with lions 
and tigers in the circus ring.  George Mendonca is the topiary gardener 
(the person who sculpts hedges into lifelike shapes) for Green Animals' 
Gardens.  Ray Mendez is a mole-rat specialist (mole-rats are hairless 
mammals that live in insect-like colonies).  And Rodney Brooks is a 
robot scientist who works in an artificial intelligence lab at M.I.T.  
All four of these individuals are among the best in their respective 
fields, and it's their passion for their jobs, rather than anything 
especially startling or hypnotic about the work itself, that piques our 
interest.
     As we watch, however, we become aware that, by structuring FAST, 
CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL as he does, Morris is doing far more than merely 
presenting a series of talking-head interviews.  By piecing the film 
together with fast cuts and sequences where the soundtrack of one 
interview overlaps images depicting the activities of another of the 
subjects, Morris explores at least two intriguing, interrelated themes:  
the evolution of humankind and our never-ending attempt to control our 
environment.
     Contrast is a critical element.  Hoover, with his wild animals and 
his stories about serial film star Clyde Beatty, belongs to a business 
(the circus) that is losing out to the glitz of modern-day 
entertainment.  Likewise, Mendonca is one of the last of a dying breed.  
On the other hand, Mendez, with his observations about how the survival 
instincts of mole-rats exceed those of humans, and Brooks, who 
postulates that robots may ultimately outlive their creators, are men 
whose skill and knowledge place them on the road to the future.  Shaped 
by an ever-changing cultural and technical climate, jobs, like people, 
evolve.  By telling all four stories, Morris gives us a sense of what 
will be lost and what may be gained as time moves on.  FAST, CHEAP & OUT 
OF CONTROL functions as a requiem for the past and a nod to the future.  
     One thing that never changes, however, is man's desire to regulate 
everything around him.  Brooks speaks of his robots being the 
forerunners of a new breed of silicon-based life form that may 
eventually render our species extinct.  Despite his assertion that he is 
only an observer, Mendez takes an important role in shaping the 
existence of his mole-rats, hoping to learn more about himself through 
their actions.  Hoover's entire livelihood is based on mastering 
creatures that are more powerful and dangerous than himself.  And even 
the mild-mannered Mendonca alters the course of nature by twisting and 
shaping bushes into works of art.  In one way or another, all four are 
playing god.  
     Still, if you're a reluctant documentary-goer like me, there's 
probably only one question that you want answered:  what's so special 
about a movie than interviews a no-name lion tamer, a no-name hedge 
trimmer, a no-name vermin photographer (with a funny bow-tie), and a no-
name robot scientist?  The answer, simply and succinctly, is Errol 
Morris, who has the talent to give meaning to even the most apparently-
mundane material.  Spending time with the four subjects of FAST, CHEAP & 
OUT OF CONTROL isn't just an opportunity to learn about what they do, 
but, surprisingly, a chance to understand a little more about our place 
in the universe.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Errol Morris is one of our most accomplished documentarians.  His
A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME explores the meaning of life and infinity
through the mind of the brilliant physicist Stephen Hawking.  His THE
THIN BLUE LINE investigates a possibly innocent man sentenced to death
for murder.  And finally, what some consider his best, GATES OF HEAVEN
examines people's feelings about a couple of California pet cemeteries.
     FAST, CHEAP, AND OUT OF CONTROL takes everything we know about the
construction of a documentary and twists it around in fascinating ways.
Rather than choose one subject, he picks four seemingly unrelated
topics and then interlaces and intertwines them.
     All coming loosely under the category of wild animals, the
subjects include a circus wild animal trainer (Dave Hoover), a topiary
gardener (George Mendonca), a mole-rat specialist (Ray Mendez) and an
MIT robot scientist (Rodney Brooks).
     The prerequisite for a good documentary filmmaker is a knack for
choosing the right subjects to interview, and all four of these look
straight out of central casting.  Each has his own quirks that make him
photogenic.  Dave has the rugged good looks of the Marlboro Man, George
has beady eyes from his meticulous work, Ray wears a butterfly bow tie
with his plaid shirt, and Rodney has wide saucer-like eyes when his
imagination goes wild.
     In a highly non-linear format, Morris keeps the audio from one
section going when he switches to the visual of another.  As Ray talks
about the colonizing habits of mole-rats, the most insect-like mammal,
the camera moves on to the circus performers and people in the stands.
Using such techniques he forms a bond between the disparate material.
     Another secret of the film's success is the use of an Academy
Award winning cinematographer, Robert Richardson (JFK).  Most known for
his collaboration with Oliver Stone, Richardson's work was one of the
best parts of Stone's most recent film U-TURN.
     "Its all done from memory," George says telling us his topiary
secrets.  "You know what an animal looks like, and you start making an
animal."  He has been working on the same garden almost forever.  The
spinster who owned the house and grounds died over twenty years ago,
but he keeps on tending her large and magnificent gardens.  Perhaps
because George has the only stationary animals in the story, I found
this part the weakest link.
     Better is the confident but ever cautious lion tamer.  Dave grew
up watching and worshipping Clyde Beatty, a real life animal trainer as
well as an actor in adventure B movies like THE LOST JUNGLE.  Morris
includes old black-and-white movie footage of Beatty fighting wild
animals as well as warriors incongruously dressed in Roman helmets with
large wings on their backs.
     "If you're not scared of them, you're in big trouble," Dave tells
us about his wild animals.  After relating one horror story after
another, he admits that most trainers never retire, and heart attacks,
not animals, kill most of them.  A funny guy, he explains the reason
lion tamers point the four legs of a chair at the lion.  "His mind is
distracted from his original thought - eat the man in the white pants,"
he says.
     The robot scientist has a simple approach to problems.  He likes
to find out what every one assumes and then negates it.  Everyone
assumes, for example, that one needs stability to walk.  After
observing ants who fall all the time but are highly mobile, he designed
a robot that could move by falling along.  The film's title comes from
his proposal for massive numbers of small robots for scientific
exploration.
     Rodney likes to build contraptions without knowing how they will
get along in their environment.  "If you analyze it too much, life
becomes almost meaningless," he says.  His goal is to "understand life
by building something that is lifelike."  His robots may have lifelike
mannerisms, but they resemble nothing in nature with the possible
exception of insects.  Their bodies of moving circuit boards are quite
a contrast to the interspersed science fiction footage of man-like
robots.  Ever the dreamer, Rodney talks of a future with twenty tiny
robots for a dollar, whose sole purpose would be to come alive and
clean your television whenever it is turned on.
     My favorite part was Ray's mole-rats.  Small moles without fur,
they live in large ant-like colonies.  Among their more bizarre habits
are what he calls their "Zen bowel movements."  Their feces are
normally hard, except when they have hungry children.  Their kids live
on a diet of soft feces, and the adults can control whether to emit the
hard ones or the soft ones.
     FAST, CHEAP, AND OUT OF CONTROL runs a fast 1:20.  It is rated PG
and would be fine for kids five and up, but younger ones might be
scared by the lions.  I recommend the picture to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
