Title
Review for Vukovar poste restante (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Joan Ellis
Every now and then a film springs from an awful reality of
the present to sear itself on the conscience of everyone who sees
it. "Vukovar" is one of these. It is the story of two families
caught in the civil war that has destroyed a country and
bewildered the world. 
Filmed entirely on the site of this war's ashes, "Vukovar"
slashes through the headlines with a horrific picture of friends
and acquaintances pitted against each other for reasons buried
deeply in a historic patchwork of ethnic hatreds. With perfect
insight, someone asks, "If each of us has 20,000,000 ancestors,
how is it possible for anyone to think he is of pure extraction?"
The film opens with two families celebrating the marriage of
Toma (Boris Isakovic) and Ana (Mirjana Jokovic) in Vukovar, a
beautiful town of 50,000 by the edge of the Danube. On their
wedding day, a marching throng brings the instant realization
that their world will be shattered. 
"We're no longer fat or thin, or romantic or serious;" Toma
says; "we're either Croats or Serbs."  As with yesterday, today,
and forever, it is a country of innocents caught in a war
fomented by political zealots. 
We in the audience watch as these families lose each other,
and then we watch the absolute destruction of the city and
landscape that was such a part of their being. And we watch the
brutalization of two young mothers who knew joy a short time ago
and now will never know it again. Why is it that war always
bestows this terrible permission on sadists? 
"Vukovar" will stand as one of the most powerful antiwar
films ever made because it takes a stand only against the
intolerable human cost of war. It is a measure of the film's
power and fairness that both the Croatians and the Serbs are
furious at it. It begs the world to fight hatred with truth.
This is a war being fought not with the impersonal
annihilation of modern weaponry, but with machine guns in the
streets. It has the terrible tragedy of intimacy. These are their
streets, their villages, their families. "Vukovar," Ana says,
"has become a graveyard."     
Toma is a deeply good and kind and gentle man--the kind of
soldier who shoots to miss because he can't kill. Ana turns
quickly from a playful young girl in love to a woman whose heart
may as well have been ripped from her body. Superb performances
by these two young actors ensure the strength of this film. 
You may leave the theater still bewildered as to the why of
this war, but you will be in a rage at the fact of it. On some
very deep level, you will be a different person after you see
this film. Once again, a very important independent film has
brought to us truth and reality that scar the soul and stun an
audience to absolute quiet. Please see it.


Author
James Berardinelli
     If you turn on the evening news these days, one of the first images 
you're likely to see will originate from the devastated former 
Yugoslavia, where centuries-old hatreds have boiled over to ignite a 
scenario of unspeakable horror.  Yet the sights of Bosnia, presented by 
TV as gruesomely tantalizing tidbits of violence and death, rarely 
provoke a reaction from the casual viewer.  That's how it has always 
been with television news programs, however -- their coverage of any 
event, designed for those with limited attention spans, is superficial 
in the extreme.  It's nearly impossible to generate any strong feeling 
for a situation, no matter how cruel or inhumane it is, when all you get 
is a quick series of MTV-like clips.
     So, when it comes to the weightier matters of life, movies often 
step in where "real life" television leaves off.  Films like THE KILLING 
FIELDS, APOCALYPSE NOW, PLATOON, BEYOND RANGOON, HEAVEN AND EARTH, 
BEFORE THE RAIN, CRY THE BELOVED COUNTRY, SCHINDLER'S LIST, and dozens 
of others have gone "behind the scenes" of a news story to animate it, 
often in gut-wrenching detail.  Sure, all those motion pictures are, to 
one degree or another, fictionalized accounts of war and/or social 
injustice, but they give form to the tragedy.  Through their characters, 
who come to mean something to the viewer, the indifferent images of TV 
take on a personal aspect.  This is exactly the intent of VUKOVAR POSTE 
RESTANTE, a rare, even-handed account of the conflict ripping apart 
Bosnia.  This tale of loss, anguish, horror, and futility is powerful 
beyond words.
     VUKOVAR was filmed during 1994 in strife-torn Bosnia.  The city of 
Vukovar, from which the movie takes its name, was a thriving home to 
50,000 Serbs and Croats before the war.  Now, fewer than 3000 survivors 
remain.  Houses and businesses have been razed, and a pall of death and 
smoke lies over the ruins.  VUKOVAR's cameras catch all of this.  
Director Boro Draskovic chose to produce his movie in the former 
Yugoslavia because he believed no other part of the world could 
adequately capture his homeland's anguish.  So, at peril to cast and 
crew, who were occasionally fired upon by snipers, the story of two 
fictional citizens of Vukovar was committed to the screen.  It's a 
sobering consideration to recognize that the background of this picture 
is not a movie set. Often during VUKOVAR, the line between documentary 
and fiction becomes very blurred.
     Make no mistake, however -- VUKOVAR is not a sterile examination of 
the evils of war, nor is it a political diatribe.  Draskovic has a story 
to tell, and, while his narrative of two lovers is symbolic of nations, 
the intimate aspects of the movie remind one of a Shakespearean tragedy, 
with elements of ROMEO AND JULIET (the doomed romance), MACBETH (the 
three witches stirring an evil brew in their cauldron), and even JULIUS 
CAESAR ("The Dogs of War").  At times, the musical score is almost 
operatic in nature, borrowing heavily from, among others, Mozart.
     At the outset of the film, Ana (the stunning Mirjana Jokovic) and 
Toma (Boris Isakovic) are happy and in love.  With the news that the 
Berlin Wall has fallen, they rejoice in the possibility of a freer 
world.  Then, even as they marry and prepare to start a family, conflict 
breaks out across the country.  Ana, a Croat, and Toma, a Serb, find 
themselves unwillingly allied with opposing sides.  For Ana, it is a 
time of great personal loss.  When Toma leaves home to join the army and 
her parents are killed, the young woman finds herself alone in a 
suddenly strange and frightening country where rape, robbery, and murder 
are everyday realities.  Soon, as a reunion with her husband seems 
increasingly less likely, Ana struggles on only so that her unborn child 
will not enter the world as a corpse.
     If this was a Hollywood story, perhaps the lovers would be reunited 
at the end to live happily ever after.  But the film makers hail from 
Bosnia, and VUKOVAR has no more joy in it than current events permit.  
It is a grim story, but hardly more so than SCHINDLER'S LIST.  The 
biggest difference, of course, is the separate historical contexts into 
which the films fit:  the reality of SCHINDLER'S LIST is past; the 
reality of VUKOVAR goes on, and, if this movie and the short TV news 
snippets can be believed, the end may not be as close as the signing of 
a peace treaty.
     Distributors like Miramax and Fine Line have shied away from 
VUKOVAR, fearing a repeat of what occurred with 1995's BEFORE THE RAIN, 
a similarly-themed movie that died at the box office.  But VUKOVAR is a 
far more devastating experience, and those who do not avoid emotionally-
draining features should rejoice that this one, a film festival darling 
(twelve awards in thirty-five entries), will receive national 
distribution (albeit of a limited sort).  A stunning composition of fact 
and fiction, VUKOVAR deserves every accolade it collects.  Yet perhaps 
the most telling point is that nearly every showing concludes with a 
nonplused audience sitting in unbroken silence through the end credits.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
