Title
Review for Six Days in Roswell (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
This film was screened at Cinequest 10, the San Jose film festival.
Human folklore has always contained references to mythical beings
whose existence could never be rationally proven. At earlier times in
history these beings were often woodland creatures and spiritual
entities. In modern times, these have been replaced by
extra-terrestrial beings and unidentified flying objects (UFO's). This
film is a light-hearted exploration of an annual festival held in
Roswell, New Mexico. The festival commemorates the supposed crash of
an actual flying saucer containing intelligent creatures from another
realm, which was covered up by the U.S. government. This film is a
semi-documentary that examines the odd subculture that celebrates this
modern folklore.
The structure of the film consist of one man traveling to Roswell to
attend the festival, and his encounters with the many odd attendees.
In concept, the film is similar to the recent Trekkies, and this not a
coincidence. This film is produced by Roger Nygard, who directed
Trekkies, and the correspondent/narrator is Rich Kronfeld, who was one
of the "trekkies" presented in that film. This presents an odd role
reversal for Kronfeld, who was one of the odd fans in Trekkies, but is
the "sane" investigator in this film. Kronfeld executes his role
perfectly, because although he is clearly more eccentric that an
average person, he seems normal compared to the alien believers, and
his dry wit highlights the commentary.
A back story is injected to give the film structure beyond simply
compiling footage of the festival. The story purports that the insular
Kronfeld (who still lives with his mother and has never left his home
state of Minnesota) joins a group of enthusiasts to travel to Roswell
to determine whether alien visitors actually exist. Kronfeld is shown
at home, at work, and with other people back in Minnesota. Although
this setting has its own quirky flavor, it is meant to present a
contrasting frame of reference to which to compare the truly bizarre
setting of Roswell. The filmmakers readily admit that much of this
story is fabricated.
The festival at Roswell is too odd to be fiction. The belief in aliens
is one thing, but the extent of fascination some people have is
incredible. The landscape of Roswell is transformed into a surreal
landscape, with apparent non-humans roaming everywhere. Kronfeld's
participation and interaction with the people is wry and amusing.
Instead of simply being a passive inquisitor, Kronfeld intentionally
becomes a character in the story. When Kronfeld asks one of the
numerous trinket vendors if one of his alien spaceships is not simply
a Star Wars X-Wing fighter, the vendor responds that simply calling
anything alien will make it sell. This quick scene typifies the
atmosphere, where anything and everything remotely alien is
celebrated.
The footage is primarily a composition of the many sights and events
of the festival. These vary from an outrageous fashion show to a
serious debate about the credibility of the evidence for alien life.
The footage culminates in the unbelievably kitschy production of
"Roswell: The Musical".
Highly recommended. Although the film has a documentary format, it
departs from the genre by trying to be funny and entertaining rather
than insightful. Because of this focus, it takes the liberty of adding
contrived, staged footage to provide a backstory to the actual
coverage of the festival. The film succeeds in being entertaining,
partly because it composes the rich source material into a coherent
collage, and because the staged footage is actually funny so its humor
makes up for the betrayal of the format.
