Title
Review for Ninth Gate, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Johnny Depp, Frank Langella, Emmanuelle Seigner, Lena Olin.
Directed by Roman Polanski. Rated R.
I saw Roman Polanski's The Ninth Gate right after Final Destination,
and I'd be lying if I said that these circumstances didn't affect my
judgment at least a little bit. Many will argue that comparing the two
would be comparing apples and oranges because they are so superficially
different but I'd say that they have more in common than meets the eye.
After all, they have the same intention: to generate suspense and evoke
occasional laughs. So why does The Ninth Gate succeed while its more
mainstream counterpart fails? Because instead of relying on mayhem and
explosions, Polanski's superb supernatural thriller uses quiet,
building tension. By the time the ending comes around, I realized that
a) the time has flown by and b) I've moved precariously close to the
edge of my seat.
The movie has a mustached, older-looking Johnny Depp as Dean Corso, a
bibliophile specializing in extremely old and rare books. He does a lot
of mundane, regular stuff like appraisal and not-terribly-exciting
searches. He also has a few employers who expect more. One of these
employers is the creepy Boris Balkan, who has a gargantuan collection
of ancient volumes all having one thing in common: Satan is the main
character.
Dean has done things for Balkan in the past and has been paid
handsomely, but this time Boris has a special assignment for him. He
has one very special book, said to conceal the secret to unleashing the
devil's powers. Conveniently, it was written in 1666. There are three
surviving copies. Dean is to go to Europe and seek out the other two in
order to verify that Boris's is the real deal and not a phony.
The Ninth Gate is probably the most intense movie experience I've had
since Arlington Road, which is remarkable because there is not a whole
lot of action. The movie was quiet and slow, yet the excitement kept
building. This is partly because the plot is so inherently interesting -
- as Dean Corso begins to uncover the secrets of the mysterious book,
we're with him every step of the way, just as curious as he is. It also
has to do with controversial director Roman Polanski's masterful
plotting and staging of scenes. An example (minor spoiler ahead, skip
to next paragraph if you don't want it): in France, Dean meets up with
an enigmatic woman, who seems to pop up everywhere he goes in the most
opportune circumstances. At one point, we see her fly. Dean does not. A
lesser director would have punctuated the scene with loud music,
heavenly choruses, et al. Polanski stages it matter-of-factly; it's a
surprise made all the more creepy by the fact that it's not highlighted
in any way. Blink and you'll miss it.
When people talk about Johnny Depp, especially with negative
connotations, I always suggest that they watch The Astronaut's Wife and
Sleepy Hollow back to back to get a sense of the actor's astonishing
range. Now, I add The Ninth Gate to that list. He's a veritable
chameleon (a title usually reserved for the deserving, though less
daring, Edward Norton) and it's unbelievable to me that he has never
received an Oscar nomination. Here we see yet another side of him. His
performance is more subtle, not as distinctive, but that doesn't make
it any less impressive or engaging.
The one thing that prevented me from calling The Ninth Gate a full-
blown masterpiece is the ending. If Polanski's intention here was to
leave us with unanswered questions, he succeeded, as his movie just
sorta stops instead of giving us a satisfying and rewarding conclusion.
As spectacular as everything that came before the ending was, such
ambiguity was a letdown.
Still, there is so much good about The Ninth Gate that I recommend it
strongly despite a disappointing ending. There's nothing like a little
devil worship to complete a weekend, don't you think?

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Roman Polanski.
Cast: Johnny Depp, Emmanuelle Seigner, Frank Langella, Lena Olin, Barbara 
Jefford, Jack Taylor.
2000 - 133 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 11, 2000.
"The Ninth Gate," an alleged mystery-thriller from famed, yet controversial, 
director Roman Polanski (1968's "Rosemary's Baby," 1974's "Chinatown"), is a 
wildly overlong 133-minutes sludge through well-worn territory and 
predictable twists and turns, seemingly leading up to a whopper of an ending. 
But the ending never arrives; the screen just fades to white, then to black, 
and the credits roll, before you have even seen anything that would make you 
care one way or the other about the fate of the protagonist and the 
predicament he is in.
Boris Balkan (Frank Langella), a wealthy collector of Lucifer-themed relics 
in New York City, hires seedy book dealer Dean Corso (Johnny Depp) for a 
well-compensated mission: travel to Europe, weed out the other two copies of 
a treasured, potentially dangerous book he owns, the 17th-century satanic 
text entitled "The Nine Gates of the Kingdom of Shadows," and investigate 
which of the three copies is the original. Containing the power to summon the 
Devil, Corso must work fast to find them, for whoever owns one of the books 
may very well be plotting the end of the world.
Based on the novel, "El Club Dumas," by Arturo Perez-Reverte, "The Ninth 
Gate" drags out its only somewhat intriguing investigation to ridiculous 
lengths, slowly--and I mean slowly--moving from one scene to the next. It is 
only in retrospect that you realize just how superfluous much of the film is, 
as Corso learns very little throughout, and is so dense that the viewer 
always knows more than he does (which isn't much to know, to begin with). 
Following an appropriately deliberate prologue and a superbly realized and 
entrancing opening credits sequence, with a memorably sumptuous music score 
by Wojciech Kilar, the film goes straight into downtime, and stays there for 
over an hour, treading through tedious scenes of meaningless exposition that 
don't get Corso anywhere further in his search.
The second hour of the film picks up considerably, as you finally are treated 
to scenes that incredibly seem to be leading somewhere, even when they 
aren't. There are a few chase sequences placed within the running time to add 
a little action to the arduous proceedings, and, more effectively, a handful 
of highly effective and tautly directed setpieces. One late moment that will 
intentionally be left vague as to not reveal one of the very few disturbing 
developments, involves Balkan in a dark and atmospheric castle, black clouds 
forbiddingly looming overhead. All of the striking images the film has to 
offer, by the way, are thanks to the always-impressive cinematography of 
Darius Khondji (whose work on 1999's "In Dreams" was snubbed of an Oscar 
nomination).
For such a world-class filmmaker, Polanski gets little support from his 
actors, almost all of whom turn in amateurish performances, as if they were 
performing in their very first movie (which is far from the truth), or had 
just received the script five minutes prior to when filming commenced (which 
may be the case, based on the evidence here). Johnny Depp appears to be 
playing the movie for laughs, and isn't having much fun doing it, while Lena 
Olin, as the alluring previous owner of one of the books, slinks her way 
through her scenes and doesn't pay attention to such a thing as "good" 
acting. Of the major characters, only Emmanuelle Seigner, who happens to be 
Polanski's younger wife, spices up the goings-on. As a mysterious traveler 
that keeps running into Corso during his trip, and then finally is revealed 
to know more about "The Nine Gates" than meets the eye, Seigner adds 
much-needed life to a picture that, without her and a few select technical 
credits, would be as dead as a doornail.
"The Ninth Gate" wants to be a horror movie, and Polanski apparently is 
attempting to recapture the acclaim he received from his first satanic-themed 
motion picture, "Rosemary's Baby," but he has no such luck. That 1968 classic 
chiller offered an outstanding performance from Mia Farrow, and was filled 
with a lumbering sense of dread and fear, two things that are largely absent 
from "The Ninth Gate."    

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NINTH GATE, THE (director/writer: Roman Polanski; screenwriter: John
Brownjohn/Enrique Urbizu/from Arturo Perez-Reverte's Spanish novel El
Club Dumas; cinematographer: Darius Khondji; editor: Hervé de Luze;
cast: Johnny Depp (Dean Corso), Lena Olin (Liana Telfer), Frank Langella
(Boris Balkan), James Russo (Bernie), Emmanuelle Seigner (The Girl),
Barbara Jefford (Baroness Kessler), Jack Taylor (Victor Fargas), Jose
Lopez Rodero (Pablo and Pedro Ceniza), Tony Amoni (Bodyguard), Willy
Holt (Suicide), 1999-Fr./USA/Sp.)
Director-in-exile Roman Polanski (Rosemary's Baby) and the occult go
together like butter and toast. This, his first film since his 1994's
Death and the Maiden, is a visually stunning mystery chiller about the
supernatural that is a good example of old-fashioned storytelling. A
lengthy film (132 minutes) that doesn't overstay its welcome, as it
keeps one guessing till the very end how it will be resolved and even
then, there is puzzlement. But the film is not without some flaws in its
storytelling as attested by the last scenes, which are resolved in
pyrotechnics and do leave a lot to be desired.
Many critics will justifiably argue that there is no proper payoff in
the director's payoff. But I'll take this Polanski version of a horror
story over so many others that I have seen recently, there is an elegant
craftsmanship and an ability shown by him, to keep one in suspense for
most of the film without resorting to Hollywood's special effect grab
bag of tricks typically used for this genre. Polansky also captured the
feel of what it is like to be a rare-book collector. It is a film that,
if it does nothing else, it depicts the lives of those who are searching
for dramatic meaning in their life through books of the occult. That
Polanski is a skeptic, only adds resonance to the telling of the story.
A sleazy Manhattan rare-book dealer and consumate chain-smoker, Dean
Corso (Johnny Depp), is hired for a significant fee by a sinister,
extremely wealthy collector of occult books, Boris Balkan (Frank
Langella), to track down and authenticate which of the three extant
copies of a 17th century illustrated book "The Nine Gates of the Kingdom
of Shadows" authored by Satan himself is not the forgery. Aristide
Torchia, who co-authored the book, was burned to death by the Spanish
Inquisition as a heretic.
Balkan as owner of one of the three copies, has an overconfident
reliance on his demonic beliefs. He is dressed in an expensive
pin-striped Armani-type suit. After Corso meets with him in his sleek
New York skylight library setting, he is told that he will have to
travel to Portugal and France to track down the other two books.
The first casualty of the book is an elderly gentleman (Willy
Holt-Polansky's art director in "Bitter Moon") who hangs himself from a
chandelier in his study. He sold his book to Balkan the day before
killing himself. Liana Telfer (Lena Olin) is his rich widow. She aptly
fits the description of a femme fatale in a noir film, dressed in a very
unwidow-like black, as she seduces the book detective Corso in his New
York apartment. She comes calling on him, trying any possible means to
get back the book. When she is through with her sexual romp on the floor
with the owlishly bespectacled Corso, who is sporting a goatee, she
discovers the scholarly looking lover of rare books doesn't have the
copy of Balkan's Ninth Gates in his knapsack. She will, thusly, hunt him
down for the book throughout Europe, using her bodyguard/lover (Amoni),
a black man with blond hair (an albino), to do all her dirty work.
The only friend the mercenary broker seems to have, is Bernie (Russo), a
New York rare-book dealer, whom he has entrusted the invaluable book
with. When he heads to the airport, he stops by Bernie's bookstore to
get the book and finds him hung upside down in a similar way to the
first illustration in the Devil's book. Corso takes the book Bernie
securely hid for him to Europe and places it in his knapsack. He does
not make a copy of the book and therefore places himself in an awkward
spot if the book should be stolen.
In Toledo, Spain, Corso goes to the Ceniza Bros. bookstore, where the
Telfers acquired the "The Ninth Gates," interviewing the twins (Jose
Lopez Rodero-he plays both parts through the clever use of f/x
camerawork), in a scene that was deliciously funny, as they explain what
a forgery is and how rare-books could be verified by how they are bound
together. Corso then visits with Victor Fargas in Sintra, Portugal, who
now owns the book. It is interesting to see this once grand mansion
where the nobleman Fargas lives and how the once wealthy intellectual is
forced to survive by selling off a few of his rare books every so often,
but who refuses to sell the book that Corso wishes to obtain. His unique
lifestyle is one that is rarely depicted in movies as well as it is
here.
After some hectic dealings in Portugal, Corso takes his detective work
to Paris, where he meets the elderly wheelchair-bound Baroness Kessler
(Jefford-noted Shakespearian actress), in an attempt to see if Lucifer
has put his autograph on her book. Not surprisingly, murders and
intrigue follow the book detective's path, as he gets more fully
enmeshed in the search for authenticity. Some of the collectors believe
that by having the right formula they can conjure up the materialization
of Lucifer himself, giving the person holding that secret the same power
as God, which is indeed, if possible, more than what money can buy.
While Corso goes from one "Ninth Gates" owner to another to authenticate
their copies, he's pursued by a nameless, green-eyed blonde (Emmanuelle
Seigner-Polanski's actress wife), who appears out of nowhere and acts as
his guardian angel, and who may possess supernatural powers. She is the
most enigmatic character in the story, whose real identity will be
revealed by the end of the film. She did not appear to be like the other
book lovers in the film, even her choice of reading material is absurd,
"How to Win Friends and Influence People." She did have one nude scene
in the movie, which she passed with flying colors.
The film turns into a series of questions: Whose side is the
karate-skilled, mystery girl really on? Is she on Corso's side? Balkan's
side? Her own side? But the more pertinent question is, will Balkan get
Satan's powers by getting all the books?
There are more things to like about this film than dislike. For
starters, I was impressed by Depp's subdued performance, it gave his
character credibility and even though he wasn't an ethical character, he
made himself more palatable as the film progressed and he seemed to
become more of a victim than someone who is uncaringly in this deal for
just a windfall profit. He had a healthy detachment from the subject
matter of the book (just like the director was detached from the
storyline), as he unwittingly uncovers various reasons people like to
collect occult books. Then there is Langella, who is able to give a
masterfully threatening performance, as someone not satisfied with all
his possessions but who is after the power of the Devil. Satan shows up
not in a materialized form for him, but through his inner being. He is
more scary when he is offering his kindness (money) to Depp than any use
of a special-effect externalization of the devil could have been.
I was also impressed by the way Darius Khondji's cinematography took me
around Europe, into castles, private library collections,
voyeuristically looking into dark corners, and into a devil worship
ceremony. It was shot largely by using a wide-angled lens, always
pointing to interesting shots of dark corridors, or of villages that had
a strangely beautiful feel toward them. I felt I was transported into
the world of book collectors, hearing them converse and seeing what
makes them want to be collectors, and how some are merely pretenders and
some real lovers of books.
The film, unfortunately, ultimately suffered from an undue silliness and
how it ended by fading out to a glowing white screen, as if that is
supposed to mean something special, did not work for me. Unless, it is
meant solely as Polansky's private joke that all this devil worship is
nonsense in the first place, and by ending on a blank note, all he is
doing is telling the audience that there is nothing to see. If there's a
more metaphysical message, it wasn't conveyed to me by the film. But,
that aside, I still maintain that this picaresque film adapted from
Arturo Perez-Reverte's popular Spanish novel El Club Dumas is better
than most satanic thrillers, especially those recent ones relying on
blood and gore to shock the viewer. Here, the director is mostly
spoofing the conventions of horror movies and it is his very personal
humor that should be appreciated, along with the brilliance he brings to
the screen with his filmmaking ability.
The Satan worshippers' annual meeting on Torchia's birthday is a good
example of what I mean by the director's brand of malevolent humor being
on display, seeing how the wannabes in satanism are cloaked in black and
using mumbo jumbo to summon up Satan, as Langella boldly enters their
ceremony and calls them all fools and shouts, "Boo!" We then see them
run for cover. That is the joke Polansky is having with the audience. It
is similar in intention to what Stanley Kubrick's black mass orgiastic
gathering in Eyes Wide Shut, accomplished. Both these ritualized
ceremonies should not be looked at without seeing  them for the farces
they are in the eyes of each filmmaker.
Polansky has crafted a metaphysical suspense film that is more
lightheaded than scary, which might disappoint some but should not take
away from the many pleasures derived from this engrossing thriller.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Allan Jenoff
Corso (Depp) is an unscrupulous dealer in rare books, hired
by Balkan (Langella) to track down the remaining two copies
of The Nine Gates of the Kingdom of the Shadows.  Balkan owns
the third copy but believes two of the books are fakes.  He 
wants Corso to compare them.  First Corso visits the widow (Olin)
of the former owner of Balkan's copy - a man who commits suicide
after giving up the book.  And things start getting complicated.
Corso doesn't trust Balkan, who may be following him.  He's 
definitely being followed by a mysterious woman (Seigner), who
seems to have supernatural powers.  And people keep turning up 
dead.  Meanwhile the not so grieving widow seems to be lurking
in the background.  And Corso is beginning to wonder whether the
legend of the book, that its coauthor was Satan, is true.  And 
he begins to fear what will happen when his mission is completed.
Polanski likes making movies about morally ambiguous people 
who find themselves slowly drawn into evil.  So slowly, that it
becomes difficult to determine exactly when the irreversible
step was taken.  Characters like that can be seen in films like 
Chinatown, Death and the Maiden, and Macbeth. Corso is one of 
those characters.  No one would mistake him for a saint, he 
begins the film by cheating a family on the value of a rare 
book, but he does have some morals.  He says he loves money, but
at times he is willing to give up the chance at big money just
to get out of this macabre deal he has struck.  But something
keeps pulling him back.  Curiosity, lust, the desire for revenge, 
maybe even fear - there's always something. 
Depp is excellent, always stopping just this side of the brink 
of parody.  Langella and Olin are both suitably mysterious and
frightening.  Seigner gives a surprisingly strong performance.  
The direction is reasonable (weak for Polanski).  A few scenes, 
like the opening sequence and the titles stand out.  But compared
to most horror films, this is brilliant stuff. Unfortunately,
the story is the weak point.  While the characters are 
interesting, the story verges on dull.  Not much happens and
nothing is resolved.  I don't need to be spoon fed a resolution,
but this film doesn't even give you any decent hints.
I paid full price for this film and didn't feel cheated.  Horror
fans (and fans of Depp or Polanski) will find it well worth the
price.  For the rest of you, wait for the video.  

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Roman Polanski's THE NINTH GATE, Johnny Depp plays Dean Corso, a rare
book dealer who is looking for a couple of good books.  But, like men
buying "Playboy", he's only interested in looking at the pictures.
Other characters in the movie are dying to read the books.  Literally.
Nefarious book collector Boris Balkan (Frank Langella wearing some truly
ridiculous glasses) hires Dean to find the other two copies of a book
known as The Ninth Gate.  Boris, who has a copy himself, tells Dean that
one or more of the books may be fakes.  Boris wants Dean to compare his
copy with the others.  Needless to say, Boris isn't exactly telling him
the full and complete truth about this antiquarian search.
The story opens with the suicide of the last owner of Boris's copy.
There is a lot of foul play afoot.  Dean, however, is aided by a
gorgeous guardian angel of sorts known only as The Girl (Emmanuelle
Seigner).  In this extremely predictable story, as soon as The Girl
shows up, you can immediately predict whom she's working for and just
when she will seduce Dean.  For no extra charge, the writers (John
Brownjohn and Roman Polanski) throw in an EYES WIDE SHUT subplot.
The most surprising aspect of the movie, given the director, is that it
isn't outlandish enough and lacks significant energy.  A supernatural
thriller that can put you to sleep with its plodding pacing is not
exactly a recipe for success.
Johnny Depp, who usually adds something special to any movie with which
he's associated, phones in his part this time.  Acting remote and
uninvolved, he goes through the motions but never gets involved
emotionally with his character.
The script bursts with clichéd moments.  "You don't know what you're
getting into, Mr. Corso," advises one of the book owners.  "Get out
before it's too late!"  There are also sequences with killer drivers who
keep missing Dean and one in which his eyeglasses are smashed.  I tried
thinking of any original scenes in the picture, but I couldn't recall a
single one.
The ending is lame and silly.  This is especially infuriating since the
only reason to sit through the entire movie is the almost academic
interest as to exactly how the mystery will be resolved.
THE NINTH GATE runs a long 2:12.  The film is rated R for some violence
and sexuality and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Artisan Entertainment
 Director: Roman Polanski
 Writer: John Brownjohn, Enrique Urbizu, Roman Polanski.
Novel by Arturo Perez-Reverte, "El Club Dumas"
 Cast: Johnny Depp, Frank Langella, Lena Olin,
Emmanuelle Seigner, Barbara Jefford, Jack Taylor, Jose
Lopez Rodero, James Russo, Tony Amoni
   The public fascination with movies on occult themes is
bottomless.  Given the general routines of our lives--our daily
trips to work, shopping for this and that, suburban barbecues
on weekends while city people go to the zoo--we seek out
drama and conflict more exotic than that of ritual battles
between political candidates who debate such trivial matters
as whether a building on a deserted street should be seized
and destroyed to make room for a wider road.  In short, we
look for battles that have higher stakes than squabbles within
cities or a discordant national dialogue or even rows between
nations.  We want nothing less than a clash between good
and evil, in which selling your soul to the devil does not mean
taking bribes to award a contract to x or y construction
company but a literal conjuring up of the Lucifer to achieve
power beyond ordinary human scope.  
   Few directors can comply with audience demands to be
pulled out of their mundane worlds better than the sixty-six
year old Roman Polanski.  We can understand Polanski's
interest in the obsessions of the principal characters of his
absorbing new movie "The Ninth Gate" when we grasp his
difficult youth.  Polanski had a terrifying childhood.  At the
age of eight, his parents were shipped off from Krakow,
Poland, to a Nazi concentration camp where his mother died. 
Roman escaped from the Jewish quarters (ghetto) of Krakow
before its destruction, was hidden by Catholic families as he
wandered the Polish countryside, and in more than one
instance became the victim of a sadistic game by Germans:
They used him for target practice, watching Polanski dodge
bullets by soldiers who used him for target practice in much
the way that Ralph Fiennes' character exercised his power in
Steven Spielberg's blockbuster, "Schindler's List."  His early
childhood, then, was given over to more fear than perhaps
the most abused kids in the U.S. today experience.  This
anxiety translates to his films, and though Polanski is capable
of breaking loose from his characteristic style with an
exquisitely literary and cinematic "Tess," he is best known
today for his adaptation of Ira Levin's modern thriller,
"Rosemary's Baby"--in which an innocent woman does not
suspect the bargain that her husband has made with
satanic forces.
   Something of "Rosemary's Baby" comes forth in "The Ninth
Gate," though not until the penultimate scene.  Most of the
lengthy--but not overlong--drama accommodates a
supernatural tone, but happily,  no ridiculous aliens burst
from the abdomens of human beings and no stereotypical
bloodsuckers seduce their victims into eternal, if profane, life. 
Polanski relies on a noir inflection, shooting many of his
scenes in dimly lit interiors and displaying his central
character as a chain smoker with scholarly, owlish glasses
who becomes involved  with two fetching women that could
have come from a Hammett novel.
   The talented and diversified Johnny Depp performs in the
role of Dean Corso, a man with an enormous knowledge of
rare books who is also a mercenary willing to sell his talents
to the highest bidder.  Essentially a book detective, he takes
on a commission from the fabulously rich collector Boris
Balkan, Ph.D. (Frank Langella), whose vast personal library
includes the exceedingly rare "The Nine Gates of the
Kingdom of Shadows" published during the 1600s and
allegedly co-authored by Lucifer himself.  Balkan offers a
huge sum to Corso, who must travel to Portugal and France
to find the other two copies of this rare book, presumably to
determine whether Balkan's copy is authentic or a forgery. In
the course of his investigation he interviews the
sinuous Liana Telfer (Lena Olin), recently widowed from the
previous owner of the book, and is followed everywhere by a
mysterious, green-eyed blonde whose name is not revealed
(Emmanuelle Seigner) but whose identity becomes clearer in
the concluding scenes.
   Frank Langella, not unaccustomed to villainous roles during
his career on stage and screen, looms physically large in this
production.  Wearing an unusual rug on his head, an
expensive pin-striped suit on his body, and a heavy pair of
eyeglasses on the bridge of his nose, Langella is convincing
as a man whose millions do not provide what he is really
after--more power than that enjoyed by any human being. 
Since the engravings in the books he seeks would complete
a set of illustrations he already owns and allow him to conjure
the devil--much as Rabbi Loew animates an avenging
monster in Paul Wegener's 1920 film "The Golem"--Balkan
will stop at nothing to gain possession of the volumes.  
   Whether you think the film comes apart near the finish as
many critics have offered depends really on your age.  A
youthful audience may turn on from the unleashing of 
psychic energy as black-robed men listen to a sinister
supplication in Latin, while a more enlightened crowd will
appreciate the human aspects of the drama, especially
the remarkably adept performance by Depp.  "The Ninth
Gate" is far and away superior to the blatantly exploitative
"End of Days," avoiding most of the special effects beloved of 
Peter Hyams while displaying a humorous scene involving
Jose Lopez Rodero who is f/x'd as a pair of twins, Pablo and
Pedro Ceniza.  Though the final minute of the film will have
most of the audience scratching their heads and wondering
"Is that all?" despite its generous 132 minutes, "The Ninth
Gate" is for the most part an appropriately restrained, deftly
acted and smartly stylized with a dynamite score by Wojciech
Kilar.  
Rated R.  Running Time: 132 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Roman Polanski
WRITTEN BY: Roman Polanski and John Brownjohn
MPAA: Rated R for some violence and sexuality.
Runtime: USA:127 / UK:133 / Argentina:133 / Finland:134 / France:132 /
Spain:143
Country: France / Spain / USA
Language: English / French / Latin
Color: Color
Certification: USA:R / UK:15 / Belgium:KT / Finland:K-16 / France:U /
Germany:16
After 'Chinatown' he disappeared, and to this day everyone were anxiously
waiting for his comeback. Now Artisan Pictures presents Roman Polanski's
fresh thriller "The Ninth Gate". Polanski was fascinated by the concept of
good and evil, their effect and place in our lives. "The Ninth Gate" is no
exception. It is a more intelligent and elegant version of 'End of Days'
The Ninth Gate begins ominously  a comfortable-looking study takes on a
distinctly uncomfortable atmosphere as middle-aged man hangs himself with a
rope that dangles from the chandelier. Then we see Dean Corso (Johnny Depp,
'Sleepy Hollow') at work. He's a rare books expert, of `the lean, hungry,
restless type, who would stab friends in the back.' As the wealthy book
collector Boris Balkan (Frank Langella, 'Dracula' ) observes, `It is easy to
trust a man whose loyalty can be measured in money'. Corso is highly skilled
at his work, a position which requires dexterity, cultural expertise, nerves
of steel...and few scruples. Known for locating rare books for wealthy
collectors, Corso is hired by eminent book-lover and scholar of demonology,
Boris Balkan. Corso's mission: to find the last two volumes of the legendary
manual of satanic invocation "The Nine Gates of the Shadow Kingdom" - a book
surpassingly written by Lucifer himself. Corso has to compare them with
Balkan's first volume, supposedly the only one of its kind, and ascertain
the authenticity of the series. Corso accepts the challenge. From New York
to Toledo, Paris to Cintra, he immerses himself in a labyrinth full of
pitfalls and temptations, disturbing encounters, violence and mysterious
deaths. Protected by an angelic creature and guided by a force more powerful
than himself, the hunter solves one by one the mysteries of the dreaded Book
and discovers the real purpose of his mission...
Polanski carefully constructs his script and creates very interesting
characters. Among the other sinful types racing with Corso toward their
devilish goals are nymphomaniac rich widow Liana Telfer (Lena Olin), and her
menacing albino bodyguard (Tony Amoni), the angry-at-God wheelchair-bound
Satan aficionado Baroness Kessler (Barbara Jefford) and a mysterious blond
backpacker who appears everywhere and may possess supernatural powers
(played by Polanski's wife, Emmanuelle Seigner).
The film becomes a crazed journey into darkness. What starts as a quest for
money, goes deeper as he dives into his soul. Corso is a professional in his
area, nonetheless it looks like he is following his own shadow. The film is
greatly woven as Polanski plays with the definitions of good and evil. The
pure, real evil is not 'the end of days'. It's not an apocalypse, fire or
fury, but the dark side of the human soul and psyche. Satan need not show
himself with external signs, but can work entirely within ourselves -- our
minds and souls. Evil resorts in us and is as natural as goodness, only
easier to live by.
This film is at times funny, at times frightening, shocking and operating on
a slighter higher intellectual level than most of its genre. Like in 'The
Devil's Advocate' nothing is obvious and nothing is primitive. The Devil
doesn't puke blood or blow up buildings. And yet, he shows himself. He is
everywhere around us. And by taking the dark path, we're letting Him into
our souls. Sometimes he can be seen in a little girl, sometimes in a dog.
And little by little, Corso becomes the monster he seeks. As the Devil
brilliantly says in the slightly better 'The Devil's Advocate': "..Follow
the money..straight to the top..", Dean Corso persuaded the only thing
sacred for him. His path went through greed, lust, anger and finally led to
the key to the darkest place of his soul. He finally understood his place
and meaning..
The movie is one intense visual nightmare, based on the European hit "El
Club Dumas" by Spanish writer Arturo Perez Reverte. It is an ironic, tense,
literate story in which Lucifer and his minions and worshippers increasingly
erupt into everyday reality. 'The Ninth Gate' is a typical European movie,
made in the classic style. This means -- no expensive models, no action
sequences, no digital special effects. It is full of terrific locations, and
Polanski's eye has not faltered. He has a fine photo/design team, a good
score by Wojciech Kilar, and his knowledge of Europe puts him way ahead of
most American directors who could have been hired. Johnny Depp is a perfect
choice for the cynical and intelligent 'book detective' -- the master of
every situation. With a develish black beard and dark eyes, he coolly walks
the streets, smoking a dozen cigars a day. Depp is spectacular in a role
that is difficult and demanding. Perfect is Frank Langella as the mysterious
and deadly aristocrat. Interesting is Lena Olin as the deadly beauty and
Barbara Jefford as the sinister invalid, hungry for revenge. Worse is
Emmanuelle Seigner, who is perfect when the camera zooms into her diabolical
green eyes, but she is not much of an actress. She remains the Sofia Copolla
of this film.
"The Ninth Gate" is the latest horror movie by a master of the genre. It's
not a perfect film. It's not as provoking and energetic as 'The Devil's
Advocate' and it's not as genially frightening as 'Rose Mary's Baby'. It is
unfortunately a bit dull and boring at times, when Corso is desperately
running through the empty streets of European cities. And I wonder if
audiences will accept it that way. With "Scream 3" and "Battlefield Earth"
around the corner, will today's audiences accept intelligence or embrace the
usual blood, gore and technological marvels? I think that the answer is
obvious: this will not be a major hit at the box office. But for you all
serious movie goers -- this is quality. 'The Ninth Gate' is drained in
Polanski's specialties: rich dark humor, mysterious premise and overwhelming
atmospheres of doom and dread.
This review is written by Alex Ioshpe (C) 1999

Author
Jerry Saravia
Johnny Depp stars as Dean Corso, a goateed, unethical book dealer who
specializes in finding rare books for wealthy collectors (the kind of books not
available online at Amazon.com). One particular collector, Boris Balkan (Frank
Langella), requests Dean's help in locating two existing copies of "The Nine
Gates of the Kingdom of the Shadows," a guide on how to conjure the spirit of
Satan, reportedly written by Satan himself. But Satan could not have written
three different copies of the same book, now could he? Dean's job is to
authenticate the other existing copies, and to determine if Balkan's is the
real deal. At first hesitant, Dean decides to travel to New York, Paris and
Portugal on his search. He encounters twin booksellers, a feisty widow (Lena
Olin), a stringent baroness in a wheelchair (Barbara Jefford), and an
aristocrat who plays the violin (Jack Taylor) and lays out all his precious
books on the floor of his living room. Naturally there are mysterious deaths
along the way, and there is a mysterious woman, identified in the credits as
the Girl, with piercing green eyes (Emanuelle Seigner, Polanski's wife) who
happens to appear wherever Dean goes. 
"The Ninth Gate" has a smoothly refined, exquisitely moody feel to it, thanks
to the amber, murky tones in the cinematography. Every scene in the film feels
as if there are mysterious forces within waiting to be uncovered, and the pages
of the books evoke an elusiveness in Dean's close introspection of every single
detail - you just sense he will find something which may lead nowhere. That is
Polanski's gift as a storyteller, letting minute details flourish in our mind
but we must be quick to catch them. I like the way he makes us focus on the
Girl when she first appears at Balkan's lecture, he tilts the camera down to
show that her legs barely touch the floor where she sits. The other neat touch,
though incidental in theory, is when Balkan shows Dean his collection of books
guarded by glass doors where the password to open them is 666. I also found it
interesting that Dean never sees the Girl floating in the air whenever chaos
ensues. 
In the past, Polanski's atmosphere, mood and implicit horror always lead to a
dramatic, shocking finale, as in "Repulsion" or "Rosemary's Baby." This time,
the film sort of ends but in such an abrupt, wanting fashion that we wonder why
he went through the whole expense of involving us in the first place. To add
insult to injury, the film's final half-hour is submerged in absolute ridicule,
including a laughable Satanic ceremony, Langella yelling and screaming while
chanting to Satan, and a gratuitous sex scene that would make Hugh Hefner
chuckle with derisive laughter. 
I still enjoyed "Ninth Gate" overall but it is more of an exercise in style
than substance, and Polanski does not take the film as seriously as he should
have. It is as if he wanted to revisit the themes of "Rosemary's Baby" and
decided to end it all in a "Fearless Vampire Killers" mode. A guilty pleasure
for us, and probably for Roman as well.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or concerns at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Bromborough)
Released in the UK by UIP on June 2, 2000; certificate 15; 133 minutes; 
countries of origin France/Spain/USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Roman Polanski; produced by Mark Allan, Antonio Cardenal, Inaki 
Nunez, Roman Polanski, Alain Vannier.
Written by John Brownjohn, Roman Polanski, Enrique Urbizu; based on the novel 
"El Club Dumas" by Aturo Pérez-Reverte.
Photographed by Darius Kondjhi; edited by Hervé de Luze.
Chandeliers are grand, ornate and thoroughly ridiculous, and sometimes fall 
down on people. Roman Polanski's "The Ninth Gate" is like that -- a 
supernatural thriller and detective movie that begins by playing tricks with 
its genre and ends up playing one on the audience. It deliberately leaves us 
unsatisfied, but is silly and goofy and a whole lot of fun.
Johnny Depp stars as Dean Corso, a rare book dealer hired by a strange 
collector (Frank Langella) to track down a book entitled "The Nine Gates of 
the Kingdom of Shadows". Legend has it that its illustrations, when used in 
satanic ritual, can summon up Lucifer himself. Corso, in trying to find it, 
runs into one strange person after another, and we are reminded of such films 
as "The Big Sleep" and "Angel Heart", although "The Ninth Gate" is goofier, 
and the structure and details of the plot make it extremely predictable.
Until, that is, the last act, when the fire-and-brimstone conclusion we've 
been expecting doesn't happen, and there is a confusing final shot that 
leaves us wondering whether Corso has lost power over his soul, sold it, or 
gone to battle.
Polanski, the director, is manipulating us. He knows how to make a serious 
detective movie ("Chinatown"), tale of witchcraft ("Macbeth"), or movie about 
the Devil ("Rosemary's Baby") -- but he's decided to forget about that and 
have a little fun. The early scenes involve us with a subtle, odd sense of 
humour: they undermine the seriousness of the plot by focusing on ridiculous 
images like a light fixture a guy hung himself on; and by letting Depp skulk 
through the movie with an eyebrow raised, as he did in "Sleepy Hollow". Then 
the anti-climactic nature of the ending reveals that Polanski's chuckles 
extend to us, because he's toying with us just as surely as he is with the 
film noir genre. Odd, but not uninteresting.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website at 
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
   Problem is: when Roman Polanski directs and Johnny Depp
stars, you expect more than you get in this grim, third-rate horror
mystery.  Returning to his Rosemary's Baby roots, Roman Polanski helms
this thriller, casting Johnny Depp as an unscrupulous antique book
dealer who is hired by a wealthy New York publisher, Frank Langella,
who has just acquired a rare 17th century Venetian text called The
Nine Gates of the Kingdom of the Shadows.  Langella is a demonologist
who believes that this tome, along with another two, are manuals of
satanic invocation.  Legend has it that if the engravings in the books
are assembled properly, Lucifer will be released from Hell.  Depp's
assignment is to locate the other two volumes in France and Portugal
and to ascertain their authenticity. Interesting concept. Only what
comes next makes little sense. Depp goes to Europe and develops what
he terms a "growing obsession" with his mission. Predictably, there's
a femme fatale, Lena Olin, along with Polanski's wife, Emmanuelle
Seigneur, who serves as Depp's mysterious guardian. Based on the novel
El Club Dumas by Arturo Perez-Reverte, it's been adapted for the
screen by Enrique Urbizu, John Brownjohn, and the director who make
the quest remarkably incoherent and quite lacking in
suspense. Cinematographer Darius Khondji does remarkably sinister
camera work, and production designer Dean Tavoularis creates a
convincing replica of Manhattan since Polanski, who is considered a
fugitive, could not film in the United States. Curiously, if you saw
Eyes Wide Shut, you may find the secret sect of robed society people
interested in the occult vaguely familiar. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, The Ninth Gate is a blithering baroque 4. Scary?
No. Silly? Yes.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Another devil movie?!? Well, not really. Sure this film is centered around a
man's search for ancient satanic books, but unlike STIGMATA which took the
MTV route or END OF DAYS, which took Arnie and dove head-first into thrill
mode, this film relies entirely on its mood, its haunting score, its
carefully laid out clues and its leading man to keep your interest. Think
EYES WIDE SHUT meeting ANGEL HEART.
PLOT:
An unscrupulous book appraiser is hired by an eccentric collector to find
and authenticate the two other copies of the "Book of the Nine Gates", a
tome which apparently holds the key to conjuring up the devil. It isn't long
before the book sleuth finds himself caught up in a mysterious game of cat
and mouse.
CRITIQUE:
Creepy, atmospheric, slow-moving mystery which drew me in with its awesome
opening credit sequence, kept me interested with its dark, moody look and
sound, and stapled my final approval with an unpredictable resolution worthy
of a second trip to the theatres. But let's talk real turkey here...Johnny
Depp pots yet another great role and takes full advantage of his
ever-expanding talent to present us with yet another unique and engaging
performance. This man is totally on top of his game right now (besides being
a great-looking individual!) and seriously has me looking forward to any of
his future roles. Harumph...but back to the review. This movie is definitely
not for your typical thrill-a-minute popcorn crowd. No way! In fact, its
mandate doesn't really include thrills as much as it does the creation of
feelings of uneasiness. I don't know if it was just me, the film's brooding
cinematography, its eerily seductive soundtrack or the general Euro-feel of
the entire movie, but this one definitely had me by the balls the whole way
through.
Of course, it's really more of a mystery film than anything else. A thinking
man's (or woman's) movie, if you will. No easy answers. No
wham-bam-thank-you ma'ams. Just a lot of subtle hints here and there,
something said, something shown, a person seen before...definitely a film
which asks its audience to pay attention and appreciate its drawn out
nature. And drawn out it is. The one thing I would have liked was if they
had cut it down a little, it felt like it ran on a little near the end. But
then again, once the final resolution revealed itself, I can't say that I
held much else against the film. Having said that, it is to note that the
ending is actually quite vague and surely in need of further discussion or
re-examination in order to fully appreciate its meaning. I mixed and matched
some of my ideas with that of my friend, and within a few minutes, we had
already uncovered several interesting theories to complete the puzzle.
Ironically, it is the film's ambiguity that left me further intrigued to
watch it all over again. Of course, I won't deny that its unclear ending,
peculiar pace and sheer length won't easily turn many people off, because I
am sure that they will, but for me personally, the film worked on several
levels, with the most important one being that of entertainment.
I really liked this film. Johnny Depp is always interesting to watch, the
plot has basically been seen before but not with all of its subtleties, the
score is Hitchcockian and flawlessly intertwined with the film's dark,
stylish look and best of all, the ending keeps your brain working even after
the final reel clicks the end. Don't expect action, don't expect many
thrills, don't expect Arnie with a machine gun. This is a simple mystery
film mangled in the supernatural with zero special effects and a lot of
depth. Interested?

Author
Jerry Saravia
Johnny Depp stars as Dean Corso, a goateed, unethical book dealer who
specializes in finding rare books for wealthy collectors (the kind of books not
available online at Amazon.com). One particular collector, Boris Balkan (Frank
Langella), requests Dean's help in locating two existing copies of "The Nine
Gates of the Kingdom of the Shadows," a guide on how to conjure the spirit of
Satan, reportedly written by Satan himself. But Satan could not have written
three different copies of the same book, now could he? Dean's job is to
authenticate the other existing copies, and to determine if Balkan's is the
real deal. At first hesitant, Dean decides to travel to New York, Paris and
Portugal on his search. He encounters twin booksellers, a feisty widow (Lena
Olin), a stringent baroness in a wheelchair (Barbara Jefford), and an
aristocrat who plays the violin (Jack Taylor) and lays out all his precious
books on the floor of his living room. Naturally there are mysterious deaths
along the way, and there is a mysterious woman, identified in the credits as
the Girl, with piercing green eyes (Emanuelle Seigner, Polanski's wife) who
happens to appear wherever Dean goes. 
"The Ninth Gate" has a smoothly refined, exquisitely moody feel to it, thanks
to the amber, murky tones in the cinematography. Every scene in the film feels
as if there are mysterious forces within waiting to be uncovered, and the pages
of the books evoke an elusiveness in Dean's close introspection of every single
detail - you just sense he will find something which may lead nowhere. That is
Polanski's gift as a storyteller, letting minute details flourish in our mind
but we must be quick to catch them. I like the way he makes us focus on the
Girl when she first appears at Balkan's lecture, he tilts the camera down to
show that her legs barely touch the floor where she sits. The other neat touch,
though incidental in theory, is when Balkan shows Dean his collection of books
guarded by glass doors where the password to open them is 666. I also found it
interesting that Dean never sees the Girl floating in the air whenever chaos
ensues. 
In the past, Polanski's atmosphere, mood and implicit horror always lead to a
dramatic, shocking finale, as in "Repulsion" or "Rosemary's Baby." This time,
the film sort of ends but in such an abrupt, wanting fashion that we wonder why
he went through the whole expense of involving us in the first place. To add
insult to injury, the film's final half-hour is submerged in absolute ridicule,
including a laughable Satanic ceremony, Langella yelling and screaming while
chanting to Satan, and a gratuitous sex scene that would make Hugh Hefner
chuckle with derisive laughter. 
I still enjoyed "Ninth Gate" overall but it is more of an exercise in style
than substance, and Polanski does not take the film as seriously as he should
have. It is as if he wanted to revisit the themes of "Rosemary's Baby" and
decided to end it all in a "Fearless Vampire Killers" mode. A guilty pleasure
for us, and probably for Roman as well.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at faustus_08520@yahoo.com
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE NINTH GATE (France, Spain, 1999) *** Produced and directed by 
Roman Polanski. Written by Enrique Urbizu, John Brownjohn, Polanski, 
from the novel "El Club Dumas" by Arturo Perez-Reverte. Photography, 
Darius Khondji. Editing, Herve de Luze. Production design, Dean 
Tavoularis. Music, Wojciech Kilar. Cast: Johnny Depp ( Dean Corso), 
Frank Langella (Boris Balkan), Lena Olin (Liana Telfer), Emmanuelle 
Seigner (The Girl),  Barbara Jefford (  Baroness Kessler),  Jack 
Taylor (Victor Fargas), Jose Lopez Rodero (Pablo and Pedro Ceniza), 
James Russo (Bernie), et al. Released (USA) by Artisan 
Entertainment.133  minutes.  R (sex and violence)
Black humor seems to be, among other characteristics, in the genes of 
director (and writer and actor) Roman Polanski -- but that's a 
speculation. What is certain is that his childhood and youth were 
marked by dark events. He was born in Paris (1933) in a Jewish-Polish 
family which, in 1936, made the wrong choice of returning to Poland. 
That's where the German attack of September 1, 1939 started World War 
II. In 1941 Roman's parents were sent to a concentration camp where 
his mother died. The boy escaped the Cracow ghetto, meandered in the 
country taking refuge in Catholic families. His  survival would make 
a fascinating film, but as a filmmaker Polanski has referred directly 
to the savagery of war in just one short movie.
How he became a major cineaste is also a fascinating tale. I'll skip 
it, except to say that three aspects of his "oeuvre," anguish, 
alienation and absurdism, were often accompanied by a sense of the 
comedic (cf. the parody "The Fearless Vampire Killers or: Pardon Me 
But Your Teeth Are in My Neck")
In America Polanski's fame came with  the Hollywood movie "Rosemary's 
Baby" (1968).  The following year, his pregnant wife  Sharon Tate and 
others were murdered by the Manson "family" In 1974 came the triumph 
of "Chinatown" and in 1977 the scandal (the statutory rape of a 
13-year old model) which had Polanski flee to Europe. His subsequent 
films there were the hit "Tess"; " Pirates" which justly bombed; the 
underrated, Hitchcockian "Frantic"; the quirky "Bitter Moon"; the 
powerful "Death and the Maiden."
"The Ninth Gate" may not be epoch-making, but it is better than it 
may seem at first sight, especially if one does not view it simply as 
"horror" (the wrong pigeonhole), but as a black humor fantasy. Bear 
in mind that the film is a simplification of a novel otherwise 
impossible to adapt.
New York City's Dean Corso (Johnny Depp) is a kind of book detective, 
an agent with impressive knowledge who searches for valuable rare old 
books. He's also a con-meister who tries to buy cheap and resell very 
high.
The opening sequence (after a marvelous list of credits) is of A+ 
caliber. Corso visits a wealthy but naive couple to appraise the 
collection of their old father, now a wheelchair-bound vegetable. In 
the process, Corso purchases for himself a rare "Don Quijote" for a 
ridiculously low sum. Note how the old man's face -- he is aware of 
the book's value but is unable to communicate-- expresses his 
feelings. This is one of the several good moments of the film, 
details that keep it going through thick and thin.
New York is shown in "film noir" terms, disturbing, ominous. It was 
terrifically recreated in European studios. Corso is summoned by a 
client, zillionaire Boris Balkan (Frank Langella) who has a haughtily 
sinister side and whose name recalls Transylvanian vampirism. Balkan 
is a high-power  demonology lover whose collection (protected by high 
tech) of books on Satan is world class. He has recently bought "The 
Nine Gates of the Kingdom of the Shadows" from another collector, the 
aged Telfer who then hanged himself. That's a priceless book, with 
nine etchings, published in Venice in the mid 1600s. The story goes 
that its author Aristide Torchia (who signs his engravings AT) was 
assisted by Satan and paid for this on the stake.
Balkan has tried some magic via the book (some sort of Renaissance 
voodoo? ) but it didn't work. Knowing that the volume is one of three 
extant, he commissions Corso to examine the other two books,  in 
Portugal and in Paris, for a huge fee --undisclosed and regularly 
increased. He  trusts him with his copy which, wrapped in chamois and 
placed in a leather bag will accompany Corso's every step. (The bag 
may someday go for thousands at a movie memorabilia auction)
For safety, Corso deposits the volume at his collaborator Bernie's 
rare-book shop. The defly deftly sketched relationship of the two men 
is one of the several reasons to see the movie.
The investigation begins. It is high powered. It is also high camp. 
If you take the film and its mumbo-jumbo seriously, you're on the 
wrong track. Polanski's tongue-in-cheek treatment spills out all over 
the place.
Does the plot make sense? No. Is it amusing? Yes-- in spite of Bernie 
getting mysteriously killed and hung just as in one of the volume's 
etchings. Enter the young and sexy widow Liana Telfer  (Lena Olin) 
who is after the book her late husband had sold Balkan.
As in private eye thrillers she tries seducing Corso. No need to 
alert you to   her raised skirt, but do notice the thigh's cabalistic 
tattoo of a snake biting his own tail. Vigorous sex terminates when 
Corso gets bumped on the cranium. It's Hollywood film noir again. 
Except for a clever shot of the man coming back to life with his eyes 
double printed on the film. Another striking, fugitive moment.
The search for the two other copies escalates. It leads to Spain, 
Portugal and France. Corso is indefatigable, shows extraordinary 
stamina and remains unruffled. Johnny Depp is remarkable in the cool 
way he plays his part, even more impertubably than the three major 
Philip Marlowes: Bogart, Mitchum and Dick Powell. And like the 
private investigators of old he punctuates his sleuthing with smoking 
Lucky Strikes and drinking scotch. The permanent joke however is that 
Depp, hairdo, mustache, goatee and glasses is a dead ringer for a 
more manicured Leon Trotsky!
Involved in his search is a pretty, nameless and most mysterious 
young woman (The Girl) played by Polanski's wife Emmanuelle Seigner. 
She pops up all over the map, does strange things, keeps super-cool, 
rescues Corso more than once and joins forces with him. I cannot 
reveal more.
More pleasantries include twin brothers  Ceniza (the name 
symbolically means ashes) Spanish book specialists played by one 
actor (great special effects); a Dennis Rodman-like goon; a one-armed 
old Baroness in a wheelchair. A passionate bibliophile, she competes 
with hated Balkan, owns another copy of the book, has a forbidding 
secretary (the latter is used as a nice red herring ). Corso, in a 
devilish hurry, opens the outer door to the Baroness's place --but he 
does not shut  it. A mistake, as film fans will attest.
The good moments are many, especially when they deal with books, 
their inspection and their collectors' passion. Corso's discoveries 
of etchings initialed LCF (Lucifer) are sort of silly fun. But the 
film does suffer  from unclarities and disorientations. When the 
investigator takes a cab to Victor Fargas -- an impoverished 
Portuguese aristocrat who owns one of the "Nine Gates," the road 
looks like a typical tree-lined French one. Fargas's English accent 
is an un- Portuguese hybrid. Later,to follow another car, Corso 
instantly and incredibly hijacks a half-million dollar sports 
convertible that a super-wealthy Arab and his Parisian chick have 
left for hotel personnel to park. The chase is fun and funny, but 
leads to an improbable chateau which is hosting a huge coven of high 
society witches, all unlikely devil-worshippers about to have an 
orgy. Balkan puts an end to this.
Starting with the fast car, the film goes downhill even faster. It 
reaches a nadir with ridiculous episodes in another, far more ancient 
castle, and with  an idiotic finale of sex. Even the original score 
by  Wojciech Kilar.and the intelligent photography by Darius Khondji 
(*see note below) looks like a silly add-on. The third half-hour of 
the movie is a mess, but two out of three ain't bad.
* Darius Khonji.  Born in Tehran, Iran, to an Iranian father and 
French mother. Studied film at New York University. Among his 
credits: Delicatessen ,  The City of Lost Children , Stealing Beauty, 
Evita, Alien: Resurrection, In Dreams, The Beach.
In The Ninth Gate his imaginative camera-work avoids the horror 
genre's oft-used mists, soft-focus tricks or SFX gimmickry. Instead, 
it keeps a sharp, often deep focus and making his shots realistic and 
his lighting match the sets.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 2000.
Starring Johnny Depp, Frank Langella, Lena Olin, Emmanuelle Seigner, 
Barbara Jefford, Jack Taylor, Jose Lopez Rodero, James Russo.
Screenplay by John Brownjohn, Roman Polanski, and Enrique Urbizu.
Directed by Roman Polanski.
Rated R.
When Arnold Schwarzenegger fights the Devil, you know the prince of
darkness is a popular subject. But 1999's "End of Days" was a critical
and commercial flop that trailers for Roman Polanski's latest effort
"The Ninth Gate" made their film look dangerously similar to. Those
who endured Arnold's misfire may therefore be pleased to find out that
"The Ninth Gate" is a refreshingly slow-paced and thoughtful detective
story involving a protagonist who collects books for a living, and
veteran director Polanski has spiced up the proceedings enough to make
his film consistently engrossing -- for about three-fourths of its
running time. A shame that Polanski didn't quite know how to end his
movie; "The Ninth Gate" slowly but surely pulls us in, making us
believe that it's building towards a grand ending, one that never
comes.  It's a disappointing conclusion to an otherwise good film.
Johnny Depp stars as Dean Corso, a book collector hired by wealthy
professor Boris Balkan (Frank Langella) to find two other copies of a
book reputed to have been written by the devil himself. The book, "The
Nine Gates of the Kingdom of Shadows," will supposedly call up Satan
when used properly, but Balkan worries that the copy he has recently
acquired may be a fake. He dispatches Corso to examine the other two
books and discover which, if any, is an authentic version. Corso's
quest leads him to Europe, where the other two copies are held in
private collections. But in his search, Corso discovers he may be
getting more than he bargained for. The vampish widow of the recently
deceased former owner of Balkan's copy (Lena Olin) wants the book
back, despite Corso's insistence that the book is not his to give up.
He notices a strange blonde woman (Emmanuelle Seigner) following him
wherever he goes, dead bodies keep turning up in his wake, and
eventually Corso's own life is threatened. Cars try to run him
over. Thugs encounter him in dark alleys. And it seems the closer Dean
Corso gets to the secret of the ninth gate, the more dangerous his
search becomes.
Polanski has been known in the past for his updating of the film noir
genre, especially in his most well-known (and probably best) film
"Chinatown."  In "The Ninth Gate," he returns to the genre with which
he has been most successful. The film is partially a homage to, and
partially a parody of, the classic Hollywood detective story. We see
it in the cast: Depp is a strangely detached main character,
definitely not the classic Humphrey Bogart model detective. He's a
"book detective," and he looks the part, wearing glasses and a goatee,
looking as if a stiff wind might knock him over. The other characters
are near-cartoonish parodies of traditional noir characters. Frank
Langella, Lena Olin, and Emmanuelle Seigner ham it up (as they were no
doubt told to do) as, respectively, the shady businessman and female
vamps. Other amusing characters turn up in smaller roles, most notably
a pair of Italian book dealer brothers, both played by the same actor,
Jose Lopez Rodero, and one of the surprising things about "The Ninth
Gate," despite its supposedly weighty subject matter, is how darkly
funny it often is. Some may see this as a failure on Polanski's part,
but not if one takes it as an intended joke on the director's
part. Polanski obviously doesn't see Satanism as seriously as many
other directors would, and the intentional stabs at humor work a whole
lot better than the unintentional ones in the ridiculously serious
"End of Days."
In many ways, it's fun to see Polanski fooling around with genre
cliches: the femme fatales, the trail of dead bodies, the car chases,
and the fistfights in back alleys. It could be said that "The Ninth
Gate" is little more than conventional film noir with a supernatural
element, but that's a bit of an understatement. There aren't many new
noir ideas here, but then again, there aren't many new noir ideas to
be had. What's important is that in "The Ninth Gate," Polanski does
classic film noir well. Until the final reel, his storytelling is
near-perfect. The mystery of the ninth gate is handled well, with
layers of truth gradually revealed until we figure out what's going
on. Polanski's handling of the camera is also as adept as ever.  It's
wonderful to see a director who is just as willing to let pictures
tell the story as dialogue; very often the camera reveals more in one
continuous shot than could be told in ten minutes of exposition. For
about 100 minutes, "The Ninth Gate" manages to be an engrossing,
amusing thriller.
I would certainly love to keep on talking about why I enjoyed the
first three-fourths of this film, but eventually, we have to get to
that final reel, don't we? What a shame. All I can say for the
conclusion of "The Ninth Gate" is "Huh?" I was engrossed in the film's
plot most of the way, and for devoting my attention to a picture for
that long, one might expect a decent payoff. Too bad this film doesn't
have one, and it's not just one of those "Blair Witch Project"
we-didn't-get-to-see-the-witch endings. That film's directors had the
good sense to at least give us something to think about, clues as to
what had happened, even if they didn't spell it out for us.  "The
Ninth Gate" gives us nothing, and it doesn't help that the film had
clearly taken a turn for the worse in its final half hour: There are
too many endings, too many loose ends, and far too much silliness
leading up to the abrupt fade-out, which is possibly the most
uninvolving way Polanski could have ended his film. It's as if he ran
out of film before shooting the final scene. Questions linger, those
that one would expect to have been at least touched upon before film's
end. Who was the mysterious girl? Why does Corso take such a sudden
interest in the occult after it had previously been only the money
that he wanted? And most importantly, does the devil get called up or
not?
You won't find answers to any of these questions in "The Ninth Gate."
Though repeat viewings may bring to light more aspects of the ninth
gate legend, there doesn't seem to be much revealed about what
actually happens when (and if) Satan is called up, and that is a major
disappointment. You aren't left with a whole lot to chew on after
seeing "The Ninth Gate." The ending, perhaps intended to appear
"clever" and ambiguous, mostly comes off as lazy, and as much as I
would like to proclaim Polanski's return to the director's chair a
triumphant one, his film is far too imperfect for me to do that.
Polanski came very close to creating a great film here. It's just too
bad he forgot to end it.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Roman Polanski
Written by: John Brownjohn, Roman Polanski
"There's nothing more reliable than a man whose loyalty can be bought for
hard cash," Boris Balkan (Frank Langella) states near the beginning of "The
Ninth Gate". The film actually starts off rather well, with decent quotes
like this one and an intriguing story. However, things grow steadily worse
from there, until the movie disintegrates into a heap of cheesy dialogue and
horror film cliches. Roman Polanski ("Rosemary's Baby") hasn't made a film
in quite some time, since he's been out of the country fleeing a statutory
rape charge that was brought against him. Polanski is obviously out of
practice. The man who once created a classic horror film like "Rosemary's
Baby" back in 1968, now seems incapable of scaring his audiences in any way.
Dean Corso (Johnny Depp) is a finder of rare books (a book detective, as one
character puts it). His latest assignment is to track down the remaining two
copies of an ancient book for his employer, Boris Balkan. The book is called
The Ninth Gate, a sort of bible to devil worshipers. Balkan wants Corso to
determine which of the three remaining volumes is authentic, as he is
certain that two of them are forgeries. Corso's journey leads him to France,
Portugal and Spain as he tracks down collectors of rare and occult books. He
soon discovers that he is being followed by two interested parties. One is
Liana Tefler (Lena Olin), who was the original owner of Balkan's copy, the
other is a young lady (Emmanuelle Seigner) who seems to be protecting Corso
for unkown reasons.
Like I said, it really is a rather interesting plot idea, but Polanski
somehow botches it beyond all recognition. One of the largest problems with
the film is that Polanski seems incapable of tightening the script in any
way. We are constantly given scenes like this one: Johnny Depp walks into
the room, looks around for a minute and a half, then unpacks his bag. He
looks at his book for several more minutes, then puts it away and walks out
of the room. You'd be amazed at the amount of yawning I heard in the
audience during this so called thriller. It seems Polanski decided to spend
all his time on scenes which we couldn't care less about, but in the
tradition of "Eye of the Beholder" and "Boiler Room", he spent no time at
all on the film's ending. This is another one you can add to that ever
growing list of films that just stops in mid-scene, rather than really
ending.
I recently heard that Johnny Depp refused to discuss "The Ninth Gate", being
unhappy with the final product. His lack of enthusiasm for the film
certainly shows in his performance. The man looks bored out of his mind
throughout the entire film. As for the rest of the cast, the only
interesting performance comes from Frank Langella ("Cutthroat Island") as a
creepy millionaire. Lena Olin ("Mystery Men") has always appeared to possess
no acting talent whatsoever, and she continues to display this here.
Emmanuelle Seigner ("Frantic") is given very little to do, and she does so
admirably. The most aggravating and yet somehow strangely amusing
performance (or perhaps I should say performances) comes from Jose Lopez
Rodero, playing twin brothers who complete one another's scentences.
The last thing I'm going to mention is the music used in this film. I'm not
sure who chose it, but it is more suitable for a comedy than a horror film.
There is nothing remotely suspensful about it; what suspense might be in the
film, is killed whenever the music starts playing. If 2000 continues with
the sort of movies I've seen so far, we're all in for a very long year. "The
Ninth Gate" is yet another waste of time. Luckily, "American Beauty" and
"The Sixth Sense" are playing in theaters right now, having been re-released
after their Oscar nominations. I'd suggest seeing one of those rather than
this piece of tripe. The movie runs far too long at 127 minutes, which
should have been cut down to at least 110. I'd recommend it only to die hard
fans of Johnny Depp, and give it two out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Take a Sherlock Holmes story and set it in the Middle Ages at a
monastery and you have IN THE NAME OF THE ROSE.  Tell the story that
way, and the unfamiliar trimmings will have some interest and you can
give new life to what might otherwise be a tired plot.  Far too much of
THE NINTH GATE is hard-boiled detective story in the Sam Spade
tradition, but sprinkled with trimmings from the rare book trade.
Supposedly the novel on which THE NINTH GATE is based has almost no
supernatural element and Polanski emphasized the little that was there.
But take the supernatural out of this film and you have warmed over
Dashiell Hammett.  Late in this long film the greatly amplified
supernatural element becomes more important, but its contribution is of
too little interest too late.
     Johnny Depp plays antiquarian book dealer Dean Corso, a wheeler-
dealer with few scruples.  In marked contrast to the passion his
customers have for books, Corso treats books like stocks, buying and
selling them like pork belly futures.  Corso is hired by Boris Balkan
(Frank Langella doing a Fritz Weaver impression) a well-known collector
of books on witchcraft and demonology.  Balkan has recently purchased
or stolen a Necronomicon-like book, "The Nine Gates of the Kingdom of
the Shadows."  Whether the book was bought or stolen will not be
determined since the previous owner, Andrew Telfer, committed suicide
once the book was out of his hands.  There are thought to be only three
copies of this book: Balkan's, one in Portugal, and one in France.  But
Balkan knows that even that number is not correct.  There is only one
copy and the other two are frauds.  Balkan hires Corso to compare his
copy with the other two copies and determine which is the original.
     Before leaving for Europe Corso pays a visit to Liana Telfer (Lena
Olin), widow of Andrew.  She claims that the book belonged to her and
by rights it still does.  Corso heads for Europe.  He quickly discovers
that there are people trying to kill him and get Balkan's copy of the
book.  He also has acquired a sort of mysterious guardian who protects
him in time of danger.  She is an attractive blond (Emmanuelle Seigner)
with a mean kick-boxing style.  Corso has no idea who she is or why she
protects him.
     Roman Polanski has taken a rather complex and mystical novel,
increased the emphasis on the supernatural, and changed a number of
things around.  By dropping the entire Alexander Dumas subplot, for
which the book was named, he has freed up characters to be redefined
for his new plot.  Some of Polanski's seem just to be testing the
medium.  He has a completely gratuitous special effect in that two
twins on the screen together are played by a single actor.  The
conclusion of the film is markedly different from the book.  The
mysticism that suffuses the film seems completely artificial, a long
way from Polanski's best work.  Part of the problem is that he seems to
have lost his way in understanding where true horror lies.  Certainly
there are Polanski films that are horrifying.  But in ROSEMARY'S BABY
the ceremonial Satanism only worked because it was the late 1960s and
people were open to really weird ideas.  It was the situation of
Rosemary being entrapped where the film's punch can still be felt.  In
this film he builds to a horror that seems cliched and uninteresting,
like a spook in a sheet.  He breezes right past the films only scene of
true horror.  That was at the beginning of the film and involved a
stroke victim.
     Polanski filmed THE NINTH GATE entirely in Europe.  He had to
recreate New York City much as Kubrick had to in EYES WIDE SHUT, though
presumably he did it more economically.  For this and other reasons
this film seems at least superficially a companion film to Kubrick's
last film.  However, Kubrick brought his film to a conclusion while
Polanski ends his film just short of telling us what it all means.
Even when you find out what is happening you do not know what is
happening.  After 132 minutes it seems there should be more we know.
It is the difference between serving a feast or just tantalizing the
audience with one.  I rate THE NINTH GATE 5 on the 0 to 10 scale and a
low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Christopher Null
     What is THE NINTH GATE?  Judging from the cryptic marketing
campaign, you might be likely to dismiss it as another ridiculous action
movie, with big fireballs and car chase scenes.  Or worse, maybe you'll
shun it as a metaphysical adventure -- yet another END OF DAYS.
     Fortunately, THE NINTH GATE is neither of these.  In actuality,
it's a mystery with Johnny Depp as the unlikely hero, Frank Langella as
the perfectly-cast antagonist, and Lena Olin and Emmanuelle Seigner as
the femmes fatale.  Under the direction of Roman Polanski, you can rest
assured that these characters get mixed up quite a bit en route through
a serpentine plot that is far more interesting than its subject matter
would imply: The search for a couple of rare books.
     As Polanski's first movie since 1994's DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, the
auteur has a lot to make up for in lost time.  Apparently striking into
more commercial territory, THE NINTH GATE offers Depp as a
chain-smoking, rare-book-finding mercenary.  Employed by Langella's
publishing magnate, he is tasked with hunting down the two additional
copies of "The Nine Gates," a book also owned by Langella's character
and which he wishes to authenticate.
     Mystery ensues, largely owing to the subject matter of "The Nine
Gates," which is purported to be a manual for summoning the devil.  Now
if only a couple of these books weren't forgeries....
     An awful lot of THE NINTH GATE (based on the book "The club Dumas")
is better than you'd expect, but a lot of its potential is wasted on
repetitious scenes and a meandering storyline (the film runs about 2 1/4
hours).  The fistfight scenes are weak, the car chases dull.  The ending
is particularly annoying, essentially leaving the interpretation up to
the audience (and thus making it unable for loudmouth critics to spoil).
     However, Depp and Langella are fantastic, playing off one another
with demonic flair.  Imagine Depp's SLEEPY HOLLOW character with a
personality and you've got him spot-on.  Seigner (aka Mrs. Roman
Polanski), whom you might recognize from Polanski's BITTER MOON and
FRANTIC, is starting to lose her credibility as a sex goddess, I will
note.
     Still, despite a little snickering in the audience, Polanski still
pulls enough tricks out of his sleeve to recommend this film.  It
certainly isn't CHINATOWN, but it does carry a punch.
Director: Roman Polanski
Producer: Roman Polanski
Writer: John Brownjohn, Roman Polanski, Enrique Urbizu
Starring: Johnny Depp, Frank Langella, Lena Olin, Emmanuelle Seigner,
Barbara Jefford
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
