Title
Review for Executive Decision (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Heart attack city!  So, is your adrenaline a little low?  Suffer
from low blood pressure?  Have I got a cure for you: EXECUTIVE
DECISION.  Since Steven Seagal is on the marquee, you figure, hey, this
has got to be another Steven Seagal action film, right?  Wrong.  Steven
Seagal has basically a cameo role and disappears early on, never to be
seen again.  Moreover, you even guessed the wrong genre; this is a
thriller.  Although there is action, most of the movie's time and
tension is spent in mental anguish with lots of sweaty brows as the
time for disaster approaches.  How will they figure a way to pull it
out?
     The show starts with an unsuccessful covert mission by Lt. Col.
Austin Travis (Steven Seagal).  The research for the mission was done
at a comfortable desk back in Washington by David Grant, Ph. D. (Kurt
Russell) so Col. Travis and Dr. Grant dislike and distrust each other
from the beginning with each blaming the other for the failed mission.
In the next scene, Dr. Grant gets a flying lesson in a small private
plane.  Just before he gets to fly solo for the first time, he is
called back to his desk to learn about the failed mission.  Right then
and there, the whole audience knows the ending of the show, but it
doesn't matter because editor turned director Stuart Baird is so good
at keeping the tension mounting.
     While Dr. Grant is in a very formal tuxedo at a government ball,
he gets called to the Pentagon situation room.  It seems that the same
terrorist group has hijacked a 747 and plans to kill everyone on board
unless another terrorist is released from an American prison.  Up until
then, it is the classic terrorist problem, but Dr. Grant deduces the
terrorists have an extremely lethal nerve gas called DC-5 on board, and
they do not want to land in Washington, D. C., they want to kill
everyone there with the gas by taking the plane on a kamikaze mission.
     The only solution is to get on board the 747 in flight, defuse the
bomb attached to the nerve gas, subdue the terrorists and land the
plane.  The question is should the president make an executive decision
instead to shoot down the plane and the 400 people on board before the
terrorists get a chance to explode the nerve gas over land.  Dr. Grant
says the rescue mission is possible since he knows a nerdy engineer
named Cahill (Oliver Platt) who has devised a theoretical way to fly a
stealth fighter underneath another plane and link up without being
detected.  Platt does all nerds proud and the classic little straw he
sucks on turns out to be one of the heroes of the show.
     Cahill, Dr. Grant, and a small, crack secret forces team headed by
Col. Travis flies in the stealth fighter which links up with the 747.
Most of the show happens after the army team plus Cahill and Dr. Grant,
still in his Tux, boards the cargo hold of the 747.  I will not cover
what happens next, but suffice it to say that your heart may try to
pound out of your chest as mine did.  I even found my body shaking some
on the defusing the bomb scenes.  The soldier named Cappie tells the
Cahill while trying to defuse the bomb not to worry since, "if you
screw up, you'll never know it."
     Beside what I believe is one of the best performances ever by
Russell, many others are great too.  David Suchet from PBS's Perot
series, is excellent as the leader of the terrorists on the plane.
Halle Barry plays a brave and resourceful airline stewardess.  John
Leguizamo and B. D. Wong are good as some of the soldiers.  The only
weak character in the show is an ambitious senator (J. T. Walsh) who
wants to be the next president.  This character happens to be on board
the plane, but I wish he hadn't been.  The senator's aid tells him,
"Senator I think we are presented with an incredible opportunity here."
The senator quizzically asks, "Opportunity for what?"  The aid goes on
to explain, "Remember how the press is always talking about your not
having a war record?  You could be the one to negotiate with the
terrorists."  Walsh's performance is extremely weak, and the movie
would have been more focused without his character.
     The show works because of the tension, but there is one technical
aspect deserving of special mention, the cinematography by Alex
Thomson.  The first time we witness the terrorists in action, they are
shown in black and white slow motion sequences that slowly gain color
before dissolving into the next black and white sequence.  See the show
at your local monster screen house because the images of the stealth
fighter coming right at you in the hazy yellow and red glow of early
morning are quite impressive as is the sound.  The whole linkup
sequence is another marvel to behold.  Finally, although the show does
not try to overwhelm its viewers with technology, I was fascinated by
the way the soldiers look through cameras with small flexible tubing to
see what is going in the main cabin.
     The script by Jim and John Thomas sticks to the suspense to keep
the show going.  Other writers would have gone for a lot more laughs.
They do use humor, but sparingly.  Upon boarding the 747, one of the
soldiers says, "I hope they have a good movie on this flight."
EXECUTIVE DECISION, by the way, is one film I guarantee you, you will
never see on an airplane. The movie ends with Frank Sinatra singing,
"It's nice to go traveling, but oh so much nicer to come home."  By
that time, my adrenaline was pumping so fast, I could have flown home
without use of a plane.
     Since this is about a presidential decision, whom do you think
they cast in the role of the president? In the show's major
incredulity, the answer is: nobody!  The president is AWOL throughout
the entire film and is not available even by telephone since he is out
of the country.  I guess he is in one of those fourth world countries
where they have no phones.  No problem, since the Secretary of Defense
makes all of the decisions for him.  The situation concerns the
destruction of the nation's capital along with tens of millions of
people, but I guess since the president can not be reached, he is
dealing with matters of more import.
     Finally, every show with bad guys has to have them be of some
nationality or religious conviction.  Although most American shows with
bad guys, have just plain old Americans as the evil characters, I have
seen the villains be Colombians, Italians, Fundamentalist Christains,
and just about everyone imaginable.  In this movie they are Islamic.
We were pamphleted on arrival, admonishing us that Islam does not
condone killing.  I wonder if in the future, I will be pamphleted by
Colombians, Italians, Fundamentalist Christains, etc.?  Oh well, they
were very friendly and polite leafleters.  I should point out that the
number two in command complains at one point to David Suchet about the
destruction of Washington that, "This has nothing to do with Islam."
     EXECUTIVE DECISION runs 2:15, but it feels like a much shorter
show.  I would advise going to the bathroom before entering the
theater.  You do not want to miss a second of the suspense.  The film
is rated R.  This is a soft R that comes from a little bad language and
several people killed, but without a lot of blood or gore, more like an
old fashion Western.  There is no sex or nudity.  The movie would be
fine for any teenager.  I loved this show, and I think you will too so
I recommend it highly and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Paul McElligott
"Executive Decision" is probably the best film Kurt Russell has made
since the original "Escape From New York."  Of course, only "Tequila
Sunrise" and "The Mean Season" give it any serious competition.  That
said, this is largely a standard "'Die Hard' on a plane" action film
that works best if you don't think too hard.  Fortunately, most of its
mistakes are technical errors that can be mostly dismissed as "artistic
license."
The story concerns an airliner hi-jacked between Athens and Washington,
D.C.  The motivation is presumably to free an Arab terrorist leader
("Babylon 5's" Andreas Katsulas), but intelligence analyst and student
pilot Kurt Russell deduces that the terrorists have some Russian nerve
gas stolen by Chechen mobsters.  Rather than the let the plane land and
wipe out Washington, the Americans launch a daring mid-air transfer led
by stony-faced Steven Seagal, with Russell, a nerdy ARPA engineer
(Oliver Platt) and a rainbow coalition of commandos (John Leguizamo,
B.D. Wong and Joe Morton) along for the ride.  The transfer goes
horribly wrong, mercifully killing off Seagal, breaking Morton's neck
and leaving civilians Russell and Platt stranded on the airliner with
the commandos.
Russell and the surviving commandos start scoping out the enemy and
planning to retake the plane, aided by a plucky flight attendant (Halle
Berry).  Things are complicated by a pompous U.S. senator (J.T. Walsh),
who takes Hart Bochner's role from the original "Die Hard": in other
words, he arrogantly tries to exploit the situation, negotiates with the
terrorists and gets his head blown off as a reward.
One could take issue with the portrayal of the Arab terrorists as nearly
mindless fanatics.  A little more subtlety in their motivation would go
a long way.  It's just not realistic to have the lead hijacker be the
second-in-command of a major terrorist organization who actually
believes the incendiary anti-American rhetoric he uses to fire up the
troops.  Just once, I'd like to see terrorist leaders, Arab or not,
portrayed as the skillful manipulators of propaganda and practitioners
of realpolitik that they probably are.
The ending of the film is telegraphed all the way back in the second
scene where we see Russell taking a flying lesson, so it comes as no
surprise that we end up with the plane crippled and the pilots dead. 
Despite the inevitability of the conclusion, the story moves briskly and
never seriously insults our intelligence.
Still, there were a couple of moments that I'm sure had real military
personnel and aviation engineers laughing hysterically.  At the
beginning of the film, we see Steven Seagal dispatch three armed guards
at the Chechen mafia safe house using a knife, while the rest of his
team looks on with their silenced automatic weapons.  Of course, it
would have been easier, safer and just as quiet to pick off the guards
with the guns, but then Seagal wouldn't have gotten to play with his
knives.
Later, Oliver Platt's character tells us that the mid-air transfer
technique was originally designed for "low-orbit, supersonic" transfers
to the space shuttle.  But Oliver, to be in low-orbit is to be in space
and sound does not travel in a vacuum, thus supersonic is a meaningless
term in this context.  And the last time I checked, the F117 stealth
fighter is not a supersonic aircraft anyway.
Finally, toward the end of the movie, a stray bullet from a terrorist's
gun blows out a window, ripping a huge hole in the side of the aircraft,
through which many passengers and at least one dead terrorist are sucked
out of the plane.   Despite what Hollywood has always shown us, people
would probably not get sucked out of a hole in the side of a plane,
since the differential between the internal and external pressures is
not that great and the pressures would equalize fairly quickly. 
Secondly, one shattered window would never cause a gaping hole like the
one that they show here.
Of course, such artistic license is the norm in Hollywood action movies
and it doesn't spoil my enjoyment of this film in the least.  I just
wish someday, someone would have enough faith in movie audiences to get
such details right.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by    Stuart Baird
Written by     Jim and John Thompson
Cast           Kurt Russell, Halle Berry, John Leguizamo, Oliver 
               Platt, Joe Morton, David Suchet, Steven Seagal
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time   129 minutes
Reviewed at    Carmike 7 Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (9MAR96)
     Aircraft silhouetted against an afternoon sky.  The music on 
the soundtrack surges; the actors grow into terse, tense expressions.  
A dangerous mid-air transfer is about to happen onto an endangered 
747.  Could it be Charleton Heston, about to be lowered into a 
cockpit to rescue Karen Black?  No!  It's never-aging Kurt Russell 
and a team of commandos raiding a hostage-held jetliner that's 
armed with nerve gas for use on a suicide mission.  Wohoo!  The 
disaster film lives!  
     Twenty-one years since AIRPORT '75 and the formula still works 
wonders, though with a few necessary changes:  instead of a mid-air 
collision causing problems, it's Middle-Eastern terrorists; instead 
of Gloria Swanson on board, the biggest name on the passenger list 
is Marla Maples Trump.  (She has a cameo as a stewardess.)  The 
expected emergency landing stays, but they've added an entire DIE 
HARD subplot that has Russell and his crack commandos methodically 
plotting a takeover.   All that's missing is George Kennedy's 
cigar!
     EXECUTIVE DECISION is shameless fun from producer Joel Silver 
and editor-turned-director Stuart Baird.  The Jim and John Thompson 
(PREDATOR, PREDATOR 2) script steals from everywhere-- AIRPORT, 
FAIL SAFE, SPEED-- and, once it gets airborne, the darn thing works 
wonders.  The attention to casting detail is particularly good:  
J.T. Walsh as a worried Senator on board, Steven Seagal as the 
squinty commando leader, Halle Berry as the stalwart stewardess.  
And the list of good players goes on:  Joe Morton, Oliver Platt, 
John Leguizamo.  No particular character is written *that* well, 
but they gel into one of the better action ensembles that we've 
seen in some time.  Recommended.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Jane Taylor
this review is also posted at 
http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/executivedecision.html
I could pick this movie apart for a lot of movie critic type
reasons, but the fact is, I was on the edge of my seat for two
hours and twenty minutes.  Wholly unbelievable situations and
hokey, ride-off-into-the-sunset-with-the-girl-Pentagon-be-damned
endings are no match on the ratings scale for fingernails bitten
down to the quick.
Kurt Russell plays a U.S. Government intelligence expert who's
spent years on the tail of a member of the Chechan mafia.  Does
it seem to anyone else that the Sicilian mafia is passe' in
favor of other more exotic third world crime organizations? 
It's as if the darn Gottis and Gambinos are very 80s and
slightly tacky, like vacationing on the French Riviera, as
opposed to the rain forests of Costa Rica.
Anyway, this pesky Muslim zealot engineers the abduction and
delivery into American hands of a middle eastern terrorist so
that he and his men can hijack a plane and demand the
terrorist's release, giving them an excuse to fly into the
airspace over Washington DC and blow up the plane (and
themselves, and a substantial portion of the Eastern Seaboard)
in the name of Allah.
Got that?  Me neither.   That's okay, because the details of the
plot are really secondary to the nifty details of getting a U.S.
Army commando squad on board this plane, undetected, while it's
inflight and watching them outsmart the hijackers.  Oh, and did
I mention that during the transfer from the stealth plane to the
commercial 747, they manage to lose most of their sophisticated
surveillance gear (and their commander, Steven Segal, in the
shortest role of his career) and have to resort to paper clips
and chewing gum and good old American ingenuity?
You'll gasp at the high wire acrobatics over the passenger
cabin!  You'll hold your breath as the plucky flight attendant
(the beautiful and totally wasted Halle Berry and her even more
superfluous companion, Marla Maples Trump) hides Russell's
presence in the galley elevator from the terrorists.  And you'll
cheer and howl at the old fashioned way that this high tech
squad of commandos finds to notify the Pentagon that they are on
board and that they have matters in hand.
What a great way to spend a Sunday afternoon!

Author
Christopher Null
     For those action film fans who think that Steven Seagal is
indestructible, I highly recommend you see EXECUTIVE DECISION, a
cheese-o-rama of an action flick that gives Seagal *seventh* billing and a
quick ride to Action Hero Heaven.
     No, this is *not* a "Steven Seagal Movie."  It's a "Kurt Russell
Movie"--the New Kurt Russell, the tough-yet-vulnerable Kurt Russell, the
Kurt Russell a la Bruce Willis-type with whom we're about to be deluged,
like it or not (answer:  probably not).
     The story of EXECUTIVE DECISION is easy to boil down:  another
rehashing of DIE HARD, on an airplane for the first time since PASSENGER
57.  This outing, Seagal, Russell, John Leguizamo, and Oliver Platt head a
team of scrappy commandos and less-warlike people who board a 747 in
mid-flight to stop a nerve gas bomb from detonating over Washington and
wiping out the Eastern seaboard.  This, apparently, is what terrorists do
for kicks.
     It could've been fun.  It's been done, yes, but a fresh take on the
hostage story can be exciting, and at times, EXECUTIVE DECISION is
edge-of-your-seat material.  The problem, and it shouldn't exist, is that
for the entire first *hour* of this film, it is the most hideously boring,
lifeless, repetitive, derivative, and pointless bit of celluloid you can
imagine.  Clocking in at a whopping 2 hours, 20 minutes, this picture had
*plenty* which could have been cut out but wasn't, resulting in a whole
lot of catching up to do in the last hour.
     Thank God that the catch-up is pretty fun--but still, putting the
audience to sleep at the beginning of the movie is a violation of the
cardinal rule of action filmmaking.
     If you're wondering about the acting, dialogue, etc.--don't.  They're
all typically cheese-infested (Seagal's character is actually, and I am
not making this up, named "Austin Travis").  Instead, if you go to
EXECUTIVE DECISION, sit back and try to enjoy the explosions and high-tech
gadgetry.  But more importantly, try to get there late.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter  /  Novelist  /  Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Michael Redman
The two faces that have been displayed in order to push this film are those
of Steven Seagal and Kurt Russell. This seems an unlikely combination.
Seagal's films have been in the vein of Schwarzenegger and Stallone: mostly
shoot-em-ups with little plot. Russell has done his share of the hyphenated
action-adventure genre, but usually lighter with more story.
The best news for me is that Seagal is not in this film. Well, he does have
about three minutes of screen time before he gets literally blown away. This
leaves terrorist intelligence expert Russell, a nervous design engineer, a
paralized bomb specialist and a couple of military commandos to save the day.
The second in command of an Arab terrorist group hijacks a 747 supposedly to
free his leader, recently kidnapped and in US custody. In fact he has a
grander plan to deliver Allah's lightning to the heart of Satan. The only
thing that stands between us and the destruction of the eastern seaboard is a
futuristic plan.
Seagal heads a unit that attaches an experimental plane remora-like to the
jet and plan to board it, wipe out the hijackers and live happily ever after.
Due to an unexpected development; Seagal and half of their equipment and team
never make it on board. In their place, Russell and Oliver Platt (the
engineer) accidentally end up on the airliner.
The plot is old (didn't Bruce Willis do this just a year or so ago?), but the
story, refreshingly new. While there are the expected big guns scenes, you'll
see more planning and computer work. With Seagal out of the tale, it becomes a
team effort rather than a one-man show. All the better.
With a few exceptions, the acting is first rate especially from Russell and
Platt. The action is energized due, no doubt, to direction from Stuart Baird,
editor on "Lethal Weapon" and "Die Hard 2". Same ole, but with a new lively
new slant.
[This appeared in the 3/21/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
