Title
Review for Gadjo dilo (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

GADJO DILO (director/writer: Tony Gatlif; cinematographer: Eric
Guichard; editor: Monique Dartonne; cast: Romain Duris (Stephane), Rona
Hartner (Sabina), Isidor Serban (Izidor), Ovidiu Balan (Sami), Dan
Astileanu (Dumitru), Florin Modovan (Adriani), 1998-France)
For the Algerian-born French director Tony Gatlif, "Gadjo Dilo" is the
third in his gypsy trilogy. In 1994, Gatlif wrote and directed "Latcho
Drom," a musical documentary of gypsies performing in different
countries. "Mondo" told the story of an abandoned gypsy boy in France.
Gypsies have a reputation of being known as thieves and have suffered a
vast amount of prejudice because of their nomadic lifestyle and failure
to conform to the society where they live. Here, the director, himself a
Rom member, is in love with the gypsies -- their foibles and all -- and
plays a joke with their worldwide pejorative image by reversing the
things usually said about gypsies, and having the gypsies say them about
the foreigners.
The film has caught the gypsy mood and their persona: the gypsies here
have gold teeth, the women bathe together in the nude and talk about the
men in a frank sexual manner, the men drink a lot, play music with deep
feelings, curse on a regular basis, and are quick to smile and see the
humor in almost everything they do. This film lays the gypsy spirit on
thickly, as its infectuous story unfolds in a gypsy village somewhere in
rural Romania.
"Gadjo Dilo" opens with a young educated Parisian, Stephane (Romain
Duris), walking in torn boots, down an isolated desolate road covered
with snow and ice. He reaches a local village hotel at night, but he is
told it is too late for them to admit him. He's soon joined by an old
drunk man shouting by the town square: "May I die! May I rot!" and
lamenting the injustice of his son Adriani having just been sent to
prison, claiming that there is no justice for the gypsies. The old man
says his name is Izidor (Isidor Serban ) and that his finding Stephane
here is a sign of good luck. He makes the young man get drunk with him
as a sign of respect and starts to treat him as a surrogate son.
The next morning, in the gypsy village, some children discover Stephane
in Izidor's bed. They shout in excitement, "There's a great big gadjo
sleeping at our place!" "Gadjo Dilo," in the Gypsies' Romany language,
means "crazy stranger," which becomes a reference to the French youth
and the film's title.
It turns out that Stephane is an ethnomusicologist like his father,
interested in recording the gypsy music and is on a pilgrimage through
the rural Romanian countryside in search of the pure gypsy sound, in
particular, he seeks a singer - Nora Luca - whose voice is on an
audiotape of his late father and was his favorite singer. He comes
prepared for his research, with a tape-recording system and many
cassettes of the type of gypsy music he is looking for.
Stephane gets trapped in the village, as the old man refuses to let his
good luck Frenchman leave, despite the other gypsies calling for the
foreigner to get out -- that he is here only to steal their chickens.
There is a language problem and the only one in the village who speaks
French, an attractive but spirited young girl named Sabina (Rona
Hartner), who left a husband in Belgium, refuses to translate. Stephane
has a problem getting the old man to understand that he wants to meet
Nora Luca and that she is the main purpose for his travels. Instead, the
old man takes him into his house, gets the gypsy women to repair his
shoes like new, teaches him to speak like a gypsy, and tells him the
best gypsy music in the world is in this village.
When Stephane tries to clean up Izidor's place, in appreciation for his
hospitality, he is told by him: "Aren't you ashamed of yourself for
cleaning my house?" Some women, observing Stephane's dusting and
sweeping, mock him, laughingly saying that he's a faggot.
Sabina is considered by the villagers to be a slut because of what
happened in Belgium. When Stephane shows that he is attracted to her,
she shows disgust; she bites his hand when he tries to help her carry
wood back for the fire and she then raises her skirt mooning him. But,
despite that initial coldness, Stephane is soon making love to her in
the woods and running around naked with her.
As he's about to go back to Paris, the local townspeople react to
Adriani's release from prison and revenge killing of the town official
who had him arrested, by burning down the gypsy village and killing
Adriani and Izador. The question now becomes how and if Stephane and
Sabina will remain together and where, as he buries his gypsy recordings
knowing that he has not found a utopia. Whether he can return to French
society or feels liberated after living for months with the gypsies and
assimilating with them, becomes his dilemma. For the director, the
question becomes, how is it, whenever events turn bad, the gypsy
community is almost always made the scapegoat.
Gatlif succeeded in setting an evocative gypsy mood, touching on their
charms, highlighting their moving music, demonstrating the sheer joy in
their wedding ceremonies, and leaving a good taste in one's mouth about
the gypsy spirit to survive. Though the film doesn't tell a great story
but a conventional one, even with all the exotic atmosphere the film
exudes in, but it still holds one's interest throughout, as the moods
change and gypsy life takes a more dramatic turn.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Gadjo Dilo," which in the Romany language of the gypsies
means "crazy outsider," is a film for people who like music--
not "light FM" or elevator music, but the pulsating tones of a
people who cry out because their soul is in pain.  In that
respect it resembles the mournful cries of the cantaor in
Spanish flamenco and can easily be mistaken for a variety of
songs common to Turkey and the Middle East as well as
southeastern Europe.  Yet "Gadjo Dilo" is not really driven by
the music.  If you had seen the second film in writer-director
Tony Gatlif's trilogy on gypsy themes, "Latcho Drum," you
would know what a music-driven film is all about.  This
picture, for all its humor and song and drunken reverie ends
on a melodramatic note: if you treat it as metaphor for the
frequent bouts of ethnic cleansing that has devastated Europe
and parts of Africa in recent decades, you'd have to call
"Gadjo Dilo" an out-and-out tragedy.
   The film works on many levels, given the sincere and
realistic acting by its three principals: Stephane (Romain
Duris), a handsome young Parisian traveling through remote
regions of Romania in search of a singer; Izidor (Isidor
Serban), an elderly tribal leader of a gypsy village pining for
his jailed son and most of all for himself; and Sabrina (Rona
Hartner), who symbolizes a modern women free from the
strictures of her gypsy culture who dances, laughs, cries and
makes love with equal passion.
   The story, inspired by the travels of a musicologist friend of
the director, opens as Stephane walks through an isolated,
snowy road to a gypsy village, perhaps all the way from
Bucharest.  A musicologist in search of a particular gypsy
singer famous even in France, he stumbles upon a band of
lively women in colorful native garb who spout bawdy
invectives at him from their horse-driven cart, laughing all the
way.  When he reaches the town, he runs into an old man,
Izidor, who insists that he would die rather than leave his
bottle of vodka anything but empty and shares a drink with
him.  Quickly becoming the best of friends with the man,
Stephane temporarily replaces Izidor's son who had been
sentenced to six months in jail.  At first treated with suspicion
by the townspeople who ironically accuse him of the same
sorts of thefts by which gypsies are traditionally charged, he
decides to remain as Izidor's guest, learns a good deal of the
language, and is accepted by the community.  (The process is
an arresting reversal of the typical pattern which finds third-
worlders seeking havens in more prosperous areas of the
world and, in fact, shares a commonality with the American
hippies who shed their wealth during the early seventies to
experience nirvana in the East.)
   Until the dire concluding section of the piece, "Gadjo Dilo"
plays like a kaleidoscopic travelogue as Stephane
experiences the culture of these people and internalizes some
of their values, manifested particularly in a poignant dance
around a makeshift gravesite when the French expatriate
pours vodka over some buried tapes as would a native.  
   As Sabrina, Rona Hartner--actually a fairly accomplished
actress now living in Paris--turns in some breathtaking steps
in the countryside and in night clubs, and in the process falls
in love with the so-called crazy outsider and does he with her. 
Since life often follows art, we learn from the press notes that
Romain Duris, a positively fetching performer, actually fell in
love with Ms. Hartner, causing scripter Gatlif to rewrite some
parts in a brief period of time.  
   Perhaps the most fascinating scene in the movie comes
when the father of a woman about to be married threatens to
kill the bridegroom and his party with an axe, screaming that
no way will he give up his little girl.  Other fascinating gypsy
values include throwing money freely at performers in night
clubs and calling Stephane a "faggot" for cleaning the house
in which he is a guest.
   "Gadjo Dilo" is a enchanting film that shows its relatively
low budget only in the overly choppy editing that takes us
from one colorful scene to the next.  Perhaps Gatlif is not
entirely objective in his virtual worship of the gypsy way of life,
his evocation of a people who actually take the expression
"life is a banquet" seriously--but who'd want him to do
otherwise?   The film is in Romany (with a smattering of
French and Romanian) with English titles.  Not Rated. 
Running time: 97 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Louis Proyect
We first meet Stéphane [Romain Duris] in the opening moments of "Gadjo
Dilo" walking down an ice-covered road in the Romanian countryside.
The young Parisian is in search of a legendary gypsy singer, whose
tape he carries with him. Her songs had consoled his ethnomusicologist
father on his deathbed, and the tape was recorded on one of his many
field-trips. Stéphane is following in his footsteps.
I can understand the fascination with gypsy music. The authentic sound
is nothing like the kitsch you hear in Hungarian restaurants. It has a
simultaneously raw and ethereal power like no other music. Over
thirty-five years ago I was listening to one of composer and
ethnomusicologist Henry Cowell's radio programs on NYC's left-wing,
listener-sponsored WBAI. He announced that he was going to play some
field-recordings he had made of Romanian gypsy fiddle-players who had
influenced Bela Bartok. The sound mesmerized me. To this day, I search
for recordings of this type of fiddle-playing but nothing could
possibly match Cowell's field-recordings. So I can understand
Stéphane's passion.
Exhausted and half-frozen, Stéphane reaches a tiny village in the dead
of night. All the doors are closed, the lights are out and the streets
are empty. The only person he finds is an elderly drunken gypsy named
Izidor [Isidor Serban], who is cursing loudly at the cops who have
just taken his son Adrjani to jail on trumped-up charges. Stéphane
asks the old man if he knows the location of a hotel, but the gypsy
only wants to share his bottle with the young man, and pour out his
complaints about the Romanian judicial system.
Stéphane listens patiently, shares from the bottle, but still has a
warm bed on his mind. Finally he has an inspiration. He takes out the
tape and plays it for the gypsy. "Do you know who she is? Do you know
where I can find her?" From that moment on, Izidor is drawn to the
young man, who becomes a surrogate son. They go back to the gypsy
village where Izidor gives Stéphane his own bed.
The next morning the villagers are shocked by the presence of a "gadjo
dilo" (crazy outsider) in their midst. They surround Izidor and press
him with questions. How can he guarantee that Stéphane is not there to
steal their chickens, since "gadjos" can never be trusted. The joke,
of course, is that the gypsies project on to the outsider exactly the
same fears that outside society has of them.
Stéphane enjoys gypsy hospitality for several days, but announces to
Izidor that it is time for him to move on. He must track down the
singer of his father's tape. Izidor pressures his surrogate son to
stay for a few days more, and then the days turn into months. As
Stéphane learns to speak their language, they lose their distrust of
him. He takes part in their rituals and travels about the countryside
with them on various adventures, including performances by the skilled
musicians from Izidor's village.
The film was directed by Tony Gatlif, who made the award-winning
documentary "Latcho Drom" in 1993, which depicts gypsy musicians in
performance across the planet, from India to Spain. Gatlif is a gypsy
himself, born in Algeria in 1948. "Latcho Drom" was part two of a
trilogy on gypsy culture, that began with the 1982 feature "Les
Princes." "Gadjo Dilo" is the final installment.
Ultimately Stéphane becomes assimilated totally into gypsy society. He
falls in love with Sabina [Rona Hartner] who initially wards off the
"gadjo." When he proves to her that he has cut his ties with
"outsider" society, she takes him into her tent where they make
passionate love.
In the climax of the film, Izidor's son Adrjani [Florin Moldovan] is
released from jail and there is an joyous celebration in the gypsy
village. The joy is short-lived, as Arjani and two accomplices go to
town and track down the local official who victimized him. They murder
him in a saloon in full view of the townsfolk. This leads to a raid on
the gypsy village and the death of both Izidor and Adrjani.
While the film does not explore the underlying tensions between
Romanians and gypsies, there is little doubt that it is related to the
social disintegration following the fall of Ceaucescu. In a time of
worsening economic conditions, gypsies become a convenient scapegoat
just as they were in the 1930s when fascism was on the rise.
Anti-gypsy racism is on the increase everywhere, including Vaclav
Havel's "enlightened" Czechoslovakia. A gypsy reporter writes:
"Voicing stereotypes common throughout Europe, Czechs claim that Roma,
with their traditionally large families, are a drain on the social
service budget and live better than Czechs with jobs. They regard Roma
as dishonest and often criminal. In a 1996 poll cited in the U.S.
State Department's human rights report, 35 percent of Czechs favored
'concentrating and isolating the Roma' and 45 percent supported
'moving the Roma out of the Czech Republic if possible.'"
As a Marxist, I have always been interested in "exceptions" to normal
bourgeois society. There is no greater exception than the gypsies, who
resist assimilation like no other people. They originated on the west
coast of India in the early middle ages and soon migrated into the
middle east. They arrived in Europe by the fourteenth century, and now
number more than 8 million there. They have always tried to find ways
to avoid the confinements of wage-labor. By the same token, they show
little interest in becoming captains of industry. While racist
mythology paints them as thieves, most are hard-working. Patrin, a web
page devoted to Roma (gypsy) culture and history states:
"For a collective economic effort, Roma may form a purely functional
association, the kumpaniya, whose members do not necessarily belong to
the same clan or even the same dialect group. Individually, many Roma
are peddlers, especially in Europe. Some sell goods they have bought
cheaply. Others sell what they make themselves, although in the
twentieth century a number of Romani crafts have suffered from
competition with mass-produced articles. 
"There are certain staple Romani occupations, such as horse trading,
metalworking, dealing in scrap metal, and vegetable or fruit picking
in some countries. In gaining a livelihood, the women play their full
part. It is they who often sell their wares from door to door and who
do the fortune telling. Among the Vlad-speaking Roma in the United
States, this latter profession, known as 'reading and advising,' is
still widespread."
Bourgeois society has always had great difficulties with peoples who
remain economically and culturally distinct. Like the gypsy, the Jews
have historically been outsiders. During the nineteenth century,
Eastern European Jewry existed on the fringes of bourgeois society as
pawnbrokers, tax-collectors, saloon-keepers, etc. Christian society
encountered them not only as an undifferentiated economic bloc, they
also saw them as an alien presence, with their Yiddish language, their
strange garb and religious beliefs. During times of relative economic
stability, the Jew and gypsy was tolerated. During times of duress,
they became scapegoats. And during the time of complete economic
collapse in post-WWI Europe, they functioned as the ultimate
scapegoats and were exterminated.
Today the Jews have become assimilated into bourgeois society. In the
United States, they are virtually indistinguishable from other
Americans. The gypsy, like the American Indian, remains unassimilated.
There are pressures on both peoples to meld with the outside world.
Like the American Indian, the gypsies face continuing cultural and
economic genocide. As is the case for American Indians, one of the big
worries for gypsy society is the disappearance of their language.
Tony Gatlif's "Gadjo Dilo" can be seen as part of the larger effort to
preserve gypsy culture and society. Ironically, it is Stéphane the
"outsider" who is assimilated into their culture and not the other way
round. It is not too hard to identify with him as he discovers the
joys of everyday gypsy life. There is a closeness and honesty that is
obviously missing from the colorless and competitive world of
bourgeois society. As our own society becomes more alienated and
hate-filled--to the extent that fourteen year olds bring automatic
weapons to school for the purpose of mass murder--, we will inevitably
begin to think about alternatives to our own materialist values.
At this point many people will be tempted to find a way to assimilate
into "outsider" societies, like Stéphane did into the gypsies. In many
ways, this was what the 1960s counter-culture was all about.
Unfortunately, these solutions can only exist for individuals, and not
for greater society which revolves around the cash nexus. The crying
need is for some sort of economic system that can make the freedom and
solidarity of the gypsy village depicted in "Gadjo Dilo" universal.
("Gadjo Dilo" is scheduled for theatrical release on July 10, 1998)
(For Marxist discussion: //www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html)
