Title
Review for Rambling Rose (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Lightweight memoir of a boy growing up
     in the mid-1930's Georgia and of the commotion caused by
     hiring a former "loose woman" to do housework.  Well filmed
     and to nobody's surprise Robert Duvall turns in a terrific
     performance as the father of the household.  Rating: +2 (-4
     to +4).  [minor spoilers in the review]
     "She caused one hell of a damnable commotion," says a middle-aged Buddy
(played by John Heard) recalling the young woman who came to live with his
family when he was 13.  The story of that commotion is told in a golden-
toned flashback that makes up all but about five minutes of the film.  The
"she" he is referring to is Rose (played by Laura Dern).  In a small Georgia
town in the mid 1930s, a younger Buddy (played by Lucas Haas) has a crush on
Rose.  His daddy (played by Robert Duvall) has hired Rose to save her from a
life of prostitution.  But Daddy has no idea how much Rose is going to
disrupt his well-ordered existence.
     That well-ordered existence includes three precocious children, Buddy
being the oldest, and a wife who is working on her Master's degree from
Columbia.  In talking, Mother tends to go off on philosophical tangents and
Daddy calls that "going off into the fourth dimension."  Mother takes a
maternal interest in this new hired girl.  Mother is played, incidentally,
by Dern's real-life mother, Diane Ladd.  The ruckus is caused by the fact
that Rose just exudes and radiates sexuality.  Both Daddy and Buddy are
attracted to her.  At this point one is really expecting the cliche of
Southern gentility being a thin veneer over decadence.  This film flirts
with that cliche, but generally seems to say that underneath that gentility
is just more gentility.  Or perhaps it is just Mother's good example.
Mother seems to have a sensitivity to the feelings of all living things with
the possible exception of her own children.  Daddy and Buddy are fascinated
by Rose's sensuality and in one memorable scene watch from a distance as
Rose walks around town attracting men.  Later this quality of attraction
will cause what may be more trouble than it is worth.
     Robert Duvall is in all probability the best American actor alive.
This might have been a pleasant enough film without his contribution, but it
would have not been nearly as good.  His gestures and his very posture are
unfailingly perfect.  Lines that could have been just straight flat dialogue
become witty or very telling when Duvall delivers them.  Laura Dern is not a
great actress but she has the right look for Rose.  She has a feral
sensuality that makes her attractive without being pretty balance that is
just about right for Rose.  The late Kevin Conway plays a Northern doctor
with his accustomed slightly sinister edge.  The one bad piece of casting is
John Heard as the 1971 Buddy.  He must look 49, speak with a Southern
accent, and look like Lucas Haas.  I usually like John Heard but he fails on
all three counts.
     RAMBLING ROSE is not a great film.  Though at times it reminds one of
other childhood reminiscences of the South such as TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD and
THE HEART IS A LONELY HUNTER, it has little of the power and does not really
have a whole lot to say,  But it is an enjoyable film and is well above the
general run of films of the last few months.  I would give it a +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.
