Title
Review for Kiss or Kill (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
KISS OR KILL is an honest attempt at something different by
writer/director Bill Bennett, but unfortunately his effort is a wacky,
crazed, emotionally confused mess of a film. That's not to say that it's
bad--there are some moments that work, and some material that is both
funny and moving, but the overall picture here is a labyrinthine
disaster so hyperbolic that it actually manages to hide much of its
insanity in its own craziness.
Matt Day and Frances O'Connor star as Al and Nikki, an Australian couple
on the run from the police for accidentally killing a guy but
intentionally stealing all of his valuables. They take off across the
desolate Australian landscape and meet an interesting array of
characters, most of whom end up with their throats slit at the hands of
. . . someone. Yes, it's a road movie-slash-love story. It reminded me
somewhat of the loathsome THE DOOM GENERATION and a little bit of
KALIFORNIA, but Bennett has no problem escaping cliches and common plot
devices--if nothing else, KISS OR KILL can be described as innovative.
But the problems can not be ignored. First, we're talking style overkill
here. Bennett likes short takes. Really short takes. I'd guess the
average take-length is around two seconds. Not only do the takes change
constantly, but the angles change with each take. The result is jittery,
and hyper, and the thought of it makes my heart pound quickly. Through
the whole film I felt uneasy and tense. I almost called Bennett
brilliant for this, but I realized something: he uses this approach
through the entire film, even when the action is focusing on the two
cops (Chris Haywood and Andrew S. Gilbert) pursuing the heroes. If
Bennett threw us the style fastball only during the scenes containing Al
and Nikki, I could see some point in it. As it is, there is clearly no
reason for its presence other than his need for style.
The script is outright sloppy. The characterizations seem almost
completely random, and hardly effective. Nikki is the most interesting,
because her past is explained (well, one element of it, anyway) so at
least we know something about her other than what's on the surface. Al,
on the other hand, is an opaque window--there might be something there,
but any hypothesis would simply be a stab in the dark. At one point the
plot twists and Al may or may not be who we expected--either way, it
makes no sense. His actions in the last half of the film--not to mention
the interactions between himself and Nikki--are simply unfounded. I was
constantly questioning motivation, but I never got the answers. There
was a moment towards the end of the film that felt true and solid, but
it was just a moment--the rest of the film lacks this kind of honesty.
The only characters that I really liked were the two cops. The best
scene in the film has the younger giving the older a fake story about
his life--it's a wonderful scene, and ironic that it has nothing to do
with the rest of the film. In fact, the cops-n-robbers part of the film
is never integrated smoothly, and the quick transitions from cops to
robbers is intrusive. Not only that, but a legal scene in the last third
of the film feels contrived--I don't see how the laws in Australia could
be so easily avoidable.
The acting is great all around, with a particularly strong performance
from O'Connor (mostly because she has the most to do with her
character). Bennett's direction, aside from his ludicrous stylistic
attacks, at least allows the film to progress in a manor that does, in
fact, feel progressive. It doesn't meander and it's far from dull.
But it's unsatisfying. Even in the closing scenes the characters'
relationship is sketchy, but it seems like it shouldn't be--here is a
couple who has made it through a lot of junk, and yet Bennett can't even
level with the audience about what is going through their minds. The
shell of this film is an interesting one, and Bennett clearly has a
great deal of talent in what he does, but he needs to learn the value of
solid characterizations and the point of stylistic approaches.

Author
David Sidwell
Rated MA in Australia (Medium Level Violence, Adult Themes, Medium Level
Coarse Lanuage)
Cast: Frances O'Connor, Matt Day, Chris Haywood, Barry Otto, Andrew S.
Gilbert, Barry Langrishe and Max Cullen.
She sleep walks; unconsciously and subconsciously re-enacting an horrific
event she witnessed as a child. 
But no. Think about it. It must be him. He's got the knife. He's got the
short fuse and has blown up a few times already. 
These are just some of the virtual deductions that you find yourself
contemplating as you sit there in that darkened picture house, trying to
untangle KISS OR KILL.
She is Nikki (O'Connor). He is Al (Day).  They are lovers on the run in the
outback. It's just the two of them. Yet, people they meet - literally in
the middle of nowhere - have a nasty tendency to be murdered. Is it him or
her doing it? This Nullabor Plain has thousands of miles of nothing ;
except fear, suspicion and radioactive dirt.
KISS OR KILL is a very good piece of filmmaking. The use of jump-cut edits
adds to the sense of things going wrong. Time is compressed. We see the
start (cut) middle (cut) then end of a scene. What would have taken 30
seconds in real-life takes only 10 or 15 on the screen. In this movie this
technique works; it serves to increase the feelings of urgency and tension.
Day and O'Connor are hot property and the click between them is so loud as
to be deafening. Improvisation played a role during the making of the film.
 As Nikki and Al start to suspect each other of doing the killings, this
technique kicks in particularly well; their interactions have a real edge
to them. Uncertainly, shock and confusion rule.
With these two representing the current New Wave of young Australian
cinema, Bill Bennett has assembled a virtual who's who of the previous
'generation' of actors as supports. Chris Haywood, Barry Otto and Max
Cullen mostly hover admirably in the background but add in valuable little
pieces to the puzzle.
If you like modern, well crafted, intelligent, thriller.roadmovie.romance
films, you are in for an exciting drive.
        Work:  http://www.midcomp.com.au
   (AS/400 & Other Midrange Software & Services)

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
KISS OR KILL is an Australian film, which will probably make what I'm about to
say all the more politically incorrect - but here I go anyway: KISS OR KILL
would've been a million times better if it had been done more Hollywood-like.
Yes, that's right - even though we usually hear the opposite about a movie,
KISS OR KILL could've used a more glamorizing, sensationalistic approach.
Writer/director Bill Bennet gives us a product that seems more like a film-
school project. It's low-key, somewhat amateurish, and in a film class it
would probably be hailed as a creative masterpiece. But in the "real world" of
movie-goers, this is not an enjoyable hour and a half. Put in the hands of a
more "commercial" director, and with some retouches to the script, I think
KISS OR KILL could've had some real potential at being a unique, fresh, and
fun adventure/romance flick. Sadly, it is not.
KISS OR KILL is the story of two young lovers who travel Australia conning
lustful men. Nikki (Frances O' Connor), the female of the duo, hangs out in
the bars seducing married men. When they go back to the guy's apartment for a
drink, she slips him a couple of pills, he falls asleep, and she robs him
blind. Then along with her boyfriend Al (Matt Day), they travel on until they
find the next victim.
The first time we actually see this happen, however, something goes wrong. The
guy Nikki drugged isn't just sleeping, he's dead! As Nikki and Al ransack the
dead guy's personal belongings, they argue over what's happened. They're
attention soon turns to different matters however. They discover a videotape
of well known sports-figure Zipper Doyle (Barry Langrishe) in bed with a young
boy. Shocked and disgusted, Nikki calls Zipper and leaves a harsh message on
his answering machine.
The two lovers take off once again, while back at the hotel room, the cops are
investigating the dead body. They suspect murder and begin a hunt for Nikki
and Al. Meanwhile, aware of the missing tape, Zipper too takes off searching
for the duo. We follow Nikki and Al as they travel from place to place, and
although we never actually see it happen, the people they meet tend to wind up
dead and robbed. When Nikki and Al fight about how the victims died, it
becomes obvious that we can't be sure who did it, whether it be one of Nikki
and Al or not.
KISS OR KILL really does have a good *idea* behind it, but it also has too
many flaws. Mainly, it scores high in the three U's: Underdevelopment,
Uneventfulness, and Unevenness. If this film had taken more time to develop
it's characters and give them depth, this film could have been a real gem in
today's prosaic market. Sadly, it just never gets rolling. Then there's the
editing. For a moment I was quite delighted with the non-stop jump cuts. They
never deviated from the scene or focus, but merely added a jumpy quality to
the film. For a moment, you're quite dazzled by this, but it doesn't take long
at all for it to become an annoying, overdone characteristic that is anything
but becoming. If Bennet had used this technique merely for introductions, it
would have proved to be a unique and artistic use of "poetic license", but
when it's used throughout the entire film, one wants to swat at the screen as
though it were a fly endlessly buzzing in their face.
As seems to happen all too often in movies, there are a few rare things that
*almost* make the movie recommendable. In this case, it's the acting.
Unfortunately it isn't the two leads who provide this wonderful acting. While
O' Connor and Day show that they indeed have potential, they are wasted in
frivolousness and, at times, downright silliness. But it is Chris Haywood and
Andrew S. Gilbert (as detectives Hummer and Crean, respectively) who just
don't get enough screen time to really shine, although we do get a peak at
their brilliance. In particular, a bewitching little exchange in a diner
(heavily influenced by PULP FICTION) shows us what we've been missing. This
laugh-out-loud moment makes one lament over the fact that there was so much
potential lost in this film. In addition, Max Cullen as Stan the "not-all-
there" motel-keep, is also quite winsome but underused.
Overall, KISS OR KILL may be worth a disheartening look merely for it's
potentiality, but nothing more. It may wind up being a good example of what
*not* to do when making a motion-picture. The faults stand out enough that you
could actually take notes on what to avoid. I constantly found myself thinking
of ways I'd improve the film, and as a possible re-write, this could be one
for the books. Instead of coming away angry and disappointed, KISS OR KILL
makes you want to help the film. It has enough there to make you *want* to
enjoy it, but not enough to really win you over. In the end, you won't want to
chastise Bennett for his shortcomings - you'll be more likely to pat him on
the back and say, "Nice try. Better luck next time."

Author
Jamie Peck
October / 1:35 / 1997 / R (language, sexual perversion, nudity, violence)
Cast: Matt Day; Frances O'Connor; Chris Haywood; Barry Otto; Andrew S. 
Gilbert; Barry Langrishe; Max Cullen 
Director: Bill Bennett 
Screenplay: Bill Bennett 
With "Kiss or Kill," Aussie director Bill Bennett tries to fashion a hip 
film noir with attractive leads, alluring scenery and a complex plot 
involving sex and murder. Unfortunately, the results are middling at 
best. It really says a lot that the movie's best sequence -- two cops 
casually conversing over breakfast, which, by the way, is extremely 
similar to the John Travolta-Samuel L. Jackson diner dialogue near the 
end of "Pulp Fiction" -- has absolutely nothing to do with anything. 
Jackson's "Fiction" hitman character claimed that personality goes a long 
way. Well, this movie has none. 
"Love and Other Catastrophes" alums Frances O'Connor and Matt Day play 
drifting grifters Nikki and Al. She's a flirty lass who hangs out in 
bars, bats her eyes at wealthy-looking patrons and escorts them up to 
their hotel rooms where she spikes their drinks; he, brooding and 
secretive, lets himself in and helps her make off with whatever valuables 
they can steal. When one mark accidentally dies after being drugged, 
Nikki and Al panic and make off with his briefcase, which they're sure 
contains some kind of worthwhile bounty. Not quite -- its contents 
actually consist of a tape that explicitly reveals a renowned sports hero 
(Barry Langrishe) to be a pedophile. With the police and several other 
seedy types on their trail, the criminal lovebirds hit the road. 
There are many directions "Kiss or Kill" could go at this point, and the 
filmmakers attempt to cover them all with equal parts disturbing 
suspense, black comedy and romantic drama (with a couple of repressed 
flashbacks and blazing explosions thrown in for good measure). The mix 
might have worked had any of these characters been tightly-written, but 
they're not -- we don't know about them, we don't care about them. In 
similar movies, the supporting cast can be quirky enough to steal the 
stars' fire, but here they're just as dull. Incredibly strong, appealing 
performances from Day and O'Connor aside, there's little meaty enough 
here to sink your teeth into. 
Because "Kiss or Kill" utilizes the seemingly-foolproof, twisty elements 
of the crime caper, one might be tempted to call it a triumph of style 
over substance. But discounting glamorously dusty outback scenery, the 
movie's look is a headache-inducer thanks to sledgehammer editing. An 
example scene construction: Cut to Nikki opening a house door to walk to 
a car trunk, cut to Nikki at the car trunk, cut to Nikki walking back 
through the house door. I've heard of keeping things moving, but this is 
absolutely irritating. 
"Kiss or Kill" does boast a few interesting nuances -- like Nikki and 
Al's growing distrust of each other -- but overall, the more turns the 
plot takes, the more distancing and dull it becomes. Eventually, a 
particularly engaging setup is wasted to serve annoying contrivances. 
Perhaps the most telling flaw of "Kiss or Kill" is divulged in its 
production notes -- a majority of the film's dialogue and interaction 
were improvised. Maybe Bennett will use an actual script next time. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Frances O'Connor, Matt Day, Chris Haywood, Barry Langrishe, 
      Andrew S. Gilbert, Barry Otto, Max Cullen
Director: Bill Bennett
Producers: Bill Bennett, Jennifer Bennett
Screenplay: Bill Bennett
Cinematography: Malcolm McCulloch
U.S. Distributor: October Films
     KISS OR KILL is a chaotic-but-pointless exercise in mediocrity.  It 
belongs to the ever-increasing group of post-Tarantino road pictures, 
where a modern-day Bonnie and Clyde go on the run, mouthing pseudo-
clever dialogue while the body count piles up.  Inevitably, they are 
being chased by both the good guys and the bad guys, and the final 
confrontation usually involves gunplay and bloodshed.  But, while KISS 
OR KILL strives for the relatively modest goal of being an Australian 
TRUE ROMANCE, it never quite ascends to that level, remaining instead 
mired in the pit that claimed titles like LOVE AND A .45.  
     The first problem with KISS OR KILL is that there aren't any vital 
characters.  To be sure, Nikki (Frances O'Connor) and Al (Matt Day) are 
attractive, but they spend the film's 90-minute running time inhabiting 
lifeless husks.  These two are deadly dull, and, despite a few heated 
sex scenes, there's no evidence of any chemistry between them.  Their 
pursuers, a pair of bumbling cops (Andrew S. Gilbert and Chris Haywood) 
and a pedophile ex-soccer star named Zipper Doyle (Barry Langrishe), are 
no more interesting.  Along the way, we have the usual gallery of 
oddballs, including a recluse (STRICTLY BALLROOM's Barry Otto) who shows 
up everywhere and a motel owner who uses a blow torch to keep the fondue 
warm.
     When the film opens, our heroes, Nikki and Al, are in the process 
of pulling a scam on a businessman -- she takes him to a motel room, 
drugs him, then lets her partner in so that the two of them can clean 
their victim out.  Only this time, something goes wrong, and the 
businessman dies.  Panicking, Nikki and Al flee the scene with a video 
tape in their possession that shows Zipper Doyle in bed with a little 
boy.  Soon, they're involved in a cross-country chase.  Only, every 
place they stop for the night, someone turns up dead.  Distrust worms 
its way into their relationship as Nikki and Al begin suspecting each 
other of being a little too handy with a knife.
     In an unsuccessful attempt to energize his film, director Bill 
Bennett employs an irritating form of jump-cutting that compresses time.  
The effect is interesting on the first few occasions when he uses it, 
but, like a child infatuated with a new toy, he overdoes things.  Soon, 
this peculiar form of editing becomes both distracting and off-putting.  
Sadly, Bennett's stylistic riffs may be the most intriguing aspect of a 
film that feels gratingly over-familiar.  In fact, my complaints about 
this movie are similar to those I voiced for A LIFE LESS ORDINARY, 
except that picture was somewhat better made.
     Frances O'Connor and Matt Day, reunited here from LOVE AND OTHER 
CATASTROPHES, are appealing performers, but there's little that they, or 
anyone else, can do with this script, which, by trying to be too hip and 
kinetic, ends up being simply muddled.  There is one great moment, 
however, and, while it's not worth sitting through the movie for, it 
will stand out for anyone who sees the film.  The scene in question 
doesn't involve the leads, but features the two cops.  It begins like 
something from PULP FICTION, with one man explaining why he doesn't eat 
bacon.  Where the conversation goes, and how it ends, is borderline-
hysterical.  
     Bill Bennett's last feature was the lifeless TWO IF BY SEA, and 
KISS OR KILL doesn't represent much of a step in the right direction.  
The films have some plot and character similarities, but the most 
obvious shared trait is that neither is particularly enjoyable.  Viewing 
KISS OR KILL is more of a trial than a pleasure, and, while it isn't 
terrible film making, there's nothing here worth getting excited about.  
Even those with a fondness for this overpopulated genre may find that 
Bennett's picture is one too many.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
James Brundage
Rated R for violence, profanity, and sexuality
Written and Directed by Bill Bennett (Two if by Sea)
Starring Frances O'Conner (Love and other Catastrophes) and Matt Day (Love
and other Catastrophes)
 I could write this review with my eyes closed.  If it weren't for all the
typos you would see, that'd actually be a good idea.  What I can tell you is
that, for each of the four times I have seen this film, it has gotten better
and better.
 At first, I rented it on the basis of wonderful PR: a provocative back and
front cover of the video.  The second and third time, I rented it because I
had previously enjoyed it.  This final time, I taped it off of HBO at 1:10
in the morning...  I wanted it that much.
 Kiss or Kill, winner of the Australian Best Picture, Director, Actor, and
Actress awards in 1997, in the story of Niki and Al, a pair of thieves
marking married men, having Niki seduce them and drug them, and then robbing
them as a pair.  Niki is the victim of a childhood memory of her mother
being burnt to death in front of her eyes when she was six.  Al is the
disowned son of a Gold Coast millionaire.  Both lives equally tragic, they
survive with each other.
 When one of their marks dies of an overdoes, they set themselves to run for
Perth, but not before finding a suitcase with a pornographic video in it.
This video implicates Zipper Doyle in a child porn ring, and, somehow, has a
link into Niki's past.  Running for Perth, whoever they meet starts dying,
and they are left with only one option: distrust each other.
 As B-grade of a road movie as this may sound, it is the creme de la creme.
Kiss or Kill's characters are fully developed, it's script tainted with a
dark humor and gifted with a sublime mystery, and it's directing a steel
machine.  Kudos go out to Henry Dagnar, the editor, who does the most
innovative technique in years: cutting up each continuous shot to give the
viewer a "hurried" feeling.
 Niki and Al, on the run from the police, are set into a philosophical
examination of lies and truth.  As they are forced to mistrust each other,
they are forced to re-evaluate their love for one another and what they
thought they knew.  Rather than stage this examination in a quiet suburban
town, as the independent masterpiece Sex, Lies, and Videotape did, Kiss or
Kill uses the mystery of the murders that surround them to propel the story
along.  Everyone is on the run.
 Frances O'Conner and Matt Day, previously seen as friends in Love and Other
Catastrophes, are excellent as the couple on the run.  Should the movie have
been done in America, it very well would have won them an Academy Award.
Frances O'Conner projects exactly what she should: an aura of mystery and
self-distrust, not to mention a distrust of others, accompanied with a naive
intelligence.  She seems innocent, but is not.  Matt Day shows himself as an
angry victim of a father that ignored him.  Not as intelligent as Niki, but
good at masking it, Matt Day is the more practical of the two.
 Also of note are the two policemen on their train, whose names escape me
but who deliver perhaps the best scene of lies in recent times.  This comes
in the form of a breakfast talk about why one of them won't eat bacon, and
seems utterly serious until the end.
 Told in a detached manner, Bill Bennett was and should be recognized for
his brilliance.  He uses almost no lighting throughout the film, yet
persists in using scenes in darkened rooms in order to heighten the shadows
and thus the suspense.  Leaving no music in the film whatsoever, he allows
us to view this as if it were really happening, instead of as it was just
another movie.
 Kiss or Kill was a technical and colorful masterpiece, and deserves every
bit of praise I or anyone else could give it.  Enjoy, people, enjoy.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     KISS OR KILL starts with a shocking immolation scene.  While the
mother burns, her small daughter looks on in horror.  We then cut to
the present where the now grown daughter,  Nikki, leads a life of crime
with her boyfriend, Al.
     This Australian criminals-on-the-run picture is directed by Bill
Bennett, whose last movie, TWO IF BY SEA, made my worst films list for
1996.  KISS OR KILL is infinitely better than his last picture, but
still not quite worth recommending.
     Two actors from the delightful but inconsequential LOVE AND OTHER
CATASTROPHES play the leads in KISS OR KILL.  Frances O'Connor is the
sleepwalking woman named Nikki, who may or may not slit throats as a
sideline, and Matt Day plays her explosive boyfriend, Al, who must be
the throat slicer if she isn't.
     It all starts with their usual MO.  Sexy Nikki, wearing a
minimalist red dress, hits on some married man alone in a bar.  After
luring him to her room for some hot sex, she drugs him, and she and Al
take the guy's money.  One night, they accidentally kill a guy with an
overdose, and, except for a Rolex, the only thing he has is a
videotape.  On the tape is a pedophiliac scene of a famous athlete
named Zipper Doyle (Barry Langrishe), now rich and retired.  And part
of the tape has a woman that looks like Nikki in bed with Zipper.
     If you're a fan of experimental editing techniques, you'll love
what editor Henry Dangar does in KISS OR KILL.  Using more jump cuts
that I've seen in while, scenes jump back and forth from wide angle to
close-up and forward and backward in time all while maintaining vocal
continuity.  When the story begins to flag, the editing does keep your
attention just as too much caffeine keeps you jittery.
     In contrast to the vicious killers on the loose, the local cops
are exceedingly polite.  Their every other phrase seems to be a hearty,
"thank you matey."  The film is set mainly in the Australian outback,
which the police describe succinctly as, "it's not the end of the
world, but you can see it from here."
     Although the two leads are good, their characters are rarely
compelling.  Both actors would be worth looking for in future movies.
KISS OR KILL is not a bad film, but it is too often more an exercise in
style than an interesting narrative.
     KISS OR KILL runs 1:33.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, profanity,
attempted rape, and gore.  The film would be acceptable for teenagers
only if they are older and very mature.
