Title
Review for Mi vida loca (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This is a heart-breaking story of the boys and girls, the young
men and women who live in the barrios of East Los Angeles.  It would
seem like a hopeless existence with a dead end.  Their world is
tattoos, and guns and hanging around with nothing to do but get into
trouble.
     MY CRAZY LIFE shows that existence, that entrapment.  Two of the
women, best friends "Sad Girl" (Angel Avilas) and "Mousie" (Seidi
Lopez) each is pregnant by Ernesto (Jacob Vargas), a drug dealer.
Even  their names, "Sad Girl" and "Mousie" reveal that they are lost.
What do they know about rearing babies and where will they get the
money?  And what life lies ahead for their children?
     What keeps this from being a better film is that it is an apologia
for the gangs.  It is made to appear as if the gangs are innocuous,
formed to bond newcomers and friends who are harassed by other gangs
and the police.  But people get shot in drive-bys.  And there is a fear
that permeates their lives.   Even Giggles (Marlo Marron) who goes to
jail even though her man is the guilty one, ends up without hope.
When, in jail, the realization comes that she cannot depend on men;
that the men will end up wounded, in jail, or dead, she tries to learn
a trade in prison but when she gets out and looks for a job, the ads
ask where she studied, what experience does she have and has she ever
committed a felony.  No hope.
     And when the women realize they have to depend on their own wits,
the film ends tragically, negating the hope that the women can make it
on their own.
     As a film, it is engrossing, well-acted (many are first-time
actors) but perhaps it should have been an outright documentary rather
than a fictional film based on real lives.
     Written and Directed by Allison Anders who herself was a teenage
runaway, has done time in jail, and is the single parent of two
childen.

Author
James Berardinelli
     1992 saw the debuts of two incredible American filmmakers.  The
first, with his devastating, ultra-violent RESERVOIR DOGS, was Quentin
Tarantino.  The second, with a more low-key, yet no less effective
effort, was Allison Anders.  Her GAS FOOD LODGING possessed the
refreshing quality of emotional honesty.
     MI VIDA LOCA, the director's sophomore film, takes her into the
Los Angeles neighborhood of Echo Park, a community dominated by gangs,
the likes of which has been portrayed in such diverse offerings as BOYZ
'N THE HOOD and BOUND BY HONOR (BLOOD IN, BLOOD OUT).  This is the
female perspective of what it means to live in the inner city, where
almost every girl has at least one child by the age of twenty-one, and
where most homeboys of the same age are either dead or in prison.
     MI VIDA LOCA allows a peek into the lives of several of the young
Echo Park women, as gathered through Anders' interviews with the people
who really live there.  The two most prominent characters are Sad Girl
(Angel Aviles) and Mousie (Seidy Lopez), a pair of friends who were
inseparable until they both became involved with a smooth-talking drug
dealer named Ernesto (Jacob Vargas).  After each bore him a child,
jealousy and betrayal drove a wedge between them which now threatens to
ignite a bloody confrontation.
     Then there's Giggles (Marlo Marron), an older homegirl who spent
four years in prison because of the crimes of her dead boyfriend.
After walking past the barred gates as a free woman, she decides to
change the way she lives.  No longer will she be in thrall to any man;
self-reliance is her new creed.
     The film is divided into three episodes (complete with their own
opening title cards), each presenting a different story.  While
characters, plot elements, and themes are shared, Anders uses (and
occasionally overuses) a variety of narrative perspectives (and
voiceovers) to emphasize where one tale ends and another begins.
     MI VIDA LOCA doesn't have the power of GAS FOOD LODGING, although
both movies develop similar themes regarding the empowerment of women.
One of the main problems here is that there are too many characters to
develop, so none gets much in-depth presentation.  As soon as the
audience starts to relate to a person, there is a viewpoint shift.
With this sort of gritty, near-documentary style, the most effective
films focus the audience's empathy towards a small number of
protagonists.
     The abrupt ending is stunning, and recalls the kind of impact than
Anders is capable of making.  The voiceover at the time--"Women don't
use weapons to prove a point.  Women use weapons for love."--adds an
extra dash of potency to the scene.
     MI VIDA LOCA's insight into human nature is as keen as that of any
other film with an inner city perspective, and this is a rare attempt
to present the women's point-of-view.  Anders has a keen eye and ear
for details and dialogue.  The movie presents life as it is, the good
alongside the bad.  The large number of characters offers the
opportunity for greater variety, but their presence is also a diluting
factor.
     MI VIDA LOCA is worthwhile viewing, but it will not draw you as
completely into Echo Park as GAS FOOD LODGING did into the world of
truck stops and tumbleweeds.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
