Title
Review for Perfect Blue (1997/I)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Kent Johnson
This is an animated murder mystery suspense thriller from Japan about an
idol singer trying to become a serious actress.  The last third is so
wonderfully surreal that it seems an inconclusive "which world is real?"
ending is inevitable (but it isn't).  PERFECT BLUE is excellently
written and executed and except for one thing, would be moody,
suspenseful and shocking -- all the virtues of a good mystery film
combined with the beauty and poetry of an animated film.
The fact that PERFECT BLUE is *opening* at the dinky Opera Plaza theatre
(usually reserved for second-run art films) tells you how marginal this
release is, so it's great that it made it into the theatres at all.
Unfortunately, instead of being subtitled, the film has been dubbed in
English and although it's not that bad for an English dubbing effort, at
every turn the dubbing undermines the effectiveness of the film.  The
voices don't sound right, the dialogue is awkward because it was
rewritten to match the animated mouth movements and Japanese concepts
are slaughtered in the Americanized dialog.
It's disturbing to watch a movie which you constantly have to mentally
filter ("Well, would have been a good scene if it was subtitled...),
especially since Japanese voice-acting is generally really good and adds
a lot to the animated films.  I don't feel like I'll have really seen
the film until I see a subtitled version.

Author
Dustin Putman
"Perect Blue," directed by first-time filmmaker Satoshi Kon, was my first 
foray into the world of anime films, a contemporary animation style from 
Japan, and as such, I can also call it the most outlandish animated film I've 
ever seen. Definitely not for children, it is a violent and bloody thriller, 
but one that is thoroughly likable, thanks to the amicably sympathetic lead 
character.
The film tells the story of Mima Kirigoe, the lead vocalist of a Japanese pop 
band called Cham, who decides to quit her rising singing career to pursue 
acting, despite the caution of her manager. She quickly garners a pivotal 
role on a televison series, but begins recieving threatening letters and 
faxes, and also learns of an internet site that tells everything she does 
each day, down to the smallest detail. Someone must be watching her every 
move, Mima decides, but that's far from her only problem. A lookalike of Mima 
starts to appear everywhere she goes, threatening to restart her music 
career, posing as her.
"Perfect Blue" is a wildly inventive creation that is just about as adult as 
an animated film can get, and at times, I even started to forget that it was, 
in fact, animated. The filmmaking process of the soap opera Mima stars in is 
shown in a techincal, realistic light, and it occasionally could waver over 
into the category of being creepy, particularly the climax, which involves a 
twist that I not for once saw coming. 
The unique animation style is one of the highlights of viewing the film. 
Although not up to the artistry of a Disney picture, it nonetheless remains 
almost life-like, particularly in the drawings of the characters and the city 
landscapes that can be seen from Mima's apartment. The colors are bright and 
stylized, and the animation always seems reality-based, rather than Disney's 
often exaggerated features. 
Since it is the character of Mima that guides us through the film, it was 
improtant that the viewer could see eye-to-eye with her. Mima loves her music 
career, but doesn't want to be known as a "pop star," and so she finds 
herself in a situation in which she gets stuck doing a graphic television 
series that, in one scene, requires her character to be raped. Somewhat 
ashamed of herself, and for defying her best friend, Rumi, who didn't want 
her to do the scene, Mima finally blows up in her room when she sees that, 
not only is someone stalking her and she has a crazed doppleganger running 
around, but her pet fish have all died.
At 80 minutes, "Perfect Blue" runs at a brisk pace, but still manages to grow 
tedious and slightly confusing in the middle half-hour, which becomes 
particularly repetitive. The exciting, gory climax boosts the film up a 
notch, however, with a chase across the rooftops of buildings and through the 
city streets. Best of all, with the final line of dialogue that comes from 
Mima in the last scene, I noticed a definite growth on Mima's part, as she 
finally realizes she can do whatever she wants for her career, just as long 
as it makes her happy. "Perfect Blue" isn't quite as perfect as the title 
suggests, but it is still a film that I could easily recommend to those 
searching for something a bit more original than the norm.
- Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
  Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Brandon Herring 
Unrated contains (all animated) graphic violence and gore, a strong rape scene,
nudity and some language.
Anime films have always been awesome to me, I haven't seen many, but what I did
see made me hooked on them. Now I finally get to see the brand new anime film
'Perfect Blue' as I would put it is that it is a cartoon with Hitchcock
highlights. A cartoon which is not for kids at least under the age of 14. With
it's high quotient of graphic violence and copious gore, it's a mature film
made to be viewed by adults.
Mima is a popular star in a Japanese pop group. After wanting to pursue an
acting career, despite the personal opinion of her agent, she becomes an
actress and gets a part in a thriller. Someone however does not like the fact
that Mima is out of the pop light, and has become an actress, someone is
watching Mima, every move she makes, killing off people she knows, now she has
to try and figure out rather her career or her life comes first...
Despite a few slow parts in the film, this is a great psychological thriller.
It takes on a journey to places where our minds are challenged, we have to
think about what is happening. The lead character Mima is so well-thought out,
you'd think she was real. Even being a cartoon at times the film seemed like a
live action movie, with some intense scenes. Towards the middle of the film it
becomes a little confusing on our part, but quickly descends back into it's
brilliant mind.
The animation is plush and colorful, with the character well-animated. The
movie does contain content that some viewers may not like or even be offended
by. Graphic violence does occur in the film, but not all the time. Of course it
is animated, but with the violence is alot of blood and gore, some resulting in
bloody messes. The movie has a way to captivate us, and make us part of the
story. The direction of the film, writing and the way it is brought to us is
very original and innovative.
'Perfect Blue' is probably the best adult cartoon movie I've seen in a while.
It pays homage to Hitchcock, has the animation to satisfy any animation buff,
the intensity to make someone uncomfortable. I also found the film to make me
think about what can happen, and by the end of the film some shocking stuff
happens in the storyline, which I would have never thought possible. A
wonderfully entertaining movie, that all anime fans should love.
Reviwed by Brandon Herring September 11, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Athan Bezaitis
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/14c211de96509278882567fe0007a920?OpenDocument
If it were somehow easier to translate Japanese into English without
losing so much essential meaning and depth, anime style films would
surely be more entertaining and maybe even accepted by mainstream
American audiences.  This unique style of animation is fun to watch,
especially when it's in the context of a sadistic story such as
PERFECT BLUE.  The exaggerated features and expressions along with the
mess of blood and gore seem perfectly suited for the larger-than-life
anime style.  Unfortunately, PERFECT BLUE is nothing more than
visually exhilarating, and the reason is that too much is lost in the
dubbing from its original format.
Directed by Satoshi Kon, PERFECT BLUE is the story of 21-year-old pop
star Mima Kirigoe, who is the lead singer in the all-girl band Cham.
Heeding advice from her agent to get out of the business before her
fame runs out, she decides to become an actress.  Like many of the
instant pop celebrities before her, Mima finds it hard to be taken
seriously and is forced to change her image in order to be cast in
larger roles.  In her first big feature she plays a stripper who is
raped and sets off on a wild killing spree.  A disturbed fan, who also
runs her Website, refuses to accept that his favorite pop star is
changing her persona and is obsessed with keeping Mima the innocent
young starlet that he has fallen in love with.  After several of the
people associated with casting her in smutty roles are murdered, Mima
becomes plagued with disturbing hallucinations and is stalked by the
deranged Webmaster who somehow knows too many details of her personal
life.  Mima eventually can no longer discern fantasy from reality and
becomes paralyzed by her inability to associate the events around her
with increasingly disturbing visions.
 The film is inundated with frighteningly sordid imagery.  I would
definitely categorize it as a horror film complete with vicious
stabbings, a naive female victim being stalked and hunted, and a
staged rape scene that is downright chilling.  Don't be fooled into
taking your kids to see this one just because they like Power Rangers.
This one will be rated R and deservedly so.
The main problem is that too much of the dialogue seems canned and
sappy.  The translation makes Mima seem almost dumb as she is
confronted with a chain of events that she does nothing to cope with.
She comes off as nothing more than a ditsy child even as those close
to her are dying and she seems to be losing her mind.  If you're in
the mood for something dark and twisted this is the right film for
you.  Otherwise spare yourself the trouble of having to sit through
what is a crude film that will be hard for most audiences to swallow.
** Two Stars
Starring:  N/A
Producer:  Hiroaki Inoue, Masao Maryama
Director:   Satoshi Kon
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Michael Dequina
Mima, a member of the bubblegum girl singing trio Cham, decides to quit
the group in pursuit of other interests (think Ginger Spice)--namely, an
acting career.  As Mima's pursuit of a new professional image takes a
much darker turn--she lands a role that calls for a violent rape scene;
she poses for nude photos--people around her start to die bloody deaths,
and the spitting image of her former pop idol self begins to haunt her. 
Could it be the work of a shady-looking fan who watches her every move? 
Or is she imagining the whole thing, including her break from Cham?  Or
is her entire showbiz career a figment of fantasy?
_Perfect_Blue_ is the latest entry in the hot new subgenre of the
thriller, the "what is reality?" thriller.  The crucial difference with
this Japanese import is that it is an animated film, and with the freedom
of animation comes a more effective blurring of fantasy and reality; when
the world is entirely drawn, everything can plausibly be real.  Director
Satoshi Kon takes his time to get this adaptation of a novel by Yoshikazu
Takeuchi off the ground, bringing to light the horrendous acting of a
number of the English-speaking voice actors, but by the film's end,
_Perfect_Blue_ has become an exciting and haunting exercise in
psychological horror.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Manga Entertainment/Rex Entertainment
 Director:  Satoshi Kon
 Screenplay: Sadayuki Murai, novel by Yoshikazu Takeuchi
 Animation: Hideki Hamazu
   Ordinarily one wouldn't compare a film like "Perfect Blue" to the
highly publicized final film of Stanley Kubrick, "Eyes Wide Shut," but
since the Kubrick epitaph opened just three weeks before the
U.S. debut of Satoshi Kon's Japanese anime feature, one can't help
noting at least a marginal similarity.  In "Eyes Wide Shut," Tom
Cruise's character, Dr.  Bill Harford, is made privy to a provocative
fantasy of his wife (played by Nicole Kidman).  Bored with a lull in
her nine-year marriage, Alice Harford attempts to make her husband
jealous by telling him of a near-affair she enjoyed with a naval
officer during their marriage.  Struck hard--as though he were living
in pre-war Imperial Vienna rather than in contemporary Manhattan--the
doctor becomes discombobulated, experiencing a virtual psychotic
break.  He wanders confused through some of New York's shadier
streets, an alienated man who has lost his bearings, ending up in a
mysterious Long Island mansion which is the site of a masked orgy to
which he had not been invited.  Kubrick invites the audience to
determine whether Harford is actually experiencing his disaffection or
whether he is merely an actor in a bad, bad dream.
   "Perfect Blue" deals with a woman who goes through a similar
ordeal.  Like Dr. Harford, Mimi Kirigoe, is leading a solid life as an
entertainer with the respect of both those near to her and of her
followers.  But a brief series of ill-fated encounters shatters her
fragile spirit in much the way Harford is crushed by his wife's
revelation, and she undergoes a period of deranged illusions which are
so real to her that she can no longer tell the difference between
delusion and actuality.  As she regresses psychologically into violent
episodes, she becomes convinced that she is no longer the victim of a
madman's agenda but a murderer herself.
   If the plot evokes for you Roman Polanski's "Repulsion"--that
director's 1965 psychological shocker about the mental deterioration
of a sexually repressed girl left alone in her sister's apartment for
several days--you'd be on the money.  There is one huge difference,
however.  "Perfect Blue" is wholly animated, a genre usually known in
the U.S.  for children's features by studios like Disney, Dreamworks,
and Warner Bros., but in Japan a type of filming taken with deadly
seriousness to display violent, shocking, psychologically compelling
themes.  Cognoscenti in the West may be familiar with Katsuhiro Otomo,
currently the giant of this category, whose "Akira" adapted a Japanese
comic-book sci-fi novel to the screen, depicting a group of
motorcycle-riding, telekinetically-empowered teens living in a
post-disaster Tokyo.  Though "Akira" was produced ten years before
"Perfect Blue," it shares the newer feature's technically spectacular
excellence, but unlike "Perfect Blue," "Akira" sometimes is derailed
by confusing storytelling.
   Director Satoshi Kon brings Sadayuki Murai's screenplay (based on a
novel by Yoshikazu Takeuchi) to vivid life, splashing spectacularly
vivid colors to the screen as he weaves the story of Mima Kirigoe--who
at the age of 21 is a pop idol whose Spice-Girls-style singing group,
Cham, is well-liked by their fans but whose records simply cannot make
the top-100 charts.  Persuaded to switch careers against the advice of
her manager, she becomes an actress, is given a bit part in a TV
detective drama, and is conned into taking part in more graphic pieces
involving nudity, rape, and modeling for Playboy-style magazines.
While her two partners who now perform as a duet in Cham become
successful, Mima loses the moral support of her former fans, forfeits
integrity in her own mind, and begins to deteriorate psychologically.
She can no longer distinguish her role in the thrillers from the
reality of her own life, is certain that she is being watched (someone
has even created a Mima Kirigoe home page on the Internet with
information that only she could have known), and while she appears to
be stalked by a genuine psycho who has brutally stabbed several of her
associates to death, she toys with the idea that she is herself an
illusion.
   Since Satoshi Kon is given only eighty minutes to tell this
frightening story, he dispenses with casual development of Mima's
character--which is all to the good.  By getting right to the point,
"Perfect Blue" moves forward quickly, compelling the audience to pay
close attention to detail, to vet each action for clues.  "Perfect
Blue" delights in keeping us in the audience as off guard and clueless
as its principal character.  Like Mina we never know when the
stalker's murderous moves on her are real, a figment of her
imagination, or a component in the thriller she is staging for her TV
audience.  We are reminded of David Cronenberg's recent fantasy,
"eXistenZ," in which Allegra Geller is plunged into an acid trip,
keeping the audience without an indicator to which scenes are part of
Allegra's journey and which represent her comeback to her actual life
before the start of the experiment.
   The title comes from the TV movie that has employed Mima as a
performer, "Double Bind," which the staff calls "the looking-glass of
Perfect Blue."  "Perfect Blue" works so well as a psychological
thriller that at times the audience can't be blamed for forgetting
that no real people are acting in the movie.  While the picture has
been shown at festivals around the world, the U.S. appearances are in
the English-dubbed version, a technique that does detract in the least
from its effectiveness.  One can't help thinking that the novelist is
taking a stab at celebrity with its fleeting fame and ersatz ecstasy,
illuminating in his story just why so many of the rich and famous wind
up alcoholics, drug addicts, and suicides.  He may, in addition, be
criticizing the public for seeking thrills in the tastelessly erotic
rather than in the more established qualities of fine fiction.
   "Perfect Blue" will probably wind up screened exclusively in art
houses, but this would be a shame.  Few Americans have experienced
animation except in movies principally for the kiddies (however
well-realized).  "Perfect Blue" is a fine antidote for moviegoers who
are bored by both the formulaic and the naturalistic.  The movie is
resonant with adult themes, superbly vivid animation, and the
excitement that a good thriller even if handicapped with human actors
can provide.

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Dubbed in English from Japanese. Not Rated (Would be a strong R or an
NC-17).
For those who do not know, "anime" is a Japanese form of animation. It
has a very distinctive style and, with graphic violence and often
nudity, it's strictly for adults. Perfect Blue is one of the few animes
released on the big screen in the US and why they chose this one is
beyond me. It's an intriguing but pretentious, confusing, often
incoherent meditation on the nature of reality: a concept that has been
explored so thoroughly in Hollywood the past couple years, did we really
need to import a movie about it?
Perfect Blue tells the story of Mima, a lead singer for a pop group
named "Cham" who decides to leave music for an acting career. Her first
television role does not exactly fit in with her previous perky persona.
In fact, her deeply troubled character resembles herself all too well;
so much so that she begins to confuse her life with that of her
television counterpart.
One day she finds a page on the internet entitled "Mima's Room". It has
too much personal information: things other people wouldn't know unless
they were watching her. At the same time, she begins getting anonymous
letters -- one of them complete with a letter bomb -- and she grows
frightened. Soon the stress of her job overwhelms her and she spaces out
of reality. She is no longer able to separate the dream world from the
real world and is haunted by visions of her pop-star alter ego and a
mysterious man who seems intent on doing her harm.
After running it over in my head for hours, I am now pretty sure that I
understand just what went on in Perfect Blue, but as I was watching I
had no idea. This may have been the effect that director Satoshi Kon was
going for, but either way it doesn't work; instead of enjoying the
kinetic, visually charged production I was scratching my head. I have no
problem with films that are, by their very nature, complex, but it's no
fun when it gets to the point of being impossible to follow.
I understand that translating a film into English from another language
is a daunting task, but when said film has pretentions of being a
legitimate psychological thriller, its dialogue should not sound as if
it was written by a third-grader. Here, the content does indeed suggest
an adult suspenser but the dialogue seems to have come from The Iron
Giant (especially botched is a scene where Mima is taught to use the
internet: it comes like an extraordinarily bad commercial for an online
service).
Well-made action sequences and a terrific, powerful soundtrack almost
redeem this sloppy, incoherent movie. One of the reasons I love
animation is that it makes it easy for filmmakers to stage long,
complicated scenes that would be very difficult (i.e. expensive) to do
when bound by the limits of the real world. Perfect Blue takes full
advantage of this wonderful medium. The drawings themselves are fluid
and realistic while the things they do with the drawings are amazing.
The film does look great, but my rating would have been at least a star
higher had director Satoshi Kon paid a little less attention to the
visuals and a more to narrative cohesion. I am a sucker for "what-is-
reality" movies; even the otherwise lambasted The Thirteenth Floor eked
out a 3-star rating from me. I definitely find the premise of Perfect
Blue to be brimming with potential. Too bad the film disrupted my idea
of reality with its mediocrity.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Richard Scheib
Japan. 1997. Director - Satoshi Kon, Screenplay - Sadayuki Murai, Based 
on Character Design by Hisashi Eguchi, Based on the Novel by Yoshikazu 
Takeuchi, Producers - Hiroaki Inoue & Masao Maruyama, Planning - Koichi 
Okamoto & Yoshikazu Takeuchi, Photography - Hisao Shirai, Music - 
Masahiro Ikumi, Animation Director/Character Design - Hideki Hamazu, 
Production Design - Mitsusuke Hayakawa, Special Adviser - Katsuhiro 
Otomo. Production Company - Mad House/Oniro.
Plot: Mima Kirigoe takes the risky move of quitting as a member of the 
girl pop trio Cham to pursue an acting career with a part in a tv 
detective series. But the part only proves to be a minor one and Mima is 
forced to accept playing rape scenes and appearing in a nude magazine 
layout to sustain herself, while the other two girls take Cham on to 
great success. At the same time Mima is disturbed to find every detail 
of her life is being reported as a faked diary on an Internet website. 
As her spirits sink, she finds herself haunted by a doppelganger which 
taunts her with what her life could have been if she had not chosen this 
path.
The name of Katsuhiro Otomo casts a giant shadow over anime. Otomo 
directed `Akira' (1987) which, with its epic-sized vistas of mass 
destruction, succeeded in becoming a huge cult hit and whetting Western 
audiences' appetite for anime. It also made Otomo the only anime name 
that is recognizable to Westerners - and the subsequent attachment of 
his name to any project has been enough to carry it to the West. 
Although what may have escaped notice of those who flock to the Otomo 
name is that Otomo has only really directed one film other than `Akira' 
- `World Apartment Horror' (1991) - something which seems incredible 
considering the size of the shadow Otomo casts over anime. He has 
directed segments of other films like `Robot Carnival' (1986) and 
`Memories' (1995), but the greatest Otomo successes - `Rojin Z' (1991), 
`Memories' and this - have ironically been ones that wave Otomo's name 
above them but little else. Here Otomo's credit remains the rather 
nebulous title of `Special Adviser' which nevertheless seems to be 
enough for it to still be promoted as an Otomo film.
`Perfect Blue' turns away from the usual thematic territory for an 
Otomo-associated film - Cyberpunk futures and epic-vistas of mass 
destruction - and is in fact a psycho-thriller. It starts in rather well 
- there is a marvelously spooky moment where the heroine, after some 
amusingly comic moments trying to learn how to use a computer, accesses 
a website only to discover the minutiae of her day is being reported in 
elaborate detail in a series of faked diary entries written as though by 
her. The story all-too-believably details the fall of an aidoru 
(Japanese pop star) who takes an artistic risk in becoming an actress, 
fails to succeed as expected and is gradually forced into filming 
gratuitous rape scenes and modelling nude in order to sustain herself, 
all the while seeing her former partners prospering. In these scenes the 
film manages to convey a portrait of the downfall of a fragile innocent 
with considerable conviction.
But unfortunately about halfway through the film becomes somewhat 
incoherent with the plot becoming a tangle of strands involving the 
heroine having to deal with her Internet stalker; being haunted by a 
taunting doppelganger who claims to be her alternate self had she stayed 
with the group and gone on to success; as well as someone assassinating 
the people around her. When the film then starts to get into her having 
memory blackouts and missing days and having scenes in the tv show start 
oddly mirroring events in her life, it becomes difficult to follow what 
is meant to be going on. However the film then momentarily pulls back 
and in a plotting twist of dazzling ingenuity suggests that the role of 
the actress is really a split personality created by the heroine to deal 
with the stress of being a pop star, that the doppelganger is her real 
self emerging through and that the tv show is a projection of the 
repressed memories of an abusive childhood. It is a moment of 
crystalline clarity in which all of the hanging confusions up to that 
point suddenly make perfect sense. But then oddly enough the film seems 
to back away from this and continues on to an ending where the 
doppelganger and assassinations are mundanely revealed to be the mere 
machinations of one of the heroine's friends. It's a puzzling denouement 
which holds explanations that are actually less convincing than the ones 
offered by the multiple-personality disorder twist.
Reviewed at the 1998 Wellington International Film Festival
Copyright Richard Scheib 1998


Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Seriously inappropriate for anyone under 17. Period. No
discussion necessary.
That summary line is from the publicist. Cranky endorses it
heavy-handedly. Long time readers know of my love for animation and my
admitted lack of education about Japanese anime. There are three types
of anime; without embarrassing myself by using a language I don't
understand they break down to "standard" animation, cute-stuff for
kidlets a la Sailor Moon or Pokémon, and absolutely hardcore adults only
material.
Perfect Blue is absolutely hardcore. I'll be blunt to scare the parental
units first, then we'll get into the bones of the story. Fundamentalists
will consider Perfect Blue to be pornographic, as its main character
moves from a pop-star music world to a soap opera career in which
photographers get her to pose nude for publicity shots. By the end of
the film she will be attacked and raped and confined to a mental
institution. Or maybe not, as this tale of schizophrenia, stalkers and
image sublimation tears into your cortex.
Understand the difference in culture demonstrated here. In Japan, hard
core pornography in comics is considered normal. Phonebook sized XXX
comics are read by the suits on their way to work on the train. It's a
different world from where we come from. More disturbing, to these eyes
at least, is the graphic violence depicted in Perfect Blue. Ice picks
into the eyes, a couple of bloody murders and the aforementioned rape.
If this film were rated, it would carry an NC-17, no question about it.
Parents, and the rest of us grownups, have been warned. This is
absolutely not for children. It's not for most American adults, either.
The story: Mima Kirigoe has had a good career as part of a popmusic girl
group called Cham. Think Spice Girls at the bitter end and you've locked
in to Mima's position. Prodded to leave music behind for a career as an
actress, she bows off the mainstage leaving shocked fans behind,
including a gray haired, pale thin geeky looking stalker type. Needing
to lose the squeaky clean image, Mima is convinced to take a role which
will require her to be "raped" and whose publicity shoot turns into a
soft core bonanza. The Cham fans aren't happy, and Mima's advisors and
scriptwriters start getting killed in gruesome ways. It may be the
stalker, who is maintaining a detailed daily website which purports to
be from Mima herself or it may be a schizophrenic Mima, whose split
personality is asserting itself in an attempt to set right what has gone
wrong. As a straight psychological drama, there's a good nut of story
here.
Cranky couldn't lose himself in the story because the quality of
animation varies wildly. The changes aren't indicative of Mima's mental
state, or of anything symbolic that I could figure out. Then there's the
violence, which is nauseating, disturbing, creepy, you add the synonyms.
Cranky was gasping for air and reeling from the very unpleasantness of
this story.
You know how I've been describing the thought of an animated flick for
grownups? This ain't it. The thing is, this story could do gangbuster
biz as a live action flick, it's certainly deep enough and has enough
twists and turns. We accept the violence in "live" movies because, at a
most basic level, we know it's all fake. Graphic cartoon violence is way
beyond our parameters. Perhaps we've been mind-wiped by Disney, but
watching this kind of violence in cartoon format is truly stomach
turning.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Perfect Blue, he would have paid...
Which is mid-week rental level Perfect Blue is reco'd only if you're a
die hard anime fan or curious and self-confident as all get out (as in
"no cartoon is gonna make me sick...")
Give it five years and you'll probably see a live action remake.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Satoshi Kon's PERFECT BLUE gives an entirely new meaning to the term
"cartoon violence."  Featuring multiple realistic rapes, gory stabbings,
mutilations, sex and full-frontal nudity, this animated feature from
Japan hails from the Brian de Palma school of excess.  Needless to say,
it's not for kids.  And I would go further to argue that it's not for
most adults either since it's level of writing is beneath them.
Sadayuki Mura's script, which is dubbed into English, might not have
been so ridiculous in its native language, but one suspects it was.  Why
they had someone with a heavy US Southern accent dub the part of the
Japanese mother is a mystery.
A confession is in order.  This style of Japanese animation is called
"anime," and PERFECT BLUE is the first example of that art form that I
can remember seeing.  Whether this one is typical or not I cannot say, I
am only reviewing this particular film and not the genre.
Although the drawing in PERFECT BLUE is colorful, it is as flat and
lifeless as a typical Saturday morning television cartoon.  The action
is created mainly by panning the camera across the canvas and making
some of the characters' lips move slightly.  The resulting
two-dimensional look is particularly uninviting.
The story concerns the life of a self-described "pop idol," named Mima
Kirigoe.  Mima, a member of a Spice Girls type singing group, decides to
leave the group to become an actress.  Being an actress means that she
has to act out stripper scenes, rape scenes, etc.  It's a rough life,
but she's willing to do it in order to advance her career.
Someone begins to stalk Mima.  The stranger starts killing those around
her as he gets ever closer to her.  The story is told with the old trick
of sequences that look real but which turn out to be fantasies and vice
versa.  If Mima wasn't such a twit, one might have been able to care
about her some.  This is a girl who has a cordless phone, a TV and a FAX
in her bedroom but doesn't even know what the word "Internet" means.
There is probably an audience for PERFECT BLUE, but I can't figure out
what the demographics would be.  It's too dumb for adults and too
violent for kids.  Go figure.
PERFECT BLUE runs a tortuously long 1:20.  It is not rated but would be
an R for strong violence, rape, gore, strong sexuality and nudity.  It
would be acceptable for teenagers only if they are older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Foong Ngai Hoe
SPOILERS AHEAD - When it comes to battling inner demons - the
doppelgaengers, the alien others - the Japanese literary circle takes it
on almost with an obsession. The anti-hero in Abe Kooboo's 1964 Tanin no
kao (The Face of Another) confronts his new, unfamiliar face, while the
protagonist in Endo Shusaku's 1986 novel Sukyandaru (Scandal) has to
face his murderous double in Tokyo's red light district.
Based on Yoshikazu Takeuchi's 1991 novel, Satoshi Kon's (Roujin Z,
Patlabor 2, Memories ~ Kanojo no omoide/Magnetic Rose) anime, Perfect
Blue (1997), deals with the double of a former pop idol who returns to
torment the singer, when she seeks to become an actress instead.
Mima Kirigoe is a member of the idol group Cham. Quitting the trio, she
decides to take up a career as an actress, and gets her first role in
the murder-mystery Double Bind, playing the sister of a murder victim in
the show. Already uneasy about her new life - especially having to
appear in a rape-scene, as well as posing nude for photo magazines -
Mima's life starts to fall apart when those involved in the film are
brutally murdered one by one. On the Internet, an alter-ego posts every
minute detail of her life onto her fan site. And more ominously, a
malevolent double appears to taunt Mima for turning her back on her
singing career.
Perfect Blue is an interesting dig at Japan's pop-idol industry, and its
teen idorus whose careers and lifestyles are at the mercy of the clean,
wholesome images their marketers and adoring fans come to expect of
them.
When Mima chooses to part with her idol-singing career, not only does
she earn the scorn of her former fans, but her own guilt also returns
back to haunt her in the form of her pop-idol double. Her rocky start in
the film business, coupled with the success of Cham, soon affects her
morale -- to the point that Mima wonders if she herself could be behind
the gruesome murders.
Further irony is also found in Double Bind, the movie Mima is acting in
when the crimes began. Called 'the looking-glass of Perfect Blue' by the
staff of the anime, Double Bind is almost a mirror-image of the turmoil
going on in Mima's head.
Takeuchi's novel seems set for what should have been an intriguing film
adaptation. But despite Kon's competent direction, Perfect Blue is less
the psychological thriller than it is another murder-mystery to feature
a celebrity being stalked.
The film fails to work up enough scenes inside Mima's head to suggest
that as her acting career takes a turn for the worse, Mima's begins to
yearn for her past. There are flashes of that in the film - like when
she fantasies herself among her former group mates, as they celebrate
their single making it to the charts - but such moments are few and
brief.
In another scene, Mima wakes up to the news of the murdered
photographer, and subsequently finds the blood-stained attire tucked
away in her closet. A terrified Mima hastily hides them away when
someone comes knocking on her door, and that is the last we hear of the
matter. Such a discovery would have undoubtedly traumatised the girl,
and yet its psychological impact is again played down.
By dealing inadequately with Mima's own ambiguity, Perfect Blue loses
that cutting-edge in this sort of film. By the time it is revealed that
Mimamaniac, an obsessed Mima fan, and Rumi, Mima's own disillusioned
manager were behind the killings, the ending has become disappointingly
run-of-the-mill.
"I am the real thing," a confident Mima takes off her shades as she
smiles into the car's rear-mirror. Not that there was much before that
had one guessing otherwise. Not that there is much after to indicate
that it's all but one bad dream for Mima either...
I'm not looking for another Freudian trip - a la Neon Genesis Evangelion
- but for a show touted as a 'psychological suspense-thriller', the way
the film ended, and how it got there, left me feeling rather
short-changed.
Also, the screenplay by Sadayuki Murai (Eko Eko Azarak) is engaging as
far as mystery-dramas go, but again it's more pulp fiction than a
thinking-man's anime. Some of the scenes in the later half of the film -
with Mima's mind traversing back and forth between acting and reality -
gets a little disruptive and incoherent as well.
But criticisms aside, Perfect Blue is, nevertheless, well worth the
accolades and awards it's received. It's an unmistakably disturbing and
absorbing work -- gripping (and perhaps gory) enough to keep fans of the
genre happy. Some scenes -- like the one where Mima's double stabs a
photographer to death -- are visually powerful. And Mima does come
across as an anguished and confused character.
Being a fan of horror-mysteries myself, I enjoyed Perfect Blue. But
being a demanding anime fan, I;m also left thinking if this could have
been something more, especially when the industry's heavyweights such as
Katushiro Ootomo and Hisashi Eguchi have lent their expertise to the
film.
Perfect Blue is good, no doubt. It just ain't perfect.

Author
Chen Chiou Beng
Mima is a singer in a popular pop idol group. Then one day, she decides to
forgo her singing career for a serious acting. But alas, she got only a
minor role to contend to, and so, to further her career, she chose to strip
and even appear in a rape sequence in the film. But things are not going
fine for her. First, she received threats. Then, she found a fan page
dedicated to her is actually reporting on her every move. Next a mysterious
figure, claiming to be the real her, started appearing everywhere and
talking to her. And she started developing memory lapses, forgetting what
she has done in those hours. And finally people are getting murdered around
her in the most gruesome way possible during her lapses. But who is the
killer? Is it the mysterious security guard that is stalking her? Or is it
her friends? Or could it be Mima herself? But is she capable of murder?
Forewarned, the anime is not for the squeamish. For though Perfect Blue runs
at only 81 minutes, it contains enough nudity and violence for a longer
film, and the murders occurred is at its most violent. But Perfect Blue may
be, in my opinion, the best Japanese animation in this years Singapore
International Film Festival. It does not delve in the usual science fiction
that Japanese anime normally deals in. It deals, however, with the dark
reality of film-makings. Also, Perfect Blue is also a murder mystery.
Everything you see in the film may or may not be reality. As for the ending,
I would spoil it for you. See for yourself and be amazed.
