Title
Review for Pelican Brief, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Jon A Webb
     THE PELICAN BRIEF has Julia Roberts and Denzel Washington running
around together, being pursued by semi-government types in an obvious
political thriller.  The movie seems to be more about how beautiful
Roberts and Washington are, and what nice clothes they wear, than
anything else.  If you accept these terms, the movie is fun and
enjoyable to watch.  (Roberts is more beautiful than ever.)  But don't
go expecting thrills or suspense, or much of an acting stretch by
Roberts or Washington.
     Roberts plays a law student who somehow uncovers the truth behind
the recent assassinations of two Supreme Court justices.  She writes up
her theory, calling it "The Pelican Brief," and it gets into the hands
of the people who did the assassination.  Naturally, she becomes a
target.  In her effort to get the truth out and save her own life, she
teams up with Washington, a reporter who seems to have remarkably close
ties to the government.
     There are two odd things about this movie.  One is that no attempt
is made to achieve any verisimilitude in the pursuit of Roberts and
Washington.  She goes into hiding, with an apparently huge amount of
money "from her father," then shows up in new outfits each day.
Washington also is always nicely dressed; everything is beautifully
pressed.  Now, this makes these two handsome people even more handsome,
but it just doesn't make any sense.
     Another point: Roberts always stays in the best hotels, which of
course require a credit card check on checking in, even if you pay with
cash.  Wouldn't this make it awfully easy for the shadowy, presumably
well-connected forces searching for her?  Movies like this stand or fall
on the consistency of details; it's supposed to be a pleasure to see
how carefully the screenwriters have crafted a story that is consistent
with everyday reality.  Sloppiness is laughable.
     The other odd thing is that Roberts and Washington never
experience passionate love for each other.  I don't know how long it is
since I've seen a movie where two attractive people spend time
together, staying in hotel rooms and being pursued by the bad guys, and
don't fall in love and have sex.  It's part of the standard story.
Instead, Roberts and Washington seem to develop a deep repect for each
other, and have a Platonic relationship.  Could it be that Hollywood
has finally realized that two sexually compatible people don't need to
experience sexual ecstasy to confirm their friendship?  (Ha.)  Or is it
possible that a sexual relationship was ruled out because it would
cross a color line?  I think this is the case, and find this sort of
subtle racist assumption very disturbing (in a way, more disturbing
than explicit racism.)
     The direction is leaden and unconvincing, especially towards the
end.  About thirty minutes into the movie, you know everything that's
going to happen, and only details need to be filled in.  There is
little suspense even in the most thrillingly staged scenes, because you
know that a movie like this is not going to sacrifice its two
leads--this is no PSYCHO.  At the end, when they were wrapping up the
details, it was as though they were slogging through mud, trying to
reach the end of the trail before the last reel ran out.
     It is interesting to compare this film with THE FIRM, which was
also based on a John Grisham novel.  THE FIRM is much better, I think
because it took more liberties with the novel (I'm guessing at this,
because I haven't read either book), and because of the good direction
and fine acting (particularly by Cruise and Hunter.)  I especially
liked the scene towards the end, where Cruise is confronted at the law
firm and he can't think of anything else to do, so he just runs away.
It was a brilliant moment, coming quite close to the edge of comedy,
which made perfect sense.  There is nothing like that in this film, and
no loony comment delivered perfectly like Holly Hunter's comment about
the coffee pot, either.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Julia Roberts, Denzel Washington, Sam Shepard, John Heard,
           Tony Goldwyn, Robert Culp, John Lithgow.
Screenplay/Director:  Alan J. Pakula.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE PELICAN BRIEF has a lot in common with this summer's THE
FIRM.  Of course, both are based on uberbestsellers by John Grisham,
but the similarities run deeper than that.  THE FIRM starred
Hollywood's most marketable male star, Tom Cruise; THE PELICAN BRIEF
grabbed the most marketable female star, Julia Roberts.  Both were
directed by "prestige" directors, and both were constructed from the
"slicker is better" model of thriller-making.  In short, THE PELICAN
BRIEF might as well *be* THE FIRM:  an overlong, over-plotted,
instantly forgettable entertainment sporadically enlivened by decent
supporting performances.  Unfortunately, it doesn't have Gene Hackman.
     THE PELICAN BRIEF opens with the assassination of two Supreme
Court justices who appear to have little in common, one an aging
liberal and the other a young conservative.  However, a possible link
is discovered by Darby Shaw (Julia Roberts), a law student at Tulane
University.  Through her law professor/lover Thomas Callahan (Sam
Shepard), Darby's theory, which comes to be known as "The Pelican
Brief," is circulated in Washington.  Among its implications are
possible connections between the assassinations and the president
(Robert Culp), and suddenly people start turning up dead.  A frightened
Darby turns to Gray Grantham (Denzel Washington), a White House
reporter investigating the assassinations, and soon the two are running
for their lives, desperately searching for proof of their theory before
they too are added to the growing body count.
     Technically, THE PELICAN BRIEF is just fine.  Director Alan J.
Pakula (ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN, PRESUMED INNOCENT) knows how to
ratchet up the tension, using pull-back crane shots to heighten the
sense of paranoia.  James Horner's score works well, even if it does
depend overmuch on dissonant piano chords and wood block percussion.
The problem with THE PELICAN BRIEF, the movie, is the same thing that's
wrong with THE PELICAN BRIEF, the book:  there's not a single
interesting or original thing happening, either from a story or
character perspective.  The big conspiracy at the heart of the story is
both insipid and insulting to one's intelligence.  It's impossible to
accept that no one considered the possibility of spacing out the
assassinations, or being slightly more creative than putting a bullet
in the head of a man who was on a respirator.  There's only one
possible reason for such stupidity:  there wouldn't have been anything
for a clever law student to sniff out.  It's equally ludicrous to
suggest that no one else in Federal law enforcement would have
considered the possibilities Darby Shaw comes up with.  Grisham's story
is loaded with implausibilities and the payoff it offers for accepting
them is simply not worth it.
     The characters in Pakula's adaptation don't fare much better.
Julia Roberts chose Darby Shaw as her first role in two years, but it's
difficult to figure out why.  There is not a shred of back story,
nothing to suggest why she pursues the assassination story, nothing to
make her anything but a positively bland lady in distress.  To her
credit, Roberts' reaction to an explosion is gripping, and she's
thoroughly convincing at suggesting dazed trauma, but dazed and
traumatized is about as fara as this role goes.  Denzel Washington, one
of the most talented and charismatic leading men around, has an equally
blank slate with Gray Grantham; somehow he manages to act circles
around a part where there's really nothing there.  Up and down the cast
it's the same story:  Tony Goldwyn is the President's shadowy Chief of
Staff; John Lithgow is Washington's skeptical editor; Stanley Tucci is
the icy killer.  Only Hume Cronyn, in a single scene as the aging
justice Rosenberg, has any spark.  No one else has a thing to work
with.
     THE FIRM was no piece of art, but at least its characters were
reasonably fleshed out for the screen.  THE PELICAN BRIEF asked me to
sit through nearly two and a half hours of repetitive chases involving
people I didn't care about.  A third Grisham adaptation, THE CLIENT, is
on its way next year.  I suppose it's too much to ask that he's learned
to write an interesting story by now.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Julia Roberts, Denzel Washington, Sam Shepard, John Heard,
           Tony Goldwyn, Robert Culp, James B. Sikking, John Lithgow
Director:  Alan J. Pakula
Producers:  Alan J. Pakula and Peter Jan Brugge
Screenplay:  Alan J. Pakula based on the novel by John Grisham
Music:  James Horner
Released by Warner Brothers
     THE PELICAN BRIEF is the second John Grisham novel to make the
book-to-movie transition.  Like its predecessor THE FIRM, it
disappoints, which isn't such a big surprise considering the pedestrian
story upon which it is based.  Instead of wondering why Grisham's work
doesn't translate well to the screen, maybe someone should take a step
back and consider whether his page-turners are worth filming in the
first place.
     On one bloody May night, two Supreme Court Justices are
assassinated (one of whom is played by Hume Cronyn).  At Tulane
University, law student Darby Shaw (Julia Roberts) has a theory about
who's responsible for the killings.  Using the resources of the school
library and several semi-public court case files, she develops what is
later dubbed as "The Pelican Brief."  Initially regarded as a wild
theory, the short document comes under scrutiny when readers of Darby's
work start getting murdered--beginning with her Constitutional Law
professor, and lover, Thomas Callahan (Sam Shepard).  As the nameless
thugs close in, Darby turns to WASHINGTON POST writer Gray Grantham
(Denzel Washington) for help.  Naturally, this makes Grantham as much
of a target as Darby, and the pair end up on the run.
     In the book THE PELICAN BRIEF, the particulars are different from
those of THE FIRM, but the basic premise is very similar.  Grisham
apparently has one basic story that he likes to dress in different
clothes.  That's all right, and it makes for quick, brainless reading,
but neither of the movie versions has worked.  Paradoxically, THE
FIRM's biggest failing is in straying too far from the written version
while THE PELICAN BRIEF's flaw is in remaining too faithful.
     As scripted and directed by Alan J. Pakula, THE PELICAN BRIEF is a
straightforward visual re-telling of Grisham's book.  With few changes,
it follows the basic storyline, and includes a number of complications
and secondary characters which seem superfluous on screen.  The final
result is an unnecessarily-long thriller that contains far more talking
than action.  Pakula's direction is lackluster, showing little of the
style that permeated his two most impressive pictures, ALL THE
PRESIDENT'S MEN and PRESUMED INNOCENT.
     Character depth and development are virtually nonexistent.
Grisham's book isn't a tremendous achievement in this area, but at
least we get some insight into what various people are thinking.  With
that element absent in the movie, no one attains more than a
two-dimensional status, and much of the entertaining in-fighting and
political wrangling is lost to the viewer.  John Heard's Gavin Verheek
is a perfect example.  In the book, we get to know him.  In the movie,
he's in about five scenes before meeting his fate.
     The supporting cast is impressive, with names like Robert Culp,
John Heard, Sam Shepard, and John Lithgow all turning in solid
performances.  Likewise, Denzel Washington brings a calm
self-possession, bordering on arrogance, to the role of Gray Grantham.
This may be the only film character to approach the level of the book
version, and much of it can be credited to Mr. Washington's work.
     Julia Roberts' Darby Shaw, however, is an unmitigated disaster.
Ms. Roberts simply doesn't have the range required for the role, as
becomes painfully obvious when she's supposed to express terror at a
car bombing.  That particular scene, as well as several others
requiring deep emotional responses, presents a fair approximation of
her acting limitations.  One of the reasons for the failure of the
basic premise in THE PELICAN BRIEF--that Darby could uncover the truth
while everyone else fumbles around--is that the lead actress does
nothing to make us believe the possibility.
     Ultimately, probably the biggest problem with THE PELICAN BRIEF is
that it's a letdown.  After all the running around (and there's a lot
of that), all the gory deaths (there are a few of them), and all the
anemic plot twists, the payoff is virtually nonexistent.  Instead of
the rousing conclusion expected from a screen thriller, THE PELICAN
BRIEF fades away into an anticlimax.
     Those who read the book have no need to see the movie, unless it's
to satisfy the curiosity of how the conjurations of the imagination
materialize through the filter of Pakula's interpretation.  Those who
haven't read the book will find material to catch their interest, but
it's uncertain how long this ill-paced production will hold that
attention.
     So, after the disappointments of THE FIRM and THE PELICAN BRIEF,
we now await the cinematic rendition of THE CLIENT, hoping that for
Grisham's books, the third time will be a charm.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark Brader
     Alfred Hitchcock used to say that some movies were slices of life,
but "*I* give people slices of *cake*."  Well, Hitchcock is alive
again, and his name is Alan J. Pakula.  THE PELICAN BRIEF is one of the
best thrillers I've seen for a long time.
     The title refers to the film's McGuffin: the reason why two
justices of the U.S. Supreme Court were assassinated in the film's
opening minutes.  Law student Darby Shaw (Julia Roberts) sets herself
the exercise of figuring out that reason.  Soon after, a narrow escape
from death convinces her that she must have guessed right, and also
that in this case it is not safe to go to the police.
     So now she is on the run, from New Orleans to Washington to New
York, while she tries to turn her suppositions into a solid case
against the chief villain.  Along the way she makes the good decision
to trust a Washington reporter, Gray Grantham (Denzel Washington), and
now it's two smart people against a set of adversaries who are also
smart, and well connected, and well equipped, and considerably more
numerous, and entirely willing to kill.
     The movie is 2 hours and about 25 minutes long, almost certainly
the longest thriller I've ever seen.  But it did not seem padded,
except for the surprisingly long denouement.  During the heart of the
movie, Pakula's direction and pacing just kept the movie flowing--and
my adrenaline along with it.
     And that direction is exceptionally restrained.  There are several
murders during the movie, but they generally take place off-screen.
The chief villain is seen, as far as I can recall, only in a
photograph--this is Darby's story, we never stay long away from her
point of view, and we learn his fate only when she does.
     (Pakula does show us more blood than Hitchcock would have, but he
does not linger on it.  For those who are counting, there is also no
nudity--though for some of us male viewers, Julia Roberts's kilowatt
smile can have an equivalent effect.  This too is used in restrained
fashion.)
     This is a director's movie more than an actor's movie; only
competence rather than brilliance was required of the performers.
Roberts delivers this in the lead role, as does Washington, and so do a
number of well-known actors in smaller parts.  (I won't try to
enumerate everyone from memory; see one of the other recently posted
reviews for a cast list.)
     I haven't read John Grisham's book that the movie was based on,
and judging by what I've seen in those other reviews, that's just as
well.  There are plenty of authors whose books are just too complex for
film adaptations to retain much of their content, and by those remarks
and the similar remarks made when THE FIRM came out, it looks as though
Grisham must be one of them.
     I therefore recommend highly that thriller fans, and Hitchcock
fans in particular, see the movie--unless they have already read the
book.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Good, workmanlike adaptation of Grisham's novel, but the joy of
discovery is gone.
John Grisham writes solid, workmanlike novels which get translated into
movies of dizzyingly varied quality. THE PELICAN BRIEF, directed by Alan
Pakula, is one of the better ones, but it's limited by the strangely
one-sided screenplay. A thriller should allow us to participate in the
puzzle being unscrambled onscreen; this one shuts us out, and instead gives
us too much manufactured suspense.
Darby Shaw (Julia Roberts) is a legal student down south, and her mentor and
lover Tom Callahan (Sam Shepard, very nice) are both confused about the
assassinations of two Supreme Court justices. On a lark, Shaw tries to
figure out why two men of such disparate persuasions were killed -- but the
more she uncovers, the more serious she gets, and soon she's assembled an
amateur legal brief that purports to have the answers. Then the brief falls
into the wrong hands, and she's targeted for death. She runs -- one of the
nice things in the movie is that she is not stupid, and knows better than to
do things that leave a trail, like use credit cards -- and winds up crossing
paths with Gray Grantham (Denzel Washington), a journalist who has done jail
time for not jeopardizing his sources.
This leads us to the movie's big problem, which is that up until about the
halfway mark, we're almost totally in the dark about what the mystery is.
Then we get it -- all in one gigantic, clumsy expositional lump. This tactic
irritated me, because I could see no end of opportunities earlier on to
deploy the same information in small daubs -- and allow us to fit everything
together.
The movie is not stupid, though . There are many good touches, especially
whenever Grantham's journalistic ethics and his boss (a wonderful John
Lithgow) are concerned. One of my pet peeves is the way journalism (or
computer techonlogy, or the military) are represented in the movies, and
this one gets it mostly right: one scene with Washington and Lithgow arguing
about the factuality of a source has enough tension in it to propel a movie
all by itself. The thriller plot is well-oiled and unfolds nicely, even if
it is jury-rigged. And we get a gallery of good-to-excellent performances. I
don't normally think much of Julia Roberts, but she did well by me in this
one, and Denzel Washington is never less than great. There's also one piece
of cinematography -- a scene of someone being gunned down by a sniper --
that I will not soon forget.
But because we're not allowed to participate in any of the assembly of the
evidence from the start, we get only to watch passively, and instead get the
contrivances of an assassin (Stanley Tucci, really creepy) and many other
scenes that don't add up to much. I wanted THE PELICAN BRIEF to add up to a
lot more, but it worked against itself in far too many ways.
syegul@cablehouse.dyn.ml.org                 EFNet IRC: GinRei / ICQ: 934998
http://cablehouse.dyn.ml.org/serdar                another worldly device...
you can crush me as I speak/write on rocks what you feel/now feel this truth
