Title
Review for Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Rating: 7.9 out of 10 (B, **1/2 out of ****) 
     DRAGON is less a strict recounting of the life of Bruce Lee
(played by Jason Scott Lee--no relation) than it is a tribute to him.
Based on the book BRUCE LEE, THE MAN ONLY I KNEW by Linda Lee, this
film tells the story of an icon.  Since Bruce is regarded as a hero by
this picture, how much we actually get to learn about him is
uncertain.  At any rate, the film follows his life quickly through
childhood, then begins a more detailed account of events as Bruce heads
for America.  DRAGON ends shortly before the title character's death,
leaving one of the most talked-about aspect of his existence
unexplored.  Perhaps it's better that way.
     There's no doubt that, even more than Danny DeVito's HOFFA, this
picture was devised to show Bruce Lee in the most positive light
possible.  He is larger than life throughout the film, whether he is
fighting human foes or the demon that stalks his nightmares.  DRAGON
captures the energy and exuberance of Bruce Lee, but it fails to give
more than an incomplete picture of the man behind the personae.  In
that way, it is unlike HOFFA, CHAPLIN, or MALCOLM X, three other
recent, high-profile screen biographies that attempt to present a more
balanced portrait.
     The Kung Fu fights, well-choreographed and obviously overdone, are
executed in the same unforgettable way that similar scenes were done in
Lee's own movies.  In addition to being a homage to the late actor,
they're fun to watch, and add an element of action to what otherwise
would have been straight melodrama.
     Dramatically, there isn't a whole lot of substance to DRAGON.  It
isn't going to make anyone cry with its power of human insight.  There
are some nice scenes--especially those early in the relationship of
Bruce and Linda (Lauren Holly).  Also present is a subtle-but-forceful
point about racism in 1960s Hollywood (as Lee is refused the chance to
play the lead character in the series KUNG FU, which he helped
develop).
     Jason Scott Lee is a good choice to play Lee.  The physical
resemblance may not be perfect, but Jason matches Bruce for energy and
screen presence.  His acting is not superior--there are two scenes
(one in the hospital after Bruce is seriously injured in a fight and
another in Hong Kong when his wife tells him she's taking the children
back to America) that are horribly overacted--but Jason has charisma
and that covers for a great many faults.
     An eerie dimension has been added to this picture by the tragic
March death of Brandon Lee, Bruce's only son.  It shifts the focus of
Bruce's climactic battle with the demon, in which he fights to save not
himself, but his son.  An unexpected level of poignancy has been added
to this--and other--scenes by a cruel twist of fate that the producers
could not have foreseen.  The movie is dedicated to Brandon.
     DRAGON is a fun experience, but far from a great film, and those
expecting a probing examination of Bruce Lee's life are likely to be
disappointed.  Still, as a celebration of the first international
Chinese-American movie star, the movie keeps the audience interested
and entertained for its full running time, which is not an
insignificant feat.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Thomas Miller
     I caught a sneak preview of this last night and figured I'd inform
the world.  The movie is an account of Bruce Lee's life, from his
childhood to his death.  Though the fight scenes are well-filmed and
believable, this movie is equally as good for its focus on other
aspects of Lee's life, such as his relationship with his wife and
children, his conflicts with the Chinese martial arts community, and
his desire to prove himself despite racism in America.
     Though there are some gaps in the history (several of Bruce's
films weren't mentioned) this isn't really a factor.  One small problem
I saw was the apparent dubbing at times.  It makes no sense that they
would have to dub anything, but yet it shows in some conversations.
There are also some confusing scenes, but I don't want to give anything
away - no doubt this will be discussed in rec.arts.movies soon.
     Bruce Lee is played by Jason Scott Lee (no relation), who does a
good job, though he is a bit too muscular.  The actress who plays Linda
Lee did an outstanding job, particularly in the scenes where Bruce is
torn between his family and his career (her name escapes me at the
moment.)
     The movie is based on the memoirs of Linda Lee, and it shows.  In
my opinion, this is as much a movie from the heart as from the fist,
though action fans won't be disappointed.  The audience I was part of
gave it a standing ovation at the end, one that was, again in my
opinion, well-deserved.

Author
Steven Kim
     Bruce Lee was a bigger-than-life martial artist (and) actor.
Bruce's unique character (i.e., self-produced sound effects, etc.) and
seemingly perfected martial art and physique were all well portrayed
by the actor, James Lee.
     The story is told from his wife Linda's point of view where she
put a lot of family and practical side of Bruce Lee's life.  However,
you can't help but like, whenever the fight scenes are on, what he can
does with his body and that familiar Bruce attitude and character.
     I also like the little bits of insight scenes about Bruce Lee's
life before he became famous: scenes like Bruce practicing
pronunciation of English.  It seemed as if he was no better than
anybody else.  Scenes like Bruce delivering Chinese food as a delivery
boy ridding a bike through the American college looking at the
(all-white) students, cheerleaders, and athletes.  It seemed he too
wished for the American dreams and hopes.
     In conclusion, the movie was well made, it produced a realization
of who Bruce Lee was, and actor James Lee was so much like Bruce you
have to remind yourself that he is just an actor.  And the fighting
scenes were all excellent.  So go see it and enjoy the movie.
P.S. If you have seen the movie UNFORGIVEN by Clint Eastwood, then the
feeling left after DRAGON was very much like the feeling you got after
the UNFORGIVEN. 
