Title
Review for Moonlight and Valentino (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Elizabeth Perkins, Gwyneth Paltrow, Whoopi Goldberg,
      Kathleen Turner, Jon Bon Jovi, Joseph Somner, Jeremy Sisto
Director: David Anspaugh
Producers: Alison Owen, Eric Fellner, and Tim Bevan
Screenplay: Ellen Simon based on her play
Cinematography: Julio Macat
Music: Howard Shore
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     Grief is a difficult subject for a motion picture to address.
Handled improperly, the emotion can be conveyed as shallow and
insincere.  A Hollywood film's insatiable need to contain feel-good
moments invariably diverts scripts in this direction.  MOONLIGHT AND
VALENTINO represents a constant struggle between presenting a heartfelt
examination of the effects of an unexpected death and manipulating the
audience.
     The function of a solid performance should be to elevate an
intelligent script to the next level.  In MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO,
however, the actors save a rather ordinary screenplay from going down
the drain.  There's nothing radically wrong with the material--it's
just mundane and predictable.  The movie doesn't contain any surprises,
and there are times when the legitimacy of the characters' emotions are
in question.  Those wanting an astonishingly genuine portrait of grief
should check out Krzysztof Kieslowski's vastly superior BLUE (the first
film in his THREE COLORS trilogy).  As good as Elizabeth Perkins is
here, she can't hold a candle to Juliette Binoche's emotionally
shattered Julie.
     Perkins is Rebecca, a thirty-something widow whose husband was
killed while jogging.  She's convincing in the role, where she's
constantly trying to cope with repressed emotions.  Her support system
includes her sister Lucy (Gwyneth Paltrow), her best friend, Sylvie
(Whoopi Goldberg), and her ex-stepmother, Alberta (Kathleen Turner).
None of these women are the picture of psychological stability, however.
Lucy, a chain-smoker whose idea of breakfast is a cigarette and a can of
Pepsi, hasn't been able to get over her mother's death from cancer--and
that happened fourteen years ago.  Sylvie is trapped in a dying marriage
with a husband she keeps at arm's length.  And Alberta, a big time Wall
Street mover and shaker, has become so caught up in the world of high
finance that she's lost the ability to relate on a human level.
     Perkins isn't MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO's sole shining beacon of
acting.  Gwyneth Paltrow (FLESH AND BONE, SEVEN) gives a wonderful
performance, mixing a natural upbeat energy with expressive eyes.
Paltrow is also blessed with the rare ability to deliver corny lines of
dialogue in a completely natural fashion.  Jon Bon Jovi, in a small role
as a housepainter who captures the eye of every woman in the film, also
acquits himself admirably.  Whoopi Goldberg and Kathleen Turner,
however, are not as impressive, with Goldberg seeming especially flat.
     Perhaps the most disappointing aspect of this film is the facile
manner in which it resolves all the various emotional tribulations.  The
ending of MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO is so silly and over-the-top that it's
more likely to have the viewer shaking her or his head than reaching for
a Kleenex.  Admittedly, there are moments likely to prompt a tear or
two, but there's also quite a bit that doesn't ring true.  Many of the
interpersonal conflicts (such as Lucy and Alberta's strained
relationship) feel like scripted contrivances; it's only when the story
delves into the characters' inner turmoil that it strikes the right
chord.  Predictably, the result is a mixed bag--a study of grief and
friendship that might have been more effective had the script been
better-focused and the director's approach less heavy-handed.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Edwin Jahiel
     A combination of coincidence and trend has just brought us at
least three new American movies either directed by women and/or with a
nearly all-female cast: Diane Keaton's UNSTRUNG HEROES, David
Anspaugh's (HOOSIERS) MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO, and, by Australian
Jocelyn Moorhouse (PROOF), HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT.
     In MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO a bunch of relatives and/or friends are
trying to support college poetry teacher Elizabeth Perkins after her
(also academic) husband is killed in a yuppie accident: a car hits him
as he jogs.
     MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO is a would-be tearjerker.  The problem is
that the tears are on the screen and not in the audience, unless you
count tears caused by boredom.
     The script, from a play by Neil Simon's daughter, suffers from
uninteresting everything: characters, acts, facts and dialogue.  A lot
of useless yakety-yak here makes the sluggish pace even slower.  The
talk is of time-killing trivia.  The death-in-the-family treatment is
far inferior to that in UNSTRUNG HEROES.  The roles are dull and
artificially constructed--much less attention-getting than those in
HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT.
     The consolers are themselves in need of drastic straightening out
too.  The ladies bond, de-bond, re-bond.  A hefty Whoopi Goldberg, a
pottery maker, is unstable, with pathological fears about her husband
leaving her.  Gwyneth Paltrow, still mixed up from the long-ago death
of her mother,  spots a kooky, perpetually hat-wearing student of her
sister Perkins.  The movie telegraphs with hammer-blows that a new
twosome is in the making.  And as Paltrow has troubles with her
virginity, she first shows her body to Big Sis who decrees "You're a
knockout.  You should never wear clothes." Then she asks Sis for advice
on how to moan during sex.  Perkins obliges. ( I am not making any of
this up).  And to think that they now blame the Internet.
     Kathleen Turner--whose best role by far was in SERIAL MOM--is
photographed in terribly unflattering ways, with the focus on her oddly
soft nose, while she has an un-dimensional, vague part as a
self-centered, hard-nosed business exec.
     It takes 29 minutes into the film  (during which time you waste
your energy deciphering matters) to establish relationships or
unscramble who's who and what's what.  Even then things are not always
clear.
     The neighborhood seems to be bucolic suburbia--with too many
pretty landscape shots--of the "On Golden Pond" school.  For some
reason, sentimental family gatherings in movies are located in the East
of the United States, unlike the enormous majority of other subjects
that all take place in California. (Ph.D. thesis, anyone?)
     Perkins teaches a three-minute class (sic).  She also injects
Francois Truffaut in her lectures, for no discernible reason.
Distraught Perkins (the very actress who was recently quoted as
deriding Demi Moore's nudity in movies) takes a bath.  The mixing of
pathos and nipples is counterproductive, distracting indeed, as it is
known from statistics that 94.67 percent of men are voyeurs to some
degree.
     Turner turns out to be the former stepmother of Perkins and
Paltrow, whose father, at the funeral reception, is coyly told by his
ex that she needs a hug and kisses.  He replies "Here's my kiss, and
you fax me your hug."  That's the movie's best line.
     Except for Paltrow's new boyfriend, the main male presence is Bon
Jovi's.  He is a house painter, an Italian who speaks no English, and
whose buns inflame the women's libido.  They discuss them openly, until
the man turns out to be a real Yankee. (Score one for sitcom humor).
His name is wrongly believed to be Valentino, hence the awkward title.
The other part of the title comes from Bon Jovi showing up at night to
paint the Perkins home.  Why night?  He's a romantic, which leads of
course to intercourse that speeds up Perkins' healing process. (He also
relaxes Perkins by teaching her how to eat pizza with her fingers).How
exciting.  There is a mystery  however: is why change the house color
from a perfectly nice gray to the color of regurgitation?
     The bottom line in this film is that everyone, but everyone, is
uninteresting.  Not only is everyone unconvincing, but everything
stultifies us with boredom, down to the heavy, lachrymose musical
score.
     Capping all this, the "good-bye to Ben" (Perkins' defunct spouse)
finale has all the women, with painted faces, coming to terms with the
past by doing a kind of witchcrafty ritual at night, in the cemetery,
with loud music and song plus up and down dancing.  Then a magic rain
falls.  Ugh!
