Title
Review for American Pie 2 (2001)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
Hey, break open a keg.  The gang's all here.  In James B. Rogers's AMERICAN PIE
2, it's a year later, and everyone has just finished their first year of
college.  So that they can make it a summer to remember, the guys, Jim (Jason
Biggs), Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas), Oz (Chris Klein), Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas)
and, most of all, Stifler (Seann William Scott), whose irreverent smart mouth
makes the movie, have rented a beachfront house.
In order to remind us of the bawdy incidents that we loved from the first movie,
writer Adam Herz begins with a lot of not so subtle references to the original,
which the audience laps up.  Although no pie is harmed in the making of this
movie, you can be sure that Jim will have another encounter that he won't soon
forget or be able to live down.  As soon as you see the cause of his troubles
this time, you'll guess what will happen, but that will in no way detract from
your enjoyment of the results.  Actually, the two most memorable scenes in
AMERICAN PIE 2 are centered on Stifler.  One is based on champagne, and another
involves men's fantasy of homosexuality -- but only among women.  
The director and the editor (Larry Madaras) seem to make just the right choices
in knowing how long to stay with a scene and when to cut away.  The movie itself
feels like a compendium of the best episodes from an entire season of a raunchy
cable sitcom.
Not much has changed from when we last saw our studs and would-be studs.  Jim
worries, correctly, about how bad he is in bed.  Jim pines for the voluptuous
Nadia (Shannon Elizabeth), but it is band nerd Michelle (Alyson Hannigan) to
whom he goes to for sexual advice.  
Oz has a thing only for Heather (Mena Suvari), who is inconveniently abroad. 
This leaves them with one almost successful phone sex scene and not much else to
do in the movie.
Finch is in training to be the world's greatest lover to his goddess, Stifler's
Mom (Jennifer Coolidge).   And Kevin wants only the unobtainable Vicky (Tara
Reid).  They settle by agreeing to be "friends."
Among the story's many gems is the "Rule of 3."  Take the number of women that a
man claims to have slept with and divide the number by three.  For women, the
operation is multiplication rather than division.  
AMERICAN PIE 2 has some large laughs but not many genuine surprises.  One
surprise, however, is that it can sometimes be as sweet as it is funny.  The
best example of this occurs when Michelle tries as hard as she can to teach Jim
the finer points of love making.  As she put its succinctly, "You've got to
preheat the oven before you stick in the turkey."  Michelle is the type of girl
that every guy wishes had lived next-door when they were growing up.  It's not a
blonde bombshell that guys want.  It's an understanding female to show them the
real ways of romance.  Michelle provides that charmingly for Jim.
AMERICAN PIE 2 runs 1:40.  It is rated R for strong sexual content, crude humor,
language and drinking and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 10, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
"I seem to have glued myself... to myself."
Starring Jason Biggs, Seann William Scott, Chris
Klein, Thomas Ian Nichols, Allyson Hannigan, Shannon
Elizabeth, Natasha Lyonne, Tara Reid, Mena Suvari,
Eugene Levy, Jennifer Coolidge. Directed by J.B.
Rogers. Rated R.
American Pie 2 reunites the cast members from American
Pie in a different setting; instead of being high
school seniors looking to score before they graduate,
they are now past their first year of college and have
gathered in a beach house to enjoy the summer of their
lives. Jim (Jason Biggs) is still an insecure geek
looking to improve his performance, Oz (Chris Klein)
is still the sweetest guy on the block, having
sickeningly saccharine phone conversations with his
studying-abroad girlfriend, Stifler (Seann William
Scott) is still a horny stoner, Kevin (Thomas Ian
Nichols) still has no personality and Finch (Eddie
Kaye Thomas) still longs for Stifler's Mom. Have I
missed anyone?
So, obviously, not much has changed. This is not a
problem, provided that the movie boasts the rapid-fire
hilarity and unexpectedly true sentiment of the
original. But American Pie 2 is the very definition of
"sequelitis." It's coarser, yes, and it pushes the
envelope even more, but its heart isn't in it. It's
easy cash to capitalize off the first film's success,
but it would have been a worthier investment to
prolong the franchise by coming up with something
original.
Part of the reason why the film doesn't work, I think,
is that while in the original the kids' quest for sex
was a coming-of-age stepping stone as much as an
outlet for their horniness. Here, everything has been
cheapened. They behave like those idiot frat boys who
kill themselves drinking; they have no motivation
except for sex, sex, beer and sex. That's not to say
that you can't make a decent comedy from that premise,
but it is one of American Pie 2's undoings.
Missing, too, is the sweetness that permeated American
Pie, the this-could-be-you quality of the main
players. Here, the characters are too aware of
themselves as pop-culture icons, and they're even more
one-note. Stifler and Finch are now caricatures while
Jim, Oz and Kevin are forced to make awkward
self-discoveries at arbitrary moments, none of them
betraying what the writers think the audiences want to
see.
And then there's the soon-to-be-notorious scene where
Jim superglues "himself to himself," which perfectly
demonstrates yet another of the film's ailments, one
that also permeated Say It Isn't So, director J.B.
Rodgers' debut. There's a fine line between comedy and
abject humiliation, and American Pie 2 is on the wrong
side of it. It's hard to laugh at the characters when
you are profoundly embarrassed for them. I shielded my
eyes watching this more than I have watching any
horror movie.
If there's one redeeming factor to American Pie 2,
it's the inimitable Eugene Levy as Jim's dad, who pops
in on Jim as he's about to score and utters lines like
"your mother and I have been known to get frisky...
not so much anymore, but..." and then when the girl's
parents walk in, blurts out "this must be your
daughter! I didn't get her name, but hopefully my son
did."
If only the rest of the movie had the wit and wisdom
of Levy's performance. This is an unworthy sequel to a
gross-fest that brought back the raunchy teen comedy.
The box-office of this onw should keep the genre going
strong, which is disappointing. The genre needs a
hiatus; filmmakers are getting lazy. 

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by JB Rogers. Screenplay by Adam Herz, based on a story by David
H Steinberg and Herz, and characters created by Herz. Starring Jason
Biggs, Alyson Hannigan, Thomas Ian Nicholas. Running time: 107 minutes. 
Rated AA for mature subject matter and sexual content by the MFCB. 
Reviewed on August 29th, 2001.
Synopsis: Home from college, Jim (Biggs), Kevin (Nicholas), Oz (Chris 
Klein), Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas) and Stifler (Seann William Scott) rent a 
beach house for the summer. Jim gets sex lessons from Michelle (Hannigan) 
while awaiting Nadia (Shannon Elizabeth); Kevin pines after ex-girlfriend 
Vicky (Tara Reid), and Finch for Stifler's Mom; and Oz is reduced to phone 
sex with Heather (Mena Suvari). Will their friendship survive the summer?
Review: Despite a cast of unknowns, 1999's "American Pie" was a hilarious 
hit, paving the way for many lesser imitators. And although the first 
"Pie" wasn't exactly screaming out for a sequel, its box office success 
made one virtually inevitable. The result is not as good as its precursor 
-- unsurprising, given that the sheer freshness of "American Pie" was part 
of its appeal -- but "Pie 2" is nonetheless an enjoyable romp. To a large 
extent, the best ingredients of the original "Pie" shine here as well: 
Biggs is fine as hapless Jim, Eugene Levy is terrific as his 
well-intentioned father, and Hannigan sparkles as sexually deviant flutist 
Michelle. And, once again, Nicholas and Reid are forgettable as former 
couple Kevin and Vicky, and Natasha Lyonne's Jessica is given nothing to 
do. There are a few additional missteps this time: Stifler, entertaining 
in small doses in the first film, grows wearisome in the expanded role 
he's given here. And Finch, so enjoyable last time around, is trapped in 
basically the same joke throughout "Pie 2". There is also a sketchier feel 
to the script, like a tacit admission that it has little reason to exist. 
Although a few sequences stand out -- including phone sex between Klein 
and Suvari, and hilarious lessons in sex from Hannigan -- it would not 
come as a complete disappointment if this was the final slice of pie.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Your old friends from the original AMERICAN PIE flick are back and not much has
changed. Of course, they've all completed a year in College at this point, but
they're still just looking to have a good time and get busy with the ladies. And
with the summer off and good times ahead, the lads decide to take their action
to the beach and hilarity, sexual promiscuity and lots of dick jokes ensue...
CRITIQUE:
This movie should've been called "A Teenager's Guide to Getting Laid!" It's a
decent follow-up to the original with a few laugh-out loud moments, much
hilarity by the way of Sean William Scott and Eugene Levy, a little deja-vu, a
little nostalgia and a weak ending. I enjoyed this movie on the whole and
certainly don't see how fans of the original wouldn't enjoy it either. It's got
all of the same elements working in this one and it manages to pull them all off
rather nicely. The plot is seriously unimportant, it's basically about the same
five guys from the original, all looking to get laid. Period. There are pissing
jokes (probably one of the funniest in the film), sexual embarrassments, some
lesbo stuff, some gay stuff, some tantra stuff, a few patches of T&A and a whole
lot of drinking and partying. Nothing wrong with all that, of course...
The film's also got a great soundtrack, at least to my ears, with pretty much
all of the cooler tunes from this summer making an appearance at one point or
another. But the downside to the film is that there are just too many characters
to cover and seeing as it is only a quickie summer flick, some are basically
relegated to cameo appearances (maybe the DVD will slice more of these folks
into an extended version or something). The girls, for example, are practically
absent during the entire film. Tara Reid, Mena Suvari, Shannon Elizabeth and
Natasha Lyonne barely have any "real" moments in the whole movie. They just come
in from time to time and say a few words. A little disappointing. The film also
seems to lose its steam with about half an hour left. The energy of the
original's conclusion isn't matched in this one, and you just end up waiting for
a cool, surprising moment that never comes (no pun intended, ya'll!). But on the
whole, the film kept me smiling for the most part, had me cracking up whenever
Sean William Scott said anything (!) and definitely scored points for still
being able to give all of these kids a little bit of sweetness and "reality"
beneath all of that horniness and perversion, so I guess that's gotta count for
something! Sniff, sniff...it also reminded me of how irresponsible, sexually
experimental and fun my youth used to be before "adulthood" turned me into the
bitter, horny jerk you see before you...harumph, but I digress. A fun movie for
the kids! ;)
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Pie (7/10) - Can't Hardly Wait (7/10) - Dude, Where's My Car (7/10) -
Freddy Got Fingered (5/10) - Loser (2/10) - Road Trip (7/10) - Saving Silverman
(5/10) - Say It Ain't So (3/10) - She's All That (6/10) - Tomcats (4/10)

Author
Bob Bloom
AMERICAN PIE 2 (2001) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jason Biggs, Chris Klein,
Shannon Elizabeth, Alyson Hannigan, Natasha Lyonne, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Chris
Own, Tara Reid, Seann William Scott, Mena Suvari, Eddie Kaye Thomas and Eugene
Levy. Story by David H. Steinberg and Adam Herz. Screenplay by Adam Herz.
Directed by J. B. Rogers. Rated R. Approx. 115 minutes. 
 American Pie 2 is filled with laughs. But they are mostly cheap ones built
primarily upon sexual degradation and adolescent humor more fit for a locker
room than a movie theater. 
 I'm no prude and I admit to laughing along with everyone else at the preview
screening to this sequel to the 1999 hit comedy. 
 But the laughs are built on discomfort and embarrassment, not on any intrinsic
humor from within the story itself. 
 What separates American Pie 2 from its predecessor is heart. Of the original, I
noted it was "a warm, pleasant outing about the travails of growing up." 
 Well, the quartet of chums - Jim (Jason Biggs), Oz (Chris Klein), Kevin (Thomas
Ian Nicholas) and Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas) - have grown up. At least they are a
year older, but don't seem any wiser. 
 Fresh from their first year of college the quartet, along with the obnoxious
Stifler (Seann William Scott), rent a summer house by the lake in order to
attract girls in an attempt to score. 
 As usual nothing goes right until the last reel. But what we are left with is
five guys spending nearly two hours drooling over various young women. 
 And American Pie 2 is rather degrading to women. For the most part, they are
not shown as individuals. They are nothing more than potential recipients of
over-active, raging hormones. 
 It is telling that the most normal couple, Oz and Heather (Mena Suvari) spend
the bulk of the film trying to have phone sex - she's overseas on an exchange
student program. 
 Despite having been to college, Jim is still klutzy and awkward, unsure of
himself around the opposite sex. Most of the pratfalls and humiliations are
heaped upon him, including a painful episode involving an instant glue-like
substance. 
 Also uncomfortable to watch is a sequence involving three of the lads with two
young women roommates, whom the boys suspect of being lesbians. It is offensive
and plays upon outdated, adolescent stereotypes to generate laughs. 
 The first film, despite some raunchy moments, had an innocent charm to it. The
sequel is more cynical. It knows what its predominantly male audience members
want and unabashedly gives it to them: The many mentions of Finch's encounter
with Stifler's mom becomes a tiresome running gag throughout as does Eugene
Levy's return as Jim's well-meaning, trying-to-be-hip dad. 
 The only performer who is actually given some new, fresh material is Alyson
Hannigan as Michelle, the band geek from the original. In the sequel, she imbues
her character with vulnerability, wisdom and maturity. 
 American Pie 2 is a pre-sold commodity that will earn several million at the
box office. It is a shame, though, that in its rush to rake in some bucks
screenwriter Adam Herz, who also penned the original, could not have set his
sights higher. 
 American Pie 2 is funny, but it's still a comedown as well as a letdown. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net.
Other reviews by Bloom can be found at www.jconline.com by clicking on
golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom 

Author
Christopher Null
The gang from American Pie is back in American Pie 2, or, I Still Know
What You Screwed Last Summer.  The immortal pie, of course, is gone, but
there are plenty of foreign objects and luscious ladies to occupy the
genitalia of the entire cast for a full hour and a half.
After reinventing the sex comedy in 1999's American Pie, AP2 had a high
bar to live up to, and miraculously, it has done so.  It actually
outdoes the original (by a mile) when it comes to juvenile and crude
humor.  And the sex gags... jeez, the dick jokes come rapid fire, one
every minute.  It ain't Woody Allen, but damn if it isn't utterly
hysterical.
Where Freddy Got Fingered failed, American Pie 2 succeeds admirably. 
It's silly and largely immature, but it's also original, clever, cheeky,
and has enough borderline sophistication to maintain plenty of appeal
for the adults in the audience.  (And parents, if I haven't made this
clear, this is a very adult movie, wholly unsuitable for any child you
don't want to end up as the town slut, male or female.)
Never mind the plot, which is an awkward construct of a bunch of
returning characters in search of a story.  And apparently they didn't
find one, so they just remade American Pie, only set one year later. 
This time out, the characters are coming home from their first year at
college, facing the same disillusionment they bore in high school.  To
find the meaning in all of it, the stars decide to rent a lakefront
beach house so opulent it might as well be the set for The Real World:
Michigan.
Aside from minor details, the rest of the plot is largely the same.  AP2
starts with another party at Stifler's, and it ends at another big
blowout bash.  Couples are formed and couples are broken.  Stifler's mom
makes the requisite appearance.  Jim's dad causes havoc.
Thanks to his tension-busting charisma, Seann William Scott's Stifler
has a greatly increased presence in the sequel, but all the girls except
for Alyson Hannigan's flute-toter have been practically cut out of the
film.  Tara Reid and Mena Suvari have arguably become the biggest
breakout stars from the original; they were obviously the busiest during
shooting and had to be disposed of conveniently for the sequel (Suvari's
character is shipped overseas for the summer in an awkward,
sitcom-feeling device).  No worry -- Reid and Suvari aren't funny
anyway.
The only thing that really interferes with the enjoyment of the movie is
that all of its stars have made so many bad knock-offs of American Pie
in the last two years that they've lost any sense of identity with the
characters that made them so original and endearing.  Chris Klein has
become a jokey caricature of himself -- from Say It Isn't So to Here on
Earth to Election (a great film, but basically the same character
again).  Ditto Jason Biggs, who played a wishy-washy loser in Loser and
Saving Silverman.  And Seann William Scott has turned into a generic
bozo in Evolution and Dude, Where's My Car?  Oddly, though, the biggest
stretch, which surprised me, is seeing Mena Suvari again playing an
innocent girl next door.  After films like American Beauty, she's broken
her own mold pretty permanently.
Of course, there's no hope searching for any kind of meaning in American
Pie 2.  Relying on the older brother of Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) to
once again show the kids the way, our heroes are just interested in
movin' on with their lives, because now that they're 19 years old, you
know, shouldn't there be some meaning in all of it?  And in full Pie
style, the answer is found... by throwing a beach party.
Director: James B. Rogers
Producer: Chris Moore, Craig Perry, Warren Zide
Writer: Adam Herz
Starring: Jason Biggs, Jennifer Coolidge, Shannon Elizabeth, Chris
Klein, Alyson Hannigan, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Eugene Levy, Natasha
Lyonne, Chris Owen, Tara Reid, Seann William Scott, Mena Suvari, Eddie
Kaye Thomas
http://www.americanpiemovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Homer Yen
"AP2" is a frequently bawdy yet often hilarious film
about college freshman looking to have the summer of
their lives.  There's no better way to enjoy your
first summer out of high school than at the beach,
away from your parents and surrounded by bathing
beauties, plentiful amounts of beer, and your best
friends.  There's unlimited opportunity to talk about
sex, curse, and engage in generally bizarre behavior. 
Ain't summer grand?  And if you think that such a film
will never teach you anything worthwhile, you're
wrong.   Listen carefully: super glue and porn films
don't mix.
"AP2" reunites the entire ensemble from the first
film, led by likeable doofus Jim (Jason Biggs) who was
taught that making love felt like warm apple pie. 
Meanwhile, his friends also came to grips with their
changing lives and first loves.  It's been a year
since their infamous prom night (the setting of the
first "AP").  Has college taught them anything?  If
not, perhaps this summer will teach them something
themselves and about life.  These guys have a lot of
catching up to do and happily and funnily, we see that
nothing much has changed.  
Jim is still as klutzy as ever, and his sexual
encounters amount to embarrassing debacles.  Nadia
(Shannon Elizabeth), his one-time Czech girlfriend, is
scheduled to return at the end of the summer.  In
their only session, he...uh...blew it pretty badly. 
He's naturally nervous.  "She deserves filet mignon,"
he laments.  "All she'll get with me is rump roast."  
Luckily, he has the whole summer to prepare.  He gets
some sexual pointers when he revisits Michelle (Alyson
Hannigan), his kinky prom date who always has a story
about "this one time at Band Camp."  She enjoys an
expanded role from the first film and provides a sweet
element of poignancy.
The rest of the lovable gang has their share of issues
as well, although their screen time seems to be
reduced this time around.  Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas)
is trying to handle his feelings for former girlfriend
Vicky (Tara Reid) who wants to be just friends.  Oz
(Chris Klein) and Heather (Mena Suvari) try to carry
out a long-distance relationship while injecting a
1-900 spirit to their conversations.  Finch (Eddie
Kaye Thomas), whose sexual comeuppance with Stifler's
mom made him a God among all High School dorks,
studies about Tantric orgasms as he awaits her return.
And then there's the glorious, rambunctious Stiffler
(Seann William Scott) who is 100% id.  I believe that
a bust of his likeness should be mandatory in every
fraternity in America.  This guy is the party animal
that we all loved and simultaneously regretted knowing
back in college.  Our audience even cheered for him
when he first appeared.  Stiffler deserves his own
sitcom or a recurring role on Saturday Night Live.
But we're here for its raunchiness.  While the
direction and pace is erratic at times, many of the
scenes are daringly funny and gross-out memorable. 
The audience had a tremendous reaction to a scene
featuring spilled champagne and was in an uproar
during a sequence about libidinous lesbians.
"AP2" has lots of funny moments and the characters are
all quite endearing.  They try so hard to generate
laughter, it's impossible not to like them.  Everyone
looks happy to be back, and like old friends that we
haven't seen for a while, they are always welcome. 
Times may change; people may change.  But thankfully,
friends stay the same.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   I was born too early.  The more I see pictures about the fun
that 19-year-olds are having these days, the more I regret that
the Ayatollah Khomeni was the dean of men at my college and
Taliban regularly enforced the curfew on the women's campus. 
"American Pie 2" does show that some hearts get broken; for
example, one young woman insists that she and her ex-boy
friend must remain just friends and ditto one young man's
declaration of mere friendship to his girl friend.  But all's well that
ends well and the whole team of lovable collegians, some
boisterous, others quiet and meditative; some geeky and others
cheeky, are paired off by the closing credits of this rollicking
comedy from the pen of Adam Herz with James B. Rogers at the
helm.
   A sequel to "American Pie," which broke some new ground as
a primer on establishing an intimate relationship with a dessert,
"American Pie 2" is more of the same, though without the cutting
edge provided by the predecessor's novelty, the party begins to
outlive its welcome.
   No matter though, because so many of the sketches work once
Rogers gets past a fairly flat opening and we get to like each one
of the fellas and gals that the picture is a compelling enough
dash of summer silliness to garner an endorsement.  The high
school seniors that we met and loved last year have just
completed their freshman year of college and though a couple of
the romantic relationships have fizzled, the fun-loving boys  are
sticking together for a season of merriment at an endless
summer-resort beach party.  Leading the levity is Jim (Jason
Biggs), a not yet confident fellow who regularly gets firm
encouragement in matters sexual from his liberal-minded but
often embarrassing dad (played by the wonderful Eugene Levy). 
After a goodbye tryst from a woman with whom he had never
shared a hello relationship, he moves out to the lakeside retreat
with the motormouthed Stifler (Seann William Scott), who like
everyone else of both genders has just one thing on his mind--
but is the one least likely to hide his consuming preoccupation. 
Joining them are the disparate denizens of the college including
the geeky Sherman (Chris Owen), who turns everyone off by
insisting that he's the Shermanator; Oz (Chris Klein), whose
woman friend Heather (Mena Suvari) has gone to Europe; Finch
(Eddie Kaye Thomas), whose fixation with sex leads him to
Eastern thought, namely the practice of Tantric yoga which he
claims could generate an orgasm lasting for an hour or so; and
Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) who simply can't get over his
breakup with the gorgeous Vicky (Tara Reid).
   According to the press notes, "the women in the movie want to
have fun and they want adventure...They're ready for
shenanigans with the guys, but they're not about to be taken for
granted."  The sure had me fooled, then, because these girls
come across as hornier than the guys and in one case Michelle
(Alyson Haningan) is even willing to teach the inexperienced Jim
how to seduce a woman as though she were instructing him in
the latest and coolest dance steps.
   Most of the fun comes from the mishaps and while there's no
pie this time around--no need for one when there are so many
sweet young things around to take its place--the topper involves
Jim once again who halfway through the story gets stuck not on
a girl but on...himself, using a brand of Krazy Glue which he
places liberally on himself thinking that it's a KY-type of
lubricating ointment.
   If you've been introduced to the vulgarities of the screen
beginning with "There's Something About Mary" and anything
else by the Farrelly brothers, you may find that either the
coarseness is toned down in the J.B. Rogers picture or that we
have become so accustomed to indelicacies in the theater that
"American Pie 2" seems delightful without being offensive.  We
root for all of these folks to get hooked up with the persons they
most desire, even the obnoxious Stifler, because uncouth as
these revelers may be at times, they're all good natured--as is
the picture.
Rated R.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WAR OF THE WORLDS, THE (director: Byron Haskin; screenwriter: Barré Lyndon/from
book by H.G. Wells; cinematographer: George Barnes; editor: Everett Douglas;
cast: Gene Barry (Dr. Clayton Forrester), Ann Robinson (Sylvia Van Buren), Les
Tremayne (Gen. Mann), Lewis Martin (Pastor Collins), Henry Brandon (Cop), Robert
Cornthwaite (Dr. Pryor), Jack Kruschen (Salvatore); Runtime: 85; Paramount;
1953) 
Warning: spoilers throughout review. 
Producer George Pal presents onscreen the H.G. Wells story, the one used in
Orson Welles' infamous radio play of 1938 that scared the world. The star of
this film is Pal's special effects, orchestrated by Gordon Jennings, which won
an Oscar. This updated version from the Victorian-era London of 1890 is now set
in contemporary Southern California of 1953. The acting was wooden, the romance
was blah, and the religious messages tacked on were pathetic. But this sci-fi
spectacle had much in it to be praised for; it was especially scary, the Martian
design was sleek and ominous (there were spider-like characters with cobra-like
heads), and the recreation of an Atomic bomb blast was spectacular. It wisely
stuck to the theme of mankind's arrogant belief of his own superiority rather
than go the Red Menace route as most sci-fi films of that day did. 
The film opens with the sobering commentary by Cedric Hardwicke, telling
something about the scientific facts about Mars and how the Martians are on the
verge of extinction, stranded on a dying planet. Their only hope for survival is
landing on the green Earth and conquering it. 
In a carefully designed plan to carry out their mission, groups of three
cylinder spacecrafts fall from the sky in different parts of the world looking
like giant meteors, with the one falling in the small town in Southern
California of Linda Rosa, about 30 miles from L.A., being of main interest to
the story. 
A leading atomic scientist from Pacific Tech, Dr. Clayton Forrester (Gene
Barry), vacationing in the area, joins the crowd of curious onlookers and
strikes up a romantic friendship with a teacher Sylvia (Ann Robinson), the niece
of Parson Collins (Lewis Martin). The romantically inclined couple go square
dancing while waiting for the meteorlike object to cool down before the
scientist begins his observation. But the Martians descend from their spaceship
and zap the three locals guarding the area, who go to the Martians thinking they
could make friends with them. They also cut the town's electrical power and
telephone lines and mysteriously their watches stop working, as the authorities
realize that they have visitors from another planet. The military is called in,
and word from across the world is that they are zapping cities with their heat
rays and are bent on destroying the Earth. 
Sylvia's uncle believes he can show them he's a true man of God and attempts to
talk with them about friendship, but he's quickly zapped for his futile effort.
The Army then blasts away with all its modern weapons of destruction, but the
Martians have an electronic shield around their space vehicles and the weapons
have no effect. The authorities now figure that they better come up with
something drastic to save the world and since the U.S. has the Atomic bomb, it
uses it to thwart the Martians. But the Earth's most powerful weapon of
destruction, the bomb, is also ineffective. It seems machines can't destroy them
and as Dr. Forrester, in his deep baritone voice says: we'll find their mortal
weaknesses and destroy them that way. 
In the lab the scientists study samples of their blood collected and the Martian
electronic eye Forrester salvaged, which the Martians use as a periscope, leads
the scientists to the conclusion that the Martians are physically primitive even
if they are mentally superior to us. They also have anemic blood and because of
the darkness of Mars, it's 140 million miles away from the sun, they can't
handle a strong light. The religious Sylvia says: the world was created in 6
days and will be destroyed by them in 6 days. 
The film's climax occurs as Los Angeles is being attacked and the evacuation of
the city causes a great panic. Barry is disappointed with the selfishness of
humanity and fights through a crowd of rioters who steal transportation out of
the city, he does this so that he may be reunited with Ann in the church she
seeks shelter in before the world ends. In the end, the Martians are defeated
not by science or the military, but by bacteria germs their systems can't adapt
to--or, as the film states, these insignificant things were put on Earth by God
in his wisdom. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The world needed American Pie about as badly as it needs Dubya leading it
into oblivion.  It was Porky's for the next generation (believe me, kids -
that's no compliment); a funny, teen-oriented film that people flocked to
even though they already knew its biggest gags.  Aside from the strong
performance by Jason Biggs, the three other main characters were so
painfully bland, they could be described as The Guy Who Acts Like He's 40
(Eddie Kaye Thomas), The Guy Who Acts Like He's Retarded (Chris Klein) and
The Guy Who May As Well Not Even Be There (Thomas Ian Nicholas).  And the
aforementioned world needs a sequel to Pie as badly as it needed Porky's 2:
The Next Day.
When we last saw our four Michigan misfits, Oz (Klein, Say It Isn't So) had
just fucked glee-club nerd Heather (Mena Suvari, Sugar & Spice), Kevin
(Thomas Ian Nicholas) had just fucked longtime girlfriend Vicky (Tara Reid,
Josie and the Pussycats), and Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas, Freddy Got Fingered)
had just fucked Stifler's mom (Jennifer Coolidge, Legally Blonde).  Our
hero, the nebbish Jim (Biggs, Saving Silverman), had fucked band geek
Michelle (Alyson Hannigan, Buffy the Vampire Slayer), after, of course,
fucking a pie and coming really close (twice) to fucking Nadia, a Czech
exchange student with a really bad accent (Shannon Elizabeth, Tomcats).
Hey, why mince words?  Pie was a movie about fucking, and the sequel isn't
any different.  Pie 2 opens just after the gang's freshman year of college
as they tackle the 12 weeks of summer with a party-minded vengeance.  Oz is
patiently waiting for Heather to return from a European trip so he can fuck
her.  Kevin really wants to fuck Vicky again, but she just wants to be
friends.  Finch can't stop thinking about fucking Stifler's mom, and poor
Jim is about to fuck a classmate (Joelle Carter, Just One Time) when his dad
(Eugene Levy, Down To Earth) walks in on them in the film's opening salvo.
It's a funny scene, but just about the entire thing is shown in Pie 2's
trailer, which was a big problem with the first film, as well.  When the
people sitting behind you at an advance screening recite the dialogue along
with the actors, you know they've divulged too much of the film in the
coming attractions.  Pie 2 is essentially built around five set pieces that
are very funny and extremely well-executed.  But two of these five scenes
are shown in the trailer, and everything that takes place between these five
scenes is crap.
When Stifler's (Seann William Scott, Evolution) summer party palace is
busted up by the fuzz, Kevin's wise old brother (Casey Affleck) suggests the
quintet rent out a summer home on Lake Michigan.  Most of the action takes
place here, where the boys are forced to get jobs as house painters to
afford their swank new digs.  And, of course, they get themselves in various
sexual predicaments that usually lead to subtle-as-a-jackhammer Pepsi
product placement.
To top it off, this Gen-Y Porky's is packed full of songs by blink-182, 3
Doors Down, Sum 41 and a myriad of other lame Abercrombie-core bands with
numeric monikers (I think my musical combo is going to be called Smell My
Weiner 285).  It might be easy to overlook the fact that most of these
"kids" are too old for grad school, but it's downright shocking to learn
that 22-year-old Natasha Lyonne (Scary Movie 2) is one of the youngest
actresses involved in Pie 2 (Elizabeth is 28, Hannigan 27, Reid 26).
Original directors Chris and Paul Weitz are producers here, handing the
reins over to James B. Rogers (Say It Isn't So), who was an associate
producer and assistant director on the first Pie.  Grand Rapids native Adam
Herz once again provides a script full of shocking, gross-out humor that is
rooted exclusively in bodily fluids and copulation.  If you like that kind
of humor, and aren't put off by the fact that most of the laughs have
already been given away for free, then Pie 2 will be a surefire hit.
1:40 - R for strong sexual content, crude humor, language and drinking
