Title
Review for Ai no corrida (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
        Many films have explored sexual obsession--DAMAGE, LAST TANGO IN 
PARIS, M. BUTTERFLY, FATAL ATTRACTION, to name a few--but most of them 
tiptoe around the central issue: sex.  These movies show us the 
consequences of unrestrained passion, but don't actually show us the 
obsession as it's played out in the bedroom.  Nagisa Oshima's infamous 
IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES is a movie which is not afraid to show us 
exactly what its lovers do when they're together.  It shows us in 
explicit detail, and it shows us again, and again, and again.
        I walked into the theatre knowing only that the movie, when first 
released, was considered scandalous for its sexual content.  I 
expected something like LAST TANGO IN PARIS, considered offensive in 
its time but no longer especially provocative.  About 15 minutes after 
the opening credits, as I watched an extreme close-up of semen 
dripping from a woman's lips, I realized that I had been--to put it 
mildly--mistaken.  IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES challenges the 
distinction between art and pornography.  It is relentlessly graphic 
and taboo-shattering.  A man tastes his lover's menstrual blood; he 
puts an egg in her vagina and asks her to lay it like a hen; she asks 
him to urinate into her as they have intercourse.  And there's much 
more.  The gruesome finale manages to top even THE COOK, THE THIEF, 
HIS WIFE & HER LOVER, while the sexual antics of the two principals 
makes 9 1/2 WEEKS seem about as shocking as adolescents playing 'Show 
me yours and I'll show you mine.'
        So we've established that it's daring.  But is it any good?  As a 
story, IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES is rather dull.  The lovers are 
Kichi and Saba (Tatsuya Fuji, Eiko Matsuda); he meets her when she 
comes to work in his household, and soon they are involved in a 
tempestuous affair.  The plot's trajectory is no different from 
countless other tales of compulsive desire: what begins as 
straightforward passion becomes twisted into something more sinister, 
as the lovers become consumed with one another.  Kichi and Saba 
copulate like bonobo chimps in heat, incessantly, relentlessly, and 
mundane sex acts soon become tiresome for them.  They begin to move 
beyond pleasure into the realm of pain, experimenting with a little 
S&M, a little bondage, and some heavy-duty strangulation.  Saba 
becomes possessive, to the point of referring to Kichi's penis as 
"him," and threatening to cut "him" off if Kichi does not stop 
sleeping with his wife.  The end result is predictably disastrous, and 
offers no insights which other, better films have not already offered.
        Fortunately, Oshima finds room for humour as the tale unfolds.  
Because the lovers are continually involved in one sex act or another, 
the servants basically go about their business, unheeding, while the 
happy couple go about their pleasure.  Their lovemaking has become 
such a matter-of-fact occurrence that the servants even converse with 
their master, Kichi, while he is in the throes of ecstasy.  These 
moments provide some welcome comic relief, momentary pauses in the 
film's single-minded examination of Kichi and Saba's all-consuming 
lust.
        We're all fascinated by sex, but mostly as it pertains to us; when 
it's only happening to other people, it can become real boring, real 
fast.  This is the problem with IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES: it becomes 
monotonous.  There is too much sex, and not enough theme, character, 
and story.  The film is beautifully photographed by Hideo Itoh in 
warm, golden tones, and the overall production values are solid.  But 
while it may be nicely packaged, the contents are somewhat trivial.
        For those who feel there's a meaningful distinction to be made 
between porn and art, the question to be asked is whether or not this 
is art.  It is.  Oshima is interested in more than mere titillation.  
This is a well-crafted movie that challenges our cultural taboos; it 
seeks to explore sexual issues through unabashed melodrama (based, 
however, on a true incident which shocked the Japanese nation in 
1936).  For me, however, the important question is not whether or not 
it's art, but whether or not it's good art--and, sadly, it is not.
