Title
Review for Mona Lisa (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[This review was written last year.  MONA LISA was recently released on
videocassette, and since it had only a limited theatrical release, I thought
it might be worth pointing out.  People are encouraged to send me more reviews
of lesser-known films when they come out on videocassette.  -ecl]
     It has been observed that there are many foreign language films that could
do much better at the boxoffice if they were done in English.  I think a prime
example must be MONA LISA.  The film MONA LISA is done in British Cockney
without benefit of dubbing or subtitles.  Now I don't speak any Cockney but
many words are cognates and I can understand enough that I can usually pick up
the gist of what is being said.  With this linguistic skill, I found MONA LISA
to be one of the best films of the summer [of 1986] (second only to A GREAT
WALL).
     To start with, I am a Bob Hoskins fan from THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY and PBS's
showing of the British FLILCKERS series, and to a lesser extent from THE COTTON
CLUB.  MONA LISA has the feisty Cockney actor at his best as a small-time hood,
recently released from prison, who gets a part-time job chauffeuring a
prostitute, Simone.  She enlists his help to find another prostitute who is
missing.  the hood, who thought of himself as a bad man before, gets a quick
education in the world of prostitution and for once finds himself morally
outraged.  The plot that ensues is worthy of a Dashiell Hammett novel.  People
play dirty and rough.  And the background has an air of authenticity that
Hammett often lacked.
     Neil Jordan, who co-wrote the script as well as directed the film, has a
good feel for the characters he has created.  Hoskins's character is very real,
yet funny enough in ways the character intends and does not intend, that he is
a real joy to watch.  Cathy Tyson, as Simone, really has the mystery that the
title implies.  This a A GREAT WALL are the must-see films of the summer [of
1986].  Give it a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  And if you need an interpreter
for the Cockney, maybe I'm available.  I wouldn't mind seeing the film again.
