Title
Review for Q & A (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I generally claim that a film can tell the same story you could tell in
forty to sixty pages of prose.  That rule is not infallible.  Q & A is a
long film (at 132 minutes) but it is amazing how much happens in the course
of this realistic thriller looking at police and politics.  It is difficult
to believe this hard-edged film could have been directed by the same man who
last year directed the much softer FAMILY BUSINESS.  Q & A is complex and
frankly, difficult to follow, with many more major characters than one
expects to see in a film.  It is nice to see a film that does not talk down
to its audience even if perhaps it goes a little far in the other direction.
Not making the film any easier to follow, much of the dialogue is spoken in
(realistically) thick accents.
     Q & A opens with policeman Mike Brennan (played by Nick Nolte)
murdering a Puerto Rican drug pusher and then intimidating witnesses into
saying the dead man pulled a gun on him.  Called in purportedly to
investigate (but actually to whitewash) is Al Reilly (played by Timothy
Hutton), the new D.A.'s assistant.  Reilly was formerly a policeman and the
son of a much-loved legend on the police force.  The case does look simple
enough to start with, but a friend tips off Reilly that there may be more
going on than is immediately apparent.  The more Reilly digs the more he
finds.  His chief subject, Brennan, is a big, easy man instantly likable and
quickly detestable.  He has an open love of crude, though often funny,
ethnic jokes that soon gives way to an obvious racism.  Brennan is finding
himself in an increasingly multi-ethnic, multi-racial New York and resents
how things have changed since the "good old days."  In fact, there are many
ethnic and other minorities represented in the plot--virtually every
important character is from a minority--and the hatred each group has for
the others is part of what the story is about.  The plot involves Irish,
Italians, Puerto Ricans, gays, and Jews--Sephardic and Ashkenazic.  The plot
also involves a D.A.~with higher political aspirations (played by Patrick
O'Neal) and a drug runner (played by Armand Asante) involved with both the
victim and with Reilly's former fiancee.  There is no chance I can do a
reasonable job of explaining a complex and highly inter-woven plot such as Q
& A in a paragraph or two.
     Q & A has a very downbeat feel to it, without the sorts of heroes this
sort of film would usually have.  Lumet is not trying to make us like his
characters but instead just wants us to see the way things are.  It is set
in a New York City that is as easily recognizable by the feel as by the
buildings.  The music is by Rube'n Blades, who also wrote the song under the
titles.  (Blades, incidentally, is reportedly very likely to announce soon
his candidacy for the presidency of Panama.)  For Lumet Q & A represents a
return to a more serious style of filmmaking, such as his PRINCE OF THE
CITY.  I rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Randy Parker
     Director Sydney Lumet has made dozens of exceptional films over the
years; FAMILY BUSINESS was not one of them.  The limp caper comedy was
altogether forgettable, especially in comparison to Lumet's prior film, the
gut-wrenching drama RUNNING ON EMPTY.  But one mark of a great filmmaker is
the ability to bounce back from a misfire like FAMILY BUSINESS with a
bulls-eye like Q & A.
     In Q & A, Lumet offers a powerful and provocative look at New York
City's police force and judicial system; it's not a pretty sight.  The film
(based on the book by New York State Supreme Court Justice and former D.A.
Edwin Torres) exposes the city's ugly underbelly--the dirty cops, the
cheesy lawyers, and above all, the racist "old boy" network.  In some
respects, the movie is a routine story of police corruption.  But in other
respects, it's a bold and fiery outcry against racism, as incendiary and
infuriating as DO THE RIGHT THING or MISSISSIPPI BURNING.
     The film features Nick Nolte in his tough-guy mode, playing a
hot-shot detective on the N.Y.P.D. who is rotten to the core.  The movie
begins in a dark alley with Nolte blowing a guy's brains out for no
apparent reason and then claiming it was in self-defense.  Timothy Hutton
plays the young, idealistic assistant D.A. assigned to investigate the
shooting.
     Hutton's superior (Patrick O'Neal) assures him that the case is cut
and dried, a clear instance of self-defense.  But Hutton realizes that
there's something rotten in the state of New York when witnesses start
giving conflicting testimonies in the Q & A (the official record of what
happened).  The key witness is a drug lord (Armand Assante) who's married
to Hutton's ex-girlfriend, played by Lumet's daughter, Jenny.  Q & A
seethes with suspense and reeks of impending doom as Hutton's investigation
takes him further and further in over his head.  The inexperienced D.A.
stumbles upon a gigantic white supremacist conspiracy in which Nolte is
only a minor player.
     Like DO THE RIGHT THING and MISSISSIPPI BURNING, Q & A is as apt to
stimulate your mind as it is to arouse your emotions.  Few films depict raw
racial hostility so openly or so potently.  The relationships between the
characters in Q & A are complex and uneasy, sometimes explosive; there's an
undercurrent of animosity which always threatens to bubble over.  Even the
two detectives who are assisting Hutton barely get along; one is black
(Charles Dutton) and the other Puerto Rican (Luis Guzman)--an ethnic
division which ignites conflict between them.  Q & A measures up admirably
against DO THE RIGHT THING and MISSISSIPPI BURNING.  The characters seem
more credible than those in Spike Lee's troubling film, and Lumet avoids
the sensationalism which tainted Alan Parker's controversial movie.
     Q & A never loosens its powerful stranglehold over you, thanks to
vital performances, which remain steady even when Lumet's script starts to
wobble.  Nolte, in particular, stands out, both literally and figuratively.
Nolte tends to play either loveable lunks (DOWN AND OUT IN BEVERLY HILLS)
or gruff ruffians (EXTREME PREJUDICE).  In Q & A, he is the epitome of
nastiness: vulgar, violent, bigoted, and as dirty as they come.  The
detective's twisted, racist values have sent him straight over the edge and
turned him into a monster.  At the same time, however, the corrupt cop has
a seductive charm about him.  Nolte is unrestrained in a truly riveting
performance.
     In the central role, Hutton also stands tall.  Every time I see
Hutton, he surprises me.  He looks light-weight, but he is actually a fine
dramatic actor.  Unlike Michael J. Fox, Hutton has dramatic conviction to
back up his soft, pretty-boy looks.  Hutton always gives you the feeling
that the wheels are turning behind his baby blue eyes.  He would have done
well with Fox's role in CASUALTIES OF WAR.
     The supporting actors in the film carry their weight and then some.
Assante, as the drug dealer looking to go straight, and Jenny Lumet, as
his wife, are to the human eye what magnets are to metal.  Fyvush Finkel
has minimal screen time, but he warrants mention for his two priceless
appearances as Preston Pearlstein, a low-life Jewish lawyer.
     Q & A is far from perfect.  The film has a hopelessly complicated
story line which expects you to keep track of just too many names.  You
often have to strain to keep up with all the twists and turns.
Furthermore, Lumet embeds these intriguing characters into a plot which is
all too familiar to anyone who regularly watched "Miami Vice."  You get
this nagging feeling that Crockett and Tubbs are going to show up at any
minute and save Hutton's butt.
     To his credit, however, Lumet doesn't offer any easy answers to the
problems he raises in the film, and unlike most screenwriters, he avoids a
conventional ending as if it were the plague.  Lumet clearly is not afraid
to leave plot strands dangling and loose ends hanging.  The movie may end,
but life goes on--and not with everyone living happily ever after.  Q & A
is a sophisticated drama from a filmmaker still very much in his prime.

Author
Sandra J. Grossmann
Violence and sex ratings:  Not an excessively violent film.  No sex.
The setting for our drama is New York City, and our main characters are:
  Al Francis Riley, the assistant D.A.  (played by Timothy Hutton),
  Quinn, the district attorney (played by Patrick O'Neal),
  Mike Brennan, the cop who commits murder (played by Nick Nolte),
  Bobby Tex, the drug dealer (played by Armand Assante).
     In most films, Nick Nolte plays a gruff-voiced but huggable teddy
bear.   Not so here.  His character is a law-and-order cop whose 20-plus
years on the force have pushed his hatred of low-life dealers and
criminals to an obsession.  He's the local hero of the precinct, known
as the cop who always delivers, no matter what the difficulties.  When
he fatally shoots a two-bit criminal, no one is much interested in
finding out about the details.   The D.A., Quinn, calls on a young
cop-turned-lawyer, Riley, to run through the Q & A (Questions and
Answers) procedure.  This procedure is a standard call-em-in-and-ask-em-
questions routine.  The outcome of a Q & A is a report with
recommendations that is turned over to the grand jury, which then
decides whether to press charges in the case.
     The D.A. tells Riley that he wants an assistant D.A. who shares
his values of law and order.  Riley's father was a well-known cop of
the same repute as Brennan, and the D.A. seems to be grooming Riley
for a part in the intricate world of enforcement.  The case that the
D.A. puts him on is the shooting that began the movie.  This is
supposedly an open-and-shut case of self-defense, and the D.A. tells
Riley to process the case ASAP so that  Brennan can get back to work.
     One of the witnesses is Bobby Tex.  In the course of the
investigation,  Riley begins to doubt Brennan's testimony, but each of
the witnesses whose story conflicts with Brennan's is a convicted
criminal whose word means little when in direct opposition to a
respected officer's word.  Riley is faced with the dilemma of doing his
job "right"--in other words, not being a rubber stamp--but by doing the
job right, losing the respect (and backing) of the D.A., losing the
camaraderie of the cops he so hungrily wants to be part of, and somehow
failing in comparison with his father.
     The people Riley always looked up look different up close, and he
finds his heroes-- even his father--to be substantially lacking in the
moral department.  Even more unsettling, some of the bad guys are
better than the good guys.  Bobby Tex is a proud Puerto Rican whose
sense of honor prevents him from falsely testifying.  Yes, he's a coke
dealer, but he's not the sweet Mel type of dealer that we encountered
in Tequila Sunrise.  Bobby has a depth of character and toughness that
are nearly palpable.   The contrast between Bobby and Riley is notable:
beside Bobby, Riley is a wimp, and a fairly dumb one at that.
     I won't comment on the rest of the plot, because information about
the outcome would spoil your enjoyment of this film.  Instead, let's
probe those characters a bit.
     Bobby Tex is the most interesting character of the film, and Armand
Assante turns in a great performance.  It's hard to believe that this
is acting:   Assante is so perfect for this part that it seems like
type-casting.   However, this street-wise tough guy is played by the
same actor who played the French psychiatrist in Private Benjamin.  Now
*that's* scope.
     The D.A. is a power-hungry politician, and I'm a bit tired of this
stereotype.   Nothing terribly new here, and a mediocre performance by
O'Neal.
     Riley could have been an excellent role for a good actor, but
Timothy Hutton doesn't have what it takes to suggest complexity in this
character.  Hutton takes a very one-dimensional, straightforward
approach here, projecting naivete and a childlike, trusting quality that
are out of place in this film.   (He's supposed to have been a street
cop before he became a lawyer, and his father was a cop, too.  That
isn't exactly the sort of background that produces naivete and childlike
trust.)  What happens to his character in this film is the stuff that
great roles are made of, but Hutton is simply, well, too simple to
portray a multi-dimensional character.
     In direct contrast with Hutton is Nolte.  The easy, Hollywood
interpretation of this role would be of a hard-ass racist who has
complete disrespect for the law he supposedly enforces.  Nolte, though,
plays a passionate man whose respect for his fellow officers and
workers is completely colorblind.   The easy banter between the officers
demonstrates an ethnic-rich humor that has nothing to do with racism.
Interestingly, the script was probably somewhat ambivalent about his
orientation; Nolte picked his way carefully, and he crafted a tragic
character of memorable proportion.
     This is not a great film, but it's a good one.  Its most
conspicuous flaw is that some of the characters' motivations are poorly
sketched (or played) and their actions unlikely.  In spite of its
flaws, though, the movie is well worth seeing just for Nolte and
Assante.  One superior performance in a film is a rarity today.  Two
superior performances ?  Enjoy.
