Title
Review for Callejón de los milagros, El (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
R.L. Strong
DAVID MAZOR & JOHN LAWRENCE RÉ  PRESENT
AN ALFREDO RIPSTEIN  PRODUCTION IN ASSOCIATION WITH
ALAMEDA FILMS, IMCINE FONDO DE  FOMENTO A LA CALIDAD CINEMATOGRAFICA,
UNIVERSIDAD DE GUADALAJARA PRESENTS
"MIDAQ ALLEY" (El Callejón De Los Milagros)
staring ERNESTO GOMEZ CRUZ      SELMA HAYEK      MARIA ROJO
BRUNO BICHIR    DELIA CASANOVA      LUIS FELIPE TOVAR
MUSIC BY LUCIA ALVAREZ   CINEMATOGRAPHY BY CARLOS MARCOVICH
SOUND BY DAVID BAKSHT     EDITIED BY CARLOS SAVAGE
PRODUCTION COORDINATOR: DANIEL BERMAN RIPSTEIN
BASED ON THE NOVEL BY NAGUIB MAHFOUZ     SCREENPLAY BY VICENTE LENERO
PRODUCED BY ALFREDO RIPSTEIN, JR. & GERARDO BARRERA     DIRECTED BY JORGE
FONS
In Spanish with English Subtitles   approx. 140 minutes
Since the debut of W. Somerset Maugham's "Quartet", filmmakers have often
used the omnibus format of several tales to imbue a single idea or thought.
Such diverse films as the above mentioned title through Vincente Minnelli's
'Story of Three Loves' onto Quenten Tarentino's 'Pulp Fiction' have used
the multi-story approach to enhance their film. Jorge Fons' film adaptation
of Naguib Mahfouz's novel of a small poor neighborhood in Mexico is the
latest film to utilize the technique. And the end results are remarkably
satisfying.
                 "Midaq Alley" uses the multiple story frameworks in a way
to tell the complex stories of several characters. The script by Vicente
Lenero, expertly takes these individual stories, and combines them;
creating a marvelous whole, wherein any event from any of the three tales
could impact on the forth.  The film is actually broken up into four
distinct tales, three of which are introduced with the same game of
dominoes at a local tavern.
           The first tale is entitled 'Rutilio',  wherein we are introduced
to a middle aged man, Rutilio (Ernesto Gomez Cruz); owner of a small bar in
the town. He is a pitifully shallow man, oblivious to the thievery by his
employees, estranged by his wife and family and succumbing to his own
latent homosexuality. Rutilio's son, Chava dreams of running to America to
make his fortune. Relations become violently strained when Chava discovers
his Father having an affair with a younger man (Esteban Soberanes).
Attacking the young man and almost killing him, Chavo is forced to leave
Mexico, fearful of his Father's vengeance.
The second tale, 'Alma' gives us the story of Alma (Selma Hayek), a young
innocent girl in her mid twenties. She is the object of affection of Abel,
a young man who works as a barber in the town. As Alma and Abel date, Alma
is approached by Don Fidel (Claudio Obregón), an elderly businessman in
town; with a proposal of marriage. When Abel joins his friend, Chava (from
the previous tale) on his flight to the U.S., Alma agrees to the marriage
arrangement. But, Don Fidel passes away of a heart attack before the
wedding, leaving Alma ripe for the suave attentions of Jose Luis (Daniel
Giménez Cacho).
The third story, 'Susanita'; introduces us to the matronly landlord of a
small apartment in the  neighborhood. Her sad tale of loneliness and
despair is possibly the most riveting and heartfelt. Margarita Sanz plays
Susanita as a spinster longing for romance, longing for at the very least..
heartbreak. When she accidentally injures Güicho (Luis Felipe Tovar), she
immediately falls in love with the younger man. They marry, but the
marriage is a sham from the beginning as Güicho is only interested in
Susanita's money. The final tale, 'El Regreso' (The Return) ties up all of
the plot threads in a sad and effecting final act.
The film is nicely presented, without any flashy moves or tricks. The
camera work is modest but extremely effective, giving the film a glossy
look that belies its limited resources. The direction by Jorge Fons
concentrates on the performances, and there is not a false note among the
fine group. The standout performance is by Bruno Bichir as the lovelorn
Abel, who deftly shows both the heights of love and the depths of despair.
This is an actor to watch. Selma Hayek is wonderfully innocent as Alma. Her
child-like and playfully naive questioning of sex, to her final
transformation to a spiritually bankrupt call girl is quite possibly the
best performance of her career to date.
The most remarkable aspect of 'Midaq Alley' is that the film makes you love
and care for these diverse and desperate people. All of the inhabitants of
the neighborhood dream grand dreams, but all of them soon realize that the
dreams are well beyond their reach. Forgiveness is something that only God
can aspire to. It is only at the denouement, where Alma tries to save Abel
from himself that true forgiveness is granted. But to what end, the
filmmakers will not tell us. It is a wonderful morality tale of how life
circles and recreates itself.
                  "MIDAQ ALLEY" is a fine film, told from a point of view
that neither vindicates nor abdicates it's character's actions. These are
people we have all known, people we have all loved, people we have all
hated. In other words.. they are us.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MIDAQ ALLEY (Callejón de los milagros, El) (director: Jorge Fons;
screenwriter: Vicente Leńero/Based on the Nobel Prize novel, by the
Egyptian Naguib Mahfouz; cinematographer: Carlos Marcovich; editor:
Carlos Savage; cast: Ernesto Gómez Cruz (Rutilio (Don Ru)), María Rojo
(Dońa Cata), Salma Hayek (Alma), Bruno Bichir (Abel), Delia Casanova
(Eusebia), Esteban Soberanes (Jimy), Claudio Obregon (Don Fidel), Abel
Woolrich (Zacarias), Juan Manuel Bernal (Chava), Daniel Gimenez Cacho
(Jose Luis), Margarita Sanz (Susanita), Luis Felipe Tovar (Guicho),
Óscar Yoldi (Ubaldo "El Poeta"), Tiaré Scanda (Maru), 1995-Mex.)
This film is tied together by four tired soap opera tales, that are
competently-crafted but predictable. They are heart rendering tales of
love turned sour. Instead of being set in 1940s Egypt, this faithful
adaptation of Nobel Prize-winning Naguib Mahfouz's novel, is set in a
modern Mexican city, on a street called Midaq Alley. In my humble
opinion, this film could have been made by using only one of the
stories, instead of making them into roughly four- 40 minute segments,
each with a title flashed on the screen to indicate the start of the new
story. The four segments, which three of them are introduced by a game
of dominoes being played in a bar, are entitled: Rutilio, Alma,
Susanita, and The Return (Chava and Abel return from the States), with
each segment taking the view of the titled character. It is hard to
believe that this film won more awards than any other Mexican film ever
has! It makes you wonder about the quality of film that didn't win an
award.
In the first story, Mr. Ru is a macho man and hardworker, grimacing at
life as he sees its dark side from working in the bar that he owns on
Midaq Alley. His only son Chava is called lazybones by him, as he wishes
only to leave Mexico and live in the States and get rich quickly.
Chava's best friend is the young barber Abel, who dreams of some day
owning his own beauty parlor and marrying the beautiful Alma, a
neighborhood young girl he has known all his life. The two friends are
ridiculed by Mr. Ru for always hanging around together and for acting
like queers. This in-fighting between father and son, delights his
regular customers, the domino players.
After a night of forced lovemaking to celebrate with his wife Eusebia
their thirtieth wedding anniversary, Ru decides to become queer. It
happens just like that! The next day he's a queer and goes into a
department store and buys socks, in the process picking up the reserved
young sales clerk Jimy. Their gay union upsets Chava, who in a fit of
rage, cracks open Jimy's skull and then talks Abel into running away
with him to Tijuana and eventually to the States. Mr. Ru tells his wife,
I was going to leave him the bar and provide for him in every way, but
he disappointed me, as this segment ends with Ru weeping that he lost
his only son.
The second segment, the most bearable one of the four, mainly because
Salma Hayek as Alma, is a real knockout and her story of being poor,
looking for someone to take care of her, is filled with all the clichés
befitting the telling of a story about a young virgin lover, and of her
failure to find love. It is the usual tear-jerker fare seen on those
afternoon soap operas on American TV. She is impatient for the barber to
love her and open his own shop, but when he suddenly leaves with Chava,
even as they are embracing each other and promising to love each other
forever, he unexpectedly leaves her with the promise that he will return
soon with money and offer her his hand in marriage. She is confused and
disappointed by his action and she is ashamed with herself why they
never had sex to bond their relationship. Soon, after he is gone, an
elderly shop keeper, Mr. Fidel, comes onto her and with her mother's
permission, she accepts his proposal for marriage. But he has a fatal
heart attack just before the wedding, at Mr. Ru's bar, while playing
dominoes.
Alma, meanwhile, has been pursued in the street by a handsome rich man
named Jose Luis, who tracks her down, tempting her with his wealth, good
looks and self-confidence. He turns out to be a coke-sniffing pimp, who
turns her into a high-class whore. She runs away from home and lives in
his whorehouse, with him completely dominating her life, as her
impatience to wait for the right man ruins her life.
The third story is about a buck-toothed, middle-aged spinster, Susanita,
who is the landlord where Alma and her mother Cata dwell. Susanita is
desperate to meet a man before she gets too old, and is happy when she
has her fortune read in the cards by Cata and is told that the cards say
a man of passion will come into her life. At first she thinks that man
is Chava, but he only came to her on the night of his flight away from
here in order to get money. But he did arouse her sexual curiosity. She
then lures the 26-year-old sneak-thief waiter in Mr. Ru's bar, Guicho,
to marry her. He steals from her as he still does from Mr. Ru. When she
catches him in the act and asks him to leave, he begs her to not kick
him out. After all, she decides, she did get her teeth fixed and still
needs someone to love her, so, she keeps this untrustworthy thief as her
husband.
The final episode is about the return of the two young men, Chava and
Abel, who went to the States to make their fortune. Chava returns after
being away for two years, with a wife and a baby son. He has split from
Abel after a disagreement in the States and is surprised when Abel soon
shows up, courting Alma at her apartment door. For Chava, it is tough
going because his father is still angry with him and his marriage is not
a happy one and his economic prospects are dim. For Abel, it is a
bitterly disappointing time, as he returns home broke without any
economic prospects and he has found out that his virgin love is now a
whore and a drug addict. He goes to the whorehouse and confronts Alma,
but she can't leave. He then comes back and slashes her pimp with a
razor before he is fatally knifed in the stomach by the pimp.
On the plus side, the stories are intricately woven together so that
they make sense. There is much humor in the telling of the stories and
the acting is decent. Otherwise, this plays mostly as glorified soap
opera, with few surprises in all of its lengthy presentation.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
