Title
Review for Haunted Castle (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Annette Cardwell
More freaky and odd than scary, the latest 3D IMAX film, Haunted Castle,
is not what it sounds like.  Don't expect a funhouse-style ride through
a house of horrors.  Instead, get ready for an outrageously bad plot
filled with ear-piercingly bad music -- yikes, there's even a really
lame live band sequence at the end -- and laughable dialogue.  But,
who's really going to see a 3D IMAX film for a great storyline and
acting?
The best reason to see most IMAX films, especially the 3D variety, is to
ooh and ahh at the giant screen antics.  Through the clouded lenses of
the bulky IMAX visor, tree limbs will jut out into your face, demons
will fly straight into your body, and you'll even feel like you're
peering precariously over the edge of the castle's gargoyle-dotted
rooftop.  Even if the film's CG animation is obvious from the beginning,
it comes off looking much like an elaborate video game, and is far less
bothersome than some of the film's most ridiculous element: story.
The weak tale begins with our struggling musician hero venturing to a
spooky castle to collect on his inheritance from his famous rock star
mother.  He soon learns that mom had sold her soul to the devil, and now
"Mr. D" -- as he's called here -- wants to sign the kid up for mom's
same deal.  The movie takes us with him on his tour of Hell's more
musical realms.  But, will our boy sign on the fiery dotted line?
Of course, none of this matters.  The half-witted story will give you a
headache if you even pay attention to it, and the voice acting is just
absurd.  So don't give it a second thought, and just enjoy the cool
visuals.  But, Haunted Castle isn't as suitable for the whole family as
most IMAX films are, since some of the film's images are pretty gruesome
and even more harsh being viewed in 3D -- such as a that of a corpse
being electrocuted or grisly bodies suffering in Purgatory.  In fact,
there was talk that IMAX was not sure whether to release this movie,
since it doesn't cater to an all-age audience.  As a real horror flick
might say: Be warned... if you're bringing a small child to the movies
with you.
Director: Ben Stassen
Producer: Charlotte Huggins, Caroline Van Iseghem
Writer: Ben Stassen
Starring: Jasper Steverlinck, Kyoko Baertsoen, Harry Shearer
http://209.250.99.211/hauntedcastle/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
