Title
Review for Shadowlands (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SHADOWLANDS is story of the famous English writer C. S. Lewis
(Anthony Hopkins) and of the one true love in his life, Joy Gresham
(Debra Winger).  Joy is a life long fan of Lewis's and ventures to
Oxford where he teaches so that she can see the great man in the flesh.
His Oxford colleagues, on the other hand, see him as just another
professor and don't view him in awe as Gresham does.
     Lewis and Gresham at first trade barbs at each other when they
meet, but eventually they fall into a deep, respectful and
contemplative love for each other.  They become inseparable which is
surprising since they are both independent sorts who appear to need no
other human being.  Eventually, Gresham becomes seriously ill and the
movie becomes a TERMS OF ENDEARMENT II.
     There are so many things special about this movie it is hard to
know where to begin so let me take a little bit different approach and
list them in order with the best first:
SCRIPT
     Many lines poignant, funny, or both.  Wish I could have written
all them down.  In one example, Winger describes Hopkins and her as
"lapsed atheists".  It has an excellent ending.  The script by William
Nicholson deserves to win an Oscar.  I believe this was taken from a
play.  If so, you should get the play and read it.  Use your yellow
marker to highlight the memorable lines.  Make sure your marker has
plenty of ink before you start.  Finally, not only was the script
excellent, the story itself was a fascinating love story.
ACTING
     Hopkins was absolutely wonderful.  Okay, the character had
similarities to the one in REMAINS OF THE DAY in how reserved he was,
but these were different roles.  He deserves an Oscar nomination for
SHADOWLANDS.
     Winger played a harsh, honest, strong, complex and yet vulnerable
character.  Her acting range is enormous.  Excellent performance also
worthy of an Oscar nomination.  Actually, the only fault I have with
the movie was that Winger had trouble staying with her accent.  Oh
well, she tried.
     There were many great minor roles: The brother played by Edward
Hardwicke of Dr.  Watson TV fame was one of many.  Joy's son Douglas
played by Joseph Mazzello was another.
CINEMATOGRAPHY
     The cinematography by Roger Pratt was beautiful and yet not
overdone.  Made you want to go to Oxford without overpowering the story
and turning it into a travelogue.
     SHADOWLANDS runs 2:11, and I think the editor (Lesley Walker) made
just the right choices.  If it had been shorter, we might have missed
some aspect of two intriguing lives.  It is rated PG only for the
seriousness of its themes.  It would be a great show for anyone old
enough to contemplate serious illness.  I strongly recommend this to
you and award it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Old saying about truth being stranger than fiction was often
been proven by remarkable films being based on true stories.
One of such examples is a film that turned out to be one of
the most underrated tear-jerking melodramas of its time.
This film was based on the unusual events in the life of one
of the most influential thinkers of 20th Century. Those
events were turned into stage play SHADOWLANDS by William
Nicholson and later adapted into BBC TV film in 1985
(starring Joss Ackland and Claire Bloom). Eight years later,
Richard Attenborrough, British director specialised for
biographical films, made feature film version.
The protagonist of the film is C.S. "Jack" Lewis (played by
Anthony Hopkins), British writer who became famous because
of his science fiction novels, children's books as well as
his very passionate defence of Christianity. Lewis' personal
lifestyle, however, is in total contrast with his global
fame - he lives a quiet, ascetic and uneventful life of a
Oxford professor, shares room with his equally ascetic
brother Warnie (played by Debra Winger) and spends all free
time in intellectual discussion. In 1952 his life is going
to change when he receives a letter by Joy Gresham (played
by Debra Winger), Jewish American poetess who claims to be a
great fan of his work and wants to meet him personally.
Soon, Joy comes to England bringing her young son Douglas
(played by Joseph Mazzelo) and when meeting between "Jack"
and Joy occurs, British professor is both shocked and
attracted by Joy's openness and directness. They strike up a
friendship and that relationship gradually turns into deep
platonic love. Because of that love, "Jack" would agree to
marry her in order to help her evade deportation from
Britain. Their love, as well as "Jack"'s beliefs would soon
be put to the test by Joy's illness.
Unlike previous Attenborrough's films that dealt with Great
Men of History like Churchill, Gandhi or Chaplin this
reconstruction of Lewis-Gresham love affair deliberately
avoids visual spectacle. Instead, Attenborrough, quite aware
of anything but spectacular setting, leaves most of the work
to the actors. Casting is, naturally, perfect. Anthony
Hopkins is excellent as quiet, reserved British intellectual
who would discover love in the autumn of his life. But the
best surprise comes in the form of Debra Winger, one of the
most underrated actresses of past few decades. Her manages
to show Joy Gresham as a woman who is physically attractive,
but whose main tool of seduction comes in the sharpness of
her mind. Unfortunately, both of those great actors are
unable to leave truly superb impression simply because their
roles in same way resemble their past achievements. Hopkins
looks too much like a reserved, "stiff-upper-lip" British
butler from REMAINS OF THE DAY. Winger, on the other hand in
the last segment of the film brings back memories of her
role in TERMS IN ENDEARMENT made ten years earlier. Their
interaction is, however, great, and the rest of the cast is
splendid, especially Hardwicke, John Wood and Peter Firth.
Young Joseph Mazzelo as the only other American among almost
exclusively British cast is also very good. George Fenton
also contributes to film's elegiac atmosphere with his
melancholic musical score. In the end, SHADOWLANDS should
also be praised because this film, unlike most of other
melodramas, adds intellectual and philosophical dimension to
the romance. As a film that employs our brain as well as our
emotion, SHADOWLANDS is one of the best British films made
in last few years.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Richard Attenborough had a good year in '93.  He breezed his way
through JURASSIC PARK with a warm performance as the didn't-mean-to-
be-evil scientist.  And, in December, he served up his own movie magic
with SHADOWLANDS, the touching, true-life story of how author
C. S. Lewis discovered love very late in his life.
     The story opens in 1952 at Oxford University.  Lewis is already a
world-renowned children's author, much to the bemusement of his friends
and fellow faculty members.  They chide "Jack," as he's called, because
they know all too well of his controlled, insulated world --a world
with no seeming accommodation for children or child-like behavior.
     Into that world steps Joy Gresham, an American poet who has been
corresponding with Lewis.  Her letters hint of a special awareness into
his character.  And when she travels to England with her son, Joy
discovers a common bond with her favorite author--a bond that is
tested by friendship, love, and illness....
SHADOWLANDS is a delightfully unobtrusive film.
     Director Attenborough lets his actors act with an uncommon
sparsity of intrusive technique.  Given the very melodramatic nature of
the story, the film's plain-vanilla wrapper is almost staggering. And
yet, with hardly any overt manipulation from the filmmaker, the story
still makes quite an impact.
     (If nothing else, see it for the background music that stays in
the background! :-)
     Structurally, SHADOWLANDS weakens somewhere in the last third.
     The story wanders off-course for a bit as the characters grapple
with a host of "heavier" themes.  The saturating solemnity--coupled
with an already strained running time--results in a story that seems
to lose steam before galloping onward to its fine finish.
     Despite the weakened final act, SHADOWLANDS is still a very
rewarding experience.  Credit the combined efforts of a talented cast
and an excellent writer.
     Playing his second repressed-but-I-like-it character since THE
REMAINS OF THE DAY, Hopkins glides through with his role with magical
ease.  His part is much more expressive, though no more interesting,
than his last role of Stevens the Butler.  He'll be a front-runner for
Best Actor.
     Winger pulls off an equally fine performance--her first in quite
some time.  She walks and talks American, but her eyes flash with
unexpected intelligence.  She's the perfect foil for the stately actor.
     The supporting players are tremendous.  Standouts include John
Wood, Peter Firth, and Edward Hardwicke as "Jack's" droll brother
Warnie.
     Writer William Nicholson helps the actors along with line after
line of quotable dialogue.  Though his script is heavy on the meanings
of life, love, and loss, humor wins the day for most of the movie.  Some
of the better bits include Winger's first appearance in a British tea
room, a hilarious roundtable discussion on Christmas, and a classic bit
of Hopkins ordering room service.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Debra Winger, Edward Hardwicke, John Wood, 
           Michael Denison, Joseph Mazzello
Director:  Richard Attenborough
Producers:  Richard Attenborough and Brian Eastman
Screenplay:  William Nicholson based on his stage play
Music:  George Fenton
Released by Savoy Pictures
"What was [Joy] to me?  She was my daughter and my mother, my pupil and my 
teacher, my subject and my sovereign; and always, holding all these in 
solution, my trusty comrade, friend, shipmate, fellow-soldier.  My mistress; 
but at the same time all that any man friend (and I have good ones) has ever 
been to me.  Perhaps more.  If we had never fallen in love we should have 
none the less been always together, and created a scandal."
                - C. S. Lewis, A GRIEF OBSERVED
     One of England's most admired scholars and authors of the middle
of the twentieth century, C. S. Lewis is known for a wide variety of
literature, including a science fiction trilogy (OUT OF THE SILENT
PLANET, PERELANDRA, and THAT HIDEOUS STRENGTH), a fantasy saga (THE
CHRONICLES OF NARNIA), and a number of works as a Christian apologist,
most notably THE SCREWTAPE LETTERS, THE ALLEGORY OF LOVE, MERE
CHRISTIANITY, and A GRIEF OBSERVED.  Born in Northern Ireland in 1898,
Lewis lived almost his entire live in the British Isles, dying in
Oxford on November 22, 1963.
     Lewis, known as Jack to his friends (having never liked his given
name, Clive), met Joy Davidman Gresham in 1952.  The two had
corresponded for some time when Joy arrived in England to escape the
strain of a collapsing marriage.  Over the next several years, Lewis
and Joy met several times, developing and strengthening a friendship.
After her divorce from her husband, she and her two young sons came to
live in London, and when the government refused to renew Joy's
residency permit in 1956, Lewis married her "in name only", so she
could stay.  Early in 1957, Joy was diagnosed as having advanced
cancer, and while she lay in her hospital bed, Lewis confessed his
love, and the pair were subsequently married in a religious ceremony.
When Joy's cancer went into remission, she was allowed to accompany
Lewis home, where they spent two happy years as man and wife until her
death in 1959.
     Richard Attenborough's SHADOWLANDS stays remarkably close to the
true story of C.S. Lewis' relationship with Joy Gresham, taking only
occasional liberties with the material for reasons of pacing, not over-
sentimentalization.  Joy's two sons are "combined" into a single boy,
young Douglas (Joseph Mazzello).  The film ignores Lewis' professorship
at Cambridge, preferring instead to keep him at Oxford, and Joy's final
days are shown spent at Lewis' house rather than in a hospital.
     It's hard to imagine a better choice than Anthony Hopkins for the
lead role.  Chad Walsh, one of Lewis' close associates, described his
friend this way:  "In manner, he was straight to the point.  He was not
given to the sort of chitchat that simply fills in time, though in some
moods he could delight in a battle of verbal wit....  To him, an ideal
conversation was an intellectual fencing match, and may the man with
the best dialectic win.  The few times I crossed swords with him, he
won.  I also noticed that he seemed singularly uninterested in
introspection."  This is the C.S. Lewis that Hopkins brings to life;
the man that we follow from beginning to end in SHADOWLANDS.
     This performance also gives audiences a chance to see a gifted
actor run the gamut of emotions, from disbelieving joy to tortured
grief.  Hopkins never had the chance to express himself the way he does
here in either HOWARDS END or THE REMAINS OF THE DAY.  In many ways,
it's as difficult--if not more so--to give a genuine presentation of
heartfelt emotions than it is to convey their repression.  In
SHADOWLANDS, Hopkins gains this opportunity for release.  Sit back,
watch a master at work, and never once believe that you're not
observing the real C.S. Lewis.
     It's hard not to be eclipsed when playing opposite Hopkins, but
Debra Winger avoids being swallowed in his shadow.  She brings a gritty
worldliness to Joy Gresham that compliments perfectly Lewis'
intellectual spirituality.  Where he is reserved, she is frank and
honest, going so far to remark to a friend of Lewis', "Are you trying
to be offensive, or just merely stupid?"
     Best of all is the chemistry between Winger and Hopkins.  There is
no smouldering sensuality, but they seem very much like a real couple,
and there is no phase of their relationship that doesn't strike a true
chord.  Richard Attenborough knows how to keep the film's tone
appropriate to the subject matter, and the scenes flow together
naturally.
     The supporting cast, although with far less screen time than the
principals, is excellent.  Edward Hardwicke, best known to American
viewers as one of two Watsons in Grenada TV's SHERLOCK HOLMES
mysteries, gives a solid portrayal as Lewis' elder brother, Warnie.
Joseph Mazzello's Douglas introduces us to yet another impressive child
actor.
     As proven by GANDHI, Attenborough is a master of biographical
storytelling.  The failing of CHAPLIN--attempting to cover an entire
life in a two-plus hour film--is avoided here, making SHADOWLANDS an
immensely satisfying, and emotionally rich, motion picture.  This is a
rare tearjerker that rejects manipulation at every level, instead
relying upon narrative and character.
     The initial impression of SHADOWLANDS presented equally by its
creative team and title, may be one of somber austerity, but there is a
great deal of humor, energy, and life to be discovered beyond the
drizzly, often-dreary Oxford landscape.  The photography is beautiful,
but rarely do green vistas upstage the actors.
     To be captivated by SHADOWLANDS, it isn't necessary to have read
Lewis' writings.  The story is self-contained, and William Nicholson's
screenplay (adapted by the author from his own stage play) brings
characters and situations into bas-relief.  The tapestry of this film
successfully weaves together emotion, intellect, and narrative into a
pleasing, but never cloying, whole.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
It's nice to see a literary tradition taken over by a film community that
respects it.  The American literary tradition is usually based on how many
millions it sold, not anything in the past.
As is the case of the Ismael/Merchant group, this is another excellent
example of what loving an art, and an expression can do for any film. C. S.
Lewis has provided some beautiful stories that have been made into film.
None of them stand out so beautifully as this one, that pretty much explains
how a writer, and thinker, works.  The words have meanings.  The dialogue
speaks.  And the film floors you.
C. S. Lewis was a writer and lecturer at Oxford in England.  And he was able
to maintain the usual Oxford tradition for many years, until one day he
reads a letter about an American woman that had a dream about him.  And she
comes to England to visit him, and see what the old world has to offer.
Their relationship is nothing but a friendship, until she leaves back to
America. A respectful relationship that displays a few things that affect
Jack's methods of teaching.  The student that gets criticized
in one of his classes turns out to be a real writer in the midst of them.
He knows why he reads.  The other students do not.  All of a sudden, Jack's
life is the same way.  And the American woman has returned and drops in one
of his many lectures and sermons.  They meet again.  She is in a dilemma.
And to help her, they marry on paper, just so she will not be deported with
her child.  And one day, it is learned that she has cancer on her right leg.
Even though the new treatments of the day were rough, they managed to keep
her alive.  Jack comes to understand something about love, and people, that
before only felt like words.  They remarry, this time meaningfully.
And as she gets worst, it is Jack that is catching the worst of it, and has
a hard time talking to her son.
The film ends amidst a sheer attack of beauty, the kind that Jack loved to
discuss with his students, and wrote about many times.
There are many love stories in film. And there are many of them in novel
form that have yet to be filmed.  But this one, is one that had film all
over written in it, and stands out as a very special moment, for a writer
that had a magnanimous heart, even if he is not remembered as such.  And it
took the wildness of an American woman to bring out the humanity in him.
The appreciation of it all.  The shine that much of his work has.
The performances by everyone in this work are excellent.  And the beauty
with which they are delivered is something to behold, even if one thinks the
film is very talky, which I do.  For once, even the talk grabs you full
tilt.  And you feel the power of words, that became one of Lewis' best known
trademarks. The poetic description of a moment.  His wife was gone, but the
feelings he learned were not.
A must see film, with a outstanding styles by both Anthony Hopkins and Debra
Winger.  If you miss this one, you just do not know how  to appreciate
anyone who really has some loving to share.  Few of us, the lucky few.  C.
S. Lewis, is one of them.  The performances here, are the other part of the
equation.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Debra Winger, Edward Hardwicke,
           Joseph Mazzello.
Screenplay:  William Nicholson.
Director:  Richard Attenborough.
     If Anthony Hopkins and Debra Winger aren't careful, they're likely
to knock themselves out of contention for Academy Award nominations by
doing too much excellent work in one year.  Hopkins has received
much-deserved accolades and several critics' awards for his role in THE
REMAINS OF THE DAY, while Winger has been nominated for a Golden Globe
for her performance in A DANGEROUS WOMAN.  Now the two talented actors
are paired in Richard Attenborough's SHADOWLANDS, and the result is
stunning.  This moving, intelligent love story provides Winger with her
best role in a decade, and Hopkins with a chance to add the second best
male performance of 1993 to a resume which already includes the best.
     SHADOWLANDS, adapted by William Nicholson from his own fact-based
stage play, focuses on renowned English author and scholar C. S. Lewis
(Hopkins), known by his friends as Jack.  It is 1952, and Jack is
living an orderly, sheltered life as an Oxford don and sharing a house
with his brother Warnie (Edward Hardwicke).  Into this life walks Joy
Davidman Gresham (Winger), a brash American poet who has been
corresponding with Jack.  Her honesty immediately captures Jack's
fancy, and the two strike up a close friendship.  When Joy and her son
(Joseph Mazzello) relocate to London after Joy's divorce, that
friendship becomes a marriage of convenience, which in turn becomes a
chance for Jack to experience a love which his fears had always denied
him.
     This is the second time SHADOWLANDS has been committed to film
(the first in 1985 with Joss Ackland and Claire Bloom in the leads),
but this version is certain to become definitive.  Nicholson's play is
a winner, and he has written a sparkling adaptation.  The verbal
sparring between Lewis and Joy is wonderful, the best this year not
written by William Shakespeare.  It's the kind of love story Hollywood
just doesn't turn out all that often, a simple but affecting
examination of the ability of love to transform, and to make life's
pain bearable.  Lewis himself wrote about the experience in the
philosophical work A GRIEF OBSERVED, and that is the tone SHADOWLANDS
adopts:  introspective and restrained, yet still deeply felt.  The
score by John Fenton is non-intrusive, and some of the film's most
potent emotional moments are almost completely silent.  It's an
extremely deft piece of filmmaking by Attenborough, a director best
known for epics like GANDHI but equally skilled at personal moments.
     And it doesn't hurt that his two leads give Oscar-worthy
performances.  Anthony Hopkins' Jack Lewis begins much like his Stevens
the butler from REMAINS, a reserved and guarded man blind to his own
feelings; this time, however, he gets to undergo a real
transformation.  He laughs, he cries, he even finds himself completely
flustered by room service.  Once again Hopkins demonstrates the rare
ability to act with his entire body, turning an aborted wave to a
departing cab into a rich visual text.  However, SHADOWLANDS would have
come up short if Joy had not been equally well-handled, and Debra
Winger proves well up to the challenge.  Winger sparkles as she prods
and tests Jack, refusing to let him rest in his self-imposed cocoon.
There is strength, intelligence, savage wit and deep emotion in her
performance, and she somehow manages to steal scenes from one of the
finest screen actors in the world.  Winger has been seen far too
infrequently in recent years, but it would appear SHADOWLANDS is likely
to correct that oversight.
     SHADOWLANDS was well on its way to being a "10" before it lost
steam in the last half hour.  The third act drags on some, and a late
scene in which a glycerine teardrop dangles in physics-defying fashion
from Joseph Mazzello's eye pushed by cynic button.  Still, SHADOWLANDS
ranks among the best films of 1993, artistic and profoundly emotional.

Author
Ralph Benner
The greater astonishment in Richard Attenborough's SHADOWLANDS isn't that
Anthony Hopkins, as C.S. Lewis, the triple threat writer of highly admired
Christian apologetics, Christian-based science fiction and children's
fantasy, could deliver the kind of performance he does, but that he did.
As a recovering alcoholic, Hopkins has been able to support his growing
repertoire in the last several years because, like his characters in THE
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, HOWARDS END, the megabore REMAINS OF THE DAY, he's
been checking in his inner-most feelings at the door; he hasn't been
called upon by his sponsor to feel his way through his internal conflicts.
These meticulous examples of repression hint he's pent-up by the huge
reserves of boozeless energy, that it's inevitable he'd finally burst, as
he does so movingly here in SHAOWLANDS. This is a performance long coming
-- the kind of self-exposure of an actor as real person connecting with
the audience that often the bottle (or drug) keeps from us, the unmasking
American William Hurt has yet to achieve, even though he's been sober for
more than a few years. Ex-lushes and ex-addicts can go on to become better
actors, as we've seen with Dennis Hopper, Richard Dreyfuss, and now
Hopkins. (Or better songwriters and singers, as with Elton John and Bonnie
Raitt.) But sometimes they don't; there's that "edge" they lose, and Hurt,
at this writing, seems to be unable to regain it. Naturally, a boozing
actor has edge pouring into him, his potency based on his bottle's proof.
Whatever it was he was on during CHILDREN OF A LESSER GOD, and he was a
holy terror on the set, he got closer to the audience than he ever had,
and as something he probably isn't much of -- a romantic. (At core is that
he may have felt he needed the bottle to reach us.) On the wagon in
ROADCAST NEWS and THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST, he's lulled out, a member of the
"Living Dead." Maybe he's been hobbling as a sober actor, in much the same
way Richard Pryor did as comic, because they're looking back for the old,
sloshed verge that they can no longer find in themselves. With Hopper,
Dreyfuss, and assuredly with Hopkins, they've managed to overcome their
long, wasted agitation, they've gotten back on track by moving ahead in
their art -- surrendering to it as their fix. (In A.A., there's a rather
dramatic pretense in looking for a "higher power" to help overcome one's
addiction, but once he quietly finds it, and it's usually within one's
self, he discovers that he's replaced the bad addiction with a healthier
one.) Even in the plodding REMAINS OF THE DAY, Hopkins is on the high of
acting: in his adroit rigidity, you can see that he's flying. The problem
is that only he's enjoying himself, while many of us are languishing
through the one-note boredom. 
        This sort of monotony is nowhere to be found in Hopkins' C.S.
Lewis, a role which could easily become sanctimonious, sticky. Or worse,
it could have been a Malcolm Muggeridge bliss-out. Born in Belfast,
educated at Oxford University, accepted there as a fellow after graduating
with degrees in Greek and Latin literature, philosophy and ancient history
(even conquered the Greek language), Lewis was only 38 when his "Allegory
of Love: A Study in Medieval Tradition," about love as a central theme in
the literature of the Middle Ages, established his reputation within the
intelligentsia. His career as an author actually began a bit earlier, when
his two books of poetry, "Spirits in Bondage: A Cycle of Lyrics" and
"Dymer" were published under the pseudonym Clive Hamilton. It wasn't until
Lewis turned Christian science fiction writer, with the classic "Out of
the Silent Planet" in 1938, that he reached a larger audience: eventually
to be known as the Perelandra Trilogy ("Perelandra" and "That Hideous
Strength" the other two), the initial story is about a planet -- our own
-- that is silent because it has fallen from the grace of God. Critics
called it "a fusion of science fiction, fantasy and allegory.
Unprecedented." Early into Lewis's youthful rebellion, he was a practicing
non-believer, brought on by the premature death of his mother from cancer
when he was a little boy, and reinforced by an atheist Scottish
schoolmaster and Lewis's own formidable education at Oxford. While details
of his conversion are discussed in his poignantly titled autobiography
"Surprised by Joy," the most important also seems the most simple: through
logic and reasoning, he believed common sense dictated a fourth dimension
-- God. It made sense to believe in the comfort of hope that something or
someone awaits us after death than conceding to the sterility, the
nothingness of disbelief. By 1944, in "Beyond Personality," he was penning
embracing defenses of Christianity -- to his own surprise, admired by
agnostics and atheists alike -- and he became so popular that the BBC gave
him time to lecture over the radio during World War II. Two more
collections of his essays followed: "Miracles" in 1947, and "Mere
Christianity" in 1952. Considered by some his best novel, 1942's "The
Screwtape Letters" is a sardonic tale set in W.W.II about a devil -- an
Undersecretary of the Infernal Lowerarchy -- teaching his nephew the ways
and means of temptation. Lewis wasn't particularly happy that he became
famous after the book's publication because he thought some of his other
books were more worthy. But the public was much impressed by his fluency
with the language and, most of all, his unbounded imagination -- given
encouragement by the Inklings, a group he formed with J.R.R. Tolkien who
would gather to read manuscripts in progress. To Lewis's chagrin, only
"Allegory" had the captivating, if not show-off effects of creative word
play, while his other scholarly, syncretic nonfiction works, of which
there are close to three dozen, were staid, formal, lacking no shortage of
his customary erudition but stylish mode. His most loved and widely-read
work is of course his series of children's books known as The Chronicles
of Narnia, the first entitled "The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe," and
printed in 1950, and six more that followed at yearly intervals. (The
attics so prevalent in these writings come right out of Lewis's and his
brother's childhood. And regardless of their long friendship, and his own
devotion to Roman Catholicism, Tolkien found the "Narnia" books too
simple, too Christian.) Throughout these years, Lewis remained single, and
with less than a handful of encounters that may or may not have resulted
in sexual activity, voluntarily celibate. He would have most likely
remained a bachelor had not one day an American poet-fan asked to meet
him. Lewis died from a heart attack (after a long bout with heart and
kidney problems) in 1963, on the very day John Kennedy was assassinated
and Aldous Huxley succumbed to a drug overdose.
        Despite the briefest of ipse dixit  -- "Pain is God's megaphone to
rouse a deaf world" -- that suggests screenwriter William Nicholson is
deficient in selecting the more appealing of Lewis' championship of
Christianity, Hopkins gets us to respond to him quickly: we admire that in
his mild case of fear of the sensuous, he manages to wear his slight
superiority, exasperation and wariness not on his sleeve but his
Oxford-Cambridge robe, or more fitting, his vestment. This difference is
integral to our acceptance: while he's fully capable of slicing away his
opponents' arguments or snobbishness or his students' indifference,
because this Lewis carries the aura of the presumptively profound, his own
life looks to be filled with tentativeness, not sure he can commit himself
to anything or anyone other than Godly verbiage. And not exactly sure why:
he recognizes, perhaps even regrets, that he's explored the dogma of
Christianity more fervently than living his own life. This is set up for
us as Hopkins' Lewis is awaiting, anxiously, to meet this fan, played by
Debra Winger: when she calls out his name, the look on his face is
priceless; it's not just Winger's lack of protocol that gets his
butterflies a'flying. Others have written that this is what makes Hopkins'
performance something like a mirror image of his butler in REMAINS. Maybe,
if one believes there's something meaningful underneath the butler's
devotion to servitude. Accidental, REMAINS is like a George Bush movie, in
which a servant can't empathize with or respond to the social fabric,
while SHAOWLANDS, minus the sexsations, is Clintonesque in its healthy
male largesse.
        More in HOWARDS ENDS than in REMAINS and SHAWDOWLANDS, Hopkins
draws forth the late Richard Burton, his fellow and deeply missed
Welshman. (Burton was born in Pontrhydfen, Hopkins in Port Talbot.) In
HOWARDS ENDS and SHADOWLANDS he at times unerringly sounds like Burton,
and there's a fraction of physical resemblance, though not quite as
dislocating as how Hopkins can sometimes bring to mind William F. Buckley.
(Should please Buckley, in that, when he would have to come to frequent
bailout of his own and his friends' often inexcusable public behavior --
like his against Gore Vidal, like Patricia Bozell's assault on feminist
Ti-Grace Atkinson at Catholic University in 1970 -- he'd cite Lewis as
defense: "The higher the stakes, the greater the temptation to lose your
temper.") There's talk that Hopkins is the long-sought heir to the throne
Olivier built, the one Burton might have ascended to had he not given in
to the bottle and his ruinous relationship with Elizabeth Taylor. Such
high glory excludes Sir John Gielgud, who's no slouch. Since THE SILENCE
OF THE LAMBS, there's evidence that Hopkins is the heir-apparent. As
Hannibal Lecter, Hopkins is in but a handful of scenes, yet he dominates
the movie. His star performance is a model of minimalist actions but he
achieves near-maximum effects: he chills the hell out of you while giving
you the movie's the best laughs. Though LAMBS isn't much more than a
supremely efficient TIGHTROPE from a woman's point of view, we're always
thinking about Hopkins: when he too cleverly escapes, we just know that
he's going to pop up for some munchies. When the climax fades, all we can
think about it is Where's Hannibal? Then Jodie Foster gets a call, and,
for some sick reason best left unexplored, we're happy to hear from him.
Hopkins tells her to forget tracing the call, he won't be on the line long
enough because "I'm having an old friend for dinner." Serenely horrifying
as it is, it's nevertheless a spectacular moment of recovery: when was the
last time we left a theatre doubled up over a cannibal? It's highly
immoral, it unhinges our sensibilities, at least what's left of them these
days.
        Debra Winger, well, she's dying -- again. That would otherwise be
enough to keep away from SHADOWLANDS. Early on, with an on again/off again
urban New York accent, Winger's a bit of Streisand doing a lettered OWL
AND THE PUSSYCAT, and Nicholson's screenplay provides her with some snap
and crackle with Hopkins and another don but nothing quite pops. She's not
likable physically at first, either: she has a sometimes near-Eleanor
Roosevelt-Oxford-Shoes clop and an unnecessarily ugly, color-blind
wardrobe, and if there's a straightforward charm somewhere that finds
certain critics' weak spots, these two "attributes" come close to killing
it, and, in what has become trademark, she seems to think it's okay for us
to watch her trying to find her way into the character. I admit I'm rarely
in Winger's corner, having always been cool towards her because I can't
get passed the flashing signals that warn "Don't bother me." In AN OFFICER
AND A GENTLEMAN, she came close to turning into both Elizabeth Ashley and
Lesley Ann Warren. Only the crazed would say anything about the childish
URBAN COWBOY. She was most plainly annoyed during TERMS OF ENDURANCE and
as consequence plagued herself with misplaced glances and gestures and
only once does her very angry-busy work succeed -- her "Oh, brother!"
contempt for the wireless phone someone hands her. (Who could play those
New York restaurant and in-your-dying-honor party scenes?) She looked at
the beginning of BLACK WIDOW the way she should have at the end of TERMS,
and she's of fair interest in MIKE'S MURDER, a small movie somewhat like
JACK'S BACK that went nowhere because the releasing company hadn't any
faith in it. I still can't figure out EVERYBODY WINS: is the script as
badly written as it exposes itself to be on screen? Winger's an
intelligent enough of an actress to implicitly play the late Jane Bowles
in THE SHELTERING SKY had director Bernardo Bertolucci let her. (Instead
she had to play Florence Nightingale to a male Camille.) Winger manages
more class in her dying moments here in SHADOWLANDS than in TERMS. Yet,
something more is the matter with Winger's portrayal, and it's the
scripter's fault: imagine an intelligent peoples' Fannie Hurst novel about
a fan who, with a little boy in tow, hangers to and eventually does meet a
famous author, even becomes enough of a friend that the author agrees,
when needed, to a marriage of convenience. As if to make up for her
invasion of his domain, and for the fact that she's soon to die of S.C.
(sudden cancer), she leaves him with an unwanted child, whose father is
conveniently a cold-hearted drunk. (Not seen, but perhaps the shadow of
Vera Miles in BACK STREET?) On screen, it's rather the stuff of a Purex
Afternoon Special but in reverse: it's not she who is being tested, but
he, and his faith. It unwittingly becomes Harold Kushner's "When Bad
Things Happen to Good People." 
        What hurts Winger's characterization of Joy Davidman Gresham is
that it's shaped out of insignificance -- there just isn't much there to
make her more than a device to loosen Hopkins' buttoned-up Lewis. For
example, maybe the audience would have wanted to know that Joy, although
only a minor American poet (she won the Yale Series of Younger Poets
contest for a book of verse), was married to American novelist William
Gresham, who wrote NIGHTMARE ALLEY, which was later turned into the 1947
movie starring, in possibly their most entertaining performances, Tyrone
Power and Joan Blondell. (James Agee wrote in Time: "NIGHTMARE ALLEY is a
hair-rasing carnival side show. At the dead end of the alley lives the
Geek, as is-he-man-or-is-he-beast carnival exhibit that tears up and eats
live chickens. He is able to stomach his job because he is in the last
stages of dipsomania. [Power as] Stan is one of the most wholehearted and
resourceful heels yet to leave a print of the U.S. screen. He climbs a
ladder made of ladies.") And why the audience is given only one child when
in fact Joy dragged both her sons to England is not explained -- though
maybe to lessen the audience's taxation fatigue. Reviewers and feature
writers are quoting one son, Douglas Gresham, that though SHAOWLANDS is
"fiction and makes no pretenses about that, the emotional values are
absolutely spot-on accurate." Actually, the movie's not much of a fiction:
Joy, a Jewess who converted to Christianity, a 30s Communist turned 40s
staunch conservative, did travel to meet her idol, the man most
responsible for her conversion. Joy was indeed running away from a bad
marriage to Gresham, who was a womanizer and alcoholic. And she did become
ill -- originally and inaccurately diagnosed with acute rheumatism. Those
who knew both Lewis and Joy saw that a relationship beyond correspondence
and before marriage was already building, though painfully slowly. When
England's Home Office did not want to renew her permit of residence,
Lewis, perhaps more out of genuine charity as opposed to budding love,
agreed to a civil marriage in order to automatically grant citizenship to
her and her two sons. Joy's illness turned grave shortly afterwards, and
the bonds between her and Lewis strengthened considerably, to the point
that Lewis decided to offer his hand in a religious ceremony of marriage.
Abundant love, positive thinking and radiation provided Joy with a
remission, and for a few years the marriage had a "honeymoon" flavor to
it. Unfortunately, the movie doesn't give us a real extent of time. What
we get are transitions: first, a fall, second, radiation, third,
wheelchairs, and fourth, stretchers, putting the audience into a
get-ready-with-the-hankies mood. It's gonna be LOVE STORY -- Oxford Style.
There's also an inconsideration of Joy's kiss off -- when the tears come,
all eyes are on Hopkins. However, when he and little Douglas (played by
Joseph Mazzello, who recalls Nicholas Gledhill in CAREFUL, HE MIGHT HEAR
YOU) embrace and release their grief, memories of our own similar
experiences flood in. These scenes takes us where Lewis would never quite
allow us to go; instead, as a gentleman of culture, propriety and
unimpeachable decency, when he did grant a peek into his private anguish,
in "A Grief Observed," he could only do it under a pseudonym: N.W. Clerk.
        Richard Attenborough is a dependable craftsman as movie maker and
he's dignified, making sure we maintain our own dignity as well. I wish
that he were more like Fred Zinnemann, the master who recognized a good
story when he read one and knew how to make it into a better movie.
Referring not only to FROM HERE TO ETERNITY but also to THE NUN'S STORY,
in which Audrey Hepburn's a triumph, to the almost forgotten THE
SUNDOWNERS, with Robert Mitchum and Deborah Kerr doing what Mitchum
fantasized about doing in HEAVEN KNOWS, MR. ALLISON and to the
smooth-as-glass THE DAY OF THE JACKAL. Attenborough could use Zinnemann's
talents to plug his stories' gaps and holes; for example, in GANDHI he
needed an audience decoder -- a Lord Mountbatten, say -- to help sort out
all the complex political actions. (Luckily he had Ben Kingsley as his one
asset, and Oh, what an asset. We watch in complete amazement this
wafer-thin bronze elf and believe in the magic he wields against a very
traditional piece of epic movie-making; he's the biggest little exhibition
of the 80s.) Attenborough's intentions in CRY FREEDOM seem to be that he's
against apartheid, yet the movie isn't so much about blacks attempting to
free themselves from the oppressive South African white rule as it is
about a South African white fleeing from what he might have inadvertently
helped sanction. (Though it was fun to listen to Kevin Kline fake the
Britishspeak.) Recently, I think in an interview with Larry King, Barbra
Streisand said she was offered SHADOWLANDS to direct, and how one regrets
she didn't: like Zinnemann, she'd have insisted on fleshing out details
and make steady the wobbling of Winger's Joy, as well as discipline the
actress's needless, perpetual choler, misplaced here but used terrifically
for TNT's concert version of THE WIZARD OF OZ, in which she plays the
wicked witch. SHADOWLANDS might have been "The Fan Who Would Be Joy" -- if
only Winger had shown any.

Author
Alex Lopez-Ortiz
Starring: Anthony Hopkins, Debra Winger, Edward Hardwicke, John Wood,
          Michael Denison, Joseph Mazzello
Screenplay: William Nicholson
Director: Richard Attenborough
     Some people might construe SHADOWLANDS to be a movie about
C. S. Lewis, the Christian writer. Nothing further from the truth.
SHADOWLANDS is the portrayal of an intense romance between a troubled
man (C. S. Lewis, British writer and philosopher) and a caring woman
(Joy Davidman Gresham, American poet).
     Why then, the reader may ask, use historical names and places if
the film is not to dwell on the historic figures?
     Because C. S. Lewis, being the powerful writer that he was, left a
written trail of his feelings and tribulations during the seven year
period for which he knew Joy.
     In other words, the movie is a real story and it feels very much
so.  That is the strength of the film. One feels moved by both the joy
and the pain endured by Jack (as C. S. Lewis was known to his family and
friends) and Joy. There is genuine tragedy and happiness in this film.
     The script, superbly recreates and quotes C.S. Lewis, and it is
through beautiful dialogue and prose that we learn of the feelings
between the two of them. Brief references to Lewis's work and credo let
the viewer share on C.S. Lewis's perspective on the events at hand.
     Debra Winger and Anthony Hopkins perform flawlessly, and the rest
of the cast, with their sober performances let "Jack" and "Joy" shine
in the screen as they should.
     Photography, while unobtrusive, is no less refined than the rest
of the movie. Attenborough (and his director of photography) brings
about a sequence of gray/yellowish tones that accurately portray the
landscape and moods of Old Blighty and especially the post-war period.
     SHADOWLANDS is, in a nutshell, an experience not to be forgotten.
     I could say more, but I would only be repeating commendations
already made in this newsgroup by Berardinelli (SHADOWLANDS.2331) and
Renshaw (SHADOWLANDS.2332).
