Title
Review for Heathers (1989)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian L. Johnson
102 min., R, Comedy, 1989
Director: Michael Lehmann
Cast: Christian Slater, Winona Ryder, Shannen Doherty, Lisanne Falk,
      Kim Walker, Penelope Milford, Glenn Shadix, Lance Fenton,
      Renee Estevez
     At high school Winona Ryder is part of a clique composed of three
other girls all with the first name Heather (Shannen Doherty, Lisanne
Falk, and Kim Walker).  Ryder meets weird unpopular Christian Slater in
the school cafeteria.  He is tired of the three Heathers running the
lives of everybody at school so he proposes that he and Ryder kill them
off  in a way that looks like suicide.  They start with Walker.  After
they kill her, she becomes more of an idol than before and Ryder starts
to have second thoughts about Slater's crazy idea.
     HEATHERS is a very good black comedy about high school life, for
those who haven't forgotten high school or for those who are still in
high school.  I think to really get the meaning behind the film you must
be in high school, or have already gone through high school.  Younger
viewers, I feel, will not get the enjoyment from the film.  The use of
suicide may offend some viewers, so if this is a touchy subject with you
this may not be the film for you to see.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give HEATHERS a four.   HEATHERS is rated R for explicit language,
violence, and adult situations.
     HEATHERS covers the hard subject of cliques, not just in high
school but every where.  At least in my high school, the cliques run the
school, and someone from one clique usually doesn't associate with
someone from another clique, which is not the way it should be.
     The main problem, I feel, with HEATHERS is that the film gets
ecxessively unrealistic.  Christian Slater over does his role just a
little bit.  He seems to be trying to impersonate Jack Nicholson and he
isn't the best at it.  Slater would have done a better job if he put a
little bit more of himself into the role.   Winona Ryder's character is
not the brightest person.  She just goes into Slater's crazy ideas
without thinking of what might happen.  Ryder puts in a great
performance and I feel does a better job than Slater.  Shannen Doherty
(of "Beverly Hills, 90210"), Lisanne Falk, and Kim Walker all do a great
job as the three Heathers.
     The film is rather well written, but as I mentioned earlier, the
film does get rather unrealistic in some places.  The part that I think
was the biggest rip-off was the ending.  I felt it was just slapped in
with no consideration for those watching the film.  This I feel really
hurt the film, and I wish that somebody had tried harder to make the
ending better.

Author
Shane Burridge
You'd think that a comedy about a topic as touchy as teenage suicide
would be box-office poison, but check this one out anyway. HEATHERS is
a cool, sharp, satire about a group of high school seniors who make
the discovery that you can be more popular dead than alive.  Winona
Ryder is Veronica,a satellite member of an exclusive tripartite
sorority in an Ohio high school.  Enter Christian Slater (in Jack
Nicholson mode) as JD - Jason Dean, a rebel without a conscience - who
sees more potential in Ryder than just another member of a school
clique.  The confusing relationship between Veronica and JD is what
sets events in motion: although Ryder is appalled at what he does, she
can't fully extricate herself from his schemes.  And what are those
schemes exactly?  Even JD doesn't seem to know ("Chaos is great!" he
exhorts) and his phony family life offers only the most rudimentary of
clues.  But the universe of HEATHERS is too out of kilter for us to
have any concerns about Slater's character - it's easier to simply
accept him as an agent of change who has breezed into town.  JD knows
he is fatally flawed (which probably explains his affinity with
Captain Ahab), involved as he is with an anarchic quest which no-one
apart from Veronica seems capable of understanding.  It comes as no
surprise that his preoccupation with murder and suicide (which are
both the same thing to him) escalates into a self-destructive climax.
Potentially offensive subject matter is defused right from film's
opening - if you're willing to believe that three girls all
coincidentally named Heather are running their campus then you'll go
along with the notion of death as just another cruel high school
prank.  The cast play every scene straight, regardless of its absurd
or unnerving context - but it's also this neutrality (i.e. neither
truly scary or laugh-out-loud funny) that leaves me wanting somehow. 
On the plus side it does have several quotable lines and a supporting
role by Shannen Doherty (who would reprise her Bad Girl on Campus role
in TV's BEVERLY HILLS 90210) as the second 'Heather' in the pecking
order.  Film's big fan following is a little disquieting when you
realize that two girls were poisoned by their fourteen year old 'best
friend' who was copying the murders she'd seen on screen.  It makes me
wonder how prominently the revenge element of the film features as an
attraction for its fans.

Author
Randy Parker
        What can you say about a movie that satirizes teen suicide?  Well,
you'd probably call it sick, demented, and perverse.  And while the black
comedy HEATHERS is all these things, it's also outrageously funny and
refreshingly off-beat.
        HEATHERS stars Winona Ryder as Veronica, and as the film begins,
she's in basic training ... training to be arrogant, bitchy, and most
important, popular.  Her mentor is Heather, or make that the Heathers as
there are three of them: Heather 1, Heather 2, and Heather 3.  These
preppie Diet Coke heads are the social elite of Westerburg High; they enjoy
the ultimate social power of deciding who is in and who is out.
        Even though Veronica aspires to be popular, her brains,
sensitivity, and conscience set her apart from the Heathers, her cold and
heartless mentors.  And just when her admiration for the Heathers turns to
contempt, Veronica meets J.D., played by Christian Slater who gives a
delicious Jack Nicholsonesque performance as the mysterious, rebellious,
and demented new kid at school.  J.D. has the alarming capacity for turning
Veronica's angry thoughts and urges into reality.  For instance, Veronica
wishes in her diary that Heather number one would die, and the next thing
she knows she and J.D. have killed her.  To escape criminal charges, they
disguise Heather's death as a suicide.  And much to Veronica's surprise,
suicide becomes the latest rage at Westerburg high.
        HEATHERS definitely is not for everyone.  Some viewers inevitably
will be offended by its subject matter.  But if you're looking for a dark
comedy with a biting edge to it, then HEATHERS has a lot to offer.  Daniel
Waters' script is full of hysterical dialogue and great one-liners, and the
teenage slang he creates for the movie is a riot.  The performances are
inspired across the board, especially those by Ryder and Slater who develop
sizzling chemistry in the lead roles.
        My only problem with HEATHERS (and it's a big one) is that after an
hour of great satire, the movie sells out and turns into a full-blown
thriller.  Although the climax is exciting, it's too violent and somber in
comparison to the rest of the film.  After sustaining perfect pitch for
over an hour, HEATHERS finishes on the wrong note.  Nevertheless, HEATHERS
deserves applause for taking risks and daring to be different.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     I've been depressed and overworked lately, and looked for a comedy
at the video store.  Even though it was about teenagers and suicide (not
two of my favorite subjects) I rented HEATHERS.  It was a very erratic
black comedy, but worthwhile, particularly if you like Winona Ryder or
Christian Slater, or if you hated high school.
     Parts of HEATHERS are very dreamlike, and these parts are intercut
by fairly accurate portrayals of the chaos of high school.  Ryder plays
the confident of a group of vacuous high school girls, all of whom are
named Heather.  Ryder is fascinated by Slater, the bad, new kid at
school, and son of a man who blows up buildings for a living.  After one
of the Heathers embarrasses her, Ryder decides to take her revenge.  But
the revenge turns out to be a murder, and it's "rearranged" to look like
a suicide.
     The movie is a little ragged on the edges, but its portrayal of the
mind set of high school students and teachers is right on the money.
And both Ryder and Slater turn in terrific performances.

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Seen at the Seattle International Film Festival]
Director: Michael Lehmann
Screenwriter: Daniel Waters
Cast: Winona Ryder, Christian Slater, Shannen Doherty, Lisanne Falk,
      Kim Walder, Penelope Milford
     While not running on all eight cylinders, HEATHERS crosses the finish line
with 6.8 of them going full blast, and is one of the funniest films of the year
-- which should be a good enough recommendation for most folks, methinks.  It
has generally been labeled a "black comedy" (though not nearly as dark as I had
been led to believe from local reviewers, who were apparently afraid that high
school murders treated comically were more likely to offend than Freddy's
latest outing.  Go figure...), and seems to be mentioned in the same breath
with RIVER'S EDGE, probably because both deal with high school kids and murder.
That's about where the similarities end, though; HEATHERS is also a witty, acid
send-up of high school conventions in the upper-middle-classes, with more
on-target barbs than I can remember seeing in every Brat Pack film John Hughes
has done in the last eight years.  It's satire -- mean-spirited, nasty, cunning
satire, which is of course the best and most honest kind.
     Winona Ryder plays a high school student who, when the film opens, is a
member of Westerburg High School's most exclusive clique of girls.  She's
getting uncomfortable, though, with the mental and social cruelty that her
peers are dishing out every day, and when a handsome, sardonic outsider
(Christian Slater) starts up with her, she thinks this might be her way out of
the clique.  It is, but *not* in the way she thinks...
     The film's strong points rest between the outrageousness of the plot
(murders assumed to be suicides in the school population, and the effects on
the students, parents and the community) and the wonderful dialogue and
mannerisms of the characters.  Yeah, I've been out of high school for over a
decade (thankGodthankGodthankGod), but the cadence and attitudes are right on
the money.  ("Fuck me gently with a chain saw -- do I look like Mother
Theresa?")  It's just one good line after another...  The school's reaction to
the "mass suicides" is hysterical; this makes FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH look
like THE WONDER YEARS.  Lehmann and Waters treat Westerburg High like an
anthropology case study, detailing dominance, relationships, sex and group
migration.  The report based on the study, however, has more of O'Donoghue
(Michael) than Darwin in it.
     There are some problems, though; most of them center around the half hour
before the conclusion, where the film almost becomes a pedestrian thriller.
The humor and satire are temporarily muted, and we have the usual
stalking/stalked chase scene, albeit taking place underneath a school assembly.
It's as if the creators weren't sure what to do before the climax (where they
return to the satiric tone of the rest of the film, thankfully), and filled it
in with a standard suspense sequence with some humorous touches.
     The whole cast is good, adding to the characterizations of an excellent
script with expansive performances.  Christian Slater seems to have decided to
imitate Jack Nicholson at 18 (he's pretty good, at that), and it gets
distracting at times; but it limits his performance without hurting it.
(Daniel Waters, the writer, was at the performance, and mentioned that the
psuedo-Nicholson tone was Slater's idea; Water's disliked it, but it appealed
to Lehmann, so it stayed.)  Ryder is the standout, in a performance that is
three-dimensional, yet slips right in with the film's satiric tone.  Other
satiric comedies at the festival either tried mixing satire with drama and
failed (YEN FAMILY, CHORUS OF DISAPPROVAL) or stuck to just satire (SCENES FROM
THE CLASS STRUGGLE IN BEVERLY HILLS); HEATHERS attempted and, for the most
part, succeeded with both, making it one of the strongest comic films of the
year.
[Side note:  I wished I'd taped Water's comments, as he is about as amusing as
you would expect from the writer of HEATHERS.  His description of almost
selling the project to Disney was worth the price of admission.]
