Title
Review for One Eyed King (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Norm Schrager
Making your first feature film ain't easy.  Assemble a decent, if not,
strong cast, as writer/director Robert Moresco has done with One Eyed
King, and you're already ahead of the game.  But rehash old plot lines,
tired dialogue, and standard clichés, and a well-intentioned effort such
as this one could jeopardize your chance at a second feature film.
How many more movies do we need about a rough neighborhood full of
lifelong friends hopelessly turned to crime or worse?  The enormous
catalog of such movies might dissuade a filmmaker from making yet
another, but here we have it.  Again.  Five Irish kids in NYC's Hell's
Kitchen make an overemotional pact over some stolen rings on an
anonymous rooftop.  With teary music.  And slow motion.  In the film's
first scene.
The kids grow up to be fairly worthless adults, unable or unwilling to
make their way out of the heat of the Kitchen.  Leading the clueless
pack is William Baldwin as a good-hearted guy who watches out for his
buddies and is in tight with local mob head Armand Assante.  I'd like to
say that his character gets involved over his head in some sort of blah,
blah, blah, but all we seem to get are little tastes of possible plot
points.  He's concerned about buddy Jason Gedrick's heroin abuse.  He
sticks up for Jim Breuer after he impregnates Baldwin's character's
sister.  He looks into who might be pushing the most moronic-looking
counterfeit cash ever made (a genuinely funny touch).  But none of this
ever really amounts to anything. 
It seems that Moresco's greater concern is to provide that intangible
"slice of life", that flavor of the neighborhood that everyone's been
trying to evoke since Scorsese's early work.  So, we get the drunk guys,
hugging and singing together at the local bar, to prove to us that they
really love each other. (Do people actually do this!?)  We get a lot of
tough street talk -- usually mumbled for effect -- and a whole lot of
the F-word, whether it sounds like it fits or not. 
We also get a handful of good actors in small roles that seem to lack
purpose.  Bruno Kirby, Chazz Palminteri, you know, guys you've seen in
movies just like this one before.  Assante is intelligent casting as the
man that everyone fears, and Baldwin's performance is adequate, but most
of the rest of the cast jump into the tough guy persona so thoroughly
that it's almost funny.
Moresco, a theater guy and sometimes TV writer (including the series
Falcone), obviously labored over this one as anyone might a first child,
but the content is probably too personal.  As a result, the movie's
style is heavy-handed, in need of a considerable amount of toning down. 
Nearly every time an action by the grown up gang recalls something they
did as kids, Moresco reminds us -- boy does he remind us.  With slow
dissolves to the earlier scene, running in slow motion, complete with
dialogue from the present, just in case we don't comprehend the link to
the past.
Moresco needs to either trust his audience's intelligence, or have more
faith in his own presentation rather than beat us over the head with
it.  His next project should have a little more personal distance, and a
lot more subtlety.  If he actually gets that chance.
Reviewed as part of our 2001 Boston Film Festival coverage (feature
story coming soon).
Director: Robert Moresco
Producer: Peter Crane, Linda Curran Wexelblatt, Billy Deitrich, Luciano
Lisi, Christine Kavanagh, Julius R. Nasso
Writer: Robert Moresco
Starring: Armand Assante, William Baldwin, Jim Breuer, Connie Britton,
Jason Gedrick, Josh Hopkins, Bruno Kirby, Dash Mihok, Chazz Palminteri,
Leo Rossi, Ricky Aiello, Pat McGuinness, Amanda Moresco, Harry O'Reilly
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
