Title
Review for Stop Making Sense (1984)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: Stop Making Sense
[not rated]
Starring The Talking Heads, live in concert
David Byrne, Chris Franz, Jerry Harrison and Tina Weymouth
Filmed at the Pantages Theater, Hollywood CA
Directed by Jonathan Demme
website: http://www.palmpictures.com
IN SHORT: The Return of the Big White Suit
CrankyCritic.com doesn't put the dollar rating on reissues. This being
the 15th anniversary of the release of the Talking Heads concert film,
Stop Making Sense is reason enough to re-release the old chestnut, with
an upgraded sound mix and video remastering to CD, DVD and other such
modern initialed tech like that. Which means I get to wax nostalgic and
talk about my days in the music biz and, more important, I get to tell
you about Stuff I Like.
The hard part about reviewing concert films is twofold: It isn't fair to
the performing artist if the reviewer couldn't care less about the
music. It isn't fair to the reader if the reviewer is an unabashed fan,
and doesn't tell you. So, in the interest of full disclosure: Cranky
likes the Talking Heads. He played their first records on college radio.
He produced an appearance on the King Biscuit Flower Hour syndicated
concert series, and met both David Byrne and Jerry Harrison of the band,
back around 1980. If I wanted to wade through the pre-computer
paperwork, there is probably a review of Stop Making Sense from its
first release back in 1984. I never saw the band live.
Raving fan? No, not at all. The Talking Heads were an acquired taste.
TH'77 and Fear of Music were difficult albums to listen to, because the
Talking Heads didn't sound like anything else that had been pressed in
black in the Seventies. When you're young, it only takes a song or two
to make you go back to an album looking for more gems, and tracks like
"Psycho Killer" and "I, Zimbra" (or "Don't Worry About The Government"
and "Life During Wartime") were better than good starting points. When
the band as a whole discovered funk in the early 80's, collaborating
with Parliament's Bernie Worrell among others, the change seemed so
radical it threw us off. Now, we'd call them "ahead of their time".
Truth is, the band was always ahead of the great curve. But not so far
ahead of the fans that we couldn't keep up.
Stop Making Sense captures the Talking Heads at the peak of their
powers. Live, the Heads took their music so far beyond anything captured
on vinyl that the only disappointment was that the original soundtrack
delivered only half the film's music. Cranky is informed that the
re-release of the CD contains the whole megilla. If you've sprung for a
DVD player, that's on its way too. Let's talk about the film . . .
The first thing that comes to your mind, if you're old enough to
remember the original theatrical run, is the Big White Suit that David
Byrne sports in the show. Odds are you, like Cranky, confused the
numerous parodies of the suit (on whatever teevee comedy shows were in
vogue at the time) with reality. The suit doesn't show up until close to
the end of the show, and it wasn't as huge as I remember. But that isn't
the wildest thing about Stop Making Sense, version 1999.
The wildest thing was sitting in a packed, private screening room with
40 or so other reviewers, watching all but one of 'em try not to move at
all while the concert unspooled. Byrne, who spoke briefly before the
screening, said he was surprised when the remix was shown at the San
Francisco Film Festival earlier in the year because the audience got up
and started dancing. Cranky doesn't understand his surprise. Even if you
only roll the soundtrack, regardless of whether you like the studio
albums or not, it's hard to keep in your seat. The Stop Making Sense
soundtrack album is a kickass groove start to finish. In its perfect
creation of an audience POV, you don't have to be close to the screen to
get the feeling that you're at a Talking Heads concert. The need to
dance will follow naturally.
As a snapshot of where the band was in December 1983, Jonathan Demme's
film stands as what some rock critics have labeled it, one of the best
rock concert films of all time. It is, as with Martin Scorsese's The
Last Waltz, one of few concerts that were designed to be photographed on
film. Unlike Waltz, Stop Making Sense confines itself strictly to the
performance stage. From David Byrne's entrance onto the bare stage, with
acoustic guitar and boom box in hand, for a solo performance of Psycho
Killer through the song by song assemblage of stage set and performers
-- Tina Weymouth (bass) joins Byrne to duet on Heaven as black clad
stagehands wheel out instrument platforms for Chris Franz (drums) and
Jerry Harrison (guitars and keyboards) -- and touring bandmembers stroll
out to their positions, Stop Making Sense takes on all the qualities of
a theatrical presentation.
Even better, until an audience shot at the very end, you never see a
film camera in any shot, a practice in other films that always bothered
me. The actual cinematography, by Jordan Cronenweth (and restored by his
son Jeff), is remarkable because is uses the actual stage lighting of
the show, rather than bringing all the f-stop levels up to the norm by
pouring light out of fills. Byrne and Demme headed back into the mixing
room and brought their work up to 1999 technical specs. Now with full
surround sound, the audience reaction wraps around you as does the
music, like a loving mother.
Happy happy joy time. Play it all night long.
[If there's no Laserdisc release, Cranky may have to shell out for DVD
]
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Matthew K. Gold
STOP MAKING SENSE, the 1984 Talking Heads movie, is a masterpiece of
the concert film genre. Conceived for the stage by lead singer David
Byrne, and directed by Jonathan Demme (Silence of the Lambs,
Philadelphia, and Swimming to Cambodia), the film is a visionary
presentation of stage performance, sound, rhythm, choreography, and
soul.
The film begins when Byrne, wearing a gray suit and impeccably white
sneakers, walks onto the barren center stage and sets a boom box down
on the floor. "Hi. I've got a tape I want to play," he says, as if the
crowd consisted of three friends sitting on his living room couch. As
the opening beats of "Psycho Killer" emerge from the tape player, the
camera slowly rises from Byrne's tapping sneaker to his guitar, and
then up to his head, which bobs hypnotically to the music.
STOP MAKING SENSE contains well-edited footage from three concerts. It
eschews elaborate sets, long-winded speeches, and special effects, and
relies instead on Demme's minimalist camera skills and the band's
considerable performing capabilities. Three of the band
members--Byrne, bassist Tina Weymouth, and drummer Chris
Frantz--attended the Rhode Island School of Design, which may be why
the set looks so good.
After the first song, during which the boom box is Byrne's only
accompaniment, Weymouth enters the stage and joins Bryne in a spare,
beautiful rendition of "Heaven" (whose haunting refrain is "Heaven is
a place where nothing ever happens"). One new band member arrrives
with every song, so that the film builds with rhythmic intensity.
Demme's pace, and his use of light and color (deep blues and reds),
reminded me of Stanley Kubrick, who displayed similar skills in his
masterpiece, 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY. In STOP MAKING SENSE, Demme
includes shots of black-clad stagehands wheeling pieces of the set
onto the stage. The cumbersome metal objects, which float serenely
through hazy backlighting, resemble the ships that drift through space
in Kubrick's austere epic.
The relationship between the core musicians of the Talking Heads, who
are white, and the musicians who perform with them, who are black, is
fraught with interesting contrasts and tensions. In many ways, the
band draws its energy from the intersection of a variety of
cultures. The Talking Heads temper punk, soul, avant-garde design
aesthetics, and new-wave style with a nicely skewed sense of irony. As
he dances through the show in white sneakers, Byrne forms a bridge
over a wide variety of cultural gaps. The only weak spot in the film
comes when Byrne steps off the stage to let the remaining band members
(the Tom Tom Club) perform--without his vision, the sound is just
ordinary.
The performers have a great deal of fun with one another. At one point
in the movie, Byrne turns to face the two background singers. He
smiles, and starts to imitate their dance step. Without missing a
beat, one singer begins to strum an air guitar in imitation of
him. It's just one of the many moments of pure exuberance that grace
this film.
Most of that exuberance is conveyed through dance--these musicians
know how to move. Watch all of them dance--especially the backing
vocalists (Ednah Holt and Lynn Mabry), the guitarist (Alex Weir), and
the percussionist (Steven Scales)--and your eyes will be dazzled, your
feet will start to tap. Watch Bernie Worrell (of
Parliament/Funkadelic) swivel his head as he adds dollops of funk to
the proceedings. Watch Tina Weymouth swing her knees and
shoulders. Watch Scales, who personifies the movie's energy, cheer on
the crowd. But above all, watch David Byrne, who seems to dwell in the
eye of a dance hurricane.  Whether he's slithering like a charmed
snake, stumbling like a confused professor, or hanging his arms like a
crucified office worker, Byrne's movements are precise and hypnotic.
In the end, however, it's the choreography (the coordination of music
and movement), rather than the dancing alone, that makes STOP MAKING
SENSE such a treat. One shouldn't forget that this movie was carefully
molded, that it was crafted from the footage of three separate shows;
it wasn't just cobbled together without thought. There's someone
moving in almost every frame of the film, and Demme's camera is rarely
still--he's always approaching or circling or panning. There are
limits to a concert film, to be sure, and I'm certain that this movie
will appeal most to people already interested in the Talking
Heads. But fanhood is not a prerequisite because this is more than
just another concert film: it's a celebration of manic energy, a
tribute to the joy of performance.

Author
Ross Anthony
A straight-lipped, ball-eyed David Byrne sets a tiny boom box on a bare
stage. The box clicks out a tragically unhip, retro drum-machine beat to
which he strums "Psycho Killer" solo on the acoustic guitar. A perfectly
quirky intro to Byrne's punk-paranoia, funk-roasted musical spazzfest. Bass
player Tina Weymouth joins him in "Heaven" (the next tune); each song
thereafter adding a new Talking Head player to the stage until the modest
Pantages Theater is rocking side to side with the sweat and swing of all
nine musicians.
Completely void of the now standard, blaringly quick, MTV camera cuts, this
particular concert flick allows you time to enjoy the band members sautéing
in their own emotions. What a refreshing way to view music. During "That's
the Way it Goes" all camera angles are kept above the waist; allowing only
"Head Shots" -- the musicians' eyes say it all. Byrne and the band are so
deliciously entertaining to watch that there's no need for digital special
effects, wipes, fades, millisecond cuts, guitar string close-ups, or crowd
shots. Much well-earned praise has been given to director Jonathan Demme for
this 1984 gem, but David Byrne gave the man mountains of visual sweetmeats
to dolly around.
When I saw the original release, I wasn't ready for Byrne's wiggly nervous
vocals. Now, from a 1999 perspective, I greatly appreciate his bold
electrically eccentric self-expression. It emanates from his eyes, voice,
guitar and boils over into his convulsing body. (The big suit can't even
contain it.) His ironic paranoid demeanor is a front for his magnetic
confidence. Byrne's oddity is set in perfect contrast to solid
punk-funk-rock and roll. (Perhaps he was exactly 15 years ahead of his
time.)
Though a surprising amount of the film is shot in soft focus (a euphemism
for "not really in focus"): a decade and a half later, the music and brash
presence of creative genius still byrne down the house.
Stop Making Sense: Re-release. Copyright Š 1999. 88 minutes. Not rated.
Starring The Talking Heads: David Byrne, Chris Frantz, Jerry Harrison, Tina
Weymouth, Edna Holt, Lynn Mabry, Steven Scales, Alex Weir, Bernie Worrell.
Directed by Jonathan Demme.
Produced by Gary Goetzman and presented by Palm.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Brandon Herring
Starring: David Byrne, Chris Frantz, Jerry Harrison, Tina Weymouth, Edna Holt,
Lynn Mabry, Steven Scales, Alex Weir, Bernie Worrell. (All band members)
Unrated contains no offensive material.
Release Date: September 15, 1999 in New York, then spreads throughout the
country after that.
I will admit now, I've never heard of The Talking Heads. In fact I've never
even heard any of their songs, but after watching this brilliant film I wished
I had known more about them before. 
This concert film which is nothing but the group performing before a live
audience (Cut the word which). So you say, well the performers are so good,
especially David Byrne who gives a great performance on stage, and along with
their groundbreaking songs, the whole film remains a classic after 15 years the
film is still recognized and popular.
Jonathan Demme directed the film, which contains sensational editing, amazing
camera shots, and spectacular songs. The Talking Heads were a group between
1976 and 1988, and in 1984 they made this film which was a taped concert of
sorts (featuring) of some of their greatest songs which Include 'Burnin' Down
the House', 'Psycho Killer' and 'Once in a Lifetime'.
What makes 'Stop Making Sense' such a good movie is the fact that it has
excellentcamerawork, that we feel we are actually part of the concert audience,
rather than watching a filmed record of the show. Being remixed in Dolby
Digital sound, it is surely crisp and fresh. The picture is sharp and clear,
and is amazing. The songs are even more amazing, starting with David Byrne the
lead singer, walking out on stage with his boombox and guitar, starts singing
and eventually his whole band and back-up singers appear. 
What makes the film even more interesting is the performances that David Byrne
gets, not by acting but by singing: he lives out the songs and entertains us
while we listen to them. At one point he wears a big suit, that looks like his
head is smaller than the rest of his body, which became his trademark for
several years to follow. 
We get in the feel of the movie as it progresses, the songs made me want to get
up and dance my brains out since they are all good-natured and bright, fun
songs. Some may get bored by 'Stop Making Sense' and want more to happen
besides songs but, the songs are what make the movie. They are the dialogue of
the movie and instead ofDavid talking them he sings them. Brilliant,
innovative, and probably one of the best rock performances I've seen in my
life. 
Reviewed by Brandon Herring, September 1, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   In "The Merchant of Venice," Shakespeare conveys his
feeling about song:
 "The man that hath no music in himself,
 Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
 Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils."
   The playwright might have had no one in mind.  I've never
met a soul who disliked all music, have you?  We differ
greatly, however in our tastes. During the 1980s when the
chic crowd went with the beat of disco and hard rock, one
unique troupe emerged, led a man whose special sound
might best be called funk, or perhaps avant-punk.  David
Byrne, whose band of four--expanded in concerts to nine--
electrified his followers with a more intellectual inflection than
that found in, say, the performances of Mick Jagger of the
Rolling Stones.  His lyrics are filled with irony. His band was
"The Talking Heads," and perhaps the great irony in the
movie made in 1983 about his group is that Jonathan
Demme's documentary is anything but a talking heads piece. 
There are no backstage interviews with the musicians, no
conferences with his third-grade teachers.  In fact we get to
know nothing about the man except what we glean from his
work, which is just the way a film of this sort should be.  
   "Stop Making Sense"--whose title comes from a verse in
the group's song "Girlfriend is Better"--is a film put together
from three evening concerts of the Talking Heads staged in
Hollywood's Pantages Theatre in December 1983.  While the
three concerts have been superbly edited to give the
impression of a single night's delirium, director Demme
deliberately subverts traditional thinking by avoiding the usual
MTV jerky-camera style.  Using six fixed cameras together
with one hand-held and another for pans, Demme focuses in
on the principal's face when he spots particularly eccentric
expressions, panning to Mr. Byrne's crotch when the man
does his own rendition of Elvis's pelvic thrusts.  For the most
part, though, we in the audience cannot help feeling that we
are present at the actual, live event, digging the music
without the ambiance-destroying breaks that musicians 
frequently take.  We sit back and listen to one hit after
another, and given that this 1999 remake of the work on its
15th anniversary has been redigitalized to be played in
theaters with improved sonic systems, we essentially hear
purer sounds than did the lucky folks in Hollywood during the
historic festival of funk.
   If this gives you the impression that I'm a fan of David
Byrne's music, you'd have the wrong notion.  My taste is
fairly eclectic, from Bach to acid rock, and the particular niche
filled uniquely by the Talking Heads does not dazzle and
hypnotize me or even knock my eyeballs out--as reviewer
Chris Morris virtually guaranteed it would in his October 1984
interview with Byrne.  We'll leave the judgments of music to
the music critics. As a film, however, Demme's craftsmanship
pays off mightily, perhaps the best movie of its kind since
Martin Scorsese's 1976 "The Last Waltz," whose performers
included Joni Mitchell, Bob Dylan, and Muddy Waters. 
Leonard Maltin calls Demme's creation "one of the great rock
movies ever made," citing its conception, editing and
performance.  
   What fascinates me about Byrne is that he is the antithesis
of what you'd expect from a lead musician.  One reviewer put
it best by calling Byrne a black man's send-up of a white-
bread singer. Not that Byrne is another Eddie Fisher.  He's
tall and gaunt, with a mop of black hair cut in the most
traditional of styles.  He wears an open-collar shirt--nothing
flamboyant in the costume, nothing that would make you
think he's anything but a nice young man who escorts old
ladies across the street and studies hard for his CPA.  When
he stolls onto the stage just after Demme's portentous image
of a guitar's shadow, he says to his audience simply, "I've got
a tape to play for you."  There he stands, alone on a
minimalist platform, putting a small machine on the floor to
the knowing chuckles of an audience that has yet to become
wildly enthusiastic.  Warming up by strumming the beats of
his first song, the witty and ironic "Psycho Killer," he is joined
first by one, then another, and finally by all nine members of
his integrated band.  
   Those not already familiar with his style may wonder what
he's getting at when he moves across the stage, not in the
exaggerated flamboyant style of Mick Jagger but in the
spastic, nervous movements of a paranoid perpetrator who
has just made off with the loot from the small local bank.  As
the minutes roll on, the entire band becomes seized with an
almost other-worldly energy, its leader falling back, flat on his
back like a turned-over turtle eager to right himself, belting
out the avant-punk melodies as securely as though he were
planted firmly on the ground.  While Byrne has the modesty
on stage to allow each member of his troupe to get his or her
minute or so of fame, there is never a question about who is
the leader.  Only once does Byrne take a break, giving the
rest of the group its head to perform in a comic style which
does not quite come off.  We are eager for the man's return.
   As a physical force, Byrne is Elvis with variety.  Not only
does his pelvis undulate.  As the mood strikes, he indulges in
aerobic dancing, at one point waving his arms like The
Golden Cockerel and at another pacing about the stage like
Big Bird.  Jonathan Demme's lighting designer has a ball
aiming his beam at one point just under Byrne's chin, giving
the effect of a schoolboy trying to scare his classmates on
Halloween Eve.  The comic highlight of the night displays the
singer in a suit tailored for a man at least twice his size at
which point he knocks out the gospel-influenced "Take Me To
The River.
  Byrne's presence is a commanding one, his charisma
carrying over to his group, which consists of a drummer, a
few female singers, a bass player, all of whom caught up in
the syncopation as though they had just arrived from Kansas
and were experience the thrill for the first time.  Would I want
to see the movie again?  I couldn't say I would.  For all the
glories of the cinematography, for all the energy emitted by
the artists, for all the genuine enthusiasm of the audience, I
simply am not a fan of this unique type of euphony.  Byrne
found a niche amid the clutter of styles prevalent in the world
since the sixties, capitalizing on his special niche with a
particular audience.  Whether his sort of audience exists
today will have to wait until mid-September when the 15th
anniversal revival is re-introduced to a changed America. 
Whatever you think of the music, though, you've got to hand
it to director Demme for not falling into the trap of so many
documentarians who talk their subjects to death.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Stop Making Sense (1984/1999 Rerelease)
Reviewed by Eugene Novikov
http://www.ultimate-movie.com/
Member: Online Film Critics Society
"Into the blue again/After the money's gone
Once in a lifetime/water flowing underground"
Starring David Byrne, Chris Frantz, Jerry Harrison, Steven Scales. Not
Rated (nothing offensive).
As music films go it seems to be an accepted fact that Stop Making Sense
is second to none. The Talking Heads concert film has been out of
circulation for a long time, but it is now getting a theatrical
rerelease on its 15th birthday. On a dazzling restored print it's all
the better: an electrifying rock experience. Jonathan Demme's (The
Silence of the Lambs) film has it all: great music given a backbone of
top-notch camerawork and editing.
The music is courtesy of Talking Heads, a popular Rock/New Wave band
evidently proclaimed by some to be the most influential of the 80s. Its
lead singer David Byrne is that rare breed: a stage presence both
enigmatic and energetic. Most of the fun of Stop Making Sense comes from
watching Byrne's on stage antics as he and his band jubilantly plow
through 15 of their own songs. The songs, I admit, are not all
superlative: some are redundant and others just didn't appeal to me, but
as a whole I was impressed with the Talking Heads' (whom I've never
heard before I first saw the original version of the film a couple years
ago, by the way) repertoire.
This is an unusual concert film. There are barely ever any audience
reaction shots or music video intercuts: the camera focuses solely on
the band. It's very much a better movie for it; these kinds of songs are
better watched than listened to and frequent cuts away from the action
would have heavily distracted from the kinetic performance the Talking
Heads put on. Jonathan Demme made sure the film would be pure with no
artificial tricks (now accepting thank-you notes for not saying
"flavors") by the camera or by anything else.
The highlight of the show is a number called "Once in a Lifetime".
Byrne, looking unnervingly like Gregory Peck in To Kill a Mockingbird,
sings the Talking Heads' most distinctive song; a hypnotic intercutting
of a wonderful melody and something I can only describe as chanting. The
lyrics, too, are something to think about. They come off as gibberish at
first but, like most of their work, after a little pondering, they begin
to make sense.
If I put in a CD and listened to the music of the Talking Heads for 90
minutes, I would be bored. If I watched a 90 minute Talking Heads music
video I would be bored. Stop Making Sense, while simple, enchanted me.
It's just like watching a concert, yes, but what a concert it is! I've
never seen a musical group put on a better show and I've never seen a
show's spirit captured better than this.
See it. See it now. See it while you have the benefit of the big screen
and the surround sound. See it while you have the opportunity to watch
it as it was meant to be, with a brand new, restored print. Don't let
the "concert film" idea throw you off; most "regular" films can only
dream of being as good as Stop Making Sense.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Steve Rhodes
For it's 15th anniversary, Jonathan Demme's classic concert film STOP
MAKING SENSE is being re-released with a new print and a remastered
Dolby Digital soundtrack.  Starring David Byrne as well as the other
members of The Talking Heads, the film is certain to delight their fans.
With minimalist staging, lighting and camerawork, the concert
documentary may have a more limited appeal for those who aren't fond of
Byrne's strident singing style.
Older movies with large cult followings are some of the hardest films to
review.  People have already made up their minds about them.  Anything
less than complete praise will be derided by their fans.  And those who
didn't like the movie in the first place probably will not bother to
read the review.
For the record, I've liked a lot of music movies in which the music was
not of the type I normally enjoy.  I've loved rock concert movies
(MESSAGE TO LOVE), rock documentaries (HYPE!) and rock musicals (PINK
FLOYD: THE WALL).  STOP MAKING SENSE, on the other hand, did nothing for
me.
David Byrne is a hyper-energetic singer and dancer.  With his lean,
gangly body, his thin, geekish face and his exaggerated clothing, Byrne
stands out in any crowd.  (He was at our press screening and has changed
little over the years.)  He belts out his songs as if loudness were the
most important attribute of singing.  His aerobic dancing, however, is
mesmerizing.  He walks like a bird, undulates like a wave, jogs like a
yuppie and prances like a boxer.  The guy must be in tip-top shape to
endure his performances, and it is easy to see why he remains so lithe.
"The girls can do it too!" the drummer yells out to start the only
segment not featuring Byrne.  Called the Tom Tom Club, this silly
segment is the film's one attempt at comedy.  Even though I was glad for
a respite from Byrne's voice, I missed his stage antics.
The movie, filmed at a live concert, consists of a rapid succession of
songs without breaks.  If you like them, you will probably feel like a
kid in a candy shop, in which the owner says you have an hour and a half
to eat all the candy you want.  And if you don't like the songs, the
film can sometimes feel like living next door to a neighbor who plays
loud, harsh music that filters through your walls even when you have the
windows shut tight.  Luckily, Byrne's high spirits and undeniable
charisma offers something for everyone.
STOP MAKING SENSE runs 1:28.  It is rated PG and has nothing to offend
any age.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
