Title
Review for Grande illusion, La (1937)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Jean Renoir
Writers: Jean Renoir and Charles Spaak
Starring: Jean Gabin, Pierre Fresnay, Marcel Dalio, Julien Carette,
Erich von Stroeheim, Georges Peclet, Dita Parlo
Jean Renoir's "Grand Illusion" is pretty much unanimously praised as one
of the greatest films ever made, as well as one of the greatest war
movies.  But why is a film that seems like an arty french old version of
"Hogan's Heroes" and "The Great Escape" so amazingly praised?  Well, for
one it's a lot more structured and complex than a "Hogan's Heroes"
episode, and makes a wonderful statement about war.  I mean, this film
is so deceptively complex that the laserdisc we saw it on had a track
for a guy to narrate everything that goes on as the film plays (we
turned him off).
In" Grand Illusion," it's just before the first World War, and a couple
of french pilots (Jean Gabin and Pierre Fresnay) are shot down over
Germany, and subsequently taken into a POW camp.  The weird thing about
this film is not only is this the only real instance of war we see, but
that the german who shot them down (Erich von Stroeheim, who would later
star in "Sunset Boulevard" - the movie) actually invites them to a
dinner before they are hauled out to the prisoner camp.  "The Hanoi
Hilton" this is not.
The various prisoners quickly get to know eachother, and form a bit of
comraderie.  In the camp are a varied group of people: Lieutenant
Marechal (Gabin), a French plebian; the French aristocrat de Boeldieu
(Fresnay), who kind of isolates himself from the others; a hyperactive
actor (Julien Carette); and French jew Rosenthal (Marcel Dalio).  They
work on some escape tactics, but never go too far, sometimes getting
cold feet someway through, and usually getting cut off by the germans.
We follow some of them as they go to another POW camp, this time in a
giant castle, and headed by none other than the German soldier who fed
them after he shot them down (von Stroheim).  The film follows them
working on some more escape attempts, as well as building a
wonderfully-crafted relationship between the von Stroeheim character and
the Fresnay one.  They seem to be the two most alike characters in the
film, and the only difference seems to be their nationalities.
"Grand Illusion" paints a kind of surrealistic world where the soldiers
actually realize that they're all part of the same race, but are trapped
by nationalities and "duties."  A powerful moment towards the end
perfectly illustrates this, causing one of the few very sad moments in
the film, which is often mounted in some good old character comedy,
though not like a sitcom (this is the last time I mention "Hogan's
Heroes").  The very final scene is also poignantly representing what the
film is trying to prove.
What's cool about this film is you hardly even know there's a war going
on.  If you missed the beginning, you probably wouldn't even know
they're prisoners of War.  This makes sure that they can build up the
characters, and create parallelisms between the prisoners and their
german captors.  The film paints a world where everyone is kind to one
another, although they are somtimes held back by their nationality.
Even for those of you who would think a 30s french film about POWs would
be boring, "Grand Illusion" is not what you're gonna find.  It's an
always fascinating flick to watch, filled with a great sense of humor
that never makes this overly surreal, a dramatic edge which never feels
forced, and emotion that never feels hokey or melodramatic.  The ending
is brilliantly done, with a scene which might never really take place,
but it's a film, and it's trying to make a point.
"Grand Illusion" is one of the greatest films ever made, and a trend
setter in the tradition of the sub-sub-subgenre of POW camp films, like
"The Great Escape."  And it's a lot more complex than I originally
thought it was, making me want to see it again just so I can concentrate
more on the film's subtexts.  A good POW camp film is a horrible thing
to waste, and this is the best one of those I've ever seen.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
"The Grande Illusion" is a French film set during
World War I.  While the main subject is the plight
of French prisoners of war held in Germany, the film
also explores themes of class conflict, and the
desire to be free and living in one's own country.
Marechal (Jean Gabin) and de Boeldieu (Pierre Fresnay)
are pilots shot down by German aristocrat von
Rauffenstein (Erich von Stroheim).  Taken prisoner,
the pilots are introduced to Rauffenstein, who proves
a gracious host.  They are soon taken to a POW camp
in Germany, where prisoners fight the tedium by plotting
escapes and even by cross-dressing.  Eventually, Marechal
and de Boeldieu, along with Jewish officer Rosenthal
(Marcel Dalio) are re-united with Rauffenstein, now
a POW camp commander afflicted with war injuries.
de Boeldieu must decide whether his loyalties lie
with France or with gentlemanly snob von Rauffenstein.
Marechal must reconcile both his prejudice against
Rosenthal and his working class contempt for white-gloved
de Boeldieu.  "The Grand Illusion" also questions
whether aristocrats can survive in the new order emerging
from the tumultous world war.
"The Grand Illusion" is considered by some to be the
best film ever made.  While undeniably an excellent film,
IMHO it does not rank among the very best films.  It has
been called anti-war, but it doesn't convey that message
as well as "All Quiet on the Western Front" and "Paths of Glory",
or even "Full Metal Jacket".  The taking, losing and
re-capaturing of French cities, while implying the useless
waste of trench warfare, is depicted through second-hand
information, which lacks the visual impact of seeing soldiers
suffering in the field.  von Stroheim's character is remarkably
deep and sympathetic, but this does not apply to the French
officers.  Their characters, while perfectly credible, aren't
as deep.  Marechal is most interesting when conversing with
a cow, and Rosenthal when in despair over being abandoned
by Marechal in the German countryside.  At other times,
Marechal seems simply an opportunist, albeit an honest one.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Rialto Pictures
 Director:  Jean Renoir
 Writer:  Jean Renoir, Charles Spaak
 Cast: Jean Gabin, Dita Parlo, Pierre Fresnay, Erich von
Stroheim, Julien Carette, Georges Peclet, Werner Florian,
Jean Daste, Sylvain Itkine, Gaston Modot, Jacques Becker,
Marcel Dalio
   The recent spate of war movies opening in the U.S.
indicates at once a patriotic need to remember America's
ideals and heroism ("Saving Private Ryan," "Return with
Honor,") and the country's laments about fighting it should
never have undertaken ("Regret to Inform," "Three
Seasons").  While Steven Spielberg was robbed of his Oscar
in the last Academy ceremony ("Ryan" was heads and
shoulders superior to "Shakespeare in Love"), we might
forget that some of the great war movies deal not with World
War 2 or Vietnam but go further back to the struggle involving
the U.S. with European powers during the period 1914-1918. 
If in fact we are to understand the rise of Hitler in Germany
and the roots of World War 2, we must return at least to the
First World War, and we must look to that tragic event to see
war's irrationality once again.
   When Jean Renoir made "Grand Illusion" in 1937, he
hoped to show his own and future generations the futility of
war even as he ironically pointed out the generosity with
which supposed enemies treated one another.  World War I,
which ushered out many of the great monarchies and
empires and Europe, was the last occasion that featured
honor among gentlemen whatever their country of birth while
at the same time underscoring the differences that separated
those of distinct social classes.  In fact what makes "Grand
Illusion" a major accomplishment is only partly its dramatic
antiwar motif or a depiction of heroism, but from its
examination of conflicting loyalties: devotion to nation
surrenders to affinity among like classes.
   The story that gives these gentlemen of similar classes but
different nationalities the opportunity for cordial treatment,
begins as two French fliers, Marechal (Jean Gabin) and Capt.
de Boeldieu (Pierre Fresnay) take a reconnaissance mission
over Germany, seeking to distinguish targets.  (Renoir does
not show the actual air battle: this sort of grandstanding
would come later by Hollywood.)  Shot down by Von
Rauffenstein (Erich von Stroheim), the French prisoners
are invited to lunch for the very person who downed
them before they are carted off to a jail that looks a lot like
the summer camp I attended back in the Jurassic Age.
   The prison that houses the wartime captives is anything but
a Teutonic version of the Hanoi Hilton.  POW's are allowed to
receive food packages from home.  One fortunate fellow,
Rosenthal (Marcel Dalio)--a French Jew--shares his food
generously with his countrymen.  Meanwhile those in
captivity prefer to leave and begin to dig a tunnel. 
Unfortunately the diggers have their venues changed and the
tunnel goes unutilized while Rosenthal, de Boeldieu and
Marechal are sent to Wintersborn maximum security facility.
   Coincidentally, von Rauffenstein heads the prison after his
retirement, giving Renoir the motive to explore his central
theme: since the German and the French officers are equally
upper class, de Boeldieu is treated in a singularly considerate
manner, while the German warden ignores the captured
officers who are of no distinguished caste--who include Lt.
Marechal (Jean Gabin) and the French Jew, Rosental (Marcel
Dalio).
   Despite their more than fair treatment, the prisoners make
escape attempts even after they are transferred to a more
secure jail in another part of Germany.  Ultimately one of the
prisoners makes a heroic sacrifice of himself to allow some
others to flee to safety in Switzerland.
   Orson Wells is said to have remarked that if he had to save
only one film, this would be the one.  The performance, which
sentimentalizes the relationship between the high-ranking
German officer and the French captain who is of the same
social class, is compelling.  Renoir seems to turn Marxism on
its head: here we have an international brotherhood, but not
of workers--rather the camaraderie that crosses national
boundaries applies to the aristocratic class.  In a sense, this
story is two films in one. The first half, which would appeal
more to the men in the audience, has not a single important
female role.  We see only two old German peasant women in
one shot tut-tutting outside the prison walls about the "poor
boys" who have to spend the war incarcerated.  The second
half is more of a compelling chick-flick--a romance between a
lonely German woman, Elsa (Dita Parlo) and the stunningly
handsome Marechal--played strikingly by the great French
actor Jean Gabin, who was thirty-three years old at the time
and who could give Kenneth Branagh a run for the money in
the looks department.  
  The black-and-white film has been lovingly restored after
being sadly on shelves here and there for decades.  It was
banned by the Nazis (propaganda minister Josef Goebbels
considered it cinema enemy number one), and no wonder. 
Not only is the Jewish character given favorable treatment for
his generosity: Renoir subverts the entire basis of fascist
thought by stating that nature knows no boundaries; that
political differences are man-made and an illusion.  
   "Grand Illusion" is a must-see, featuring Renoir's signature
deep-focus photography--in which the great director keeps
the background images as clear as those in front of the
camera.  Women in the audience will swoon over Gabin, men
will dig the fighting spirit of the French prisoners who are
gutsy enough to sing their national anthem in front of their
German jailers when the French had recaptured a significant
fort.  World War One seems, however, almost like a fun
chess game than a battleground that left tens of thousands
dead and foreshadowed the far less gentlemanly second
major encounter.
