Title
Review for Nil by Mouth (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Justin Siegel
Intense, harrowing, scary, emotional. All these words apply to Gary
Oldman's debut film, Nil by Mouth. However, overlong, tedious, plotless,
and dragged-out apply as well. Now, I have nothing against plotless films
(witness my love of the films of Kevin Smith) but scene after scene of
absolutely nothing passing itself off as Something Important was just too
much for me. I also have nothing against leisurely-paced films, but,
Christ, this is amazing. No point that could have been established in two
minutes was if it could be equally well established in 15. And, at a 
little
over two hours, Nil by Mouth came dangerously close to wearing out its
wlecome.
It's about one working-class South London family, lead by an abusive,
alcoholic patriarch (Ray Winstone). His wife (Kathy Burke) has a young
daughter and another child on the way. His brother-in-law is addicted to
heroin, and he (Ray) refers to his mother-in-law (to her face) as a 
"stupid
fucking cunt." None of these characters are given any nuances. Oldman 
(who
also wrote the screenplay) just threw them onto the screen and let them 
be
just exactly what they needed to be for whichever scene they were taking
part in at the moment. The junky brother, in particular, is paper thin, 
and
it seriously hurts the film, considering his share of time on-screen.
So I know what you're thinking right now: "If you hate this thing so 
much,
why the fuck are you recommending it?" Well, Oldman, even if he's a
mediocre writer, is a damn fine director. Several scenes struck me as
simply superb (they are, in chronological order, the scene in which Ray
beats the shit out of Valerie, the scene in which Ray has a breakdown and
trashes his house, the scene in which Ray explains the film's cryptic
title, and the scene in which Ray apologizes to Valerie for beating the
everfucking shit out of her), but the whole movie is really well done in 
a
directorial aspect.
After the film fades out but before the credits start to roll, an insert
reads: "Dedicated to the memory of my father." Now, Oldman has gone on
record saying that this film is semi-autobiographical, and it is possible
that this means his father was a Ray-like bastard who beat him and his
mother savagely on a daily basis. If this is the case, I truly feel for 
the
man and respect him for having the courage to make this film. But again, 
if
this is the case, is is not a tad frightening to dedicate the film 
lovingly
to the man's memory? Even though Nil by Mouth tried somewhat to explain
that Ray was simply a product of his environment, its stance was always
clear: he was still a completely evil human-being. Dedicating the film to 
a
man anything like him is kind of sad, don't you think?

Author
Omar Odeh
"Metteur-en-scene, director. The point is not to direct someone but to
direct oneself."
-Robert Bresson, Notes on the Cinematographer
There seems to be a general disaster zone that the majority of
actors-turned-directors wander into. It is to actually try to direct
the film (usually according to some miniscule fraction of theory or
method that they have recently misunderstood.) A number of examples
come to mind of which, Buscemi citing Cassavetes and Hanks naming
Kurosawa, Kubrick and Eisenstein in the same breath are only the most
notorious examples. Anyone who saw, Trees Lounge or That Thing You Do
knows that despite their differences the films share an alarming
capacity for self-delusion. Flawed assumptions, heavy-handed
referencing and all around awkward articulations are the hallmarks of
such films which, incidentally, are not without a lot of company. Gary
Oldman's latest film Nil by Mouth, avoids such pitfalls by recognising
the number one job of the actor-director: to marshall their unique
talents (knowledge of performance and interpretation) in a coherent
effort. No flashy loud camera work (Albino Alligator), no overpriced
contrived production values (Braveheart) and no heavy handed ludicrous
symbolism (Dead Man Walking). Gary Oldman, like accomplished
actor-directors before him (epitomised by the late John Cassavetes,
and not unlike the more recent efforts of Sean Penn) makes a number of
very specific directorial decisions guided by what he believes the
crux of cinematic representation to be. Just as Errol Morris who
studied Philosophy, or Antonionni who studied Political Economy,
employ directorial methods that privelege their given expertise.  In
the case of the actor-director this expertise is clear, and it is
often insecutrity about acknowledging such limits that lead
actor-directors astray. Oldman has reminded us that when such errors
are not made the results are complex and astounding films.
    Nil by Mouth chronicles the dynamic between a lower-class London
family (This is all you really need to know). Oldman wisely, keeps the
plotting down to a minimum concentrating instead on accurately
rendering the complexity of the characters and their
relationships. For much of this he defers to the actors (all of whom
play superbly) by the specific camera decisions he makes. Throughout
the film, Oldman's camera is never in the wrong place but more
importantly the scale of the shots is perfect.  Vitrually the entire
film is shot in close and medium shots through long lenses that truly
crush the depth of field. There is also inly a very selective use of
two-shots and group shots in the film. To call the result
clasutrophobic and uncomfortable is a gross understatement. The
implications of this technique for the narrative are manifold: it
alludes to the enclosed world of the characters as well as
establishing a number of key associations between these
characters. This gives them a first layer to work with. More
importantly, howver, the longer lenses, necessarily allowed Oldman to
move away from the actors freeing up their physical space despite the
very particular diegetic space (oweing to the reduced depth of field.)
It is a technique not unlike the one Cassavets uses in A Woman Under
the Influence. The result of these decisions is apparent in the job
the actors do which I'v already said is excellent. Oldman could have
chosen any number of avenues by which to shoot these people, all of
which would have left a flawed product that udermined the strength of
the performances. Although, I don't think every film should be made
this way, when it is an actor at the helm, the technique truly seems
perfect.
    Over and above these stylistic elements the narrative of Nil by
Mouth is extremely assured. With a running time of just over two
hours, Oldman clearly had no doubts about the events to be included in
the portrayal. The film is apparently based on autobiographical
events, which shows in the film's authenticity.  The plotting is kept
to a minimum but this does not mean the film was not carefully
scripted. There are a number of crucial speeches, which are placed at
specifc times in the film for specific reasons. In a number of cases
Oldman foregoes dramtatic efficiency in order to convey a mood uf
unese and discomfort. The prominence of the unique South Londin accent
is only the ost prominent example of this. The characters seem
incapable of not talking, as if constantly nervous and hiding
something. Even towards the end of the film, in a lengthy scene of Ray
left to his own devices this tendency does not stop.  The scene is
deftly edited as to have Ray almost talking with or at (not to)
himself. This underscores some of the ambiguity with which the Ray
husband is treated. Such a treatment is genuine in a way that a film
like Bastard from Carolina could not hope to be.
    I am not sure if Oldman intends to direct other projects or if
this was a one time effort to exorcise a number of demons that the
actor has harboured. One source (I can't remeber who) has said that
Oldman was offended by the apparent glamourising of street and drug
culture in Trainspotting and thus finally decided to commit his idea
to celluloid. The accusation is a common one that I think is unfair
but we can be thankful that Oldman chose to respond in the manner that
he did. We can only hope more actors show such poise in their future
directing efforts..

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ray Winstone, Kathy Burke, Charlie Creed-Miles, Laila Morse, 
      Edna Dore, Jamie Forman
Director: Gary Oldman
Producers: Luc Besson, Douglas Urbanski, Gary Oldman
Screenplay: Gary Oldman
Cinematography: Ron Fortunato
Music: Eric Clapton
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     There is a scene in NIL BY MOUTH, actor Gary Oldman's directorial 
debut, that is excruciatingly difficult to watch.  It's not especially 
graphic, since the gruesome details take place out of frame, but anyone 
with an imagination can conjure up an image to chill the blood.  The 
sequence depicts a particularly brutal instance of spousal abuse, and is 
perhaps only recently rivaled in intensity by a similar occurrence in 
ONCE WERE WARRIORS.  One might think that movie-goers, inured to 
explicit on-screen violence, would not flinch at what Oldman presents, 
but there's a major difference between the decapitations and 
eviscerations of a STARSHIP TROOPERS and the savageness of NIL BY MOUTH 
– the former plays like a comic book come to life; the latter is 
shockingly real.
     Oldman has based this bleak, gritty tale on his memories of growing 
up in the economically deprived projects of South London.  Only Oldman 
knows how much of the story is true and how much is made up, but there's 
an eerie sense of verisimilitude about nearly every scene in the film, 
and the dialogue couldn't be more exact.  This is an uncompromising 
drama – it doesn't shrink from presenting the horror of the situation, 
nor does it take the easy path of demonizing the abuser and deifying the 
victim.  And there's no facile conclusion that wraps everything into a 
neat package.  Like life, NIL BY MOUTH is messy and open-ended.
     From the beginning, it's clear that three elements are going to be 
critical to the events that transpire during NIL BY MOUTH:  alcohol, 
drugs, and poverty.  They are facts of life in contemporary South 
London, where the movie is set.  Our first glimpse of the main 
character, Raymond (Ray Winstone, in a stunningly forceful performance), 
is in a pub where he and some friends are sitting around drinking lager 
and trading profane stories.  Oldman allows the film to develop slowly, 
giving us a feel for Ray and his buddies.  They are all victims of 
society, but do the best they can to get by, and use alcohol to dull the 
pain of not having any real purpose in life.  It's a far cry from the 
more upbeat picture painted by THE FULL MONTY.  
     Ray is a family man.  He has a wife, Valerie (a heartwrenching 
Kathy Burke, who won the Best Actress prize at the 1997 Cannes Film 
Festival), and a young daughter.  But all is not well under his roof.  
When he has had a few pints, Ray is prone to explosive exhibits of 
violence.  With little or no provocation, he will lash out at anyone in 
range.  His favorite target is his wife's drug-addicted brother, Billy 
(Charlie Creed-Miles), who lives with Ray's family.  When Billy isn't 
around, there are other possibilities, including his wife.  And, 
although Ray never harms his daughter physically, there is little doubt 
that his behavior leaves deep psychological scars (witness the shot of 
the little girl sitting alone on the staircase above the room where her 
father has just battered her mother).
     Oldman does an excellent job of bringing the audience into a world 
where despair and hopelessness are the norm.  NIL BY MOUTH does not 
sympathize with Ray, but it forces us to understand him.  He is the 
product of a dysfunctional family and the son of a man who was incapable 
of expressing affection (the film's title refers to this).  He loves his 
wife and daughter, but, like too many men under the influence of 
alcohol, he cannot control himself, and the most base impulses of his 
nature emerge with devastating consequences.  The film's treatment of 
Valerie is equally well-rounded and believable.  The director shows her 
pain, desperation, and humiliation, as well as her growing determination 
to free herself from the cycle of violence that threatens her safety.  
     From time-to-time, the movie becomes a little unfocused.  In 
attempting to flesh out the world surrounding Ray and Valerie, Oldman 
occasionally wanders far afield.  A little too much time is spent 
developing Billy's character, and one particular subplot involving 
Billy, his friends, and their attempts to procure drugs, is presented in 
a sketchy, haphazard manner.  Other than that, however, NIL BY MOUTH is 
extremely strong, and, at times, shattering.  Oldman's direction is sure 
and the performances he culls from a talented cast are consistently 
remarkable.  
     NIL BY MOUTH is as powerful as it is uncomfortable, and those in 
search of a pleasant movie-going experience would be best served looking 
elsewhere.  However, for anyone who isn't bothered by the thought of 
experiencing a shock to the system, this film is not to be missed.  It 
approaches a serious social issue in the best, most dramatically true 
manner.  Instead of resorting to lugubrious sermons or prettying things 
up Hollywood-style, it tells a simple, psychologically-exact tale that 
illustrates the depth and breadth of pain caused by domestic abuse.  NIL 
BY MOUTH leaves an impression that is hard to shake off, and that's the 
mark of an top-notch film.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Matt Williams
For his directoral debut, Gary Oldman chose a highly personal family
drama about a violent, alcoholic husband and father, and the various
lives he affects.  But while the characters, places and events may have
special meaning to the writer-director, the audience is left in the
dark.
The center of this tale is the abusive Raymond (Ray Winstone), and the
film focuses on him and the people who orbit around him.  He spends his
days hanging out with his friends at pubs and girlie bars.  Then, he
returns home to his pregnant wife, Valerie (Kathy Burke) and their
five-year-old daughter.
Raymond demonstrates his violent tendencies (and his paranoid delusions)
early on when he accuses Valerie's brother, Billy (Charlie Creed-Miles),
of stealing.  Raymond then proceed to beat (and bite) him to a bloody
wreck.  But these are the least of Billy's problems.  Billy is a heroin
addict on the downturn, and it doesn't seem that he'll last much longer.
Billy and Valerie's mother, Janet (Laila Morse), is Raymond's nemesis.
She disapproves of him (and he of her), but is powerless to do anything
about it.  She merely struggles on, hoping her children will survive
their respective torments.
If this description seems bleak, I haven't told the half of it.  This is
not a cheery movie, and most of the time it's downright depressing.
While at times it is interesting to watch to see just what makes Raymond
tick, and why no one ever simply calls the cops on him,  in the end,
it's not quite worth it.
There are too many scenes which randomly dot the picture with little or
no purpose. Take for example the extended sequence where one of Billy's
scuzzy friends defends a stray puppy.  The film is filled with these
"character moments" that never really achieve anything.  Granted, there
are a few genuinely powerful (and sickening) moments in the film, but
their expression seems to be more of a catharsis for the creator than
us.
The actors do a fine job, particularly in the central roles.  The good
thing about an actor turned writer is that Oldman knows how to write
good scenes, and the actors in Nil By Mouth have some meat they can tear
into.
The bad thing about an actor turned director is that there's no one to
restrain
Oldman from making poor choices.  A good character drama should mean
something to
those involved in making the film AND the audience.  Oldman got it about
half right.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   With the recent exception of Emily Watson's Maggie and
Daniel Day-Lewis's Danny Flynn in "The Boxer," working-class
people are consistently portrayed as craggy-faced, sullen, and
just plain homely.  Perhaps the hard life of physical work
takes its toll, or maybe it's just the lack of hope, the
resignation, that reflects in their features.  In "Nil By Mouth,"
Gary Oldman's biographical drama of the actor's childhood in
the slums of South London, Oldman represents the brooding
men he remembers as violent, drug-addicted, and foul-
mouthed while his women are resigned, accepting, even
loving in their own ways.  While "Nil By Mouth" is not Gary
Oldman's own family portrait, he has filled the screen with
people he has known in his childhood and whom he looks
upon with an patina of sympathy and understanding despite
their profane manner and primitive culture.
   "Nil By Mouth," which was a selection of the 1997 Cannes
Film Festival and even supplied a best-actress win for Kathy
Burke, is not what anyone would call narrative-driven.  Its
chief merit is as a showcase for some remarkable acting
talent--its principal characters absolutely believable in their
rage, desperation, and ultimately their fondness and warmer
side.  Its lavish disregard for plot, however, makes this a
difficult film to sit through, as it cannot be said to have a real
dramatic arc and, what's more, those behaviors which are
exhibited are perfectly predictable.  This latter deficiency is on
display particularly in the opening half-hour, in which Oldman
wants to impress on every member of the audience the
ambiance of the South London district of his childhood. 
Focusing particularly on Raymond (Ray Winstone), who has
no regular job but apparently acquires his poundsterlings
through a network of scams, Oldman opens with a family
scene as the locals gather in a downscale night club to be
entertained by a comedian imparting bawdy jokes to a crowd
that alternately pays him an ear and tell jokes of their own to
their family circles.  Ray, his wife Valerie (Kathy Burke), and
Valerie's brother-in-law Billy (Charlie Creed-Miles) smoke up a
storm, drink Smirnoff's vodka, and when the men sit around
without their women they discuss their experiences in strip
joints with all the enthusiasm of adolescents who have just
acquired their legal ID's and sample the fare of the adult
world.  
   We learn quite a bit about these people but little or nothing
about the framework that has mired them in their futile straits. 
Ray is the most violent member of the group, one who looks
for excuses to swing his fists.  In the picture's most appalling
moments, he punches and kicks his wife, accusing her with
no evidence whatever of having an affair with a neighbor. 
When Valerie lands in the hospital, she follows the
neighborhood code--mum's the word--and claims to have
been knocked over by a hit-and-run driver.  In another
episode of mayhem, Ray virtually breaks the nose of his
brother-in-law, Billy, whom he accuses of robbing his cache of
drugs.   In one unexpected setting, Ray's mother-in-law Janet
(Laila Morse) looks without disgust on his snorting of drugs,
even providing money to maintain the wastrel's habit--
anything to keep the family together, particularly since her
daughter is pregnant.
   An American audience--and perhaps an upscale English
crowd--may have difficulty with the dialect spoken by these
folks, which appears to challenge "Trainspotting" for the most
unintelligible dialogue and would provide a lifetime of work for
Professor Henry Higgins should he have the unlikely bad
fortune of being employed by them.  "Nil By Mouth" would
probably have more success on the legitimate stage.  Oldman
has not opened up his film too much to show give us a
neighborhood ambiance but hones in on the indoor locations
favored by this group of people who are going nowhere fast. 
The upbeat ending is a bit of a surprise: we wonder if Ray
and the woman he hospitalized have truly reconciled or
whether Oldman is merely providing us with a contrast to all
the bleakness in order to demonstrate what might have been
if only...
   Kathy Burke's modulated performance is the item to watch. 
While Ray Winstone in the role of Valerie's husband, can
send the celluloid ablaze with his tempestuous fury, Ms.
Burke's rendition of an abused wife who fears separation
more than anything else is the three-dimensional portrait that
redeems the otherwise predictable and altogether flaccid
narrative.  Rated R.  Running Time: 128 minutes.  (C) 1998
Harvey Karten

Author
Vince Deehan
Written and Directed by Gary Oldman.  
Cast:   Ray Winstone,  Kathy Burke,  Charlie Creed-Miles,  Laila Morse,
Edna Dore.
I went along to see Gary Oldman's highly praised directorial debut 
with great anticipation, last night (Oct 13).  I had been looking forward to 
seeing this film since I first heard about it.  I am delighted to say that I
was not disappointed with what I saw.  
The film shows the lives of an extended family in South London.  The family
is dominated by Ray, played superbly by Ray Winstone  (SCUM,  QUADROPHENIA,
and the recent UK release FACE) who is married to Valerie, played by Kathy
Burke ( anyone who saw Danny Boyle's acclaimed TV drama MR WROE'S
VIRGINS will not have easily forgotten Kathy's acclaimed performance as a 
a very disturbed young woman).  Valerie's younger brother  Billy ( Charlie
Creed-Miles - THE FIFTH ELEMENT,  TVs "PRESS GANG")  is a heroin addict, who
is the source of worry for all of the family, not least his mother Janet 
(Laila Morse).  To round off the family we have Ray and Valerie's daughter, 
Michele (played by the young and very talented Leah Fitzgerald) and Kath 
(Edna Dore - HIGH HOPES) who is Janet's mum and , of course, Billy and 
Valerie's grandmother.
Ray is an alcoholic and a wife beater, and seems incapable of speaking without
swearing repeatedly.   He is clearly a troubled man , is in constant need
of attention and finds himself unable to control his anger when he  feels he
is unable to exert full control of his family.  He loves his wife's kid brother
but is unable to restrain his violent nature when Billy's betrays him and takes
Ray's drugs.   He also loves his wife, but is so filled with insecurity that 
the minute he gets the slightest whiff that Valerie may be cheating on him 
( which she certainly wasn't) he lets his temper and his fists fly with 
devastating physical and psychological trauma to Valerie.  Up to this point 
in the film, we have seen that Ray is a violent man who you wouldn't want to 
upset, but this still doesn't prepare the viewer for the shock
of seeing the sickening way in which he abuses his wife.
Gary Oldman has created a powerful film, but one  that will definitely 
not appeal to everyone.  Not all cinemagoers will be able to stomach his no 
holds barred view of a working class family battling to keep together against 
the forces of drug addiction, alcoholism and domestic violence.  The swearing 
is constant throughout the film and will doubtless offend some viewers.  
I have to say that the opening scene with Ray and one of his mates telling 
boozy anecdotes in a club, was so full of expletives that I thought maybe 
this film wasn't for me.  You thought Dennis Hopper was the definitive 
swearer in BLUE VELVET ?  Just wait till you hear Ray in NIL BY MOUTH.  To be 
serious though,  there are lots of people for whom swearing is just common 
nature and a normal part of everyday conversation, and this is certainly the 
case for Ray and some members of his family.
The film is scored by Eric Clapton.  Surprised ?  I sure was, but Clapton has
done a terrific job with a subtly jazzy score that fitted the film very well.  
There are also a couple of  modern songs in the film, that although I can't 
identify who the artists were, provided some great moods in the film.
The acting from the entire cast is outstanding.   Kathy Burke's performance,
particularly in the second half of the film is superb.    She was  awarded
the Best Actress award at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival.  She imbues Valerie 
with a quiet dignity that is evident from the first time we see her.  Ray 
Winstone is magnificent as Ray.   Ray is a monster essentially but Winstone 
lets us see that Ray is deeply vulnerable and  and that in many ways Ray is 
just as much of a victim as Valerie.  This last bit may sound outrageous,  but 
I know that many people will see this film and feel sorry for Ray as well as 
Valerie.   What horrors has Ray gone through to make him behave the way he 
does ?  Ray is deeply warped and is clearly very weak when compared to the 
proud and defiant Valerie.
Chief acting honours go to Kathy Burke and Ray Winstone but special
mention must be given to Laila Morse who plays Valerie and Billy's mum.
Laila Morse is Gary Oldman's sister and has apparently never acted before.
Her part is very demanding, perhaps even more demanding than Burke's
and Winstone's.   She plays a mother who is well aware of her son's
drug addiction but in the face of feeling helpless to stop him, she takes
the hard option of supporting him, paying for his addiction and trying
to at least give him a stable base to hold on to.   One scene in particular 
comes to mind, when she sits in the driving seat of her van and glances
anxiously behind her at Billy injecting drugs in the back of the van.  Her
acting in this scene and in the scene where she discovers Valerie after
her beating, is very impressive.   
I wholeheartedly recommend NIL BY MOUTH to anyone who isn't
afraid to see the ugly side of human nature in unflinching detail.   Having
said that, one thing that does come through strongly throughout is the
strong affection and love the members of the family feel for each other,
particularly Janet for Valerie and Billy and Ray for his daughter and wife.
Nil BY MOUTH is partly based on Gary Oldman's own upbringing although
his own father was never violent.  Oldman knows these people and for all
their faults he looks on them affectionately and with compassion.
Gary Oldman has created an outstanding film, which will surprise and 
confound those who think that actors should stick to working in front of 
the camera and not behind it !
Review written on Tuesday 14 October 1997
e-mail : vince@deehan.demon.co.uk
http://www.deehan.demon.co.uk
