Title
Review for Corrina, Corrina (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Written and directed by Jessie Nelson
Cast Whoopi Goldberg, Ray Liotta, Tina Majorino, Joan Cusack, Don Ameche (!)
MPAA Rating     "PG"
Running Time    Approx. 120 minutes
     Naming a movie after a song is dangerous business, but CORRINA,
CORRINA swings almost as well as its namesake.  This enjoyable comedy
from the fifties stars Ray Liotta as a just-lost-mom dad with an
8-year-old daughter (Tina Majorino) who has stayed mute (or, ahem, mum)
ever since since the funeral.  Only after he hires maid Corrina (Whoopi
Goldberg), does life return to both his daughter and his home.
     CORRINA, CORRINA is clunky as all get-out, with some glaring
anachronisms and way-too-broad humor, such as Joan Cusack arriving in
padding (!) as Nanny Number One.  Director Jessie Nelson shoots every
other shot like a home movie and that's doesn't help much, either.  The
story picks up in the second hour, though, when the characters suddenly
"click."
     Liotta is good as the vulnerable father--the actor has a subtle
range that's worth watching here.  Goldberg is also good, though her
uncharacteristic (for that era) combination of "smarts 'n' sass" take a
little longer to get used to.  Majorino, as the daughter, is precious.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Perhaps the most noteworthy thing about CORRINA, CORRINA is that
it's a rare mainstream Hollywood motion picture which has been
produced, directed, and written by the same person.  This happens a lot
with smaller, independent productions and foreign films, but it's
unusual for a major release.  Unfortunately, Jessie Nelson's
triple-duty is almost the only thing that's unique about this movie.
Her tale of interracial and intergenerational bonding offers a series
of images that we've seen before.
     Following the death of her mother, seven year-old Molly (Tina
Majorino) has gone into a virtually catatonic state.  She won't talk,
nor is she responsive to questions or requests.  In the absence of his
wife, Molly's father Manny (Ray Liotta) discovers that he needs a
housekeeper who can help care for his daughter.  After interviewing a
slew of undesirable candidates, he eventually chooses a black woman
named Corrina (Whoopi Goldberg), solely because his daughter responds
to her.  So Corrina enters the Singer household, and a predictable bond
develops between her and Molly, as well as a romantic entanglement with
Manny.
     CORRINA, CORRINA takes place in the 1950s.  The apparent reason
for this is to add a little racial tension to the mix.  "Little" is the
operative word, since it's possible to count on one hand the number of
times someone makes a nasty comment about Corrina or her relationship
with Manny (and half of those are made by Corrina's sister).
     This is as average as a motion picture gets.  The storyline is a
screenplay-by-the-numbers, following certain set formulas that should
be familiar to anyone who sees more than a handful of movies a year.
The script (which bears a resemblance to that of last year's
little-seen HOUSE OF CARDS--the Kathleen Turner/Tommy Lee Jones
feature, not the British miniseries) adequately tells the tale without
trying anything daring or inventive.
     Whoopi Goldberg, doing her umpteenth movie in the last twelve
months, returns to familiar territory with Corrina.  This is a similar
sort of character to the ones she played in CLARA'S HEART and THE LONG
WALK HOME.  The actress doesn't bring anything new to a role crying out
for something fresh.  A similar criticism can be leveled at Ray Liotta,
whose Manny often seems devoid of emotion.  On the other hand, young
actress Tina Majorino (who can also be seen in the current ANDRE) gives
a winning--if sometimes too cute--performance.
     CORRINA, CORRINA might have been a better movie had the obligatory
romance been purged altogether.  The most interesting person in the
movie is Molly, and additional time spent examining her relationships
with Corrina and Manny would have been welcome.  Her reaction to racial
bigotry is also carefully sidestepped--two scenes allude to it, but
the issue is never confronted head-on.
     Taken as a whole, CORRINA, CORRINA is a lackluster production.
Its attempts at sincerity are stymied by cliched circumstances and
stereotyped characters.  The film suffers from the problem that
afflicts all films traversing this familiar road:  when viewers know
the destination, and recognize the route being taken to reach it,
there's not a lot to hold their interest.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
