Title
Review for Pushing Tin (1999)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: April 23, 1999
Starring: John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina
Jolie, Jake Weber, Kurt Fuller, Vicki Lewis
Directed by: Mike Newell
Distributed by: 20th Century Fox Films Corp.
MPAA Rating: R (language, a scene of sexuality) 
If there's a movie to be made, there's somebody there to make it -- and
there's a movie to be made about everything. So it comes as no surprise
that veteran "Cheers" writers Glen and Les Charles came up with a darkly
introspective comedy about air traffic controllers. The premise, based
on New York Times Magazine columnist Darcy Frey's article "Something's
Got to Give," sets the audience in the high-tension world of those
responsible for directing what suddenly becomes the scariest form of
mass transportation. It's an atmosphere that ought to be ripe with sick
humor and high-strung individuals, and indeed it is -- until the script
takes over. Then PUSHING TIN, the latest from DONNIE BRASCO director
Mike Newell, becomes a ho-hum presentation of stale characters and
unfinished humor. 
The usually-delightful John Cusack stars as Nick Falzone, the ace
controller for New York's Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON). He's
a slighty off-kilter individual whose life is heading down a dangerous
path, but Nick is oblivious to this in the intense confines of work. So
when TRACON brings in Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton), a controller
from out-of-town who can easily match Falzone's acumen, Nick begins to
lose control of his life. The suspicion that his wife Connie (Cate
Blanchett) may be sleeping with Russell leads Nick to an affair with
Mrs. Russell Bell (Angelina Jolie), and soon this erratic lifestyle
drives Connie away. Then it's up to Nick to put the pieces back
together. 
Although billed as a romantic comedy of sorts, PUSHING TIN makes very
little success in this area. The typical qualities associated with that
variety of comedies is not present: instead of cute romances and a
feel-good atmosphere, the movie is filled with tawdry affairs and
spiteful language. Cusack's charm, which gained so much ground in the
outstanding GROSSE POINTE BLANK, does not make an appearance here, and
the movie suffers without it. Cate Blanchett and Angelina Jolie do not
make much difference, and neither gives a standout performance. The
worst of the lot, however, is the miscast Billy Bob Thornton. Although
he excels in the oddball roles, the character of Russell Bell has too
many mixed motivations for Thornton's unique approach to work. His
efforts are wasted and the role comes out upside-down. 
For the most part, the movie as a whole has similar mixed motivations.
Although the friction between Nick and Russell ought to generate some
sort of witty report, the atmosphere is icy and the air is thick with
tension. That's no fun for the audience, and with no sympathetic factor
working in its favor, the comedy in PUSHING TIN's script falls flat on
its face. The jokes are mostly wry, tongue-in-cheek humor which, at
best, inspires nothing more than an occasional chuckle at how bitter it
is; in the end, though, there is no true humor involved. The movie is a
basket of tarnished goods, and only brief moments of genuine tension and
excitement (such as visuals of New York's packed airspace or a bomb
threat scene near the end) save PUSHING TIN from crashing and burning. 

Author
David E. Smith
        Air traffic controllers have one of the most demanding jobs on the
planet, by most accounts. With nothing more than strips of paper and small
radar scopes, they are responsible for thousands of lives daily. The
profession "boasts" high rates of alcoholism, depression, burnout, and
suicide.
Talking like auctioneers on meth, controllers have to keep track
of dozens of airplanes, getting everyone where they need to go, on time,
without killing anyone. The airspace around New York City has three major
airports within twenty miles of each other, and the small facility
responsible for controlling that area is the unlikely setting for "Pushing
Tin." (The title, by the way, is controller lingo for maximizing use of
airspace to keep planes on schedule.)
Nick "The Zone" Falzone (John Cusack) is the best controller in
New York. Unlike most of his co-workers, his life outside the workplace
isn't quite as intense as his job - for the most part, he's content to go
home to his wife Connie (Cate Blanchett), his only outward concession to
his six-figure salary a nice sportscar.
Enter Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton), another legend in the
field, the one man better at his job than "The Zone." His Zen-like
approach to the job and quiet demeanor shadow a wild nature - he rides a
mean motorcycle and has a wife half his age (Angelina Jolie). He is very
nearly the definition of "intensity," standing under landing 747s to get
caught up in the backwash. And it pushes all of Falzone's alpha-male
buttons.
"Pushing Tin" could have used a controller, as it seems to have
trouble picking a theme. At times, Nick and Russell are engaged in a war
of machismo, as they constantly try to outdo each other in everything from
shooting free throws to bedding each other's wives (and, of course,
landing planes). The mutual antagonism (and, very occasionally, mutual
respect) would have made for a great movie on its own.
But at times it flies into comedic territory as well, though the
jokes are generally subtle. Dry, intellectual humor can be difficult to
pull off, but when they're given the chance, the cast does a fair job of
it. The laughs are sparse enough that "Pushing Tin" can't really be billed
as a comedy, though.
The last thirty minutes touch on the romance that the movie is
billed for, and even elements of the classic male-bonding buddy movie. Any
of these aspects could have been drawn out to make a movie with a
consistent theme, that wouldn't feel quite as disjoint as "Pushing Tin."
Perhaps because they can't latch onto any given kind of story in
which to act, the cast turns in mediocre performances at best. Thornton
has already done his controller schtick (in "Armageddon"), and Cusack's
character just doesn't have anything distinctinve about it. Blanchett and
Jolie, both award-winning actresses, are underutilized to the point of
merely being attractive set dressing.
With a top-notch cast and intriguing setting, I wanted to like
"Pushing Tin." But the script tries to push more tin than it can handle,
leaving this movie hanging in midair and eventually crashing in the video
store.
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Author
James Sanford
"Pushing Tin" is air traffic controllers' slang for getting planes in
line for landing. That's the responsibility of Nick Falzone (John
Cusack), one of the sharpest controllers at New York's Terminal Radar
Approach Control center. Blessed with a lightning-fast mouth and mind,
he's become known as "The Zone" for his ability to sort out potential
problems in the sky before they happen.
What he's not so hot at doing is sorting out his own emotions,
particularly after the enigmatic Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton,
with a slimmer than usual physique and newly acquired hair) joins the
TRACON team and almost instantly arouses Nick's suspicions.  "Pushing
Tin," an agreeably twisted comedy-drama from the gifted British
director Mike Newell ("Four Weddings and a Funeral," "Donnie Brasco"),
tracks the slow unravelling of Nick's mind and his marriage as he
becomes obsessed with Russell and his comely young wife Mary (Angelina
Jolie), who guzzles vodka by the bucketful to deal with the stress in
her home.
Controllers' wives, we learn, refer to themselves as "firsts,"
"seconds," etc., a telling sign of the failure rate of most
controllers' relationships. The screenplay by Glen Charles and Les
Charles offers many such observations, and it's no surprise to find it
was based on a New York Times Sunday Magazine feature that
investigated the pressure-cooker world of guys like Nick and
Russell. But rather than playing the subject matter for high drama,
"Tin" finds a certain sardonic humor in the paradox of men and women
who can't cope with their own problems, yet take the lives of
thousands of travelers into their hands daily. We're told an air
traffic controller saves more lives in one shift than a surgeon does
in an entire career. "Tin" is also very much in the same school as
other Cusack comedies, such as "Grosse Pointe Blank" and "Say
Anything," movies that didn't break any box office records when they
were originally released, but have built up fervent followings in the
years since. This stage-trained actor generally has uncommonly good
taste in material, as well as an impressive capacity for playing
seemingly normal guys who have to deal with issues much bigger than
themselves. Nick may be only a breath away from flat-out nuttiness,
but Cusack obviously likes him nonetheless, and gives him a largely
sympathetic reading. Subtlety and nuance are the keys to Thornton's
performance as well, which keeps us guessing as to the true nature of
Russell's personality. In the potentially tricky role of Nick's wife
Connie, the luminous Cate Blanchett adopts a dead-on Long Island
accent while avoiding turning the woman into a caricature. Jolie's
abrasive/pathetic Mary - who growls "I'm too sober for this" when Nick
tries to engage her in conversation - is also colorful and funny.

Author
Greg King
Pushing Tin takes us inside the rarely seen, high pressure
world of air traffic controllers.  These are the men who are
responsible for the safe landing of thousands of planes at New York's
three busiest air ports daily.  It's a stressful job, with a high rate
of suicide, severe depression, alcoholism and marriage breakups.  Like
MASH, this comedy/drama explores the sense of camaraderie that binds
over-stressed workers together, both at work and at play.
Pushing Tin is based on a magazine article written by a tower
insider and, frighteningly enough, reeks of authenticity.  While the
film often presents the human face of this intense but little known
environment, it doesn't exactly instil those who may be flying
somewhere in the near future with a sense of confidence.
Nick "the zone" Falzone (John Cusack) is New York's cocky
young hot shot controller, who is good at his job and revels in the
notoriety.  He finds his status challenged by the arrival of Russell
(Billy Bob Thornton), a maverick veteran who has come to New York
seeking greater challenges.  Russell once stood under a landing 747
just for the experience.  Testosterone quickly fills the air, and a
fierce spirit of competitiveness erupts between the two star
controllers as they attempt to upstage one another and prove their
machismo.
But then Nick breaks an unwritten rule of the tower fraternity
when he sleeps with Russell's seductive young wife Mary (Angelina
Jolie, from Hackers, etc).  Wracked by guilt, Nick slowly comes apart,
and both his career and his marriage are threatened by his
uncharacteristic and increasingly erratic behaviour.
Writers Glen and Les Charles, who wrote for tv sitcoms Cheers
and Taxi, explore this world with plenty of humour, although the
script contains a few slow and awkward patches.  British director Mike
Newell (Four Weddings And A Funeral, Donnie Brasco, etc) maintains a
fairly light tone throughout, although he does bring an edgy humour to
the material.
The central performances are all superb.  Cusack gives a solid
and increasingly neurotic edge to his performance and catches that
fragile line that most controllers walk.  Thornton brings his
characteristic droll style and down to earth charm to his role, and
does his best with a slightly underwritten role.  Aussie actress Cate
Blanchett is strong and appealing as Nick's bored suburban wife,
heavily into self-improvement courses, while Jolie brings a seductive
and sexy quality to her lesser but pivotal role.
Pushing Tin is an enjoyable enough film, but somehow its
melodramatic plot development leaves one feeling vaguely unsatisfied
that it didn't cut closer to the bone in exploring the on-the-edge
lifestyle of these men.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
I was just telling one of my buddies the other day, about how there just
aren't enough air-traffic controller comedies out there, and the next thing
you know, boom...PUSHING TIN! Pretty amazing :) This film is director Mike
Newell's follow up to the critically acclaimed DONNIE BRASCO (8/10) and his
most popular film, FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL (8/10).
PLOT:
Ace air-traffic control man, Nick, finds himself a worthy opponent, in
Russell, the new air-traffic kid on the block. But despite Russell's obvious
indifference to Nick's competitiveness, Nick suddenly finds himself obsessed
by the man's enigmatic superiority, and slowly begins to lose grasp of his
professional and personal life.
CRITIQUE:
Entertaining film that includes many funny moments, a roll of great actors
in top form, an original profession to dissect in air-traffic control, and
an overall feel of nothingness once finished viewing. I only saw this film a
couple of hours ago, and already, I don't remember much about it. That's
just the kind of movie it is. No huge moments, no huge laughs, but enjoyable
enough to see, and recommended on an even higher level on video. Now despite
its two-hour time clock, this movie never left me bored, and offered a great
mano-a-mano showing between the spry and cocky Cusack character, and the
cool and distant Thornton character. In fact, Billy Bob Thornton is the one
who really made this movie fun for me to watch. His character's ability to
thrive coolly under all of the pressure impressed upon him, was both
hilarious and inspiring to behold.
Kudos to Cate Blanchett for taking on a completely different role from her
previously Oscar-nominated turn as the Queen of England (She plays a perfect
Italian New York housewife in this one), and Angelina Jolie's breasts, who
put forth some of the greatest work by breasts in a film since the Jennifer
Tilly performances in BRIDE OF CHUCKY (7.5/10). I personally see a great
future for her pompons in the movie industry, especially when you consider
that they are attached to a truly great actress in her own right :) Cusack
is Cusack and jives perfectly as the fast-talking, smartass control man, who
eventually loses all control. The ending of this film was a tad cheesy, but
in a nutshell, its basic message expressed a need for external stimuli in
certain relationships, in order to jumpstart any stalled emotions. You'll
enjoy this movie if you're looking for something funny and less filling,
with an interesting insight into a profession that you don't know much
about, some fine actors, and a unique and humorous performance from Billy
Bob Thornton.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Coming soon to JoBlo's Movie Emporium (http://www.joblo.com/)

Author
Bob Bloom

 Pushing Tin (1999) 3 stars out of 4. Starring John Cusack, Billy Bob
Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie and Vicky Lewis. Directed by Mike
Newell.
 "Pushing Tin" opens with an impressive aerial shot of jumbo jetliners
zooming to and fro over New York.
 You are left to ponder how director Mike Newell created this shot. Are
they real planes? Is it computer graphics special effects?
 It's a dazzling opening and one that hooks you for the story to follow.
 For "Pushing Tin" is a character study of the men and women on the ground,
the air traffic controllers who every day hold the lives of thousands of
passengers in their hands as they direct the busy traffic that
criss-crosses the nation's skies
 Among these macho men, the balliest and coolest is Nick "The Zone" Falzone
(John Cusack), who lines 'em up and brings them in with ease and élan. To
Falzone, keeping track of who is where in the sky is the ultimate arcade
game and he is the grand master.
 That is until the arrival of Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton), a
laid-back, Zen-practicing controller who might be considered a bit crazy by
his cohorts. It seems Bell once placed himself at the end of the runway to
stand in the turbulence wake of a departing 747 just to see what it felt
like.
 A rivalry soon develops between Falzone, the control freak, and Bell, the
motorcycle-riding cowboy.
 Air traffic controllers are highly stressed, hard-living individuals who
work hard and, in their off hours, play hard.
 "Pushing Tin" (an expression for moving aircraft) is a quirky, comic movie
that also is a bit disturbing. If you really stop to think about it, would
you want to put your life in the hands of these on-the-edge individuals?
 You'll have your doubts after watching "Pushing Tin." The average career
span of an air traffic controller is about 6 1/2 years, and this movie -
the first to really delve into this profession - aptly shows you why. There
is no room for error in the air traffic control business. One misstep could
cost hundreds of lives.
 Yet, "Pushing Tin" does not dwell on the more morbid aspects of the job.
 Rather it focuses on the rivalry between Falzone and Bell and the
consequences it creates on the ground, which almost crashes and burns one
family.
 For the movie also looks at the spouses of the controllers and how they
must cope with the pressures their mates face.
 Russell's wife, Mary (Angelina Jolie), is a dusky, bosomy, beautiful woman
who - because of her husband's profession - is an alcoholic. She is
introduced at a backyard barbecue, and when she meets the wives of the
other controllers, they ask her what number she is. They then explain to
her how each of them is not the first wife of their respective spouses.
 It seems that most marriages eventually nosedive because of the fallout
from the stress of their spouses' jobs.
 With his calm detachment on the job, Bell eventually begins to surpass
Falzone as the ace controller. Nick has never been challenged, and his
reaction is to somehow get back at Russell.
 Nick's chance comes when he bumps into Mary crying in the supermarket.
Russell has gone off without any explanation - something he does on
occasion, Mary explains. Nick convinces Mary to accompany him to dinner.
Afterward, he follows her home and spends the night.
 The script by brothers Glen Charles and Les Charles, co-creators of the
hit TV series "Cheers," follows a path few other movies tread. It shows the
repercussions of a one-night stand.
 Mary and Nick are wracked with guilt. Mary tells Russell, but Nick cannot
bring himself to confess to his wife, Connie (Oscar-nominee Cate
Blanchett). This, of course, puts a strain on their marriage, which you get
the idea is a bit shaky from the outset.
 The last third of "Pushing Tin" cannot sustain what preceded it. It goes soft.
 If the film was a controller, it would have been relieved.
 But the performances by the four principals, as well as some throw-away
touches by the Charles brothers, redeems the effort.
 Cusack, as usual, gives a finely honed performance as a man on the edge.
He almost reminds you of his stressed-out hit man in "Grosse Point Blank."
 Thornton continues to re-invent himself. Here he is lean, meditative, an
odd man out, a far cry from the dorky, half-wit character he played in "A
Simple Plan."
 Blanchett is almost unrecognizable as Connie. Her American accent is near
perfect. She is as far removed from a legendary queen as an actress can be.
 And Jolie, daughter of Jon Voight, is sexy and vulnerable as Mary Bell.
 Among the supporting players, Vicky Lewis has a fine few moments as Tina,
one of the controllers. One of the film's best throw-aways shows Tina
competing in a women's body building competition. It has nothing to do with
the plot, but it helps define her character.
 It's those little touches that separate movies. "Pushing Tin" is fun and
interesting, a look inside a profession most people know nothing about.
 How accurate is it? Who cares. This is supposed to be entertainment, not a
documentary.
 Fine performances, a solid script and interesting visuals help "Pushing
Tin" take off without having to linger on the runway.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Sometimes a stellar cast can compensate for a lot of things, and
"Pushing Tin" certainly features some name stars who are going places:
Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie, and oh yes John Cusack
who might not realize it at first, but he's actually the *veteran* among
this quartet of fine-looking people.
        Sometimes a terrific cast like this can compensate for a lackluster
screen treatment of an idea that has "hip comedy" written all over it,
compensate for workmanlike but uninspired direction, compensate for an
obnoxious score that would have anyone but the tone deaf screaming for the
exits, compensate for clichéd characterizations, compensate for
embarrassing "you have to be joking" situations.  Etc.
        In "Pushing Tin," Thornton, Blanchett, Jolie, and Cusack don't have
an earthly.
        From the opening sequence the film is in big trouble: squiggly,
"quirky" credits, fake-looking passenger planes circling New York, and Anne
Dudley's in-your-ear music making us wonder how she ever got that Best
Original Score nomination for "The Full Monty," let alone won it.  But I,
for one, wasn't ready to walk just yet.
        So quickly we descend into a tightly-edited air traffic controllers
montage which screams to us in large capital letters THESE PEOPLE HAVE A
DIFFICULT JOB, YES, what with their frantic, mile-a-minute instructional
personas, juggling planes and passenger's lives like some huge, real,
mid-air video game.  Hip, cool, demonic auctioneer Nick "the Zone" Falzone
(Cusack) is the best in the biz.  Of course.  Until some hipper, cooler,
leather-clad flyboy assist in the guise of Russell Bell (Thornton) shows up
to challenge Falzone's finite air space.
        Boys will be boys and some heavy duty testosterone starts exuding,
then the macho one-upmanship begins.  It doesn't stop with seeing who can
juggle three 747s within a cat's whisker of each other.  Oh no.  There are
some broken hoop dreams, some wanna-see-how-fast-I-can-drives, and then the
ultimate showdown: was that my wife I saw you with last night?
        Director Mike Newell ("Four Weddings and a Funeral") must have read
a different draft of this script because the one that's being acted out up
there between Newark, JFK, and La Guardia doesn't have an ounce of
subtlety, and Newell has made some awfully good-and funny-movies before.
The antics of these air traffic controllers will make you cringe.  They'll
make you frown in disbelief.  They'll have you constantly looking at your
watch.  But wait!  There's still 100 minutes to go!!
        The film's only saving grace is Blanchett, whose Connie Falzone is
a spunky, brash, Long Island housewife who wants to better herself by
taking art classes.  This is a wonderful accomplishment for the fine
actress who has previously played a red-headed Australian gambler ("Oscar
and Lucinda") and a tempestuous British monarch ("Elizabeth").  But she's
not enough to save the picture.  Thornton looks terrific and performs
solidly but his character is a joke.  Jolie (as Russell's knock 'em dead
wife) isn't bad, but the up-and-coming actress disappoints by allowing
herself to be displayed like a plaything.  Cusack cracks gum, dons shades,
and acts hip throughout but, like everything else in the film, his
performance is forced.
        In the last ten minutes or so, for some inexplicable reason, things
start coming together and you begin to get a sense of how this film might
have been, like the trailer teases.  But it's too little too late.  A fine
cast aside, "Pushing Tin" is nothing more than an embarrassment.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "PUSHING TIN" (20th Century-Fox)
"The current (air traffic control) system is 99.4% reliable," according to an FAA spokesman, but how do the air traffic controllers, who have the ultimate high pressure job, let off steam?  The title, "Pushing Tin," refers to a phrase that air traffic controllers use to describe their work - and that's the theme of this dark romantic comedy in which John Cusack plays a vain, fast-talking "jet jockey" at New York's Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON) center on Long Island that handles up to 7,000 flights a day into and out of LaGuardia, Kennedy, and Newark airports. He's the manic, self-absorbed, dominant "top dog" until the arrival of Billy Bob Thornton ("A Simple Thing"), a mysterious, motorcycle-riding, half-Indian cowboy from Oklahoma with a laconic demeanor and a wild reputation ("Did you really stand on a runway and let a 747 part your hair with weight turbulence?"). Fueled by caffeine and machismo, a fierce, obsessive and disruptive rivalry emerges.  It's a !
contest of wits and wills, where stress is the great equalizer and bravado is the lowest common denominator, a game where the winner - not the loser - could lose it all: his marriage, his job, and his mind. Cate Blanchett ("Elizabeth") and Angelina Jolie (TV's "Gia") are the wives who serve as the escape routes in their husbands' emotional and psychological lives.  Director Mike Newell ("Four Weddings and a Funeral," "Donnie Brasco") keeps the chaotic comedy fast-paced, while Glen & Les Charles's (TV's "Taxi," "Cheers") relationship-oriented screenplay is based on a New York Times Sunday Magazine article, "Something's Got to Give," by Darcy Frey. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pushing Tin" is a frantic, funny 7. It's an inventive, intense, irreverent look at the prevention of mid-air and mid-life collisions.

Author
Jon Popick
A group of men emerge from a giant warehouse, their eyes obscured by
dark sunglasses.  No, it's not one of those Ray Ban commercials with the
vampires  it's Pushing Tin, a film about a group of over-stressed,
bleary-eyed New York air traffic controllers, working the most crowded
air space in the world.  The name comes from the vocational slang for
when a controller is landing planes at a higher-than-average rate, or
`pushing tin.'
John Cusack (Midnight in the Garden of Good & Evil) stars as Nick `the
Zone' Falzone, the fast-talking, efficient leader of the group who finds
his life thrown into upheaval when his bosses hire another alpha-male,
Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton, A Simple Plan), to work alongside
him.  Bell's tag as `an interesting guy' and Zen attitude toward his job
and personal life brings out all of Falzone's insecurities.  Plus, Bell
has a really hot wife (Angelina Jolie, Gia).  Before you know it,
Falzone is reduced to a simpering idiot.
You would expect more from a film with this pedigree.  Director Mike
Newell (Donnie Brasco) has a more-than-decent track record, and the
acting talent is first-class (three Oscar nominations and two Golden
Globe wins in the last three years).  The big problem is with the
predictable script, which was adapted from Darcy Frey's magazine article
titled `Something's Got to Give' and is the first film adapted for the
screen by Cheers creators Glen and Les Charles.  Tin also features a
bizarre subplot focusing on Falzone's lone female coworker (Vicki Lewis,
NewsRadio) and her aspiring bodybuilding career.
2:03 R for nudity, adult language and some mild violence

Author
Michael Dequina
_Pushing_Tin_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
_Pushing_Tin_ is not, as a friend of mine erroneously yet understandably
concluded from its title, about aluminum siding salesmen.  However, the
occupation held by its main characters, Nick Falzone (John Cusack) and
Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton), is indeed one not typically given center
stage treatment in the movies: air traffic control.  Directing planes into
a collision-free course onto the tarmac may not sound like the
action-packed stuff movies are made for, but director Mike Newell makes the
challenging yet seemingly tedious job appear incredibly exciting.  The
rivalry between cocky hotshot Nick and the serious, even more skilled
newcomer Russell threatens to turn their very real and serious job into one
big game, and their battlefield of computer blips certainly resembles a
video game.  However, they--and the filmmakers--never lose sight of the
lives that hang in the balance with every move of the cursor, lending Nick
and Russell's faceoff-at-the-console scenes a certain amount of suspense in
addition to their driving intensity.
Nick and Russell's rivalry naturally leaks out into the world beyond the
workplace, and that's where Newell and screenwriters Glen and Les Charles
run into turbulence.  In fact, _Pushing_Tin_ is less about Nick and Russell
as air traffic controllers than it is their domestic lives.  While this
inherently is not a problem, its familiarity is, and it takes about a good
hour of exposition before the film touches a crucial, and eventually
central, point--that each appears to fancy the other's wife.  Nick is drawn
to Russell's vivacious 19-year-old wife Mary (Angelina Jolie), and Russell
starts to pay some much-needed attention to Nick's largely neglected
homemaker wife Connie (Cate Blanchett, acquitting herself nicely in a
contemporary role).  This side of the story is well-played by all involved
and there are more than a few funny moments (a musical interlude in a
restaurant is a highlight), but instead of enhancing the film, it only
serves to make what was an original premise into something far too
conventional.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
starring John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie,
Jake Weber, Kurt Fuller, Vicki Lewis
based on the article "Something's Got To Give" by Darcy Frey
written by Glen Charles and Les Charles
directed by Mike Newell
According to a character in PUSHING TIN, Mike Newell's very
interesting new comedy, air traffic controllers have a higher risk of
depression, alcoholism, and suicide than workers in any other
profession. When I first heard the remark, I took it as a joke, but
after the film was through, I understood that it was indeed a fact.
John Cusack stars as Nick Falzone, a New York area air traffic
controller who, according to himself, "pushes tin" better than any of
his colleagues. His marriage to Connie(Oscar nominee Cate Blanchett)
is working out fairly nice, and he doesn't let the fact that he has to
make thousands of fateful choices every day bring him down.
But then Russell Bell(Billy Bob Thornton), the Marlboro Man of air
traffic control, gets shipped from his southern post to New York. An
intense rivalry between Nick and Russell begins. Nick begins to crush
on Russell's young, voluptuous, alcoholic wife Mary(Angelina Jolie),
while Russell starts to take a liking to Connie. Nick and Russell's
rivarly ensues during work and at home, with each character trying to
outdo each other so intensely that they end up trying to control not
only planes but their own lives.
John Cusack is fine as always as the protagonist, and PUSHING TIN is a
film in which he can show off his dramatic and comedic chops. It has
been a while since Cusack's sarcasm and charisma totally shine in one
performance.
Billy Bob Thornton stays low-key during most of the film, but he
portrays his villain nicely. Thornton is indeed talented, but I'd like
to see him play more SLING BLADE-type roles instead of being typecast
as a southern devil who just happens to have a certain amount of
grace.
Cate Blanchett's performance, though, is questionable. First of all,
why should this actress of tremendous skill be miscast in her first
American role? She tries hard enough to perfect a New York drawl but
her Australian voice pops through one too many times. Blanchett is a
commanding actress, and she deserves a role with more prowess.
And then there is the great Jolie. Angelina Jolie. There is nothing
that special about her performance in PUSHING TIN(she is very
underused), but she is much different than her characted in PLAYING BY
HEART, so I guess I'll say that she shows some depth. Seriously,
everyone should take notice. Angelina Jolie is going to take over
Hollywood.
Director Mike Newell has shown his knack for drama(DONNIE BRASCO) and
comedy(FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL), and PUSHING TIN gives him the
chance to combine both.  For the most part, it works very well, but
the last 1/3 of the film features a couple plot elements that are too
contrived to take seriously. If nothing else, Newell has provided a
film that works on many levels, both as a drama and a comedy, and also
the film shows us very interestingly a job that many of us have never
seen or even thought about. PUSHING TIN is also partly a romance, but
mostly it's just the kind of film you want to see. That's my
recommedation.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST


Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie.
Rated R.
A filmmaker that wants to make an observation of the American workplace can
go many directions. He or she can do it the satirical, brutally funny way,
like Scott Adams likes to do in his Dilbert comics and tv show or like Mike
Judge tried to do with the recent Office Space. One could go with subtle
irony such as Harold Ramis did in Groundhog Day. Or you could go the way of
the new dramedy Pushing Tin. Director Mike Newell (Donnie Brasco, Four
Weddings and a Funeral) essentially pulls a bait-and-switch; he pretends to
focus on the characters and engages us in their stories, but when the movie
is over you realize that what you have just seen is subtle, somewhat
effective social commentary on the unfairness of one fundamental fact: some
people's jobs are just more important than others.
If you've ever wondered, or even been a little frightened of who it is that
patrols the sky making sure that those big things called planes don't crash
into each other while flying 600 miles per hour at 20,000 feet in the air,
this movie may make you a little wary of flying. From the very beginning it
plunges us into the world of the engimatic people that are air-traffic
controllers. Newell introduces us to hot-shot Nick Falzone (John Cusack), a
cocky but gentle, average guy with an average wife. His job, however, is
nothing but average: on his shoulders, every minute of every hour, lie
thousands of lives. One slip and you lose a planeload of people. Fortunately,
Nick hasn't slipped: yet. But then a new guy is hired, Russell (Billy Bob
Thornton, and from the moment the two see each other, they hate each other.
Or so it seems.
What is most interesting about Pushing Tin is the way it handles the men's
intense rivalry. I liked how Newell never let it boil down to something very
simple, like he easily could have. As a matter of fact, the fun part of this
movie is figuring out just what drives these two men. Let me warn you: the
reason is not simple and it never becomes glaringly obvious, although it isn't
particularly hard to see after all is said and done.
Pushing Tin tends to be darkly funny, but if I was asked to classify the
movie I would likely say drama. It is even a real drama, up until about
two-thirds of the way through, when it completely falls apart. For reasons
that never become clear, Pushing Tin falls into the deadly grips of
conventionality just as it was starting to become interesting. It all begins
with a bomb threat -- now you know that a sudden bomb threat in a movie like
this can only ruin it. That holds true, because after that scene everything
goes wrong in this movie. There is a ridiculous and utterly pointless
sequence closer to the end, which I won't go into, but which involves two
people standing under a Boeing 747 as it takes off. It's your average
pseudo-inspirational crap.
Fortunately, the performances from the leads in Pushing Tin are solid
straight across. John Cusack is charismatic in a charismatic role, and Cate
Blanchett finally has a delightfully ordinary role to play, and after seeing
her in Elizabeth it's fun to watch her play an ordinary person. Billy Bob
Thornton is extraordinary once again, more mysterious than anything else in a
role that lets him (for once) underplay his character.
The first half of Pushing Tin works like a gem, the second half flops. I
didn't know whether to laugh, cry or go stand under a Boeing 747.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) It is well known that air traffic controllers have one
of the most stressful jobs there is. So it seems odd that before now,
they haven't shown up as the subjects of a movie. 
John Cusack and Billy Bob Thornton break onto the screen as two
interesting specimens. Both are at the top of their field, though each
takes a different approach to his job.
Nick (Cusack) is extroverted and fun-loving. He has nervous tics and
can't handle driving below the speed limit. He's an alpha-male
overachiever, a grown-up kid who loves the stress and challenges of his
job.
During the film's setup, we catch a glimpse of what goes on in his mind
while he's working. The simple blips on the controller's screen
transform themselves into an active, dynamic 3-D computer simulation
when he's "in the zone."
Once we get a feel for the fast-paced, close-knit camaraderie of the
control room, the film introduces us to Bell (Thornton). He's the new
kid on the job with a killer rep. Rumors that he stood under a landing
747 to ride the turbulence turn out to be true. But unlike Nick, he's
always cool under pressure. He's just as good as Nick, but he doesn't
wear his adrenalin on his sleeve.
Nick is thrown off-balance by the arrival of Bell. Having someone equal
to him in the control room shakes him deeply, and he doesn't know how to
react. He's jealous of Bell. He doesn't dislike or begrudge him, but he
can't let go of the fact that someone else might be as good as or better
than him.
An unspoken competitive tension exists between the two characters --
mostly in Nick, but kept alive by Bell. Their tension is a spark waiting
for some fuel, say three bottles of vodka and several glasses of wine,
to ignite it.
Nick finds Bell's buxom wife Mary (played by the big-lipped Angelina
Jolie) crying in the supermarket with mostly vodka in her cart. She's
looking for sympathy and he's looking to give it. Since neither spouse
is home, the two end up in an Italian restaurant sharing lots of stories
and too much wine. Nick valiantly offers to follow her home, just to be
sure she gets there safely. One thing inevitably leads to another, and
the two end up in bed together.
Bell finds out what happened and reacts with his usual calm. Although
he's calm, he still manages to get back at Nick by insinuating some
cross-cheating with Nick's wife. These mind games make Nick jealous and
confused, as they were no doubt intended to.
The plot wanders away from its two main characters before it takes a
firm shape. Just when you think the film is entirely about Nick and Bell
and their wives, screenwriters Glenn Charles and Les Charles (of
"Cheers" fame) introduce a horribly transparent plot device. A bomb
threat is called in and the shift supervisor says "I need two" (what a
coincidence) "good men to stay and man the scopes!"
After that, it's hardly worth tracking the plot. The bomb threat clears.
Nick's wife Connie (Cate Blanchett, underused in this role) eventually
learns of his infidelity. Nick's paranoia about Bell comes to a head.
There are two or three "endings," none of which really feels like it
wraps up the whole movie.
Suffice it to say everything works out in the end for everyone, after
Nick undergoes a contrived catharsis that doesn't even make sense
emotionally.
PUSHING TIN is borderline recommendable. With such a confused and
contrived final act, the movie leaves you with a bad taste. But it CAN
be worth the price of admission, if you're not going for the plot.
Go because of the well-formed, well written characters. Go because of
the funny, solid camaraderie of the air traffic controllers. Go because
Cusack is surprisingly good and Thornton is predictably good. Go with
forgiveness in your heart, save some for the ending, and have a good
time.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 20th Century Fox/ Regency Enterprises
 Director:  Mike Newell
 Writer:  Glen Charles, Les Charles
 Cast: John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett,
Angelina Jolie, Vicki Lewis, Ramona Milano, Robert N. Smith,
Jake Weber
   TV and movie screens are overloaded with police dramas
because cops lead exciting and dangerous lives.  Yet no film-
maker before now has dramatized the career of air traffic
controllers, who work in a profession that ranks along with
high-school teaching as among the most stressful.  Each day,
thousands of people entrust their lives to the judgement of
these brave people, who burn out so briskly that for some
their most prominent fantasy is chucking their jobs at big city
airports and transferring to small-town landing strips that
handle two or three flights a day.  I recall sitting in the waiting
lounge at Narita airport outside Tokyo, gazing at planes
coming in at the bewildering rate of one per minute.  Only
then did I appreciate the guys behind the scenes who were
directing traffic only by the blips on their radar screens,
barking orders throughout the day so that a major city can
play host to hundreds of flights in a 24-hour period without
experiencing a crash--ever.
   Mike Newell, who received great plaudits for his skills in
directing the delightfully comic "Four Weddings and a
Funeral," puts his talent to work in a comedy-drama filled with
fast talk, hip exchanges, moments of melodrama and no
small among of sit-com exchanges.  The film is so engagingly
offbeat for a commercial studio feature that you await a
concluding payoff, praying like the passengers on the
descending planes that this time around, Hollywood would not
compromise.  Don't expect too much.  The final half hour of
what could have been one of the more challenging studio
movies of the year is so out of character, so sappy, silly and
unbelievable, that you'll wonder what sort of audience Newell
had in mind: the type that regularly patronize the more
intimate and challenging indies; or the category that go for
the saccharine genre that helps make daytime TV a vast,
though well-populated wasteland.  
   The good news is that John Cusack and Billy Bob Thornton
can both play unconventional roles: pitting them together in
conflict keeps the movie flowing, crackling with tension and
technique for most of its two-hour run. (Thornton, in fact, was
the recipient of the Best Support Actor Award from the Online
Film Critics Society in 1998 and Cate Blanchett, who
performs in the role of Cusack's wife, received OFCS' Best
Actress prize the same year.)  
   Newell, using a screenplay from Glen and Les Charles
(which includes some scenes reminiscent of the TV megahit
"Cheers," also by those writers), fills the opening displays
with a field-trip-eye view of the work done by the harried
controllers.  They speak so rapidly to the pilots that you may
wonder how the poor fliers from countries with non-Romance
languages understand a word.  Their conversations with one
another are at least as rapid, and like cops and firemen, they
form buddy-buddy attachments so strong that they go
together to bars after work and invite one another to their
backyard barbeques.  When Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton)
is introduced to the crew as its new but highly experienced
and recommended employee, the controllers think of him as
weird. He is a mysterious fellow who hardly speaks and is
known as a cowboy who once stood in the path of a landing
747 to experience the effect of a backwash--which had the
outcome of tossing the man into the air and flinging him
swiftly to the ground.  When Russell's sexy wife, Mary Bell
(Angelina Jolie), is introduced to Nick Falzone (John Cusack),
Nick's mind strays from thoughts of his sweet wife Connie
(Cate Blanchett).  One night, when Russell is out of town and
Mary is feeling lonely, Nick invites her to an Italian restaurant
where he charms her by his ability to sing.  They land
inevitably in her bed.  What follows will threaten the lives of
the pilots who depend on him, his marriage to Connie, his
entire career.
   While Cusack can compete with Chris Farley as a
motormouth, the show-stealer is the laconic Thornton, who
comes across as a New Age philosopher who is also
outstanding on the job at the radar controls.  His calm
reaction to news of his wife's extra-marital activities is a
product of his philosophy, making a scene in Colorado
between him and the straying husband, Nick, the most
fascinating one of the story and surprisingly credible when
compared to the absurd ending of the movie.  
   "Pushing Tin" is worth seeing because you don't often get
players like Cusack, Thornton and Blanchett bouncing off one
another.  And you do learn quite a bit about the people you
entrust with your lives each time you fly, whether domestic or
international, whether Continental or Delta.  Speaking of the
behind-the-scenes people who never get the recognition they
deserve, the movie's make-up personnel deserve mention for
the job they did on Cate Blanchett, transforming her image
from that of England's most famous queen to a suffering
suburban American housewife.  "Pushing Tin" is solid, offbeat
entertainment of the sort you don't often find in heavily
financed studio films.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
        John Cusack and Billy Bob Thornton are in top comedic form in Pushing
Tin, a strange little movie about air traffic controllers.  Directed by
Mike Newell (Donnie Brasco, Enchanted April), the film is hilarious and
entertaining for the first hour and a half, but slumps into
senselessness for its conclusion.  The characters are well-drawn and
perfectly acted by the cast, and the movie works when it focuses on the
rivalry between the two stars.  But it could have been a great movie if
it had found the right way to end (which would have included no baptism
scenes in a Colorado mountain stream).  It also doesn't have a lot to do
with air traffic controlling -- we get the feeling this story could have
been about stock brokers on Wall Street.  Nonetheless, Pushing Tin has
more charms than annoyances, and is therefore worth a look.

Author
Walter Frith
A children's tour group is shuffled through an air traffic control center
and while the tour guide is trying to make his usual informative speech, one
nerdy little kid observes that air traffic controllers have one of the
highest stress jobs imaginable.  Describing the job that leads many of them
to become alcoholics, insomniacs, nervous wrecks, air traffic controller
Nick Falzone (John Cusack) says: "You forgot suicide, kid".  Suicide in this
line of work doesn't just mean the loss of life.  There are many ways to die
in this job.  Three mistakes in two and a half years by allowing planes to
come too close to each other on your radar screen means your job is killed.
Having an affair with a colleague's wife can mean the death of your
marriage.  And remaining in the building when a bomb threat becomes a
serious threat can indeed kill you.
What makes 'Pushing Tin' work so well the way it does is that the film is
layered with many whimsical anecdotes and makes a tediously old story of
marital infidelity seem fresh and alive with short controlled burst of
laughter rather than genuine belly laughs.
Nick's fellow colleagues in the air traffic control business are the kind of
people you want to socialize with.  They keep a sense of humour about
themselves during the most stressful points on the job.  They often place
bets on a colleagues performance and frantically exchange the money between
themselves when the payoff comes.  They often get together for barbecues,
play pool and drink while toasting to their job which, believe it or not, is
a real marvel.  An observation made in the film is that an air traffic
controller is responsible for more lives in one day on the job than a
surgeon is for his entire career.  The story is set around the New York City
area where three airports, JFK, LaGuardia and Newark International are all
within twenty miles of one another.  Incidents involving planes flying too
close to one another appear to be a regular thing if you believe the display
of events in this film.  I'm sure this will cause a lot of talk among
aviation analysts, the general public and air traffic controllers themselves
as well as the Federal Aviation Administration as to just how accurate this
information is.
Nick seems to be a happily married man.  His wife Connie (Cate Blanchett -
Oscar nominee from 'Elizabeth') is a loving wife and they have two kids.
Their lives are turned upside down by the arrival of Russell Bell (Billy Bob
Thornton) and his sex pot wife Mary (Angelina Jolie).  Russell is a
colleague of Nick's who has worked as an air traffic controller in many
locations around the U.S. and Nick has a one night stand with Mary while
Connie says she slept with Russell although we don't know if this ever
happened since we don't see it.
What makes the film work is that many of the scenes involving infidelity and
the talk surrounding it have many injections of off beat humour that are
appealing and director Mike Newell ('Donnie Brasco'), directs 'Pushing Tin'
in the same manner he did with 'Four Weddings and a Funeral'.  There is a
zany but realistic flare emphasized in the film's comic moments and pushing
tin is a slang expression which refers to the job an air traffic controller
has of directing huge aircraft safely through the skies of the world's most
hectic city.
The strikingly original screenplay is by Glen Charles and Les Charles based
on an article by Darcy Frey entitled 'Something's Got to Give').  The film's
score is also very entertaining and is by Oscar winner Anne Dudley ('The
Full Monty').
What's most interesting about this film is the excellent performance of John
Cusack.  Cusack has denied himself the opportunity to become a huge star
like Tom Cruise, Mel Gibson and Harrison Ford.  A group he can easily fit
into but he has instead purposely opted for the quirky and off beat roles
he's enjoyed and is one of the best actors out there.  But more than that is
the bizarre, and at times hilarious performance of Billy Bob Thornton.  He
has made a habit of playing bizarre and unorthodox characters in 'Sling
Blade' and 'A Simple Plan'.  And if you liked him in those films, don't miss
'Pushing Tin'.  His character in this film enjoys mind games, sleeping
through possible traffic accidents where he may be a victim, shooting hoops
without missing very often, and standing under 747's as they fly over his
head upon landing on runways and the concussion of the plane's sweeping
force lifts him off his feet and hurls him many feet into nearby fields
where he laughs his head off upon hitting the ground.  He reminds you off a
circus performer and free spirit at the same time.  All in keeping with the
film's general theme which is a balanced and totally redeemable comedy for
adults.  You may not want to fly for a while after seeing the movie as it
plays on the paranoia of air travel the way 'Jaws' played on the paranoia of
going swimming in the ocean.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mike Newell.
Cast: John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie, 
Jake Weber, Vicki Lewis.
1999 - 124 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed April 24, 1999.
While watching the offbeat comedy-drama "Pushing Tin," I was involved in 
the characters and all of their plights. Leaving the theater, the only 
real thing in my mind was the literally flawless cast, filled to the rim 
with both Academy and Golden Globe winners. I liked most of what I saw, 
but it was also difficult not to acknowledge how much stronger it might 
have been with just one more screenplay rewrite.
Starting off as a film set in the world of air traffic controllers at 
New York's Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON), the central 
character, Nick Falzone (John Cusack), is at the top of his profession, 
effortlessly firing out airplane directions as if it was poetry at a 
near-constant rate. He has a loving wife, Connie (Cate Blanchett), who 
yearns for knowledge and thus has just begun a college art class, and 
two young children, one of which they have just learned has Attention 
Deficit Disorder (this pointless plot development is brought up briefly 
and then completely dropped). Eventually, Nick's world slowly begins to 
unravel when he has a negative run-in with the mysterious 
motorcycle-riding Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton), and then discovers 
that he has just gotten a job as an air traffic controller. While at a 
barbecue get-together with friends, Nick is surprised, to say the least, 
when he discovers that the 40-year-old Russell has a beautiful sexpot 
20-year-old wife, Mary (Angelina Jolie). After comforting the upset Mary 
at a grocery store and having dinner with her, Nick finds himself 
sleeping with her, but immediately afterwards regrets it and gradually 
begins to feel more and more guilty towards Connie. Meanwhile, he also 
starts to grow jealous as Connie and Russell hit it off and become 
buddies, fearing that they might make the same mistake that he made with 
Mary. 
In hindsight, after seeing the film, it is clear that "Pushing Tin," 
directed by Mike Newell ("Four Weddings and a Funeral"), probably seems 
like a better movie than it actually is for one simple reason: the 
performances from the top-notch cast are nothing short of marvelous. 
While the film certainly has a memorable premise, it quickly puts its 
originality on the backburner for a more conventional romance which, 
honestly, is fine by me since the relationship between Cusack and 
Thornton is sorely underdeveloped and flat. This subplot could have 
easily been more effective, however, but it was in the thin screenplay 
by Glen and Les Charles where the film failed. While all of the other 
characters are brought into a three-dimensional perspective, Russell is 
left noticably vague, more of an enigma than an actual participant in 
the story. This obviously leads to some very major problems, considering 
that what was supposed to be one of its strongest elements was in the 
feud between Nick and he. Instead, Russell is seen as mostly a good guy, 
albeit a poorly-written one, and their problems stem solely from the 
jealousy of Nick. 
As previously mentioned, faring best are certainly the performances from 
a line of brilliant actors who all are able to inject unexpected life 
into the people they portray (aside from Thornton, so unforgettable in 
1998's "A Simple Plan," who just doesn't have anything to do here). In 
what is perhaps his best role since 1989's thoughtful "teen" 
comedy-drama, "Say Anything," John Cusack, like Nick, is in top form. 
With his doe-eyes and puppy dog face, Cusack really hasn't aged much in 
the last fifteen years, and is able to sympathetically convey Nick's 
flaws and emotions, as he quickly realizes that, because of one 
thoughtless night with another woman, he has put his relatively happy 
marriage into serious jeopardy. Cate Blanchett, fresh off her amazing 
performance in the otherwise mediocre "Elizabeth," has transformed 
herself from the Brit that she is into a New Jersey housewife, complete 
with one of the most unaffected and natural accents I can remember. Not 
only that, but Blanchett is given the most purely human and likable 
character, and handles every scene perfectly, including the heartfelt 
and inevitable sequence in which she finds out Nick has cheated on her. 
Finally, Angelina Jolie, snubbed of an Oscar nod for 1998's "Playing by 
Heart," proves once again why she is currently one of the best and most 
exciting young actresses working today. Although her character of Mary, 
like Russell, is thinly written and completely disappears in the second 
half, Jolie is fortunately still given a few scenes to show her stuff 
and make the audience care about her.
You know, it's funny how much I cared about everyone in "Pushing Tin," 
how much I wanted them to be happy and relinquish themselves of their 
many mistakes and problems. But then, it's unfortunate how subpar the 
rest of the movie really is. For every intelligent and well-handled 
scene, there were several that were way off the map, including pretty 
much the whole last twenty minutes, with Nick and Russell going out to 
an airport runway and having the force of a landing plane overhead cause 
them to spin right off the ground into a sort of circular tornado motion. 
Silly me; I was led to believe, by what came before this, that what I was 
watching was supposed to be reality-based. With such an entertaining 
array of performances, it's almost enough to marginally recommend 
"Pushing Tin," but not quite. It is at the screenplay level that ultimately 
leaves these fine actors without a plane to fly them home.
Special Note: In the aftermath of the Columbine High School Massacre in 
Littleton, Colorado, it was fairly shocking how closely some plot points 
in the film came to the tragic occurrence. Not only is there a bomb 
threat scene, complete with police, SWAT teams, news reporters, and 
helicoptors, but later on we find that one of the men trapped in the 
building, Russell, has moved to Colorado. 
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Michael Redman
Competition is one of the almighty forces in the universe. In the course of
human affairs it ranks up there with gravity, nuclear fission and sex.
When I was a kid, we were told that competition was the main difference
between communism and capitalism. We had it, they didn't and because of that,
their economic system was doomed to failure. Plus they were godless which was
almost, but not quite as bad.
Competition is what drives wars. For 50 years the Soviet Union wanted to be
King Of The World as did the United States. Oddly enough for a non-competitive
country they were as aggressive as we were.
Competition causes men and women to do weird stuff. It's behind the macho and
catty attitudes. It's why people can be remarkably stupid in the presence of
the opposite sex. It causes individuals to cheat, lie and steal to get ahead
in their careers.
It's also one of the reasons that some perform at their peak and do
extraordinary work.
Nick "The Zone" Falzone (John Cusack) is a competitive guy. And he's the best.
An air traffic controller at the New York Terminal Radar Approach Control, he
guides planes at three major airports with rapid fire commands.
It's a frantic job. The facility controls 7,000 flights a day. Controllers are
responsible for thousands of lives a day. Sitting at radar scopes, they are
one with the electronic images. They stare through the screen into a virtual
3-D world with the same concentration that teenage video game players possess.
After work, they play with the same intensity. Drinking, flirting in cafes,
shooting hoops, catching a quickie with their wives: everything is fast and furious.
Nick's life is good. In the small town of Controllerville, he's top dog.
Until, that is, a new gun moves in. Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton) shoves
aside the chair on rollers, pulls up his own folding chair, sticks a feather
in his hair and gazes into the scope with a Zen-like serenity.
Russell is a wonder, stacking up planes like no one has seen before. He shows
up Nick. Even worse, he does it without breaking a sweat. He effortlessly
bests Nick's free throw record at a barbecue. All the wives are agog in the
presence of the mysterious stranger. Nick is fueled by caffeine and
adrenaline. Russell is a smooth as silk.
Nick can't stand it and begins his search for a way to win the rivalry. Soon
his paranoia takes over and he starts to lose it. Is Russell playing the
one-upmanship game or is he just who he is?
The actors are first rate. Cusack masters his quirky obsessed character and
makes it seem as easy as rolling off a log. Thornton retains his impressive
presence he's shown in other films and captivates the screen.
The women are equally skilled although they don't get as much screen time.
Cate Blanchett is Nick's wife Connie, a middle class floosie with a look of
intelligence behind her eyes. There isn't a second you don't believe that's
who she is. Her performance is particularly impressive when you realize this
is the same woman who played a completely different role in "Elizabeth".
Angelina Jolie, as Russell's child bride Mary, is the film's hot babe. When
she struts through a backyard party, leather-clad, pouty-lipped and exhibiting
abundant cleavage, the men are speechless. She and Nick have dinner in an
Italian restaurant after he chances upon her crying in a supermarket. While
they are talking, she slowly tastes one of her fingers and his fidelity is a
lost cause.
Mary is the woman that every man would like to meet - until they discover the
foundation of her personal food pyramid is vodka.
The film has dozens of sub-plots maneuvered like the tiny blips on radar,
lining up one after another. Although most glide to smooth landings, some
meander around and eventually crash into the Atlantic. The individual scenes
are well crafted, but a few don't work together.
The story's weakness is the ending. Not completely unsatisfying, it still
feels out of synch with the rest of the movie. Like many films recently, it
could have ended about ten minutes earlier.
(Michael Redman has written film columns since before the invention of
moveable type and thinks he's going to take the train on his next trip. Email
tales of air adventure to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 4/26/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
Ross Anthony
Nice take off and landing, but the flight was rather uneventful. "Pushing
Tin" pits John Cusack against Billy Bob Thornton one-upping each other for
top air-comptroller status. The ego-dual isn't enough to move the plot
along, so wives get involved; changing the feel of the film from the air to
a worldly soap opera.
The two hot shots bump heads until one of them breaks. From there the
development of the relationship jumps a few thousand feet rather abruptly.
"Pushing Tin," sporting great dialogue, is very well acted. It's tense techy
setting is promising, but the meat of the movie seemed rather inharmonious
with it's dazzling slices of beginning and end.
Starring John Cusack and Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett and Angelina
Jolie.
Directed by Mike Newell. Screenplay by Glen Charles and Les Charles.
Produced by Art Linson at Fox 2000/Regency.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Kong
Pushing Tin is one of those movies that have at its core a subject that is
quite exciting, but fails to realize it to its full potential.  With
Pushing Tin, the core subject is the lives of air traffic controllers.  The
movie starts out well, but then it crashes and burns as if there were no
air traffic controller guiding this film along.
There are in essence two parts to Pushing Tin.  Both parts center on the
life of Nick (John Cusack) Falzone.  The first part of the film shows
Falzone at work as a air traffic controller at one of the most busy air
spaces in the world, which is located in New York.  Falzone is the best of
the best when it comes to air traffic controllers, able to mentally
reconstruct the two-dimensional radar display into a three-dimensional
image.  He can talk faster than the fastest person in the profession and
can line up those planes faster than anyone in the office.  This first part
is fast paced, exciting, and quite watchable.  The second part of the film
deals with Falzone's life outside of the air traffic control room.  This
includes Nick's wife who is played by the unrecognizable Cate Blanchet.
Everything changes for Nick one day as another air traffic controller,
Russell (Billy Bob Thornton) Bell, enters the picture.  Bell seems to be
the better controller than Nick is, and being the competitive sorts that
the both of them are, they are at each other's throats for the rest of the
film.  This concocted tension between the two is ludicrous.  The tension
built like this could have been for any profession, why did writers Glen
and Les Charles (who created "Cheers") have to saddle it with air traffic
controllers is beyond me.  I mean it could have well been two guys who are
laying phone cable and still have been the same movie.  The movie's plot
boils down to the common male conflict, "mine is bigger than yours."
As the movie moves along Nick's life falls apart and near the end of the
movie we're wondering how things are going to resolve themselves.  And
things resolve themselves in a typical sitcom kind of way - except that in
Cheers the problems are all made and solved in 30 minutes, in Pushing Tin
it's a painful 110 minutes.  Let's just say that Nick's problems are solved
with cold water and jet wash.  The ending is just plain silly.
Director Mike Newell who has directed strong films such as Four Weddings
and a Funeral does what he can with the awful script.  The script is
occasionally laugh-out-loud funny, but those moments are far and in
between.  There was one sequence that I did enjoy and that was the sequence
in which Falzone shows off his driving skills to Bell.
The primary actors in the film all do well with the material.  Cusack does
exceptionally well with his material, giving how thin his part really is.
Cusack is able to pump more life into his part just by being onscreen.
Thornton is always a reliable actor and he doesn't fail in Pushing Tin
either.  His performance is wonderful as the exceedingly quite Bell.
Blanchet (Elizabeth) is hilarious in her role.
It's too bad that Pushing Tin is pushing a bad script.  This movie could
have been much more.  There are great performances in the film and a
director that knows what he's doing.  It's just the script that fails in
all ways.  The script wanders like a plane in the sky without destination.
Skip Pushing Tin in the theatres and save your money for something else.
This might be a decent catch on video if you want to see Cusack, Thornton,
and Blanchet's performances, but next to that, it's a skip on video also.
 a guy with a helluva attitude who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
20th Century Fox is now on a roll.  This year, they have released many of what
I call "could have been great" films that have had everything in place to make
an outstanding, one of a kind film.  Pushing Tin is just another to add to the
list.  The main element in this film that could have made it an A' film is the
wonderful cast.  John Cusack, Academy Award nominee Cate Blanchett, Academy
Award winner Billy Bob Thornton, and Golden Globe winner Angelina Jolie are the
key cast in this comedy/drama about the occupation of air traffic controlling.
John Cusack stars as Nick Falzone, an air traffic controller.  He is the best
at his station, and everyone admires his wonderful work of saving lives all day
long.  Nick is at a great stage in his life.  He is very happy in his marriage
with Connie, played by Cate Blanchett, whom he has two kids with.  One day, all
of that changes.  A new air traffic controller is introduced to his station. 
His name is Russell Bell (Billy Bob Thornton), and is top notch as well.  Nick
starts competing with him right off the bat.  For the rest of the film, the two
compete to see who is the better man.  Sometimes this is funny, but sometimes
it can be very dramatic as well.
At first it is all fun between the two, but then things start to turn bad. 
Nick finds himself losing everything he had.  He even cheats on Connie with
Russell's alcoholic wife, Mary, played by Angelina Jolie.  From the point where
this takes place, the film goes into more of a serious, suspense-drama mode
than the more fun, light, comedic mood.
The entire concept of Pushing Tin was based on a magazine article about an air
traffic controller.  It was neat to see such an interesting insight to this
overlooked job.  It's not often I walk away from a film knowing a lot more
about a subject than I did to begin with.  The 3-D scenes that the film goes
into makes the concept of air traffic controlling seem pretty simple.  I
thought this was very cleverly done.
The writing in Pushing Tin is absolutely horrible.  There are so many scenes
that don't serve any purpose at all to the overall film.  At least twenty
minutes of footage could have been cut from the film.  If scenes like the
pointless seven or eight-minute bomb scene were cut, the film would have been
much better.  Due to the amount of pointless scenes, the film dragged a lot. 
The running time is only two hours and hour minutes, but yet it seems like it
was three hours long.
Other than the writing, everything is okay in the film.  The sound really added
a lot to the film.  The sounds of airplanes send off vibrations that you can
feel.  The filmmakers turned down the sound at the right times and pumped it up
right when it was perfect to do so.
The strongest part in the film without a doubt was the outstanding
performances.  John Cusack, who has not been seen in a leading role since
1997's Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil, gives the best performance I
have ever sen him give.  He got to go a lot of places with this character, and
he took full advantage of that.  Billy Bob Thornton is good in Pushing Tin, but
it is a step down from the wonderful flick, A Simple Plan. (A-) Thornton's
character just kind of sat there silent for the majority of the film, and it
would have been nice to hear some more from him.  Also taking a step down is
Cate Blanchett, who perfected her role in the masterpiece Elizabeth. (A+) She
is very good here as well, but she doesn't get a lot of room to develop her
character too much.  Angelina Jolie, who was last seen in another one of 1998's
best, Playing by Heart (A-), pretty much plays the same role as she did in
Playing by Heart.  We didn't get to se her as much though, which was a
disappointment.
The Bottom Line- The writer of this could have been great film were "pushing"
it a little bit.

Author
Christopher Null
     PUSHING TIN is being promoted as a funny, endearing look at the
crazy-wacky lives of air traffic controllers, with a little romance in
the mix.
     PUSHING TIN is actually a droll, relatively lifeless look at the
crazy-wacky lives of two rival air traffic controllers (Cusack and
Thornton), neither of whom you'll actually like very much nor care
about.
     Same goes for their wives (Blanchett and Jolie, respectively, who
play shades of the same white trash bimbette - one blind to the world,
the other a drunk loony).
     TIN has a few things going for it, namely some mildly interesting
scenes where said tin is pushed around (the tin being a euphemism for
planes in the air), though the movie gets awfully pedantic and obvious
in pointing out just how stressful this job can be and what an awful
toll it takes on the personal lives of these guys.  And if you thought
air travel was dangerous, well, this movie won't help matters much.
     But TIN has much more detracting from an otherwise interesting
setup: namely, that the story blows.  It's too long, it's boring, and no
character is remotely likeable.  Even John Cusack, who made a name for
himself being likeable, is not.  Same for Thornton, imitating a deaf
mute air traffic wunderkind of some sort.  And while you think it may be
fun to watch Jolie slut around as the town ho, it's not.  Even Blanchett
(last seen as Queen Elizabeth) playing streak-haired Jersey is just
plain bizarre instead of compelling.
     What else to say?  PUSHING TIN is poised to be a substantially
overhyped flick that delivers on few of its promises.
     Consider this flight delayed at best, due to bad weather.
http://www.foxmovies.com/pushingtin/
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com - Buy my
book!
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom/002-2549101-0837427

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Credit 20th Century Fox marketing with a first in my tenure as a
critic:  along with the press notes for PUSHING TIN, they included a copy
of the source material.  "Something's Got to Give," an article written by
Darcy Frey for the New York Times Magazine, took us behind the scenes at
the New York Terminal Radar Approach Control (or TRACON), which manages
air traffic in the busiest airspace in the world.  Focusing on the events
of one Thanksgiving weekend, the article provided a brilliant and
frightening look at the people who cope with incredible stress and
appalling working conditions to prevent your plane from slamming into
another plane every time you take off or land.  It was a superb piece of
reportage turned into a compelling story.
     There may be a great film to be made from that story, but PUSHING TIN
isn't it.  It's set at New York TRACON, all right, focusing on a hot-shot,
nerves-of-steel controller named Nick Falzone (John Cusack).  Nick is the
undisputed champ at taking them up and bringing them down...until Russell
Bell (Billy Bob Thornton) comes to town.  A laconic outsider who pushes
the limits of "pushing tin" -- controller lingo for maximizing the use of
airspace to keep flights on time -- Russell also pushes Nick's alpha-male
buttons, setting off a rivalry which leads to Nick sleeping with Russell's
wife Mary (Angelina Jolie), then suspecting that Russell has taken the
same liberty with Nick's wife Connie (Cate Blanchett).
     For about the first half hour, and sporadically thereafter, PUSHING
TIN is actually about the high-pressure world of air traffic controllers.
Director Mike Newell employs computer graphics effectively to get us
inside how controllers see their domain, and keeps up a brisk pace to
match the frantic energy of the characters.  Meanwhile, writers Glen & Les
Charles (co-creators of "Cheers") do a nice job with the camaraderie and
gallows humor that keeps everyone sane.  The control room scenes dump you
right into the milieu without explaining every scrap of terminology first,
pushing you through days in the life of a place always just seconds away
from chaos and complete disaster.
     In fact, just about everything is right with PUSHING TIN except its
central storyline.  Cusack and Thornton are such talented actors that it
might take longer than usual to register that their conflict has virtually
nothing to do with the world of air traffic controllers.  There was a
mini-series' worth of psychological material in Darcy Frey's article, but
PUSHING TIN instead chooses the mundane head-butting of Nick and Russell,
combined with smirky seductions and marital squabbles.  It's a conflict
that appears to have been pasted over this backdrop by people who had no
idea what to do with it for a major studio film except tell a generic
studio film story.  There's no reason for PUSHING TIN to be a film about
rival air traffic controllers if this was the story they were going to
tell; it could just as easily be a film about rival matadors, or rival
insurance salesmen, or rival periodontists.
     The lack of a solid center really shows in the final 45 minutes, when
the film falls apart completely.  There's a bumpy flight, a bomb scare, a
Zen immersion in a mountain stream and a showdown with jet engines, none
of which makes the characters more than the broad sketches they've been
from the start.  It all builds to a climax in which the big question is
not whether these twitchy folks will cause a mid-air collision, but
whether Nick and Connie will kiss and make up, playing cutesy over a
passenger jet's radio.  There was a tremendous opportunity for PUSHING TIN
to dig into the on-the-edge psyches of men responsible for thousands of
lives a day, the men Darcy Frey introduced us to in the source article.
That'll teach Fox to give us a glimpse into what might have been.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Mike Newell's PUSHING TIN, John Cusack and Billy Bob Thornton go head
to head as rival air traffic controllers.  If you thought air traffic
controllers wouldn't be promising subjects for a comedy, you'd be right,
at least based on PUSHING TIN.  But forget the marketing, maybe the film
was meant to be a drama, not a comedy.  Regardless of its intentions,
the resulting movie, while not bad, is neither particularly funny nor
dramatic.
I've seen the movie and still have no idea what the director was trying
to do.  It almost seems as if the creative energies ended after the
film's admittedly strong casting was completed.  Glen Charles's script,
based on an article by Darcy Frey, doesn't have many ideas other than
one good sight gag, which is done twice, and involves a bit of
ridiculous bravado.  The story's twists are predicable, and one of the
best scenes is set up only to be aborted just as it is starting to work.
If real New York air traffic controllers are anything like the guys in
this movie, you may want to rethink your upcoming trip to the Big Apple.
They spend their time horsing around, acting like overgrown kids playing
an increasingly boring video game.  They get their kicks by playing
games with those little graphics representing airplanes in the sky.
Acting like frat boys anxiously awaiting the next panty raid, they
fidget and jump all over the place.  There is a token female on board,
but we're shown her at her body building competition to prove that
underneath she's really one of the guys.
When they're not on the job, the controllers are performing daredevil
maneuvers in their flashy cars.  (They make better than a hundred grand,
their wives brag.) In a scene lifted straight out of MARRIED TO THE MOB,
their overly made-up wives compare numbers, as in which wife number are
you?  Third seems to be about average.  These guys burn out wives like
tires at a racetrack.
Nick Falzone (Cusack) is the leader of the pack, until a lone wolf named
Russell Bell (Thornton) comes into his air traffic controller den.  Like
rival alpha males, they test each other by seeing who can stack the
planes into the tightest spacing without blinking and without causing
passenger deaths.  Hint: Bet on Billy Bob.
Thrown in the plot for no extra charge and not much reason is some juicy
marital infidelity.  Cate Blanchett, looking like a Mafioso wife, plays
Nick's wife, Connie.  The winner in the maximum cleavage category,
Angelina Jolie plays Russell's wife, Mary.  Besides producing the most
saliva from Russell's coworkers, the alcoholic Mary's big claim to fame
is that she is the only wife number 1 in the group.
After the affair -- or is it affairs?  -- the already charged dynamics
between Nick and Russell take on even stranger dimensions.  If the
characters were either more genuine or more humorous, this part might
have proved interesting.  As it is, the movie just lies there without
much happening until the last act, which contains several endings.  Too
bad only one of them is satisfactory, and it's not the last one.
Is there a market for a comedy that isn't particularly funny or a drama
that doesn't have much impact?  Only time will tell, but this movie
doesn't have much going for it other than the marquee names.
PUSHING TIN runs too long at 2:04.  It is rated R for some profanity,
nudity and sexuality and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
In the crowded skies over New York City, planes fly dangerously close
to one another, but somehow manage to never collide.  In the film,
"Pushing Tin," hotshot air traffic controller Nick (John Cusack) and
new-kid-in-town Russ (Billy Bob Thornton) have an uneasy working
relationship that comes dangerously close to colliding, yet their story
never manages to make an impact.  What throws this film off-course? 
The answer is that the main story between these two could only muster
as much flight as the Spruce Goose.
Nick is the charismatic leader of a tightly knit clique of air traffic
controllers.  These ATCs safely guide in dozens of airplanes every
minute over the busy New York City skies.  Nick, who has a sharp mind,
an acute ability for spatial relationships, and a-mile-a-minute mouth,
easily tames the chaos and congestion overhead.  Looking at a dozen or
so scattered blips on his radar screen, he confidently blurts out
instructions to each of the incoming planes, urging them to change
course or speed.  It's an unenviable juggling act, and if he (or any of
the ATCs) can not perform at their highest level, a mid-air collision
becomes frighteningly likely.  As Nick relays instructions, the
scattered blips begin to take form.  What was just a disorganized bunch
of blips a few minutes ago has been transformed into a cadence of jumbo
jets making their final approach.  This guy definitely knows how to
push tin.
Nick's self-esteem is about to be compromised when Russ, a new ATC,
joins the group. He's an odd and quiet person who dons an Indian
feather.  But, he knows how to maneuver planes in for landings, and
he's really good at it too.  Russ's skill earns the respect of the
other ATCs, while his eccentric demeanor makes him 'interesting' to
Nick's wife (Cate Blanchart, the only bright spot in this film).  Nick
can't seem to handle his insecurity.  He begins a personal quest to
regain superiority, which will ultimately come at the expense of his
honor, integrity, and even his family.  Stories where a likable guy has
to regain his previous greatness after a horrific fall is always nice
feel-good film fodder.  But Russ is too subdued and is in a constant
state of Zen.  He doesn't seem like much of a threat and their rivalry
amounted to nothing more than a staring contest.  Nick's obstacles
didn't seem all that compelling.  Contrast his relative short journey
to the more challenging and ultimately more fulfilling quest of Jerry
Maguire.  Consequently, Cusack's character and his situation could not
draw us into his life-turned-upside down world.  
This mediocre rivalry and Nick's laffable ascension would make any of
us assume crash positions.  But hidden in this generally lifeless film
are some nice 'slice-of-life' elements replete with heavy
'Lon-Guy-Land' accents, confessions, and revelations.  I don't know
many air traffic controllers, but I bet that they lead some interesting
lives.  On a field trip to the control station, a bespectacled egghead
points out that ATCs are the most likely to commit suicide or suffer
from mental breakdowns.   At a picnic, wives identify themselves by
which number wife they are ("I'm his fourth wife"), giving us a glimpse
into the unique lifestyle of the ATC.  I liked these little snippets
and peeks into their lives.  The rest of the movie, however, is just
excess baggage.


Author
Luke Buckmaster
PUSHING TIN
Cast: John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie,
Jake Weber, Kurt Fuller, Vicki Lewis, Matt Ross
Director: Mike Newell
Screenplay: Glen Charles & Les Charles
Australian theatrical release: July 22, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
1 and a half stars
"Pushing tin" is a term that refers to the ability to move planes
quickly, but don't be deceived by the film's trailers - it's not so much
about controlling air traffic, but rather the controllers themselves.
Writers Glen and Les Charles have an obvious interest in the
high-pressure job of their central characters, but ultimately this is a
very simple story about human relations and traits; jealousy, I suppose,
the key one on show.  The really bad news is that the vast majority of
this humdrum drama - advertised as if it were the year's most exciting
film - is awkwardly paced and far, far too conventional.  Consequently,
it's boring.  Booorrrriinnng.  Pushing Tin begins promisingly, but it's
a down hill ride.  The film systematically topples over itself again and
again, destroying the already crippled plot elements it depended on.
I mentioned the word "conventional" in a disapproving context, which is
rightfully so because I want to make it clear that Pushing Tin does not
lack in the flow its narrative due to the prevalent style its
screenplay - marriage dilemmas are perhaps too common in film nowadays -
but rather the continually obvious and quite uninteresting plot elements
at work.  The Charles' have developed a screenplay that takes familiar
formulas from different genres and sticks them together.  As a whole,
the film is not entirely predictable, but contains many scenes that are
laced with cliches; the kind of cliches that were bad even when they
first appeared oh so many years ago. I found myself constantly wanting
to be involved and entertained by the picture, but my frustration
dominated as the story generally worsened.
Nick Falzone (John Cusak) is an ace air traffic controller - a real
hot-shot in the industry - who is challenged to give up his legendary
status at work upon the arrival of Russel Bell (Billy Bob Thornton).
Russel is even greater a hot shot - he "pushes tin" - thus Nick gets a
severe case of green-eyed jealousy.  So much so, that both parties
suffer marital problems with their wives (Cate Blancett and Angelina
Jolie) that result in some bitter confrontations, and (yawn), some life
lessons.
"This is pretty boring," the person sitting next to me said, and I think
we both had that reaction when the formalities of the story became
tedious.  If Hollywood will insist on reissuing cliches again and again,
surely they can stage them in the right context.  The moral of the
story - scenes and dialogue in a screenplay should not be there simply
for the narrative to keep jumping as the plot proceeds.  Don't write
dialogue for the sake of it being heard, write it for enjoyment and to
sustain interest in the story.  The dialogue in Pushing Tin is very
average, and the film's pacing is very awkward - it seems to be
constantly trying to build up momentum, only to slow everything down
again.
The cast list of Pushing Tin is certainly an impressive one.  I believe
John Cusak and Billy Bob Thornton are two of better, if not best, actors
working today.  Cusak is a rare find, an actor who effortlessly conveys
subtle absurdity in many of his roles, and somehow manages never to look
bad in the process.  I could almost say the same thing about Thornton,
although he usually looks for something a little more deep.  His
incredible debut in Sling Blade, his jokingly serious part in Armageddon
and his riveting performance in A Simple Plan made him a reliable choice
for a difficult dramatic role.  The strange thing is, these two actors
bored me in Pushing Tin, due to a lack of chemistry between the male
leads.  Cusask's very intentionally charismatic acting becomes
irritating, and Thornton is supposedly portraying a wise, mysterious
character, but he appears like one of those annoying people whose every
spoken word is an attempt to prove their supposed intelligence.
Veteran director Mike Newell, whose credits include the messy but very
enjoyable Four Weddings and a Funeral and Donnie Brasco, doesn't find a
good rhythm in Pushing Tin, and doesn't drive his narrative into enough
intriguing scenarios.   There are some worthwhile parts in the film,
most of which occur inside the air traffic control headquarters.  But
that's nowhere near enough.  Call me fussy, call me pretentious; but if
one more person makes an artsy-fartsy joke at my expense, I'll be forced
to hibernate through the winter and re-emerge when next year's Oscar
contenders arrive at Christmas.  So please refrain from giving me crap.
There's plenty of that at the cinema.


Author
Dennis Schwartz
PUSHING TIN (director: Mike Newell; cast: John Cusack (Nick Falzone),
Billy Bob Thornton (Russell Bell),Cate Blanchett (Connie Falzone),
Angelina Jolie (Mary Bell), Vicki Lewis (Tina Leary), Jake Weber (Barry
Plotkin), Kurt Fuller (Ed Clabes), Jerry Grayson (Leo Morton), 1999)
Who's the better man? That's the real theme of this sitcom
comedy/romance film about air traffic controllers in the NYC area,
covering its three major facilities, JFK, LaGuardia, and Newark, that is
based on a "NY Times Magazine" article about how stressful their job is.
As the hot shot traffic controller, Nick Falzone (Cusack), known
affectionately by his peers, as "The Zone", who is very confident of his
ability to make sure planes land safely, with the keen ability to solve
problems quickly, who is also known as being a rapid fire talker
possessing a razor sharp mind. Nick's life changes for the emotionally
worse when a new controller is transferred into his shift, also a hot
shot, or a loose cannon, as Nick prefers to think of him, he is the
soft-spoken mystery man, Russell Bell (Thornton), who battles with Nick
for top spot, as he displays an extraordinary ability to keep the air
lanes clear, without slowing the planes down, so the airlines have no
complaints to the supervisors about their planes not being on time. This
is called "pushing tin."
The film becomes a contest as to who is the better man, Nick or Russell:
1) As they vie on the job, even wrestling on the floor, for top spot. 2)
In racing their vehicles. 3) In their basketball shooting. 4) In each
other's marriages. They don't care for each other, as each has different
things to work out in their life and each finds something about the
other one that disturbs them.The other two characters in this basically
four character movie, are Connie Falzone (Cate), Nick's suburban wife
and former high school sweetheart, who speaks with a fluent Long Island
accent (quite different from her stronger Elizabeth 1 role), and Mary
Bell (Jolie), who is the 19-year-old alcoholic, knockout, tattooed wife
of the 40-year-old Russell, who relates to the other controllers' wives,
as wife number one, as these women refer to themselves by the numbered
wife they are to their previously divorced spouses, such as wife number
one, two, three, four, or five.All the women' performances are cute, but
they don't have too much else going on for them to make their characters
interesting.
The male stars keep the film flying along. Billy Bob might just be the
best character actor in the movies today. He keeps his character
zen-like and puzzling, despite being hampered with an inept script, as
he tries to outwit the script that makes everything he is doing seem
contrived, as he offers us a contrast to Nick's slightly off-beat
regular guy role.Nick is the one who is supposedly contented with his
family life and his job, that is, until Russell pulls the rug out from
under him and he begins to unravel in all area's of his life. I just
wish Cusack would lose that coy smile he seems to bring with him in
every role he has, it is starting to wear tiredly lame on him.These
stars make their characters seem more real than they have a right to be,
because the story is just too thin to carry much weight on it, except to
follow its commercial instincts and provide the audience with enough
obvious action sequences to keep the pace of the film moving at jet
speed, allowing hardly any time for one to sit back and think about the
real turbulence that could have been experienced about traffic
controllers' stress from the job.
The British director, Mike Newell (DONNIE BRASCO and FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL), has a sound ear for comedy and a way of capturing the tense
work scene in the control tower. The chaos and controlled confusion in
the tower, and close camaraderie waffling in the air between the
controllers and even their bosses was fun to watch, as well as giving
the audience a chance to be looking over their shoulders at the computer
screens they work with, giving an accurate and colorful view of the job
they do.
The film chose not to go in the direction of political insights, so no
mention is made of the Patco strike (1981), where President Reagan fired
over 11,000 controllers of the 17,000 in the nation, creating a shortage
that still exists, even though replacements were almost found for all
those layed off, but the flights have increased many-fold since then,
leaving them with the same stressed-out conditions they complained about
before, and with less experienced men on the job. It is really
astonishing that a film about traffic controllers wouldn't even mention
the most startling event that ever happened to them.
It was the director's ear for comedy that made the film enjoyable,
despite the sitcom feel to this story that, at times, made me cringe
with disappointment, wishfully thinking that this capable cast,
including the fine supporting cast, could have really done well with
this subject matter if they were only presented with a potent script
instead of this trivial one, that laid all the stress problems on the
laps of the controllers' twisted personal lives, such as when Nick
screws up, nearly causing two crashes within a short-time span at work,
all because his wife left him over his infidelity with Russell's wife
and Russell retaliated by screwing his wife, while the real cause of
stress, the unimproved work conditions at the airports, is not even
broached.
In any case, the humor and the banter among the workers was constantly
funny, but the low-key, understated wit of Russell was even more
hilarious than the workers' gallows humor, it was laugh out-loud humor,
as in the macho driving scene, where Nick is making an effort to get to
know his rival, to find out up-close what he is up against, as he
invites him out for donuts after work, and starts racing his car and
passing cars and trucks dangerously on the crowded Long Island
Expressway, and he can't even fluster Russell, as he stops for a light,
and as the light turns green, he sits exasperated with his hands folded
over the wheel, and Russell quietly says, the light isn't getting any
greener, and so, he puts on one more burst of daredevil riding and pulls
into the donut shop, and all Russell could say after that harrowing ride
is, good, the shop is open... I'm afraid that scenes such as this one,
are the only redeeming features of this comedy/romance that saved it
from crashing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
