Title
Review for Get Over It (2001)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Pete Croatto
Get Over It at least has one thing that a lot of other high school
movies don't:  earnest, affable leads.  It also has all of the key flaws
that make going to teen movies so risky:  an almost unbearable goofy
streak, a plot with the strength of a newborn fawn, and bland supporting
characters.
The movie makes the same mistakes over and over and eventually drains
one's patience, but yet I stuck around because the leads played kids I
would have liked to know.
Kirsten Dunst (Bring It On) plays an intelligent, friendly musical
talent, who for reasons never explained in the movie, helps a schoolmate
(Ben Foster) win back the girlfriend (Melissa Sagemiller) who dumped
him.  Dunst coaches him through an audition for the school musical,
which stars Sagemiller.
But nothing comes easy.  Dunst and Foster start falling in love, while
Foster still has the hots for Sagemiller, who is seeing her co-star
(Shane West).  Meanwhile, events conspire to force Foster to star
opposite the two girls he has feelings for.
Dunst and Foster (a real-life couple) are perfect for the leads.  He has
a very appealing, laid-back charm, while she displays a sweet, concerned
demeanor that makes her such a good pal here.  Together, they're fun to
watch.
Unfortunately, most of their (and the movie's) appeal gets lost among
the stupid activities that dominate the plot--a chronically humping dog,
punch spiked with vomit, a trip to a sex club.  Screenwriter R. Lee
Fleming seemingly wants his teenage audience constantly occupied, an
insulting and disrupting tactic.
By going the crass route, Fleming neglects developing most of the
supporting characters.  Foster's friends (Colin Hanks and "Thong Song"
crooner Sisqo) don't have personalities.  They're just extras with more
face time.  Dunst's friend (Mila Kunis from That 70's Show) appears to
have been cast simply because they needed at least one more attractive
girl to get the green light from Miramax.
Foster's sex therapist parents (Swoosie Kurtz and Ed Begley Jr.) are
also poorly written.  They readily accept their son's sexual/social
adventures.  Boring.  It'd be funnier if the parents were completely
shocked at everything their son did.  The only effective supporting
actor is Martin Short, who plays his typically unhinged self as the
school musical's obnoxious director.
Here he's doing a variation of his flamboyantly blunt talent agent from
The Big Picture, but it's still fun to watch him dance like a Backstreet
Boy and to perkily tell Dunst of her performance: "Yes, it's just not
very good."
Short's production of A Midsummer Night's Dream (think Grease meets
Shakespeare) is one of the movie's bright spots, as is a musical number
featuring Foster walking in lovelorn shame as singer Vitamin C and an
array of characters dance to "Love Will Keep Us Together."
Those moments of bubbly charm come in fits and starts, and the wait
requires lots of patience.  Either that or a predilection for watching
dogs hump objects.
Director: Tommy O'Haver
Producers: Michael Burns, Marc Butan, Paul Feldsher, Richard Hull,
Louise Rosner
Writer: R. Lee Fleming
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, Ben Foster, Shane West, Martin Short, Sisqo,
Colin Hanks, Mila Kunis, Swoosie Kurtz, Ed Begley Jr.
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Get Over It (2001)
Kirsten Dunst, Ben Foster, Melissa Sagemiller, Sisqo, Shane West, Colin
Hanks, Swoosie Kurtz, Ed Begley Jr., Zoe Saldana, Mila Kunis, Martin
Short, Mistress Moira, Coolio, Christopher Jacot, Kylie Bax. Written by
R. Lee Fleming Jr. Directed by Tommy O'Haver. 87 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
In 1998, Indianapolis filmmaker Tommy O'Haver became a hot commodity
with his debut feature, "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss," a sweet,
wonderfully imaginative and beautifully shot production. When I
interviewed O'Haver, he was hard at work on a big screen adaptation of
the beloved comic book, "Archie." "I'm rewriting the script and will be
directing the film" O'Haver told me in '98. "I wrote the first draft as
well. It's going to stay very true to the comic book. It's going to be
like a live action comic and will be hip in its aesthetic. And yet these
characters are going to be ultra-pure and squeaky clean, but there's
going to be so much drama going on in their romantic lives that I hope
people won't hold that against them. It's going to have dream sequences
and musical numbers, some good catfights between Betty and Veronica."
Alas, the movie was not to be. The studio executives changed their minds
and the highly anticipated "Archie" ended up shelved. But O'Haver was
not to be denied. For his second feature, the young director has taken a
thoroughly ordinary teen romantic comedy and added his distinctive
touches, making "Get Over It" more engaging than most offerings in this
tired genre. We may never see O'Havers' take on "Archie," but the
stylistic flourishes here give us a good idea of what it might have been
like. I don't want to oversell this production, so let me stress that
"Get Over It" is no jewel. The script is only intermittently funny, good
ideas are underdeveloped, most of the characters are barely even
one-dimensional and the lead couple has no chemistry together. Still,
I'm glad I saw it, thanks almost completely to Tommy O'Haver.
Set in Anytown, USA, the story introduces high school senior Berke
Landers (Ben Foster), who was just dumped by Allison McAllister (Melissa
Sagemiller). The pain of rejection heightens when Allison starts dating
Bentley "Striker" Scrumfeld (Shane West), a smirking Brit from the 'N
Sync-ish boy band Smalltown Lads (we get a brief look at the video for
their hit, "Luv S.C.U.D.").
When Berke learns that Allison and Striker plan to audition for the
school's spring musical, a "hip" take on Shakespeare titled, "A
Midsummer Night's Rockin' Eve," the lovesick teen ignores the advice of
his friends Felix (Colin Hanks) and Dennis (Sisqo) and sets out to join
the production. Berke is tone deaf, but luckily, Felix's sister,
aspiring singer-songwriter Kelly (Kirsten Dunst), offers to coach him.
Will there be tense moments between Berke and Striker? Will there be a
big party where something disgusting happens? Will the drama teacher
turn out to be a dictatorial queen? And will romance finally spark
between Berke and Kelly? Anyone who has ever attended a teen comedy
knows the answer to these questions. Happily, O'Haver brightens up the
generic journey with some inspired touches. For instance, when the
just-rejected Berke trudges away from Allison's house at the beginning
of the movie, a production number breaks out behind him, with a garage
band lip-synching to "Love Will Keep Us Together" while trash collectors
and delivery men break into dance.
There are more treats, particularly during the latter part of the movie,
when the school musical shifts into high gear. Martin Short plays drama
teacher Dr. Desmond Forrest-Oates as a cross between Andy Dick and Fred
Willard, tossing off lines like, "I remember what the great Robert De
Niro once said to me well, not to me, but I read it in an article."
Short clearly has a field day throwing tantrums in the kiddy pool and,
clichéd though his character may be, he is fun to watch.
The other adult characters in the cast are kind and understanding to an
absurd degree, from the coach who tells a tardy player, "You are so
lucky I'm not Bobby Knight," to Berke's parents, played by Swoosie Kurtz
and Ed Begley Jr., who host an extremely lurid TV relationship show
called "Love Matters."
Along with the pleasant surprises comes the requisite teen comedy
gross-out bits. Viewers are treated to a pet pooch that humps anything
and a drunken partygoer that barfs into a bowl of punch. O'Haver
presents these scenes in a pedestrian manner, getting them over with as
quickly as possible so he can focus on what he really wants to do.
The young cast is serviceable, doing what they can with their one-note
roles. Only Kirsten Dunst comes off as an actual human being in this sea
of lightly sketched cartoons. But the real star of this movie is Tommy
O'Haver; who takes a lousy teen comedy and manages to spin it into a
mildly entertaining feature. Even with his efforts, "Get Over It" is as
insubstantial as meringue, but at least it's a tasty meringue.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Give a teenager a reading assignment, and they'll grumble up a storm.  Make
a movie out of the same reading assignment, and they'll be breaking down the
multiplex door while waving fistfuls of money.  That's the lesson you can
cull from the last few years, which has seen more than a few classic works
of literature turned into films geared toward teenagers.  Kids don't want to
read "Pygmalion" - they want to see She's All That.  I've seen 16-year-olds
visibly cringe upon hearing Jane Austen's name, but they'll watch Clueless
every time it's on cable.  They can't stand Shakespeare but think 10 Things
I Hate About You is a frigging riot.
The latest transformation from neglected classic to teenage tripe is Get
Over It, a high-school take on Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
The thing that separates Get Over It from its ilk is the presence of the
original work within the story, although in the somewhat unconventional form
of a school musical.  In fact, there's more that a few musical numbers in
the film, most of them intentionally awful (I hope - they were written by
South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut's Mark Shaiman), starting with the
somewhat bizarre opening credits, where pop star Vitamin C lip-synchs The
Captain and Tennille's "Love Will Keep Us Together."
Get Over It's protagonist is Berke Lawrence (Ben Foster, Liberty Heights),an
integral part of his high school's basketball team along with best friends
Felix (Colin Hanks, Roswell) and Dennis (Sisqó.seriously).  Long story
short, Berke's girlfriend Allison (Melissa Sagemiller), who he has loved
since he was seven, has just kicked him to the curb and started dating an
arrogant new student and former British boy band member called Striker
(Shane West, Dracula 2000).  Berke is distraught and will resort to anything
to win Allison back (the film was originally called Getting Over Allison),
but his friends try to get him to divert his attention elsewhere.
Berke sees a big chance to get close to Allison in the school's musical
production of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" but is a little too dumb to figure
out how to learn lines and stuff.  So he gets help from Felix's kid sister
Kelly (Kirsten Dunst, Bring It On), who, presumably, has had a crush on him
for years.  In case you couldn't see it coming, when the play is cast, Berke
plays Lysander, Kelly is Helena, Striker is Demetrius and Allison plays
Hermia.  And in case you aren't familiar with "Dream," this all means that
Berke is going to have a chance to get back with Allison, but opts to get
friendly with Kelly instead.
The story is a simple as they come, and without Shakespeare's prose, can't
come close to filling up a 90-minute film.  So how does Get Over It pad its
running time?  Mostly with a bunch of sight gags that have absolutely
nothing to do with the story.  It's junior-league Farrelly stuff, like a dog
who loves to hump things.  There are a few adult characters who are supposed
to help with the comedy but end up being nothing but annoying.  Ed Begley
Jr. and Swoosie Kurtz plays Berke's seemingly normal parents, but they're
also co-hosts of a television relationship show (cue embarrassing on-air
moment).  Worst of all is Martin Short, who plays the clueless director of
the high school play with about a tenth of the vigor of Corky St. Clair in
Waiting for Guffman.
Get Over It was directed by Tommy O'Haver (Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss) -
the man responsible for (unknowingly, I hope) unleashing the untalented
force known as Sean Hayes on the world.  There wasn't much to Billy's, but
it was visually appealing; a talent O'Haver seems to have misplaced.  The
script was written by R. Lee Fleming Jr., who wrote She's All That (and
didn't star in Full Metal Jacket).  Of the young acting talent, only Dunst
is a standout.  Unfortunately, there doesn't seem to be enough films like
The Virgin Suicides for someone of her age and talent to tackle, leaving
only claptrap like this available.
1:34 - PG-13 for some crude/sexual humor, teen drinking and language

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A boy who gets dumped by the love of his life can't seem to get over her.
While she's moved on to the next guy, he still tries to win back her heart.
In the meantime, another girl likes him for what he is, but blinded by the
love for his ex-girlfriend, the boy does not notice her. Of course, sparks
fly all around when the whole gang join in the school's theatre production
and strands of truth begin to surface.
CRITIQUE:
What can I tell you...I was entertained! A cute, fun teen flick with many
scene-stealing moments from the incomparable Martin Short, an upbeat
soundtrack, believable performances from its leads and a predictable, yet
charming, romance angle. Believe you me when I tell you that I wasn't really
looking forward to seeing this movie. The first two months of this year had
jaded me in respect to bad teen and romance flicks altogether, and this
movie didn't seem to have much going for it. But low and behold, there I
was, laughing and giggling my way through this surprisingly potent vehicle
for the teen generation. This movie is a lot like SHE'S ALL THAT and 10
THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU. It's entirely predictable, it's based on a more
renowned dude's writings (this one plays off Shakespeare's A MIDSUMMER
NIGHT'S DREAM), and is obviously set in high school. But the difference
between this and most other crappy teen movies is that this one actually
comes across as a fun ride, with little more on its mind than entertaining
its audience. Does the film have its problems? Absolutely. For one, it
unfortunately includes a couple of recycled jokes from other movies like the
girl getting hit by a car and flying through the air (SCARY MOVIE) and the
clutzy blonde chick who keeps bouncing into things (HEAD OVER HEELS).
Also, I simply could not get past the fact that two of the supposed
"teenage" actresses in this film looked like they were in their 30s. I
mean...really! (for those who care, I'm referring to Allison and the clumsy
girl). And the final act of the film, which essentially comes down to a
major school play, just went a little longer than I thought was needed. I
mean, did we really have to sit through 3-4 songs from the play itself? But
these were really small issues for me, and for the most part, I can't say
that I wasn't entertained by this movie. In fact, pretty much every word
that came out of Martin Short's mouth was funny to me. I don't know, maybe
it's just me, but his character definitely took this film to that "other
level". But the rest of the kids were pretty good, too. Sisqo did what he
does best, Tom Hanks' son was pretty solid as the best friend, the lead kid,
Ben Foster, played his character quite sympathetically and Kirsten
Dunst...well, looked great! Okay, she was pretty good in her role, too. And
geez, let's not forget Foster's parents in the movie, Swoosie Kurtz and Ed
Begley Jr. Very small parts but very funny characters. In fact, most of the
side players in this film made it a stronger one as a whole. Besides Carmen
Electra, who for some reason or another decided that a 10-second spot as a
leathered-up stripper in this film would be good for her career?!
Anyway, if you like cute boy-loves-girl, girl-dumps-boy, boy-wants-her-back
while another-best-friend-type-girl-wants-boy-also movies (oh, that again?),
then you'll enjoy this one. It's light, it's got a few "gross" jokes but
mostly solid humor with some nice touches from the director and a fun
soundtrack. All in all, an enjoyable time at the theatre. And who knows,
some of you adults might like it, too.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
10 Things I Hate About You (7/10) - Can't Hardly Wait (7/10) - Center Stage
(6/10) - Down to You (5/10) - Grease (8/10) - Save the Last Dance (7/10) -
She's All That (6/10)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Not surprisingly, the screenwriter of this film also wrote the Freddie
Prinze Jr. teen flick, SHE'S ALL THAT.
This film was originally titled GETTING OVER ALLISON and was shot in
Toronto, Canada.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Tommy O'Haver.
Cast: Ben Foster, Kirsten Dunst, Melissa Sagemiller, Shane West, Colin Hanks, 
Martin Short, Sisqo, Mila Kunis, Ed Begley Jr., Swoosie Kurtz, Kylie Bax, Zoe 
Saldana, Vitamin C, Carmen Electra.
2001 - 90 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, crude humor, and teen drinking).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 10, 2001.
"Get Over It," the new teen film surprisingly directed by Tommy O'Haver 
(1998's "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss"), has enough offbeat elements to 
distinguish it from the pack of cliched movies of its ilk that have been 
released in recent years. The movie is predictable, and isn't particularly 
original, but right from the opening credits sequence, in which singer 
Vitamin C, accompanied by the residents of a suburban town and even a 
marching band, perform a song-and-dance number to "Love Will Keep Us 
Together" while following the main character as he walks sullenly down the 
street, it becomes obvious that this isn't going to be just any ordinary high 
school comedy.
Nice guy Berke Lawrence (Ben Foster), a high school senior, is crushed when 
his girlfriend of sixteen months, Allison (Melissa Sagemiller), dumps him. 
Knowing her since they were still in diapers, Berke is sure that they are 
soul mates and deserve to be together. Hurting him even more is that she has 
begun a relationship with artificial former boy band member Striker (Shane 
West). When Allison and Striker decide to try out for the school play, a 
musical version of William Shakespeare's "A Midsummer's Night's Dream," Berke 
desperately auditions, as well, in an attempt to woo her back. Coaching him 
on acting, dancing, and singing is aspiring songwriter Kelly (Kirsten Dunst), 
the younger sister of Berke's best friend (Colin Hanks), who also has a part 
in the production and begins to grow strong feelings for him. In true 
inevitable fashion, Berke is too involved in getting Allison back to notice 
that the person right in front of him, Kelly, is his true perfect match.
While "Get Over It" is threatened into become a tiresome retread of 1999's 
"10 Things I Hate About You" and 2000's "Whatever It Takes," the bright 
performances and mostly non-stereotypical teenaged characters save the day. 
Although Kirsten Dunst (2000's "The Virgin Suicides") is perhaps too talented 
an actress to be wasting her time with material that is so obviously above 
her, if I could choose any young performer to appear in my own personal teen 
movie, it would be her. Dunst is not only extremely cute, but has the acting 
chops to add depth to any part she is given. While her previous excursion 
into high school territory, 2000's "Bring It On," was a better movie with a 
more demanding role, Dunst lights up every one of her scenes, and also proves 
to have a lovely singing voice.
Ben Foster (1999's "Liberty Heights") plays Berke, the main character, and as 
such, he does well with the part and shows off a great deal of charisma. 
Newcomer Melissa Sagemiller, as the aloof Allison, is also fine, and what a 
refreshing change of pace it was to not have her be portrayed as a bitch, but 
as a relatively likable person. Mila Kunis (TV's "That 70's Show"), as 
Kelly's friend, Basin, is attractive in a small role, as is Kylie Bax (2000's 
"Boys and Girls"), as a beautiful, but terribly klutzy classmate. 
On the other end of the spectrum, Shane West shows zero of the magnetism he 
presented in 2000's "Whatever It Takes," although, to be fair, it isn't all 
his fault. West's Striker is a shallow, distasteful individual with no 
redeeming qualities. Zoe Saldana, so wonderful in last year's "Center Stage," 
is wasted as Allison's friend, Maggie, and R&B artist Sisqo, as another 
friend of Berke's, gives an amateurish performance, to say the least. His 
appearance proves to be nothing more than a gimmick to draw his fans in, as 
his character could have been discarded completely without any change to the 
story at hand.
What really raises "Get Over It" above being just mediocre is Martin Short 
(1999's "Mumford"). As the tell-it-like-it-is theater director Dr. Desmond 
Forrest-Oates, Short is hysterical in every scene he's in. When he's not 
saying something funny, his brilliant facial expressions alone are, and it is 
a genuine treat to watch his comedic talents flow so joyously. This is almost 
an Oscar-caliber performance, and something that comes as completely 
unexpected in the film.
While not all of director Tommy O'Haver's stylistic choices work (the 
occasional leaps into the fantasy world of "A Midsummer's Night's Dream" grow 
annoying very quickly), his heart is always in the right place, and his 
ambition is admirable in a genre that is admittedly so worn out. The original 
songs, written by Marc Shaiman (1999's "South Park: Bigger, Longer, & 
Uncut"), are a lot of fun and also aid in raising the movie to a higher level 
than it otherwise would have gone. "Get Over It" isn't great, and it isn't 
deep, but it doesn't aspire to be. It's a lighthearted, frothy entertainment 
that goes down with ease, and is something that I am pleased I saw.
Special Note: Could someone please tell me when Carmen Electra's name is 
splashed on all of the ads and posters for this film, when she is onscreen 
for literally three seconds and has one line of dialogue. She does reappear 
during the music video over the end credits, but why? And even more 
mysterious, why did she choose to appear at all when her role is little more 
than akin to being an extra? Just wondering. On second thought, maybe I 
should just get over it (sorry, I couldn't resist).
    - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
      http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
GET OVER IT, by director Tommy O'Haver (BILLY HOLLYWOOD'S SCREEN KISS) 
and writer R. Lee Fleming, Jr. (SHE'S ALL THAT), suffers from a bad case 
of the two-movies-in-one syndrome.  One movie is a promising, albeit 
unoriginal, teen romance in which Berke (Ben Foster) loves Allison 
(Melissa Sagemiller), who has broken up with him in order to date a more 
popular kid, Striker (Shane West), a former member of a boy band.  All 
the while, Berke stays good friends with Kelly (Kirsten Dunst, BRING IT 
ON), who would be a much better choice for him if he would just realize 
it.
The second movie is a traditional crude teen comedy complete with a 
horse who urinates profusely on a guy's face and a dog who has sex with 
every inanimate object he passes.  A bad Martin Short -- Is there any 
other lately? -- chews up the scenery as an obnoxious high school play 
director who looks like Bobby Darren dressed as the devil.  He says 
things like, "Me thinks thou better not botch it," to his cast.  This 
second movie feels almost like an afterthought in order to obtain studio 
funding.  The first movie doesn't deserve this crude level of humor.
Containing several imaginative dream sequences and a cute ending with a 
musical adaptation of Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream," GET 
OVER IT could have been a sweet little movie.  Instead, we end up 
feeling sorry for the two likable leads, Foster and Dunst, who have to 
endure all of the story's failed attempts at making recycled bathroom 
humor funny.
GET OVER IT runs 1:25.  It is rated PG-13 for some crude/sexual humor, 
teen drinking and language and would be acceptable for teenagers.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GET OVER IT (2001) ** 1/2  Directed by Tommy O'Haver. Written by  by 
R. Lee Fleming Jr. Cinematography, Maryse Alberti. Editing,  Jeff 
Betancourt.  Production design, Robin Standefer. Music, Steve Bartek. 
Cast: Kirsten Dunst (Kelly), Ben Foster (Berke), Martin Short (Dr. 
Desmond Forrest Oakes), Melissa Sagemiller (Allison), Colin Hanks 
(Felix). Swoosie Kurtz and Ed Begley, Jr. (Berke's parents), Sisqo 
(Dennis), Shane West (Striker). A Miramax release. 87 minutes. PG-13
Do we need another teen flick? Do we need a hole in the head? We 
don't, assuming that "we" stands for minimally mature, objective and 
sophisticated viewers. But since the huge market for youth movies 
fills Hollywood's coffers, such pictures will be made ad infinitum 
and ad nauseam.
Still, once in a blue moon something acceptable pops up. "Get Over 
It" --filmed last summer in Toronto--has an unzapping title, comes 
unannounced,  had no advanced hoopla or press previews. But it is 
sort of OK.
The basic plot is strictly deja suffered through --since the dawn of 
cinema. Boy meets girl,  boy plus girl, boy minus girl, boy and other 
girl, other girl sweet on and better for boy, boy too dumb to see 
this -- until the last reel.
Fate (read US mobility) separates childhood playmates Allison and 
Berke. They meet again in high school, become sweethearts in a flash. 
After 16 months of cohabitation and bliss (at least on Berke's part) 
Allison drops him. For him it is like a sudden attack by friendly 
fire. Allison's reasons are not specific, but rather interestingly 
illustrate the French saying " tout casse, tout passe, tout lasse," 
meaning that sooner or later " everything breaks, goes away, gets 
tiresome."  Allison is emblematic of the many and short relationships 
of "celebrities." In fact, 16 months and 3 days is a long 
relationship-affair-mariage by Hollywood standards.
The girl did not ditch Berke for another fellow, yet soon enough she 
starts an affair with Striker, whose prestige includes having been in 
a boy-band. The new twosome successfully try out for the school's 
spring musical "A Midsummer Night's Rockin' Eve." (That show is 
after, you know, Shakespeare, sort of.)
The inconsolable Berke, still hoping to get Allison back, also tries 
out --against all logic--for the musical, for which he is not 
qualified (his thing is basketball) but somehow he makes it. Felix 
(Colin Hanks, the son of Tom Hanks) his best friend, has a cute 
younge sister, Kelly. She writes songs and sings pretty well.   She 
helps, instructs and encourages Berke, who, of course, does not 
notice that Kelly is drawn to him. But give them time. (Felix is 
protective of his sister, but this doesn't add anything significant 
or useful to the movie).
Expectedly mild developments and predictable complications ensue -- 
nothing really original or notable, with the big exception of the 
musical's director. The composer-writer of its twelve songs, its 
producer and part author (move over, William S!) this flick-saving 
character is the school's Chair of Fine Arts, Dr. Desmond Forrest 
Oakes. In a style as theatrical and grandiose as that name,   Martin 
Short plays him with all stops out,  no holds barred, alternating 
between cutting criticism, merciless put-downs (but you know he's 
deep down a kind person), booming imperial commands, haughty advice, 
sage orders and self-promoting declarations. and steals the show over 
and over again.
Short has been around quite a bit, on TV and in movies. The latter 
did not do right by him. They were mostly mediocre items, with an odd 
exception --odd because that was Short's first major role.
The 1986 hilariously absurdist take-off "Three Amigos!" by John 
Landis, also starred Steve Martin and Chevy Chase. It is still an 
underrated feature but has many partisans, of which I am one.
  In "Get Over It" Martin Short is given the best lines, in fact the 
only funny ones. "Bill Shakespeare was a  wonderful poet, but Burt 
Bacharach he was not!" The absurdism of this declaration is anywhere 
from amusing to delicious, depending on one's taste. So is Short's 
over-the-top, no-holds-barred mannered delivery, flamboyant in choice 
of words, intonation, gesture and body language. It's also 
gay-leaning, so that it comes as a surprise, a joke, or a gag (you 
choose) when late in the movie his secretary tells him "Your wife 
called." This bit is the only raison d'etre of Mrs. Oakes.
When the film was shot, Short was a youthful 50. Most of "the kids" 
were in their early twenties, but this is not blatantly obvious. What 
is however is that very strong impression that the film was cut down 
to its unusual  87 minutes, no doubt to qualify for a PG-13 by 
removing raunchy or vulgar passages.
Some of the latter remain, and might have been excised too, but then 
the film would have shrunk too much. Whether or not the cuts are the 
guilty parties, the picture is episodic, fragmented and choppy. This 
vagueness is not lethal, since the two best elements appear to be 
intact: Martin Short, and the updated Midsummer Night's Dream which 
we see often, in sections, from rehearsals to fantasy scenes to the 
final product. That's when things fall in place, love blooms, the 
villain is punished. There is quite a bit of pleasing imagination as 
Shakespeare, the musical and the lives of the students mix and 
reflect one another. It is the second movie by director Tommy 
O'Haver, whose debut was "Billy's First Hollywood Kiss."
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
GET OVER IT (2001) ** 1/2  Directed by Tommy O'Haver. Written by  by 
R. Lee Fleming Jr. Cinematography, Maryse Alberti. Editing,  Jeff 
Betancourt.  Production design, Robin Standefer. Music, Steve Bartek. 
Cast: Kirsten Dunst (Kelly), Ben Foster (Berke), Martin Short (Dr. 
Desmond Forrest Oakes), Melissa Sagemiller (Allison), Colin Hanks 
(Felix). Swoosie Kurtz and Ed Begley, Jr. (Berke's parents), Sisqo 
(Dennis), Shane West (Striker). A Miramax release. 87 minutes. PG-13
Do we need another teen flick? Do we need a hole in the head? We 
don't, assuming that "we" stands for minimally mature, objective and 
sophisticated viewers. But since the huge market for youth movies 
fills Hollywood's coffers, such pictures will be made ad infinitum 
and ad nauseam.
Still, once in a blue moon something acceptable pops up. "Get Over 
It" --filmed last summer in Toronto--has an unzapping title, comes 
unannounced,  had no advanced hoopla or press previews. But it is 
sort of OK.
The basic plot is strictly deja suffered through --since the dawn of 
cinema. Boy meets girl,  boy plus girl, boy minus girl, boy and other 
girl, other girl sweet on and better for boy, boy too dumb to see 
this -- until the last reel.
Fate (read US mobility) separates childhood playmates Allison and 
Berke. They meet again in high school, become sweethearts in a flash. 
After 16 months of cohabitation and bliss (at least on Berke's part) 
Allison drops him. For him it is like a sudden attack by friendly 
fire. Allison's reasons are not specific, but rather interestingly 
illustrate the French saying " tout casse, tout passe, tout lasse," 
meaning that sooner or later " everything breaks, goes away, gets 
tiresome."  Allison is emblematic of the many and short relationships 
of "celebrities." In fact, 16 months and 3 days is a long 
relationship-affair-mariage by Hollywood standards.
The girl did not ditch Berke for another fellow, yet soon enough she 
starts an affair with Striker, whose prestige includes having been in 
a boy-band. The new twosome successfully try out for the school's 
spring musical "A Midsummer Night's Rockin' Eve." (That show is 
after, you know, Shakespeare, sort of.)
The inconsolable Berke, still hoping to get Allison back, also tries 
out --against all logic--for the musical, for which he is not 
qualified (his thing is basketball) but somehow he makes it. Felix 
(Colin Hanks, the son of Tom Hanks) his best friend, has a cute 
younge sister, Kelly. She writes songs and sings pretty well.   She 
helps, instructs and encourages Berke, who, of course, does not 
notice that Kelly is drawn to him. But give them time. (Felix is 
protective of his sister, but this doesn't add anything significant 
or useful to the movie).
Expectedly mild developments and predictable complications ensue -- 
nothing really original or notable, with the big exception of the 
musical's director. The composer-writer of its twelve songs, its 
producer and part author (move over, William S!) this flick-saving 
character is the school's Chair of Fine Arts, Dr. Desmond Forrest 
Oakes. In a style as theatrical and grandiose as that name,   Martin 
Short plays him with all stops out,  no holds barred, alternating 
between cutting criticism, merciless put-downs (but you know he's 
deep down a kind person), booming imperial commands, haughty advice, 
sage orders and self-promoting declarations. and steals the show over 
and over again.
Short has been around quite a bit, on TV and in movies. The latter 
did not do right by him. They were mostly mediocre items, with an odd 
exception --odd because that was Short's first major role.
The 1986 hilariously absurdist take-off "Three Amigos!" by John 
Landis, also starred Steve Martin and Chevy Chase. It is still an 
underrated feature but has many partisans, of which I am one.
  In "Get Over It" Martin Short is given the best lines, in fact the 
only funny ones. "Bill Shakespeare was a  wonderful poet, but Burt 
Bacharach he was not!" The absurdism of this declaration is anywhere 
from amusing to delicious, depending on one's taste. So is Short's 
over-the-top, no-holds-barred mannered delivery, flamboyant in choice 
of words, intonation, gesture and body language. It's also 
gay-leaning, so that it comes as a surprise, a joke, or a gag (you 
choose) when late in the movie his secretary tells him "Your wife 
called." This bit is the only raison d'etre of Mrs. Oakes.
When the film was shot, Short was a youthful 50. Most of "the kids" 
were in their early twenties, but this is not blatantly obvious. What 
is however is that very strong impression that the film was cut down 
to its unusual  87 minutes, no doubt to qualify for a PG-13 by 
removing raunchy or vulgar passages.
Some of the latter remain, and might have been excised too, but then 
the film would have shrunk too much. Whether or not the cuts are the 
guilty parties, the picture is episodic, fragmented and choppy. This 
vagueness is not lethal, since the two best elements appear to be 
intact: Martin Short, and the updated Midsummer Night's Dream which 
we see often, in sections, from rehearsals to fantasy scenes to the 
final product. That's when things fall in place, love blooms, the 
villain is punished. There is quite a bit of pleasing imagination as 
Shakespeare, the musical and the lives of the students mix and 
reflect one another. It is the second movie by director Tommy 
O'Haver, whose debut was "Billy's First Hollywood Kiss."
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 
