Title
Review for Talk Radio (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Randy Parker
        When I saw BETRAYED, I thought the most interesting part of the
movie was its opening sequence, which portrayed the 1984 assassination of
Denver shock-radio jock Alan Berg.  I remember thinking at the time that
someone should make an entire film about Berg.  Director Oliver Stone
obviously agreed and the result is TALK RADIO.
        TALK RADIO is adapted from Eric Bogosian's play of the same name,
which in turn was based on Stephen Singular's book "Talked to Death: The
Life and Murder of Alan Berg."  TALK RADIO's rendition of Berg is Barry
Champlain, an all-night talk-show host who likes to insult and abuse his
callers and attack their right-wing views.  His listeners call to discuss
topics ranging from sticking your hand in the garbage disposal to denying
the existence of the holocaust.  TALK RADIO chronicles the last four days
of Champlain's life, during which his boss is attempting to cut a deal for
the national syndication of his show.  With a corporate big-wig observing
him, Champlain is expected to be on his best behavior--a chore he finds
extremely difficult.  Nearly all of the film is set in the KGAB broadcast
studio with Champlain on the air taking phone calls.
        TALK RADIO is a directorial triumph for Stone; he makes watching a
talk show for two hours absorbing, thought-provoking, and visually
stimulating.  The camera work, editing, and close-ups of Champlain raving
into the microphone give TALK RADIO a strong sense of claustrophobia and
in-your-face intensity.  Stone has elicited an Oscar-calibre performance
from Eric Bogosian, who plays the tormented, angry, and self-destructive
Champlain.  Some of his broadcasts in the film are so inflammatory and
passionate that they bring you to the edge of your seat.  TALK RADIO is a
gripping, close-range character study of a troubled man on the verge of an
emotional breakdown.  Stone also succeeds in tapping the talents of the
film's excellent supporting cast, which includes Ellen Greene as
Champlain's ex-wife and Alec Baldwin as KGAB's general manager.
        My only criticism of TALK RADIO is that some of the issues it
raises get lost under a blanket of ambiguity.  The film addresses such
matters as racism, anti-semitism, freedom of speech, and the role of
media--especially radio--in our lives.  But I never quite could fathom the
exact point of the film, or the meaning of Champlain's life and death.
Bogosian's electrifying performance and Stone's masterful direction,
however, more than compensate for this shortcoming.

Author
Bernard Aboba
     TALK RADIO, which stars Eric Bogosian, is loosely constructed around the
story of Denver talk show host Alan Berg, who was murdered by members of a
Neo-Nazi group.
     Like many radio talk shows themselves, the characters are a study in
extremes.  Bogosian's character, Barry Champlain is an abusive personality, on
the air and in his personal life, and his show attracts a mixture of alienated,
confused, and at times even criminal characters calling in.  Champlain treats
the large portion of them with a healthy dose of sarcastic abuse.
     The basic premise is that the show is phenomenally popular, so much so
that an offer is made to take the show national, while still having it
broadcast from its Dallas/Ft. Worth location.  The action takes place largely
during several days prior to the national syndication in which the show is
being evaluated.
     The best way to describe the film is unrelenting.  Bogosian only turns
down the searing anger of the character during periods of remorse, but
otherwise it is full speed ahead -- with only occasional treatment of callers
and the situations they present with more than sarcasm or disdain.  The basic
premise seems to be: if you like the show, you're a phony because you're trying
to be nice; if you hate it, you have no taste.
     In effect there's no way to win with Barry Champlain, as both his ex-wife
Ellen and his new lover discover.  However, neither Ellen, nor Champlain's new
lover, are played with sufficient depth to give them much cinematic weight.
This places the spotlight firmly on Bogosian, which gives the film its black
and white cast.  For example, while one might give Ellen the benefit of the
doubt in marrying Champlain in the first place, for her to entertain thoughts
of going back to him, and risk her new marriage for those, we need something
more than the ditsy performance given us.  Like the character Barry Champlain,
this movie would have been somewhat better if the star had been willing to step
back and let someone else on the stage for a while.  Playing supporting actress
to Bogosian in this role is a little like playing Bambi against Godzilla in
"Bambi meets Godzilla," an underground cartoon with a thoroughly predictable
ending.  Unfortunately, TALK RADIO is somewhat too predictable as well.

Author
Shane Burridge
Oliver Stone's film of Eric Bogosian's stage play (they collaborated
on the screenplay) was received favourably by critics but ended up
unnoticed by the public amid Stone's bigger-budget successes.  It
begins and ends with marathon performances by Bogosian in the role of
Barry Champlain, a Dallas shock-jock on the verge of being syndicated
nationwide.  Everything about Champlain is on the edge, including his
rocky relationships with producer/girlfriend Leslie Hope, wife Ellen
Greene, and boss Alec Baldwin.  Isolated in his darkened studio, he
rants to unseen callers as if he were addressing his invisible demons.
 His listening audience is largely hostile, and he is always on the
attack.  At first we are prepared to accept Champlain as a champion
for the underdog; as more and more callers run the gauntlet of his
show we grow to mistrust him.  The moment we believe he has finally
lost his balance is when he turns on one of his admirers and insults
her mercilessly, using exactly the same time of confrontational and
interruptive tactics he reserves for the bigots, fascists, and junkies
that comprise most of his audience.
Champlain is so unpredictable and fast-talking that it is difficult
for us to figure out his real agenda.  But he doesn't seem to have
one.  It's the line he snaps to a detractor at a ball game that gives
him away, when he tells her the reason she doesn't like his show is
because she has no sense of humor.  Champlain is no activist, merely
an egotist who is running his own private put-on (similarly, TALK
RADIO masquerades as an issues piece but is essentially a character
study) and is concerned only with his ratings.  There are moments he
has on air when he looks as if he may let the mask slip - but 
he has gone too far to turn back now.
Clearly, enjoyment of TALK RADIO will depend on how much you like
Bogosian's performance.  The scenes with him on the air crackle thanks
to Stone's charged direction and tight editing by David Brenner and
Joe Hutshing.  If you've ever listened to late-night talkback and
found some of the callers unsettling, you're bound to relive that
feeling again in the paranoid atmosphere of Champlain's studio. 
Bogosian's  meeting with an incoherent teenager (Michael Wincott) is
by turns hilarious and chilling.  He's just one of several memorable
callers, many of whom were voiced by the same group of actors. 
Inspiration for both film and play was the assassination of Denver DJ
Alan Berg by White Supremacists - exactly the kind of audience that
would be incensed by Champlain's uncompromising broadcasts.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Unforgiving and bleak, but exacting portrait of a man drunk on the
power of his own words.
The biggest mistake would be to compare Barry Champlain (Eric Bogosian), the
non-hero of Oliver Stone's black-as-volcanic-glass TALK RADIO, to a specific
real-life radio personality such as Rush Limbaugh or Howard Stern. He has
the worst tendencies of *both* of them, to the point where politics and even
audience are irrelevant. He will do anything to get people to listen to him,
even though they're already his captive audience. And what do you think that
does to him, in the dark?
Expanded slightly from a stage play that Bogosian himself wrote, TALK RADIO
is not so much an analysis of the title subject but a character portrait.
Bogosian plays Champlain with machine-gun nastiness, getting mileage from
his cruel eagerness to rip up callers to his late-night talkfest. He is not
interested in actually *communicating* with anyone; he's like a verbal slam
dancer, abusing his audience to see if they really will come back for more.
He's convinced that 9/10ths of the world is stupider and crueler than he
could ever be, so he's obviously not going to be anywhere nearly as bad as
the jerk-offs who call him now, is he? Even if he tries to pander to their
worst instincts, how's he any worse off than the guy who beats his kids and
brags about it on-air?
We learn a bit more about Champlain outside of the studio -- his marriage,
his younger years, etc. They aren't dwelled on excessively; there's just
enough for us to get the picture. Champlain is smart, but has absolutely no
idea what to do with his smarts, other than test other people's limits and
see if they'll indulge him because he constantly astonishes them with his
verbal excesses. And how far does he go? At one point someone mails him
something that might be a bomb, and Champlain, smirking, rattles it next to
the microphone. This is not a man with his feet on the ground.
There are other things he does that are not as explicitly disturbing, but
that give unsettling clues to his personality. A foaming anti-Semite calls
in, and Champlain tries a bizarre psychological tactic on him -- trying to
play on his sympathy. But the guy doesn't have any, and there's a strong
hint that Champlain may be one of those people who will literally say
*anything* to get someone to stop hassling him. Which one's worse? Maybe
they're both examples of the same kind of scum -- people who live to goad
others and get intemperate reactions?
TALK RADIO is as intense and claustrophobic a movie as there might
conceivably be. It is also excellently written and directed, and for that
reason alone is worth seeing. The camera lives inside the studio, and the
movie operates more like the stage play than we might expect -- we have to
imagine the guy at the other end of the wire, and in Champlain's fetid,
vicious universe, that's something that makes us cringe. We already know
what Champlain himself his like -- what about his callers? And then the
movie decides to settle *that* question, once and for all.
