Title
Review for Players Club, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael Dequina
A mix of Showgirls, Striptease, and '70s Blaxploitation.  Sounds like a
surefire recipe for camp, but against all odds, Ice Cube's directorial
debut The Players Club, if a bit uneven, works a lot better as a serious
drama than its individual ingredients would make it appear to be.
The Players Club is the name of a seedy Southern strip bar that counts
among its stable of dancers Diana Armstrong, a.k.a. "Diamond" (newcomer
LisaRaye).  Like Demi Moore in Striptease, college senior Diana dances to
support her child and better her life (and pay her tuition).  The Showgirls
ingredient comes in Diana's feud with lesbian-leaning bitch queen dancer
Ronnie (Chrystale Wilson), who has a lustful interest in her adversary.
Like a Blaxploitation heroine, Diana is also a headstrong superwoman,
determined to protect her naive, also-stripping younger cousin Ebony
(Monica Calhoun) from falling prey to the job's dark side; and more than
willing and able to kick whatever ass stands in her way.
Cube, who also wrote and has a small role, one-ups his film's stripping
cinematic cohorts by for the most part succeeding in his intentions.  The
Diana-Ronnie feud, thanks in no small part to the solid performances by
Wilson and LisaRaye, never comes off as ridiculous.  Cube has his cake and
eats it too--he even delivers the knock-down, drag-out catfight that
Showgirls promised but never delivered.  And unlike Striptease, most of the
humor works.  Earning the lion's share of laughs is Bernie Mac as the
club's sleazy malapropism-prone owner Dollar Bill; Jamie Foxx also has some
effective comic scenes as Blue, the club's DJ.
However, that's also where Cube runs into some trouble.  The broad humor
and more cartoonish characters (like Dollar Bill and his right-hand man
L'il Man, played by A.J. Johnson) are never seamlessly meshed with the
film's largely grim, gritty tone and earnest story.  Some laugh lines fall
flat (one reference to co-star John Amos's former role on the TV show Good
Times is too obvious and in-jokey to be funny), as does some of the
dialogue in general; Cube sometimes offers hackneyed lines such as "I
walked into the Players Club a girl... and came out a woman."
But overall Cube guides The Players Club with a sure hand, and he makes a
true acting find with the commanding LisaRaye, whose diamond-hard charisma
recalls the young Pam Grier.  Diana's mantra "Make the money; don't let the
money make you" is neither the most profound nor original statement, but
LisaRaye is able to make you believe it--and believe _in_ it.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Matt Williams
Oh boy!  Another foray into the world of strippers!  Are there any
stories here that haven't been told?  Are there interesting ways to
present tired material? Well, if there are, you wouldn't know it from
The Player's Club.
Diana Armstrong (LisaRaye) is an unwed mother and college student
struggling to barely get by.  One day, while on her job at a local shoe
store, she meets two strippers, Ronnie and Tricks (Chrystale Wilson and
Adele Givens), who advise her to join them in a new career at The
Player's Club.
The Player's Club is a gentleman's club (aka strip bar) owned by the
supposedly colorful Dollar Bill (Bernie Mac).  Dollar is heavily in
debt, but hires Diana on the spot, hoping a new young body will bring in
more dough.
Diana puts her dignity aside, and prospers in the job, seeing it as
merely a temporary money-making venture while she completes her
education.  However, trouble ensues when her young cousin, Ebony (Monica
Calhoun), idolizing Diana's lifestyle, decides to work at the club as
well, and go farther than she wisely should.
The plight of the stripper is hardly anything new, having recently been
covered by several bad movies (Showgirls, and Striptease).  And while
The Player's Club tries to put an ethnic spin on the story, the result
is not much better.
Ice Cube makes his directoral debut with this movie, and, of course,
gives himself a bit part as a lowlife who frequents the club.  His
direction is serviceable, but uninspired.  He fares much worse as the
film's screenwriter, surviving barely on the merits that his dialogue
never plummets to the depths of Showgirls.
There are a couple of stories here that could have been interesting, but
instead are relegated to pointless subplots.  Diana's relationship with
an inspirational college professor, and the conflict of her protective
father and her boyfriend (and club DJ) Blue (Jamie Foxx) are both
stories that had much more potential than the mundane fare that fills
the rest of the movie.
LisaRaye does the best she can with the "stripper-with-a-heart-of-gold"
role. But, like virtually every other character here, she's void of
personality, and is merely a loose collection of stereotypes.
The Player's Club is an inauspicious directing debut for Ice Cube.
Hopefully his future efforts will be better than this unimaginative
outing... it won't be hard.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases
