Title
Review for Faculty, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Elijah Wood; Jordana Brewster; Clea Duvall; Laura Harris & Josh
Hartnett
When I went into The Faculty I was expecting a typical teen horror flick. I
figured it may be a bit above average considering that Kevin Williamson
(Scream, Scream 2) had written the screenplay. My theory was that if
Williamson was involved, at the very least this movie was going to be
entertaining. Not only was the movie entertaining, but Williamson has proven
once again that he is one of the most gifted writers in Hollywood. Add to
that Robert Rodriguez' great job in the director's chair and you have the
makings of a pretty good film. When you throw in a great young cast, you
have a winner.
Elijah Wood plays the school whipping post, who works at the school
newspaper with the head cheerleader (Jordana Brewster). In the course of
looking for leads for a new story, they discover an even bigger one. Their
teachers have been taken over by aliens, which are rapidly taking over the
rest of the school. It then falls to them and four of their classmates, the
only six people left in the school unaffected, to find a way to stop the
aliens before they can take over the world. OK, it sounds a little corny,
but it actually comes off pretty well. There is never any real point at
which you start saying to yourself "As if that would happen". Of course, you
have to get by the whole alien invasion thing. After gettting passed that,
you are home free.
In terms of casting, The Faculty is fairly impressive. To make up for the
relatively unknown, but extremely talented cast of high school students, the
producers decided to cast some familiar faces in the roles of the faculty.
They include Robert Patrick (the liquid terminator in Terminator 2), the
high school principal is Bebe Neuwirth (Cheers), and the school nurse is
Salma Hayek. (I'm betting every guy in that school gets sick at least once a
week.) If Salma weren't enough, adding to the babe factor is Famke Janssen
(Goldeneye). Among the young cast of students is only a couple of
recognizable names, they are Josh Hartnett (who played Jamie Lee Curtis' son
in Halloween: H20) and Elijah Wood (Free Willie). Singer Usher also makes a
brief appearance in a small role. Adding some heat to the younger generation
are up a coming hotties Jordana Brewster and Laura Harris. I enjoyed the
performances of the whole cast. Of course, this is a horror movie and not
Shakespeare, so nobody was really stretching their acting talents to the
limit. As horror movie casts go, this one was fun to watch.
Unlike the early slasher type films of the late seventies and eighties, The
Faculty actually had a production budget and it shows. This film wasn't shot
on any shoestring budget, nor where the special effects cooked up in
somebody's garage. The Faculty lives up to the high production values that
were set by Scream a few years ago. So it's no coincidence that Kevin
Williamson was involved in both films. Maybe it even raises the bar a bit.
Considering that this was a movie about aliens, visual effects are a little
more important.
It's a great movie. Although, parents should be warned -- The Faculty is not
for the kids, even though it seems to be marketed towards them.

Author
Steve Rhodes
You've always suspected that your teachers were aliens. THE FACULTY
supplies the proof.
Mixing equal measures of INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS, ALIENS, and
SCREAM, Kevin Williamson's script is smart enough to realize it is a
parody. Never taking itself seriously, the film may not be much of a
movie, but at least it's not a pretentious one.
One day, at a rundown high school staffed with hopeless wimps, an alien
comes to visit. Making his way onto campus in someone else's body, he
soon has infected the brains of the entire faculty and most of the
students. As directed by Robert Rodriguez, the film layers gobs of
horror film gore onto what is basically a science fiction plot.
Fighting against this evil unleashed upon the earth and spreading
rapidly is a rag-tag group of 6 uninfected students. (That they will get
it too becomes obvious so they devise a test using a caffeine-based,
diuretic powder that they force themselves to inhale in order to
discover any new alien converts. The aliens, you see, are a
moisture-craving species.)
The students includes nerd-in-residence Casey (Elijah Wood),
pseudo-lesbian Stokely (Clea DuVall), cocky cheerleader Delilah (Jordana
Brewster), ex-football team captain and star quarterback Stan (Shawn
Wayne Hatosy), drug dealer and self-trained scientist Zeke (Josh
Hartnett), and squeaky clean blonde Marybeth (Laura Harris). Marybeth
has just transferred to the school when the terror starts, so she is one
of many suspects as the carrier for the alien.
The movie uses stereotypes to advance the comedy. Brainy Casey refuses
to get into sports, telling the coach (Robert Patrick), "I don't think a
person should run unless he's being chased."
When Casey and Delilah witness the possessed faculty engaging in their
alien rituals to recruit new members, Casey tells his parents. After
investigating and finding nothing, his parents figure he must be on
drugs, so they give him a most modern punishment. They go to his room
and remove his cell phone, his Internet connection, his boom box, and
even his "porno," which he had carefully hidden under his mattress.
On the football field, accompanied by one of the tunes from PINK FLOYD
THE WALL, the team of players with alien-charged bodies plays with a
vengeance. Never have the cheers from the stands of "Kill!" been taken
more literally.
THE FACULTY runs 1:40. It is rated R for horror movie violence,
profanity, brief nudity, and drug usage and would be fine for most
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE FACULTY
(Dimension)
Starring:  Elijah Wood, Josh Hartnett, Clea DuVall, Laura Harris, Shawn
Hatosy, Jordana Brewster, Robert Patrick, Famke Janssen, Bebe Neuwirth,
Piper Laurie, Jon Stewart.
Screenplay:  Kevin Williamson.
Producer:  Elizabeth Avellan.
Director:  Robert Rodriguez.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, profanity, drug use, brief nudity)
Running Time:  102 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There's something very strange going on at Ohio's Herrington High in 
THE FACULTY.  It's something only six students -- sensitive drug dealer
Zeke (Josh Hartnett), tormented geek Casey (Elijah Wood), black-clad loner
Stokely (Clea DuVall), cheerleader Delilah (Jordana Brewster), quarterback
Stan (Shawn Hatosy) and sweet new girl in school Marybeth (Laura Harris)
--  seem to recognize.  It starts in the faculty, including the football
coach (Robert Patrick) and the principal (Bebe Neuwirth), then slowly
spreads to their classmates.  Herrington High has been overtaken by... a
world-shaking case of deja vu. 
     It's not just that another film from earlier this year, DISTURBING
BEHAVIOR, already suggested a sinister conspiracy to turn high school
students into obedient robots.  Deconstructionist screen scribe Kevin
Williamson managed a tightrope act across the fine line between homage
and outright theft in SCREAM and SCREAM 2.  In THE FACULTY, he stomps that
fine line into a fine paste.  The Tommy Hilfiger-bedecked sextet of
protagonists shows the meticulous cross-sectioning of THE BREAKFAST CLUB.
Their test of each other's humanity is a crib from John Carpenter's THE
THING.  Their last stand locked away from the Menace Out There recalls
NIGHT OF THE LIVING DEAD, ALIENS, and any number of other science fiction
thrillers.  It's a monster movie that could not exist without the
existence of other -- and much better -- movies.
     Of course, some will argue that such is entirely the point of any
Williamson project, that he shows off the conventions of genre films so he
can revitalize them.  The problem is that there is nothing remotely
revitalizing about THE FACULTY.  Sure, it's a movie movie, but its quotes
are as witlessly regurgitated as in any number of recent Leslie Nielsen
projects.  Instead of having something clever to say about cliches, it
simply recycles them, tossing in the occasional reference to "The Puppet
Masters" or ALIEN's Ripley as though it suddenly makes all the trite
characterizations and profanely insult-filled dialogue tolerable.  Even
Elijah Wood's wide-eyed genuineness and some pseudo-analysis of teenage
desire for conformity can't rescue THE FACULTY from feeling exactly like
the "attractive teens in jeopardy" tales it supposedly derides.
     If THE FACULTY proves anything, it's how much Williamson needs Wes
Craven.  Both SCREAM films featured chilling sequences which could stand
with the best the genre had to offer; they showed what chould be great
about horror films even as they showed what could be awful about them.
Robert Rodriguez -- who, if nothing else, has always shown that he has an
electrifying sense of cinematic pacing -- seemingly has no idea what to do
with this material.  THE FACULTY drifts sluggishly from character to
character as though they actually mattered, and the few action sequences
are designed to show off alien effects.  Every opportunity for genuine
creativity is turned into yet another self-satisfied commentary on how
every science-fiction story is really a rip-off of some other 
science-fiction story.
     There are a couple of amusing moments in THE FACULTY -- a football
game in which the Herrington team "infects" the opposition during dogpile
tackles, for instance -- but even most of those are taken from other
films.  Williamson's name is supposed to make this a knowing satire of
alien takeover films like INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS, but there was
more inventive humor in a piece of cheese like 1985's killer yogurt film
THE STUFF.  I kept waiting for either fun or fear, and all I got was a
jokey cameo by Internet gossip guru Harry "Ain't-It-Cool" Knowles.  THE
FACULTY merely adds to the list of lame science fiction films for someone
else to satirize...and maybe even get it right next time.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Director Robert Robriguez teams up with the new sensation in horror
films, screenwriter Kevin Williamson, for a mixed up movie which
mingles elements of many other films including THE INVASION OF THE BODY
SNATCHERS, THE THING (8/10) and THE BREAKFAST CLUB (7.5/10). This film
was also one of the first to be heavily sponsored by a clothing line
for its publicity, as Tommy Hillfiger decided to take a stab at the
movies himself.
PLOT:
Six unique students with their respective identities all agree on one
thing: they believe their teachers to be possessed by aliens. As the
story unfolds, we find that their far-fetched theory is not that far
off.
CRITIQUE:
Passable horror flic manages to steal from literally every horror and
science-fiction movie from the past (while acknowledging most with a
wink of the eye), while moving at a slower pace than I would've
anticipated from a Rodriguez film, featuring some solid performances
from all of its stars, and a scattered set of special effects that were
anything but out of this world. This movie was never boring, but never
really did manage to blow me away from my seat either. The multitude
and breadth of its cast was elaborate and fun to watch, featuring Usher
the rapper, Bebe Neuwirth from TV's "Cheers", Josh Hartnett from this
year's other scary movie H20: HALLOWEEN (7.5/10) and even Summer
Phoenix, sister of Joaquin Phoenix, and the late River Phoenix. Add to
that, the fact that the script also wasn't anything fantastic, and
neither was the directorial style from the eye of Robert Rodriguez, and
you've got yourself a semi-interesting peek into a genre that could
easily be improved upon in the future.
There were a couple of scenes that were cool to see, and some slick
lines, but all in all this film drove along the standard teen horror
terrain without a kink in the road, with many science-fiction elements
tossed in for effect. The length of the film might not have been such
an issue with me, were it not for the fact that the students seemed to
go on discussing their issues ad infinitum, explaining the film as it
went along. I would suggest this film to all those that have enjoyed
the rest of the recent crop of horror junkfilms that have passed
through their mutliplexes of late, but ask that you not expect too much
in regards to originality or style. For the rest of you, well, just go
out and rent the original SCREAM (8/10) for a real good script by
Williamson, or see John Carpenter's classic sci-fi movie, THE THING
(8/10). All in all, a believable tale of sci-fi horror with an
unnecessary cast of names who play their roles quite well, which
ultimately didn't astound me due to its deja-vu factor, and which
surely could've used some Christmas "trimming" of its own.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
One obvious nod in the script to his own previous hit films, has Zeke
selling black market videocassettes of "Jennifer Love Hewitt and Neve
Campbell with full-frontal nudity" out of the trunk of his car. As we
all know by now, each respective girl starred in the Kevin
Williamson-penned screenplays of SCREAM (8/10) and I STILL KNOW WHAT
YOU DID LAST SUMMER (7.5/10).
Harry Knowles, the man behind the infamous "Ain't it Cool" Web site at
http://www.aint-it-cool-news.com/ has an appearance in this film. He
apparently plays the "film teacher" in the movie, but just look for the
overweight gentleman with the red hair, who seems to hang around in the
faculty lounge.
Summer Phoenix, younger sister of Joaquin Phoenix and the late River
Phoenix, plays the girl who keeps smacking her boyfriend around for the
whole movie.
Piper Laurie, the scary-looking teacher with the fat face, also played
CARRIE's (7/10) overbearing mom in the 1976 classic Brian DePalma film.
Robert Patrick, who plays Coach Willis in this film, is best remembered
as the T-1000 character that he played opposite Arnold Schwarzenegger
in 1991's TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY (8/10).
Clea Duvall, who plays Stokely in this film is not related to acting
legend Robert Duvall.
Salma Hayek has played a role in all of director Robert Rodriguez'
Hollywood pictures. She stands 5"2, was born in southeast Mexico, and
is the daughter of a Lebanese father and a Mexican mother. Hayek began
her career in Mexican TV soap operas in late 80's.
Famke Janssen was born in Holland, where she began her professional
career as a model.
Laura Harris, who plays Mary Beth in this film, also played in SUICIDE
KINGS (6.5/10). She was the sister who got kidnapped by the mobsters.
Director Robert Robriguez earned most of the $7000 it cost to make his
first picture EL MARIACHI (7/10) by subjecting himself to experimental
drug studies. He has a son named Rocket.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        It's not uncommon for teenagers to think all adults are from
outer space.  It's much less common, however, for them to be correct
in that assumption.
        "The Faculty," the new horror-thriller from director Robert
Rodriguez (El Mariachi, From Dusk Til Dawn) and screenwriter Kevin
Williamson (The "Scream" movies), is an interesting experiment.  A
unique (but not entirely successful) blend of gore, suspense and
comedy, the film plays like a high-speed collision between "Fast Times
at Ridgemont High" and "Invasion of the Body Snatchers."  The movie
tells the tale of a mysterious alien force which is taking over the
inhabitants of our lovely but ever helpless planet, one person at a
time.  The aliens take over the minds of humans by inserting a
slug-like creature into the victim's ear (opening scene of "Star Trek
II: The Wrath of Khan" anyone?).  But don't worry: six plucky
teenagers are on the case, so it'll all turn out okay in the end.
        These astute young heroes, a varied lot that includes the
geeky Casey (Elijah Wood), walking crack-house Zeke (Hartnett), spooky
goth-gal Stokely (Clea DuVall), school football legend Stan (Shawn
Hatosy), the incredibly sweet but none-too-bright Marybeth (Laura
Harris), and sexy head cheerleader Delilah (Jordana Brewster), are the
first to notice that something strange is happening.  The notoriously
ill-tempered Coach Willis (Robert Patrick, who you'll remember as the
evil terminator from "T2") is suddenly full of smiles and gentleness.
The mousy school principal (Bebe Neuwirth) starts dressing and acting
like a sex goddess.  And the entire faculty chugs enough water each
day to float an ark.  Naturally, the only explanation must be that
aliens are taking over the world.
        You all know I have a soft spot for ridiculously bad horror
films, as my review of "Halloween: H20" no doubt revealed.  It's a
good thing, too, because "The Faculty" is a ridiculously bad film.  As
with "From Dusk Til Dawn," Robert Rodriguez seems totally unsure what
kind of story he's supposed to be telling: a comedy?  Action?
Suspense?  A dark thriller?  Following the "more is better" principle,
he seems determined to throw all of the above into his movie.  The
result is a smorgasbord of different cinematic techniques, all of
which are competently done, yet somehow don't taste particularly good
when mushed up together.  C'mon, Robert, I've seen "El Mariachi."
You, of all people, should know that less can be more.
        If Rodriguez is at fault, however, it's only for being too
ambitious, and trying harder than the material really warrants.  Kevin
Williamson's screenplay makes no such mistake; in fact, it's such a
jumble that at times it seems to be on vacation.  Lacking the wit that
made the two "Scream" films such commercial (and critical) successes,
Williamson here seems to be playing it a little too safe.  His
dialogue lacks the fire and biting satire of his previous work.
Rather than pushing the boundaries of horror, this screenplay seems
firmly rooted in the very situations he mocked so brilliantly in
"Scream" and its excellent sequel.
       This isn't to say that "The Faculty" is without merit, provided
you know what to expect.  The special effects are adequate (though not
spectacular), the acting isn't bad, and the film's pacing is
excellent, a testimony to Rodriguez's directing/editing style.  I
actually had more fun at this film than my review may lead you to
believe.  You might, too, as long as you're not expecting "Citizen
Kane."  Or "Scream," for that matter.
  (If you're a diehard horror fan, add one star to the rating I gave
the film.)

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.  Or,
you can subscribe directly from my web page.  Thanks.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
James Brundage
Starring Elijah Wood, Clea DuVall, Laura Harris, Josh Hartnett, Sean Wayne
Hatosy, Jordana Brewster
    I shouldn't have to review this film.  Don't get me wrong -- The Faculty
rocks -- but anyone with a half of an IQ point should know that.  Think
about it.  Look at who wrote it, look at who directed it.  Admit it, we all
loved Scream, Scream 2, and IKWYDLS.  And Desperado kicked ass.  So why
should I have to bother telling you why the collaboration between the writer
of Scream and the director of Desperado is the best horror movie of the
year.
Not that the competition is high: ISKWYDLS sucked.  But, compared to that
film, The Faculty is still light years ahead.
    The Faculty has the same plot as The Puppet Masters: parasites are
taking over the Earth.  This time, however, they sneak in through the back
door of Ohio and start taking over a high school in an unnamed football
town.  And six kids (an anti-social girl, the school nerd, a new girl from
Georgia, the editor of the newspaper which has more scandal than The Drudge
Report, the ex-quarterback, and the high school drug dealer) have to stop
the aliens from taking over the planet.
    As always with Williamson, whom I believe to be a satirist with
proportion to a script-writer Kurt Vonnegut, he is setting his sights on
something to parody.  This time, it's the all-too-cheesy and idiotic sci-fi
films.  He points out to all of us just how stupid Independence Day was, how
much Invasion of the Body Snatchers was a rip-off, and how the monsters
always die from the dumbest things (In Puppet Masters, it was a brain
disease.  In The Faculty, it's caffeine).  This alone would have been cool
enough for me.  But, no, they stuck Rodreguiz behind the camera.
    Now I hated From Dusk till Dawn, but I loved this one.  He continues his
love affair with the stedicam as he takes the first major scene of the film
in a roughly 7-minute tracking shot.  He follows the victims during the
chase scenes with great precision that rivals John Carpenter's skill.  He
goes to slow-motion at just the right moment, edits his film until all the
errors are tweaked out, and uses our fear of the unknown as good as
Speilberg did in Jaws.
    Now I go to the flaws for all of you who haven't left and seen the movie
already: the script is as predictable as any you've seen.  The "queen" alien
is known to you after the first thirty minutes.  The dialogue sucks.  The
performances are atrocious.  But, like I said with Blade: to hell with all
that.  Have some fun.

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Robert Rodriguez.  Written by Kevin Williamson.  Starring
Jordana Brewster, Clea DuVall, Laura Harris, Josh Hartnett, Shawn Hatosy and
Elijah Wood.  1998, 104 min., Rated R.
     Because of the usual critical overreaction that accompanies the release of
many American films that are intended to be no more than an hour and a half
long popcorn-filled break from reality, "The Faculty" was panned by most.  And
I went into this viewing experience not expecting much.  After all, director
Robert Rodriguez went from "El Mariachi" to "Desperado" and Kevin "Scream"
Williamson's scripts become tediously self-referential.  The theatrical trailer
boasted the previous projects of director and screenwriter more than it did the
actual movie.  Even the Tommy Hilfiger ad campaign, which would make one
believe that R&B star Usher was the main attraction of "The Faculty," quickly
wore out their welcome.  How did my opinion change after actually seeing it? 
You may be as surprised as I was.
     Lacking the satirical edge that fueled both "Scream" entries; "The
Faculty" manages to be a parody instead, not entirely with success.  "The
Breakfast Club," "Alien," "The Thing," and "The Invasion of the Body Snatchers"
are all evident influences.  More than influences, they provide the plot and
familiar characters.  Herrington High used to be a typical school in Ohio.  But
lately the teachers have been acting strange, and six seemingly mismatched
teens will have to tolerate one another in order to save the day.  Delilah
(Jordana Brewster) is the head cheerleader and editor of the school paper who
is dating Stan (Shawn Hatosy), the star quarterback who is sick of getting
preferential treatment because of his place on the social hierarchy.  He worked
hard for the D he got on that science test.  How dare Mr. Furlong (Jon Stewart,
host of "The Daily Show") give him a higher grade for having a golden arm that
has led to the team having a great season?  
     Zeke (Josh Hartnett, "Halloween: H20") is the bad boy.  His parents are
gone, possibly to Europe, and as he repeats his senior year he sells homemade
drugs, fake IDs, and video tapes featuring full frontal nudity of Neve Campbell
and Jennifer Love Hewitt (stars respectively of "Scream" and "I Know What You
Did Last Summer," another Williamson script) out of his trunk in the school
parking lot.  Rounding out the group are the new girl, Marybeth of Atlanta
(Laura Harris), geeky, much harassed photographer Casey (Elijah Wood, the
veteran of the young cast), and Stokely (Clea DuVall, in a standout
performance), the sci-fi reading, darkly dressed outcast whose ambiguity leads
Delilah to fire off several homophobic insults.
     The faculty itself, consisting of Nurse Harper (Salma Hayek in her
obligatory appearance in a Rodriguez film) who's saving her sick days for when
she feels better; Miss Burke (Famke Janssen), a bookish teacher who transforms
into a sexpot and who has a very funny scene with Zeke; Mrs. Olson (Piper
Laurie, who was spooky in "Carrie" and "Twin Peaks"); Principal Drake (Bebe
Neuwirth, in a nod to Lillith and her "Cheers" days); Mr. Furlong; and steely
Coach Willis (Robert Patrick, from "T2: Judgement Day") is bent on making the
town pod people.  
     As the six students race to find out who the "Queen" of the pod people is
in order to prevent disaster, they begin doubting each other, and with good
reason.  Fast pacing, dialogue that is at times surprisingly lame, and hokey
special effects add to the jovial atmosphere.  Particularly amusing are the
insults Stokely throws around and Summer Phoenix as a girl who is always
yelling profanities at and hitting her boyfriend.  It's not quite campy; it's a
bit more serious than that.  "The Faculty" is, however, entertaining, a
throwback to the era in cinema history when cheesy sci-fi stories were viewed
at drive-in theaters by teenagers on the weekend.  A grade A B movie,
recommended.  

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Kevin Williamson is now without a doubt one of the most acclaimed writers in
America today.  He has worked hard to get where he is, and with The Faculty, he
proves that he is a grade-a writer.  In his latest movie, The Faculty, he teams
up with Robert Rodriguez director of From Dusk Till Dawn and Desperado.  How
could it lose??  It didn't at all.  In The Faculty, the plot is that aliens are
taking over the teachers at Harrington High.  The high school is located in a
pretty crummy part of Ohio, where it isn't very nice at all.  One attraction
that the city loves is the football games every Friday night.  Almost the
entire town is there.  As we see more into the high school, we learn about the
students.  There is a large variety of different types of people, unlike many
other movies.
We are introduced to Casey, played by the upcoming Elijah Wood.  Casey is the
kind of kid who gets beat up every day, and he is the school geek.  Supposedly,
every school has a kid like him, and Casey is that kid in Harrington High.  We
see alot of Casey throughout the movie, and his personality kind of grows on to
you.  We also meet Zeke.  Supposedly, there is also one of Zeke in every
school.  Zeke is played by the also upcoming Josh Hartnett.  Zeke is the class
clown.  He sells drugs and other related items to the students at Harrington
High.  Stan is played by Shawn Hatosy.  He gets terrible grades and is the
captain of the football team.  He is dating Deliah played by Jordana Brewster. 
She is the school gossiper, and she writes for the school paper.  Stokely is a
very different person.  She is played by Clea DuVall and is extremely mean to
everyone else.  She has no friends, wears all black, and there is a dirty
rumour about her around school that she is a lesbian.  Marybeth (Laura Harris)
is the new girl in school.  She came from Georgia and doesn't have many friends
considering she is brand new to the school.  She tries making friends with
Stokely, but Stokely just tells her off.
Now, meet the faculty.  There is Mr. Furlong, (Jon Stewart) the science
teacher,  Principal Drake (Bebe Neuwirth), Nurse Harper (Salma Hayek), Coach
Wills (Robert Patrick), Miss Burke, (Famke Janssen) the English teacher, Mr.
Tate (Daniel Von Bargen), and Miss Olsen (Piper Laurie).  One by one, the
faculty is turned to aliens who want the students and the entire city turned
into the same species.  The faculty needs water as much as possible for some
reason.  They drink and drink and drink.  A teacher runs to a shower but dries
out because did not have enough water.  At this point, the students are getting
a little bit suspicious as the teacher's personalities completely change.
The first time they know for sure something is going on is when Deliah and
Casey sneak into the faculty lounge.  They hide in the closet when some of the
staff members enter.  They find a body of a teacher in the closet and they see
some weird events occur among the teachers as they watch through the cracks. 
They run and now the teachers now that the students know.  When Casey and
Deliah try to inform others, people just think they are crazy.  At night, Casey
even sees three faculty members outside of his house waiting, considering he
knows.
Another incident occurs when the six students meet in the same room and an odd
encounter with Mr. Furlong happens.  Now, these six students will have to kill
the master of this alien race before it is too late.  Stokely is a sci-fi freak
and gives many tips about what to do and what is going to happen.  The students
conclude that they can be dried out by Zeke's drugs.  All six must take some of
the drugs to prove they aren't one of them.  As you guessed it, one or maybe
even two or three of the kids are aliens.  They do escape though and aren't
seen until later on.
The remaining kids are determined to find the leader of the aliens.  They go to
the football game suspecting that the leader is Coach Willis.  The football
team is obviously turned because they are continuously attacking the opposing
team.  It's a good thing that Stan quit the team before this encounter.  Or was
it too late?  When the students find the master, this is where the special
effects kick in.  We see a huge, gross alien that wants to turn every human
being into one of them.  A very suprising conclusion takes place, and that is
great especially in horror movies.
As The Faculty started, it seemed like the same old stuff.  The first fifteen
minutes were pretty slow and that's why it didn't get the perfect four.  The
plot wasn't the best in the world either, but the way the actors brought the
screenplay to life, it was very nicely done.  The cast is what brought The
Faculty to a great level.  Piper Laurie, Clea DuVall, and Elijah Wood brought
the most into this sci-fi/horror flick.  For all of you who thought Usher
Raymond, popular rap singer, was in the movie, think again.  He appeared for
about five minutes as a role that we didn't get to know.  With such a large
ensemble cast, you would think that the character development wouldn't be all
that great.  Think again, you could pretty much write a book about each
character.  Hands down to Kevin Williamson and Robert Rodriguez for bringing us
the best horror flick of the year.  It may not have been extremely scary, but
it was certainly very nicely put together and will go down as a classic.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: December 25, 1998
Starring: Elijah Wood, Piper Laurie, Josh Hartnett, Laura Harris, Robert
Patrick, Clea DuVall, Usher Raymond, Salma Hayek
Directed by: Robert Rodriguez
Distributed by: Miramax Films
MPAA Rating: R (strong violence, language, brief nudity) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/faculty.htm
Georges Polti once wrote a paper called "The Thirty-Six Dramatic
Situations," in which he asserted the fact that all drama could be
defined by no more than thirty-six different situations. This may be the
modern restatement of the Biblical prophecy from Ecclesiastes, "There's
nothing new under the sun." THE FACULTY, the latest movie by FROM DUSK
TILL DAWN director Robert Rodriguez, certainly proves this in typical
Hollywood fashion. There's not a measureable fraction of original
material in this unworthy outing. 
Drawing elements from both THE PUPPET MASTERS and INVASION OF THE BODY
SNATCHERS, screenwriter Kevin Williamson (of SCREAM 2 credit) gives us a
horror tale set in middle America (Ohio) one eventful fall. Making use
of a cast of unusually stock characters, Williamson designs an alien
invasion that will not be done INDEPENDENCE DAY-style but rather
"through the back door." Parasitic aliens take over the faculty of a
run-down high school and soon have infested most of the student body,
leaving it up to the ensemble of principal characters to win the day. 
The lack of gusto is the movie's major stumbling block. Even though the
genre has seen movies that have a lack for quality such as this, they've
been saved by an energetic approach. This casts more than a shadow of a
doubt on Williamson's ability, who enjoyed success with the Wes
Craven-directed SCREAM but couldn't pull anything solid in for this
outing or I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER. Although he designs THE
FACULTY with more of a sci-fi bent than his typical slasher picture, it
still comes down to the same results: throw the stock characters in a
steel cage match and see who comes out alive. 
On that level, the main roles are played by virtual unknowns. Only the
recognizeable Elijah Wood (DEEP IMPACT) is at the front; other than
that, the screen veterans are saved for the minor roles of the alien
teachers. Perhaps Williamson has it in mind to champion these
up-and-comers to the fame that their SCREAM and LAST SUMMER counterparts
achieved; but to do that, they'd all need to star in their own WB
television show about the horrors of puberty a la "Dawson's Creek."
Needless to say the acting is far from top notch, nor does necessity ask
that it should be. There is a moment or two of genuine horror, but
unfortunately Williamson and Rodriguez did not take the story far enough
in the sci-fi direction to make any use of it. In sum, THE FACULTY was
just one long shot that did not pay off. 

Author
Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 stars
With a credit list that is sure to raise some eyebrows, The Faculty
boasts two of the best names in the horror industry, director Robert
Rodriguez (From Dusk Till Dawn, Desperado) and screenwriter Kevin
Williamson (Scream, I Know What You Did Last Summer).
Sure enough, the screenplay boasts Williamson's entertaining
90's-culture dialogue as well as some likeable characters - who
collectively bear a radical resemblance to the characters from The
Breakfast Club - but at times is severely let down by Rodriguez's
direction.  His usual electric pacing is somewhat lacking, as is his
keen sense of the absurd.  His direction is certainly not without its
merits - many of them attributed to atmosphere, others the clever
structure of scenes that reflect older styles of horror filmmaking mixed
with props and surroundings from a very modern era - that create a sort
of Invasion of the Body Snatchers for the Mortal Kombat age.
One perfectly satirical touch comes curtsey of Williamson, who
ingeniously gives the heroes of the story - school kids battling their
teachers, whose bodies have been taken over by aliens - only one kind of
weapon that they can effectively fight with: home made speed.  In an
irony that is both whimsical fun and tongue-in-cheek cynicism, a
life-threatening, deadly, don't-touch-it-for-the-life-of-you substance
is now saving the human race from oblivion.  Which, I thought, was kinda
cool, although Rodriguez's finished product is not a film that will be
remembered in ten, or even five years time.  In his attempts to once
again re-create the horror genre - after the mammoth commercial and
artistic success of From Dusk Till Dawn - Rodriguez has created an
enjoyable, not-to-be-taken-seriously piece that entertains well,
although sometimes doesn't quite cut it (no pun intended).


Author
Bill Chambers
THE FACULTY ** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers ( wchamber@netcom.ca )
[For more purple prose, visit Film Freak Central -
http://filmfreakcentral.net )
starring Elijah Wood, Josh Hartnett, Clea DuVall, Jordana Brewster
screenplay by Kevin Williamson
directed by Robert Rodriguez
Before Kevin Williamson came along, could anyone other than film
geeks/freaks name a living, working screenwriter? His name on a
movie's credits (sometimes before the title) is a signal to teenagers
that they're in for some post-Gen X irony-his screenplays assume
everyone born after 1980 grew up in a video store. (Often, as he's 
cribbing a plot, he'll refer to the source-the Breakfast Club episode
of "Dawson's Creek", for example.) Williamson is, in some circles,
even hipper than Quentin Tarantino is.
T2's Robert Patrick stars as a pent-up high school football coach
whose body is taken over by a parasitic alien; he proceeds to
contaminate virtually the entire faculty-most amusingly,
Ain't-It-Cool-News webmaster Harry Knowles (!) in his screen debut as
the Teacher Most In Need of a Treadmill. A group of rambunctious 
whippersnappers uncover this secret early on. Together, they search
for places to hide and a defense against their newfound enemies.
Said group of archetypal-make that stereotypical-teen heroes are as
follows: Delilah (Brewster), the head cheerleader and school beauty;
Stan (Shawn Hatosy), ex-captain of the football team and ex-boyfriend
of Delilah-a jock with a yearning for learning; Casey (Wood), the
underappreciated school nerd; Marybeth (Laura Harris), the naive new
girl in school; Zeke (Hartnett), the rebel without a comb, an
underachieving student who sells homemade drugs out of the trunk of
his car; and Stokeley (DuVall-be still my beating heart), the weirdo
gothic brainer who pretends she's a lesbian so guys will leave her
alone. Did I just describe the cast of The Breakfast Club? Here,
Williamson takes it a step further, as the characters look to the text
of Jack Finney's Invasion of the Body Snatchers for a solution to
their dilemma.
The real problem is that Rodriguez (Desperado, From Dusk Till Dawn) is
such an efficient director (three staff members are snatched within
the first five minutes of the film) that (the nonetheless enjoyable)
The Faculty rarely has a chance to breathe. Relationships are pared
down to their essentials; oftentimes, two characters are conversing
(and snooping together) who were not friends a scene before. Marybeth
gravitates to Stokeley immediately-why? Unlike The Breakfast Club (or
any of the Body Snatchers films, for that matter), there is little
reason all these characters would unite. Also, as in most movies of
this type, it seems a dartboard was used to select who will become an
alien and who won't. (Aside, some entries for Roger Ebert's Movie
Glossary: when testing a group of people to see which person is
harbouring a secret alien identity, the last one tested will turn out
to be the monster; in an attempt to body snatch the male protagonist,
a female villain will appear totally nude before him and invite him
closer.)
There is mild subtext to Williamson's screenplay (which was polished
off by David Wechter and Bruce Kimmel)-The Faculty at time plays like
an effects-laden "Just Say No!" commercial. Which is a great message, 
except that drugs defeat these aliens-perhaps Rodriguez and co. are
commenting on the merits of detox? The beauty of all three Body
Snatchers movies is how emblematic of their respective periods they
are (1956: McCarthyism; 1978: the Me Generation; 1993: the military
state); in 1999, there is more to say about the threat of widespread
mind control than what's laid out here. Today's teenagers and
twentysomething folks (myself included) have been spoonfed so much pop
culture-we're all talking like the characters on "Friends"-that I
doubt they'd notice if our teachers and parents lost their identities,
too.

Author
greg king
THE FACULTY (M).  
(Dimension Films/Miramax/Village Roadshow)
Director: Robert Rodriguez
Stars: Elijah Wood, Josh Hartnett, Jordana Brewer, Clea DuVall, Laura 
Harris, Shawn Hatosy, Famke 
Janssen, Robert Patrick, Bebe Neuwirth, Jon Stewart, Usher Raymond, Salma 
Hayek, Piper Laurie, Daniel 
Von Bargen, Chris McDonald, Summer Phoenix
Running time: 100 minutes.
A variation of the classic Invasion Of The Body Snatchers,
squarely aimed at a teen audience?
Something strange is happening at Ohio's Herrington High School. 
 Almost overnight, the once jaded and disillusioned teachers suddenly
develop a renewed interest in their students, as well as an
unquenchable thirst.  They are possessed by a race of alien parasites
planning on conquering the earth.  The obligatory group of film
literate school misfits and outcasts discover the truth and band
together to save the school.
Gun writer Kevin Williamson (who reinvigorated the slasher
genre with Scream, I Know What You Did Last Summer, etc) makes no
bones about liberally borrowing from The Invasion Of the Body
Snatchers or a number of other sci-fi thrillers (Village Of The
Damned, Invaders From Mars, The Hidden, and even the recent Men In
Black, etc) for his latest screenplay.  Williamson is a clever writer
who certainly knows his horror movies, but the rules of the alien
invasion genre are not as clear cut as those of the slasher genre.
Consequently, The Faculty offers less opportunities to playfully
dissect the clichés for a knowing young audience.  The script is
not as sharp or as fresh as his previous efforts, and the sly in-jokes
and film references are also a little harder to spot.
While the original movie also was a neat parable about the
paranoia and fear experienced by America during the McCarthy era,
Williamson's script takes the same themes and sets them in high
school, an environment with which adolescent audiences can easily
identify.  He deftly mixes gory horror and humour with liberal doses
of teenage angst.
The Faculty is the biggest budget film to date for director
Robert Rodriguez (Desperado, etc).  He makes the most of the
opportunity, with great special effects, solid production values, and
a strong cast.  The students are played by up and coming hunky young
actors, most of whom are new to the screen.
With 14 films under his belt, Elijah Wood (from The Ice Storm,
etc) is the veteran of the young cast, while Josh Hartnett recently
appeared in Halloween H20.  Jordana Brewster, Clea DuVall and Laura
Harris play the three female students with plenty of fire, spunk and
attitude to spare.  Herrington's creepy staff are played mainly by
veteran actors better known for their villainous roles - T2's Robert
Patrick, Piper Laurie (from Carrie, etc), Daniel Von Bargen, and
ex-Bond femme fatale Famke Janssen (from Goldeneye).  Laurie is given
little to do, while Rodriguez regular Salma Hayek makes little
impression as the school nurse, who seems to disappear without any
reason.
The Faculty moves along at a satisfyingly rapid pace, and is
certainly fun while it lasts.  But as soon as you leave the comfort of
the cinema, its faulty logic unravels very quickly.  For example, if
you were an alien creature that thrived on water, wouldn't you first
take over a small coastal town with a user- friendly environment
rather than some arid, inhospitable dust bowl in the middle of the
American mid- west?
Although an inferior film, The Faculty offers plenty to those
teen audiences who enjoyed Scream and its ilk.

Author
Michael Dequina
Questions pondered during _The_Faculty_ (all apologies to Roger Ebert,
whose _Halloween:_H20_ review inspired this piece):
*Why do all (or, at least, most) Kevin Williamson scripts begin the same
way?
That is, with an extended set piece that ends with a murder, usually of
a recognizable star.  Here it's _Cheers_ and _Chicago_ star Bebe
Neuwirth, who plays Miss Drake, principal of Herrington High School,
located somewhere in Ohio.
*Why do high school movies always bunch together a diverse range of
students who would never interact in real life?
The film's focal group: Chilly newspaper editor Delilah (Jordana
Brewster), geeky Casey (Elijah Wood), jock-turned-wannabe-brain Stan
(Shawn Hatosy), loner goth chick Stokely (Clea DuVall), perky country
bumpkin Marybeth (Laura Harris), and brilliant but misguided Zeke (Josh
Hartnett), a drug manufacturer.
*Speaking of Hartnett, why doesn't he ever use a comb?
The _H20_ co-star's case of "perpetual bedhead" (as dubbed by
_Entertainment_Weekly_) gets no better in this film.  In fact, it gets
worse.
*Why would a babe like Delilah be romantically linked with a
dorky-looking guy like Stan?
Because she's also the head cheerleader and he the football team
captain, of course.
*What is the appeal of Usher beyond his music?
The current prince of R&B is strangely robbed of all charisma not
singing a note and keeping his shirt on in the small role of Gabe, Stan's
eventual successor as football team captain.
*What the hell is Harry Knowles doing in this film?  And in a scene with
Salma Hayek, no less?
The webmaster of the notorious Ain't It Cool News site appears in a bit
role as a teacher.  Mercifully, we're only given one close shot of his
face--a reaction take.  Hard to believe, but Knowles is an even worse
actor than he is a writer.
*Speaking of Hayek, why does director Robert Rodriguez always cast her in
his films?
...not that I'm complaining, of course.  Here, the divine Miss H. plays
the school's Nurse Harper, whose nasty cough disappears when she's
afflicted with a more, say, unusual ailment.  As if being an impossibly
gorgeous school nurse weren't unusual enough.
*Can anyone buy Amazonian former Bond Girl Famke Janssen as a mousy
English teacher?
Apparently, neither can Williamson nor Rodriguez, as Janssen's Miss
Burke and most of the characters undergo a 180-degree turn as a
mysterious--perhaps alien--force corrupts the school faculty and, before
long, the students themselves.
*Has Robert Patrick ever been more perfectly cast since
_Terminator_2:_Judgment_Day_?
The actor effectively revives his famously ice-cold stare as football
coach Willis, who, with drama teacher Mrs. Olson (Piper Laurie), is the
apparent figurehead in the bizarre goings-on at Herrington.  Patrick is
just one of the many amusing casting touches, along with Hayek, Janssen,
Laurie (from _Carrie_ and _Twin_Peaks_), Neuwirth, Jon Stewart, Susan
Willis (known to viewers of _All_My_Children_ as malevolent maid Helga),
and even--to a certain novelty value extent--Knowles.
*Is there a more talented genre film director currently working than
Rodriguez?  Or a more clever horror movie writer than Williamson?
Only these talented two can turn such a blatant
_Invasion_of_the_Body_Snatchers_ ripoff/homage (with touches of _Alien_
and _Species_) into such an enjoyable--and wonderfully witty--romp.  They
have a clear awareness of the absurdity of the premise, but that doesn't
prevent them from delivering the suspenseful goods.  Williamson's script
continually serves up surprising twists as it dishes out often hilarious
doses of irony; and Rodriguez keeps the action moving at rapid-fire speed
for maximum excitement.  Whether it be lowbrow comedy (his segment in
_Four_Rooms_), go-for-broke action (_El_Mariachi_ and _Desperado_),
teensploitation (this and _Roadracers_), or horror (this and
_From_Dusk_till_Dawn_), Rodriguez always displays boundless energy and
creativity.  Helping his cause as in _Dusk_ is the superlative effects
work by the KNB Group, all done within an economical budget.
*Will there a bigger, better blast of pure, unpretentious, popcorn
entertainment this holiday season?
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]

Author
Matt Williams
And another film rolls out of the teen-horror factory.  But, The Faculty
shows promise:  it has some decent talent attached, and seems to be a
change of pace from your run-of-the-mill serial killer stalking
teenagers film.  Is it any good?  Well, it's better than your standard
slasher fare, but hardly enjoyable enough to be called a "good" movie.
There's something odd about the faculty at Herrington High School. Not
only have they begun consuming large quantities of water, but they've
been acting...strangely.  Could it be that alien body snatchers are at
work?  Several students think so.
An unlikely band of students team up to try and stop the invasion. It
starts out with trendy cheerleader/newspaper editor Delilah (Jordana
Brewster) and the hopelessly nerdy photographer Casey (Elijah Wood).
But soon they've roped in Delilah's ex-boyfriend, the ex-quarterback
Stan (Shawn Wayne Hatosy), and the sci-fi obsessed gothic wannabe
lesbian Stokely (Clea DuVall).  Rounding out the group are the brilliant
loser, who peddles his own homemade drugs, Zeke (Josh Hartnett), and the
perky new girl, Marybeth (Laura Harris).
Armed only with their knowledge of body-snatcher cliches, these teens
must face down such fearsome foes as Coach Willis (Robert Patrick),
Nurse Harper (Salma Hayek), Miss Burke (Famke Janssen), Miss Olsen
(Piper Laurie), and the sinister Principal Drake (Bebe Neuwirth).
The script for The Faculty was written by the vastly overrated Kevin
Williamson, of Scream and I Know What You Did Last Summer fame. Once
again, he is good at pointing out cliches,  but displays little or no
originality of his own.  Williamson does give the characters knowledge
of those cliches (which raises him one rung above the average horror
film writer), but doesn't use that knowledge to go anywhere.  As a
result, the film simply revisits the same territory as Invasion of the
Body Snatchers, or The Thing, without any real surprises.
The characters, while all shallow archetypes, are at least well played.
Those in, or recently out of, high school will recognize at least a few
of the various types among the oversimplifications here.  On a purely
escapist revenge-seeking level, the film does work in a way.  The
every-teens here are able to wreak revenge upon the every-teachers who
have tormented them.
The special effects of the film include some potentially interesting
concepts, but they're hamstrung by flawed execution.  Many of the
effects, which are intended to look creepy, are goofy instead.  Even the
film's ultimate CGI creature looks rather unremarkable...  The novelty
of computer-generated monsters has worn off, and special effects artists
need to return to creating innovative designs.
Director Robert Rodriguez, who has successfully created tense and
suspenseful scenes in the past, has lost his touch here.  A few of the
scenes hint at his prior potential, but they're all hobbled in one way
or another.  There's rarely an feeling of true danger, and when there
is...you simply don't care.
Still, compared with the string of recent horror films, The Faculty is
one of the better entries in this struggling genre.  In may even be
worth a look when it arrives at your local rental store.  But,
particularly at this time of year, you can do much better than The
Faculty when at your local theater.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Christopher Null
Finally.  We always knew Robert Rodriguez had talent as a filmmaker.  We
were just waiting for someone to put a good script in his hands, and
Kevin Williamson has done that here.  Do not be fooled by the woefully
bad trailers, or by the fact that critics have roundly panned this
horror film.  THE FACULTY is easily the best of the genre to come along
since Williamson's breakout hit, SCREAM.  It is also the first watchable
film Rodriguez has put up since storming onto the scene with EL
MARIACHI.
Easily the biggest problem with this movie is in the marketing.  I can
only imagine how pissed off Williamson, Rodriguez, and everyone else
involved in the movie must have been to see the film marketed as just
another schlocky entry into the horror genre, which generally takes the
words aliens; teenagers; battle; suspicious; killer; small town; etc.
and jumble them up to come up with a concept (to wit, this time: 
suspicious small town teenagers battle killer aliens).  Now if you are
already a big 80's horror fan, just skip this review, because you
already saw the movie, but this review is for people who are highly
suspicious of shelling out eight bucks to see a horror flick.  The only
reason I actually saw THE FACULTY was because my little sister begged me
to.  But now I'm trying to convince you to.
Actually, THE FACULTY is just as witty as SCREAM, slightly less
original, but makes up with it by acknowledging its status as
essentially an update of Donald Siegel's 1956 classic INVASION OF THE
BODY SNATCHERS, one of the most frightening movies ever made, before
Hollywood began trying to make you jump in your seat rather than truly
fear the end of the world.  Granted, with Robert Rodriguez and his
frenetic camera involved, this update heightens the sense of urgency and
makes you hop up a time or two.  But, unlike his substance-lite
stylizations in DESPERADO and FROM DUSK TILL DAWN, Rodriguez manages to
hold onto the wit and character of Williamson's script and fashion a
film that not only gets your heart racing, but also manages enough
intelligence to force you to suspend your disbelief.
To top it all off, THE FACULTY throws in some good BREAKFAST CLUB social
commentary about high school social hierarchy, and examines the lasting
effects of a surreal experience on such an ingrained social order. 
Granted, THE FACULTY's not SCHINDLER'S LIST, but if you give it a chance
it will make you think a little bit.  Which is a good thing.
Director: Robert Rodriguez
Producer: Elizabeth Avellan, Robert Rodriguez
Writer: Kevin Williamson
Starring: Elijah Wood, Jordana Brewster, Josh Hartnett, Shawn Hatosy,
Jon Stewart
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - Writer and Script Consultant
Check out The Movie Emporium's new design at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Faculty (1998)
Elijah Wood, Josh Hartnett, Shawn Hatosy, Clea DuVall, Laura Harris, 
Jordana Brewster, Robert Patrick, Bebe Neuwirth, Famke Janssen, Piper 
Laurie, Jon Stewart, Salma Hayek, Christopher McDonald, Usher Raymond, 
Susan Willis, Daniel von Bargen, Louis Black, Megan Gallagher, Joe Hatton,
 Harry Knowles, Duane Martin, Jason D. May, Katherine Willis. Screenplay 
by Kevin Williamson, from a story by David Wechter & Bruce Kimmel. 
Directed by Robert Rodriguez. 102 minutes.
Rated R, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
I entered the theater to see "The Faculty" with low expectations, but 
came out grinning. The sci-fi horror thriller, directed by Robert 
Rodriguez from "Scream" scribe Kevin Williamson's screenplay, is a brash, 
welcome throw-back to the days of American International drive-in flicks. 
Williamson's script, about teens who discover that aliens have taken over 
the bodies of their high school faculty, cheerfully cribs ideas from a 
load of different sources and jumbles them together quite nicely, 
creating a very entertaining diversion. Think "Dawson's Creek" meets "The 
Breakfast Club" meets "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" meets "Scooby-Doo" 
and you'll have some idea of what to expect. "The Faculty" is funny, 
scary, lurid, gross and cheesy in just the right places. 
The film works because Kevin Williamson understands what a kick 
exploitation movies can be. He's smart enough to play with the genre 
without mocking it and bold enough to write some of the most reckless 
scenes I've witnessed onscreen in years. Like any good exploitation flick,
 "The Faculty" is every parent's worst nightmare. In order to save the 
world, Williamson's teen heroes are required to get high, drive like 
maniacs, run around with guns and kill authority figures. Irresponsible? 
Yes, indeed, and isn't it nice to see a writer with faith in young 
people's ability to vicariously enjoy forbidden acts without emulating 
them. 
Our heroes are six teen archetypes, each with just enough detailing to 
feel genuine. Casey (Elijah Wood) is a sheepish nerd prone to tripping 
over his own feet. He has a major crush on head cheerleader/school paper 
editor Delilah (Jordana Brewster), who is only too happy to remind him 
that she is completely out of his league. The aptly-named Delilah breaks 
up with star quarterback and all-around good guy Stan (Shawn Hatosy) when 
he quits the team to focus on his studies, tersely explaining that she 
dated him solely because of his place in the student hierarchy. But Stan 
has a secret admirer in sullen goth bookworm Stokey (Clea Duvall), a 
withdrawn girl who poses as a lesbian, hoping the pretense will cause 
typically homophobic classmates to steer clear of her. 
On the fringes of this urban "Dawson's Creek" quartet is wholesome new 
girl in school, Marybeth (Laura Harris) and Zeke (Josh Hartnett), a 
dealer in fake I.D.'s, bogus videotapes and homemade designer drugs. With 
his ambling gait and chronic bed-head hair, Zeke reminded me of the 
beatnik kid from the "Scooby-Doo" cartoons. In fact, the story's teen 
sleuths were so reminiscent of the "Scooby-Doo" gang that I half-expected 
the film to end with an alien leader exclaiming "My plan would have 
worked if it wasn't for those meddling kids!"    
Drugs, dangerous driving, and guns aside, "The Faculty" does carry a 
tacit positive message, showing that for our world to survive, people 
must set aside their differences and work together. And these kids need 
the power of unity, because in addition to the alien menace, they're 
facing a formidable adult cast.
As the school principal, Bebe Neuwirth is sexy and lethal; a murderous 
variant of her Lilith character from "Cheers" and "Frasier." Robert 
Patrick is terrific as the brutal football coach, his juiciest part since 
"Terminator 2." Patrick's perverse alien smile is even scarier than his 
pre-invasion drill sergeant rants. Both actors make the proceedings all 
the more creepy because their characters actually seem to enjoy being 
possessed. Piper Laurie, Salma Hayek, Jon Stewart, and Daniel von Bargen 
also turn in spirited performances, and Famke Janssen steams up the 
screen as a drab, repressed English teacher transformed into a beautiful 
seductress; a twisted spin on "My Fair Lady," with an alien slug serving 
as her Henry Higgins. Janssen is also the central figure in the film's 
most enjoyably over-the-top special effects scene, a great cornball 
homage to John Carpenter's "The Thing."
As usual, Williamson liberally peppers his script with pop culture 
references, but they seem less self-conscious here than in some of his 
other works. When the teens begin to explore the whole alien parasite 
theory, it's only natural that they look to science fiction for insight, 
speculating that the old axiom "write what you know" might even apply to 
the authors of "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" or "The Puppet Masters." 
Director Robert Rodriguez keeps the film moving at a nice clip, neatly 
balancing laughs, gross-out scenes and "Night of the Living Dead" style 
claustrophobic dread as he builds to a climax that is at once campy and 
intense. Then, to cap things off, Kevin Williamson tweaks contemporary 
horror clichés with a nifty closing scene most notable for what it 
doesn't do. Lurid, high-spirited and unapologetic, "The Faculty" is great 
trashy fun. I only wish I could have watched it at a drive-in.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Robert Rodriguez
Cast: Elijah Wood, Piper Laurie, Christopher McDonald, Bebe Neuwirth,
Robert Patrick, Usher Raymond
Screenplay: George Huang, Kevin Williamson
Producers: Elizabeth Avellan, Robert Rodriguez, Bill Scott
Runtime: 100 min.
US Distribution: Miramax/Dimension
Rated R: violence, language
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
In The Faculty, little slimy aliens take over an entire school.  They
start with the football coach (Robert Patrick), and move their way
through the principal (Bebe Neuwirth), some of the teachers (Piper
Laurie, Daniel Von Bargen, Famke Janssen, Salma Hayek), and then move on
to the students.  So, naturally, it falls into the hands of our
protagonists to stop the alien invasion:  computer-nerd Casey (Elijah
Wood), tomboy Stokely (Clea DuVall), cool drug-dealing Zeke (Josh
Hartnett), football kid Stan (Shawn Hatosy), superficial cheerleader
Delilah (Jordana Brewster), and innocent Souther girl Marybeth (Laura
Harris).  Along the way, there are plenty of violent deaths and a whole
lot of movie references.  
I like writer Kevin Williamson's self-conscious horror films better
than most horror films.  They certainly overpower the numbing badness of
recent horror junk like I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (although,
oddly enough, Williamson did write the original Summer flick) and
Disturbing Behavior.  He's clearly a man who has seen a lot of movies,
judging from the constant barrage of movie references through all of the
films that he's written (the Scream movies are basically 90-minute
movies references, actually).  The Faculty is sufficiently aware of its
own silliness to pass the time pleasantly.  It rather reminded me of
Deep Rising, which was similar in it's sci-fi/horror/comedy approach.
Some are calling The Faculty a science-fiction thriller, but it really
isn't.  I don't even think it attempts to be.  All of the science (the
silly explanations about how the aliens survive, for instance) is
intentionally dumb, and never tries to be serious (unlike Phantoms,
which came out earlier this year and takes itself entirely seriously). 
The Faculty is strictly a horror film, with some comedy thrown in for
good measure.  And it's not a great movie, but it's inoffensive and it
has some fun scenes.  Directed by Robert Rodriguez with the same kind of
visual flair that he's shown in previous films (even the terrible From
Dusk Till Dawn), The Faculty has the look and feel of an efficient
thriller, even though it is mostly played for laughs.  The giant digital
slugs that appear later in the film are nicely done, and most of the
violence dances skillfully between disgusting and funny.  
And funny it is; Williamson's dialogue is sharp, and I found myself
laughing often (Stokely's constant insults are very amusing).  The movie
is not played for scares very often; there are some exciting sequences
(the first scene, with Bebe Neuwirth running away from Robert Patrick,
is well-done), but mostly it's just for fun.  The actors are appealing,
especially young Elijah Wood (I'm glad he hasn't met the fate of other
child actors), and the film is just a lot of fun.  I think it might lift
from one too many horror films (The Thing, especially); Williamson still
hasn't proved to me that he can come up with something really original,
but the way he keeps reshaping the stuff we've seen is good enough for
now.

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
A group of misfit high school students grow suspicious of their teachers.
Have they been replaced by sinister alien doubles?  What are their plans
for Earth?  Have aliens infiltrated the rebels?  Is this just a crap SF
film?
Kevin Williamson is chiefly (in fact only) for his self referential and
ironic horror films "Scream" and "I Know What You Did Last Summer".
Neither were exactly post-modern classics.  A bad horror film where the
characters know that they are in a bad horror film is - in-jokes, knowing
winks to the audience, homage to genre aside - still a bad horror film.
His screenplay for "The Faculty" does nothing to change this track record.
Although endless comparisons have been made to the cult SF flick "Invasion
of the Body Snatchers", "The Faculty" bears a greater resemblance to a more
recent film, John Carpenter's "The Thing".  (Actually two scenes are stolen
outright: a walking autonomous head, and a "loyalty test" to ascertain who
can be trusted.)  The strange behaviour of their teachers leads a diverse
group of students to conclude their school has been taken over.  But their
own ranks have been infiltrated and as their numbers drop, suspicion
blossoms within the group.  In the hands of Carpenter, this created a
claustrophobic atmosphere, with a team that needed to trust each other
being unable to.  "The Faculty" is by contrast a sloppily constructed film.
Starting with a group of uniquely unlikable characters (the bitchy
cheerleader, the drug dealer, the professional victim nerd, the dumb jock),
they are brought together implausibly and just as implausibly start to
fight.  The only reason for the timing of their squabble seems to be that
this was around when it happens in other films of this type.  It may be
interesting to see who gets taken over next, but the director doesn't play
fair here.  Several party members turn when there has been no opportunity
for them to have been converted.  In a flashback late in the film we are
reshown a previous scene, including something that clearly didn't happen in
it.  Rather than redirect our attention or be clever with our sympathies
the film just lies to get out of plot cul-de-sacs.
The acting is passable, with creditable performances by Famke Janssen, Bebe
Neuwirth and Piper Laurie in small roles.  . Salma Hayek however shows
herself to be a talent-free zone by failing to carry a three-minute
appearance as a school nurse.  Clea DuVall does a nice turn as as a gloomy
outsider, shining against the rest of the glossy teenage leads.  I'd like
to say something positive about director Robert Rodriguez, who looked so
promising when he made the shoestring budget "El Mariachi".  However any
number of dull Hollywood hacks could have made "The Faculty", with its
off-the-shelf direction.  Regrettably, another talent bites the dust.
So the central characters are the geek, the jock, the prom queen ...  no,
hang about, that was "The Breakfast Club".  One thing about Kevin
Williamson scripts is that they're like so many other films you've seen
before.  Like one of those composite photos made by averaging hundreds of
faces, there's something elusively familiar about it all.  (Or, to pick a
genre example, the shimmer suits from Philip K Dick's "A Scanner Darkly".)
In fact, this cut-and-paste passes as narrative.  When considering how to
defeat the aliens, the characters decide apropos no evidence whatsoever
that it must be the same way as in Heinlein's "The Puppet Masters".  Of
course they turn out to be right.  When the heroes do so little to deserve
victory, can you really be interested in the outcome?
In his book of essays "A Supposedly Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again", Mark
Foster Wallace ponders why there is so much bad television and why people
still watch so much.  The reason, he decides, is that television is
fundamentally ironic.  On one hand it parades its importance ("don't miss",
"don't go away", "hear it first") while on the other hand giving a sly
wink.  You and I know, it says, this is all a joke.  What's the harm?  So
programs can simultaneously portray themselves as vital and garbage, as
original and derivative, as unmissable and disposable.  Wallace may not
have Williamson's number, but he is in the right area code.  "The Faculty"
tries to be tense by being predictable, to tell a scary story by copying
other scary stories, to cover up plot holes by hiding in genre.  It's not a
poorly made film - it's just not even trying to be a good film.
And this isn't going to do.  How long has it been since the last really
scary film you saw.  (For me it was the launch sequence in "Contact".)  Why
has SF, in fact big box office film, become action-comedy SFX by default?
Does anyone make serious and sincere films anymore?  It's very easy to
produce ironic, self-referential work, escaping any responsibility for
being derivative or illogical with a plea that it's a parody.  It's a lot
harder to actually produce something new and be prepared to face criticism
head-on.
"The Faculty" isn't a terrible film, but it's a terribly lazy one and a bad
sign for the future.  [*/misfire] and "Death to the archdemon
 Williamson!" on the Sid and Nancy scale.
"The Faculty"
Released 1998.
Directed by Robert Rodriguez.
Screenplay by Kevin Williamson.
Starring Jordana Brewster, Clea DuVall, Laura Harris, Josh Hartnett,
   Shawn Hatosy, Salma Hayek, Famke Janssen, Piper Laurie, Bebe Neuwirth,
   Robert Patrick, Elijah Wood.
--
Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Biology, Imperial College
"We were too young, we lived too fast and had too much technology ..."

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Robert Rodriguez.
Cast: Elijah Wood, Josh Hartnett, Clea DuVall, Shawn Hatosy, Jordanna 
Brewster, Laura Harris, Robert Patrick, Bebe Neuwirth, Famke Janssen, 
Piper Laurie, Jon Stewart, Salma Hayek, Christopher McDonald, Usher 
Raymond, Susan Willis, Daniel von Bargen, Louis Black, Megan Gallagher, 
Joe Hatton, Harry Knowles, Duane Martin, Jason D. May, Katherine Willis, 
Summer Phoenx. 
1998 - 101 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, gore, profanity, nudity, and drug use).
Reviewed December 27, 1998.
"The Faculty," the heavily-hyped and advertised sci-fi/horror film that 
has teamed up director Robert Rodriguez (1995's "Desperado" and 1996's 
"From Dusk Till Dawn") and screenwriter Kevin Williamson (1996's 
"Scream" and 1997's "Scream 2"), is being called a cross between 
"Invasion of the Body Snatchers" and "The Breakfast Club," and I don't 
think I could describe it any better than that.
The film sets up the six central teenage characters who do not seem to 
have much in common, and then the science-fiction aspect is added, 
involving the fear that the faculty at Herrington High School are 
actually aliens who are quickly transforming everyone in the town. The 
six characters, as in "The Breakfast Club," can be easily labeled as a 
stereotype, but as they are developed, they become far more complex: 
Casey (Elijah Wood), the much picked upon nerd; Stokely (Clea DuVall), a 
goth outcast who hides behind the false facade of being a lesbian so 
everyone will avoid her; Zeke (Josh Hartnett), a drug dealer who turns 
out to be a science whiz; Stan (Shawn Hatosy), the star football 
quarterback who is considering quitting the team to concentrate more on 
academics; Delilah (Jordanna Brewster), the popular cheerleader and 
newspaper journalist; and Marybeth (Laura Harris), the sweet 'n southern 
new girl in town. Although the characters are only slightly connected 
(i.e. Casey is Delilah's photojournalist assistant; Marybeth tries to 
become buddies with Stokely, since they both don't have friends, etc.), 
when they all begin to suspect the teachers due to some grotesque and 
strange occurrences, the only people they can count on for help is each 
other, even though they aren't really even sure if they can trust one 
another.
"The Faculty" is another smart and pop-culturally hip film from 
Williamson, although it does not equal up to his best film, the original 
"Scream," and Rodriguez, whose "From Dusk Till Dawn" is still one of the 
more original genre films of the 90's. Williamson and Rodriguez are so 
assured at their professions, respectively, that the idea of teaming up 
together is pretty much a no-brainer. The plotline of "The Faculty," 
involving aliens taking over other people's bodies, has been done quite 
a lot before, from "Invasion of the Body Snatchers," to "The Puppet 
Masters," to "Invaders from Mars," so one of the obstacles that 
Williamson and Rodriguez had to overcome was to somehow make the idea 
seem fresh, and by setting the goings-on at a high school and having the 
protagonists be a group of teens, they were mostly successful. Surely, 
the conventions of the story are still the same, and the climax was 
inevitable, but there were a few surprises along the way, including the 
question of who were the aliens, and who weren't. The epilogue was also 
a refreshing change-of-pace as it did not set up a sequel but ended on a 
note that probably could not have been any better.
The performances in "The Faculty" were a treat throughout, since there 
were so many recognizable actors in roles that were the polar opposite 
of what they usually do. One exception were the teens, who, aside from 
Elijah Wood, are not very well-known, but they all aquit themselves 
nicely, particularly Wood (the seasoned pro), Clea DuVall, and Jordanna 
Brewster. As members of the faculty, Robert Patrick ("T2: Judgement 
Day") was creepy as the gym coach; Piper Laurie was amusing and 
threatening as the drama teacher; Bebe Neuwirth actually was somehow 
able to look like an alien; and Salma Hayek, as the school nurse with a 
bad case of the cold, was very funny in a small role. The standout, in 
my opinion, of the whole cast was Famke Janssen who turns in an oddly 
touching performance as the shy and meek english teacher who, after 
turning into an alien, becomes the sex bombshell. If there was any 
problem I had with the faculty, it was that some of them were given no 
real payoff in the climactic sequence. Since the teenagers realize that 
in order to save everyone they must kill the "Queen" alien, many of the 
faculty members disappear. It might have been more fun if they had to 
face every one of the teachers, although the finale is still pretty 
impressive, and includes some showstopping creature effects, especially 
for a relatively low 15-million-dollar budget.
Although not one of the best horror or science-fiction films I have 
seen, "The Faculty" is still an exciting and worthy film that Dimension 
Films was smart to release around the Holiday Season when this type of 
genre offering is usually not released. While the story is as old as the 
hills, it is also, in a way, timeless, because everyone, I think, has 
suspected at one time or another that a certain person simply did not 
act right, as if they really weren't human. And by putting this idea in 
the setting of a small-town high school, it perfectly contrasts with the 
alienation that most teenagers usually go through when relating to 
adults and other peers. 
+ Note: The ad and poster campaign for this film is hugely misleading, 
as it features R & B artist Usher Raymond as one of the main characters. 
In actuality, he only has a small role as one of Stan's buddies who 
becomes quarterback after Stan resigns from the team. If I were one of 
the heads from Dimension, I would change this advertising at once, since 
it is unnecessary and rather deceiving.
           - Copyright 1998 by Dustin Putman
             Dustin
Putman's Film Reviews >

Author
Dennis Schwartz

FACULTY, THE (director/editor: Robert Rodriguez; screenwriter: Kevin
Williamson/ story by David Wechter & Bruce Kimmel; cinematographer:
Enrique Chediak; cast: Elijah Wood (Casey Conner), Josh Hartnett (Zeke),
Clea DuVall (Stokely), Jordana Brewster (Delilah Profitt), Laura Harris
(Marybeth Louise Hutchinson), Shawn Hotosy (Stan), Salma Hayek (Nurse
Harper), Famke Janssen (Miss Burke), Piper Laurie (Mrs. Olson), Bebe
Neuwirth (Principal Drake), Robert Patrick (Coach Willis), Jon Stewart
(Mr. Furlong), Usher Raymond (Gabe); Runtime: 104; Dimension Films;
1998)
A meant to be chic sci-fi film, set in an Ohio high school, that pays
homage to a number of other trashy genre horror films, but especially to
horror classics such as "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" and "The Thing"
and more surprisingly to "The Breakfast Club," as in the film's best
moments, it explores teen relationships and the pressure put on teens to
succeeed by parents and from peer pressure to conform with the group.
The fast-paced story, the crisp editing, and the atmospheric music plus
all the schlock horror it could throw out to the audience by using those
traditional podlike aliens, helped make this a silly venture geared
mainly for the under 25 crowd (I'm not only referring to age, but to
I.Q.).
It was most appealing when the teens confronted their real romantic and
self-image problems and seemed to use the gore from this ridiculous
story, to mildly get in some satire about every conceivable high school
type they could fit into their story line, with the following six
alienated students representing Herrington High School: the depressive
outsider, sci-fi specialist and unattractive loner Stokely (Clea
DuVall); the jock who is upset that his grade 'D' was changed to an 'A'
and quits playing football because he doesn't want special treatment,
Stan (Shawn Hotosy); the new student from Atlanta who is as sweet as
pie, but makes no friends here, Marybeth (Laura Harris); the beautiful
but stuck up bitchy cheerleader and editor of the school newspaper, the
acid-tongued Delilah (Jordana Brewster); the nice, brainy nerd who gets
bullied by the jocks and apologizes to them for taking up their space,
Casey (Elijah Wood); and the underachieving school science whiz, hustler
and dealer of homemade speed that is inhaled, who is without parental
supervision and is doing his bit to deconstruct America, Zeke (Josh
Hartnett). All the students were stereotypes of the characters they were
playing, jostling to break out of the cookie cutter mold they were in.
In the mystery taking place, the teens try to save their school and the
world from an alien master killer. "The Faculty" featured a running
battle between authority figures (the faculty) and the misfits (the
teenagers).
When an unknown parasite is found on the campus grounds and brought into
biology class by Casey, the teacher observes that this creature is
something he has never seen before and will call in the experts at the
university to identify it, but it comes to life when it becomes moist
and suddenly has sharp teeth, and soon it disappears from the fish bowl
it was stored in.
Members of the faculty are taking over by the thirsty alien parasite and
become docile, smiling, and emotionless clones of human beings. There
are only six diverse students left to defeat the aliens and they must
learn to put aside their differences and work together. But they don't
know who is an alien and who is human, and can't find out until it's too
late, except if they snort Zeke's homemade caffeine concoction to
destroy the alien (drugs are cool in this film--they only kill the bad
guys, which is the most daring thing the film stated about the
rebellious students).
All the faculty members are also stereotypes: Coach Willis (Robert
Patrick), the first victim, is the gung-ho football coach and
hot-tempered disciplinarian; Mrs. Olson (Piper Laurie), the cautionary
veteran music teacher, is the second victim, and soon Principal Drake
(Bebe Neuwirth) becomes an alien. She is a repulsive purveyor of false
educational standards and represents the Establishment. It's only a
matter of a day and a half before the rest of the staff - the popular
science teacher Mr. Furlong (Jon Stewart); the bored literature teacher
Mr. Tate (Daniel Von Bargen); the sniffling school nurse, Harper (Salma
Hayek); and the timid Miss Burke (Famke Janssen) - succumb. So, it's a
battle of students versus faculty, as the students figure out what to do
by discussing what other films and literary works did when confronted by
the same aliens. Amusingly, they think that the past films may have been
part of a plot to fool everybody into not taking alien invaders
seriously and therefore making it possible for them to let their guard
down for a real alien attack.
Robert Rodriguez ("El Mariachi"/ "Desperado"), the director, and Kevin
Williamson ("Scream"), the screenwriter, have created a film that lacks
suspense, lacks freshness, lacks wit, and suffers from some rather lame
special effects. If there is enjoyment to be found, it's in the frantic
moments when the students are acting out their stereotypes and some of
the vilest things come up out of their wiser-than-they-should-be mouths.
It's a cult film for those with a taste for earwigs, a stomach for slop,
and an appetite for mind altering drugs... . Gee! I wonder why I wasn't
more taken with the film!
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Dimension Films
 Director: Robert Rodriguez 
 Writer:  David Wechter (story) and Bruce Kimmel
 Cast: Elijah Wood, Piper Laurie, Christopher McDonald,
Bebe Neuwirth, Robert Patrick, Usher Raymond, Jon Stewart,
Clea DuVall, Susan Willis, Salma Hayek, Daniel von Bargen,
Laura Harris, Josh Harnett, Famke Jannsen, Harry Knowles
   In "The Faculty" a bunch of high-school kids discover that
their teachers are from another planet.  So what's new?  We
knew that for quite a while but we differed about the location
and makeup of the world that they were from.  [Critic's aside]:
Truth to tell, high-school teachers are from the planet
Masochist in the galaxy Milquetoast Way.  They take guff
from the kids who think they're being picked on, given the
wrong grades, or being forced to think.  They take nonsense
from administrators whose principal preoccupation is not with
learning.  They accept drivel from the public who resent the
decent vacation time; from the government, which does not
allow them the right to strike because they are not "working
people": from parents, who complain that "no one else ever
criticized my child."  
  But enough asides.  For the most part there's nothing new
about this movie, either, since it borrows liberally from "The
Invasion of the Body Snatchers" and "Alien."  Nonetheless it
starts off on an interesting track only to deteriorate when the
new forms of life begin to take on the shape of spiders and
octopuses.  If only director Robert Rodriguez avoided the
special effects baloney (which wouldn't scare a six-year-old)
and kept the aliens looking pretty much human, he would
have served up an involving drama about the attempt by bug-
like forms parasitically to take up residence in the bodies of
human beings--having discovered that they depend on liquid
to remain alive and that we people are seventy percent water. 
Goodness knows he has a likable enough cast of teenagers--
two strikingly attractive and appealing young women (and one
who is passable), bouncing their ideas and bodies off three
basically decent guys.
   The story opens on an Ohio institution, Herrington High,
situated in a town that tolerates it only because it has a
crackerjack football team.  Coached by hotheaded Willis
(Robert Patrick), the team is captained by Stan (Shawn
Hatosy), who quits the squad a day before the big game to
concentrate his mind on academics.  This puts him into
conflict with the head cheerleader, Delilah (Jordana
Brewster), who reminds him of the American tradition: head
cheerleaders date only football captains.
   Based on a story by David Wechter which has been
adapted by Bruce Kimmel's screenplay, "The Faculty" is
particularly reliable in its portrait of a typical middle-class
school, filled with hormone-driven teens who freely curse
everything that crosses their path, push into one another, and
generally muddle their way through their trying years on the
way to a diploma.  They try to deal with their loneliness
(newbie Marybeth, played by Laura Harris has just begun her
new life in Ohio while the allegedly lesbian Stokely, played by
Clea Du Vall is generally avoided).  They put up with the
taunt of bullies, as when the nerdish Casey (Elijah Wood) is
shoved around as though he were a football.  They look up to
a drug supplier, Zeke (Josh Harnett), who despite repeating
his senior year is surprisingly articulate--a wiseguy who in
one great scene taunts a repressed teacher by offering her
free, cherry-flavored condoms.
   When the coach, then others on the faculty like Miss Olsen
(Piper Laurie) and the school principal, Drake (Bebe
Neuwirth), begin looking at acting zombieish, they promote
the suspicions of the primary circle of teens, who realize that
they have a bug up their ears, an insect determined to take
over the bodies of all human beings on the earth.  At this
point the movie turns into a whodunit as these kids perceive
that one of them is the host, the queen bee as it were, who
has started the epidemic.
   One flaw is that while the infected faculty members take on
the appearance of ghouls while the infected youngsters
become simply docile, the chief perpetrator continues to look
wholly innocent and thorougly human.  Also, we never really see
how the people become infected, though we get hints that the
bugs are placed into the ears of the innocent victims in much
the way that Claudius poisons Gertrude's husband, who is
Hamlet's father.  
   These flaws are minor when pitted against the greatest
fault.  We can accept Principal Drake as the evil administrator
who calls on the school intercom for groups of students to
report to her office for the insect treatment.  But when
characters begin turning into spiders, as does a teacher
played by Famke Jannsen; and into an octopus, as does the
ringleader of the infected ones; then an otherwise satisfying
film turns just plain silly.  "Invasion of the Body Snatchers,"
the classic of the subgenre, was anything but nonsensical. 
Opening in 1956 during the McCarthy era, it warned against
mindless conformity.  The only thing "The Faculty" counsels
is to stay away from people drinking inordinate amounts of
bottled water.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
What do you get when you combine literary elements with a "B" storyline?  
A film that's hard to brag about but difficult to dislike.  'The 
Faculty.'
Kevin Williamson, the writer of 'Scream,' has churned out another 
post-modern horror flick, a yarn targeted toward teenagers, in which 
teenagers are targets.  Into the formulaic plot he has mixed a pinch of 
motifs, a smidgen of imagery, a dash of foreshadowing.  The result is a 
movie full of flavors, another self-reflexive romp that does not stay 
with you for long.
At Herrington High School in Ohio, most of the kids are punks and most 
of the teachers are burnt out.  There's Mrs. Drake the principal (Bebe 
Neuwirth), who plays the part of a frank realist.  She tells Mrs. Olsen 
the drama teacher (Piper Laurie) that no, plays will not receive the 
proper funding - but football will.  "Have you seen the stands on Friday 
nights?  The whole town is there," she quips.  There's also an alcoholic 
teacher who does not even know what chapter the class is supposed to be 
covering.  Finally we meet the foul-mouthed football coach, played 
wonderfully by Robert Patrick with his smooth face and squinty eyes.  
It's Coach Williams who is first infected, or rather invaded, by the 
alien species that eventually takes over the faculty, most of the 
student body, and ostensibly, at one of those Friday games under the 
lights, the entire town.
It takes awhile for all this to happen, and along the way we watch as 
Williamson and director Robert Rodriguez sketch in the traits that help 
us to tell the six teen heroes apart.  Casey (Elijah Wood) is the 
photographer for the school paper, a computer geek who has not yet 
raised a whisker and who is continually harassed by various badasses of 
the school.  Zeke is played by Josh Hartnett (a dead ringer for a young 
Tommy Lee Jones);  his character is a dealer of anything illicit.  From 
the trunk of his muscle car Zeke peddles pills, cherry-flavored condoms, 
and a drug of his own concoction, a white powder that can be sniffed 
from the barrel of a ball point.  The final male is Stan (Shawn Wayne 
Hatosy), the star quarterback who decides to quit the team so he might 
focus on his studies.  
Stan's decision poses problems for his girlfriend, the shallow Delilah 
(Jordana Brewster), a stunning cheerleader and editor of the school 
paper.  She implies she'll drop him but quick.  Delilah also has 
problems with a girl named Stokely (Clea DuVall), calling her a violent 
lesbian.  The third female is Marybeth, a slim blonde from Atlanta, an 
unassuming new kid in school who tries to befriend everyone.  Thus the 
stereotypes are set.
Although the mild-mannered Casey and his editor witness, through the 
slats in a closet door, a couple of the alien-possessed teachers 
graphically recruit the school nurse, they cannot get their friends to 
believe them.  It takes a scene of full confrontation with the erstwhile 
science teacher.  He corners the six and says, "This won't take long" - 
as if he expects the teens to line up compliantly for the grotesque 
inoculation.  What follows - a turning point - is one of the strongest 
scenes in the film.
Soon afterwards, we see one of the weakest.  Yes, the film is 
derivative, and for the most part the script tries to be witty about its 
borrowing;  but the scene in which suspicion raises its Gorgon head 
smacks too much of Kurt Russell and the crew from John Carpenter's 'The 
Thing.'  Here even the acting lapses into a congeries of wooden, 
menacing expressions.
Many of the other allusions work well.  Stokely, who wears black eye 
shadow, doesn't bother to dispel the rumors of homosexuality;  they 
allow her to be a loner.  She makes use of her extensive reading of 
science fiction - especially Robert Heinlein - to guide her harried 
school mates in their quest to escape and, hopefully, to conquer the 
aliens.  We also glean elements of 'Invasion of the Body Snatchers,' 
'The Puppet Masters,' and, when one of the youngsters is compared to 
'Ripley,' the 'Alien' movies.  There's a neat scene near the end when 
Casey is running from the thing, and we see shadowed cross-hatching on 
the floor of the locker room - reminiscent of the lighting in 'Aliens.'
Water imagery is remarkable as well.  Rodriguez comes close to being 
heavy-handed here, placing water in several key scenes:  there's the 
sprinkler system on the football field (a sure sign that academics are 
being neglected!); the tank in the science room, where an embryonic 
alien is revived; a rainstorm into which the thing inhabiting the coach 
extends its thin tentacles;  bottled water and the faculty room cooler; 
and the indoor pool in which one of the creatures does an instantaneous 
shape-shift into the fanged lobster-snake hybrid chasing Casey.  All 
these images work, though, lending unity and even a certain comedy to 
the plot.  Cool special effects, too.
What's gratuitous in this late '90's teen treatment?  For one, the 
language goes too far, probably in the service of sending up real 
problems in many American high schools.  The drug use gives a tawdry 
tone, though figuring prominently in the resolution.  Most noticeably, 
the behavior of the teachers, after they are taken over, is inexplicably 
bold and sexual.  Bebe Neuwirth as Principal Drake dresses in skimpy 
outfits, flaunting her skinny curves.  Another teacher, Miss Burke 
(Famke Janssen), threatens and curses out Zeke, and later speaks 
provocatively before attempting to, well, impregnate him.  Again and 
again Rodriguez and Williamson cater to young viewers, working sex and 
screams into the same sentence.
'The Faculty' knows it is smart.  Though it is not packed as full of 
self-reflexivity as the 'Scream' movies, the clever and engaging tones 
are there.  Fans of science fiction and horror, teenagers 16 and over, 
teachers seeking easy laughs, go to see or rent this film.  Hokey, yes, 
but light entertainment blended with just a touch of literature.

