Title
Review for Hoosiers (1986)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
     HOOSIERS is the first sports movie since THE NATURAL that I've liked, and
maybe that's not surprising.  After ROCKY came out, there were about fifty
billion "sports underdog" films out, most of them pretty poor: track & field,
gymnastics, kung fu, even bowling.  But I've always found both basketball and
baseball to be the two "romantic" American sports--the two sports where a group
of people work together as a unit to accomplish a goal, where the disparate
personalities are fused into a team.  Baseball tends to be also blend in a
generous touch of nostalgia; basketball, with its speed and precision, is the
other.  Football (to me) is just too hyped and too violent to qualify for the
designation.  But I digress...
     This is a beautiful film to watch.  David Anspaugh directs, and if I
remember correctly, he has been responsible for some of the best TV of the last
decade.  I particularly remember an old "Lou Grant" episode that (I believe)
Anspaugh was involved with, where Lou returns home to a small mid-western town
for a relative's funeral.  The show had atmosphere, and Anspaugh has brought it
back threefold for HOOSIERS.  The overcast skies, the tree-lined streets, the
leaves over everything; the small high school.  Anspaugh's eye for detail sets
the stage perfectly for the story.
     The story isn't anything new: a new basketball coach (Gene Hackman)
arrives in a very small Indiana town, Hickory, in the early 50's, and begins to
mold a champion high school basketball team despite a variety of obstacles,
including his own rather mysterious past.  A phenomenally gifted boy who is
being pressured to play; a young teacher (Barbera Hershey) who resents the
importance of basketball; a colorful drunkard (Dennis Hopper, in a delightful
role) who Hackman wants as an assistant coach, despite the differences between
Hopper and his son, who is on the team; and the inevitable Monday Morning
Quarterbacks who played basketball as boys and think the coach is screwing up.
Almost all of these subplots work; what they lack in originality they make up
in the skill in which they are resolved.  The only thing I found somewhat
awkward was Hershey's rather sudden romance with Hackman, but that is a minor
detail.  The story keeps you interested throughout, and while the conclusion
could well be anti-climatic, even this seems to fit in well with the story.
Hackman's conflict between playing the game to win, and playing the game for
sake of playing, seems to be the real dramatic theme of the film, and when it
is resolved, you tend to worry a lot less about who wins The Big Game--it's not
whether you win, but how you play.
     Certainly next to Anspaugh's name on the kudos list must be Hackman.
Someone once said that Gene Hackman was the only actor he'd ever seen who looks
like you could invite him over for a beer, and enjoy the experience.  I can't
think of another actor today who has the skills AND looks enough like a
basketball coach to pull this off.  Hackman doesn't surprise me in doing
it--he's done too much good work--but he certainly deserves credit all the
same.  The actors playing the basketball players also deserve credit, because
not once did I think of them as anything but high school basketball players and
small town kids, to boot.  It is another factor that makes the illusion of
Hickory almost seamless.  Dennis Hopper adds just the right touch of
eccentricity and humor to the film, though his scene with his character's son
deserves credit; I don't think I'd argue with his Academy Award nomination for
this film (though many friends have told me he really deserved something for
BLUE VELVET).  And finally, Jerry Goldsmith turns in another award-winning
score.  Horner is derivative, Rozsa hardly does anything any more, and John
Williams seems to have burned out; but Jerry Goldsmith has turned out original,
effective and memorable scores for the last thirty years.  Here's hoping he
(and we) will have thirty more years of his work.
     A substantively entertaining movie--perfect for a rainy afternoon.

Author
John Carroll
Hoosiers, starring Gene Hackman, Dennis Hopper and Barbara Hershey.  Directed
by David Anspaugh.  1986.
   Whether good or bad, sport films always used to generate big box office
buzz.  Historic sports films, like Rocky, seem to touch everyone and become
tremendously popular.  However, sports films have become a sort of endangered
species with such big films as For Love of the Game and Mystery, Alaska not
performing up to par at the box office.  However, the sporting film genre can
always be relived through classics, and if you are in search of a classic,
please rent Hoosiers as soon as possible.
   For any sports movie to be a tremendous success, it needs to appeal to a
wide range of people.  A film like Rocky would have never been such a huge
success had it only appealed to boxing fans.  Hoosiers follows the same path,
playing more on your emotions than your fundamental knowledge of basketball.
   The film has a very simple and basic premise.  It tells the tale of a small
Indiana basketball team that goes to the State Finals.  Throughout their
journey, director David Anspaugh looks at some of the underlying subplots,
including the past of Coach Norman Dale (Gene Hackman), his relationship with
Myra Fleener (Barbara Hershey) and how the coach tries to help his team, in
particular, dealing with the fathers and cleaning up the drunk Wilbur Flatch
(Dennis Hopper).  The story has a simple David versus Goliath setup, but such
intriguing subplots and a heart-tugging journey makes Hoosiers impossible to
dislike.
   Gene Hackman plays Coach Norman Dale, a former big-time college coach.  At
first, the reason for Dale coaching at such a small high school is irrevelent,
but this story develops as the story progresses.  In fact, the only place where
Hackman fails is in his love story with Barbara Hershey.  As some films tend to
do, Anspaugh tries to cram a romantic plot into Hoosiers, but fortunately, it
only serves as a minor distraction.
   Aside from Hackman, Barbara Hershey and Dennis Hopper have the other lead
roles.  Hershey plays the guardian of the town's star player, and also evolves
as the romantic interest of Norman Dale.  She gives an adequate performance,
but considering the terrific talent surrounding her, she rarely shines as much
as she could have.  Dennis Hopper, on the other hand, gives a tremendous
performance, undoubtedly the best of the film.  He plays the drunken father of
one of the players, and is given a chance to put his basketball knowledge to
good use with Coach Norman Dale.  Hopper portrays what Hoosiers is all about. 
He is given a chance to shine, fails, but in a way, succeeds as we see him
bounce back and tighten his ties with his formerly estranged son.
   The supporting cast, aside from Hershey and Hopper, consists of the
basketball players and their fathers.  The players are on screen for a long
time, but do not have many lines.  This actually serves to help Hoosiers.  It
is always a risk to give too many lines to young and unexperienced actors, and
the basketball team is able to convey their message through their actions on
and off the court rather than through words, which makes Hoosiers all the
better.
   The journey of this team progresses without a hitch, and going into sports
films, most viewers can guess the ending.  You will watch Hoosiers with this
same attitude, yet, when the final game is taking place, the audience will
continually find themselves questioning who will win the game.  This is a true
testament to a sports films and stands out for why Hoosiers is one of the
greatest sports films to ever hit the big screen.
   In the end, the predictability and sappiness can be put aside to take a
clear look at what Hoosiers truly is: not a basketball film, but a film that
makes us look at what people can become despite the mistakes they make in life,
and that is the true message of Hoosiers.
Final Verdict: B+
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!
