Title
Review for Multiplicity (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Michael Keaton, Andie MacDowell, Harris Yulin, Richard Masur, 
      John DeLancie, Eugene Levy
Director: Harold Ramis
Producers: Trevor Albert and Harold Ramis
Screenplay: Mary Hale & Chris Miller and Lowell Ganz & Babaloo Mandel
Cinematography: Laszlo Kovacs
Music: George Fenton
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     At one time or another, we've probably all wished that there was 
more than one of us.  MULTIPLICITY taps into this  universal fantasy, 
using it as the premise for the latest comedy from director Harold Ramis 
(GROUNDHOG DAY).  The involvement of both Ramis and actress Andie 
MacDowell may recall the 1993 Bill Murray hit, but there really aren't 
many other intersections or similarities.  MULTIPLICITY is more of a 
"gimmick" motion picture.  While GROUNDHOG DAY was a lighthearted fairy 
tale, this excursion is more like the Michael Keaton show.  It's a 
straight comedy, a great deal of which is of the physical variety.  So, 
although MULTIPLICITY is funny, it's not as heartwarming or inventive as 
GROUNDHOG DAY.
     I give Michael Keaton the lion's share of the credit for 
MULTIPLICITY's success.  The script may contain the puns, double 
entendres, slapstick, and other forms of humor, but Keaton delivers them 
flawlessly, playing four variations of the same everyday sort of 
character.  The visual effects that place two, three, or four Keatons 
together are seamless, but it's not difficult to imagine the challenge 
that performing in some of these scenes can present for an actor.  After 
all, it's not easy to play off of empty space.  See Eddie Murphy in the 
recent updating of THE NUTTY PROFESSOR for another example of this sort 
of multi-character tour de force.
     I have never been one to sing Andie MacDowell's praises, and I'm 
not going to start now.  She's had a few solid performances (SEX, LIES, 
AND VIDEOTAPE and UNSTRUNG HEROES spring to mind), but, in general, I 
find her to be irritating.  Nothing in MULTIPLICITY encourages me to 
change this point-of-view.  At best, it could be argued that she does an 
adequate job, but this is far from a clinic in the art of acting or 
capturing the audience's sympathy.
     I suppose it's necessary to briefly note that MULTIPLICITY is 
seriously flawed from a technological perspective, but this "unreality" 
doesn't detract from the film's pure entertainment value.  MULTIPLICITY 
opens by introducing us to Doug Kinney (Keaton), a construction manager 
for a company whose motto is fast becoming, "If you don't come in on 
Saturday, don't bother coming in on Sunday."  In Doug's words, "Work is 
first, my family is a close second, and I'm a distant third."  He's 
feeling tired and burnt-out, and, when his wife, Laura (MacDowell), 
expresses a desire to go back to work, Doug can't figure out how they're 
going to manage two careers and two children.
     Enter the mysterious Dr. Leeds (Harris Yulin), who has the answer 
to all of Doug's problems:  cloning.  Soon, there are no less than four 
Dougs running around.  In addition to the original, there's #2, the 
workaholic; #3, the anal retentive; and #4, an imperfect copy of #2 who 
is affectionately referred to as "Rain Man."  And, even though Doug is 
becoming very productive, things are getting progressively more 
confusing with each additional copy.
     MULTIPLICITY is an uncomplicated comedy with a lot of big laughs 
and a disappointingly weak framing story.  Do we ever really care about 
any of the characters or their situations?  With the exception of Doug 
#1, not really.  As far as the promise of MULTIPLICITY is concerned, 
this script gives us a fertile field only half-tilled.  There are 
moments of near-brilliance, but, for the most part, MULTIPLICITY falls 
into the "above average, but not great" category.
     The jokes, which are frequent and frequently successful, make this 
motion picture worth sitting through, even though, at nearly two hours, 
it runs on for far too long.  For those who are just looking for a movie 
that scores high on the feel-good comedy scale, MULTIPLICITY is a can't-
miss choice.  In the end, however, I couldn't help wishing that Ramis 
had tried for something a little more ambitious, rather than settling 
for a multiplicity of laughs without much genuine substance.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Are the triple demands of work, family, and home too much for you
lately?  Ever find time for yourself?  How often do you get to practice
your golf game?
     Director Harold Ramis (GROUNDHOG DAY) has just the tonic for you -
more time through the miracles of cloning.  One of you not enough?  How
about three more to help you out?  Be warned, however, there are a few
pitfalls to this wonder cure to your chronic exhaustion.
     In MULTIPLICITY, construction supervisor Doug Kinney (Michael
Keaton) is suffering from massive overload just like you.  He laments
that, "my whole life's an emergency."  Ted (John De Lancie) and his
coworkers are workaholics whose mottoes include, "if you don't come in
on Saturday, don't bother coming in on Sunday."
     No problem, says Dr. Leeds (Harris Yulin), all Doug needs is a
clone.  In fact the good doctor already has one which allows him to
travel while the clone works.  Although Doug is worried that his clone
will be half human and half insect as in THE FLY, number two is a
perfect duplicate with the same memory as Doug.  As it turns out, two
is tougher and harder working than Doug which is fine with number one.
     His wife, Laura (Andie MacDowell from FOUR WEDDINGS AND A
FUNERAL), says she wants to go back to work, but Doug will have to help
out.  She doesn't know about the cloning.  Doug is overwhelmed by the
domestic chores so gets a number three to take care of the kids and the
house.  Since number three turns out to have more of Doug's gentler and
domestic side, this looks pretty ideal.  As number one puts it, "I've
been working since I was twelve; it's break time."
     Eventually, number two gets tired too and clones himself to get
number four.  Four is, well, not exactly perfect.  As three puts it,
"we made a copy of number two.  You know, sometimes the copy isn't as
sharp as the original."  That's an understatement.
     With this great setup and with Michael Keaton's comedic skills, it
would be hard to make a bad movie.  MULTIPLICITY, while far from a
great comedy, did provide this critic with a lot of laughs and made for
a thoroughly enjoyable time at the movies.  Yes, there are several
periods devoid of humor, and some of the physical comedy is a bit too
outlandish.  Nevertheless, this is one funny movie.
     The script by the committee of Lowell Ganz, Mary Hale, Babaloo
Mandel, Chris Miller, and Harold Ramis comes up more with situations
that are funny than with witty dialog.  The housing development Doug is
working on, for example, is proclaimed in the billboard to be Vista de
Nada.
     There are some gems in the script.  Number one keeps reminding the
others of rule number one, "nobody has sex with my wife but me."  In a
small line I like, Doug's young son's football coach tells Doug how
clueless his players are, "I've got kids who couldn't identify their
parents in a line-up."
     The acting by Michael Keaton is excellent albeit not as good as
some of his performances.  In a secondary role, Andie MacDowell holds
her own.  Her acting gets better and better as the movie unfolds.  I
admire the talent of both these performers and since they have almost
all of the lines in the show, I got to see a lot of them.  Left
unanswered by the credits is who played numbers two, three, and four.
     MULTIPLICITY runs a fast 1:55.  It is rated PG-13.  There is no
sex, nudity, violence, and the language is pretty mild.  I suspect the
reason it got PG-13 rather than PG is because there are a few sexual
situations.  The film would be fine for most kids ten and over.  I
recommend the show and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Redman
Mr. Mom has a lot on his hands nowadays and can't get to half of it.
His job requires more hours than are in the day and he just got
assigned even more responsibilities. His wife wants him to spend more
time at home and, by the way, could he finish building their
half-completed home? He misses his kids' sporting events and Brownie
graduation.
Sound familiar? Lack of time must be the disease of the nineties. No
one has the schedule to do it all.  Few have the ability to squeeze in
even the essentials, much less have any fun. When Doug Kinney (Michael
Keaton) is asked what he does to relax, he replies "golf". Questioned
about how often he plays, his response is "never". Welcome to the late
20th century, Doug, where all of our obligations and labor-saving
devices have conspired to steadily shrink the time where we do what we
really want to a scant few hours a week.
Doug can't deal and finds his magical way out one day while supervising
construction at a lab. It turns out that the facility specializes in
creating fully grown clones, so Doug takes home another Doug to help
him out. Doug Number Two is sent to work so that the original can get
his duties done at home.
But, even with two of them, there's still not enough time for golf and
Doug Number Three comes into the picture. Later, Two and Three still
can't get it all done so they duplicate Number Four from one of the
clones. As often happens, the copy of a copy isn't quite as sharp as
the original. No matter how many Dougs there are, the work load
increases to more than can be done.
The film wanders around during the first hour trying to set the stage
for the "message" before it finds its course. Only after the clones
exist is there much humor and the yucks are still fewer than you would
hope. The comedy is mostly various send-ups of the "Two dates in the
same night" scene you're well acquainted with. The only hilarious
scenes are with Number Four, but even then you stand the chance of
feeling guilty at laughing at a "special" (Uh oh, that's not the
correct _euphemism_d'_jour_, is it?) person.
Director Harold Ramis ("Ghostbusters", "Groundhog Day") has a feel for
the science fiction comedy and humorous bits, but these scenes (as well 
as "Groundhog Day") don't hold together as a whole.
He does successfully avoid one apparent pitfall in having four exact
copies of Doug. Instead of copies, which would become annoyingly
redundant, they are aspects of Doug, not actual clones. Number Two is
Manly Man Doug; Three, Feminine Side Doug and Four, Inner Child Doug.
This gives Keaton something to work with and he does so with competence
although nothing spectacular.
Andie MacDowell plays Laura, Doug's long-suffering (and never lets him
forget it) wife. The actress is mostly wasted as more a plot object for
the various Dougs to interact with than an actual human being.
MacDowell does nothing much for the film other than look as if she is
about to cry during every minute she's on screen.
Oh yeah, the message? If you want your woman to really love you, build
her a house.
[This originally appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington,
Indiana, 7/26/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Columbia)
Directed by     Harold Ramis
Written by      Mary Hale, Chris Miller, Lowell Ganz, and Babaloo Mandel
Cast            Michael Keaton, Andie MacDowell, Harris Yulin, Richard
                Masur, John DeLancie, Eugene Levy
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    115 minutes
Reviewed at     General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, NC (9JUL96)
     Michael Keaton plays a man so busy that he has to clone himself to
find enough time to work, play, and parent.  He's copied three times,
courtesy of your friendly neighborhood geneticist (Harris Yulin).  "Two"
is his aggressive side and takes charge at the office, while "Three" is
more prissy and stays home with the kids.  ("Four" is the flub; a fuzzy
copy with the mind of a child.)  Mr.  Keaton is very funny-- and
distinctly different-- in each of these roles.  He gives a command
performance that the movie doesn't know what to do with.  The best that
four (cloned?) writers could come up with are some recycled gags from
MR. MOM, a few hundred or so double takes, and one very funny sequence
involving the rule over who gets to sleep with the wife (Andie
MacDowell, looking dazed and confused even when she's not supposed to
be).  The latter is also the closest that the movie comes to having a,
uh, climax.  MULTIPLICITY attempts to end on a serious note and it
doesn't work.  Twenty minutes are wasted there.  Also curious is how
absolutely nothing is explained about the character of the scientist.
We see him in the cloning sequence and then he just disappears for the
rest of the movie.  Perhaps he's working on opening a franchise, maybe 
one called Clones 'R' Us?
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Michael Keaton, Andie MacDowell, Richard Masur, John DeLancie,
Eugene Levy, Harris Yulin.
Screenplay:  Chris Miller, Mary Hale, Lowell Ganz, Babaloo Mandel, Harold
Ramis.
Director:  Harold Ramis.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There have been many instances where my positive reaction to a film
has been as much a result of what it _wasn't_ as what it was, and
GROUNDHOG DAY may be the perfect example.  On paper, it was a high-concept
premise with nowhere to go, an over-extended "Twilight Zone" episode with
a laugh-track.  There didn't appear to be any way to make an infinitely
repeated day anything but infinitely repetitious, but director/co-writer
Harold Ramis and co-writer Danny Rubin startled me with a comedy of
improbable inventiveness and even more improbable resonance.
MULTIPLICITY, Ramis' latest project, arrives with many of the same warning
signs, and again it stays fresher through its running time than you might
expect.  This time, however, the comedy is as instantly disposable as it
is enjoyable.
     MULTIPLICITY stars Michael Keaton as Doug Kinney, a construction
foreman living the 1990s version of the American Dream:  a beautiful wife,
Laura, (Andie MacDowell); two wonderful children; a never-quite-completed
dream house...and almost no time to enjoy any of them.  Changes at work
are threatening to make Doug's life even more hectic, but he is offered a
unique solution to his time crunch by geneticist Dr. Owen Leeds (Harris
Yulin) -- the opportunity to be cloned, to have a second self help
shoulder the burden of his responsibilities.  The procedure is a success,
and Doug #1 finds himself able to enjoy life more as #2 takes over his
job responsibilities.  But even two Doug Kinneys doesn't seem to be
enough, and when Doug #3 enters the picture, the opportunities for
disaster multiply right along with him.
     In a way that GROUNDHOG DAY never was, MULTIPLICITY really is a
gimmick film.  It was easy to summarize GROUNDHOG DAY's plot in a short
sentence, but it was always about the change in Bill Murray's Phil Connor.
MULTIPLICITY is always about the farce of several Doug Kinneys getting
each other into trouble, and the fact that it works so well and so often
shows how artfully Ramis is able to execute that farce.  Michael Keaton
has tremendous fun with the Doug his three clones, each of whom has a
rather specialized personality for his designed purpose -- #2, the
workaholic, is a hard-nosed man's man, while #3, the housekeeper, is sort
of a cross between John Bradshaw and the Anal-Retentive Chef.  The comedy
gets rather broad with Doug #4, the "copy of a copy" who turns out to be
"special, but the situations are great showcases for those characters, and
Keaton does some good work considering he is often working with no one but
himself.  Particularly memorable:  a night when Doug #1 is away and the
three clones get a chance to play...with a sexually insatiable Laura.
     MULTIPLICITY is a very funny film, full of clever touches like the
character of a blissfully incompetent sub-contractor played by Eugene Levy
and a housing development called "Vista del Nada" (View of Nothing), and
it's easy to keep smiling through most of its 110 minutes.  Unfortunately,
its attempts at a message get rather muddled.  Contributing screenwriters
Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel (CITY SLICKERS, FORGET PARIS) have a
tendency to paint emotional situations in extremely broad strokes, and
that leads to some rather forced conflicts between Doug and Laura.  Andie
MacDowell, who was so good in GROUNDHOG DAY, doesn't have the chance to
make an impression here; her character is a necessity, not an individual.
As the film wraps up, Doug is forced to save his marriage by facing hard
truths about himself, but exactly what those truths are and how they
relate to the cloning escapades which have come before are never quite
clear.
     There are a number of rough edges in MULTIPLICITY (including the
excessively grainy special effects photography by Richard Edlund which
allow the four Dougs to interact), and they are mostly the result of an
attempt to be the kind of film GROUNDHOG DAY was:  a laugh-out-loud comedy
which also managed to be about something warm and human.  That kind of
film is a rarity indeed, and it is no sin to have aspirations to that kind
of completeness.  MULTIPLICITY, however, is simply a laugh-out-loud comedy
about clones running around, and the mayhem which ensues.  Ramis set
himself a high bar with GROUNDHOG DAY, but you don't need to set a world
record every time out to be a winner.  In MULTIPLICITY, one laugh usually
turns into another.

Author
Christopher Null
     I hate it when a film *sounds* like it's going to be great, has a
hilarious teaser-trailer, stars some wonderful actors, features a small
role played by the daughter of one of my film review subscribers, and ends
up falling a bit flat on the screen.
     Such is the case with MULTIPLICITY, the new Harold Ramis-Michael
Keaton comedy about a guy who clones himself in order to get a little free
time.
     Doug (Keaton) is a construction contractor with way to much
responsibility at work and not enough time to do it.  His wife (Andie
MacDowell) never sees hubby, and neither do the kids.  Doug's stress is
getting so severe that he seems on the verge of a breakdown, and eventually
he does so -- a couple of times -- before being talked into having himself
cloned by a doctor in Malibu.
     Doug #2 (Keaton) is a gruff mensch who takes over Doug's job and never
looks back.  Deciding that still isn't enough, Doug opts for another in #3
(Keaton), who takes on the personality of a fey househusband obsessed with
souffl=E9s, Tupperware, and the non-crumpledness of aluminum foil.  And when
#2 and #3 decide they don't have enough time themselves, they get together
to clone #4 (Keaton), who doesn't turn out quite as sharp as expected,
shaving his tongue and keeping pizza in his wallet.
     Yes, it *does* sound funny, and Keaton does some of his best work
here, hamming it up to an extreme -- particularly with the fall-down funny
#3:  the Martha Stewart inside all of us.
     But what to do about that darned script?  Rewrite after rewrite has
taken its obvious toll, and the thing comes off as shredded as a bowl of
cole slaw, with very funny moments (watch for "Vista de Nada") interspersed
with lifeless exposition.  Keaton does his best, but it isn't enough to
maintain more than a mild chuckle-average during the course of the film.
     Also of note:  MULTIPLICITY has the dubious honor of being the second
movie in a row that Andie MacDowell stars in that she did not
single-handedly ruin (the first being UNSTRUNG HEROES).  Let's hear it for
Andie!
     But I found the most interesting part of the movie's premise painfully
avoided, and I'll ask it here for the reader to ponder:  Just how much
*does* it cost to get a clone?
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
