Title
Review for FairyTale: A True Story (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
 _______________________________________________________________________
     Right before the ending credits roll, the fairies gather for a
massive panoply of color.  Why the screenwriter wasted most of the rest
of the movie treading water remains FAIRY TALE: A TRUE STORY's biggest
mystery.  Although the picture has an undeniable underlying charm, it
may have you squirming in your seat as it did my son, waiting for
something, anything, to happen while the fairies are waiting in the
wings.
     Based on an incident that happened in England around the time of
the first World War, the movie tells the story of two girls, Elsie
Wright (Florence Hoath) and Frances Griffiths (Elizabeth Earl), who
claimed to have seen fairies in their garden.  As proof, they borrow a
camera and take pictures.  Since only the girls have seen the fairies,
the adults must rely on the photos as proof.  When a disbelieving Harry
Houdini (Harvey Keitel) and his believing friend Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
(Peter O'Toole) send the photos to Kodak to look for fraud, Kodak
pronounces the photos probably genuine.  The show uses this and other
carefully chosen ambiguity to advance the storyline.
     Although all are perfectly acceptable, none of the actors stand
out.  The girls are cute and the adults perplexed, but their emotions
run no deeper.  Director Charles Sturridge has trouble staging
compelling scenes when the fairies are on a break, and they spend most
of the film sleeping in their trailer.  When they are allowed to come
out and play, they mesmerize the audience.  The trouble is that they
get no more than a few minutes of screen time.  And the dialog when
they are not on the set rarely captivates.
     Michael Howells's sets and Shirley Russell's costumes recreate the
era with a deft sense of the tragedy of war and of the working class
environment of the region.  And Michael Coulter's cinematography is
warm and inviting.
     The special effects of the fairies are dazzling.  Small people
with gossamer wings and radiant faces fly around as if in a
particularly lovely dream.  When they are on the screen, magic is in
the air.
     Peter O'Toole gives an earnest reading of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle,
and Keitel delivers a quizzical one of Harry Houdini.  "Never try to
fool children," admonishes Houdini.  "They expect nothing and therefore
see everything."  Although he has some faith in children, he cannot
abide adult charlatans who try to deceive people with tricks that they
claim are supernatural.  "Anything can be faked by anyone," he asserts,
and he produces some fakes of his own to prove his point.
     Occasionally Ernie Contreras's script does provide some insights
as when the Elsie's father (Paul McGann) talks with their mother
(Phoebe Nicholls) about their dead son.  He confesses that he can no
longer remember his own son's face.  When he tries, the face blurs as
if in a crowd among other faces.
     Although the trailers have a high energy level, the film itself
frequently drags.  With its severely underdeveloped script, the movie
is a big disappointment.  The tragedy is that with more scenes like the
ending one, the film could have been so special.  With the paucity of
good kid's movies, it is a shame that one with so much potential
realized it in so few scenes.
     FAIRY TALE: A TRUE STORY runs a little long at 1:39.  It is rated
PG for the sight of a man horribly disfigured by war and for one word
of profanity.  The film would be fine for kids of all ages.  My son
Jeffrey, age 8, thought the movie was good but was upset that the
fairies were hardly in it at all.  I'm not voting against any film with
fairies this sweet no matter how uninvolving the rest of the story, so
it's thumbs up from me and ** 1/2.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When Richard Adams wrote WATERSHIP DOWN it was not really clear
who his audience would be.  The story seemed too violent for children
and a tale of rabbits looking for a safe warren seemed a little puerile
for adults.  It was a difficult task for Adams to get it published, but
once it was it remained a bestseller for years.  That book
notwithstanding, it is a good idea to know when you are telling a story
whom you expect to be your audience.  FAIRYTALE: A TRUE STORY is a film
that was made without too much thought as to who its audience would be.
As a result it is too slow and deliberate to be a children's film and
it is a bit too logically inconsistent to work well for adults.  The
story tells of how two young girls during World War I produced what
they claimed to be authentic photographs of fairies in an English
country garden.  At the time, the story caused quite a sensation.
Notables including Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Harry Houdini
investigated the claims and Doyle became convinced.  FAIRYTALE: A TRUE
STORY is a fictionalized account of what happened told from the point
of view that the fairies were real.  To claim this to be a true story
and to have special effects fairies flitting around seems less than
strictly honest, though I suppose the filmmakers are taking the
viewpoint of believers.
     It is a miserable time in 1917 England, with men returning from
the war having been shot to pieces in battle. Nine-year old South
African Frances Griffiths (played by Elizabeth Earl) lost her father in
the war and comes to England to stay with her twelve-year old cousin
Elsie Wright (Florence Hoath).  [Historical note: the actual children's
ages were ten and sixteen respectively according to one source.
However, the "true" story plays better if they are younger.]  Elsie is
also mourning a recent loss, that of her older brother.  The two girls,
shown here as almost being too storybook perfect, build a bond of
friendship.  Then one day when playing in the garden, Frances sees a
fairy.  The fairies will not let themselves be seen by adults, but
Frances and Elsie determine to prove the presence of the fairies by
borrowing Elsie's father's camera and taking a picture.  That is just
what they do and resulting photographs cause a sensation.  Peter
O'Toole plays Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the creator of the hard-nosed
skeptic Sherlock Holmes, who nevertheless is ready to accept the
photographs as real.  He calls in master illusionist and debunker Harry
Houdini (played very nicely by Harvey Keitel).
     If one looks for it there is some material that is worth
considering in the film.  The story offers us a variety of people in
varying degrees of belief or skepticism and we can see their
motivations for their degree of belief.  Generally it is the people who
have been most injured by reality who are willing to turn from that
reality and embrace the fanciful.  Faith also works better on children
than adults in the film.  And the film seems very accepting of
skepticism.  The most sympathetic adult character is Keitel's Harry
Houdini. O'Toole, on the other hand, is not well-cast as Doyle.
Physically he is wrong to play the short and plumpish writer.  His
character seems too anxious to convince others to believe in the
supernatural, at one point even saying to be skeptical is to show
disrespect to him.
     But where the film is unsettling is in the question of whether the
photographs are genuine or not.  Certainly the film shows you fairies,
so it really says that they are real.  But the photos are the historic
originals or very good facsimiles and while we do not get much chance
to look at them on the wide screen, the originals clearly are fakes.
(Sorry, Sir Arthur.)  It does not take much examination of the original
photographs to conclude that the fairies shown are drawn by hand rather
than photographed from life.  The film suggests that may be the case
also, but never ties that end up.  Of course, there are many ends not
tied up in this film and left for the viewer to decide.  The level of
storytelling is confusing and will be more so for children. The telling
of the story is a little muddled and not helped by thick accents
occasionally obscuring the dialog. Often parallel action is inter-cut
and one time they add a chess game that seems to have nothing to do
with the rest of the story, but they inter-cut it with two pieces of
inter-cut action to create a third one.
     Some script problems and editing problems damage this well-
photographed and acted story of the Cottingly Fairies.  It could have
been a lot better and rates a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Florence Hoath, Elizabeth Earl, Paul McGann, Phoebe Nicholls, 
      Peter O'Toole, Harvey Keitel
Director: Charles Sturridge
Producers: Wendy Finerman, Bruce Davey
Screenplay: Ernie Contreras
Cinematography: Michael Coulter
Music: Zbigniew Preisner
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Fact or fiction, FAIRYTALE: A TRUE STORY is a fine motion picture.  
Cast from the same mold that shaped A LITTLE PRINCESS and THE SECRET 
GARDEN, FAIRYTALE is one of those rare family films that has the 
potential to appeal equally to adults and their offspring.  While the 
movie is likely to make smaller children fidget, those who are old 
enough to grasp the themes and issues addressed by the movie will find 
themselves enchanted by the story.  And grown-ups will discover that 
there's enough depth in the material to arrest their attention.
     The chief truth explored by FAIRYTALE is that the process by which 
a child becomes an adult destroys innocence and robs life of its magic.  
Paradoxically, the older one gets, the more he or she craves the wonders 
that only boys and girls can believe in.  In FAIRYTALE, children are the 
ones with insight, who can never be fooled because "the expect nothing, 
and so see everything."  Adults, on the other hand, "don't know how to 
believe."  They have lost the capacity to accept what they cannot see.  
Rationality can be a harsh taskmaster.  The film's very title 
exemplifies this -- children in the audience will have no trouble 
accepting FAIRYTALE as true.  Adults, on the other hand, will 
immediately dismiss the "true story" part of the title and view this as 
a well-crafted work of fiction.
     FAIRYTALE takes place in the English countryside around the end of 
World War I.  Eight-year old Frances Griffiths (Elizabeth Earl) has come 
to live with the family of her 12-year old cousin, Elsie Wright 
(Florence Hoath), after her father has been declared missing in action.  
Almost immediately, Frances and Elsie find that they have a great deal 
in common, chief of which is a fascination with fairies -- the tiny 
sprits of the air that only children can see.  In fact, by her own 
admission, Elsie knows more about fairies than anyone else alive.  One 
day, while the girls are playing near a local stream, they experience 
their first sighting of one of the small creatures.
     Soon, Elsie and Frances have procured Elsie's father's camera.  
Using it, they take two pictures of the fairies, and, when it has been 
confirmed that no photographic trickery has been used, the snapshots 
come to the attention of none other than Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (Peter 
O'Toole) and his friend, Harry Houdini (Harvey Keitel).  Soon, these two 
luminaries make a trip to meet the girls, each with a different opinion 
of what they have seen.  Houdini, a master of illusion himself, claims 
that the pictures are fakes.  Conan Doyle, on the other hand, is willing 
to take the photos at face value.  Meanwhile, Elsie's parents don't know 
what to think.  As her mother says, "I'm not sure which frightens me 
more -- that the children are lying to us or that they're telling the 
truth."
     FAIRYTALE is extraordinarily intelligent and insightful in its 
approach to the story, blending images of illusion and reality while 
playing the two off against one another.  The film, which is presented 
from a child's point-of-view, also examines the mysteries of growing up.  
The manner in which this subject is approached will have many audience 
members thinking back to when they first realized they had crossed the 
invisible barrier separating childhood from adulthood. 
     The realm of children is a magical one, and director Charles 
Sturridge understands this.  Elsie and Frances live in a place where 
fairies, angels, and other creatures are more than figments of the 
imagination.  It's a terrain where reality is colored by wonder, and 
their photographs bridge the gap between their world and that of their 
parents.  Each of the adults in the film reacts differently to the 
possibility that fairies might exist -- one is awestruck, many are 
skeptical, and a few are fascinated.  But, while the children accept 
without question, their elders need explanations.  FAIRYTALE also 
addresses the one area where faith is most necessary -- the great 
unknown of death.
     As the two girls, actresses Florence Hoath and Elizabeth Earl are 
delightful, and both exhibit a natural talent for performing.  Hoath 
plays Elsie with a quiet seriousness while Earl imbues Frances with a 
pixie-like wildness and exuberance.  The adult actors, while not often 
in the foreground, are just as good.  Paul McGann (the eighth DOCTOR 
WHO) and Phoebe Nicholls (PERSUASION) are believable as Elsie's confused 
parents.  Harvey Keitel remains low-key and unthreatening in his 
portrayal of Houdini.  And Peter O'Toole creates a strong, amiable 
version of the man who gave birth to Sherlock Holmes.
     One of the lessons of the Bible is that a person who believes 
without demanding proof shows true faith.  FAIRYTALE echoes and 
amplifies that message, adding that the purity of childhood is a 
necessary ingredient to the unquestioning acceptance of things that defy 
a rational explanation.  This is a story without villains or 
melodramatic plot twists.  It's a simple picture with two very likable, 
believable young protagonists and an uplifting, optimistic viewpoint.  
Few family films of this caliber reach the screen in any given year, 
and, to this point, nothing in 1997 has come close.  We can only hope 
that the word will get out about FAIRYTALE, and it won't suffer a box 
office fate similar to that of A LITTLE PRINCESS.  This film deserves 
much better, and that's the true story.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Florence Hoath, Elizabeth Earl, Paul McGann, Phoebe Nicholls,
Peter O'Toole, Harvey Keitel Director: Charles Sturridge Producers:
Wendy Finerman, Bruce Davey Screenplay: Ernie Contreras
If someone told me there were pixies picking daisies on my front lawn
and sprites were salting salami in my back garden, I would smile and ask
them whether the wicked witch of the west was cleaning my roof as
ordered. What the heck, I'm in need of some recreational fantasy and if
sprites and pixies want to do my gardening and cooking, then by all
means let them.
In this magical tale of tiny people with wings, two little girls have
claims to fairies frolicking in their neck of the woods. If you don't
believe them, they can always whip out their Kodak shots of the
momentous occasion. This is a true story in the sense that these events
too place in the early twentieth century, and does not is any way imply
that fairies are true. In the grand scheme of things we have two
prominent historical figures like Houdidi (Harvey Keitel) and Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle (Peter O'Toole), involved and scrutinising the photos of the
fairies. In may ways their presence makes this tale more real to life,
as it shows us that lots of people were interested with the photos at
the time, and more importantly - this is not just some washed up tale
from an outhouse.
With the miracle of special effects, the fairies in question are brought
to life more magically on screen than perhaps in life. However, their
screen presence is sadly limited to the occasional midnight flickering
appearance in the garden. This is unfortunate because the fairies are
this movies highlight and I felt the audience wanted to see more fairies
in action and less humans bumbling about. Harvey Keitel makes an
interesting interpretation of Houdini and O'Toole is very suitable in
the role of Conan Doyle. There is also a special cameo appearance of a
fellow Australian towards the end of the movie.
So the question on everybody's mind is whether or not to believe the two
girls? My response is - does it really matter? The fairies aren't here
to invade the world, cause mass genocide or to destroy it with pollution
and nuclear weapons. So let the girls believe in fairies if they want to
and if you had a little imagination in your life, perhaps you should
too.

Author
Nicholas Amado
Fairy Tale claims to be based in truth, from the writings of Sir Arthur Conan
Doyle. However,the title and the special effects might lead you to believe
this is a children's fantasy. Unfortunately, this inspired attempt at a sweet
story fails on both accounts. It's subject matter and dry storytelling are
much to advanced for children, and is too dry for adults.
The film focuses on a pair of little girls, cousins who roam the meadows
looking for fairies. What sets them apart is from the adults in the film is
that they believe in the existence of these little people, not only because
they are girls at play, but because they have actually seen them. The adults
don't develop faith until the girls take two photographs of fairies, at which
point a controversy arises, do they exist, or was this an act of trickery?
The little girls and the fairies should be the focus of this film, but too
much screen-time is devoted to Harry Houdini (Harvey Keitel) and Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle (Peter O'Toole). Because of the claimed truthfulness of the
story, Doyle and Houdini are important to the story, but that doesn't mean
they work. This film would have been much more entertaining both for children
and for adults if they had taken the Doyle storyline, and applied more of a
fantastic twist. The true disappointment for me was that the fairies only
appear onscreen briefly, and we never get to meet any of them. They look like
wonderful characters, but none are ever explored, we don't know their names,
we don't even get to hear them talk.
There are some good aspects of the film, however. Though much of the
photography is standard and not terribly challenging, it manages to capture
some beautiful scenery quite well. There are also some interesting looks at
the early days of photography, showing us cameras from the early 20th
century, and glass plate exposures. The little girls are quite good,
especially Frances (Elizabeth Earl). She has a cute,  smart and almost sassy
attitude that translates quite well for her character. Her energy is always
high and she has some of the more enjoyable dialogue.
Unfortunately, type-casting does have its place in filmmaking, and even the
most versatile of typecast actors have trouble now and again. Physcially,
there couldn't be a better match for Harry Houdini than Harvey Keitel, but
when I watched him in this, I couldn't stop images of the pimp from Taxi
Driver, or "The Wolf" from Pulp Fiction from flooding my head. Aside from the
fact that Houdini doesn't make much of an impact as a character in this film,
Keitel adds to the distraction. 
Fairy Tale  A True Story could have done a lot more. Had it decided to take a
turn into more fantasy, less realism, this could have been a real success.
But the only time the children in the audience seemed excited, and asked
questions of their parents as children so often do at the movies, was when
the faires were onscreen. It seemed a shame that they were only able to enjoy
the film for those fleeting moments.*
*Coincidentally, the two girls grew up to become old women, and confessed
that the photographs were indeed fakes. So why couldn't this film have gone
deeper into fantasy than it did if there was no truth to it.....?
Two out of four stars
Copyright (C) Nicholas Amado 1997
