Title
Review for Jump Tomorrow (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Jump Tomorrow" is a curiously unfunny romantic comedy,
with sparks generated only by the relationship between two
heterosexual men who team up on a buddy trip that takes them
on the road to Niagara Falls and vicinity.  We can only guess that
the movie was featured in the recent Sundance Festival because
of its politically correct mixture of cultures and races, as the two
men and two women are Nigerian, French, Spanish and British
respectively, all having lived at least part of their lives in the
United States.  The film is unlike recent British drug-and-crime
imports like "Trainspotting," "Sexy Beast," "Lock, Stock and Two
Smoking Barrels" but considering its indie classification it is
virtually bereft of style or signature--more like a romantic sitcom
you're likely to see on TV any weeknight at about 7.  
   In his feature film debut, writer-director Joel Hopkins may feel
some pride in affirming both the casualness of intercultural
connections and a liberal-minded putdown of arranged unions,
but both concepts are old hat by now, and in any case we're way
ahead of him on the question of who will wind up with whom in
this predictable little yarn.
   Hopkins introduces us to Nigerian-American George (Tunde
Adebimpe) who contrary to the now-tattered stereotype is as
uptight as any old-money Brit could be.  Asked by several
people, including a jeweler, to "smile, you're getting married,"
George can barely squeeze out a grin. He puckers his lips, rolls
his eyes right and left, and conveys an expression that could win
him quite a few hands at poker.  When a love-obsessed
Frenchman, Gerard (Hippolyte Girardot), runs into him at the
airport where George had gone to meet his intended but is one
day late, the two strike up a conversation about the nature of love
and find themselves promptly together in a rental car where
Gerard agrees to give George a lift to Niagara Falls, the site of
his forthcoming marriage.  Coincidentally, George has met the
talkative Spaniard Alicia (Natalia Verbeke), who is on her way to
the same area with her English  boy friend Nathan (James
Wilby).  No sooner does Alicia call Geroge "Jorge" then George
is smitten and, while on a pit stop heading to Niagara he buys a
tape that purports to teach one Spanish.
   How George and Alicia ever got cozy with each other is
anybody's guess, but director Joel Hopkins seems to be clueless
on this matter, especially since--as we later learn--George's
fiance is a strikingly attractive Nigerian immigrant, Sophie (Abiola
Wendy Abrams) while Alicia is a plain-featured, motormouthed
bore.
   Nonetheless the performers try their best with a lame script,
with Tunde Adebimpe successfully maintaining his deadpan
features (not too difficult considering the lack of laughs in the
script), Hippolyte Girardot doing OK as a second-rate Daniel
Auteuil, and James Wilby projecting embarrassment at not being
in his usual Merchant-Ivory venue.  Poor Adebimpe has to take
his share of pratfalls, dropping to the floor not once, not twice but
three times while riding shotgun in the Citroen and bumping his
head into anything that gets in the way of his 6-feet + frame. 
Unfortunately he is neither Chevy Chase nor Gerald Ford.
Not Rated.  Running time: 97 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Jump Tomorrow is cute with a capital C.  Everything about it is cute, from
the story, to the direction, to the sets, to the songs.  If you can't walk
away from this film with a smile on your face, you'd better keep right on
walking to your shrink's office.
Tomorrow focuses on George Abiola (Tunde Adebimpe), a perpetually
uncomfortable-looking Nigerian man who is about to marry a childhood friend.
George, who looks like he came out of his mom wearing a suit, could be a
grown-up Urkel on quaaludes.  And to say he's nervous about his impending
nuptials would be a drastic understatement.
With his traditional Nigerian wedding just a few days away (it's set to take
place in Niagara Falls), George heads to the airport to pick up his fiancée,
who is on her way from Nigeria.  But he comes one day late, and, after
calling his uncle (Isiah Whitlock Jr.), finds out Sophie (Abiola Wendy
Abrams) is already in Niagara Falls.
George meets two strangers at the airport - a Latina beauty named Alicia
(Natalia Verbeke) and a man named Gerard (two-time César Award nominee
Hippolyte Girardot) who was dumped by his fiancée at the airport.  George is
instantly smitten with Alicia, who calls him Jorge and invites him to a
party later that night, and, almost against his will, George becomes
Gerard's co-pilot after he offers to drive the groom-to-be to Niagara Falls.
As chance would have it, Alicia and her smarmy Brit boyfriend Nathan (James
Wilby) are hitching a ride to Canada, and most of Tomorrow shows Gerard
trying to coerce George into following Alicia and winning her affections.
Gerard, who George talks out of jumping off a building (convincing him to
"jump tomorrow"), is kind of like a suicidal Cupid.  Even his license plate
reads "Amour 1."  And then your basic road trip flick stuff ensues.
Tomorrow is a lot like Jim Jarmusch's Stranger Than Paradise in more ways
than just having three main characters and being predominantly set on Lake
Erie. Paradise, like most of Jarmusch's other films, shows complete
strangers of different nationalities, who would ordinarily have nothing to
do with each other, forced into contact with one another for bizarre
reasons.  Granted, there's a lot more going on in Tomorrow than in Paradise,
but the similarities are still there.
Tomorrow is a British film packed full of folks from a bunch of different
countries.  Writer/director Joel Hopkins based Tomorrow on an award-winning
short (called Jorge) that featured Adebimpe playing the same character but
in a different setting.
1:37 - PG for thematic material, mild sensuality and language
