Title
Review for Romeo Must Die (2000)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Michael Dequina
_Romeo_Must_Die_ (R) *** (out of ****)
The big challenge faced by hot Hong Kong talent looking to make the
transition to mainstream American stardom is to expand their audience
without watering down the special qualities that earned them cult U.S.
followings to begin with.  More often than not, it's a losing
battle--witness director John Woo's lacking initial stateside efforts,
_Tomorrow_Never_Dies_' fleeting taste of Michelle Yeoh's considerable
capabilities, and the disappointing Jackie Chan lite on display in
_Rush_Hour_.  Against all odds and expectations, however, martial artist
extraordinaire Jet Li has managed to buck that dismaying trend, first
with his movie-stealing villain turn in _Lethal_Weapon_4_ and now his
first U.S. starring vehicle, the satisfying actioner _Romeo_Must_Die_.
As is so often the case with films such as these, the story of
_Romeo_Must_Die_ cannot be called satisfying in itself.  The main concern
of the plot is a routine bit of business involving a pair of rival crime
syndicates--one Asian, the other African-American--engaged in a violent
war over the control of waterfront property in Oakland.  The first
casualty is the Asian crimelord Ch'u Sing's (Henry O) son, younger
brother of Hong Kong convict Han (Li), who breaks out of prison and
travels to Oakland to, per usual, settle the score.  Such a familiar
story would not be complete without Han taking a liking to someone with
rival gang ties--namely, Trish  (Aaliyah), headstrong daughter of the
African-American gang's boss, Isaak O'Day (Delroy Lindo).
While the script by Eric Bernt and John Jarrell doesn't break any new
ground--its twists won't surprise anyone--it does provide a sturdy enough
foundation for what everyone pays admission to see: fight scenes.  And
these scenes deliver; first-time director Andrzej Bartkowiak (who had
previously made his name as a cinematographer) just about steps out of
the way and lets Li and fight choreographer Corey Yuen do their thing.   
Fans of Li's famous high-flying wire stunts will get their fix, but that
effect is wisely used in moderation, generally to punctuate some of Li's
already-impressive maneuvers.  Bartkowiak isn't completely hands-off,
though, and he puts an innovative x-ray visual effect--with which one can
literal see victims' bones crack--to good, measured use.  Some fight
scenes obviously exist just for the sole purpose of having them, serving
no real necessity to the story, but when they are as polished and
exciting as they are here, it's petty to complain.
Li was undoubtedly cast for his athletic prowess, but he also fares
pretty well in the other scenes, coasting on an easygoing charisma when
his English skills falter.  He shares a gentle rapport with R&B chanteuse
Aaliyah, who is the real revelation of the film.  For a screen neophyte,
she delivers a relaxed and impressively natural performance, even pulling
off some challenging emotional scenes.  The veteran of the cast, Lindo is
a welcome presence, adding some needed gravity to the proceedings; and
it's a pleasure to see Russell Wong, who had previously proven his
fighting chops in the short-lived television series _Vanishing_Son_, back
in action as Ch'u Sing's head enforcer.
The title _Romeo_Must_Die_ is a vague allusion to the even vaguer
allusions to Shakespeare's _Romeo_and_Juliet_ in the film.  Thankfully,
that's as pretentious as the film gets.  All _Romeo_Must_Die_ claims and
wants to be is one brisk jolt of action, and that's exactly what it is.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Brandon Herring
Rating: * * * out of * * * *   (3.5 out of 5 for Nzone)
Starring: Jet Li, Aayliah, Delroy Lindo, DMX, Isaiah Washington, Jon Kit Lee.
Directed by: Andrzej Bartkowiak  
2000- 128 minutes
Rated R for strong violence, language, drug content, and brief nudity.
Written by Brandon Herring March 24, 2000.
Ok, so there are movies that come out that are just soooo guiltily 
entertaining, that you really cant suffice it and say that movie was good. Ok 
so maybe "Romeo Must Die" isn't one of those movies, but it isn't perfect by 
any means. Hong Kong films are always technically well-made, bloody, violent, 
lightning-paced fist fight, no plot movies. The one exception is "Romeo Must 
Die" a very entertaining, fast-paced thrill ride, that will have you cheering 
by the end, and a smile permanently on your face throughout the two hours.
Jet Li plays a man who is an ex-cop just escaped from prison to find his 
brother's killer in New York. He meets up with singing sensation Aayliah who 
gives a better than you'd think performance. Jet Li plays a Romeo type who is 
avenging his brother's killer, while Aayliah plays a Juliet type trying to 
cope with the fact that her father is a mob boss, and may be responsible for 
the killing of 'Romeo's' brother. The two team up and try to find out the 
truth, leading to a huge finale and some shocking secrets. 
What seems like a thin plot type movie, really is. There is a nice solid plot 
to this movie, though it seems like it has been done so many times before, it 
isn't even funny. The Romeo And Juliet modern day tale, is just that. Man 
loves Woman, Woman loves Man, they can't be together because of their 
families fighting, and their families do not want them to be together. Even 
watching this film, you know your treading familiar water, the fight scenes, 
action, and acting in the film especially by Aayliah makes you overlook that 
stuff, and just enjoy yourself.
Surprisingly enough, Aayilah gives the best performance in the movie, backed 
up great performances from Jet Li, Delroy Lindo and Isaiah Washington, "Romeo 
Must Die" is a brainless action film, with some brains and sometimes no 
action. The film goes from being an action film to a love story, to an action 
film to a love story, yet never loses it's punch to make us the viewer 
continue to like this movie. We are brought to these characters lives, their 
loves, they adventures and their tragedies. Even with all these flaws, "Romeo 
Must Die" continues its way to be a fast-paced thrill ride, that grabs hold 
of the viewer and does not let go until the end credits role.
The cinematography and directing were both flawless, but the script could 
have used some polishing. Of course expect the usual subtitles, but no 
dubbing (yay). This is an American made film, that will appeal to all races: 
White, Black, Oriental, there is something in this movie for everyone, and 
everyone will find something that will appeal to them. Even if the person 
didn't like the movie, I found those people did like something in the movie 
that was memorable. The fight scenes in the movie were more than incredible, 
and some of these stunts are the most amazing martial arts I have ever seen 
on a film strip. Without the fight scenes and the overall entertainment of 
the film, there really isn't much to Romeo Must Die. But when you put those 
aside, you get one fun and wild ride!

Author
Bob Bloom
Romeo Must Die (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Jet Li, Aaliyah and
Delroy Lindo.
 "Romeo Must Die" is definitely a guilty pleasure movie.
 An action-packed, one-two punch of martial arts and hip-hop, the film
marks the starring debut of Hong Kong action star Jet Li.
 Li was the main action heavy in "Lethal Weapon IV" and walked away with
the film without so much as a thank you to Mel Gibson and company.
 Set mainly around the Oakland waterfront, "Romeo Must Die," as the
title implies, involves two warring families, one black the other
Chinese.
 Li is Han, whose father is the head of the Chinese faction. His
co-star, Aaliyah (Trish) is the daughter of the leader of the black
faction.
 Han and Trish unite to solve a series of murders, including those of
both their brothers.
 Of course the story is mere stuff and nonsense centered around
acquiring waterfront property in hopes of luring an NFL team back to
Oakland.
 But you really don't give a hoot about the plot. 
 All you really want to see is Li kick butt, face, stomach, groin and
other body parts. And he does plenty of that.
 The problem with "Romeo Must Die" is a lack of action. There is too
much dialogue and too little Li. Not that he is much of an actor. His
feet and hands usually do the talking for him.
 And some dialogue is needed for exposition, but you merely tolerate
those scenes waiting for Li to again knock the heck out of some smirking
wise guy who can't see beyond Li's calm facade.
 He is a tiger. The fight sequences are a superb melding of choreography
and editing. At times it looks as if Li is defying gravity.
 "Romeo Must Die" is not a movie for serious filmgoers. But fans of this
genre will have a field day.
 With Chow Yun-Fat and Jackie Chan also making movies for American
studios, some enterprising studio boss should try to develop a script
utilizing the talents of all three.
 Now that would be a cinematic battle royal.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Fontaine Lien
        At first viewing, `Romeo Must Die,' with its curious mix of patented
Jet Li martial arts, Hollywood special effects and especially
ineffective plotline and characterization, and non-stop hit hip hop
music soundtrack, was almost too hard for me to digest.  I felt guilty
for enjoying this brainless popcorn film, because I knew the screenplay
left much to be desired, that the action scenes showcased Li's talent
but also left a lingering sense of craving for more, that Li deserved,
in his first starring vehicle, a more developed character rather than
the one dimensional Han Sing.  And while I could figure out from the
beginning most of the twists and turns of the plot, I was distracted
during the movie trying to figure out each character's motives. 
Nevertheless, part of me was thrilled to witness part of cinematic
history: an implied relationship between an Asian and an African
American in a mainstream film.  A small step, and a flawed one at
that--because the film focuses primarily on kung fu instead of on this
relationship--but a step forward nonetheless.  And as a long time fan of
Jet Li's, I definitely enjoyed the part where he kicked everyone's ass. 
Less than three days later, I went back for a second helping -- and
found this time the plot became clearer, the funny moments funnier, and
the action scenes more compelling because I could savor each and every
move without trying to take in what was happening at the same time. 
Yeah, I'm a girl who likes good action flicks.  So sue me.  And people
wonder why I opted to see this instead of `Erin Brockovich.'  
        As elating as it was seeing Li and his team once again put on an
astonishing performance, and on the big screen no less (I grew up
watching Jet Li's movies on cable), as refreshing as it was witnessing
an amalgamation of two cultures (re: football and kung fu) ... I
sympathize with Li when he tells his fans that in this film he had no
real control over the creative process, and it shows.  `Romeo Must Die'
is a prime example of Hollywood's attempt at packaging and selling an
unfamiliar Asian legend to the mainstream audience, its attempt at
establishing the film career of a young recording artist.  It succeeds. 
Sacrificed, however, are character development, plot articulation, and
artistic restraint.  This film committed one of the seven deadly sins of
cinema (IMO, anyway): having a constant stream of background music to
speed up the pace.  I do like the music (having bought the soundtrack),
but there is no need to have it there eighty percent of the time.  Most
of the characters are cardboard cutout villains and turncoats, their
lines copied from God knows how many gangster movies before. 
Fortunately, Aaliyah has charm and cinematic presence enough to lend
believability to her role as Trish O'Dey, one of the more interesting in
the batch.  With time and improvement, I can definitely see her going
places with this acting business.  O'Dey's father Isaac is portrayed by
the stern and unrelenting Delroy Lindo, an example of excellent
casting.  I give the filmmakers credit for masking Li's deficient
language abilities by putting scenes together that highlight his boyish
charm and innocence in two clashing cultures.  He still seems most
comfortable speaking in his native language, and it is only during the
scenes with Han's father that his talent as an actor shines.  
        The plot is an interesting source of inner conflict for me.  During the
first viewing the little movie critic voice inside me kept piping up and
reminding me how linear and unsurprising the plot was, how predictable. 
Perhaps because during the second viewing I just sat back and said, `To
hell with it, I'll enjoy the movie,' the plot actually moved along at a
faster pace, and what was simplistic before took on a brand new twist. 
These are not the twists of, say, `Fight Club' caliber, but I do indeed
sense that the script tries to rise above its all-encompassing hit movie
packaging courtesy of Joel Silver.  Another point of debate is the
wonderful action sequences, though lacking the intensity of those from
`The Matrix,' which sometimes are so clearly staged that they distract
us from Han's supposed sense of purpose.  Again, the opponents are
portrayed as mindless dummies who would rather have Han take them out
one by one instead of, say, attacking him together all at once. 
However, I will not be one to complain about these flaws, since they are
common ailments of films of this genre.  Li's work is as exciting and
original as usual, and only slightly hindered by the Mortal Kombat music
(reminiscent of scenes from `The Matrix') and sometimes shaky camera
work.
        One thing I'd like to especially point out in favor of `Romeo': it is
not afraid to have emotional moments.  Most of these moments come from
the interaction between Li and Aaliyah who have surprising chemistry
together.  These are two earnest actors at work, and it shows.  My
favorite moments--the scene on the couch after Collin dies, the dancing
scene at the Casino--are a welcome respite from the tiresome `gangsters
cleaning up' sequences obliged to supply the plot's linearity in
between.  Trish's playfulness was a perfect compliment to Han's shyness
and determination.  It is a shame that they did not have a chance to
develop any sort of romance that was hinted of in the title, yet it is
oddly appropriate and refreshing at the same time.  Hint to filmmakers:
not every film has to have a romance.  These two would have made a good
couple, though.
        The last but most complex source of my ambivalent feelings toward the
film is its approach regarding the ethnicity issue.  Yes, it is elating
to see that this movie even got made, got released, won over some
audiences.  We've come a long way, baby.  It is saddening, however, as
my friend Heather mentions, that they needed an action flick to do so. 
I would like to see yet another attempt at tackling the race issue, but
in a more sober and more realistic film.  Preferably not gang related. 
Thankfully, however, `Romeo' was gracefully free of many stereotypes
that plague other films of the same type.  This made up for a lot.  I am
partial indeed.
        I think you might have sensed a trend in my review thus far.  Watching
`Romeo' was a constant psychological tug-o-war for me.  On one hand I
bought two tickets to watch the film produced by `the producers of The
Matrix,' to watch them break down the race barrier a little bit; most
of all I bought tickets to watch Jet Li kick ass.  I did not expect to
be touched by a platonic relationship of the most wonderful and
tantalizing kind, I did not expect a smarter gangster movie than `Rush
Hour.' Like `Romeo,' I was hopelessly conflicted.  It's a film that
almost achieves memorability yet fails because it is inevitably
Hollywood in its gunpowder, war, and backstabbing betrayals.  Somehow I
think the film is stuck in this grey area because it can't go either way
without becoming something else entirely.  Jet Li's charm and agility
almost achieve their full potential but do not, because Li and his team
have not quite seemed to click with American production sensibilities. 
`Romeo' is enjoyable, but it might leave idealists and die-hard Li fans
like myself with a lingering sense of disappointment.  Why am I
disappointed?  That elusive fact is what I've spent this entire
reviewing trying but failing to discover.  This movie's rating is what I
felt it deserved yet I hate to bestow because I needed to latch on to
something much more significant in this film, and because Jet Li always
lights up every movie he's in.
Rating: B- (First viewing, 3/31/00; Second viewing, 4/3/00)

Author
Brandon Herring
Rating: * * * out of * * * *   (3.5 out of 5 for Nzone)
Starring: Jet Li, Aayliah, Delroy Lindo, DMX, Isaiah Washington, Jon Kit Lee.
Directed by: Andrzej Bartkowiak  
2000- 128 minutes
Rated R for strong violence, language, drug content, and brief nudity.
Written by Brandon Herring March 24, 2000.
Ok, so there are movies that come out that are just soooo guiltily
entertaining, that you really cant suffice it and say that movie was good. Ok
so maybe "Romeo Must Die" isn't one of those movies, but it isn't perfect by
any means. Hong Kong films are always technically well-made, bloody, violent,
lightning-paced fist fight, no plot movies. The one exception is "Romeo Must
Die" a very entertaining, fast-paced thrill ride, that will have you cheering
by the end, and a smile permanently on your face throughout the two hours.
Jet Li plays a man who is an ex-cop just escaped from prison to find his
brother's killer in New York. He meets up with singing sensation Aayliah who
gives a better than you'd think performance. Jet Li plays a Romeo type who is
avenging his brother's killer, while Aayliah plays a Juliet type trying to cope
with the fact that her father is a mob boss, and may be responsible for the
killing of 'Romeo's' brother. The two team up and try to find out the truth,
leading to a huge finale and some shocking secrets. 
What seems like a thin plot type movie, really is. There is a nice solid plot
to this movie, though it seems like it has been done so many times before, it
isn't even funny. The Romeo And Juliet modern day tale, is just that. Man loves
Woman, Woman loves Man, they can't be together because of their families
fighting, and their families do not want them to be together. Even watching
this film, you know your treading familiar water, the fight scenes, action, and
acting in the film especially by Aayliah makes you overlook that stuff, and
just enjoy yourself.
Surprisingly enough, Aayilah gives the best performance in the movie, backed up
great performances from Jet Li, Delroy Lindo and Isaiah Washington, "Romeo Must
Die" is a brainless action film, with some brains and sometimes no action. The
film goes from being an action film to a love story, to an action film to a
love story, yet never loses it's punch to make us the viewer continue to like
this movie. We are brought to these characters lives, their loves, they
adventures and their tragedies. Even with all these flaws, "Romeo Must Die"
continues its way to be a fast-paced thrill ride, that grabs hold of the viewer
and does not let go until the end credits role.
The cinematography and directing were both flawless, but the script could have
used some polishing. Of course expect the usual subtitles, but no dubbing
(yay). This is an American made film, that will appeal to all races: White,
Black, Oriental, there is something in this movie for everyone, and everyone
will find something that will appeal to them. Even if the person didn't like
the movie, I found those people did like something in the movie that was
memorable. The fight scenes in the movie were more than incredible, and some of
these stunts are the most amazing martial arts I have ever seen on a film
strip. Without the fight scenes and the overall entertainment of the film,
there really isn't much to Romeo Must Die. But when you put those aside, you
get one fun and wild ride!
"Sometimes there is so much beauty in the world, I feel like I can't take it,
like my heart is going to cave it"- American Beauty
"He came home"- Halloween
"Things fall down, people look up, and when it rains it pours" Magnolia

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Romeo Must Die (2000) 
Rated R; running time 120 minutes
Genre: Action 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0165929 
Official site: http://www.romeomustdie.net/  
Written by: Eric Bernt (based on the story by Mitchell Kapner)
Directed by: Andrzej Bartkowiak
Starring: Jet Li, Aaliyah, Delroy Lindo, Isaiah Washington, 
Russell Wong, Henry O, Anthony Anderson, Edoardo Ballerini, 
Jon Kit Lee, D.B. Woodside, DMX
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsromeo.html
Alright everybody, raise your Suspension Of Disbelief Bar higher...a 
little higher...c'mon, Billy, higher than that!...okay, that's just 
about high enough.  Ready for a little high-kickin' adventure and fun, 
with a whole lot of "oh, come on now...but, dayam!" thrown in for good 
measure?  Then step right up and grab your ticket for "Romeo Must Die"...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The Sings and the O'Days are not your Typical American Family: they are 
the Hatfields and McCoys, the Jets and Sharks, the Montagues and the 
Capulets, of the Oakland California riverfront, slugging it out over 
property rights that are meaningful only to a greedy few.
  [Billy, raise that Suspension Of Disbelief Bar back up, y'hear?]
Isaak O'Day (Delroy) wants to get out of the gangster racket and become 
a legitimate businessman, and take his daughter Aaliyah (Trish O'Day), 
son Colin (D.B. Woodside), and right-hand man Mac (Isaiah Washington), 
with him.  Standing in his way is one last deal, securing riverfront 
property to sell to NFL development broker Roth (Edoardo 
Ballerini)--himself also dealing O'Day's rival overlord, Chu Sing (Henry 
O) and his Family: his spoiled son Po Sing (Jon Kit Lee), and Chu's 
lieutenant Kai (Russell Wong).  Isaak and Chu know it's Just Business, 
until someone kills Po--and in the words of Po's ex-cop brother, Han 
Sing (Jet Li), "That...was a mistake". 
The Upshot:
Based on its trailers, "Romeo Must Die" was a Must See Movie for me.  
Sure, I knew it was another in a long line of "chop sockey" action 
flicks that was probably high on flash and low on substance; certainly, 
nothing we've not seen before countless times.  Sure, I knew that 
Aaliyah and DMX would probably not be burning up the screen, thespianly.  
Sure, I knew that "Romeo" was delegated to the Unspoken Ghetto of 
release days for "Black" films--Wednesday nights--most likely because of 
its "violence quotient" (more on this in the "Black Factor" below).  But 
heck, it had Jet Li--the *only* good thing about "Lethal Weapon 4"--so 
it couldn't be half bad, could it?  "Half bad", actually, is a good 
descriptor here.
One thing most people don't go to see "karate" flicks for, is the story; 
just like guys don't really Read Playboy For The Articles, few people go 
to action-adventures expecting to see, well, Shakespeare.  In that 
sense, "Romeo" didn't disappoint too much; the audience was asked to 
swallow some pretty far-fetched stuff (including stunts that would've 
made the folks behind "The Matrix" proud), and to a great extent, we 
played along.  Some of us whilst rolling our eyes, but that's to be 
expected when one can spot the Obligatory Turncoat only a few minutes 
into the movie, and see the unsurprising developments unfold from a mile 
away.  No, the story in and of itself didn't bother me--but the three 
card monty-like misdirection of its underlying premise, did.
What do I mean by that?  Hold on buckaroo, and I'll tell ya: by all 
indications, "Romeo" should have at least the slightest of love story 
Issues, no?  If the movie's title doesn't give that implication away, 
then the "rival gangs with a boy and a girl from different backgrounds 
meet and fall in love" hints in the trailers, would, one would think.  
One would be wrong.  In fact, I'll go so far as to say that virtually no 
genuine "love story" between Aaliyah's Trish or Jet's Han, could be 
found on the reels that I saw, and further, that whoever came up with 
the breathless "tags" for the movie--"A young Chinese businessman in New 
York is asked to broker peace between two mobs..."; "Han soon takes his 
brother's place in the war and becomes entangled in the violence, until 
he falls in love with the daughter of the rival gang's 
leader..."--must've seen a much different movie than did I.  Flirt, they 
did; but if that's what they call "love", I just don't want any.
Good thing, then, that my main interest wasn't in seeing Jet Li and 
Aaliyah lock lips.  What I did go to see was Jet kick butt and take 
names--and he, along with Russell Wong, obliged in high fashion.  I 
would do them both an injustice in trying to describe their martial 
artistry as performed on screen; "poetry in motion" is as close as I can 
get.  Though it was taken a bit too far over the top--my reference to 
"Matrix"-like moves wasn't an exaggeration, nor was it a compliment--Jet 
Li especially impressed me in this, his second American film.  Having 
the skills of Bruce Lee, and the charm and humor of Jackie Chan, Li's 
quiet, yet powerful presence should lead the way for more (and 
hopefully, better) American movie roles in the near future.
All else blended into the background, for the most part.  Lindo and 
Washington gamely gave their Gruff Black Gang Overlords roles their best 
shot, but far outdistancing them were Henry O and Wong; even in his 
scenes sans martial arts, Wong was quite enjoyable to watch, as was O, 
especially when playing against Li.  As casino owner Silk, Rap artist 
DMX barely registered on the radar; but on a positive note, Anthony 
Anderson's comic relief bit as Maurice, one of O'Day's bodyguards, was 
funny enough to elicit a laugh or two along the way.   
All in all, not earth-shaking, but not too shabby for a Wednesday night 
at the movies.  Hold up: a Wednesday night?  Hmmm...
The "Black Factor"  [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
   "If it's Wednesday a Black film must be opening".
So says James Surowiecki in his article on the subject of seemingly 
obligatory releases of many "Black" (as Suroweicki calls them, "urban") 
movies on Wednesday instead of Friday.  Though it is not officially 
acknowledged by the folks who decide when releases will occur, the 
pattern of a great deal of "Black" movies being released on Wednesdays, 
can be traced back to 1993's "New Jack City" and "Boyz N The Hood"--not 
coincidentally, the same time that some knuckleheads of the black 
persuasion, decided to ruin it for the rest of Us by opening fire at and 
around a few theaters showing the movies.  
The rest, as they say, is History.  A history that infuriates me on the 
one hand--unspoken or not, one would be hard-pressed to look at the 
trend and excuse it away as Business As Usual--but on the other hand, as 
heinous as it is, I understand why it's being done.  And that leaves an 
awful choice to face: should we choose, even with the best of 
intentions, racism--and I'm sorry, but if the trend holds out, it cannot 
be described as anything other than that, from my understanding of the 
term--for the sake of safety (and unquantified safety at that)?  And if 
not, then what do we do if (when?) the next knucklehead with a pistol 
and a pass to a Friday opening, shoots someone?
The "Salon" article is good reading; check it out.  And don't just stop 
there; watch carefully for the trend yourself.  As long as there are 
short-sighted planners in Hollywood--and ignorant knuckleheads amongst 
Us--there is no doubt in my mind that segregation For The Greater Good, 
shall continue to exist.
[3BC thanks various members of the "scaalist" email discussion group for 
their messages which led to this "Black Factor" segment; more to follow 
in a future "Beyond The Screen" article I hope to write, further 
exploring the subject, its pros and cons, and including specific 
comments from that group.  Special thanks go to Tanya Stephens for 
pointing me toward the Salon article.]
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Politics aside, I don't know if a Friday release would make much of a 
difference here; the appeal is in the butt-kicking, not in the gunplay.  
And in that, it has few rivals--but that only accounts for a few minutes 
out of two hours.  Most def not a good thing.
"Romeo Must Die": 
(rating: greenlight): Green for the kick-butt action and stunts, 
soundtrack by Stanley Clarke (and Timbaland, if you like Hip Hop) and 
for its light humor, but...
(rating: yellowlight): ...Yellow for everything else.

Author
Homer Yen
I want to share a strange experience with you that I
always seem to suffer whenever my friends and I visit
a Chinese restaurant for dinner.  We order four or
five different entrees.  The food is brought to our
table and placed upon a Lazy Susan (a circular
platform that revolves so that you can bring a dish
closer to you without having to reach across the
table).  I sample a portion from each of the entrees. 
Yet, no matter how much I sample, I never seem to be
able to satisfy my hunger.  Perhaps this empty feeling
arises because the dishes feature only chunks of
chicken, slivers of vegetables, and slices of beef. 
For my kind of appetite, however, I'd prefer something
meatier that I can take a knife and fork to.  
"Romeo Must Die" suffers in much the same way as my
Chinese dinners.  It incorporates several plots and
sub-plots that lack a noticeable meatiness.  The film
opens with the murder of a Chinese warlord's son. 
This incident starts a chain reaction of events.  His
brother, Han (Jet Li), comes to America in search of
his killer.  Meanwhile, the unsolved murder increases
tensions between the Chinese sect and the Black sect
that are in an ongoing power struggle.  As the movie
continues, there's also a component that revolves
around a shady real estate deal, a brush with the
virtues of honor and loyalty, and a desire for the
leader of the Black sect, Isaak O'Day (Delroy Lindo),
to make things right with his life and his two
children.
There is just too much going on.  The only constant is
that just about everyone carries a spare gun and seems
blinded by vengeance.  The story lines converge from
different angles and at different speeds in ways that
left a strange taste in my mouth.  Try eating Orange
Chicken and Beef in Oyster Sauce in the same bite, and
you'll know what I mean.  The result is a movie that
is sprinkled with jumbled ideas, generally flat
acting, and only slivers of a comprehensible plot.
Among the Asian stars that are starting to gain a
noticeable foothold with American audiences (in
addition to Jet Li, I am referring to action stars
Chow Yun-Fat of "The Replacement Killers" and Jackie
Chan of "Rumble in the Bronx"), Jet Li's persona isn't
as cool or hip as Chow's and is certainly more fierce
than that of Chan's.  Although Li has a boyish face
and a meek demeanor, when he coldly stares down an
opponent and angrily mutters "THAT was a mistake," you
can see his rage begin to swell as he tightens his lip
and tenses his muscles.  Some serious butt-kicking is
about to happen.  Jet Li performs several
well-choreographed scenes in which his gravity-defying
maneuvers (aided by special effects) are stunning.  He
pummels lesser opponents while suspended upside-down,
executes an array of acrobatic moves, and utilizes a
host of props-as-weapons such as belts, fire hoses and
even other humans.  Another interesting effect to
highlight the impact of Li's blows is that the film
cuts to an X-ray view of the human body to show the
internal damage that he inflicts.  But his subtle
style is drowned out by the seemingly endless hail of
gunfire and the bass-heavy, urban flavored soundtrack.
The film's one bright spot was actually one of the
second rate thugs (Maurice played by Anthony Anderson)
in the O'day camp.  He seemed like the only one who
was enjoying his role.  However, the film is just too
unfocused to offer any real value.  We can't associate
with any of the characters, we have a tough time
following the plot, and in the end, we are just hoping
that Jet Li's fighting makes up for the lulls (and it
does).  So now we've come to the end of the review,
and I open my fortune cookie.  It reads: Chunks,
slivers, and slices aren't enough to sustain "Romeo
Must Die."

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Despite its thin veneer of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet
tragedy, this is a martial-arts adventure featuring Jet Li (Lethal
Weapon 4) and recording star Aaliyah as reluctant members of the
Chinese and African-American mobs who are drawn to one other despite
their crime lord families' disapproval. Aimed specifically at fans of
Hong Kong action pictures, the story introduces 36 year-old Jet Li as
a disgraced ex-Hong Kong cop who escapes from jail to arrive in
Oakland, California, in time for his younger brother's funeral and, of
course, to avenge his murder. The plot that ensues is not logical yet
utterly predictable. But who cares? Audiences flock to see Jackie
Chan, Chow Yun-Fat, and now Asian superstar Jet Li for the fighting
not the fiction. And the intricate fights are impressively staged by
cinematographer-turned-director Andrzej Bartkowiak, who did the
visuals for Lethal Weapon 4.  One cool, computer-enhanced sequence
that impressed me showed precisely what happens inside the human body
when bones crack and break. But the audience seemed to respond best to
a stunt in which Jet Li polishes off five opponents while hanging
upside down, tied to a rope by one foot. Russell Wong, Henry O, Delroy
Lindo, and Isiah Washington co-star and popular R&B singer Aaliyah
makes a creditable feature-film acting debut - plus makin' music with
hip hop star DMX. Credit writers Mitchell Kapner, Eric Bernt, and John
Jarrell for trying to give their stock characters, bound by tradition,
some background and depth. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Romeo Must Die is a violent, fast-paced 5 - but recommended for fight
fans only.

Author
Vince Yim
As the Hong Kong film industry disipated due to piracy, Triad
interference, one of the end results is the influx of very talented
individuals coming over to the North American film market.  This is a
godsend for many film buffs, wishing to see the high-octane fueled
gunplay of John Woo, lightning fast fists of Jackie Chan, and
charismatic screen presence of Chow Yun-Fat.
The unfortunate byproduct of mixing East and West cultures is that West
tends to dominate, leaving mere reflections of what once was.  Albeit,
the forementioned people have proven themselves, but only after a
lackluster turn.
John Woo made the brilliant actioner, Face/Off...but he also did start
out with the heavily edited Hard Target.  Jackie Chan has most of his
Hong Kong films released here, as well as the successful Rush Hour...but
then, he also starred in "Battle Creek Brawl" and "The Cannon Ball
Run".  And then there's Chow Yun-Fat, who received acclaim in Anna and
the King...but then, started out with "Replacement Killers".
Romeo Must Die, starring Jet Li, is one of these films.
Hot off the success of the super badass heavy in Lethal Weapon 4, Jet Li
comes back to his hero roots playing the role of Han, who escapes from
prison to find his brother's killers.  Along the way, he meets Tricia
(R&B singer Aaliyah), the daughter of a crime boss who helps him along
the way.  With the two warring families going at it...ah, never mind. 
The story has a mere passing resemblance to the Bard's play about doomed
love.  
For the most part, this is a very entertaining film.  Once you get past
the fact that 40% of the story and characters can be jettisoned, the
fact that it takes place in LA but it looks a hell of a lot like
Vancouver, a small handful of continuity errors, and the annoying
hip-hop soundtrack, the film is actually quite entertaining.
The Matrix blew the door open for martial arts flicks, and the ones they
do here work.  Of course, after Jackie Chan pioneered Wing-Chun in the
films and the use of every day objects as weaponry, it's hard to top. 
Of course, it's not like these guys don't try.  
For starters, there is the much talked about bone crunching which you
finally get to *see*, not just hear, thanks to the magic of CGI (one
character has his arm broken and you see the x-ray of his bones getting
broken).  Then, Jet Li also shows off some of his comic flare during a
slapstick sequence in which he is forced into a pickup football game. 
Upon learning the rules ("Why are they hitting me?"  "'Cuz you got the
ball."), he comes out on top and announces, "I love American football!" 
Then, there were some of the coolest fight sequences that Lethal 4 only
gave hints at.
If you had to actually think of the storyline, you'd put yourself in an
asylum.  Or, you'd want to take up a screenwriting class and come up
with a better script.  Included in the 40% jettisonnable script is an
annoying subplot about the NFL (which doesn't make that much sense) and
a lot of nonsense that could've easily been replaced with more images of
Jet Li beating the snot out of someone bigger than he is.  But on the
plus side, they didn't give too much of a romance between Jet Li and
Aaliyah.
For the most part, I was entertained.  But then, I'm also from Vancouver
and I'm attending film school in the area.  A very, very deadly
combination for a film viewer/critic/cynic.  Much of the 2 hours in the
dark theatre were spent counting the cigarette burns (which tell the
projectionist when to change reels...but then, I had to watch Fight Club
first), noticing the glaring continuity errors during the chase scene
(bullet holes appear and disappear), and noticing that the place where
Han drops off Tricia in the cab happens to be the the same place that I
get off of the Skytrain.  And what's up with those "BC" Transit busses?
That, and the fact that movie soundtrack producers seem to think that
all Chinese people listen to nothing but hip-hop.  I'm Chinese and I
hate hip-hop.  There are fewer things worse than that Hack Daddy taking
old songs from the 80s and turning them into his (c)rap music
travesties.  The only song I like from Puff Daddy is "All About the
Benjamins", and that's only for Foo Fighters frontman David Grohl's
contribution.  "Come with Me"?  Puh-lease.  If I have to hear him say
"Uh huh...yeah" one more time...!  When Jet Li's Black Mask (aka Hap
Hak) was released to North American audiences, I went to a Chinese video
store and rented the version with Chinese dialogue, English subs, and NO
ANNOYING HIP-HOP SOUNDTRACK.
But for what it is, it's not bad, and a worthy first time effort for
it's director, Andrzej Bartkowiak, once responsible for cinemetography
of the Lethal Weapon flicks and a bunch of others.  It's certainly a
slick looking picture, and has almost enough martial arts to satisfy the
action starved audience.  While it doesn't quite match up to the
standards already set by Jet Li and his contemporaries, it's okay.
In terms of a film with a Hong Kong star in it, it's not bad.  Jet Li
could have done a lot worse (and judging from some of the North American
debuts had by his fellow countrymen, that's saying quite a bit).  But
here's to hoping that he'll finally get much, much better.
Rating: B-
-- 

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/a0254e68017faff8882568aa000a50a3?OpenDocument
Romeo Must Die is a jetliner of film headed straight for black ice.
Namely, it subsists on ridiculous action sequences meshed together by
predictable plot points and truly horrible acting.  Fueled by the
`Monopoly Money' pockets of Joel Silver  the guy responsible for such
titles as The Matrix, the Lethal Weapon series, and Richie Rich  this
movie is bad. Really bad.
It's such a damn shame when such a talent and versatile actors like Jet
Li and Delroy Lindo re subjected to portray such stereotypical, mundane,
pointless characters.  To all those who are unaware of Jet Li, stop
reading right now and run down to your local video story and ask for
Once Upon a Time in China, Bodyguard from Beijing, and Hitman.  You
might have seen him in that techno-redubbed version of Black Mask or as
the evil Chinese bad guy in Lethal Weapon 4 that had be shot and stabbed
before Mel Gibson could save face and not get his ass kicked again.  But
Jet Li's character in Romeo Must Die reminds me of the circus clown
hired to keep the kiddies smiling in the film.
When the film (a modern-day feuding mob tale set in New York) begins to
drag, director Andrzej Bartkowiak just brings in Li to perform some
amazing acrobatics and flying fists of fury to keep the audience awake.
It's a damn shame, again, because Bartkowiak -- cinematographer for such
films as Lethal Weapon 4 and The Devil's Advocate -- can't seem to
follow any of the action.  Jet Li moves so fast that the camera just
catches flashes and never the fire of his movements.
The addition of Aaliyah (the R&B singer chosen as one of Teen People
magazine's "21 Hottest Stars Under 21" for 1999) as one of the lead
characters that falls for Jet Li's character is the true point of
absurdity for the film.  During one of the most poignant moments in the
movie, her acting actually caused my rowfull of critics to burst into
uncontrollable laughter.  Aaliyah, put down the script and walk slowly
towards the exit, stage right.  Note to studio heads: The inclusion of a
singer among the cast will not increase your soundtrack sales.
Romeo Must Die could have worked beautifully as a dark, twisted tale of
family corruption and the values of loyalty and honor.  All of the
elements were present for success.  But it inevitable turns into some
lemon drop-sweetened nightmare, two hours long.
Perhaps the best description I can give you are the words of two ladies
walking out of the screening, `That was some whacked shit!'  I'll say.
Director: Andrzej Bartkowiak
Writers: Eric Bernt, Mitchell Kapner
Producer: Joel Silver, Warren Carr
Actors: Jet Li, Delroy Lindo, Aaliyah, DMX
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Scott Hunt
Cast: Jet Li, Russell Wong, Aaliyah, Delroy Lindo, Isaiah Washington,
DMX, Henry O.
Writer: Mitchell Kapner.
Director: Andrzej Bartkowiak .
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
The story of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet has become so iconic that
the story crosses many cultural boundaries. It's a fine framework on
which to build a story about rival gangs, eastern vs. western morality
and forbidden love. The problem with Romeo Must Die is just as the
writer and director start building their clockwork beast, they suddenly
stop to admire their work without fleshing it out. It's a creation
whose heart pulses to the beat of slick marketing: the world of music
video meets Shakespeare. It's an unsteady creation.
The film teeters along a path in which it tries to be an action film
while haltingly being an examination of societal boundaries within the
code of honor amongst thieves. The story centers on two crime families.
One is Asian American. One is African-American. The Asian family is
headed by actor Henry O., whose son, Han Sing (Li), a former police
officer,  is in a Hong Kong prison for an unspecified crime involving
his father. In archetypical Hong Kong cinema fashion, the brutal death
of Han's brother brings him to America, seeking answers and revenge.
The other family is helmed by Isaak O'Day (Lindo), whose daughter and
ersatz Juliet, Trish (Aaliyah), wants nothing to do with the family
business. Both men are attempting to acquire oceanfront property in a
bid to acquire land for a shady developer looking to build an NFL
stadium for an Oakland expansion team. Whichever family is able to land
the deal will be able to emerge from the shadows of crime into the
world of legitimate businessmen.
Kapner and Bartkowiak try too hard to force the disparate themes
together. They've culled one of the basic tenets of Hong Kong cinema: a
family member being killed and the hero's ensuing search for justice.
Rather than the death being affecting, it feels perfunctory. Added to
the mix is a distractingly loud urban soundtrack that is a too obvious
grab for teenage viewers. (Especially when a song sung by Aaliyah was
being played as she was on the screen.) Layered on top of that is the
inert "romance" between Trish and Han. Though the pair are intimated as
having romantic feelings towards each other, there is nary a kiss or
profession of love between them. Perhaps this is a concession to a
perceived unmarketability of interracial romance, especially when both
parties are minorities? The script lightly touches on the notion of
race in America, but with such a feathery touch so as to be almost
unnoticeable. Interspersed throughout the film are fight scenes
involving Li. These are done to Li's disadvantage.
There are some unique situations for Li to present his on-screen
fighting skills. The first being a Houdini-like escape in which he must
overcome six prison guards as he is dangling in the air by one foot and
handcuffed. It could have been a memorable scene, however, the camera
flashes through the action so quickly that the confrontation becomes a
blur of colors and noises, rather than a mano-a-mano between men. Other
battles are ingeniously set up with Li using props such as a fire hose,
a belt and other items. Each scene is compromised by spastic editing
that doesn't allow full appreciation of the powerful, yet precise
fighting style of Li. During the fights, one can sense the marketing
gurus at work. Punches land and bones are broken, but it's done in a
bloodless and oddly politically correct manner. One innovation involves
showing an x-ray of an opponent as his bone, spine, etc, is broken.
Given the overreach of the material, several performers manage to carry
the film  on sheer charisma. Aaliyah acquits herself nicely, even being
given a crying scene that feels forced and too obvious a showcase for
her range. There is promise in her. Li has some moments where he
effectively and silently conveys a range of emotions, yet other times
he merely occupies the screen. There are snippets of the presence that
made him a star in Hong Kong, but this vehicle doesn't allow that
persona to fully surface. The always sturdy Lindo gives much needed
heft to the proceedings. Wong and Washington both radiate a handsome,
leading man glow that dims as they are gradually reduced to mustache
twirling villains. Maybe if Romeo must Die had sets its sights a tad
lower and gained some focus in the process, it might have been a better
showcase for Li and Aaliyah. As it stands, both partially cut through
the confused fog to show two emerging Hollywood lights. It's said that
a man's reach should exceed his grasp, but in this case, the filmmakers
went a bit too far and muddied things by taking on too much.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: Andrzej Bartkowiak
WRITTEN BY: Eric Bernt (I) and Mitchell Kapner
CAST: Jet Li, Aalyah, Delroy Lindo, DMX
MPAA: Rated R for violence, some language and brief nudity.
Runtime: USA:115
In our time. In our modern world, where the cool rule, it's hard to
imagine that Shakespeare is becoming 'the man'. And yet - film after
film, after film, is based on his everlasting magic. In Warner
Brothers' latest production, Shakespeare is kicking ass to a rap beat,
while his magic and intelligence slowly fades away.
Though the producers of The Matrix have vaguely based their picture on
William Shakespeare's 'Romeo And Juliet' , its title sequence with a
frightening rap song and a black limo making its way through the dark
streets of New York, is very hard to associate with Shakespeare's
poetry. The film takes place during a silent war between the two major
mafia families in the city - the Afro Americans against the
Chinese. The youngest son of a Chinese mafia chieftain is found
murdered. The Afro-Americans are immediately suspected, but a peace
treaty is signed between the two godfathers. It is at this point that
Han (the Romeo of the story) finds out about his brother's
death. Escaping from a prison in China, he returns to United States to
avenge his brother's fate. But before he can restore justice with his
Kung Fu kicks, he falls in love with a mysterious beauty. The only
problem is that she is the daughter of his enemy..
There's only a weak echo of Shakespeare's talent in this disappointing
production. And there are more problems besides its title. Of course
we don't call it a deformation of a great masterpiece. We call it
'modernization'. It seems that the producers fear that the audience
will not respond to lyrics, without any car chases and gun
fights. This lack of respect for the audience I find very
disturbing. Kenneth Brannagh has already proven that Shakespeare
doesn't need to be updated, because his tales are grounded in the
basics of life and human nature. And as long as love, hate, honesty
and corruption do exist, everyone will understand and embrace
Shakespeare. I must admit that I found 'Rome Must Die' very
confusing. I can forgive Andrzej Bartkowiak, since it is his first
attempt at directing. He manages to create an incredible atmosphere
and directs with a firm precision. Unfortunately he completely forgot
about character- and story developments. His latest picture is
therefore visually impressive, but intellectually hollow. The love
story between Han (Jet Li) and Trish (Aalyah), and the mafia intrigues
are undeveloped and simplified. Jet Li is one of the most amazing
fighters to ever hit the silver screen and Aalyah has a magical
voice. Their achievement save this film from being completely
braindead, but they are not actors, and therefore can not act. They
are nothing more than two celebrities put together. The other actors,
including Isaiah Washington, Russell Wong, Henry O and DMX all give
the standard mediocre performances. Delroy Lindo is the only one that
projects a coherent image of reality. But there's more than acting to
worry about. Even with Li's incredible skills in martial arts, the
action scenes (though technically excellent) are too long and story
updates simply embarrassing. To make a long story short: 'Romeo Must
Die' is not intelligent enough to be a thriller, not sensual enough to
be a love story and too serious to be a fun action film. It is certain
that Bartkowiak would be much better off with o this embarrassing and
completely unnecessary parallel to 'Romeo and Juliet', so the film is
completely stuck - not sure of what to be. And in the end it's
nothing. There are no performances worthy of notice, no interesting
character- or story surprises. So again, the only good thing about it
is its technical achievement. This film can boast of great sound, fast
paced editing, solid cinematography and some very well coordinated
action sequences. The music is another factor that prevents you from
leaving the theatre. It is mostly provided by Aalyah's enchanting
voice and several carefully inserted rap songs by various artists,
that create a kind of 'ghetto feel' to it. But when I think back, it's
not much I remember from this 'production'. As in almost every summer
movie, there are some interesting scenes, but most of the moments that
I remember are associated with massive special effects. It is not a
film that will get any attention for its artistic qualities, simply
because it doesn't have any. For someone who has never read
Shakespeare, it's another popcorn film. For those of us who has, it's
a waste of money, time and brain cells.

Author
Jon Popick
The idea is almost too good to be true:  Shakespeare's timeless romance
set in modern time and packed full of guns, kung fu and interracial
dating.  Here, burgeoning action star Jet Li and songbird Aaliyah play
the two crazy kids that fall for each other even though their respective
fathers are the heads of two feuding gangs in Oakland.  But they don't
really fall for each other.  And nobody is actually named `Romeo.'  So
you're on your own trying to figure out where the title came from.
Aaliyah, making an astonishingly respectable film debut, plays Trish,
the daughter of the diabolical Isaak O'Day (Delroy Lindo, The Cider
House Rules).  She hates her father, distancing herself from his
criminal way of life, even though his dirty money probably paid for the
boutique that she runs.  After the son of another Oakland gangleader is
killed, Trish is ordered to have round-the-clock protection (in the form
of the chubby Anthony Anderson, Liberty Heights) in fear of retaliation.
Li (Black Mask) plays Han, the son of O'Day's deadly rival, Chu (Henry
O, Brokedown Palace).  As the film opens, Han is locked up in a dingy
Hong Kong prison, but quickly escapes after receiving word that his
brother has been knocked off.  He blazes into Oakland intent on finding
and killing the person responsible and, in the process, meets Trish as
he is stealing a cab and she is trying to ditch her porky protector.
The two team up to get to the bottom of the whole war, which revolves
around a slimy white guy (Edoardo Ballerini, The Last Days of Disco)
trying to bring an NFL expansion team to the city's four miles of
waterfront property that Isaak and Chu are fighting over.  Each ganglord
comes complete with a opulent mansion and a Machiavellian right-hand man
(Isaiah Washington, True Crime; and Russell Wong, The Prophecy II,
respectively).
But there isn't any real romance between Trish and Han.  They merely run
around trying to piece the puzzle together, and the result is more
Encyclopedia Brown & Nancy Drew than Romeo & Julietif Brown was a
martial arts master and Drew was a red-hot R&B siren.  There's a
missed-it-if-you-blinked balcony scene, but with only the threat of
romance, Romeo plays more like a rerun of Remington Steele or
Moonlighting.  Only with karate  which isn't really such a bad thing.
Li's fight scenes are amazing and there honestly shouldn't be anybody
going to see this film for any other reason.  DMX fans might be geared
up for it, but the rapper is only in two brief scenes (he was in Belly
longer, so rent that instead).  There are three really nifty moments
when Li is beating the crap out of his rivals, who are depicted
x-ray-style so you can actually see their bones breaking - kind of like
the whole bullet-through-the-gut scenes in Three Kings, but not nearly
as cool.  Romeo is the directorial debut of Andrzej Bartkowiak, who
previously worked with Li as the cinematographer on Lethal Weapon 4.
Romeo might be Li's big breakout role in this hemisphere, but it
probably should be remembered for its horrible racist edge.  Can someone
explain to me how a black guy can call an Asian guy `Dim Sum' and `Rice
Noodle' throughout an entire film?  Imagine a white actor calling a
black actor `Porch Monkey' and `Spear Chucker' in a movie (and then
imagine Spike Lee going into cardiac arrest).  And who greenlighted the
Chinese gong sound after Chu's mandate about the importance of timing
their strike against Isaak?  The official description from the studio
says that the film is about a war between Asian and African-American
gangs, but Romeo never uses either of those PC monikers, opting instead
for `black' and, at best, `Chinese.'  And if you pay attention too
closely to the convoluted script, you'll walk away thinking that the
message of the film is that blacks solve their problems with guns, while
the Chinese use their hands and feet.
1:50 - R for violence, adult language and nudity

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Andrezj Bartkowiak
Written by: Mitchell Kapner (story), Eric Bernt
How exactly does one review a Jet Li movie? I suppose it must be held to a
different template than the new film from Tom Hanks or Meryl Streep. Let's
face facts, if you're going to "Romeo Must Die" expecting to see Academy
Award material, then you obviously haven't seen the previews. You're going
to see this movie for bloody, bare fisted, no holds barred style brawling.
You are not going for a strong plot, great acting, or important social
messages. I went into "Romeo Must Die" expecting to see Jet Li at his
gravity defying best, and I'm happy to report that the fight sequences are
indeed something to behold. The problem is, these excellent fight scenes are
few and far between, and the remainder of the film is filled with useless
melodrama that no one could care less about.
A gang war has consumed the bay area of Oakland. The two factions are
Issak's (Delroy Lindo) African Americans, and C'hu Sing's (Henry O)
Orientals. Both leaders are attempting to sell their bay area property to a
greedy business man (Edoardo Ballerini) so that he can develop yet another
football franchise. The most recent casualty has been C'hu's son, Po (Jon
Kit Lee). This sets off a chain of retaliations from both sides which
threatens to destroy everyone. Po's death brings about the return of his
brother, Han (Jet Li), from Hong Kong. Han begins investigating the events
which caused his brother to be murdered. While investigating, he meets up
with Issak's daughter, Trish (Aaliyah), and the two soon form a close
friendship. Han must discover who the killers are before they decide to
eliminate both he and Trish as well.
If this plot summary sounds a bit confusing that's because this is a rather
confusing and convoluted movie. In case you're wondering, it also has very
little to do with the bard's tale, aside from the name Romeo being in the
title and the story revolving around two warring families. There is no
romance between Trish and Han, the families aren't exactly true families
(they're just warring gangs), and this story is missing the excellent,
comical character of Mercutio. In fact, the lack of humor is one of the
problems with this movie. It may have a comical moment or two, mainly
because of a supporting character named Maurice (Anthony Anderson) and one
or two amusing scenes involving Li, but the majority of the film is
incredibly and unnecessarily melodramatic.
As for the actors, it seems that rap singers have been cast in place of
actors in most cases. Rapper DMX has been cast as a club manager, and
Aaliyah is obviously the female lead. With these two being cast in
significant roles, you can guess what kind of soundtrack is going to
accompany this film. If you don't like rap music, be forewarned that it
doesn't stop playing throughout the entire movie. The other actors are
mediocre at best; the only two exceptions being Li himself, who exudes
charm, charisma, and strength, and Delroy Lindo ("Broken Arrow"), who is
simply a good actor doing what he can with a miserable part. Worth noting is
Isaiah Washington ("True Crime"), playing Lindo's right hand man. Washington
is an early candidate for a Razzie award this year, turning in an absolutely
horrendous performance.
Andrezj Bartkowiak does have one neat little trick up his sleeve. Throughout
the fight scenes, we are given occasional x-ray insights of what happens to
a person when Li hits them. It's nothing more than a gimmick, but still a
rather original one. After watching "Romeo Must Die", I can only hope that
Li will be given a better script next time. The man is incredibly talented,
and it's no wonder that he is one of the largest film stars in China. I do
hope that his next film contains a few more fights and a lot less melodrama.
One last thing I must note; several fights in "Romeo Must Die" are blatantly
enhanced by CGI. This was completely uncalled for, as it ruins the effect of
watching Li do his thing. The movie runs far too long at 118 minutes. I'd
recommend it to serious martial arts fans and give it three out of five
stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you have nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Starring Jet Li, Aaliyah, Isaiah Washington, Russell
Wong, DMX, and Delroy Lindo.
For those expecting a clever masterpiece of an ancient
Shakespeare play, Romeo Must Die will not be
satisfying. The only real similarity is that both
contain rival gangs from rival families. That's it. In
this "adaptation" you won't find any monologues, any
romance, any dukes, nor, for that matter, any
characters named Romeo or Juliet. You will find a lot
of violence, rap music, curse words, and bad acting.
This is not necessarily a bad thing; the soundtrack
and beautifully choreographed fight scenes add a much
needed Matrix-like environment while the bad acting
reminds its viewers that this is a movie that doesn't
require much thought, just pointless eye-candied
entertainment. And when star Jet Li shows off his
impressive Martial Arts talent, the movie is extremely
fun. He is so graceful at his job that he makes
beating up huge gun-carrying gangsters look extremely
easy. 
The elaborate plot made simple follows Han (Jet Li) as
he escapes a Hong Kong prison to find out who killed
his brother. When Han reaches America, he finds that
two gangs, one African American the other, led by his
father, Chinese, are in the middle of a nasty battle.
As Han continues to search for the truth about his
brother, he meets Tricia (singer Aaliyah) the daughter
of the opposite gang's leader (Delroy Lindo). The two
find they have much in common while the gangs do all
they can to separate them. 
The real problem with Romeo Must Die is that Li is
rarely given a chance to show off his skills. The film
is held down by a confusing subplot involving the NFL,
in which the two families try to profit off of the
league. Also there are way too many characters in this
movie. In a pleasing action movie, there should be
five main characters max: the hero or the two heroes,
the person they try to rescue, and a couple of
villains. There are so many actors in this film that
Li has to wait large portions of the running time
before returning for more action. The other actors do
a fine job, they just stand in the way of the main
point of the film. Russell Wong and Isiah Washington,
in particular, add perfect charisma to their "2nd in
charge" characters. Other Martial Arts flicks with
thinner (almost nonexistent) plots are entertaining
because what is expected, creative fighting scenes,
are shown one after the other. Rumble in the Bronx is
a good example of a ridiculous plot cured by the
expertise of its star (Jackie Chan). 
Another problem is that Han and Tricia never give a
convincing case that they care for each other. They
both disobey their families by secretly meeting to try
and find out who killed Li's brother but there is no
real reason why they do this. Missing is a scene where
the two bond and understand their partner's struggles
in life. Would you risk your life for someone you
hardly knew? These people would at the blink of an
eye. 
The scenes in which Jet Li skillfully gets himself out
of danger are highly recommended, but unfortunately
they are not given the center spotlight. Rent Rumble
in the Bronx and save yourself some money. 

Author
Ross Anthony
Glaring streaks of reflected streetlights rebound off a black sedan as it
parks sharply next to a silver sports car. Beat. Like synchronized swimmers,
five doors swing open, five Chinese thugs in suits step out. Beat. Camera
pans sharp Chinese guy with cool shades as he pops out of sports car to lead
the gang into hip-hip club for a little "exercise." Cool is the paint of
this American-made Hong Kong-style martial arts film.
Rival gangs attempt to curb contempt for each other in order to secure a
jointly profitable business deal. Asian family on one side, African American
on the other. Mutual respect via mutual fear. News of an irresponsible
murder of one prominent member compromises the truce and prompts Jet Lee to
bust his Hong Kong prison chains and fly to the States to avenge his
brother's death. He's not interested in truces or illegal commerce - he
wants revenge.
In his search for the slayer Jet stumbles across help from the daughter of
the black gang's leader; she's recording artist, Aaliyah - Juliet (if you
will). Top rap artist, DMX also makes an appearance.
The high powered warlords are brought to real life with conviction by Delroy
Lindo and Henry O, their second-in-commands (Isaiah Washington and Russell
Wong) also do a kick-butt job of acting and re-acting. Pawn thug, Anthony
Anderson, maneuvers smoothly between punches and punch lines. He's very
funny.
Jet li, of course, is loveably dangerous, saying it all as he silently
shuffles across an oriental garden bridge carrying his late brother's
deflated basketball. Well, actually, he does have a bit more to say with his
fists, twists and computer graphic assists. In one charming brawl, Lee
manages to de-belt his opponent. As the pants fall to the ground, Lee
fastens the poor guy's harry leg to his head with the belt.
Though this is definitely an action flick, "Romeo" does a fair job of
portraying compelling and interesting relationship pairings in-between and
during scuffles. Hand-to-hand and Heart-to-heart, and don't forget the
tasteful funnybone-to-funnybone relief. Not in the now-popular, laden
fashion via comedic-costar as in "Rush Hour," here the humor is an added
flavor, not an equal balance.
Aside from acceptable improbabilities in fight set-ups etc., "Romeo's" only
mars are: 1) D.B. Woodside wavers in his role as gang-leader Isaac's number
one son. 2) a scene in which a Mercedes catches up to a BMW motorcycle in
less than 100 feet. I don't think so. 3) Strong from beginning to end, the
climax isn't weak, but not as resounding as the beginning and middle,
despite the low frequency thuds that resonate front row seats as the titans
plant fist to bone.
Still these imperfections are no match for the strong acting, fun dialogue,
graceful agility of Jet Li, and cool direction of first time director
Andrzej Bartkowiak. It's just a big cool fun movie.
Romeo Must Die. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Jet Li, Aaliyah, Isaiah Washington, Russell Wong, Delroy Lindo
Directed by Andrzej Bartkowiak.
Screenplay by Eric Bernt and John Jarrell. Story by Mitchell Kapner
Produced by Warren Carr at Silver/Warner Bros.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
R.L. Strong

"ROMEO MUST DIE"
Review by R.L. Strong
** out of *****
WARNER BROS. PRESENTS SILVER PICTURES PRODUCTION "ROMEO MUST DIE" JET
LI AALIYAH   ISAIAH WASHINGTON   RUSSELL WONG WITH DMX AND DELROY
LINDO CO-PRODUCED BY WARREN CARR  EDITED BY DEREK G. BRECHIN
PRODUCTION DESIGNED BY MICHAEL   DIRECTOR OF PHOTOGRAPHY GLEN
MACPHERSON, C.S.C.  EXECUTIVE PRODUCER DAN CRACCHIOLO   MUSIC BY
STANLEY CLARKE AND TIMBALAND   STORY BY MITCHELL KAPNER SCREENPLAY BY
ERIC BERNT AND JOHN JARRELL   PRODUCED BY JOEL SILVER AND JIM VAN
WYCK   DIRECTED BY ANDRZEJ BARTKOWIAK
Rated R for violence and language. 158 minutes  Scope (2.35:1)
Hong Kong cinema has been going through a bad spell. The last few
productions have been effect laded action adventures that combine both
the best and worst of American filmmaking with the same qualities of
Hong Kong films. In a nutshell, the current crop of films from Hong
Kong has been maddeningly convoluted and visually sumptuous.
With the one time British colony reverting back to Mainland ownership,
a lot of Hong Kong's best talents have crossed the pacific to work on
U.S. productions. Such talents as Jackie Chan (Rush Hour), Chow
Yun-Fat (Anna & the King, The Corrupter) and Yuen Woo-Ping (The
Matrix) have all moved into the budget bloated world of Hollywood
filmmaking with mixed results. Now we can add two other Hong Kong
filmmakers to the mix with star Jet Li and Director and Fight
choreographer Corey Yuen Kwai. Unfortunately "Romeo Must Die" bears
all the trademarks of a typical Hollywood action film and none of Hong
Kong's rhythms.
The film opens in a nightclub as an Asian Couple is necking. Enter a
group of Chinese gangsters led by Kai Sing (Russell Wong). Kai
confronts Po Sing (Jon Kit Lee), the son of Kai's boss and leader of
the local Chinese family. A battle breaks out between the bodyguards
of the club and Kai, who handily kicks and punches his opponents down.
It's not until club owner Silk (rapper DMX), bears down on Kai and his
henchmen that the fight ends.
The following morning Po Sing is found dead. Suspicions escalate, as
Issac O'Day (Delroy Lindo) is told of the murder. His concern that the
war between his and the Chinese family may explode and ruin his plans
to move out of the business of corruption and into a legitimate
venture. Issac implores his chief of security, Mac (Issiah Washington)
to watch after his son and daughter.
The scene shifts to a prison in China, where Han Sing (Jet Li) learns
of his brothers murder. He fights with the guards and is dragged off
to be disciplined. Hung upside down by one foot, Han recovers and
battle his way out of custody in a blistering display of fight
choreography and stunt work. Escaping to the U.S. Han sets out to find
the person responsible for his brother's death.
"Romeo Must Die" is in many ways a fun film. It is both absurd and
assured. The basic plot of a gangster wanting to become legitimate
echoes "The Godfather". The relationship between Jet Li's Han and
Aaliyah's Trish O'Day reminds us of Abel Ferrera's "China Girl",
except that Romeo Must Die's couple never once exchange more than a
loving glance towards one another. Their romance is much more
puritanical than any other romance in film history.
The performances are adequate if not fully acceptable. Li, of course
has the showiest part, having to express both an innocents and
steadfast determination. Allayah, in her feature film debut manages to
carry what little is asked of her with a certain style and grace. It's
obvious that the camera loves her and she is very photogenic. But,
still the part is under written in such a way that even a poor
performance would not have affected it. Delro Lindo as Issac O'day
carries himself well in the film. An unsung and under appreciated
actor, Mr. Lindo turns out the films best performance. The other
performers are all adequate in what the script asks of them except for
D. B. Woodside as Issac's son, Colin. The performance is undirected,
with the character changing his tone and demeanor in accordance with
whatever location he is in. An unfocused performance that should have
been reigned in and / or better written.
First time director Andrzej Bartkowiak does a workmanlike job in
handling the film. Having a career as one of the industry's best
cinematographers, Bartkiwiak knows how to set up his shots, and "Romeo
Must Die" does look good. But the pacing of the film is lethargic,
only coming to a semblance of life during the fight scenes. The script
by Eric Bernt and John Jarrell is not focused in such a way that we
can care about the characters or the situations they are in. The big
gambit of buying up waterfront property to facilitate the building of
a sports center for a NFL team is needlessly confusing. And of course
the common practice of one character being the comic relief of the
film becomes painfully obvious here as Anthony Anderson as Allayah's
bodyguard, Maurice has no comic timing whatsoever.
The best things about the film are its fight scenes. Jet Li is a
master of these intricate physical battles. One needs only to see his
film "Fist of Legend" to understand that the man is without peer in
the realm of Martial Art combat. Here, Jet is given the opportunity to
show off in a way that "Lethal Weapon 4" (Jet's U.S. debut) didn't
allow. Unfortunately, a lot of Jet's fights are aided with computer
effects that detract from his ability and precision. Also "Romeo Must
Die" must be noted as having the most singularly useless effect ever
committed to film, and that is an x-ray effect that appears three
times during the course of the film, showing the effect of bone
crushing blows on an opponent. Obviously a homage to the famed x-ray
scene from Sonny Chiba's "Streetfighter", the scenes here are just
pointless and interfere with the pacing of the film. It's as if the
film has stopped and a video game has been inserted.
One problem though about the fight scenes. Those that are familiar
with Hong Kong action know that even though the films are fantasies
and are as removed from reality as any anime or cartoon. They do have
an internal rhythm to them. A heartbeat, so to speak in their
choreography. The fight scenes in a Hong Kong film breath with an
emotional resonance. This is created by the performance, the direction
and the editing. Here in "Romeo Must Die", there is no staccato. Every
fight scene, even though technically adroit and amazing becomes boring
as the editing both cuts away from battle at hand and simple follows a
set pattern. The rhythm is monotonous. A Hong Kong film has a tempo
that changes, heightening its emotional impact. 'RMD' is limited to a
standard 4/4 tempo, not allowing for any emotional content whatsoever.
A fine example of this difference can be found by examining a couple
of Jackie Chan's films.. watch the restaurant fight from the film
"Rush Hour" and notice that the context of the fight, while
technically amazing is rather flat (the framing and cut always do not
help). Now look at the warehouse fight from "Rumble in the Bronx".
There you have a heartbeat, and emotional draw that doesn't let the
audience catch its breath. The stops and pauses for dramatic effect
work perfectly, causing the viewer to be both astounded and
flabbergasted. Here in 'Romeo Must Die', the fight scenes have no more
emotional content or character than any John Wayne barroom brawl.
Jet Li is a grand and personable screen presence. it's a shame that
his full talents were not used to full effect here. One day filmmakers
here in the U.S. will stop making films by the numbers and start to
embrace the style and emotion that has made Hong Kong action pictures
such a commodity. Until then, we'll be left with emotionally hollow
product like "The Replacement Killer" and, currently "Romeo Must Die".
Owned and Copyright Š 2000 R.L. Strong
Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without the
express written permission of the author.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Jet Li busted onto the American action movie scene, when he stole the show
in 1998's LETHAL WEAPON 4, with his wicked looks, his nasty moves and his
undeniable charisma. It only took another two years for mega-producer Joel
Silver to set him up in an all-American movie, primed to take over some of
the empty action-hero seats left by alleged coke-head Van Damme and that
pudgy guy named Steven Seagal. Would this film take Li past his rival Asian
action counterparts, namely Chow Yun-Fat and Jackie Chan? Let's find out.
PLOT:
Rival Chinese and black gangster organizations fall further out of favor
from one another, when members of their respective families start turning up
dead. That's when badass Jet Li blasts into the picture to find out who the
men were behind his brother's death and to exact some of his own style of
revenge.
CRITIQUE:
Three words: not enough action! Simple enough? Not enough Hong Kong kickass
Jet Li action to compensate for a horribly predictable screenplay, bad
actors, crappy dialogue and oh-so many over-the-top melodramatic moments.
And a romance angle? Why, one must ask...why? I love fight scenes and I
really dig Jet Li too, but this little ditty barely contained three
memorable action sequences, and Jet, well, the poor dude was barely in the
movie. And I thought this was supposed to be his big break? How 'bout giving
the slickster some more opportunities to show us his kung-fu fighting chops,
slap him in a few more scenes, and give him more chances to practice his
acting/English abilities? What a letdown. Even BLACK MASK was more
entertaining than this glossed up, empty shell of a film. In fact, I am sure
that more time was spent gathering the "hits" for the soundtrack of this
film, than were on the so-called "screenplay". I felt like I was watching a
soundtrack rather than a movie most of the time.
The sad part about the bad script is that it wouldn't matter so much if the
film actually had some decent actors spouting out the tacky lines. But no,
save Lindo and Aaliyah, who weren't too shabby, I thought the rest of the
cast was picked primarily from their inability to deliver lines
convincingly. And what was the deal with the whole NFL franchise deal run by
some 15-year old looking guy, acting like he's the overlord of a drug ring?!
What a mess. Then again, I don't want it to seem like I'm complaining solely
about the story which was completely foreseeable, since we all go to see
these movies for the action anyway, not the story. Well, I guess that's what
disappointed me the most out of this film. There were a couple of cool fight
scenes with Li, but simply not enough to satisfy my overall craving. Also,
as much as I love the way they incorporate wires and special effects in some
of their stunts, a couple of the exaggerated fight scenes were simply too
obvious a stunt. It should be seamless, fellas, not necessarily against the
laws of gravity! The one cool thing that was original in the movie was the
way in which the director showed us some of the inside cracklings of the
human body when penetrated by a blow, but that simple creative touch
couldn't save the rest of this film's uninteresting plot movements.
I'm disappointed for Jet Li that this film didn't give him the real
opportunity to star in a good story with many great action scenes.
Hopefully, the next time will be a charm for this charismatic actor. For
now, I just hope that for his sake, the film's title isn't a premonition of
the movie's ultimate fate at the box-office.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Opera.  For some people, watching opera with its silly and simplistic
plot can be excruciatingly painful.  Aficionados, on the other hand, are
swept up in the majesty of the music and the visuals and could care less
about plausibility or any lack of depth in the storyline.
So it is with Andrzej Bartkowiak's ROMEO MUST DIE, a film with only a
tenuous relationship to the Bard's famous romantic tragedy.  For viewers
who can't get enough martial arts action and who dig the latest hip hop
music, ROMEO MUST DIE may be just their cup of tea.  Like a music video
for MTV as directed by Quentin Tarantino, the movie is built of surface
pleasures only.  There are no characters, just stick figures.  The
minimal plot tries to blend elements of THE GODFATHER into a mixture of
ghetto action picture and Hong Kong martial arts.
When we meet Han Sing (Jet Li), he has just learned that his brother has
been murdered.  Summoning up all of his powers, he fights his way out of
the maximum security prison in which has been staying.  Like the
Energizer bunny, but better looking, martial-arts action star Li is an
unstoppable force against his enemies.  With boundless charisma, but
regretfully none of Jackie Chan's humor, Li commands attention --
something that the rest of the movie fails to do.
Two large crime families, an African-American one headed by Isaak
(Delroy Lindo) and an Asian-American one led by Ch'u Sing (Henry O), are
in the midst of a big deal when the death occurs.  The Asians suspect
the blacks, and Han wants revenge.
The movie is filled with GODFATHER references.  "I'm working on a deal,
a really big deal.  And, if it goes through, everything we do will be
legit," Isaak tells his son in dialog lifted straight from Michael
Corleone's mouth.  And, just in case, anyone should miss the point that
ROMEO MUST DIE wants to be taken as an African/Asian-American GODFATHER,
Simon (rhymes with Hyman) Roth is the duplicitous leader of the whites
with whom they are in cahoots in the story's big deal.
Among the movie's more ludicrous aspects is the way it is supposedly set
in Oakland, but the terrain features large Canadian mountains.
One of the better sequences, a nicely choreographed car chase, could be
used as an effective commercial about the advantages of anti-lock
brakes.
Along with all of the traditional scenes of buildings exploding, people
being mowed down by gunfire and more fights that you can count, the
movie adds something new to the mixture.  When Han breaks someone's
bones, the effects are not left to the sound person alone.  In addition
to the sound of breaking bones, the movie uses computer graphics like an
perhaps, but at least it's original, a commodity generally lacking in
the rest of the picture.
ROMEO MUST DIE runs 1:58, too long for this martial arts extravaganza.
The film is rated R for violence, some language and brief nudity and
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
