Title
Review for Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Whoopi Goldberg, Lauryn Hill, Barnard Hughes, Kathy
Najimy, James Coburn, Maggie Smith.
Screenplay:  James Orr & Jim Cruickshank and Judi Ann Mason.
Director:  Bill Duke.
     Let's play a little "Jeopardy."  The answer is, "140 million
dollars."  If you said the question was, "Why make a sequel to SISTER
ACT?" you'd be right.  It certainly wasn't because anyone had an actual
idea or, if onscreen evidence serves, because Whoopi Goldberg was
brimming over with enthusiasm to don the robes again.  SISTER ACT was a
simple but extremely pleasant entertainment which worked thanks to a
solid set-up and lively performances.  SISTER ACT 2: BACK IN THE HABIT
strips away the last shred of energy, originality and fun, leaving only
a few good musical numbers and a stupefyingly uninteresting story.
     Goldberg again plays Deloris Van Cartier, who is enjoying a
successful career as a Las Vegas singer when our story begins.
Attending one performance are three old friends:  Sister Mary Patrick
(Kathy Najimy), Sister Mary Robert (Wendy Makkena) and Sister Mary
Lazarus (Mary Wickes).  They bring a request from Mother Superior
(Maggie Smith) to return to San Francisco, rejoin the fold as Sister
Mary Clarence, and help straighten out the streetwise students of St.
Francis School.  She naturally agrees, and finds herself music teacher
to a sassy-but-good-hearted bunch of homegirls and homeboys, including
acid-tongued Rita (Lauryn Hill).  Unconventional methods ensue, leading
Deloris to bump heads with St.  Francis' principal, Father Maurice
(Barnard Hughes), and diocese administrator Mr. Crisp (James Coburn),
along the way trying to save the inner city school from closing down.
     If the preceding summary betrays my antipathy, well, it was going
to come out sooner or later.  The irony of SISTER ACT 2 is that where
so many recent sequels have done nothing by Xerox the original, there
was at least an attempt in this case to do something different.
Unfortunately, the attempt was dreadfully misguided.  The charm of
SISTER ACT was based on Goldberg's fish out of water frustration and
the interesting collection of characters in the convent.  There was a
plausible reason for her to be there, and a genuine conflict.  In
SISTER ACT 2 there's no conflict, no plausibility and nowhere for the
humor to come from.  Screenwriters James Orr, Jim Cruickshank and Judi
Ann Mason throw Goldberg into one of the most overused situations in
films, the underachieving bunch of kids who just need a
tough-but-understanding teacher with a fresh perspective.  Even so,
they at least could have played it for laughs, but there is nothing
funny going on anywhere.  A couple of the kids are flat out annoying,
and the resolution of this story is telegraphed from the moment they
appear.  This is nothing but STAND AND DELIVER with a wimple.
     What's truly depressing is that none of the returning characters
even needed to be here.  Kathy Najimy, Wendy Makkena and Mary Wickes
stay pretty much in the background, because their characters haven't
been given anything to do.  Maggie Smith, who was so delightful as
Goldberg's foil in the first film, is reduced to a cameo role; in her
place are Barnard Hughes as the befuddled principal and James Coburn,
and neither are up to the task.  Coburn is ostensibly the villain of
the piece, but there is no effort to define his character or his
motivations, so he just becomes a scowling oaf.  As for Goldberg
herself, there is similarly little for her to do, and she looks bored.
Anyone could have wandered into that classroom and it would have been
the same movie.  Maybe BEVERLY HILLS COP 3: AXEL TEACHES TRAFFIC
SCHOOL.  There's some small attempt to portray a balanced picture of
inner city life, but basically it's Disney 'N the Hood.  Lauryn Hill
gives a nice performance as Rita, and I did enjoy the music.  But
SISTER ACT 2 is supposed to be a comedy, and I did not laugh *once*.
     One more round of "Jeopardy."  The answer is, "Nun."  The question
is, "How many sequels to SISTER ACT should have been made?"

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Whoopi Goldberg, Kathy Najimy, Wendy McKenna, Mary Wickes,
           Maggie Smith, James Coburn, Lauryn Hill
Director:  Bill Duke
Producers:  Dawn Steel and Scott Rudin
Screenplay:  James Orr, Jim Cruickshank, and Judi Ann Mason
Music:  Marc Shaiman
Released by Touchstone Pictures
     What happens when you have low-budget, low-profile motion picture
that turns into an unexpected smash hit?  You make a sequel, of
course.  And, as proven by SISTER ACT 2, as long as you have the star
of the original, there's absolutely no need to concern yourself with
little details like plot, characterization, or acting.
     Deloris Van Cartier (Whoopi Goldberg) has returned to her Las
Vegas act, although this time to considerably more applause than she
experienced at the beginning of the previous movie.  It doesn't take
long for the sisters from the convent to show up and plead their case.
They are now teaching at St. Francis High School in San Francisco, and
the kids are out of hand.  Could Deloris return with them, resume her
alter ego of Sister Mary Clarence, and help sort things out?  After a
little friendly, nun-style persuasion, she agrees to don her habit
again, and the rowdy students at St. Francis High get a new music
teacher.
     If there's one thing that SISTER ACT 2 does, it makes the viewer
appreciate the first installment of the series.  During the course of
this film, I found myself longing for the original--and that's
especially surprising because I wasn't fond of it.  Nevertheless,
chapter one had quite a bit more going for it than this sorry excuse
for a sequel.
     SISTER ACT was occasionally enjoyable because of the freshness and
energy with which the pop-turned-gospel songs were performed.  This
time around, with the exception of the closing number ("Ain't No
Mountain High Enough"), that exuberance is missing.  In fact, most of
the fifties and sixties songs have been replaced by rap numbers, and I
can assure you that the technique doesn't work nearly as well.  How
many people really want to hear a rap version of "Joyful, Joyful"?
     Also missing in action is Harvey Keitel (Yeah, I know his
character is supposed to have ended up behind bars, but since when has
that stopped anyone?), who was one of the better performers in the
original.  Wendy McKenna and Kathy Najimy are back, but their roles
have been reduced to microscopic proportions.  If it weren't such a
pleasure to see these two, they might just as easily have been
altogether eliminated.  Of course, Whoopi Goldberg has also returned,
but the less said about her so-called performance, the better.
     The newcomers to SISTER ACT 2 don't do much for the movie.
Michael Jeter, who plays a Franciscan father, isn't especially funny or
entertaining (except during the previously-mentioned closing number,
which is better by far than anything in the one-hundred minutes that
precede it), and I'm still having trouble figuring out why James Coburn
was given a part.  The only one of the new group with any sparkle is
Lauryn Hill, although her character of Rita is sketchily-developed, at
best.
     It's kind of frightening that it took three writers to come up
with this "plot."  The story is pieced together using all sorts of
easily recognizable formulas, each tied to the others by some
ridiculous plot device.  The "dramatic" moments are enough to make even
the most stalwart movie-goer cringe, and the comedy is flat.  That
leaves the musical number to supply redemption, and they're not up to
it.
     Those who like stale, formula-driven comedies with
sickeningly-sweet happy endings, not to mention unbelievably-contrived
plots, will find SISTER ACT 2 an example of good entertainment.
However, I can't promise that everyone who enjoyed the initial
installment will find this one as pleasant a diversion.  The original
was at least an attempt at something a little different.  This one is
exploitation, pure and simple--a blatant grab at milking money from an
idea that's already bone dry.  Maybe the movie-going public in general
will forgive the producers for foisting this one upon them, but after
sitting through it, I'm in no mood to grant absolution.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
