Title
Review for Jerky Boys, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Johnny Brennan, Kamal Ahmed, Alan Arkin, Brad Sullivan.
Screenplay:  Johnny Brennan & Kamal Ahmed and James Melkonian &
             Rich Wilkes.
Director:  James Melkonian.
     There is a regular feature in "Sports Illustrated" magazine
devoted to examples of astounding stupidity.  It is titled "This
Week's Sign That the Apocalypse is Upon Us."  That phrase kept
running through my head as I sat through THE JERKY BOYS.  Somehow,
two obnoxious losers had managed to parlay a fascination with
juvenile humor and prank phone calls into an incredibly popular pair
of audio releases and a movie deal.  For irritating people, they
were being rewarded in the millions of dollars.  And the worst thing
is, *none* of it is funny.  THE JERKY BOYS is a terrible idea badly
executed.  And it will undoubtedly be extremely profitable.
     THE JERKY BOYS are Johnny (Johnny Brennan) and Kamal (Kamal
Ahmed), a pair of unemployed buddies still living with their mothers
in Queens, NY.  With all the time on their hands, the boys enjoy
running up hefty beer tabs and making wacky prank phone calls.  One
of these calls is made to organized crime boss Ernie Lazarro (Alan
Arkin), with the boys claiming to be mafia big shots from Chicago.
When Lazarro learns that they aren't who they claim to be, they find
themselves on the run from Lazarro's goons, as well as from the
local cop (Brad Sullivan) who over hears the phone call and believes
that they boys really are with the mob.
     Let us begin here: The idea of building a movie around prank
phone calls is somewhat mind-boggling to begin with.  THE JERKY BOYS
is full of shots of phones ringing, of stationary speaker phones, of
people talking on the phone.  I'm hard-pressed to think of any way
such a format could have been turned into riveting cinema.  Then
again, THE JERKY BOYS never had to be riveting cinema.  This is a
movie about one thing, giving two idiots a chance to do their
schtick, which consists entirely of insults, threats and silly
voices.  There are a bunch of absurd setups which are designed to
get the boys on a phone, an intercom or a dispatch radio, where they
each display their gift for two voices (Johnny is either a nasal
grouch or a nasal whiner, Kamal either a babbling immigrant or a
snarling authority figure).  In a strange way, it's a little like
the old Elvis Presley movies, in which it didn't matter what was
going on in the plot, as long as Elvis got a chance to sing.  That
was what the people were coming for.
     But for people coming to THE JERKY BOYS expecting the same
thing they heard on their best-selling CDs, they aren't going to get
it.  I have listened to the "Jerky Boys" CD, and I think it is
spectacularly unfunny, but there could be some minor entertainment
value in the befuddled reactions of the recipients of the calls.  Of
course, that simply is not possible in a movie; everyone is in on
the gag, so you end up with a lot of reaction shots of actors fuming
in mock frustration.  And there are few things sadder than the fact
that one of those actors is Alan Arkin.
     Much has been and will be written about THE JERKY BOYS as not
simply a bad movie, but as part of a horrible trend, the logical
successor (if logical is the word I want to use) to the popularity
of DUMB AND DUMBER, "Beavis and Butthead" and the like.  Not only
does treating THE JERKY BOYS in this way give it far more
sociological importance than it deserves, it insults those other
examples by comparison.  As bad as DUMB AND DUMBER was, at least
someone was trying; as stupid as "Beavis and Butthead" can be, at
least they are rooted in satire.  THE JERKY BOYS is simply junior
high school humor aimed at junior high schoolers.  It is aimed
squarely at those who are guaranteed to burst into uproarious and
self-righteous laughter at swishy gay stereotypes and copious
expletives.  If hearing someone intone the word "liverlips" several
times is your idea of yuks galore, then by all means toss your $7
into THE JERKY BOYS' coffers.  I suspect few moviegoers old enough
to get into this movie legally will waste their money or their time.

Author
Chuck Dowling
     I went to see THE JERKY BOYS in the theater on the first day it
came out.  Yes, The Jerky Boys are very juvenile and extremely profane,
but there's just something about what they do.  It's so simplistic,
it's funny.  If you are unsure about exactly what it is they do,
basically these two guys from New York call various people and act
rudely through a myriad of colorful characters.  They have two albums
out (with a third on the way) and someone got the bright idea to put
these two guys into a major motion picture.
     So anyway, I went to see the film on it's first day of release.
Not so much because it was The Jerky Boys, but because my favorite
actor, Alan Arkin, was playing the bad guy in the film.  Well, after it
was over, I remembered laughing a few times (mostly at Arkin).
     Anyway, THE JERKY BOYS is about to be released on video, and so I
decided to watch it again.  For some reason, at no fault of Mr.
Arkin's, the film was much worse than I remembered.  For those of you
who have seen it, I'll describe why.
     The film's core audience has to be the people who have listened to
the albums.  So how come the entire movie is nothing but the routines
from those albums?  THE JERKY BOYS is a *very* poorly written film with
many idiotic plot points and sadly, very few laughs.
     Example, for some reason our heroes (?) are tied up to chairs in a
meat locker.  When the bad guys leave them, The Jerky Boys move their
chairs back to back.  The camera then cuts to something else, and when
we come back, they are free.  Ridiculous.
     I can not recommend this film, not even to fans.  I will say that
Alan Arkin is truly funny in the film and almost makes it worth seeing
if only he had been on screen more.
